THE HISTORY OF THE CIVIL WARS OF FRANCE;

Written in ITALIAN, By H. C. D'AVILA.

Translated out of the ORIGINAL.

The Second Impression, whereunto is Added a TABLE.

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Blew Anchor, in
the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, M.DC.LXXVIII.

TO THE READER.
THIS AUTHOR is so Generally Esteemed in all Countries, that those who
understand not the Italian, are glad to Converse with him by an Interpreter;
and even in France, after so many Histories as be there of the same Times,
several Impressions of this in their Language have been bought off; whereby we
may judge, they think Him to be Impartial, and as worthy of Credit, as the best
of their own. Nor has He wanted a due value here, for, our late King, of ever
Glorious Memory, by whose Command, at Oxford, this Translation was Continued
and Finished (though not begun) read it there, with such eagerness, that no
Diligence could Write it out fair, so fast as he daily called for it; wishing
he had had it some years sooner, out of a Belief, that being forewarned
thereby, He might have prevented many of those Mischiefs we then groaned under;
and which the Grand Contrivers of them, had drawn from this Original, as
Spiders do Poison from the most wholesome Plants. The Truth is, their Swords had
already Transcribed it in English Blood, before this Pen had done it in English
Ink; and, it were not hard to name the very Persons, by whom many of the same
Parts were Acted over again in the Civil Wars of England; the Faction of our
Presbyterians in that Long-Parliament, outvying those of the Hugonots and of
the Holy League put together. Yet, when they had followed the steps of them
both, as exactly as they could, they were out-vied themselves by the
Independents, who far transcended them all, in an unexampled Conclusion, by the
Horrid Murder of our Royal Martyr, and by enslaving the Kingdom under several
Tyranies, till His Son's Miraculous Restoration to His Just Rights, Restored
His Subjects also to their Much-wish'd-for Liberties. But, I am not to Write a
Preface, and therefore all I shall add, is, That finding this BOOK still much
sought for, since the former Impression has been Sold off, I obtained the
Right of the Copy from Sir Charles Cottrell, (whose WORK it was, all but some
Pieces here and there in the First Four Books) with his Leave to Reprint it, as
I have now done, so carefully, that I think it has not many gross Faults; and,
for those less considerable, I doubt not but the observation of the Ingenious
Reader will easily find, his care Correct, and, I hope, his Candor pardon them.

LICENSED,

Nov. 24. 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The FIRST
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
IN this First Book is set down the Original of the French Nation: The Election
of their first King Pharamond: The Institution of the Salique Law: The Rights
and Prerogatives of the Princes of the Blood: The Succession of their Kings to
Lewis the IX. surnamed The Saint: The Division of the Royal Family into two
distinct branches, one called Valois, the other Bourbon: The Iealousies between
them, and in time the suppression of the House of Bourbon: The original, and
raising to greatness of place in the rooms of the Princes of the Blood, the
Families of Guise and Momorancy: The Emulations, and Occurrences between them,
in which the Guises prevail. King Henry the Second is killed by accident in a
Tournament: Francis his Son, a Youth of weak Constitution, succeeds to the
Crown: He gives the Government to his Mother Queen Caterine, and the Guises:
The Princes of Bourbon are offended thereat: The King of Navarre, chief of the
Family, upon that occasion goes to Court, prevails little, goes from thence,
and retires into Bearn: The Prince of Conde his Brother resolves to remove from
the Government of the Queen Mother and the Guises: He is counseled to make use
of the Hugonots: Their Beginnings and Doctrine: La Renaudie makes himself chief
of a Conspiracy, and the Hugonots resolve to follow him: The Conspiracy is
discovered: The King chooses the Duke of Guise for his Lieutenant General, who
without much difficulty does break, take and chastise the Conspirators.

THe Civil Wars, in which for the space of forty years together the Kingdom of
France was miserably involved, though on the one side they contain great
Actions, and famous Enterprises, that may serve for excellent Lessons to those
that maturely consider them; yet on the other side, they are so confused and
entangled in their own revolutions, that the reasons of many businesses do not
appear, the counsels of many determinations are not rightly comprehended, and
an infinite number of things not at all understood through the partiality of
private Interests, which under diverse pretenses has obscured the truth of
them. True it is, that many excellent Wits have endeavored to make of these a
perfect Story, by bringing to light such things as they have gathered together
with great diligence, and commendable industry: Notwithstanding the
difficulties are so many, and the impediments prove to be of such consequence,
that in a multitude of accidents (all great and considerable, but hidden and
buried in the vast ruins of civil dissentions) his pains will not be less
profitable to posterity, who labors to digest them into an orderly method,
than the endeavors of others formerly have been. Wherefore, being in my
infancy by Fate, that destined me to a restless life, transported into the
inmost Provinces of that Kingdom, where, during a long space of time which I
lived there, I had the opportunity to observe, and be an eyewitness of the
most secret and notable circumstances of so remarkable passages; I could not
choose a more worthy matter, nor a more useful Study wherein to employ my
present Age, now come to maturity, than to write from the very beginning, all
the progress and order of those troubles. And although the first taking up of
Arms, which happened in the year 1560. was indeed before my time, so that I could
not be present at the beginning of those Civil Wars: nevertheless I have
diligently informed my self by those very persons who then governed the affairs
of State; so that with the perfect and particular knowledge of all the
following events, it has not been hard for me to penetrate to the first root
of the most ancient and remote causes of them.

This Story will contain the whole course of the Civil Wars, which brake forth
upon a sudden after the death of King Henry the Second; and varying in their
progress, by strange and unthought-of accidents, ended finally after the death
of three Kings, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. But to form the Body of
this Narration perfectly, it will be convenient for me to look back some few
periods into the Original of the French Monarchy; for the seeds of those
matters which are now to be related, taking their beginnings from times long
since pas^, it is necessary to lay a foundation, and to explain all
difficulties, that we may with more clearness come to the perfect knowledge of
modern things. But if in the performance of this my so painful undertaking, I
be neither accompanied with eloquence of words, nor richness of conceit; yet
being free from those affections which usually bias the Pens of many Writers,
I hope I shall be able to reach the proper order, and natural unfolding of
those things which (having been many years conversant in the Courts of Kings,
and always active in the first Files of Armies) I have learned of my self by
Experience and Action.

Whilst the Roman Empire, with the terror of Arms, upheld the Majesty of her
Monarchy, (which with a large compass embraced the greatest part of the known
World) those few Nations, who, either defended with the generous fierceness of
their own courage, or by nature invincibly fortified, felt not the general yoke
of slavery, being restrained within those Confines which necessity prescribed
them, studied rather how to preserve their own liberty in their native soil,
than forcibly to invade the rights of others. So in the East, the Parthians had
for a bridle to their fierceness the banks of Euphrates; so in the West, the
Germans for the most part contained the force of their Arms beyond the Rhine.
But afterward, when the Dominion of the Romans, through its own unbounded
greatness, first disunited it self, or through change of ancient customs, began
manifestly to decline; the barbarous Nations, (that for a long time had for
their own defense only kept a Guard upon their Confines) the bridle being
broken, and the bonds of fear shaken off, assaulting on all sides the Roman
Provinces, gave beginning to new Principalities, and new Kingdoms. Hence it was
that the fame of so many warlike people, till then wholly buried in its own
obscurity, began powerfully to spread it self in the World; and hence likewise
it came to pass, that stranger people, emulously getting possession of the most
fertile and best Regions of the Universe, in a short time changed them, not
only in their Habits, Language and Customs, but also in their manner of
Government, in their condition, and in their names: so that all parts being
invaded by new Nations, and new Masters, not only Britany from the Angli that
usurped it, took the name of England; not only Pannonia from the Hunns, that
ruled there, took the denomination of Hungaria; but infinite other Provinces in
all parts of the World had the like change; and even within the Confines of
Italy it self, the Longbeards gave the form and name to the State of Lombardy.

But amongst all those people, who, abandoning their native Country,
endeavored to get new possessions, and usurped others rights, there is not any
one that for greatness of Empire, well-policied Government, and unconquered
Valor in Arms, and above all, for length of time and continuance, can be
compared to the French Nation. For notwithstanding the famous incursions of the
Ostrogoths, the Visigoths, the Huns, the Vandals, and the Longbeards; yet some
of them vanished like a flash of lightning, which dazzling the sight with a
sudden and unexpected light, passes away in a moment, almost unperceived:
others had so small a progress, that in a short time they lost both their power
and their greatness. But the Franks, after they had fought with, and vanquished
the most glorious Nations, and made themselves Lords of one of the most noble
and best parts of Europe, powerful in people, flourishing in riches, renowned
for great and magnanimous actions, and glorious with a Majestic Succession of
Empire, after the course of a thousand and two hundred years, do continue at
this present uncorrupted in the same kind of Government which at their first
beginning was by a formal and natural Law established amongst them.

These people which now call themselves Frenchmen, and were formerly called
Franks, whether they came long since from the most remote parts of Asia, (as
some among many modern Historians have thought) or else had their first
beginning in the bosom of Germany, (as the best Writers have reasonably held;)
certain it is, that when the Roman Empire first declined, they inhabited that
Country toward the North which lies upon the Rhine between Bavaria and Saxony,
and that Franconia to this time bears the name of that Nation. These people at
first, through terror of the Romans, kept themselves together within their own
Country where they were born, and straightened in a narrow Territory, with great
pains, provided necessaries for life: but in progress of time, (as commonly
those which inhabit a cold Climat multiply without measure) they were increased
to such a number, The Franconians, a people of Germany, not being able to
subsist in their own Country, issue out in armed multitudes, and possess
themselves of the Gallia's.
that their little ill-built Cottages could no longer contain them, nor so
small a Country afford them nourishment. Wherefore (all fear of the Romans
being now ceased) invited thereunto by the example of their other neighbors,
they resolved, by common advice, to separate and divide themselves into two
distinct People; one of which should retain the wonted care and possession of
their common Country; the other, exposed to hazard, provide by force of Arms
greater Commodities of living, and a more large and fertile Habitation.

This Consultation had no interruption in the end to which it tended, and the
division was made by a voluntary consent of every one. Those to whose lot it
fell to leave their Country, although through generosity of courage accustomed
to the toils of War, they feared not the danger of so great an enterprise; yet
nevertheless they believed it was not a design to be remitted wholly to chance,
but to be governed by mature deliberation, and weighty counsels. Wherefore
being all assembled in the fields near the River Sala, to consult of those
things which were necessary for such an expedition, and knowing well that a
tumultuous and unsettled kind of Government could not conduce to the effecting
their ends, they determined, before any thing else, to establish by universal
consent the form of their future Government. And, as people accustomed for many
Ages to live under the sole rule of one Prince, knowing also perhaps, that the
qualities of a Monarchy are most agreeable and best proportioned to those that
aspire to great achievements, and enlargement of Empire, they resolved to
choose themselves a King, upon whom should be conferred the whole authority of
all. To so great a power was added this privilege; That the Kingdom should be
hereditary in the descent of him that was to be chosen; wisely foreseeing, that
if from time to time they should make a new election, it might easily breed
Civil discord amongst themselves, which without all doubt would hinder the
success of any enterprise whatsoever. So (as the beginnings of things use for
the most part to be directed with sincerity of mind to their proper end, the
public good) all ambition and private interests laid aside, they chose by
common accord for their King, Pharamond, one of the sons of Marconir, Pharamond
chosen first King of the French at the river Sal^, and the Salique Law
established.
a Prince, not only by descent, (being of the same Blood, which that people
were used for many Ages past to obey) but in virtue also; being singularly
valiant, and most deeply wise in the Government of affairs; consenting, that to
his posterity should descend the same power and the same name, until a
legitimate descendent of his failing, the right should return to the people of
choosing a new Lord.

But because Authority without limitation commonly converts it self into
destructive licentiousness, at the same time that they elected their King, they
would establish certain Laws, which were to remain perpetual and immutable in
all times, and in which should be comprehended in brief the general consent, as
well in the succession of the Kings, as in every other part of the future
Government. These Laws proposed by their Priests which were anciently
denominated Salii, and decreed of in the fields, The Salii, Priests.
which from the river Sala, take the same name, were called Saliq^e Laws; and
(after the establishment of the Kingdom) original and fundamental
Constitutions. After this principal foundation, all other things resolved on
that were necessary for the present Government, and advantageous to the design
in hand, having passed the Rhine under the conduct of their first King
Pharamond, they betook themselves to the conquest of the Gallia's, 419.
about the year of our Salvation Four hundred and nineteen, leaving the
Dominion of Franconia to the old Prince Marcomir.

The Franks began to invade the Gallia's in the year 419. being then possessed
by the Romans.
The Gallia's were as yet possessed by the Roman Emperors, but much declined
from their first strength and greatness, partly through Civil dissentions,
partly through the incursions of diverse barbarous Nations, by whose fury they
had been long time much wasted and spoiled; which was the cause that the Franks
Army found much less difficulty in their conquest than the Romans did formerly.
Nevertheless they were not subdued without great resistance, and much time
spent. For the Roman Legions appointed to guard that Province, being joined,
for their own defense, with the Gauls themselves, held the first King Pharamond
at a bay, till his end drawing near, he left the care of the whole enterprise,
and of the people, to his son Clodian. This man, of a fierce courage, Clodian
the second King, made himself Master of Belgia, and this was first conquered.
in the first flower of his age, having many times fought with the inhabitants
of the Country, and having overcome and driven out the Roman forces, began to
master that part of Gallia, which lying nearest to the Rhine, is by common
consent of Writers called Belgica. To him succeeded Meroue, whether brother or
son to Clodian* is not certain; but out of doubt, nearest to him, and of the
same race, conformable to the Salique Law. He with happy success advancing into
Gallia-Celtica, propagated the Empire of the Franks as far as to the City of
Paris: Meroue the third King, continues his Conquests as far as Paris, and
unites the two Nations into one.
And now thinking he had gotten enough to main^ain his people, and to form a
complete moderate Empire, stayed the course of his Conquests; and having
conceived thoughts of peace, joined both Nations under the same name; and with
moderate Laws and a peaceful kind of rule, founded and established in the
Gallia's, the Kingdom of the French.

This was the first original and foundation-stone of that Monarchy; in which,
as the descent of their Kings has ever constantly remained in the same
Progeny, so in all Ages the first rules of Government have been most
religiously observed, neither power of Command, nor authority of Laws losing
any thing, through time, of their first observation, and ancient splendour.
Those Laws ordained in the beginning by the universal consent of all the
people, exclude the Female Sex from the Royal Succession, and admit only to the
inheritance of the Crown the nearest Males; by which means, the Empire of that
Nation, Princes of the Blood.
by a continued and uninterrupted Succession, always remains in the same
Blood. From the disposition of this Law, the Princes of the Blood derive their
name and privileges; for being all capable through default of the next heir,
in their order to succeed to the Crown, they have in that consideration great
interest in the State, and the privileges of their families preserved with
great reverence from the people; no time nor distance of degrees prejudicing
the conservation of that order which Nature prescribes them to the Succession
of the Kingdom. For which cause, though in the course of time, diverse families,
through sundry accidents, have changed their names; as some have taken the
surname of Valois, others of Bourbon, others of Orleans, others of Angolesme,
others of Vendosme, others of Alanson, and others of Montpensier; yet for all
that they have not lost the trace of their Royal Consanguinity, nor the right
of succeeding to the Crown; but the pre-eminencies of their Blood, and the same
privileges are ever from time to time preserved to all.

And because it is evident how much they are all concerned in the custody and
preservation of so great an inheritance, of which they are all successively
capable, it has therefore ever been a custom, that the next of Blood should be
Guardian to the Pupils, and Governor of the Kingdom, during the minority or
absence of the lawful King. Reason willing, that the Government should not be
committed to strangers, or those altogether Aliens, who might endeavor to
destroy and dismember the Union of so noble a Body; The Assembly of the States
has the power of the whole Kingdom.

The pre eminencies of the Royal Family; Inheritance, and Administration.


but to such, who, born of the same stock, ought in reason to attend the
preservation of the Crown, as their own birthright. Nor is this Prerogative a
custom only, but the States General of the Kingdom (which Assembly has the
power of the whole Nation) having often confirmed it with their consent, and
ordered it to be so; it is since become as a decreed Law, and a firm
established Constitution.

The Royal House then enjoys two Pre-eminencies: the one in matter of
Inheritanee; the other, of Administration: that, when any King dies without
male-children; this, when the absence or minority of the Prince requires some
other person for the Government and management of the State. These two
Privileges that are always inherent in those of the Royal Line, have been a
cause that the Princes of the Blood have ever held a great authority with the
people, and had a great part in the Government of the Kingdom. For they
themselves have ever been very vigilant in the administration of the Empire,
which they esteemed, reasonably enough, as their own; and the people,
conceiving the Government might, at some time or other, fall into their hands,
have ever had them in great veneration; and so much the rather, because it has
often been found by experience, that the eldest Line failing, the Crown has
been devolved upon the younger family.

So the Regal Authority having an orderly succession in the race of Mero^es,
The Royal races; The Meroue, Caroli, Capetts, and Valois, St. Lew^^ the Ninth.
afterward in the family of Carolins, and lastly in that of the Capetts; after
many Ages, Lewis the Ninth of that name possessed the Kingdom; He who for
innocence of life, and integrity of manners, was after his death deservedly
written in the Calendar of Saints. Of him were born two sons; Philip the Third,
surnamed The Hardy; and Robert, the younger, Count of Cleremont. From Philip
came the eldest Line, The Crown continued in the House of Valois th^ee hundred
years.
which enjoyed the Crown more than three hundred years, with the surname of
Valois: from Robert descended the House of Bourbon, so called (as it is a
custom among the French) from that State of which they bare the Title, and
enjoyed a long time as their own Inheritance.

Now whilst the House of Valois possessed the Crown, the House of Bourbon held
by consequence the rank of first Prince of the Blood, and enjoyed all those
privileges which we said before by Law and Custom belonged to that quality.
This Family, great, not only through nearness to the Crown, but also in large
possessions, abundance of treasure, reputation in war, and fruitfulness of
offspring; producing likewise frequently men of a liberal nature, and popular
civility; easily exceeded the limits of a private life; and with the sinews of
its own strength, together with the favor of the people, established it self
in an excessive state of greatness: which begetting jealousy, and envy in the
Kings, who were displeased at so great an eminence and authority, bred many
occasions of hate and suspicion* which sometimes also brake forth into open
war. For Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, made war upon John, Duke of
Bourbon, in the war entitled, For the Commonwealth; and Lewis the Twelfth
(though before he came to the Crown) tried the success of Arms with Peter of
Bourbon; and so, what by open defiance, what through secret malice, the Kings
of France grew daily more and more jealous of the Authority of the Princes of
Bourbon.

At the length, Francis the First came to the Crown; 1515.
who in the beginning of his Reign, led by the ardour and facility of youth,
The House of Bourbon being next to the Crown, and grown to a monstrous
greatness, was hated, kept under, and suppressed by the Kings.
began with great demonstration of affection, to confer honor upon the chief
Princes of the Blood* it seeming a thing suitable to that magnificence he
showed toward all men, and to the greatness of his mind, that those Lords most
nearly allied to him, should be most exalted, both for the honor of the Royal
Line, and for his own particular reputation: And having observed in Charles of
Bourbon, (who was the first Prince of the Blood) a generous courage, and a
genius fit for any employment, he promoted him to be High Constable of France;
and resolved that all the weighty affairs and principal charges of the Kingdom,
should pass only through his own hands, and those that were nearest of relation
to himself. But when he came to age more mature, the fervor of youth being
past, and finding by being conversant in affairs, the reasons by which his
Predecessors guided their counsels, with how much greater earnestness he strove
formerly to raise the House of Bourbon, with so much the more anxiety of mind
he labored now to abase their excessive greatness.

Nor did fortune fail to present an occasion, Francis the first advances
Charles of Bourbon, and afterward suppresseth him; whereupon he reb^lleth.
wonderfully proper for the execution of his design. For there being a Process
at that time between Louyse, the Kings Mother, and Charles of Bourbon, for the
same Dut^hy which he then held, the King thought with himself, that if he
caused Judgment to be given in favor of his Mother, and deprived the House of
Bourbon of their fundamental revenues, the Duke would easily fall from that
power and dignity which was chiefly upheld by so splendid a fortune.

But Charles, having (by the preceding of his business) discovered the
deceitful practices of the Chancellor Antonio del Prato, by the Kings
instigation, against him, disdain of the injury, and fear of ruin, which was
inevitably prepared, so much prevailed over him, that joining secretly with the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Henry the Eighth of England, he began to
conspire against the Kingdom, and the very person of the King. Which being
discovered, he was constrained to flee, and afterward bare Arms against him;
and continuing that course, it so fell out, that he was last of all General to
Caesar in the Battle at Pavia; where, after a bloody slaughter in the the
French Army, the King, environed by diverse Squadrons of Foot, was at length
taken prisoner. For these facts Charles being declared Rebel, and all his
estate confiscate; and having within a short time after, at the taking of Rome,
lost his life also; the House of Bourbon fell from that envied greatness, which
had caused such jealousy in the King.

This was not sufficient to stop the persecution now begun: for although
Charles were unhappily dead without children, and though the others of the
family did in no way partake of his counsels; notwithstanding, the King, more
swayed with revenge of the injuries past, than the force of reason; all the
Lords of that House, more through hate of their name, than any delinquency in
their persons, were utterly deprived of all favor at Court, and wholly removed
from the management of affairs. And although this rigor was in time somewhat
lessened, and the Kings mind so far mitigated, as to forget things past, and to
lay by the ill opinion he had conceived of them; notwithstanding he continued
studiously to endeavor to cut off all means whereby those Princes might return
to their former honor, and that power to which they were formerly with so much
favor advanced.

This secret intention of the Kings was very well observed by Charles Duke of
Vendosme, the chief of that House. Wherefore forcing himself with moderation of
mind to overcome the suspicion and jealousies that so oppressed his family, he
refused, during the Kings imprisonment, to pretend to the Regency which of
right belonged to him; and after the King was delivered, having retired himself
to the quiet of his own domestic affairs, sought not to be recalled to any
part in that Government in which he knew himself so much suspected. The rest of
the same House following his example, to show how much they were strangers to
the wicked counsels of Bourbon, by being such ready Executors, though to their
own diminution and prejudice, of the Kings inclinations, voluntarily withdrew
themselves from all business that might breed any suspicion of them; and
standing retired, little troubled themselves with the charges and commands at
Court; among which, despising the little ones, they already perceived it was
impossible for them to attain to those dignities which they knew belonged to
the greatness of their birth.

The House of Momorancy descends from one of those who issued out of Franconia
with the first King Pharamond, and pretends to be the first that received
Baptism.
The House of Bourbon thus suppressed, and removed from the affairs; there
sprang up under Francis the First, two great families, which within a short
time got the whole business of the State into their own hands; Momorancy and
Guise, neither of them any way allied to the House Royal, but both the one and
the other of very eminent Nobility. That of Momorancy keeps a venerable record
of the eminency of their Ancestors; for they do not only show a right descent
from one of those Barons that accompanied the first King Pharamond in the
Salique Expedition; but prove also, they were the first among the French
Nation, that received Baptism, and the Christian Faith: wherefore among other
marks of Nobility, those of that family give this device: Deus primum
Christianum servet, as an undoubted testimony of the antiquity and piety of
their Predecessors. From this stock came Anne of Momorancy, a man of great
quickness of wit, but a moderate disposition; who, besides his natural
dexterity and gravity, being accompanied with a singular industry, Anne de
Momorancy, after the death of Bourbon, made High Constable.
and exceeding patience in the various changes of the Court, he knew so well in
what manner to gain King Francis his affection, that having passed through other
great charges, he was first by him promoted to the Office of Grand Master, and
a little after the death of Bourbon, to the dignity of High-Constable, and had
then the Government of the War, The House of Guise descended from that of
Lorain, reckons in the male-line of their ancestors Godfrey of Bullen, King of
Jerusalem; and shows a pedigree from a daughter of Cha^les the Great.
and Superintendency of the Affairs wholly in his own hands.

But the House of Lorain, from which are descended the Lords of Guise, deriving
their original from great antiquity, reckon in the male-line of their
Predecessors, Godfrey of Bullen: He who being General of the Christians at the
recovery of the holy Sepulcher, attained in Asia by his Piety and Arms, the
Kingdom of Jerusalem; and by the Mothers side, shows a long continued pedigree
from a daughter of the Emperor Charles the Great. In this Family, flourishing
in wealth, and powerful in possessions, Anthony Duke of Lorain obtaining the
Sovereignty over his own people, Claudian the younger brother, (a Prince of
excellent virtue, and no less fortunate) going some little time after into
France, to take possession of the Duchy of Guise, gave such clear testimony of
his conduct and valor in the Wars, that after the Battle of Marignan, wherein
he commanded the Almans, being found most grievously wounded among thickest of
the dead bodies, and almost miraculously recovered, he ever after held the
first place of reputation among the French Commanders. But though both these
Families had deserved so well, as it was not easy to judge which should have
the pre-eminence; yet as Guise was superior in birth, and large possessions,
so the Constable had the advantage of the Kings favor, and chief management of
the affairs. The truth is, as the condition of the Court is ever various and
unconstant, Anne of Mo^erancy and the Duke of Guise fall into disgrace with
King Francis.
so both of them toward the end of Francis his Reign, passed through many
accidents of great hazard and difficulty. For the Cons^able, who was a chief
instrument in persuading the King to credit the promises of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, and to give him a safe conduct when he was forced in haste
to pass quite through the Kingdom unarmed, to suppress the Rebellion at Gaun^:
afte^wards the Emperors deeds not any way corresponding with his words, fell
into such disgrace with the King and Court, that being noted by every one for a
light faithless man, he was forced to absent himself, and reti^e to a private
life, to be secure from the persecutions of his adversaries. And the Duke of
Guise having without Commission carried some Companies of soldiers within the
Kingdom to aid his Brother, the Duke of Lorain, in the War against the
Anabaptists, so incensed the King, that he was likewise forced, by withdrawing
himself, to give place to the adversity of fortune.

The Constable and the Duke of Guise thus gone from Court, there came in their
places to the Government of the affairs, Claud d'Annibaut Admiral, and Francis,
Cardinal of Tournon; men that by long experience and industry had acquired a
great reputation of wisdom; but of such private condition for their birth and
fortune, that they could never ascend to that suspected greatness, which the
King, as dangerous, abhorred in any subject.

Some are of opinion, that the King, a Prince of exquisite sagacity in timely
discovering the natures and inclinations of men, at such time when through
passed adversities, he was grown to be of a difficult and jealous nature, made
it his study to suppress and banish from Court the Constable and the Duke of
Guise, whom before he so much loved, and so constantly favored; supposing he
could never reign absolutely, nor rule as he listed, whilst he had men about
him of such power and reputation, who were in a manne^ able to balance his
will. And as in the Constable, that which most offended him, was his great
experience, and too much knowledge, through which he believed he could not
conceal from him his most secret and hidden designs: so in the Duke of Guise,
he was displeased not only with the eminency of his birth, but also the
restlesness of his thoughts: perceiving in those of that Family a disposition
and inclination ready to embrace any seasonable opportunity; and withal, an
ability not unfit to manage any whatsoever weighty or dangerous design. They
add also, that toward his end he gave secretly this advice to his Son Henry
the Second, That he should beware of the excessive greatness of his Subjects,
but particularly of the House of Guise; who, if they were suffered to grow too
high, would without doubt molest the quiet of the Kingdom. Which, though I dare
not affirm, having no other testimony than public Fame, which often proceeds
from malice; yet it is certain, the things which since happened have added great
credit to that report.

But howsoever it were, Francis the First being dead, 1547.
the new King Henry the Second (inclined rather to follow the appetite of his
own will, than the advertisements and so late example of his father) removed at
first dash from Court, and from their places, all those that before had any
part in the Government, and substituted into their rooms the same men whom the
deceased King had taken occasion to discharge of their trust. Presently were
dismissed from all employment the Admiral, and the Cardinal of Tournon, both of
them privy to those secrets which for many years were negotiated by this
Prince, and his Predecessors; in whose room were called to the principal
charges of State Anne de Momorancy High-Constable, and Francis of Lorain,
Momorancy and Guise are recalled to the management of the affairs by Henry the
Second.
Son to Claud Duke of Guise. These being made as it were Moderators of the
Kings youth, and Arbitrators in the Court of all businesses of consequence,
though they had several thoughts, several ends and inclinations, yet in power
and authority were in a manner the same. For the Constable, a man ripe in
years, a friend to peaceful counsels, and of a long practical experience in the
Art of Governing, grew to an exceeding opinion of wisdom, and held the first
place in the management of the affairs of State. But the Duke of Guise, being
in the flower of his age, strong of body, of a noble presence, full of vivacity
of courage, and of a ready wit for any generous notable action, had the air and
favor of the Court; was admitted by the King to a familiarity of conversation,
and as it were a companion in all his pleasures and youthful exercises: so that
his affection to the Constable was rather respect, and his inclination to the
Duke of Guise might rather be called acquaintance. Their ways also were very
different; for the Constable loving parsimony and moderation, with a certain
kind of pride that usually accompanies old age, slighting the applications of
strangers, oftentimes opposed with his authority the Kings liberality, and full
of austerity, and severe constancy, little esteemed the popular applause. But
quite contrary, the Duke of Guise, affable of speech, and popular in his
actions, with ostentation of liberality and pleasantness, labored to win the
affections of all the soldiers; and by taking into his protection those that
were in necessity, sought to gain the dependency and affections of strangers.
Hence began (as it often happens) to rise an emulation betwixt them; for
finding they were equally loved and credited, they both labored with all their
power to get the advantage of each other in the Kings favor, Emulation between
the Constable and the Duke of Guise.
and administration of affairs. Wherein, beside their natural inclination, they
were upon all occasions animated by their nearest Allies: The Constable by
Jasper de Coligny, Lord of Chastillon, his sisters son, who after the death of
Annebaut, was created Admiral of France; a man of subtle wit and esteemed
valor: and the Duke of Guise, by his brother Charles, Cardinal of Lorain; who
though he were singular in learning and gracefulness of speech, those excellent
endowments received no little luster from his dignity and noble presence.

Fortune was not slack in opening a large field to stir up this emulation: For
the Emperor Charles the Fifth preparing a mighty Army to besiege Mets a place
of strength, which they pretend belongs to the Empire, but placed upon the
Frontiers, serves in a manner as a Bulwark to France: and the greatness of the
preparations striking a terror through all the Kingdom, it appeared fit that
one of the Kings Favorites should be chosen to manage the troublesome command
of that War. But the Constable being now aged, being above sixty years old,
desiring rather to continue about the Kings person, than to expose the
reputation he had already gotten to new hazards, seemed silently to refuse the
weight of so great a charge. On the contrary, the Duke of Guise, who saw there
was no other way left to raise himself in favor and reputation above
Momorancy, but by arms, being of a warlike genius, and great courage, sought
openly that employment. So the Constable, glad of the advantage, to see the
life and reputation of his Rival exposed to such danger, either giving consent,
or not contradicting it, the defense of Mets was wholly committed to the Duke
of Guise; who with his valor and conduct having fully answered the expectation
of all men, discharging himself with great honor in so doubtful an enterprise,
remained in such reputation both with the King, and all the French Nation, that
afterward, a General being to be sent into Italy, to recover the Kingdom of
Naples, there was no doubt but that charge should be conferred upon him. And
although the War of Italy was altogether without success, or but of little
advantage, not by the Dukes fault, but partly through the ordinary defect of
the French Soldiers, partly through the unconstancy of Confederates; he
nevertheless grew in greater authority and reputation than happily he would
have done by a victory.

For Philip the Second, King of Spain, to whom his Father Charles the Fifth had
surrendered the Government of his Kingdom, having brought an Army upon the
confines of France out of Flanders, and to divert the War of Italy, invaded
Picardy, the Constable who was Governor of that Province, was forced to absent
himself from the King, and once more, against his will, to try the fortune of
War, when losing the Battle of S. Quintin, and being taken prisoner by the
Spaniards, to the evident danger and great terror of all the adjacent
Provinces, the Kings Council thought it necessary to recall out of Italy the
Duke of Guise to oppose the fury of the Enemy, and to provide against those
dangers, and repair those losses which the overthrow given to the Constables
Army had occasioned: Which expectation was so fully answered, not only by the
expedition he made thither; but by the memorable sieges of Calais, Guines, and
Thionville, that he was ever after without scruple thought as far superior to
the Constable, as the Victor ought to be above the vanquished.

But the Constable being in process of time freed from his imprisonment, and
returned to Court, it soon appeared, that the King began to renew his former
inclination toward him: for* attributing his late misfortune to the uncertain
chance of War, he received him into the same nearness as before, and again made
use of his counsel, by which he was eased (being wholly addicted to his
pleasure) of the intolerable burden of business. Whereupon the Duke of Guise,
and his Brother the Cardinal of Lorain, the one in War, the other in Civil
matters, of great reputation and credit, doubting he would easily recover his
former power, if there were not some stratagem or impediment laid in his way;
they resolved to side with Diana, Duchess of Valentinois; and so joining
interests and a strict league of friendship, under the protection of her favor
to maintain their own greatness. This Diana was of a noble Family, and
descended from the Counts of Poictiers, endowed in her youth with rare and
singular beauty, of a courtly, lively, and graceful behavior, of a flowing
sprightly wit, and indeed adorned with all those qualities that render young
Ladies esteemed and favored. She was married to the Seneschal of Normandy, and
by him having had two daughters, in a short time after became a widow; then
that yoke shaked off, letting her self loose to the pleasures of the Court, she
presently became so absolutely Mistress of the Kings affections, that she
disposed of him as she pleased; and not degenerating from her woman's nature,
governed so licentiously, and with such greediness appropriated all the riches
of the Crown, that she became intolerable to the whole Kingdom, and universally
hated of all men. For the Queen (although she made show of the contrary)
through disdain of being rivalled, was inwardly her bitter enemy; and the
Nobility, who through her womanish malice and practices, were many of them ill
used, and disobliged, could not endure to submit themselves and their fortunes
to her peevish humor; and the people ceased not to curse her covetousness
perpetually, attributing the cause of all their Taxes which they so groaned
under, only to her avarice.

But the Guises, solicited only with the fear of falling from their greatness,
to which they had climbed through so many difficulties, having no regard to this
universal hate, much less to any other respect, resolved to secure themselves
under her protection and favor; which in a short time grew so partial on their
side, that having married one of her daughters to the Duke of Aumale their
third brother, they united all their powers to one and the same end. But the
Constable soon perceived the subtle practices of the Guises, and not absolutely
relying upon his own strength, nor the Kings favor, thought likewise of making
his addresses to the same Diana; and, as the Guises had allured her with the
greatness of their alliance, to win and draw her to his party by satisfying her
covetousness, a passion by which he perceived she was no less swayed than by
her ambition: Wherefore beginning to use her with great respect, to gain her
the sooner, at the same time he gave her many rich presents, and was so far
transported with the desire of effecting his purpose, that, all greatness of
spirit laid aside, he resolved to take for his daughter-in-law, a Niece of
hers, whom he married to his second Son Henry Lord of Danville; which was so
much the more unadvisedly done, by how much Diana already straightly united
with the Guises, really endeavored to maintain their power, and favored the
Constables designs in appearance and show only.

From henceforward it was in vain any longer to oppose the greatness of the
Guises. For besides ^he merits of their actions, in the same time that this
contention was at the highest for superiority; Francis the Daulphine of France,
and the Kings eldest son, took to wife Mary, only heir to the Kingdom of
Scotland, who was daughter to James Stuart, then lately deceased, and Mary of
Lorain, The three brothers of Guise made absolute administrators of the
politic and military Government* by reason of their alliance with the Dolphin.
sister to the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal; so great an alliance, that they
seemed now to have the same interest with the Crown; in so much, that nothing
remaining to the Constable and his, but the Kings usual countenance, and some
natural propensity of kindness to him; nor to the other Lords and Barons of
France, but only the charges and offices of less consequence; the three
brothers of Guise got into their hands all the principal dignities and chief
Governments of the Kingdom, together with the Superintendency of all the
affairs both Martial and Civil.

Whilst these things, which busied the minds of all men, were agitated at the
Court, the House of Bourbon, next of blood, and nearest allied to the Crown,
contrary to the custom of the Nation, being in a manner deprived of all honors
and dignities, seldom appeared, unless called upon by the necessity of war, or
in the exercise of their charge in those few small Governments which yet
remained in their Family. And though the Prince of Anguin, one of the same
House, so advanced himself by his valor and generosity of spirit, that the
King was content to bestow upon him the Government of his Army in Piedmont,
where he won the victory at Cerisola, and in diverse other occasions gained
still greater credit and reputation: Notwithstanding, he not living long, his
good fortune but little advantaged the oppressed and still-persecuted House of
Bourbon; for he once dead, it remained absolutely deprived of all manner of
greatness or favor at Court. The chief of this House were Antony Duke of
Vendosme, and Lewis Prince of Conde his brother, both sons to that Charles of
Vendosme, who after the Rebellion of Bourbon, and the imprisonment of Francis
the First, by his modesty and retiredness, in great part appeased the hate
which so violently raged against the whole Family.

Those of Bourbon seeing themselves thus overtopped in power and authority by
the House of Guise, (being but strangers newly come out of the House of Lorain,
which lies between France and Germany) were not a little troubled to see
themselves not only deprived of all privileges belonging to their blood,
(except that which could not be taken from them, the right of succession) but,
whereas by the natural course they used always to hold the first place about
the King; to be now, contrary to all reason and justice, the last: And their
condition was yet more deplorable, by reason of the Kings resoluteness and
violent nature, not at all to be moved by the complaints of those who seemed in
any way to oppose his natural inclinations. In so much, as the Court losing in
a manner its natural unconstancy, kept still the same face and form of things;
the Guises ruling all so absolutely, that none durst oppose their power. The
Constables greatness afflicted them not so much; but on the contrary, they
exceedingly grieved to see him so much fallen from his former height, and left
in such a state, that he was scarce able to uphold himself. For being joined
with him not only by alliance, but in friendship and interests, they had yet
hope by means of his favor to rise again; at least to some tolerable
condition, if not to the power and authority their Predecessors had formerly
enjoyed. So that now deprived in a manner of all hope, (which is usually a
comfort to those in affliction) they became so much the more sensible of the
hardness of their present fortune.

But amongst these, Antony of Vendosme, a Prince of great goodness, (and of a
facile quiet nature) bare his misfortunes with an excellent temper; Antony of
Vendosme of the House of Bourbon, he that was father to Henry the 4th, marries
the daughter of the King of Navarre, by whom he inherits the pretensions of
that Kingdom.
his thoughts being for the most part busied about greater matters: for having
married Jane of Albert, only daughter to Henry King of Navarre, and after his
father-in-laws death, assumed the Title and Arms of King; he took upon him not
only the care of the Principality of Bearn, at the foot of the Pirenean
Mountains* (where he was absolute Sovereign) but also used all manner of
endeavor by way of accord, to recover his Kingdom, which the Spaniard had long
possessed by force, ever since the Wars between Ferdinand the Catholic King,
and Lewis the Twelfth. But the King of France, by whose means it was lost, had
often, though to no purpose, (being so nearly joined to Spain) attempted the
regaining of it by force. Wherefore now these two great Kings being about a
Treaty for a general peace; he hoped likewise so to be comprised in the
Articles of Agreement, that his own state should be restored to him; or at
least changed for some other lands of like value. He grew more passionate in
that desire, because the Queen, his Wife, had brought him a Son, who, in
remembrance of his Grandfather on the mothers side, was called Henry; the same,
who after the revolution of many miseries and irksom Wars, by success of
victory obtaining the Crown, is now by general consent surnamed The Great: The
birth of Henry the 4th, Dec. 13. 1554* in the Territory of Paw, in theViscounty
of Bear^^, a Free State.
He was born upon the thirteenth of December, in the year of our Salvation
1554. in the Town of Paw, in the Viscounty of Bearne, which is most deliciously
situated at the foot of the Perinees. This birth, as it greatly rejoiced the
Parents, so it spurred them on, with all eagerness, to pursue their designs for
the recovery of Navarre; and withal the King Antony of Bourbon thinking he
should easilier interest the King to include his restoration in the Treaty,
than obtain as Prince of the Blood any dignity or Government in France, with so
much the greater patience and meekness, suffered the injuries cast upon his
Family. And although the King, either still of the same mind to lessen the
Princes of the Blood, or else merely in anger to Antony, because he refused to
change his Signiory of Bearne, and the rest of his possessions in those p^rts,
for other Cities and Lordships in the Kingdom of France, dismembered his
Government of Guienne, which he enjoyed as first Prince of the Blood, and
separated from it all Lang^^ed^^, a large and populous Province, together with
the City of Toulouse, and assigned the Government of them to the Constable; he
notwithstanding, dissembling so great an affront, without any show of being at
all ill satisfied, constantly persevered in his design.

But Lewis of Conde his brother, full of high thoughts, and of an unquiet
spirit, not awed by such pretenses, finding the narrowness of his fortune could
not maintain the greatness of his birth, spitefully vexed at his present
condition, could not conceal the malice and envy he bare to the House of Guise,
which in a manner devoured all the chief employments of the Kingdom. Besides
his own interest, the disgraces laid upon the Constable, made not a little
impression in him: for having married his Niece Elianor de Roye, and made a
firm League of friendship with him and his son Momorancy, he esteemed the
suppression of that Family an increase and accomplishment of his own
misfortunes. These unquiet thoughts were still nourished in him by the Admiral
of Chastillon, and his brother Mounsieur d' Andelot: The first, of an ambitious
nature, but withal, cautious and subtle, let pass no opportunity by stirring up
troubles* to raise himself to an eminent degree of power: The other of a fiery
disposition, rash by nature, and perpetually involved in factions, endeavored
by his example and persuasions, more to exasperate the Princes fury, which
already had kindled such a fire in his breast, that burning with hate, and made
as it were desperate, his mind was wholly set upon innovation.

Such was the state of things, such the emulations and enmities amongst the
great ones, disposed upon every little occasion to break out into open
dissension, when upon a sudden supervened the death of Henry the Second, in the
month of July, 1559. 1559.


This Prince had in the War proved the variousness of fortune; and desiring at
the last to ease his Kingdom of those great expenses and troubles, he was
persuaded, joining with the Neighbor Princes, to establish a general Peace: to
confirm which with the most lasting bonds that might be, at the same time he
married his eldest daughter Elizabeth to Philip the Second King of Spain, and
Margaret his only sister to Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. But whilst these
Marriages were celebrating, with all Royal magnificence, and an universal joy
in the City of Paris; Behold, the last day of June, Henry the 2d. killed in a
Tournament by Montgomery. Francis the 2d. his Son, being 16 years old, succeeds
to the Crown.
in a public solemn Tournament, running with headed Lances against Gabriel
Count of Montgomery, Captain of his Guard, by accident the Vizor of his Helmet
flew open, and the staff of his adversaries Lance hitting him in the right
eye, he was presently carried away to the Hostel des Tournelles, where, his
wound being mortal, the tenth of July he passed out of this life, much lamented
of all men.

Henry the Second being deceased, there succeeded to the Crown Francis, Dolphin
of France, his eldest Son, being about sixteen years of age, a Youth of a
languishing spirit, unhealthful and of a tender constitution, under whose
Government all things ran on in such a precipitate way to the foreseen end,
that hidden discords brake out into open enmities, and soon after came to the
resolution of Arms. The Kings youth, or rather his natural incapacity,
required, though not a direct Regent, (for the Kings of France are at fourteen
years of age out of minority) yet a prudent assiduous Governor, till his
natural weakness were overcome by maturity of years. The ancient Customs of the
Kingdom called to that charge the Princes of the Blood: amongst which, for
nearness and reputation it belonged to the Prince of Conde, and the King of
Navarre. On the other side, the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorain,
nearly allied to the King in relation of the Queen his Wife, pretended to have
this Dignity conferred upon them, as due to their merits, and great services
done to the Crown; and, which most imported, because they in effect enjoyed it
during the lifetime of the deceased King. Amongst these, Katherine of Medicis,
the Kings Mother, for nearness of Blood, and according to many examples in
former times, pleaded the right to be in her; and her hopes were so increased
through the dissension among the Princes, that she doubted not easily to
compass what she desired. The fear that one faction had of another, facilitated
her design, insomuch that the Guises, knowing they had not the Qualification of
Blood that was required to obtain the Government of the State, and foreseeing
how much the authority of a Mother was like to prevail with the unexperienced
youth of a Son; resolved to join and unite themselves with her, dividing into
two parts that power, which they doubted they could not wholly obtain for
themselves. And in like manner the Queen, a woman of a manlike spirit and
subtle wit, knowing the Princes of the Blood are ever naturally against the
Government and greatness of the Queens; foreseeing also, that as an Italian and
a stranger, she should need the support of some potent Faction to establish her
self; willingly condescended to make a League with the Guises, who, she saw,
would content themselves with a share only of the Government, which the Princes
of Bourbon pretended to belong wholly to them.

A great obstacle to this Union, was the mutual interest of the Guises and the
Duchess Diana, whom the deceased King loved extremely even to his last; but
the business requiring it, delays not being to be used in such great designs;
The Queen on the one side, who in her Husbands lifetime had with most
commendable patience endured a Rival, was inclined with the same moderation to
forget all injuries past; And the Guises on the other part, wholly fixing their
thoughts upon the present occasion, easily consented she should be abased, and
removed from the Court; provided, she were not absolutely deprived of her
estate, which after her was come to their third Brother the Duke of A^male.
Wherefore their common interest accommodating their present Union, and all
matters concerning Diana settled to the Queens liking; they began unanimously to
lay the basis of their intended greatness.

The King of Navarre was absent, little satisfied with the King and the Court,
because in the Capitulation with Spain, no regard was had of his interest for
the recovery of his Kingdom. TheObsequies of King Henry the Second, last 33
days.
The Constable was employed in the Obsequies of the King, which were on purpose
committed to his care: for, that solemnity continuing with the same pomp three
and thirty days together, it is not lawful for him that has the charge of it
to depart from the place where the dead body lies, and the Ceremonies are kept,
which was in the Hostel des Tournelles, The King by the persuasion of his wife,
commits the management of the affairs to his Mother, the Duke of Guise, and the
Cardinal of Lorain.
very far distant from the Louvre, whither (as the manner is) the new King was
brought to reside. So that all those obstacles removed, partly by industry,
partly by fortune, it was no difficult matter to get the King, who was likewise
more than ordinarily led by the beauty and allurements of the Queen his Wife,
to remit his whole authority into the hands of their nearest Allies. So to the
Duke was committed the care of the Militia; the Civil affairs to the Cardinal;
and to the Queen Mother the superintendence of all.

Things thus settled according to their own will, they began to take surer
footing; and there being none present who by complaints or practice could work
the King to open a way to alterations, they presently entered into consultation
how to remove all such as might in any way oppose their designs. The causes of
the Constables disgrace at Court, and his exclusion from the affairs.
There was no doubt but their first attempt would be upon the Constable, as one
whose authority and wisdom the Guises most apprehended, and the Queen Mother
long, though secretly, hated. The Guises feared him by reason of the ancient
emulations that had ever been between them, and because the opinion of his
wisdom, though he had lost his power at the Court, preserved him still in great
credit with the people. But the Queens hate of him proceeded from many causes,
and particularly because when she was first married, he used all manner of
endeavor to persuade the King to repudiate her as barren; and afterward, when
she proved to have children, he never ceased to speak scandalously of her,
saying, Of all the Kings children not any one resembled him, but only Diana his
bastard-daughter, who was destined for wife to Francis of Momorancy, one of his
sons: which speeches (though not directly) cast a blemish upon the Queens
honor and chastity. Nor besides these injuries, could she easily forget, that
he (as he was naturally averse to strangers) had obstinately persecuted all
those Florentines who through relation either of Blood or Country had recourse
to her Court; and as if he pretended to an emulation with her herself, had ever
used what means he could possible to affront and keep under all her dependants.
All which things in her Husbands lifetime she either patiently overcame, or
wisely seemed not to take notice of, as indeed she was a woman of a most
insearchable mind, and a most profound dissembler. But now that there was an
opportunity, they made her easily to consent to the desire of the Guises, which
was under other pretenses to deprive him of all Government in the Kingdom, or
favor at Court. Wherefore in private discourse, cunningly falling into that
Argument, they with one accord represented to the King the too great authority
of that man; that if he remained at Court, he would pretend to keep him like a
Child, under Government, and the lash of his Discipline; and that being
straightly united with the Princes of Bourbon, (always enemies to those that
possessed the Crown which they had long looked after) it was not fit in any
manner to trust him, lest through that means his Majesty might expose both his
own life and his young brothers to the treacheries of those men, who being
suspected by reason of their restless ambition, were by the Kings his
Predecessors always kept under, and at a distance. These Arguments easily
making an impression in the Kings weakness, (as those that know little are
naturally jealous of those that know more) they resolved upon a dextrous manner
to license him from the Court. Wherefore his fathers Obsequies ended, receiving
him with great expressions of kindness, he told him, that being not able any
other way to reward the greatness of his merits, and the pains he had undergone
in the service of his Predecessors, he was determined to ease him from the
cares and weight of the Government, which he knew now were burdensome, and
disproportioned to his age, which he would not oppress with the excessive toil
of business, but reserve him for some great occasion; and that therefore he
might retire himself to his ease where best pleased him, he being resolved not
to wear him out as a servant, or a vassal, but always to honor him as a
father. By which speech the Constable knowing it was no time to dispute the
matter, The Constable retires the second time from the Court.
but that it would be best for him to accept that for a reward which otherwise
would turn to a punishment, having thanked the King, and recommended to his
protection his sons and nephews, retired himself to his Palace of Chantilly,
ten leagues from Paris, where he had formerly been sheltred from the
persecutions of the Court.

The Constable thus sent away, the next thought was how to remove the Prince of
Conde, whose arrogance and animosity appeared every day more prompt to take
hold of any whatsoever occasion to attempt innovations, and to disturb the form
of the present Government. But there being yet no means found to remove him, by
reason of his quality of Prince, and for want of a just pretext, it was thought
a good expedient, to send him out of the way, until such time as the foundation
of their new-formed Government were settled. Wherefore being appointed
Ambassador to the Catholic King, to confirm the Peace and Alliance contracted
at the end of the last Kings Reign, departing from the Court, he left them the
Field free to perfect their purposed designs.

In the same manner they proceeded with all other persons. For the Queen and
the Guises having resolved formerly to establish their commenced greatness,
they thought it would happen according to their desire, if reducing by little
and little, the Fortresses, Soldiers, Treasure, and Sinews of the State, into
their own power, all the essential important businesses of the Kingdom were
either managed by themselves, or else committed to the trust of their nearest
followers and adherents. But they were not so wholly governed by their
interests, that they had not still a regard to the public good, and their own
reputation. For they advanced not, as the common course is, men of little merit
and abject condition, thinking they would be more trusty because of their
obligation; but were industrious to get about them persons of known worth,
noble birth, and above all, of good reputation among the common people; by
which they obtained two ends at the same time; the one, that the people were
commonly pleased, and their ill-willers could have no just exceptions; the
other, that crediting persons of honor and sincere intentions, they were not
cozened nor deluded in their trust, as often those are that in great business
rely upon men of base extraction, or of vicious life.

According to which Maxim, Francis Olivier the High Chancellor, and the
Cardinal of Tournon, are recalled the second time to the Court.
they recalled to the exercise of his charge Francis Olivier, High Chancellor
of the Kingdom, a man of tried integrity, and severe constancy in the
Government; who for too much freedom, or too much persevering in his opinions,
was at the beginning of Henry's Reign, by the Constables persuasion, dismissed
from the Court. Likewise they recalled to the Council of State, and near to the
Kings Person, the Cardinal of Tournon; he who in the time of Francis the First,
Grandfather to this King, had the principal Authority in the State: by which
means, being men of tried and known goodness, and enemies to all impositions
which oppressed the Commonwealth, they not only satisfied the desire of the
common people, and public expectation; but being disgraced, and as it were
cast out by the Constable, and now recalled with much credit to the present
Government, they served also (by their counsels and industry) to establish the
foundation of their commenced greatness. Like dexterity and like artifices were
used to fetch in the rest. But with the House of Bourbon and the House of
Momorancy, they proceeded not with such moderation: on the contrary, the
Guises, transported, with a desire, as much as was possible, to abase their old
enemy, and the splendor of the Royal Family, readily embraced any occasion to
diminish their reputation, or otherwise to prejudice them. Gasper de Coligny
the Admiral, was possessed of two several Governments, the Isle of France (so
that Province is called wherein Paris is situated) and Picardy: and, because
the Laws of the Kingdom prohibit any one to have two charges, the late King had
resolved to give the Government of Picardy to the Prince of Conde; thinking by
that means, in some measure, to pacify his mind, which he knew, through his
oppressions, was much incensed. To which he was the rather induced, because his
father having long enjoyed that Government, and after him the King of Navarre
his brother, he not only very much desired it, but had also some just and
reasonable pretenses to it. But the Admiral having in consideration of the
Prince surrendered it, and the King dying almost at the same time, Francis, not
regarding his fathers purpose, though already declared, at the instance of the
Guises, conferred the same Government upon Charles de Cosse, Marshall of
Brissac, a Captain of great reputation, and no less virtue; but who taking his
rise from the fortune of the House of Lorain, and straightly united with those
Princes in all things, depended absolutely upon them. The same respect was born
to Momorancy, the Constables eldest son: For he having married Diana,
bastard-daughter to Henry, with promise to have the Office of Grand Maistre
conferred upon him, which his father had enjoyed many years, the Duke of Guise,
as soon as Francis came to the Crown, got it for himself; it being his chief
end, to add to his new greatness, new authority, and new luster, and to deprive
that family of it, which he desired to bring as low as was possible. Thus the
Duke, and much more the Cardinal, when any opportunity was offered to depress
their adversaries, and advance themselves, most greedily entertained it. But
the Queen Mother, who knew such excessive covetousness, and great animosity,
must of necessity, at one time or other, produce some great evil, and wished
they would proceed with more dexterity, and dissimulation, was so bold as in
the beginning to oppose the counsels and resolutions of those, by whose power
her own authority was chiefly upheld. Now the Princes of Bourbon in this manner
excluded from any part of the Government, and almost from the Court, and from
the Kings ear, began at last to weigh the estate of their own affairs; and
considering the proceedings of their adversaries, (who, not content with their
present authority, contrived all means to establish themselves for the future)
they resolved no longer to stand by as idle spectators of their own disgraces,
but to find out some remedy for the time to come, which might recompense their
past losses, and stop the precipice of their future ruin, which they saw
undoubtedly lay before them. To this end, Antony, King of Navarre, having left
his young son to the care of the Queen, his wife, in Bearne, in a manner secure
from that fire, which he saw now kindling to consume the Kingdom of France,
came to Vandosme, Secret Assembly of the Princes of Bourbon, and other
discontented Lords.
where met him the Prince of Conde, then returned from his Embassy, together
with the Admiral Andelot, and the Cardinal of Chatillon his brothers, Charles
Count of Roche-faucault, Francis Vidame of Chartres, and Antony Prince of
Portian, all near Allies and Friends; with whom came diverse other Gentlemen,
ancient dependents and adherents to the Families of Bourbon and Momorancy. Nor
did the Constable (who, under pretense of retiredness and a quiet life,
secretly gave motion to all the wheels of this attempt) fail to send thither
his old Secretary Dardres, that by assisting at the Assembly, he might
represent to them his judgment concerning the present business.

Now entering there into a debate what (as things stood) was fittest to be done;
they all agreed in the end, but were of different opinions concerning the
means: For they all knew the great indignities received by the Princes of the
Blood; who were not only put by the first place in the Government, but deprived
of those few charges that remained amongst them: likewise they clearly foresaw
how great a ruin suddenly threatened both the Princes of the Blood themselves,
and their whole party; the suppression of which, they saw was the Guises chief
aim. Wherefore they all concluded, that in the first place it was necessary to
provide, as much as might be possible, against so great a danger, before things
were brought to the last extremities, and irrepairable. But by what means this
was to be done, they did not so easily agree among themselves.

The Prince of Conde, the Vidame of Chartres, d' Andelot, and diverse others,
the most ardent and resolute amongst them, were of opinion, that without giving
more time to their adversaries to strengthen themselves, and augment their
power and reputation, they should forthwith have recourse to Arms, as the most
expedite remedy, and more secure than any other. They fur^her showed, it was
but in vain any longer to expect in hope that the King would at length be
moved, of his own free will, to restore them to their rights: for being of
himself unable to resolve any thing, he would hardly perceive or shake off that
carelessness wherein from his birth his own nature had as it were buried him;
that overawed by the authority of a Mother, and the power which the Guises
usurped over him, he would not dare to resume that Sovereignty which he had so
easily parted with: that the complaints and admonitions of the Princes of the
Blood, and subjects well affected to the Crown, would never come to his ears,
being as it were besieged (even to the servants about his person) by men hired
by their adversaries, the Champions of the present Tyranny: and therefore it
was not to be expected, that the King should, of his own deliberation, yield
them any relief, to whom their complaints would never be admitted, but deformed
and blasted with the odious names of Rebellion, Treason, and Conspiracy: What
else then could they look for? that the Queen Mother, and the Guises, should
willingly depart from that greatness, which with such pains and artifices they
had established, to share it with their enemies? that was a hope more vain, and
more unreasonable than the former: for what men acquire boldly, they do not
often part with cowardly. It is ordinary and natural for things unlawful and
unfit, to be sought after secretly, and acquired leisurely; but once gotten
into possession, they are afterward impudently held, and maintained openly:
That the show of right, the refuge and authority of the Laws, (things that use
to prevail with private men) do yield, without contest, to the violence and
force of Princes, who measure reason by the rule of their power and will; and
that to proceed with such respect, increased confidence and boldness in their
adversaries; That to begin with complaints and supplications, was but to sound
the Trumpet before the Battle, to give the enemy warning to prepare for his
defense; That the success of great designs depended on the quickness of
execution, and timid uncertain counsels used to abate the courages of men,
vilify their strength, and let pass opportunities, of themselves apt enough to
slip away: That therefore it was necessary to hasten the taking up of Arms,
thereby to open a way to the suppression of their unprepared enemies; and not
to use slow wary courses, which would ruin the foundation of their hopes, and
render the whole enterprise very difficult.

On the contrary, the King of Navarre, the Admiral, the Prince of Portian, and
the Constables Secretary in his Lords name, disliked so at first to have
recourse to force, and recommended more moderate gentle remedies. For they knew
well, however the Princes of the Blood professed to take Arms rather to set the
King at liberty, who was besieged and oppressed by the power of strangers, than
against his State and Authority; nevertheless, it would be sinisterly
interpreted, and abhorred by all true Frenchmen; who most religiously
reverence the Royal Majesty, which ought not in consideration whatsoever, nor
under any pretenses, to be in the least degree violated or constrained. They
considered withal, that observing the strictness of the Laws, they could not
justly force the King to yield up the Government into their hands; for being
now passed fourteen years of age, he was no longer subject to Tutelage, or the
Government of any: and therefore it would be better to manage their cause with
dexterity, and show of modesty in their attempts and complaints, as wholly
founded upon equity, rather than commit it to the fury of War: and if this
resolution were prudently followed with art and industry, they despaired not to
secure the Queen Mother; who, if she were once drawn from the Guises party, the
foundation of their vast Greatness would soon fall, and a most secure and easy
way be open to their own pretenses. Neither was it altogether to be doubted,
that the Guises, who, without contradiction, had with such boldness engrossed
the whole, when they saw themselves so sharply and powerfully assaulted, would
at least yield up some part of the Government to the Princes of Bourbon: which
once possessed of, they might secure themselves from those present indignities
and imminent dangers that now so diversely threatened them; in which manner they
thought it much better quietly to content themselves with some reasonable
condition, than to hazard all to the instability of fortune, and uncertain
chance of War: to maintain which, they did not see what Forces they could hope
for in France against their lawful natural King, nor what assistance was to be
had from stranger Princes, who by the late Treaty and Alliances were so firmly
united and entered into a League with him; in which consideration, it was
greatly to be feared, that by taking of Arms, they might rather open a
destructive way even to the utter ruin of their whole Family, than an
honorable inlet to the Government and Administration of the Kingdom.

The King of Navarre goes to the Court, soliciting the King in the name of
the Princes of the blood, that they might participate in the Government.
This last opinion, through the authority of the Author, at length took place*
and so it was resolved, that the King of Navarre, as chief of the Family, and
first Prince of the Blood, should go to the Court; and there having the Kings
ear, (which could not be refused to one of his quality) lay before him their
reasons, use all manner of means to gain the Queen Mother; and try by a wise
and well-managed Treaty, whether he could get himself any place in the
Government, and his Brothers and their dependants restored to those dignities
that were injuriously taken from them; or else to other offices and charges of
like esteem. But by the beginning it was easy to see how the event would
prove: For the King of Navarre, terrified with the dangerous face of so great
an enterprise, proceeded in it full of doubts and considerations, being besides
of a facile and bashful nature; where, on the other side, the Duke of Guise,
and Cardinal of Lorain, animated with their prosperity, boldly prepared
themselves to encounter with vigor and assuredness any opposition whatsoever.

The King for a long time was informed and made believe by the Queen his
Mother, and the Guises, that the Princes of the Blood had ever been kept under
by his Predecessors, by reason of the innate malice they always found in them
toward the Kings that were in possession of the Crown; whom they were still
practicing against, either by secret conspiracies or open rebellion; and that
at the present, the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde seeing themselves
next to the succession, the King of a weak Constitution, and without heirs, and
his Brothers Pupils, they endeavored to deprive him of his ^others Government,
and the care of his nearest kindred, and keeping him in subjection, (as
formerly the ^asters of the Palace did Clouis, Chilperic, and other Princes of
weak capacity) intended perhaps by other wicked means, by treachery or poison,
speedily to make way for themselves to the Crown. This prob^ble well-form'd
Story easily breeding jealousies in the King, who was by nature timorous and
mistrustful, he received the King of Navarre with little show either of
kindness or honor; and when he talked with him, (which was not but in the
presence of the Duke or the Cardinal, who never stirred a minute from his side)
he still made him sharp answers; and alleging his Majority, and avowing the
great services he received in the present Government, still cut him off from
the instances and demands of the Princes of the Blood; as wholly proceeding
from contrived ends, neither suitable to the times, nor any way agreeable to
reason.

The design upon the Queen Mother had no better effect: for knowing she could
not trust to the Princ^s of the Blood, who, though they seemed well-affected to
her for a time, till they had gotten access to the Government; yet she might
afterward not only be abandoned by them, but excluded from the Administration,
and perhaps made to retire from the Court; and withal, thinking it direct
indiscretion to forsake the friendship of the strongest party, that was so well
settled, to join with the Princes of Bourbon, that had not any support at all,
she resolved to rest upon that security which she had already proposed to her
self. But nevertheless, desirous to withstand as much as was possible, the
public distractions and tumults of War, she proposed to her self, not to leave
them altogether hopeless, but to essay by dissimulation and artifices, to
divert the King of Navarre (whom she knew pliable enough) from such intentions,
and by delays in time to effect something that might be beneficial to the
Commonwealth. To which purpose, at their first meeting, having with show of
kindness filled him with hope, she began most dexterously, in the progress of
their discourse, to demonstrate unto him, that the King being of a delicate
disposition, was not to be exasperated by demands and unreasonable complaints;
but that it was necessary to expect some f^t opportunity, which time would at
length produce. For as the King, being now past his minority, was not bound in
matters of Government to conform himself to the arbitrament or opinion of any
body, but only to his own will and judgment; so when an occasion should be
offered to honor or gratify the Princes of Bourbon, he would without all
doubt satisfy the bond of consanguinity, and show to all the world, how great
an account and esteem he made of their virtue and loyalty. That the King ought
not in any manner by a change to destroy or alter the things already
established, lest he should give occasion to be thought of a variable nature,
unconstant, irresolute, and inconsiderate. But when places grew void, (as daily
some or other did) he would not fail, so far as was reasonable, to satisfy the
pretenses of every one. Withal, she offered her self to undertake the
protection of the Princes of the Blood, and earnestly to solicit her Son, as
soon as was possible, to satisfy their desires; that it would not be seemly
for the King of Navarre, who was a wise man, and had ever been a pattern of
moderation, that he should now suffer himself to be guided by youthful rash
Counsels, and led into those precipices which were neither becoming his age nor
wisdom; but expecting with patience that which he ought to acknowledge simply
the Kings courtesy and affection, teach others the way how to receive in fit
time the favors and benefits of their Prince. With these discourses having
often tasted his temper, and perceiving he began already to stagger, finally,
to give him the last shock, she proposed to him, that Elizabeth the Kings
sister, being to be sent into Spain, accompanied with some Person of great
quality and esteem, she had thought to recommend that charge to him, being
every way qualified both for gravity and Royal Birth, to honor and dignifie
those Nuptials; which, besides the content the King her Son would receive by
it, would by the way prove very advantageous to his particular ends. For he
would have opportunity to gain the Catholic King, and withal, to treat in
person concerning the restitution or change of his Kingdom of Navarre; in which
business she proffered to employ all her own authority, and the power of the
King her Son, to bring his desires to their wished ends.

The King of Navarre, who in discovering and penetrating into the inclinations
of the Court, found those who had any employment there, complying with the
present occasions, took little care of the pretenses of the Princes of the
Blood; and those that had reason to desire his greatness and his Brothers, some
of them disheartened, others ill satisfied with his long stay, and all equally
desperate of effecting any thing, easily returning to his former thoughts of
recovering his Kingdom, he conceived he ought not to refuse that occasion,
which would be a means, not only to renew the Treaties of Agreement with Spain,
but also to depart with honor from the Court, where he found he could not
remain with any reputation. Wherefore willingly entertaining the motion to
conduct Queen Elizabeth into Spain, and filled with infinite hopes by the
Queen Mother, (notwithstanding the other Princes his adherents were very much
offended at it) he hasted his departure with such eagerness of mind, that his
enemies themselves could not have desired it more. Nor did he with less
facility entrap himself in the Treaty with the Spaniards: for King Philip being
already advertised of the particulars of that business by the Queen Mother, and
he desiring no less than she, that the King of Navarre, who had such strong
pretenses against his State, should be kept low, and far from any power in the
Government; commanded the Duke of Alva, and the other Lords appointed to
receive the Queen his wife, that they should be forward to use all manner of
means to allure him on, and entertain him: but slowly embracing his
propositions, they should offer themselves to make report thereof to the King
and his Council, without the opinion of whom nothing could be determined that
concerned the interest of the State.

So the King of Navarre being come to the confines of Spain, and having
delivered Queen Elizabeth to the Spanish Deputies, he presently entered into a
Treaty that began fairly, as he thought, of his own private business; which
being managed with excellent dexterity by the Spaniards, so filled him with
great, but delayed hopes, that he had no other thoughts but of his own affairs;
in such manner, that having at their request sent an Ambassador to that Court,
he determined to retire himself to his ancient quiet in Bearn; with a firm
resolution not at all to meddle in the businesses of France, since their
desires, by way of negotiation, proved fruitless. And for the War, he thought
there was but little Justice in it, and too much hazard.

But contrary was the opinion, and other the resolutions of Lewis of Conde his
Brother, a poor Prince, but hardy and courageous; who having framed his hopes
to aspire to great matters, precipitated through the hate of his adversaries,
constrained by the narrowness of his fortune, and continually spurred on by his
Wife and Mother-in-law, (this Sister, that Niece to the Constable; but both of
them fierce and ambitious women) he could no longer support the wearisomness of
his present condition, but with all his power promoted new and dangerous
counsels; having already figured to himself, that if he were a means and
instrument to set the War on foot, he should not only obtain a great power
amongst his own party, but riches also, with diverse other conveniences; many
adherents to his faction, and absolute Dominion over diverse Cities and
Provinces in the Kingdom. Wherefore having again assembled at his own house at
la Ferte in Champaigne the Princes his Allies, and Lords adhering to his
faction, he laid before them, that having till then tried gentle pleasant
remedies, and found no ease by them; it was necessary to apply a stronger
medicine to cure the distemper, which from the beginning so violently tended to
the ruin not only of the Royal House, but even of all that did not adore and
depend as slaves upon the rule of the Queen Mother and the Guises: That it was
no longer time to hide their wounds, (till then with so much patience
concealed) for they appeared manifestly to the eyes of all the world: That the
injuries, with such indignities cast upon the Royal Family, were now openly to
be seen; as their banishment from the Court, depriving them of the Government
of Picardy, the usurpation of the Office of Grand-Maistre; The superintendence
of the Kings Revenues; The dividing of all the Charges and Offices amongst
strangers, and persons unknown; The artificial imprisonment of the King
himself, to whom no body could have access, that spoke freely or honestly; And
finally, the oppression of all good men, and advancement only of those, who
looked after nothing else, but to rob and waste the riches of the Crown. The
eager persecution of the Blood Royal was known to every one, Queen Blanch
Mother to St. Lewis, having taken upon her the Government of the Kingdom in the
minority of her Son, the Barons took ar^s to maintain the right in those to
whom it belonged.
and the tyranny of strangers established amongst them, whose violence could
not be withstood but in the same manner by violence; That it was not the first
time the Princes of the Blood had taken Arms to de^end the Jurisdictions and
Privileges of their Family. So Peter Duke of Britain, Robert Count of Dreux,
and diverse other Lords, engaged themselves in a War, when in the minority of
the King Saint Lewis, Queen Blanch his Mother, of her own accord took upon her
the Government of the State: So Philip Count of Valois, after the death of
Charles the Fair, made use of his power to exclude from the Guardianship and
Regency, those that unjustly pretended to usurp it; so Lewis Duke of Orleans
made war in the time of Charles the eighth, to make himself be chosen Regent
and Governor of the Kingdom, against the power and authority of Anne Duchess
of Bourbon, who being the Kings elder sister, So did Lewis Duke of Orleans, in
the time of Charles the eighth.
had assumed the charge of his Government: That these, and many other examples,
were so evident, that they could not do amiss in following the steps of their
ancestors, whose case being clearly the same with theirs then, directed them
the way to their own preservation. That they ought no longer to linger in
expectation of the Kings pleasure; who buried in the lethargy of his own
incapacity, perceived not the miserable slavery into which he was brought. But
as a wise careful Physician gives medicines and potions to a sick man against
his will, to cure him of an infirmity, and recover him from that danger which
he perceives not in himself: so the Princes of the Blood (to whom, by consent
of the whole Nation, and ancient custom, this care naturally belongs) ought to
endeavor to free the King from that slavery, and those bonds, which he
(overcome by his infirmity) perceived not, though so prejudicial to himself,
and destructive to the whole Kingdom; but that it was necessary, before the
present danger precipitated them into extremities, to arm themselves with a
strong resolution, and to proceed with a resolved constancy. For by quickness,
prevention and boldness, they should easily overcome those difficulties, which
appear more in a Council, or putting doubts in a debate, than they are indeed
when they come to be attempted. That on the contrary, by dejectedness of
courage and slackness, they should for ever subject themselves to a ruinous
shameful servitude. Wherefore he desired every one, all doubts and
uncertainties laid aside, courageously to trust his present safety, quiet, and
future honor, to the strength of his own Arms.

These things being spoken with efficacy and Souldier-like boldness and courage
by the Prince, wrought upon the minds of the greatest part of his audience, who
were already of themselves, through their own affections and interests,
disposed to take Arms.

But the Admiral, with more weighed counsel, measuring the greatness of the
attempt, opposed the Princes opinion, and advised to take another way, which he
thought more secure, and likelier to take effect. For to hazard so openly all
the Royal Family, and so many their Allies and Dependants, with little force,
not any adherents, no strong places, without men, and no provision of money, to
the arbitrament of War and Chance, appeared to him too desperate a resolution;
and therefore thought it necessary to have recourse to industry and art, where
there was a manifest defect of strength; and so working underhand, without
discovering themselves, bring their design notwithstanding by the ministry of
other persons, to the end they desired. He showed them, how the whole Kingdom
was full of multitudes of those that had embraced the opinions and faith newly
introduced by Calvin: that, by reason of the severity of the Inquisitions
exercised against them, and rigorous punishments, they were, through despair,
brought to a desire, nay, to a necessity of exposing themselves to any danger
whatsoever could befall them, The Admiral makes a proposition to the
Malcontents to protect the followers of those opinions in Religion introduced
by Calvin, and it is embraced.
so they might be free from the misery of their present condition; that they
all believed that the severity used against them, proceeded from the motions
and advice of the Duke of Guise, and much more from the Cardinal of Lorain, who
not only in the Parliament and Kings Council ardently wrought their
destruction, but in public discourse and private meetings, opposing their
Doctrine, never desisted to persecute them; that the resolution and violence of
that people was till then suppressed, because they had no head to guide them,
nor any person whose counsel and activity might put heat into them; but with
any little show of assistance, they would, without regard, hazard themselves in
all difficult and dangerous designs, through hope to be delivered from those
calamities that so much oppressed them. Wherefore it would be an excellent
Expedient to make use of that means to animate and get into a body a multitude
so prepared; and then secretly to set them on when occasion served, to the
destruction of the House of Lorain, in which manner, the Princes of the Blood,
and other Lords of their party, should secure themselves from danger, increase
their strength by such a number of followers, gain the adherents of the
Protestant Princes of Germany, and Elizabeth Queen of England, who openly
favored and protected that belief, set a greater show of honesty upon the
cause, lay upon others the burden of so bold an attempt; and make it believed
for the future by all the world, that the Civil War was set on foot, and
stirred up, not by the interest of the Princes, and their pretensions to the
Government, but by the discords and controversies in matters of Religion.

It was not hard for the Admiral by his eloquence and authority to persuade the
rest to approve of this design, of it self, in appearance, much conducing to
the state of their present affairs: and there being many in the Assembly which
secretly inclined to Calvin's Doctrine, it was resolved with a general consent,
to follow that advice, the which, with lively and no less present hopes,
hindered so precipitate a War, and kept off, for a time, those evident dangers
to which men unwillingly expose themselves, when there is any means wholly to
avoid, or at least to delay them. But it was a counsel and resolution so fatal
and pernicious, that, as it let in all the miseries and calamities, which with
such prodigious examples have for a long time afflicted and distracted that
Kingdom, so it brought to a miserable end, both the Author himself that made
the Proposition, and all those, who, led by their own affections and interests,
consented to it.

But since the beginning and progress of Calvin's Doctrine is fallen into
mention, under the color of which, so many great and several Factions have
been engaged in the Civil Wars of France, both for the better clearing the
business in hand, as also not to be forced often to look back to those
beginnings, which are so requisite to the understanding of matters of fact, it
is necessary to make some short relation of it.

After Martin Luther in Germany opened the way to let in Schism into Religion,
John Calvin, a Picard, preaches and publishes in print 128 Principles
differing from the Roman Catholic Religion; which at first are hearkened to
only in curiosity, but at last make great impressions in the minds of men, and
produce great mischief.
and new opinions into our Faith, John Calvin, born at Noyon in Picardy, a man
of a great, but unquiet wit, marvellously eloquent, and generally learned,
departing from the Faith generally held and observed so many Ages by our
Predecessors, proposed in his Books which he published in print, and in his
Sermons which he preached in diverse places in France, One hundred twenty eight
Axioms (so he called them) disagreeing from the Roman Catholic Faith. The
French Wits, curious by nature, and desirous of Novelties, began at first,
rather for pastime, than through choice, to read his Writings, and frequent his
Sermons. But, as in all businesses of the world it uses often to fall out, that
things beginning in jest, end in earnest; these Opinions sowed in Gods Church,
so crept up, that they were greedily embraced, and obstinately believed by a
great number of people and persons of all qualities: in so much as Calvin at
the first, thought a man of little worth, and of a seditious unquiet spirit, in
a short time came to be reverenced of many, and believed for a new miraculous
Interpreter of Scripture, and as it were a certain infallible Teacher of the
true Faith.

The foundation of this Doctrine was in the City of Geneva, Calvin's opinions
had their first foundation in Geneva.
situate upon the Lake anciently called Lacus Lemanus, upon the Confines of
Savoy: which having rejected the Government of the Duke and Bishop, to whom
formerly it paid obedience under the name of Terra Franca, and under pretense
of living in Liberty of Conscience, reduced it self into the form of a
Commonwealth or Commonalty. From thence Books coming out daily in print, and
men furnished with wit and eloquence insinuating themselves into the
Neighbour-Princes, who secretly sowed the seeds of this new Doctrine; in
progress of time, all the Cities and Provinces of the Kingdom of France were
filled with it, though so covertly, that there appeared openly, only some few
marks and conjectures of it.

The Reformed Religion began to spread in France in the time of Francis the
First.
The Original of this dissension began about the time of Francis the First; who
though sometimes he made severe resolutions against them, notwithstanding,
being continually busied in foreign Wars, either remitted it, or was not aware
how at that time, the Principles of that Faith (then rather despised and hated,
than any way feared or taken notice of) began by little and little to spread in
the world.

Henry the Second was very severe against the Calvinists.
But Henry the Second, a religious Observer of the Catholic Faith, knowing
withal, that from distraction of Religion in men's minds, would infallibly
follow (as a necessary consequence) distractions in the State; used his
uttermost endeavors to extirpate the roots of those seeds in their first
growth. And therefore, with inexorable severity resolved, that all who were
found convict of this imputation, should suffer death without mercy. And
although many of the Counselors in every Parliament, either favoring the same
Opinions, or abhorring the continual effusion of blood, made use of all their
skill, to preserve as many as they could from the severity of this execution;
notwithstanding the Kings vigilance and constancy was such chiefly by the
incitements of the Cardinal of Lorain, that he had reduced things to such a
point, as he would in the end, though with the effusion of much blood, have
expelled all the peccant humors out of the bowels of the Kingdom; if the
accidents which followed, had not interrupted the course of his resolution.

1560.
But thereupon, the death of Henry happening unexpectedly, which the Calvinists
used to preach of as miraculous, The Calvinists use to boast much of the death
of Henry the Second.
and magnify to their advantage: In the beginning of Francis the Second his
Reign, this severity being of necessity somewhat remitted, the disease by
intermission of the purge grew stronger; and as the remedies were gentler and
less operative, so inwardly it increased, and spread it self the more. For the
Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorain, who governed in chief, continued the
same resolutions of severity; but it continued not in the Court of Parliament,
nor were the other Magistrates so obedient to the Regal Authority; but,
overawed by the number and quality of those that had embraced that Doctrine
which they called Reformed, and already weary of such cruelty toward their
Countrymen and kindred, silently slackned the rigor, and were less diligent
in enquiring after them: Besides, there were many amongst the Counselors, who
according to the inclination of the present Government, and through desire of
change, were well pleased to have things so brought into confusion* that every
one might live with Liberty of Conscience. For Theodor Beza, Calvin's disciple,
a man of great eloquence and excellent learning, having by his Sermons seduced
a great number of men and women, and many of the chief Nobility and greatest
persons of the Kingdom being revolted to that Religion, their Assemblies and
Sermons were then no more celebrated in Stables and Cellars, as in the Reign of
Henry the Second, but in the Halls and Chambers of the best Gentry, and most
eminent Nobility.

These people were formerly called Hugonots; because the first Conventicles
they had in the City of Tours, The name of Hugonot derived from certain places
under ground, near Hugo's gate in the City of To^rs, wh^re thos^ opinions first
took growth.
(where that belief first took strength and increased) were in certain Cellars
under ground near Hugo's gate, from whence they were by the vulgar sort called
Hugonots; as in Flanders, because they went in the habits of Mendicants, they
were called Geux: Others count other ridiculous and fabulous inventions of this
name; but howsoever it were, these Hugonots had not yet any Head, nor authority
of any Prince to protect them. For though the Admiral and other Lords inclined
to their opinions, they durst not as yet declare themselves, but were bridled
with the fear of punishment, and therefore kept their Assemblies exceeding
privately.

Now the Princes of Bourbon finding France in this state, and so agreeing with
their interests, they greedily embraced the Admirals propositions, and
unanimously consented to his opinion, to make use of this pretext, and the
opportunity of these conjunctures to perfect their designs; and to this end
deputed Andelot and the Vidame of Chartres, to negotiate their business.

Andelot was brother to the Admiral; a man of great fierceness, and much
experience in war; but being of a precipitate nature, and turbulent spirit,
(still mingling and interesting himself in seditious Treaties and Plots) had
many times offended the former Kings; and but for the protection of the
Constable, and favor of his brother, more than once had forfeited his life and
reputation. But, for these and the like causes, removed from Court, he had a
long time continued to take part with the Hugonots, and to give them his aid in
their secret assembling themselves to hear Sermons. Of like nature, and yet
more precipitate, and more open, but not of like valor, was the Vidame of
Chartres; who, great in riches, leading a licentious dissolute life, was become
a refuge and sanctuary for all vicious persons; and lastly, (more through
capriciousness of his unquiet nature, than any sense he had of matters of
Religion) declared himself an adherent to Calvin's Doctrine. These, as
experienced Instruments to stir up Novelties, and knowing the places where the
Hugonots used to assemble, had no great difficulty, without discovering
themselves, to find out men enough fit to convey secret intelligence to those
that were interessed in it, of the begun design; and to put in order and form
those things that were to be put in execution; who, besides their wondrous
activity, had continual correspondence with those who (terrified with fear of
danger and punishment) cared not for their own safety, to molest and subvert
the whole world: and easily, in a short time, brought their business to that
issue as was intended.

Practicing thus in all parts, they disposed the order of their Council in
manner as follows. That, The manner of the Hugonots proceedings.
having assembled a great multitude of those that profess the Reformed
Religion, they should first of all send, and then appearing before the Court
unarmed, desire the King to grant them Liberty of Conscience, free exercise of
their Religion, and Temples allowed them for that purpose: which demands,
knowing they would be sharply and resolutely denied, the armed men (which were
to be sent privately at the same time out of diverse Provinces) appearing on a
sudden under certain Captains, as if it had been a multitude enraged with a
denial, that ran furiously to take Arms, the King being found unprovided, and
the Court disarmed, they should kill the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of
Lorain, with all those that followed or depended upon any of their name; and so
force the King to declare the Prince of Conde supreme Governor and Regent of
the whole Kingdom; who should then remit the Laws made against them, and grant
them a freedom of their Religion.

Some believe, and have divulged, that the chief instruments of this
Conspiracy, had secret order, if their Plots succeeded as they had designed it,
that they should presently cut in pieces the Queen Mother, and the King
himself, with all his brothers; by these means to clear the way for the Princes
of Bourbon to attain to the Crown: But not any of the accomplices having ever
confessed this intention, but always, even upon the rack, and otherwise,
constantly denied that point, I cannot give my self leave to affirm it upon the
uncertain report of Fame only, which is raised and increased according to the
several inclinations of men.

Now the Conspirators having thus ordered their business, they presently
divided the charges and chief Provinces amongst the Hugonots, that they might
execute their designs with more order, and less noise. Godfrey de la Bar,
Sieur de la Renaudie, Renaudie, a man of a desperate fortune, is made Head of
the Hugonots Conspiracy.
a man who, having past through diverse fortunes, and spent much time in other
Countries, with his boldness and wit had got a great name amongst the
Calvinists, and was much followed by them, took upon him the chief Government
and care of the whole enterprise, neither wanting courage to undertake, nor
understanding to direct so hazardous a design. Withal, being brought to a low
desperate fortune, he resolved by these means either to better his condition,
or lose his life in the attempt. He was born in Perigort, (which people were
anciently called Petrocorii) of an indifferent good family; but for some false
dealing in a certain Process, was forced to flee his Country, and, having for
many years wandered up and down the World, at length came to Geneva, and there,
by the readiness of his wit, having gotten into reputation, he found means also
to return home to his own Country; where wasting his fortune in projects and
factious companies, he brought himself into such a condition, that he was at
length forced to get his living by the same arts he had formerly ruined both
his credit and estate. Such was the quality and birth of the chief Head of that
Conspiracy, with whom many others joined themselves; some led by Conscience,
others thrust on through desire of change, and many also invited by the natural
humor of the French Nation, who cannot endure to live idly. To those of best
quality amongst these, he gave several charges to raise men, and to bring them
to a place appointed; so that having divided to all their several Provinces, in
this great disorder they procceed in a most orderly method, which with all the
members, agitating severally, were notwithstanding each of them in due time to
be assisting to their Superior. To the Baron of Castelnaw they committed the
care of Gascoigne; To Captain Mazares, the charge of Bearn; To Mesny, the
Country of Limoges; To Mirabel, Xaintonge; To Coccaville, Picardy; To Movans,
Provence; To Mallines, Brie and Champaigne; To the Sieur de S. Marie, Normandy;
and, To Montejan, Britany: Men who, as they were all of Noble Families, so were
they of known courage, and reputed principal leading men, in several Cities,
and their own Countries where they lived.

All these departing from the Assembly at Nantes, a City in Britany, (where
under color of Law-business, celebrating Marriages, or such like pretenses,
they met together) and returning with great expedition, every one to the
Province allotted him, in a few days working with wonderful secrecy, they
brought a great number of people of several conditions to be at their
devotions; who, without looking further into the matter, were assured by their
Preachers, that the business they had in hand was for the good and quiet of the
Commonwealth. In the mean while, the Prince of Conde (who underhand ministered
fuel to so great a fire) by little journeys went toward the Court, to be
ready, without demur, to take such resolutions as were most expedient, and
conformable to the present occasion: But the Admiral with his wonted sagacity,
preserving himself as it were Neuter, to be better able upon all occasions to
assist his party, being retired to his house at Chastillon, made show of
desiring the ease of a private life, without any thought of public business
belonging to the Government. Which he did not so much that he might secretly
favor, with his counsel and assistance, the common design, as through doubt
(esteeming it too rash and dangerous) that it might meet some cross encounter,
or unhappy end.

Now the Conspirators (not troubled with such thoughts, but full of good hope)
were departed from their houses, where they had lain hid secretly, and carrying
arms under their garments, went diverse ways in several companies (according to
their order at that time prefixed) from diverse parts toward Blois; where for
the present, by reason of the goodness of the air, the Court remained; a plain
open City, and not any ways fortified; near which, in the places adjacent, they
were all to meet the 15 day of March, 1560.
in the year 1560. a day more than once destined for the execution of great
designs.

The fifteenth of Ma^ch was a day more than once appointed for the execution of
great designs in France: and this day, Anno 1560. the Hugonots determined to
meet at Blois, where the King then was.
But the diligence and secrecy of the Conspirators was not such (although very
great) but that it was exceeded by the industry of the Queen Mother and the
Guises: who through great rewards, and the authority they had in the State,
having infinite dependants in all parts of the Kingdom, were particularly
informed of the whole frame of the Conspiracy; and it was impossible in reason,
that the rising of so great a multitude could be concealed: for we see the
secretest plots trusted to few persons of tried secrecy and known faith, use
often to be discovered before they come to execution. Some will have it, that
la Renaudie communicated all the particulars to Pierre Avanelles, an Advocate
in the Parliament of Paris, whom he thought a man to be trusted, because he was
one of the same Religion. But he, either looking upon it as too great an
attempt, or designing to get a reward, revealed the business confusedly to the
Duke of Guises Secretary; by whose counsel, afterward sent for in person to
the Court, he discovered all the particulars to the Queen Mother. But whether
this secret came from Avanelles, or spies entertained in the houses of the
chief Conspirators, accused them; or that the advice, as some have said, came
out of Germany; the Queen Mother and the Guises having notice of it, consulted
what course to take to divert, or else suppress the mischief of the present
Conspiracy. The Cardinal not accustomed to the dangers of War, inclining to the
securest resolution, advised, that all the Nobility of the nearest Provinces
should be sent for; that all the Foot in the Neighbour-Garisons should be drawn
into a Body; that Curriers should be dispatched to all the Princes and
Governors of the Kingdom, with absolute command to put themselves into the
field, to pursue all such as they found bearing Arms: conceiving, that the
Conspirators finding they were discovered, and hearing of such great
preparations, (which are commonly increased by reports) would of themselves
scatter and disband, rather than try the uttermost danger.

But the Duke of Guise, who used to the greatest dangers, made little account
of the force of a confused multitude without discipline or government; thought,
by following that way which the Cardinal proposed, the mischief would be
delayed, but not extinguished; which still perniciously creeping into, and
settling in the inward bowels of the Kingdom, would break forth again at some
other time with greater violence, and perhaps with more trouble and damage to
the State. In which consideration, he was of opinion, that dissembling, and
making show of knowing nothing, they should give courage and commodity to the
Conspirators to discover themselves; that so being vanquished, and punished,
the State might be freed from the repletion of so pestilent and dangerous an
humor; which, showing it self like to occasion such great distempers, it was
no time to appease it with lenitives only, but being already grown to a head,
to expel it with strong purging medicines. He added yet to those reasons, that
the Conspirators being so separately suppressed but in part, it would be in the
arbitrament of malignants to calumniate the act; and the people not accustomed
to such proceedings, would difficultly believe it; so that many would think it
an invention of those that governed to depress their enemies, and more surely
to establish their present power* but that, oppressing them all united together
in one Body, at the same instant that they meant to put their designs in
execution, all calumnies would be taken away, and the truth and sincerity of
their proceedings be evident to all the world.

The Queen Mother, moved with these Reasons, concurred with him in opinion.
Wherefore not making any provisions extraordinary that might make the
Conspirators suspect they had any advertisement of their design; they carried
the King, with all the Court, as for recreation only, from Blois to Ambois, ten
leagues distant, (a French league contains two English miles) upon the River
Loire; and by reason of that, and the woods that inviron it, very strongly
situated. They did this, partly to delude the Conspirators in their first
attempt, (who thought to find the King in a nearer place, and more open;)
partly that by means of the Castle* the Kings person and the Queens might be
more secure; and being a place but of little compass, it was easily to be
defended by those few people that were to be gotten thereabouts. There the day
appointed drawing near, in which the Conspirators were to appear, the Guises,
having devised amongst themselves how to make use of this so great an occasion
for their own advantage, not only better to establish, but to increase and
bring to perfection their newly achieved greatness, and convert this assault
of their enemies to their own advancement, (as from poisons are often extracted
cordials) without making the Queen privy thereunto, they went directly to the
King, and, with show of great fear, exaggerating and magnifying the attempt of
the Conspirators, laid before him how greatly the Government, and by
consequence, his own person, and all his Allies, were endangered by their
practices; and withal, told him of the nearness of the danger, the Conspirators
being already at the gates of Ambois, and that their number and force being
more than at first was believed, it was necessary to resolve upon some present
expedient to prevent them.

The King, of a timorous feeble nature, and at the present much moved with the
greatness of so imminent a danger, calling to his presence not only his Mother,
but all the Council, began to debate the means of opposing the force, and
suppressing the violence of so great an insurrection. The Council was
tumultuous and confused, by reason whereof many doubts and infinite dangers
appearing on all sides, which were much increased by the vehemence and art of
the Cardinal of Lorain; the King of himself unable to resolve any thing in
matters of such difficulty, much less to sustain the weight of the Government
in so troubled a time, without any other motive but his own, was of opinion to
declare the Duke of Guise, his Lieutenant General, with absolute power; and
relying upon the vigor of his courage and mature wisdom, to leave the
Government of the State during those troubles wholly to him, for as much as he
found himself unable to undergo so great a burden. The Queen Mother, though
inwardly struck with so bold an attempt, readily consented to the Kings
opinion; because she saw she could not oppose that resolution without coming to
open variance with the Guises* which in that time when it was most necessary to
remain united, would have occasioned the Kings ruin, and the subversion of the
State, admitting with disorder and confusion in the Government, advantageous
opportunities for the Conspirators to execute with greater facility their
intended designs. Besides, it appeared very reasonable to her, that to such
imminent dangers should be opposed the absolute power of some one experienced
person of great reputation; and that it was not fit to rely upon one of weak
capacity, who with doubts and delays might give the enemy that opportunity
which he desired, and take off from his own that resolution and freeness of
courage which the urgency of the present affairs required. And by the example
of past occurrences, (which teach excellent lessons to govern the future) she
was put in mind, that not only Kings, who govern absolutely according* to their
will, but even Re-publicks, had conferred the supreme Authority upon one man,
when the occurrence of any great dangers seemed to require extraordinary and
powerful opposition. But besides these respects, which concerned the welfare of
her Son and the public good, she was persuaded to it by her own private
interest. For foreseeing afar off the desolation that must of necessity follow,
the enmities of the Princes of the Blood, and the hate and envy that would fall
upon her if she opposed it, she thought it very fit for her purpose, that the
Duke of Guise commanding absolutely in chief, all the blame and envy should
fall wholly on him, and she by that means preserve the love of the people, and
the liberty to bend her counsels that way which she should think most fit and
advantageous for her self.

But Olivier the Chancellor, a man in all times esteemed the Author of wise
counsel, and averse to such unlimited power, seemed to stand doubtful and in
suspense, whether or no he should consent to the Kings Proposition; and such
was his constancy and authority, that the business had been held longer in
debate, and with doubtful success, if the Queen Mother had not made it appear
to him, that the present danger was so extraordinary and so pressing, that it
could not be prevented with ordinary moderate counsels: That it was necessary
to provide for the urgency of the instant affairs, and rather than ruin the
present, lay aside a little the consideration of future things, which might be
otherwise remedied by time and opportunity: That it would be very easy, this
urging necessity once past, to moderate with new Decrees and new Edicts, the
now unlimited power of the Duke of Guise, which would quickly transport him
beyond the limits of duty and reason, if he were not restrained by his own
virtue: And finally, it would be of advantage to every one, that in the
effusion of so much blood, which it was foreseen must be spilt, no other power
nor authority should be used but the Dukes only; neither the King himself, his
Friends or Ministers, having their hands imbrued in those slaughters. Which
considerations moving the Chancellor, he sealed the Commission drawn by l'
Aubespine, Secretary of State: In which was granted to the Duke of Guise the
Title and Authority of Lieutenant General for the King, in all the Provinces
and places under his command, with supreme Power in all causes Civil and
Military.

The Duke of Guise having obtained this charge, which he had ever aspired to,
began resolutely to attend the suppression of the Conspiracy; and presently
causing the Gate of the Castle into the Garden to be walled up, and having
placed the Switzers and French Archers, which use ordinarily to guard the Kings
person, at the other; he sent forth the Count of Sanserre with some Horse to
scout abroad, and give him continual advertisement what he could discover.

In the mean time Renaudie arrived with his Accomplices at the place appointed;
and finding the King was retired from Blois to Ambois, nevertheless his courage
not failing, he went on in the same order toward the Court. The unarmed
multitude came first, who falling prostrate before the King, were to demand
Liberty of Conscience. But they were not only not admitted to his presence, but
being roughly driven away from the Gates by the Soldiers that were in Guard,
they retired, and scattered up and down in the fields, and without either order
or advice, expected the coming of their other Companions.

Not long after Captain Lignieres, one of the Conspirators, either terrified at
the point of execution, with the greatness of the danger, or else through
remorse of Conscience, leaving his Companions, went a by-way to Ambois, and
acquainted the King and Queen Mother particularly of the number and quality of
the Conspirators, the names of the Commanders, the ways by which they came, and
withal their whole design. Wherefore by the Kings order a Guard being set upon
the Prince of Conde, that he might in no manner be aiding to the Conspirators,
as he had promised them, the Duke of Guise sent forth Jacques d' Aubon, Marescal
de S. Andre, and James Savoy Duke of Nemours, with all the horse they could
make, either of the Kings Guard, or the attendance about the Court; who being
placed in Ambushes in the woods thereabouts, intended to expect the coming of
the Conspirators. Mazeres and Raunay, who led the Troops of Bearne, were the
first that fell into the Ambuscade laid by the Count of Sanserre; and
astonished with the sudden assault, neither knowing how to flee nor defend
themselves, were taken prisoners without much dispute. The Baron of Castelnau,
who led a great number out of Gascoigne, being arrived at Noze, The
Conspirators arrive near Ambois where the Court was, and are all defeated.
and and there refreshing his Horse to continue their march, was met by the
Duke of Nemours; who besieging him in that place where he had no manner of
provision to make any defense, they thought it best to yield themselves to the
Dukes mercy, who carried him and all his company prisoners to Ambois. La
Renaudie passing through the woods, having avoided all the Ambuscadoes,
approached near the Gates of Ambois, where encountered him Pardillian with a
Squadron of resolute Cuirassiers; yet seeing himself in good condition to
fight, he made a fierce assault; but soon found that his men, as it is ordinary
in such tumults, began to yield to the Kings old Soldiers. Wherefore desiring
to end his life honorably, he spurred on his Horse to Pardillian, and running
him into the Vizor with his Tuck, laid him dead upon the ground; whereupon
being shot in the thigh with a Carabine by Pardillian's Page, who was near his
Master, he died fighting valiantly; and the rest of his Companions without much
resistance, were for the most part all killed upon the place. The next day the
rest of the Conspirators Troops, hearing of the death of la Renaudie, and the
defeat of their Companions, and considering that the Country about being raised
upon them, there was no means to save themselves by flight; they resolved under
the conduct of la Mothe and Coccaville, who were the only Commanders left, to
assault the walls and gates of Ambois. For not knowing that the Prince of Conde
was straightly guarded, they hoped some commotion would be raised by him
within. The assault was at first very resolute and valiant; but finding the
walls of the Castle in all parts well defended, at length wearied out* and
desparate of effecting their purpose, they retreated into the Fauxbourg,
resolving to stand obstinately upon their defense; with hope, by help of the
night that drew on, to find some means of escape. But the Cavalry coming in
that had been scouring the Champaign, presently set fire to the houses where
they were, and so burning them, they perished in a manner all, without being
able in this last exigence to perform any memorable act. Those that were taken
alive in the places about, the chief of them were preserved to draw from their
confession the particulars of the Conspiracy; the rest condemned to die, being
hanged upon trees in the fields, and over the Battlements of the Castle-wall,
butchered and torn by the Soldiers and Executioners, were a most lamentable
spectacle to the beholders, and the first beginning of that desolation and
bloodshed, which continuing for the space of many years after; produced such
sad and miserable events.

The End of the First BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
SECOND BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Second Book contains the perplexity of the Kings Council in remedying the
Disorders discovered in the Conspiracy: The Deliberation to punish the
discontented Princes: The Assembly of Fountain-bleau: The Resolution to hold an
Assembly of the States General, which are summoned by the King to meet at
Orleans: The Princes of Bourbon refuse to go thither: The King makes them
change their Resolution: The Constable with delays procures the benefit of
time: The Princes of the Blood arrive at Orleans: The Prince of Conde is
committed to prison, and condemned to die. Francis the Second dies suddenly:
Charles the Ninth succeeds to the Crown, who being in minority, there arise
great Dissentions about the Regency. The Queen Mother is made Regent, and the
King of Navarre President of the Provinces: The Prince of Conde is absolved,
and a tacit liberty granted to the Hugonots. The King is Crowned at Rheims. The
Constable unites himself with the Guises: They join together to take away the
liberty from the Hugonots: The Edict of July follows: The Ministers demand a
Conference, and obtain it; it is kept in Poissy, but proves fruitless: The
Hugonots departing from the Conference, preach freely: Great Troubles arise
thereupon: To remedy which, the States are assembled at Paris, where by the
Edict of January, a Liberty of Conscience is granted openly. The Heads of the
Catholic Faction leave the Court: Draw into Confederacy with them also the
King of Navarre: The Queen Mother being terrified, feigns to make a League with
the Hugonots, and so adds strength to that party.

THis multitude thus scattered, and the greatest part of their Commanders
either taken or killed, that had brought them from the remotest parts of the
Kingdom, the fury and violence of the I^surrection, was in appearance abated
and suppressed. But none having perished save only the seditious rabble, who
desperate in their fortunes, were ready rashly to run upon any danger: and the
Princes of Bourbon, with the other Lords of that party, had not discovered
themselves to be authors of that Conspiracy, remaining still unsatisfied, and
ready to embrace new counsels, the common peace was still internally, more than
ever disturbed, 1560.
and the public safety exposed to new troubles. This being very well known
both to the Queen Mother and the Guises, as soon as the tumult and commotions
in the Court could be appeased, which by reason of the rareness of the accident
were very great, to make the speediest and best provision that might be against
so great a danger, they presently called to Council, in the Kings own Chamber,
all those who as faithful Ministers in the present Government, they thought
might be trusted with the secrets of these new occurrences. After the
suppression of the Conspirators, in a secret Council held in the Kings Chamber,
it is resolved to punish the favorers of the Hugonots.
There the reasons being weighed with long debate of the late stirs, it clearly
appeared that they proceeded only from the practice and incitation of the
Princes of the Blood; and that to maintain the Kings Authority, and the form of
Government established, it was necessary in the first place to take away the
Heads, and remove the Authors of that Insurrection; they knew that proceeding
according to strictness of Law, they might justly be punished as disturbers of
the public peace, as favorers and introducers of Heresy, and finally, as
such who had conspired against the Kings liberty, and the ancient Constitutions
of the Crown; and they doubted not, if the fomenters of that Insurrection were
punished and suppressed, but the people would soon return again to their former
quiet and obedience. But the reverence born in all times, to those of the
Blood Royal, and the power of those Princes that were named to have part in the
Conspiracy, would have caused every one there to suspend his judgment; it
appearing to them a business of great moment, and on all sides very dangerous,
if the King himself exceedingly incensed, even beyond his natural disposition,
at so sudden a Commotion, (which without any fault of his, or ill usage of his
Subjects, he saw was raised by the Princes in the beginning of his Government)
had not with sharp and sensible expressions given courage to the rest to
resolve upon some such severe course as might express a sense of the affront.
To which the Queen Mother (no less sollicitous of her sons welfare, than her
own greatness) and the Guises, to maintain themselves in their acquired power,
readily consenting; there was not any one who finally concurred not in
decreeing the punishment and ruin of all those, who either by their counsel or
assistance administered fuel to that fire.

But because a deliberation of so great weight, full of infinite hazards, and
that drew after it many great consequences, was necessarily to be governed with
exceeding Art, and managed with prudent dexterity; they resolved to begin with
dissimulation, to feign they had no further knowledge of any thing concerning
the Conspiracy, than the manifest appearance of it brought to light, to
attribute all the fault to the diversity of Religions, and ill Government of
the Magistrates, to show rather a fear and terror stricken into them by the
fury and sudden attempt of the Conspirators, than any confidence or security by
their suppression; in outward appearance to manifest a great desire of
regulating the Justice of the Kingdom, and to find a way to a new Reformation
in the Government, which contenting all pretenders, might reduce with
satisfaction those turbulent spirits to their former quiet. With these kind of
proceedings, they thought they might lull into security those anxious minds,
who pricked in Conscience, lived in extreme apprehensions, and by artifices
compass their desires, which they knew by force were very difficult to attain
unto. And because they conceived, the Constable and the King of Navarre had
both by consent and assistance abetted these stirs, and it was certainly known
that the Visdame of Chartres and Andelot had been active in them, whom it was
agreed upon they could not get into their power but with dissimulation and
time; they resolved to set at liberty the Prince of Conde, as well to confirm
an opinion that they were confident of his loyalty, and had not penetrated into
the depth of the business, as also because to take away or punish him alone, if
such powerful revengers of his death were left alive, would rather be
prejudicial and dangerous, than of any advantage; past examples teaching us,
that it is in vain to cut down the body of a tree, how high or lofty soever, if
there be any quick roots left which may send forth new sprouts.

The secret intentions for matter of Government thus settled, and covered over
with the veil of so perfect a dissimulation; they resolved, that soon after a
General Assembly should be called of the three Estates, upon which is divolved
the Authority of the whole Kingdom; and that for two reasons. First, because
the Kings resolution against the Princes of the Blood was so severe, he being
but young, and newly entered upon the Government, they thought it necessary to
strengthen that act by the concurrence and universal consent of the whole
Nation. Secondly, because by declaring a public Treaty concerning remedies for
the present disorders, and a form and rules to be observed in matters of
Religion, To get the favorers of the Hugonots into their power, it is resolved
to call an Assembly of the States, at which amongst others, the Princes of the
blood are to assist.
and administration of the future Government, the King might have an apparent
and reasonable occasion to call to him all the Princes of the Blood, and
Officers of the Crown, without giving suspicion to any body; neither would
there be any colorable excuse left for them not to come, when it should be
given out, that a Reformation was intended, which they themselves professed
that they desired. But because this Assembly of the States was a thing by all
Kings ever abhorred, (for whilst they fit with absolute power representing the
body of the whole Kingdom, the Kings Authority seems in a manner suspended) it
was therefore resolved first to call a great Council under pretense of
remedying the present distractions; wherein by persons set on to that purpose,
it should be proposed and counseled, as necessary; that so the Princes and
Lords of the Conspiracy might not enter into any jealousy, as though the King,
without request made by his Subjects, had voluntarily of himself resolved to
call an Assembly of the States.

Things thus resolved upon, presently were published Letters Patents directed
to all the Parliaments, and Edicts divulged to the several Provinces of the
Kingdom: In the Preambles of which the King lamenting and complaining, that
without any evident occasion, a great number of persons had risen, and taken
Arms against him: afterward proceeding, he clearly imputes the blame thereof
to the rashness of the Hugonots, that they having laid aside all belief in God,
and love to their Country, endeavored to disturb and trouble the peace of the
Kingdom: But because it is the duty of a good Prince, to proceed with love and
fatherly indulgence, He declared withal, that he was ready to pardon all such,
who acknowledging their error, should retire peaceably to their own houses,
resolving to live conformably to the Rites of the Catholic Church, and in
obedience to the Civil Magistrates. Wherefore he commanded all his Courts of
Parliament, not to proceed in matters of Religion, upon any past Informations,
but to provide with all severity for the future, that they should offend no
more in the like kind, nor keep any unlawful Assemblies. And because he desired
above all things to satisfy his people, and to reform abuses in the
Government; That he therefore signified his pleasure to assemble all the
Princes and eminent persons of the Kingdom, at Fountain-bleau, a place fitly
situated in the heart of France, and but few leagues distant from Paris, to
provide by their counsel for the urgent necessities of State; to which purpose
he gave free leave and power to all persons whatsoever, to come to the
Assembly, or else to send their Deputies and grievances in writing, which he
would not only graciously hear himself, but the supplicants should have redress
in all that was reasonable or just.

With these and the like Decrees, divulged on purpose and with dissimulation,
(the Court Masterpiece) they in a reasonable manner secured the great ones
from their fears and jealousies; nor was there any one who believed not, but
that the Queen Mother and the Guises, being terrified with the sudden attempt
of the Conspirators, and doubting more than ever new Insurrections, had
determined in a fair and fitting way to satisfy the discontented Princes, and
so to regulate the form of Government, that all should again participate
according to their merits, the charges and honors of the Kingdom.

The Prince of Conde, who was as a prisoner, is set at liberty.
In this interim the Prince of Conde was discharged of his Guard, and left free,
either to stay at Court, or depart, as he pleased; neither the King nor the
Queen omitting any demonstrations of kindness that might appease him. But he,
grievously troubled in mind, not being able to quiet his thoughts, (for if he
stayed, he stayed in danger; and going away, he went as criminal;) at length he
resolved to taste, in some measure, the Kings inclinations, and to find out, if
it were possible, the intention of those that governed. Wherefore being one day
at Council, where the Princes of the Blood are always admitted, he labored by
weighty and earnest speeches to clear himself from being guilty of any practice
either against the Kings person or the Queens, as had been falsely suggested by
his enemies: But because things done in secret cannot otherwise be cleared,
that he was ready to maintain his innocence with his Sword in his hand, against
any person whatsoever that durst calumniate him as a partaker in the late
Conspiracy. Which words, though they were directed to the Princes of Lorain,
nevertheless the Duke of Guise, not forgetting the resolutions already taken,
most cunningly dissembling, added thereunto, that he knowing the Princes
goodness and candor, offered himself in person to accompany him, and hazard his
life as his second, if there were any that would accept the challenge.

These Ceremonies past over, which were so artificially carried, on both sides,
that the most suspicious and least apt to believe, began to think them real;
the Prince not at all quiet nor secure within, but thinking he had done enough
for his justification, departed presently from Court, and with great diligence
went into Bearn to the King of Navarre.

They omitted not to use the like artifices with the Constable, the Admiral,
and the rest; but entertained them with kind Letters, and Commissions, and
charges of trust: Neither was there less care to provide in all the Provinces
against any new Insurrections; for which cause the Gens d' Arms were sent into
several parts of the Kingdom that were most suspected, and the Governors of
places, and other Magistrates, were very watchful, that there should be no
secret Assemblies, in which they perceived all the mischief was ordered and
contrived; and under pretense of the Hugonots, they kept a strict watch upon
other people of all sorts and qualities. But about the King, where there was
greatest danger, and cause of suspicion, were appointed to wait, the Duke of
Orleans, and the Duke of Angoulesme his Brothers Bands of men at Arms,
commanded by men of fidelity and trust, the Duke of Guises Company and his
Brothers the Duke of Aumale's, the Duke of Lorain's, the Duke of Nemour*s,
Prince Lodowick Gonzago's, Don Francisco d' Este's the Mareshal of Brissac's,
the Duke of Never's, the Viscount of Tavanne's, the Count of Cruss^l's, and
Monsieur de la Brosse's; to which were added the Prince of Conde's Band, and
the Constable's; for being amongst so many others, they might be carefully
enough looked over. All these, which amounted to a thousand Lances, were still
quartered about the Court, to be near the ^ings person; and to his ordinary
Guard were added two hundred Harquebushers on horseback, under the command of
Monsieur de Richlieu, a man of exceeding fierceness, and absolutely depending
upon those that governed. The Princes, Ministers of the Crown, many Prelates
and Gentlemen, eminent in birth or quality, were already summoned to the
Assembly at Fountain-bleau, where those that sat at the Helm, proceeded with
such dissimulation, that all men observing in them rather a timorousness, and
apprehension of the future events, than any thoughts bent to severity or
revenge, the Conspirators themselves believed they might without any more
trouble, obtain such a Regulation in the Government as they had designed.

In the mean time, the High Chancellor Olivier dying, By the death of Olivier,
Michel de l' Hospital is made High Chancellor.
that dignity was confirmed upon Michel de l' Hospital, who to his deep
knowledge in the Greek and Latin Letters, having added a great experience in
affairs of State, and being of a cautelous subtle wi^, the King thought he
would prove an excellent Minister for those resolutions that were then in
design. The Queen used great industry and no less diligence to advance this
Creature of her own to that Office, notwithstanding the Princes of Lorain would
have brought into it Monsieur Morvilliers; a man no way inferior, either in
reputation or wisdom, but who seemed not to desire that place, lest he might
gain the displeasure of the Queen Mother, who beginning to grow jealous of the
greatness of that Family, desired to have such a person in so eminent a charge,
who depending absolutely upon her will, might also be of ability to manage
those great affairs.

But the Election of the High Chancellor thus confirmed, (which for some days
kept business in suspense) no delays being to be used in the execution of their
purposed designs, the King with those bands before mentioned, and the Court all
armed, went to Fountain-bleau to celebrate the appointed Assembly with great
expectation of all men. There arrived two days after, Anne of M^morancy with
all his adherents, goes to the Assembly at Fountain-bleau.
the Constable accompanied by Francis Mareshal of Momorancy, and Henry Lord d'
Anville his sons, by the Admiral Andelot, and the Cardinal of Chastillon his
Nephews, the Visdame of Chartres, the Prince of Portian, and so numerous a
gallant company of his friends and adherents that in an open place (as
Fountain-bleau was) he needed not fear either the Kings strength, or the Guises
power. The Prince of Conde and the King of Navarre, though kindly invited, The
King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde go not thither.
had already refused to come thither; the first, through exasperation of mind,
which more than ever inclined his thoughts to new designs; the other, having
remitted what concerned their common interests to the Constable and the
Admiral, (to whom he sent his Confident Iacques de la Sague with Instructions)
was resolved to stand at a distance in his own private quiet.

The day appointed to begin, the Assembly being now come, The Assembly at
Fountain-bleau.
after they were all met together in the Queen-Mothers Chamber, the King in few
words told them his intent, which was to prevent the troubles that were rising,
and to regulate such things as were thought necessary to be reformed. Wherefore
he earnestly desired every one there present, with sincerity and candor to
deliver his opinion in what concerned the public good. The Queen Mother
pursued the Kings speech, speaking much to the same purpose; but more at large
exhorting every body there to speak freely their own sense, without any
respects; for the Assembly was called to no other intent, but to regulate and
reform such things as were requisite for the present and future quiet. The
Chancellor de l' Hospital made a long set Oration much to the same purpose, but
descending to more particulars, signified it was the Kings opinion, and the
Lords of his Council, that the troubles of the Kingdom did proceed chiefly from
the dissentions in Religion; and next, from the excessive grievances laid upon
the people by the Kings his Predecessors; and therefore desired every one upon
those two points especially to speak his opinion* that care might be taken both
for the settling of men's Consciences, and for paying the debts of the Crown,
without laying more burden upon the Subject, already overcharged, but rather
find some way to disburden and ease them of their oppressions: Yet his Majesty
prohibited none, if they discovered any other disorders in the Government, but
that they might and ought freely and plainly to propose, and represent to the
Assembly, whatsoever they thought might conduce to the re-setling the present
Distractions in the State.

After these Proposals, for the better information of those that were to speak
their opinions, the Duke of Guise rendered an account of the Armies, and other
things committed to his charge; and the Cardinal of Lorain related particularly
the estate of the Treasury and public Revenue, commonly called Finances; and
with these Preambles, that every one might have time to prepare himself what to
say, the Assembly was dismissed for that time.

The Admiral p^esents a Petition from the Hugonots, in which they demand
erection of Temples, and Liberty of Conscience.
The next day, before they entered upon any business, the Admiral more in love
with his own Opinions than ever, and conceiving if he could add to the Queens
apprehensions, and the Guises, they might with more facility obtain such a full
Reformation as was aimed at; resolved to set forth the number and force of the
Hugonots, notwithstanding the late suppression of the Conspiracy, and by that
means gain the favor and absolute dependence of that party. Wherefore rising
from his seat, and presenting himself before the King, he delivered him a
Paper, and said aloud, so that he might be plainly heard by every one, That it
was a Petition from those of the Reformed Religion, who in confidence of his
Majesty's Edicts, in which he permitted all people freely to present their
grievances, had desired him to present it; and though there were yet no hands
to it, when his Majesty should so order, it would presently be subscribed by
One hundred and fifty thousand persons. The King, who by his Mothers precepts
had learned the Art of dissembling, graciously received the Paper, and with
affable speeches commended the Admirals confidence in presenting to him the
desires of his Subjects. This Paper being read by Aubespine, it appeared to be
a Petition from the Hugonots, by which* with many tedious circumstances, they
desired in substance Liberty of Conscience, and Temples to be assigned them in
every City where they might freely exercise their Religion. After the reading
of which, the Admiral being returned to his place, and the murmur ceased, which
proceeded from the diverse sense that men had of this proceeding, every one was
appointed in order to deliver his opinion. The Cardinal of Lorain, of himself
ardent, and put on by the obligation of his calling, could not forbear to
answer the contents of the Petition, which he termed seditious, impudent, rash,
heretical and petulant; concluding, that if to strike a terror into the Kings
youth, it had been said, that the Petition should be subscribed by 150000
seditious persons, he made answer, There was above a Million of honest men
ready to suppress the boldness of such rebellious people, and make due
obedience be rendered to the Royal Majesty. Whereupon the Admiral offering to
reply, a great contest would have followed, to the hindrance of the business
intended, if the King, imposing on them both silence, had not commanded the
rest to proceed in order to deliver their opinions.

For so much as concerned Controversies in Religion, those that favored
Calvin's Doctrine, A National Council proposed.
as there were many even among the Prelates that inclined that way, proposed
that the Pope should be desired to grant a free General Council, where the
differences in matters of Faith might be disputed, and determined by common
consent; and if the Pope refused to grant it in such manner as was necessary
for the present times, and the general satisfaction of all men, the King ought,
according to the wise example of many his Predecessors, to call a National
Council in his own Kingdom; where, under his protection, those differences
might be determined. But the Cardinal of Lorain, and the rest who constantly
persevered in the Catholic Religion, and were the major part in the Assembly,
denied that any other Council was necessary, than that by the Popes order many
years since begun, and now newly entered into again in the City of Trent;
whither, according to the Canons, and ancient use of holy Church, it was free
for every body to have recourse, and to bring all differences in matters of
Religion to be decided by the natural competent Judges; and that to call a
National Council, whilst the General was open, would be to separate (through
the capriciousness of a few desperate persons) a most Christian Kingdom from
the union and fellowship of the holy Church; that it was not necessary to look
so far back: For the General Council of Trent, having discussed and examined
the Doctrine of those Teachers that dissented from the Roman Church, had
already for the most part reproved and condemned it; That they should endeavor
by the best means that could be, to purge the Kingdom, and not by hopes or
propositions of new Councils, increase the disorders, and multiply the
confusions. But if the manners of the Ecclesiastics, or abuses introduced into
the Government of the Church of France required reformation, or more severe
constitutions; an Assembly might be called of Divines and Prelates, in which,
without meddling with controversies in Faith, those disorders might be remedied
by common consent. This opinion was approved by the major part of voices, and
finally embraced by all.

Then for the concernment of the State, after many Propositions and Disputes,
which proceeded from the diverse interests; John de Monl^e Bishop of Valence, A
general Assembly of the States is resolved upon, and the present Assembly
dismissed.
having by secret order from the Queen proposed an Assembly of the States, both
parties willingly consented thereunto. The Constable, the Admiral, and their
faction, because they hoped from that, a Reformation in the Government: The
Queen Mother and the Guises, because they saw things go on of themselves to
their own ends.

This consultation ended, the King by his Chancellor thanked the Lords of the
Assembly, and forthwith Letters Patents were dispatched by the Secretaries of
State to all the Provinces in the Kingdom; containing, That in the Month of
October next they should send their Deputies to the City of Orleans, there to
hold a general Assembly of the States: and order was likewise given to the
principal Prelates, that in the Month of February following, they should all
meet at Poissy, to reform, by common consent, those abuses that were introduced
in the Government and Ministry of the Church; and to take such order, that a
considerable number of them should go to the general Council of Trent. The
Assembly ended, all were licensed to return to their houses, and desired to
meet again at Orleans, to assist at the Assembly of the States.

But Ia^ues de la Sague, the King of Navarre's servant, Saga a servan^ to the
King of Navarre, is taken prisoner at Estampes, with diverse Letters about him,
and being tortured, confesses certain practices against the Crown.
being charged with Letters of Instructions from the Constable, the Admiral and
the rest of the Adherents, directed to his Master, as soon as he left the Court
returning toward Bearne; being gone as far as Estampes, was by secret order of
the Queen stayed prisoner; from whence, with all his papers, he was privately
conveyed to Court. The Letters contained only private and general compliments,
such as use to pass amongst friends; and being examined, he constantly denied,
that he had any other commission than what was plain to be seen by the Letters.
But being brought to the place of torture to draw the truth from him by force,
not enduring the rack, he confessed, That the Prince of Conde had advised, and
the King of Navarre in part also consented thereunto, that he should leave
Bearne, and under pretense of coming to the Court, by the way take possession
of all the principal Towns thereabouts; seize Paris by the help of the
Constable, (his Son the Mareshal of Momorancy being Governor of it;) make
Picardy revolt by means of the Lords of Senarpont and Bouchava^ne, and draw
Britanny to his party by aid of the Duke of Estampes, who being Governor of
that Province, had great dependances there; and so armed and accompanied by the
Forces of the Hugonots, come to the Court, and force the States to depose the
Queen Mother and the Guises from the Government, and declaring the King was not
out of his minority till he came to 22 years of age, create his Tutors and
Governors of the Kingdom, the Constable, the Prince of Conde, and the King of
Navarre. He added to his confession, that if they put the cover of the Visdame
of Chartres Letters which were taken from him, in water, the characters would
presently appear, and they should find there all written that he had said. Thus
by the confession of one employed by them, and the testimony of the Letters,
the new designs of the Conspirators were discovered.

But as the discontented Princes (resolved to bring in Innovations) increased
in power and dependents; with so much the more sollicitousness and diligence
they at Court made their provisions; where continuing still their wonted
dissimulation, they studied all manner of pretenses and colors to draw near to
the Kings person, or else remove out of the suspected Provinces all such, who
being united with the Princes of the Blood, had received Commissions to trouble
or molest them. For this cause the Duke of Estampes being sent for under
pretense that he should be employed as Governor of the Kingdom of Scotland,
was entertained with artificial delays; and Senarpont being declared Lieutenant
to the Mareshal of Brissac, coming to receive new Instructions in order to his
Government, was by the same arts hindered from raising any commotion in Picardy;
and so all the rest with sundry delays and excuses were in like manner
entertained and suspended. But the remedies were not sufficient, for the wound
already festered.

The Hugonots having taken courage from the first Councils of the Insurrection
at Ambois, and the open profession of the Admiral, began to raise commotions in
all parts of the Kingdom; and laying aside all obedience and respect, not only
made open resistance against the Magistrates, but in many places had directly
taken Arms, endeavoring to raise the Countries, and get strong places into
their hands, whither they might retire with safety: which was grown to such a
pass, that from all parts came complaints against them to the Court, and news
of their deportments. But one thing more important and more grievous than all
the rest, made them hasten their former resolutions. The Prince of C^nde
practices to possess himself of Lions, but without success.
For the Prince of Conde, moved by his old inclinations, and urged by the sting
of Conscience, not being able to quiet his mind, or moderate his thoughts,
resolved to make himself Master of a strong place in some part of the Kingdom,
which might serve him afterward for a retreat or standing quarter, if he were
forced to make preparations for the War. Amongst many others in which he kept
secret intelligence, none pleased him so well as Lions, being a populous rich
City, placed upon two Navigable Rivers, not far from Geneva, the principal seat
of the Hugonots; and placed so near upon the Confines, that he might easily
receive speedy succors from the Protestant Princes of Germany, and the united
Cantons of Switzers; and from whence upon any accident or necessity, he might
soon retire into some free open place out of the Kingdom.

Wherefore using the assistance of two Brothers, the Maligni's his old
servants, he found a means to treat with diverse principal men of the City,
which by reason of the Traffic, is always inhabited by many strangers of all
Nations, and through the neighborhood of Geneva, was then (though covertly)
replenished with people averse to the Catholic Religion, and inclined to
Calvin's Doctrine. These, when they thought they had got a party strong enough
in the City to make insurrection, endeavored to bring in privately Soldiers
unarmed, and others of their faction; with which being afterward furnished
with arms, they might on a sudden possess themselves of the Bridges, and
Townhouse, and at length reduce the Town wholly into their power.

The Marshall of S. Andre was then Governor of Lions; who being sent for upon
the present occasions to Court, left there in his place, with the same
authority, his Nephew, the Abbot of Achon. He, by means of Catholic Merchants
jealous to preserve their own estates, and enemies to those Counsels that might
disturb the peace of the City, having perfectly discovered the practices of the
Hugonots, and the time that they determined to rise; the night before the fifth
of September, appointed Pro with the chief Deputy of the Citizens, with three
hundred Firelocks, to place a guard upon the Bridges over the Rhone, and the
Soane, and besiege that part of the City which is placed between the two
Rivers, where he knew the Conspirators were to assemble. The Maligni's
perceiving the Catholics design, not willing to stay to be besieged and
assaulted where they could not defend themselves, helped by the darkness of the
night, prevented the Governors men, and hasting with great courage, possessed
themselves of the Bridge over the Soane, where they lay watching with great
silence, in hope that the Catholics, terrified with a sudden encounter, would
be easily disordered* whereby the passage would be free for them to the other
part of the Bridge, and to make themselves Masters of the great place, and of
the chiefest strong parts in the Town.

But it fell out otherwise: For the Catholics enduring the first shock without
being troubled or disordered, and afterward continual fresh supplies of men
being sent by the Governor, the Conspirators could no longer resist. The rest
of their accomplices seeing the beginning so difficult, durst neither stir not
appear any longer. Wherefore the Maligni's having fought all night, and being
wearied out, as the day began to break, perceiving the Gate behind them was
open, (which the Governor on purpose to facilitate their flight had commanded
not to be shut, lest by an obstinate perseverance, all might be endangered)
they fled away, and many of their faction with them, and others hid themselves;
by which means the City was freed from those great commotions

Then the Governor calling in those Troops that lay about the Town, and having
made diligent search for the Conspirators; to terrify the Hugonots with the
severity of their punishment, condemned many of them to be hanged, and
preserving the rest alive, sent them presently to Court; who served afterward
to confirm the depositions of the prisoners against the discontented Princes.

The news of this attempt being come to Court, the King resolving to use no
longer delays, nor give more time for new experiments, departed from
Fountain-bleau with those thousand Lances that used to attend him, and two old
Regiments of Foot, that were newly come out of Piedmont and Scotland; and
taking the way of Orleans, solicited the Deputies of the Provinces to appear.

The whole French Nation is distinguished into three orders, which they call
States. The three Estates of the Kingdom.
The first consists of Ecclesiastics; the second of the Nobility; and the
third of the common people. These being divided into thirty Precincts or
Jurisdictions, which they call Baillages or Seneschausees, when a general
Assembly of the Kingdom is to be held, go all to their chief City, and dividing
themselves into three several Chambers, every one chooses a Deputy, who in the
name of that Body, is to assist at the general Assembly, wherein are proposed
and discussed all matters concerning the several Orders or Government of the
State.

In this manner three Deputies are sent by every Baillage, one for the
Ecclesiastics, one for the Nobility, and one for the People; which by a more
honorable term, are called the third Estate. Being all met together in
presence of the King, the Princes of the Blood, and Officers of the Crown, they
form the Body of the States General, and represent the Authority, Name, and
Power of the whole Nation. When the King is capable to govern, and present,
they have power to consent to his demands, to propose things necessary for the
good of their order, to oblige the common people to new taxes, and to give and
receive new Laws and Constitutions; but when the King is in minority, or
otherwise incapable, they have authority when it falls into controversy, to
choose the Regents of the Kingdom, to dispose of the principal Offices, and to
appoint who shall be admitted to the Council; and when the Kings line fails, or
a descendant of the Royal Family, they have power according to the Salique Laws
to choose a new Lord. But besides these supreme Privileges, the Kings have
always used in any urgent weighty occasions to assemble the States, and to
determine of matters of difficulty with their advice and consent; thinking not
only by a public consent to make the Princes resolutions more valid, but that
it was also necessary in a lawful Government and truly Royal, that all great
businesses should be communicated to the whole body of the Kingdom. Now at that
time it plainly appearing, that through the dissentions among the Princes, and
differences in Religion, all things were full of disorder, and had need of
speedy remedy, the Deputies elected by the Provinces, and instantly called upon
with reiterated Orders from the Court, met together with great diligence at
Orleans, at the beginning of October, where the King himself being also
arrived, with a great company of the principal Lords and Officers of the Crown,
he now expected nothing but the coming of the discontented Princes. The
Constable with his sons stayed in the wonted place, at Chantillii; the King of
Navarre, and the Prince his Brother, were retired into Bearn; and being
summoned by the Kings Letters to come to the Assembly of the States, they did
not plainly refuse it, but with diverse excuses and many delays put off the time
of their appearance.

This kind of proceeding held the King and all his Ministers in great dispense,
doubting, not without reason, that the Princes either suspecting something of
themselves, or advertised by some Confident, by refusing to appear at the
Assembly, would frustrate all their great designs and preparations, which were
founded only upon their coming. And the Prince of Conde, who ruled his actions
by the guiltiness of his Conscience, it appearing to him a thing impossible,
but that by the prisoners at Ambois, Saga's confession, and the Conspirators
taken at Lions, there was enough discovered to lay open his intents, was grown
so extremely jealous, that no reasons could persuade him to put himself again
into the Kings power or his Ministers, the chief of which he knew were all his
mortal enemies. But the King of Navarre, either being less guilty, or of a more
credulous nature than his brother, thought, that by going to the States, they
should easily obtain a reformation in the Government, which was the thing they
had so much labored for, and that by refusing to go thither, they should
condemn themselves, and leave the field free to the avarice and persecution of
the Guises. Nor could he possibly believe, that in the face of a General
Assembly of the whole Kingdom, the King yet as it were a Pupil, an Italian
woman and two strangers would venture to lay violent hands upon the Princes of
the Blood, against whom the most masculine Kings and most revengeful, had ever
proceeded with great regard, as against persons not to be violated, and in a
manner Sacro-sancti. Wherefore he was of opinion, whatsoever came of it, to go
to the Assembly, and to take the Prince with him; not meaning to give them that
advantage, to condemn him in absence, without any kind of defense, as he was
sure they would if he stayed so far off; whereas if he were there to solicit
the Deputies himself, he hoped his cause, if it were not approved of by the
rigor of justice, yet the equity of his reasons would at least make it be born
with; and at the last, (if no better) in consideration of his quality, and
pre-eminence of Blood, pardoned. All their Counselors and Friends concurred
in this opinion, except the Prince's Wife, and his Mother-in-law; both which
constantly opposed it, esteeming all other loss inferior to the danger which
they thought evident of leaving their lives there.

Whilst they were in this debate, there arrived on a sudden, first the Count of
Cursol, and afterward the Marshall of Saint Andre, whom the King had
dispatched one after the other, to persuade the Princes to come: They
represented to them, that this grave venerable Assembly was called with much
expense to the King, and great incommodity to the whole Kingdom, only in
consideration of the Princes of the Blood, and to satisfy their instances and
complaints: That they were obliged to deliver their opinions in regulating the
Government, and decision of points controverted in Religion, businesses of such
weight, as without the assistance of the chief Princes of the Blood, could not
be determined: That the King had great cause to think himself mocked, and the
States, that they were slighted by the Princes of Bourbon; since having so
often desired a Reformation in the Government, and to have the Hugonots cause
examined, now that the time was come, and the States assembled for that
purpose, they took not any care of going thither; as it were contemning the
Majesty of that Assembly, which was the representative Body of the whole
Kingdom; that hereafter they ought not to blame any body but themselves, if
they were worthily excluded from any part or charge in the Government, since
they would not vouchsafe to come to receive that portion which the King with
the approbation of the States thought good to assign them; and showing
themselves thus manifestly averse to the Kings service, and good of the Crown,
they ought not to wonder if quick resolutions were taken to suppress and
extirpate those roots of discord, and apparent designs of innovation. That the
King was resolved, as he meant to gratify such who showed themselves
respectful and obedient to him; so he would bind those to a necessary and
forced obedience, that had any intents to separate themselves from his
Councils, or to stir any commotions in the Cities and Provinces of the Kingdom:
Of which delinquency he would think the Princes of Bourbon guilty, if they took
no care at all to show their innocence, but with their absence and contumacy
should confirm the reports of fame; which being never believed either by the
King or his Council, yet his Majesty desired, for the honor of the
Blood Royal, that with true demonstrations of duty and loyalty, and a real
union for the public good, they would testify as much to all France, which
with wonderful expectation had turned her eyes upon the actions of the present
times.

This Message was delivered from the King, to the Princes of Bourbon, which had
little moved the Prince of Conde, resolved not to venture his person in a place
where his enemies were the stronger, if necessity had not forced him to break
that resolution. For the Count of Cursol, being returned to Court, and having
signified the Princes backwardness to come to the Assembly; the Guises
thereupon pressing and soliciting, that force might be used to fetch them in,
and the Queen not dissenting from them, (through a desire she had to see the
seeds of those discords eradicated, and her sons quietly re-established in
their States) the King took a resolution to make show of compelling them by
Arms. To which purpose the Marshall de Terms being dispatched into Gascoigne,
there began an Army to be formed under his command* and all the Troops and
Infantry that were distributed in the Neighbor-provinces, were sent that way.
The Princes of Bourbon were not only without Arms, and unprovided, but
restrained also in Bearne, a narrow Country, at the foot of the Perinees, and
partly by France, partly by Spain, shut up, and compassed in on all sides: So
that they were assured, being attacked on one side by the French army out of
Gascoigne, and on the other by the King of Spain's forces, (who desired to
extinguish those few relics that remained of the Kingdom of Navarre) they
should easily be oppressed and subdued. In France the Princes designs had no
where prospered; and in Bearne he had neither men nor money. Wherefore the King
of Navarre (resolved, not to hazard the rest of his state, together with the
safety of his Wife and Children, who were all in the same place) showing the
necessity, to which all Counsels must yield; at length brought his brother to
be content to go; all being of opinion, that whilst the States were sitting,
the Guises would not dare to attempt any thing against them; whereas if they
continued obstinate to stay in Bearne; they would undoubtedly be forced with
eternal infamy to fall under the hateful name of Rebels.

Charles Cardinal of Bourbon their brother, contributed very much to bring them
to this resolution. For he being a man of a facile good nature, as appeared in
the whole course of his life, averse to novelties, and extremely affectionate
to his brothers, when he understood the Kings intent, and the preparations that
he made, being persuaded by the Queen Mother, who desired their purposed
designs might be effected, without noise of Arms, or the hazard of War; he
presently took post, and went into Bearne to persuade them to come, by
magnifying on one side the greatness of the forces that were preparing,
(against which they would not be able to make any resistance) and by assuring
them on the other, that there appeared not in the King or the Queen Mother any
other show but of good will, and a desire of peace and agreement. So leaving
the Queen with the young children in Pau, they departed all three with a small
train, to give less cause of suspicion, and went together toward the Court.

The Constable was sent for, though not with such earnestness, because he was
in a place where they might easily get him into their power when they pleased.
But he proceeded with greater dissimulation, and more security: For, having not
favored the Faction of the Malcontents otherwise than with his counsel, and
that also ever tending rather to seek redress from the States, than to move any
Insurrection or Rebellion; he would not, by refusing to go to Court, increase
the suspicion against him, but by other arts and dissimulations defer his
coming thither, till he saw what became of the Princes of Bourbon. Wherefore
being come to Paris, there feigning he was troubled with a Catarrh, and the
Gout, he returned (till he could recover) to his own house. Many days after,
being again upon the way, under pretense that too much motion offended him,
(which by reason of his age was easy to be believed) he made little journeys,
and went out of the way for commodity of lodging, artificially delaying the
time, until he could hear that the others were arrived.

It is certain, that, his sons urging him to make more haste, and telling him
that neither the Queen Mother nor the Guises would be so bold as to offend a
man so much esteemed as he was, and that had such great dependences in the
Kingdom; he, grown wise through long experience, made them answer, That those
about the King could govern the State as they pleased, without any obstacle or
impediment whatsoever; and yet notwithstanding fought contradictions, and
assemblies of the States; things that could not be without some hidden design,
which with a little patience would be ^rought to light. By which reply his Sons
being satisfied, he sought still by delays to gain the benefit of time.

In the mean while the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were met upon
the Confines by the Marshall de Terms, who, under show of honor, conducted
them with a great body of Cavalry to secure those Towns which la Sague
mentioned in his Confession; and at the same time, sent other Companies of Foot
and Horse to shut up and guard the ways behind them; doubting that the Princes
might change their resolution, and endeavor secretly to get back again into
Bearn. But news being come to Orleans, that the Princes being in their journey,
were come into the Kings dominions, and compassed about by de Terms his
Troops; presently Hierom Groslot Baily of Orleans, accused to have held
intelligence with the Hugonots, to make that City revolt to the discontented
Princes, was laid close up; and by order from the King, the Visdame of Chartres
was committed to prison in Paris, who still contriving new mischiefs, had
lingered there unadvisedly.

Andelot was not so easily intrapped; who being as wise and cautelous in
providing against dangers, as he was precipitate and bold in contriving them,
had secretly conveyed himself away into the remotest parts of Britany, near
upon the Seaside; being resolved, in case of necessity, to pass over into
England. But the Admiral, who with great art and dexterity had managed the
business, without being discovered, went thither freely at the beginning, with
an intent to employ all his power in the Assembly for the advantage of his
party; and being very much made of by the King, and used (as was her custom)
very civilly by the Queen, he had opportunity nearly to observe all the
passages of the Court* of which afterward with great wariness, he gave secret
advertisement to the Constable, and the King of Navarre.

But now there was no further need of pretenses, insomuch as the Princes of
Bourbon being neither met upon the way, nor courted by any body but a few of
their intimate familiar friends, arrived at Orleans the 29 day of October;
where (contrary to the custom of the Court, though in time of War) they found
not only the Gates of the City guarded with a great number of Soldiers; but
the strong Holds secured, the places manned, and Watches appointed at the end
of every street, with a terrible show of all warlike instruments, and many
Companies of Soldiers, which passing through, they arrived at the Kings
lodging, much more strictly guarded, as if it had been the Tent or Pavilion of
a General in the midst of an Army. Being come to the Gate, and intending to go
into the Court on horseback, (which is a privilege belonging to the Princes
of the Blood) they found the Gate shut, and only the Wicket open; so that they
were forced to alight in the midst of the Highway; and being neither saluted
nor met, (but by very f^w) were conducted to the Kings presence; who placed
between the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorain, and compassed about by
the Captains of his Guard, received them in a much different manner from that
familiarity which the Kings of France use to all men, but especially to the
Princes of their Blood. From thence the King himself went with them, but the
Guises followed not, to the Queen-Mothers Chamber; who not forgetting her old
Maxims, to seem independent, and not interessed in any party, received them
with the wonted demonstrations of Honor, and with such an appearance of
sadness, that the tears were seen to fall from her eyes.

But the King, continuing still the same countenance, turning to the Prince of
Conde, began in sharp language to complain, that he, without any injury or ill
usage received from him, had, in contempt of all humane and divine Laws, many
times stirred his Subjects to rebel, raised War in diverse parts of the Kingdom,
attempted to surprise his principal Cities, and practiced even against his own
life and his brothers. To which the Prince, not at all dismayed, boldly
answered, That these were the ^alumnies and persecutions of his enemies; but
that he could soon make his innocence appear to all the world* The Prince of
Conde committed to prison.
Then replied the King* To find out the truth, it is necessary to proceed by
the usual ways of Justice: and so departing out of the Chamber, commanded the
Captains of his Guard to seize upon his person.

Here the Queen Mother, who moved with the necessity, gave her consent, but
forgot not the various changes of the world, wholly applied herself with kind
words to comfort the King of Navarre, whilst the Prince not saying a word else,
but blaming himself to be so co^ened by the Cardinal his brother, was led to a
house hard by, which being prepared for that purpose, had the Windows walled
up, the Gates doubled, and was reduced into a kind of Fortress flanked with
Artillery, and strait Guards o^ every side.

The King of Navarre, astonished at his brothers imprisonment, after many
complaints and long debate with the Queen Mother, (who laying the fault upon
the Duke of Guise Lieutenant General, sought to remove all jealousies and ill
will from her self) was carried to be lodged in a house joining to the Kings
Palace; where his ordinary Guards being changed, The King of Navarre kept (...)
a prisoner.
saving the liberty of conversation, he was in all other respects guarded and
kept as a prisoner.

At the very same time that the Prince was committed, Amaury Bouchard, the King
of Navarre's Secretary, was arrested, and all his Letters and Writings taken
from him.

The same night also Tannequy de Carrouge went from Court toward Anic^ in
Picardy, a place belonging to Magdalen d^ Roye, the Princes Mother-in-law; and
there finding her without suspicion of any thing, being but a woman, he sent
her away prisoner to the Castle of S. Germain, and carried all her Letters and
Papers with him to the Court.

But the news of these stirs (notwithstanding the Gates of the City were kept
shut, and Travelers forbidden to pass) being come to the Constable, who was
still upon the way, some few leagues from Paris; he presently stopped his
journey, with a resolution not to go any further till he saw what would be the
event of them.

In the mean while, the Assembly of the States began; The Assembly of the
States begins.
where the first thing that was done, was to make a profession of their Faith;
which being set down by the Doctors of the Sorbon, conformable to the belief of
the Roman Catholic Church, and publicly read by the Cardinal of Tournon,
President of the Ecclesiastical Order, was by a solemn Oath approved and
confirmed by every one of the Deputies, because none should be admitted into
that General Assembly either unwittingly or on purpose, that was not a true
Catholic.

This solemn Act being past, the High Chancellor, in presence of the King,
proposed those things which were necessary to be consulted of for the
Reformation of the Government. Upon which, and the demand of the Provinces,
they retired into their several Chambers; where when they had debated them
apart, they were to make their reports thereof in public. But this was the
least thing in every man's thought; for the minds of all men were in suspense,
and expecting the issue of the Princes imprisonment; whose commitment was
confirmed by a solemn Decree of the Kings Council, subscribed by the King
himself, the High Chancellor, and all the other Lords, except the Guises, who,
as suspected of enmity, absented themselves when the Princes of Bourbons cause
was to be handled, which was remitted to an Assembly of Judges Delegates, who
forming a Judicial Process, should proceed to a final Sentence. The Delegates
were Christophle de Thou, President in the Parliament of Paris; Bartholomy de
Faye, and Jacques Viole, Counselors in the same Parliament; and according to
the Customs of that Kingdom, Giles Bourdin, the ordinary Attorney that
prosecutes all Causes that either concern the Kings Rights, or tend to the
maintenance of the peace and safety of his Subjects, Procuror fiscal to the
King, performed the Office of Plaintiff and Accuser; John Tilliet, Chief Notary
in the Court of Parliament, wrote the Process; and all the Examinations and
Acts past in the presence of the High Chancellor.

In this manner proceeding upon the Examinations of the Prisoners, (which were
on purpose brought from Amboyse, Lions, and diverse other places) they were
ready to examine the Prince upon the points already discovered and proved. But
the High Chancellor and the Delegates coming into the Chamber where the Prince
was in prison, to interrogate him, he constantly refused to answer or submit
himself to the Examination of any of them; pretending as Prince of the Blood,
The Prince of Conde excepts against his trial, and appeals to the King; but the
appeal is not accepted.
that he was not under any Justice but the Parliament of Paris, in the Chamber
called The Chamber of Peers, that is, in a full Parliament, the King being
there himself in person, all the twelve Peers of France, and all the Officers
of the Crown, which was the custom formerly; and therefore he could do no other
than appeal to the King against such an extraordinary and perverse way of
Judicature. This appeal being transferred to the Kings Council, although
according to the ordinary Forms and Customs of the Kingdom it appeared
agreeable to reason, notwithstanding (the present case requiring quick and
speedy Judgment, and no Law making it necessary that the causes of the Princes
should always be tried with such formality in the Chamber of the Peers) it was
declared not valid. But the Prince having often made the same appeal, and
persisting still to make the same protestations; the Kings Council, upon demand
of the Procurer fiscal, declared at length that the Prince was to be held as
convict, because he had refused to answer the Delegates. So being forced to
submit himself to ex^amination, they proceeded judicially, and with great
expedition in the rest of the circumstances, till the very last pronouncing of
Sentence. Into such calamity were the Princes of Bourbon brought, that they
were like to expiate with their Blood their past crimes; yet was there not any
body so much their enemy among the French Nation, that, considering the great
Birth and noble Education both of the one and the other brother, was not moved
with exceeding compassion toward them. Only the Guises, men of a resolute
nature, either really believing it was expedient for the common good, peace and
welfare of the Kingdom; or else, as their ill-willers affirmed, being eager to
oppress their adversaries, and confirm their own greatness, constantly pursued
their first designs, without any regard either to the quality or merit of the
persons: nay, boasted with arrogant and bold speeches, That at two blows only
they would cut off at the same time the Heads of Heresy and Rebellion.

But the Queen Mother, though perhaps secretly she gave her consent, and was
willing enough they should proceed to execution; yet desiring notwithstanding,
that all the hate and blame should fall upon the Guises, as she had ever
artificially contrived it, and having an aim still to preserve her self Neuter
for any accidents that should happen in the uncertain changes of the World; her
countenance expressing sadness, and her words sorrow, she often sent, sometimes
for the Admiral, sometimes for the Cardinal of Chastillon, and showed an
earnest desire to find some means or other to save the Princes of Bourbon. With
the same arts she entertained Iacqueline de Logent, Duchess of Montpensier, a
Lady of sincere intentions, who being far from dissimulation, judged of others
by her self, yet she was inclined to the Doctrine of the Hugonots, and being
withal nearly intimate with the King of Navarre, she served by carrying
Messages from one to the other, to maintain a kind of correspondence between
them; which kind of proceedings, though directly opposite to her designs, the
effect whereof could not be concealed, they were nevertheless so excellently
dissembled, that even those who perceived most, were in doubt whether they were
true or no; considering how profound the secrets of men are, and how various
the affections and interests that govern the force of worldly actions.

The Commissaries had now pronounced the Sentence against the Prince of Conde;
That being convict of Treason and Rebellion, Sentence pronounced against the
Prince of Conde.
he should lose his head at the beginning of the Assembly of the
States General, before the Royal Palace. Nor was the execution deferred for any
other reason, but to see if they could catch in the same net the Constable, who
being earnestly called upon, did not yet appear; and to involve in the same
execution the King of Navarre, against whom nothing could be found sufficient
to condemn him; The King under the Barbers hands taken with an Apoplexy.
when one morning, the King being under the Barbers hands, (which he used
often) was on a sudden taken with such a grievous swooning, that his servants
laid him upon the bed for dead; and though in a short time he returned again to
his senses, yet he had such mortal accidents, that he gave very little hopes of
life. In which tumult of general amazement and confusion, the Guises solicited
the Queen Mother, that whilst the King was yet alive, the Judgment should be
executed upon the Prince of Conde; and the same resolution taken against the
King of Navarre; by which means they should cut off the way to all Innovations
that might happen upon the Kings death. Withal, they persuaded, that it was the
only way to preserve the Kingdom to her other Sons yet in minority, and to
dissipate those clouds of future dissension which already appeared in diverse
parts of the Kingdom. For although the Constable were wanting, whom in this
necessary and hasty resolution they could not get into their hands;
notwithstanding, the authority and privileges of the Blood Royal, the prudence
of the King of Navarre, and the Princes fierceness being once taken away, there
was little to be feared from him, who would neither be followed by the
Nobility, nor have the adherence of the Hugonots, as the Princes of Bourbon
had. That there wanted nothing to perfect their designs, (with so much art and
patience brought to maturity) but the very last point of execution, which by no
means was to be hindered, if the King should chance to die. For the Kingdom
falling by right upon his Brothers, both they and the Queen Mother would still
have the same reasons and interests. But the Queen having had the dexterity in
appearance to preserve her self as it were Neuter, was not so straightly
necessitated as to precipitate her deliberations. Wherefore considering, that
under her Sons, yet Pupils, the face of things would be wholly changed, and the
excessive greatness of the Guises, if it remained without counterpoise or
opposition, was no less to be feared than the continual practices of the
Princes of the Blood; she lessened the report of her Sons weakness, and often
gave it out, that there was great hopes of his recovery; seeking by that means
to gain time, and defer the execution of what was determined, that she might
afterward conform her self to the present occasions In pursuit of this
resolution, which was confirmed by the advice of the High Chancellor; as soon
as they knew the King was past hopes, she caused the Prince Dolphin, Son to
Iacqueline and the Duke of Montpensier, to bring the King of Navarre in the
night secretly into her Chamber; where, with her wonted arts and many effectual
arguments, she sought to persuade him, that she had ever been averse to the
late proceedings, and that she was desirous to join with him to oppose the
unlimited power of the Guises* Which, though it were not absolutely believed,
was not altogether unuseful for the future: for with this and other
negotiations, a correspondence being still maintained between them, it was not
so hard to treat upon agreement when occasion should serve, as it would have
been, if she had passionately declared her self a principal agent in what was
done, and an open enemy to the Princes of the Blood.

In the mean while, the Kings weakness still increased, who from the beginning
was thought to have an Impostume in his head, over the right ear, because he
was ever from his infancy troubled with defluxions and pains in that part,
which afterward coming to break, the abundance of matter and corruption
falling into his throat, choked him; so that the fifth day of December in the
morning he passed out of this life, leaving all things in extreme disorder and
confusion.

All men for the most part believed at the present, that he was poisoned by his
Barber; and it was said that the Physicians had discovered evident signs of it,
which the suddenness of the accident and time of his death would have made
believed by men of best understanding, if the disease of which he died had not
been known to be nourished and grown up with him from his cradle. He left
behind him the opinion of a good Prince, free from vice, inclined to Justice
and Religion; but reported to be of a weak heavy understanding, and of a nature
rather apt to be awed by others, than able to govern of himself. However, it
would have been expedient for the peace of France, either that he had never
come to the Crown, or else that he had lived till the designs then on foot had
been fully perfected. For as the force and violence of thunder uses in a
moment to overthrow and ruin those buildings which are built with great care
and long labor; so his unexpected death, destroying in an instant those
counsels, which with so much art and dissimulation were brought to maturity and
concluded; left the state of things (already in the way (although by violent
and rigorous means, yet) to a certain and secure end) in the height of all
discord, and more than ever they were formerly, troubled, wavering, and
abandoned.

Charles the Ninth, Brother to Francis, and second Son to the Queen, Charles
the IX.
succeeded to the Crown, being yet but a Child about eleven years old. In so
tender an age, there was no doubt but he should be committed to the care of a
Guardian, who should supply his defect in the Government; in which case the
ancient customs of the Kingdom, and the Laws often confirmed by the States,
called rightfully to that charge, as first Prince of the Blood, the King of
Navarre. But how could the Kings youth, and the Government of the Kingdom, be
safely committed into his hands, who upon great suspicions to have practiced
against the State, was kept in a manner prisoner, and his Brother for the same
crime already condemned to die? The Guises had governed with supreme authority
under the late King, and with great constancy applied all manner of frank
remedies to recover the prosperity and peace of the State: so that committing
the Government to them, the same Councils might be continued, and the same
deliberations followed. But how could the Guardianship of a King in minority be
conferred upon those that were in no manner of way allied to the Royal Blood,
against all the Laws of the Kingdom, and in such a time when the major part of
the great Lords being already wakened and advertised, would earnestly oppose
it? The States had often committed the Regency and Government of Infant-Kings
to the Mothers; and in such division of opinions and factions, the life of the
King, and custody of the Kingdom ought not in reason to be trusted in other
hands. But how could a woman that was a stranger, without dependences, and
without favorers, pretend to the supreme authority with two so powerful and
already-armed factions?

Wherefore, when the late King Francis beginning to grow worse, showed evident
signs of death; the Guises foreseeing what might easily happen, entered into a
straight league of friendship with the Cardinal of Tournon, the Duke of
Nemours, the Mareschals of Brissac and S. Andre, the Sieur de Sipierre
Governor of Orleans, and many other great Lords, continually providing what
force they could to maintain themselves and their power. On the other side, the
King of Navarre, conceiving good hopes for the future, making a confederacy
with the Admiral, the Cardinal of Chatillon, the Prince of Portian, Monsieur de
Iarnac, and the rest of his dependents, had secretly armed all his Family, and
by sundry messengers sent for the Constable, who, having understood the Kings
death, hasted his journey, which he used to delay, was every hour expected at
Orleans. So that both Factions having put themselves into a posture of defense,
and the whole Court and the Soldiers divided between them, and not only all
others, All the Nobility and the Militia is divided between two Factions
but even the Deputies of the States themselves taking part according to their
inclinations and several interests, there was no place left for any third
resolution; but with the instant danger that every hour the Factions would
affront each other, every place was full of tumults and terror, and all their
proceedings tended to a manifest ruin.

Notwithstanding, the unbridled desire of Rule did not so sway their minds (as
yet accustomed to reverence the Majesty of Laws) that through private discords,
public obedience should be denied to the lawful King, though in minority: but
both Factions with tacit and unanimous consent striving who should be the
first, they saluted and did homage to King Charles the Ninth of that Name, the
same day that his Brother died; all agreeing to acknowledge him for their
lawful and natural Prince.

This was the foundation and basis whereon to form those things which were left
so strangely disordered. For the Queen, who knew she could not trust the life
of her children, and the Government of the State to either Faction, the one
grievously offended and exasperated, the other full of boldness and
pretensions, and both of them powerful in adherents, and inclined to undertake
any great attempt, desired to preserve in her self, not only the custody and
care of her children, but also the Government and administration of the
Kingdom; which in the last days of Francis his life, and in the disorders at
his death, appeared to her so difficult, that she little less then des^aired of
safety. But this first point confirmed, of obedience rendered to the Kings
Person by both parties; which, as appeared manifestly, was done through
jealousy and mutual fear the one had of the other, each doub^ing his adversary
would arrogate the authority to rule, and usurp the power of the Government;
the Queen laying things together, conceived, that drawing from these discords
and present confusion, an advantageous resolution for her self, she might, as
Mediatrix between them, get the superiority of both, being supported by the
proper interests of the one and the other Faction; who not agreeing among
themselves, nor able easily to attain to that end they aimed at, would agree
upon her, as a mean between the two extremes; being contented that the
Authority and Power should rest in her, which by reason of the opposition of
their adversaries they could not obtain for themselves. In which respect the
Guises would easily join with her, that the King of Navarre might not acquire
the absolute Government; and the King of Navarre would perhaps be content with
less authority than of right belonged to him, rather than hazard the whole, by
contending with the Guises. So that if the business were dexterously carried,
the supreme Authority would fall upon her.

This conception was the likelier to take effect, because the Queen, though
united with the Guises, had in appearance preserved her self Neuter; by which
means she was confident to one party, and not thought an enemy to the other.

But two great difficulties traversed this design. One, that the King of
Navarre being exasperated with the injuries past, it was a very difficult
matter to appease him. The other, that beginning to treat with him, she might
give cause of suspicion to the Guises; and so greatly endangered the losing
that support, before she had time to settle the affairs. Which obstacles though
they appeared invincible, yet the urgency of the occasion enforced a necessity
to try all kind of policies, though never so doubtful. The first thought was to
assure the Guises: for it had been but an unwise counsel, to abandon all old
friendship already confirmed, before there was any manner of assurance that it
was possible to contract a new one. But a business of that nicety, and on every
side full of suspicion, was not to be managed but by persons of great
dexterity. Wherefore having thought upon many, the Queen at length resolved
there was no instrument so proper for that negotiation as the Marshall S.
Andre. For being a great Confident to the Guises, privy to all their secretest
thoughts, and besides that, a man of prudence and singular quickness; he would
not believe the Queen could have any hope to cozen him, and the businesses
treated by him would have credit and great authority with his own Faction. So
that having sent for him, and deplored the state of the present affairs, she
enquired what resolution the Princes of Lorain meant to take; professing that
she would not differ from them, but follow any advice that they, by agreement
amongst themselves should think most reasonable. To which he making a doubtful
reply, with an intent rather to penetrate into the Queens designs, than to
discover to her the intentions of his own party; after many several discourses,
at last all their arguing ended in this conclusion; That the differences
between the two Factions could not be accommodated without great troubles, and
the danger of a doubtful War, if both parties did not yield something in their
reasons, and retire (as it is commonly said) a step backwards, leaving to her
to mediate between them; who both as a Judge and Moderatrix, and as an
indifferent party, might limit the pretentions of the Princes in such a manner,
that one side should not seem to yield to the other, but through modesty and
respect that they bore to the Mother of their King, forget all past injuries,
and so things might remain equally balanced between them. This counsel
proceeding in a manner wholly from the Marshall, the Queen feigning rather to
take than give advice, they began to consult which way was best to proceed.
Then showing that the King of Navarre was a man of right intentions, and of a
facile moderate nature, she doubted not but she could persuade him to it, so
the Princes of Lorain would be content. The Marshall, that was free from any
private passion, and knew the slippery dangerous condition in which the Guises
stood, took upon him the charge to manage the business with them; which being
proposed to the Duke and the Cardinal, and afterward debated in a meeting of
their Confederates, they all approved of it. But the two Brothers were of
different opinions: For the Duke being more placable and moderate, consented to
an accommodation, provided his Governments and Revenues that he enjoyed by the
favor of the late Kings, might remain untoucht. But the Cardinal being of a
more ambitious nature, and vehement disposition, desired still to persist in
the strifes they had begun, and to endeavor to preserve themselves in the same
authority they had obtained and exercised during the life of Francis.
Notwithstanding, not only the Cardinal of Tournon concurring with the Duke in
opinion, as desirous to avoid the tempest of War, but also the two Mareschals
of Brissac and S. Andre, and especially the Sieur de Sipierre, whose opinion,
through the fame of his wisdom, was of great esteem amongst them, and
conceiving they got enough, if, preserving their reputation, their estates and
honors which they possessed, they could preserve themselves for times of
better conjuncture; leave was given to the Queen, by means of the same
Marshall, to try all the ways she should think good to make an agreement with
the King of Navarre.

This difficulty being overcome, the greatest obstacle was yet to pass through;
which was to appease the Faction of the discontented Princes: a thing judged by
many not possible to be brought to pass, and absolutely desparate. But the
Queen, knowing the nature and inclination of those she ha^ to deal with, (a
thing chiefly necessary for the effecting any great design) did not doubt to
compass her desire. The intimate Counselors to the King of Navarre were
Francis de Cars, a Gascoigne, and Philip de Lenon-court, Bishop of Auxerre;
That, a man of small judgment, and little experience in the world; This, of a
deep reach, extremely vigilant, and altogether intent upon those interests that
were most for his own advancement. These being secretly gained by the working
of the Queen Mother, with such means as were most likely to prevail over their
several humors, (for she fought by rewards, and apparent specious reasons, to
corrupt and persuade de Cars, and to Auxerre she offered honors and
Ecclesiastical preferments; which by means of the King of Navarre only he could
not so easily attain unto) they became Ministers to the Queens designs, and
under the name of faithful sincere Counselors, were ready to favor those
negotiations that tended to an agreement, and the advancement of her greatness.
The first overtures of this accommodation were made by the Duchess of
Montpensier, by reason of her goodness and candid disposition very inward with
the Queen, and a great friend to the King and Queen of Navarre, through the
inclination she had to the Hugonots Religion; and in the progress of the
business, came in by little and little Tanneguy de C^rrouges, and Louis de
Lansac, men of approved wisdom, in whom the Queen reposed great confidence: and
these three continually employed their endeavors to shake the King of
Navarre's resolution; who, being now drawn from his wonted inclinations to
peace and quietness, and incited by the ardour of enmity, and the memory of
dangers past, had his thoughts so confused, that he stood in suspense, and
doubtful what course to take. Three conditions were proposed from the Queen;
First, that all prisoners should be set at liberty, and particularly the Prince
of Conde, Madam de Roye, and the Visdame of Chartres, causing the Parliament of
Paris to declare null the Sentence pronounced against the Prince by the Judges
Delegate. Secondly, that the King of Navarre should have the Government of all
the Provinces in the Kingdom, provided the Queen should enjoy the name and
authority of Regent. And the third, that the Catholic King should be
solicited to the restitution or change of Navarre; and the Isle of Sardinia
was particularly named. These conditions being proposed by the Queens Agents,
the Kings Counselors highly approved them; showing, that the Regency, a Title
without substance, and only an airy name, was abundantly recompensed by the
authority and power over the Provinces, wherein consisted the real command and
essential Government of the Kingdom: to which being added the honorable
release of the Prince, with the suppression of his enemies, and hope to recover
an estate befitting his quality and birth, there was not any doubt at all to be
further made. They added, that their affairs for the present were in so
doubtful a condition, that putting themselves upon the rigor of the Laws
against such potent enemies, and with the prejudice of their past machinations,
it was rather to be feared they would be utterly ruined, than advanced to those
honors they desired: that the States then at Orleans depended wholly upon the
Queens will and the Guises, by whose means they were with great regard
assembled; for which cause they were for the most part united and joined with
them: wherefore it was greatly to be feared, if their cause were remitted to
the arbitrament and determination of the States, that they being incensed by
their former practices, would exclude the Princes of the Blood from the
Government, and commit it to the Guises, as persons they could more confide in;
upon which would follow the inevitable destruction of the whole family of
Bourbon. That it was necessary to stop this precipice with moderate Counsels;
and showing they desired nothing but what was just and reasonable, by yielding
to the Laws, clear themselves from suspicion and their former contumacy; and
although the change proposed with the Catholic King were very uncertain and
doubtful, yet it would be great imprudence any way by pretending to the
Government of other States, to weaken the hopes of recovering his own, and the
inheritance belonging to his children. These reasons wrought upon the King of
Navarre, of himself inclined to such kind of thoughts; but he was spurred on to
the contrary by the instigation of the Prince his Brother, though rather with a
violent passion of revenge, than any founded reason. Notwithstanding, there
being joined to that party which persuaded an accord, the authority of the Duke
of Montpensier and the Prince de la Rochesur-yon, both of the same family of
Bourbon, but who being many degrees removed from the Crown, had not interested
themselves in these late businesses; the King of Navarre inclining to come to
an agreement with the Queen, proposed; by the sa^e persons that treated the
Accommodation, besides the three Conditions offered, two others: The first,
that the Guises should be deprived of all places of command at Court; The
other, that Liberty of Conscience should be granted to the Hugonots.

When Calvin's Doctrine was first preached, the seeds thereof were planted in
the family of Henry, King of Navarre, and Margaret his wife, father and mother
to Jane the present Queen; and as the minds of those Princes were ill-affected
to the Apostolic See, Pope Iulio the second excommunicates the Kingdom of
France and the Adherents thereof; in which the King of Navarre being included,
he applies himself to follow the opinions of Beza and Peter Martyr.
being deprived of their Kingdom under pretense of Ecclesiastical C^nsures,
thundered out by Pope Iulio the Second against the Kingdom of France and the
adherents of the same, with which Navarre was then in confederacy* so it was
likeliest, they should apply themselves to that Doctrine, which opposing the
Authority of the Roman Bishop, by consequence concluded those Censures invalid,
by virtue whereof they had lost their Kingdom. Wherefore the Ministers (so they
call them of Calvin's Religion) frequenting the house of those Princes, and
there teaching their Opinions, they made such an impression in Queen Jane, that
departing from the rights of the Catholic Church, she had wholly entertained
and embraced the Religion of the Hugonots. Whereupon being married to Anthony
of Bourbon, (at the present King of Navarre) she not only continued in the same
belief, but had in great part drawn her Husband to that Opinion, being besides
persuaded by the zealous eloquence of Theodore Beza, Peter Martyr Vermeil, and
other Teachers that went freely into Bearne to preach their new Doctrine. And
the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and other principal men of the Faction of the
Princes of the Blood, having at the same time, partly through Conscience,
partly through interests of State, embraced those Opinions, with so much the
greater constancy, the King of Navarre persevered to continue the protection of
the Hugonots. For this cause he desired of the Queen in the Treaty of
Accommodation between them, that Liberty of Conscience might be granted to the
Calvinists: and she, who thought all other things inferior to the evident
danger, (wherein she saw the Kingdom to be lost both to her sons and her self)
not to interrupt the Treaty of agreement, would not absolutely deny those two
Conditions, though very hard ones, but showing, that to deprive the Guises of
their charges at Court, was immediately contrary to the Accord then in
agitation, and to the thought of reducing the wavering estate of the Kingdom
into peace and repose, (for they being armed and powerful, would never suffer
so great and manifest an affront, but joining with the Catholic Faction and
the greater part of the States, would to maintain their dignity, soon have
recourse to Arms) notwithstanding, she obliged her self, that with time and art
she would continually lessen their authority and power; which, they being by
degrees deprived of their Governments, would soon fall to nothing. And for so
much as concerned the liberty of the Hugonots, being a thing of too great
importance to be granted upon so little deliberation, and which the Parliaments
and the States themselves would undoubtedly oppose; she was content to promise
secretly, that governing by common consent with the King of Navarre, she would
by indirect by-ways, and upon the emergencies of occasions which might happen
every day, so work underhand, that by little and little they should in great
part obtain their desires.

The Queen promised these things, being forced by the present necessity; yet
with an intent, when the Government was established, and the King of Navarre
appeased, to observe none of them; but delaying the execution of them with her
w^nted artifices, at length with dexterity to render them altogether vain. For
she thought it not expedient for her own interests, and the preservation of her
sons, wholly to suppress the Guises, (who served marvellously to balance the
power of the Princes of the Blood) and to permit a Liberty of Conscience, she
knew it would not be done without great scandal to the Apostolic See, and all
other Christian Princes, nor without great disorder and dissension in the
Kingdom; but reserving many things to the benefit of time and future industry,
she endeavored by all manner of means to provide for, and remedy the present
distractions.

Now the Accommodation being in a manner confirmed upon these Conditions, the
King of Navarre declared, that he would not conclude any thing without the
consent and authority of the Constable, who was already near upon his arrival;
so that it was necessary to return to the old arts to overcome this last
impediment, esteemed by many no less difficult to master than the former.
Wherefore the Queen, who very well knew the nature and inclination of the
Constable, thought by restoring him to the authority of his place, and seeming
to acknowledge from him both her own greatness, and the welfare of her sons yet
in minority; that he, ambitious to be held the Moderator and Arbitrator of all
things, would easily be brought to favor her Regency, and to show himself
Neuter to both Factions. So that having the consent of the King of Navarre and
the Guises, (who on both sides were now inclined to thoughts of peace) she made
show of confessing that all things depended upon his power; giving order that
the Captains of the Guard and the Governor of the City at his entry into the
Gates should deliver up to him the chief Command of the Soldiers, The
Constable Anne of Momorancy restored to his Command.
acknowledging him as in effect was but just, for General of the Militia. By
which testimony of favor, the ancient sparks of loyalty and devotion reviving
in him, wherewith he had so many years served the Grandfather and the Father of
the present King, turning himself about to the Captains with the same
majestical countenance that he used always to have, he told them, That since
the King had again entrusted him with the command of the Armies, they should
not need to stand long with such watchfulness upon the Guard in a time of
peace; for he would soon take such an order, that though he were yet in age of
minority, he should be obeyed in all parts of France by his Subjects without
the force of Arms.

So being come to the Kings Palace, where the Queen received him with great
shows of honor, and he doing homage to the young King with tears in his eyes,
exhorted him not to have any apprehension of the present troubles; for he and
all good French men would be ready to spend their lives for the preservation of
his Crown: From which the Queen, taking courage, without any delay, entering
into private discourse with him about the present affairs, not to give time to
the practices of others, told him, that she had placed all hope of her own
welfare and her Sons in him only; that the Kingdom was divided between two
pretending Factions, which resolving to persecute each other, had forgotten
their obedience to their Prince and the public safety; that there was no other
person of Authority, who, standing neuter, could suppress their pretenses; that
there was no hope of preserving her children in possession of the Crown, which
was aimed at, and aspired to by so many, if he (mindful of his Loyalty, of
which he had given so long a testimony) did not undertake the protection of the
young King, of the Kingdom afflicted with such distractions, and of the whole
Royal Family that was then in a very slippery dangerous condition, and relied
only upon the hope of the fidelity and aid from those who had been obliged and
advanced by their Predecessors. To which words adding all the womanish
flatteries that either the time or business required, she so wrought him to her
will, that he not only consented to the accommodation treated with the King of
Navarre, but seeing the Guises already lessened, and the charge of the affairs
with the first dignity of the Kingdom returned again into his own hands,
forgetting all private interests of particular Factions, proposed that he would
unite himself with the Queen for the conservation of the Crown, by which only
he pretended to hold that place, which in the course of a long life he had
taken such pains to attain unto.

The accommodation then agreed upon and confirmed by the Authority of the
Constable, without further delay they assembled the Kings Council, at which
were assistant all the Princes and Officers of the Crown that were present.
Where the Chancellor proposing according to ordinary use in the Kings presence,
it was unanimously resolved upon, That the Queen Mother should be declared
Regent of the whole Kingdom, the King of Navarre President and Governor of the
Provinces, the Constable Superintendent of all the Forces, the Duke of Guise as
Grand-Master-Keeper of the Palace, and the Cardinal of Lorain High Treasurer.
That the Admiral, the Mareschals and Governors of the Provinces, should enjoy
and execute their charges, without being entrenched upon by Strangers; that the
Supplications and Letters of the Provinces should be addressed to the King of
Navarre, who should make report thereof to the Queen, and return such answers
as she and the Council thought good; that all Embassies and Letters of
Negotiation with Foreign Princes should be brought immediately to the Queen,
and she to communicate them to the King of Navarre; that in the Kings Council
where the Princes of the Blood were to assist, the Queen should preside, and
make all Propositions, and when she was away, the King of Navarre, or in
absence of them both, the High Chancellor; all dispatches whatsoever passing
under the common name of the Governors of the Kingdom; Conditions, by which
the Princes of the Blood had in show a great part of the Government, but in
substance all authority and power remained in the Queen. She promised further
than this, (although secretly, by little and little) to open a way to Liberty
of Conscience for the Hugonots, and by the same address in a short time to
remove the Guises from all Ministerial dignities: which were the two conditions
finally proposed by the two discontented Princes, and by her through a final
necessity feignedly accepted of.

The Prince of C^nde set at liberty, and the Sentence pronounced against him
declared void.
The precipice of things being thus stopped, and the best order taken that could
be for the Government of the Kingdom, the Prince of Conde, according to the
Agreement, was set at liberty; and departing from the Court to show how free he
was, within a few days after returned thither again; and lastly, was by an
honorable Edict in the Parliament of Paris absolved from the imputation laid
upon him, and the Sentence declared null and irregular which was pronounced
against him by the Judges Delegates, as incapable of judging the Princes of the
Blood. The Visdame of Chartres enjoyed not the benefit of this Agreement; for
when he was first taken prisoner, being put into the Bastile, (a fortress
placed upon the skirts of the City of Paris) he grew into such a discontent and
indisposition of body, that he died before the Accommodation was fully
concluded.

Things being in this state, ended the year 1560: 1561*
but in the beginning of the year after, the Regent and the King of Navarre,
not willing that the affairs thus settled should be disturbed by any new
practices, dismissed the Assembly of the States, after they had celebrated the
Ceremonies of the first Session; having caused by their dependents this reason
to be alleged from the beginning, The (...) of the States d smissed.
That the Deputies being sent by their Commonalty to treat with the late King,
their Commission was expired by his death; and therefore they had no power
under the reign of the present King, either to treat or conclude any thing
concerning the State: Yet notwithstanding they gave Commission, that the
Deputies upon the first opportunity should meet at a place appointed to consult
of a means to pay the debts of the Crown without oppressing the people with new
Taxes; but not to meddle with any thing else.

The States thus broken up, they applied themselves to settle the Government.
But for all this, the discords and troubles of the Court were not quieted. For
the Guises, who had gotten so little a share, and which consisted rather in
appearance than any real power, being accustomed to govern, could not conform
their minds to their present condition: and being ill satisfied with the Queen,
for having performed much less than she had promised, they sought all manner of
opportunities, whereby they might again raise themselves to their former
greatness; and on the other side, the Prince of Conde, being exasperated, but
not withdrawn from his wonted designs, burnt more than ever with an implacable
desire of revenge; and the Lords of Chatillon, who firmly continued to protect
the Hugonots party, desisted not to attempt the raising of Tumults, by which
they might augment their own power. Both Factions were intent to draw to their
party the Constable, who having declared that he would depend only upon the
Kings will and the Queens, maintained himself Neuter: and so much the rather,
because the King of Navarre, contented with his present condition, continued
still a good correspondence with the Regent, and persevered in the desire to
establish a Peace. Wherefore there was not any apparent reason for the
Constable not to remain constant in his first resolution.

But the Admiral and his Brothers, together with the Prince of Conde, hoped
that the nearness of Blood would at lenth prevail to win him to their side; and
the Guises knowing him affectionate to the Catholic Religion, and averse to
that of Calvin, so severely persecuted by him in the Reign of Henry the Second,
despaired not, under a color to defend the Faith, and extirpate the Hugonots,
to draw him to their party.

These stirs were kept in motion by the obstinacy of the King of Navarre, who
very urgently pressed the Queen, that she would apply her self to perform those
promises which she made unto him in favor of the Hugonots. And she, who
contented her self with the present state of things, which, being equally
balanced, and not enclining more to one side than the other, secured her
greatness and her Sons Kingdom, avoided all that was possible the being brought
to a necessity of discontenting him, lest he should alter his resolutions. But
on the other side, conceiving it neither just nor safe to give so much liberty
to the Hugonots, she found out quaint excuses, and diverse pretexts to delay the
execution of her promise; hoping indeed, that in progress of time the King of
Navarre would grow less instant in his desires. But it fell out altogether
otherwise: for being stirred up by the continual instigations of the Prince and
the Admiral, and the perpetual incitements of the Queen his Wife, he grew every
day more violent in pressing the performance of that promise which was made him
at the beginning.

The High Chancellor de l' Hospital, though covertly, favored his desire; who
either believing that it was indeed expedient for the quiet of the Kingdom; or
else through an inclination that he had to the Hugonots Doctrine, took off as
much as he could from the severity of other Magistrates, and advised the Queen,
to stay the effusion of blood, to settle men's Consciences in peace, to take
away all ground of scandal, and not to give an occasion of bringing things
again into confusion, which with so much pains and art were set right and
composed. Many also of the Kings Council yielded to the instances of the King
of Navarre, who professed that he was moved to compassion, to see so many of
the Kings Subjects that were continually scattered about in the Kingdom,
abandoning their own houses through fear of punishments; and that he detested
so often to goar his hands in the bowels of the French Nation. And the Hugonots
themselves, among whom were many men of wit and courage, omitted no art nor
care that might any way help them: but sometimes with little Treatises
artificially scattered abroad, sometimes by Petitions seasonably presented,
otherwhile by the effectual persuasions of those that favored them,
endeavored to move the great persons to commiserate their condition.

The Queen therefore being forced to yield to the consent and authority of so
many, and conceiving perhaps it would be best, willingly to intermit that
severity which by no means could be longer continued, (since those threats
which are not resolutely put in execution by force, prove always damageable)
she gave way, that by a Decree of Council passed the 28 day of January, A kind
of toleration permitted to the Hugonots.
the Magistrates should be ordered to release all prisoners committed only for
matters of Religion, and to stop any manner of inquisition appointed for that
purpose against any person whatsoever; nor to suffer any disputations in
matters of Religion, nor particular persons to revile one another with the
names of Heretic and Papist: but that all should live together in peace,
abstaining from unlawful Assemblies, or to raise scandals and sedition.

Thus Calvin's Religion, under the obscure pretense of hindering the effusion of
more blood, (which carried an appearance of much Christianity and piety) was,
though not authorized, at least covertly protected and tolerated. A greater
contest seemed likely to arise about the depression of the Duke of Guise. For
the King of Navarre, putting the Queen in mind of the promises she secretly
made him, required, that as the Kings Lieutenant General, the Keys of the
Palace should be assigned to him; which the Duke of Guise, as Grand-Master,
always kept. But the Queen, though she saw that she was greatly upheld and
honored by the King of Navarre and the Constable, and on the contrary knew the
Guises were grown very averse to her; yet she employed all her power to hinder
their depression. For on one side, the Hugonots party maintaining it self under
the protection of the Prince of Conde and the Admiral; and the Catholics on
the other side, under the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorain; conceiving
that between these two Factions, as between two strong banks, she might remain
secure in a calm: She would not so much weaken the Catholic party, as they
should be forced afterward to receive Laws from the Hugonots. Wherefore
sometimes by delays, sometimes by complying with him in other demands, she
sought to remove the King of Navarre from that thought.

But he persisting in his demand, and growing every day more earnest, as he saw
her more backward; not in an instant to dissolve that agreement which with so
many difficulties was effected, The K^ys of the Kings Palace taken from the
Duke of Guise, and delivered to the King of Nava^re.
it was thought convenient to command the Captains of the Guard, that from
thence forward they should not carry the Keys of the Kings Lodgings, as the
custom had been, to the Grand-Master, but to the Lieutenant General, as the man
to whom that dignity belonged. Whereat the Duke of Guise was exceedingly
incensed, and much more the Cardinal his Brother; not so much for the
importance of the thing, or the injury received, (which at the first was
otherwise determined in the Kings Council) as because they manifestly saw, that
the King of Navarre's intention, which drew along with it the Queens consent,
was wholly to suppress and tread under foot their greatness. But knowing they
were thought to be men of passion and ambition, and seeing themselves not able
in a private dispute to deal with the Princes of the Blood, who had then in
their hands all the Kings force and authority, they dissembled the affront done
unto them, and made show only of being moved and offended at the tacit
toleration that was permitted to the Calvinists; covering in this manner with a
pious pretense under the Vail of Religion, the interests of private passion.

So by degrees the discords of great men were confounded with the dissentions
of Religion; The private interests and enmities are covered with the vail of
Religion; and the two Factions take the name of Hugonot and C^^hol^ck.
and the Factions were no more called the discontented Princes and the
Guisarts; but more truly and by more significant names, one the Catholic, and
the other the Hugonot party. Factions, which under the color of piety,
administered pernicious matter to all the following mischiefs and distractions.
The Queen Regent and the Constable held the Kings party, as it were in the
middle of a balance; and the Constable, though he hated Calvinism, and lived
conformable to the Roman Church, nevertheless, both in respect of his Nephews,
and to preserve the public peace, was contented that they should proceed
warily in matters of Religion, until such time as the King, being come to age,
should be able to govern himself.

But to confirm in the mean while the Kings Authority and Empire, although in
minority, it was thought expedient by those that governed, that he should be
acknowledged with the usual Ceremonies belonging to the Kings of France.
Wherefore they resolved to carry him to Rheims, and in that place, At Rh^^ms a
vial is kept with the oil whereof the first Christian King ^louis was
consecrated.
where the holy Oil is kept with great veneration, which served at the
Coronation of the first Christian King Clonis, to cause him to be anointed, or
as they commonly call it, Sacre; and from thence to conduct him to the City of
Paris, there to reside, as the Kings for the most part are accustomed in the
principal City of the Kingdom. At the Ceremonies of the Coronation there arose
a new strife for precedence between the Princes of the Blood and the Duke of
Guise. For these pretended to the first place, as they were first in dignity
before any whosoever; and the Duke of Guise, as first Peer of France, The Duke
of Guise as first Peer of France is declared to precede all the rest.

The Peers are twelve; six Ecclesiastical, and six Secular.


pretended in waiting at the Ceremony to precede every man; and though the
Kings Council determined in favor of the Duke of Guise, (because at the
Crowning of the King, the presence and assistance of the Peers (which are
twelve, six Ecclesiastics, and six Secular) is requisite; and the Princes of
the Blood having not any thing to do, their attendance is not necessary)
notwithstanding, they being apt to take fire at every little spark, this was
enough very much to incense and exasperate them. In the mean while, the Admiral
and the Prince of Conde had used all possible endeavor to draw the Constable
to the protection of their party; but though Francis Marshall of Momorancy his
eldest son, who was straightly united with them, used great industry to
persuade his Father; yet nothing could move his constancy; being resolved not
to make himself in his old age head of a Faction, or an Author of new
dissentions in Religion. Wherefore the Admiral, always an Inventer of subtle
counsels, thought with himself, that he would make him concur with them by some
other way.

At Pointoise, a Town seven leagues from Paris, the Assembly was held of
certain Deputies of the Provinces, to consult of a means to pay the debts of
the Crown, which by reason of the past Wars, amounted to a very important sum:
and although the Mareshal of Momorancy presided in this Assembly, yet the
Admiral had some of his nearest Familiars that were of it, by whose means he
had the commodity to cause any thing to be proposed there that he pleased.
Wherefore the Brothers of Coligni and the Prince of Conde resolved by means of
their Confidents, to propose in the Assembly, That all those who had received
any Donations from the Kings, Francis the First, or Henry the Second, should be
obliged to restore them into the public Treasury; making account; that in this
manner, without imposing new Taxes, they might pay the greatest part of the
debts, which within and without the Kingdom occasioned both to the public and
particulars, so great trouble. They made this Proposition, because the
partakers of the late Kings bounty were the Guises, the Duchess Diana, the
Marshall S. Andre, and the Constable: And for those, they desired to see the
effect of it to their utter ruin; but for the Constable, it was designed to
put him only in fear, and necessitate him to unite himself with the Faction of
the Princes, to avoid the danger of losing his estate, which was the fruits of
so many years sweat and labor; and such was the animosity of the Factions,
that even his Nephews made themselves the Ministers to bring these streights
and cares upon their Uncle.

But as Counsels too subtle and forced use often to produce contrary and
unthought-of ends; so this attempt had an effect much different from that which
the contrivers thereof designed; for in this restitution of Goods, the
Constable and Guises having an equal interest; Diana, who was joined in
affinity with both of them, having already regained a confidence with them,
began, as concerned in the same business, to treat of it with the Constable:
and as she was a woman of great wit, well instructed in what she was to do,
ill-affected toward the Queen, and greatly terrified with the restitution
which was spoken of; she used her skill to pass from this to other discourses
tending to a reconcilement with the Catholic Faction, and the Princes of
Lorain: and from a consult how to hinder the proposed restitution, coming to
inviegh against the Admiral, and the Prince of Conde, who was suspected to be
the Author of it, at last they fell to a deploration of the present state, in
which, under the rule of a Pupil King, and a stranger woman, things were
governed with such pestiferous and destructive Counsels, that to promote
ambition and private passions, the public peace and tranquillity were
destroyed, with introducing shamelesly into the Kingdom those heresies, which
being condemned by the Catholic Church, were so carefully punished with sword
and fire by the just severity of the late Kings. Nor made she an end with this
condoleance, but wen^ on with the same efficacy: that the whole Kingdom was
extremely amazed, and very much troubled, that one of the house of Momorancy,
which first received the Christian Religion, who in the course of his past life
had with great praise of Piety and Justice executed the chiefest Authority of
the Kingdom, should now, as if he were charmed by the arts of a woman, suffer
himself to be led by her appetite, and one of so little wisdom as the King of
Navarre, to consent to those things which they did to the prejudice of Gods
Church: That he, who had strength and power in his hands, was straightly
obliged to disturb and hinder those wicked Counsels which then prevailed, and
once more to lend that help with which he had oftentimes formerly supported the
Crown afflicted, and Religion wholly abandoned: That he should call to mind his
own Maxim, so constantly observed in the glorious actions of his youth,
according to which he had ever condemned and opposed the power of strangers,
which always tends to the ruin, not edifying of States; and not now suffer two
women, one an Italian, the other a Navaroise, so perversely to destroy the
foundations of the French Monarchy, chiefly established upon the Basis of Piety
and Religion: That he should remember, this was that same Catherine, whose
manners and disposition he had ever blamed and detested; That these were the
very same Hugonots whom he had so fiercely persecuted in the Reign of Henry the
Second; that the persons were not changed, nor the quality of things; but every
one would believe that he in his old age suffered himself to be led, either by
ambition, or inclinations of others, to show himself altogether different from
those Maxims by which formerly he had guided his Actions.

To these persuasive speeches, many times on purpose reiterated, and adding
many other reasons, and by often visiting and solicitation, finding that the
Constable began to yield, partly through indignation conceived against his
Nephew, for what concerned his estate, and partly through the hate of
Calvinism; at length Magdalen de Savoy his wife undertook the task wholly to
vanquish his resolution; who being not well pleased to see him bear such an
ardent affection to his Nephews de Coligni, and desirous to insinuate into the
same place of his favor Honor de Savoye Marquis of Villars, her Brother, she
let pass no occasion whereby she might prejudice them, and advance his interest.

Nor did the practice end there; but by the means of Diana, the Mareshal of
Saint Andre being also brought in, who was no less concerned in the
restitution, they so wrought with him, that partly to unite himself with those
who had the same interest, partly through the hate to his N^phews, and partly
through the just appearance of the preservation of the Catholic Religion, to
which he was ever affected, he began to incline to a friendship with the
Guises. Which when they once perceived, they omitted not any artifice nor
submission, or other means that might conduce to draw him absolutely to their
party: having conceived new hopes to recover this way some part, if not all of
their former power in the Government. And it so fell out, that Diana, Wife to
the Mareshal of Momorancy, (who was the only obstacle to this Treaty) being
sick at Chantilly, his affection forced him to leave his Father to visit her;
so that he being thus removed out of the way, the friendship was finally
concluded, and a league made between the Constable and the Guises for the
preservation of the Catholic Religion, and mutual defense of their several
Estates.

But when this combination was known to the Queen, she conceiving she had lost
her greatest stay, and that the Princes of Lorain, so much increased in
strength and reputation, being ill satisfied with her proceedings, would
endeavor to deprive her of the Government; thought it so much more necessary
to enter into a streighter union with the King of Navarre, to counterpoize as
much as was possible, the other party: knowing she was to be very studiously
vigilant to preserve things in an equality so, as neither the Kings safety, nor
stability of the Government should be endangered. Wherefore the King of Navarre
soliciting it, and the Queen not disliking that his party should increase,
under the pretense to keep the Kingdom in peace during the Kings minority, An
^dict th t no ^o^y should be m^l^sted for matters of Relig^^n with the
re^^itution ^f confiscated good^.
to appease the people formerly exasperated, and at their first entering upon
the Government to gain a plausible name of clemency; it was commended to all
the Parliaments by new Edicts and Decrees, not further to molest any body for
matter of Religion; and to restore the goods, houses, and possessions of all
such who for suspicion of Calvinism had been formerly deprived of them. Which
Edicts, though the Parliament of Paris opposed, and many Magistrates refused to
obey them: nevertheless the Hugonots having so specious a color as the
declared will of the King, and the Regent, approved of by the Council of State,
they of themselves took upon them to exercise a Liberty of Conscience,
increasing still in number and force; which perhaps would have fallen out
according to the Queens intention, if the multitude of the Hugonots had known
how to contain themselves within the limits of modesty and reason. But they on
the contrary, as those use who are led by a popular rage, The Hugonots grow
insolent toward the Catholics.
without the bridle of a formal Government, finding themselves now supported
and favored, loosed from the fear of punishment, and laying aside all respect
due to Magistrates, by open Assemblies, insolent speeches, and other odious
acts, provoked against themselves the hate and disdain of the Catholics: from
whence arising in all parts obstinate jars, and bloody Factions, every thing
was full of tumult, and all the Provinces of the Kingdom troubled with
seditious rumors. So that contrary to the intention of those that governed,
and contrary to the common opinion, the remedy applied to maintain the State,
and preserve an union of peace during the Kings minority, fell out to be
dangerous and destructive, and upon the matter, occasioned all those
dissentions and perils, which with so much care they ought to prevent.

This gave opportunity to the Guises, being encouraged and increased in
strength, to begin to oppose the present Government. Insomuch as the Cardinal
of Lorain, The Cardinal of Lorain in the Kings Council inveighs against the
Hugonots.
taking a time to speak at the Council Table, without bearing any regard to the
Queen or the King of Navarre who were present, began to enter upon the point of
Religion, and with hot words and effectual speeches, to show with what
indignity to the most Christian Kingdom, what sin toward God, and with how
great scandal to all the world, Liberty of Conscience was permitted to those,
who professing manifest heresies already condemned in all Councils, went about
scattering monstrous opinions in Religion, corrupting the youth, seducing
simple persons, and in all places of the Kingdom stirring up the people to
tumult, contempt, and Rebellion. Already the Priests could no longer celebrate
their Sacrifices in Churches for the insolences of the Hugonots; already the
Preachers durst not go into the Pulpit, for the arrogancies of the Calvinists:
the Magistrates were no longer obeyed in their Jurisdictions, through the
Rebellion of Heretics; all places raged with discords, burnings and
slaughters, through the presumption and perverseness of those who assumed to
themselves a liberty of teaching and believing after their own fashion: and now
the most Christian Kingdom, and firstborn of the Church, was ready to turn
Schismatic, to separate it self from the obedience of the Apostolic See, and
the Faith of Christ, only to satisfy the capritious humors of a few seditious
persons. Upon this subject he so enlarged himself with his wonted eloquence, by
which he used to prevail in all disputes, that, not any of the Hugonots
favorers being able to answer the reasons he alleged; but the King of Navarre
holding his peace, the Queen Mother not replying a word, and the Chancellor
startled and confounded; it was resolved with great alacrity of all the
Council, who were exceedingly scandalized at the excessive license of the
Hugonots, that forthwith all the principal Officers of the Crown should
assemble at the Parliament at Paris, there in the Kings presence, to debate
these matters, and resolve upon such remedies as were most necessary for the
future. It was impossible to hinder them from coming to the Parliament, which
was appointed upon the thirteenth day of July: for the King of Navarre durst
not openly oppose it, The Edict of July.
lest by declaring himself a Hugonot, he should gain many Enemies: and the
Queen Mother, although she desired not to see the Catholic party increase in
strength, yet she was very much perplexed in mind, and above all things
apprehensive, lest the advancement and establishment of heresy should be
imputed to her.

The contestations in the Parliament were very great: and although the
Protectors of the Hugonots employed their uttermost endeavors to obtain them a
Decree for Liberty of Conscience, by which Declaration they pretended that
these stirs and dissentions would cease* yet all was in vain. For indeed, it
being clearly, not only against the intention and authority of the Catholic
Church, but also contrary to the ancient customs of the Kingdom: and the
Counselors of the Parliament being exasperated by the continual complaints
which were brought them from all parts, against the insurrection of the
Hugonots. It was with a general consent expressly ordered, The Parliament of
Paris expels the Hugonots out of the Kingdom.
that the Ministers should be expelled out of the Kingdom, with a prohibition
to use any other rites or ceremonies in Religion, than what were held and
taught by the Roman Church: and all Assemblies and Meetings forbidden in any
place, either armed or unarmed, unless in the Catholic Churches to hear Divine
Service, according to the usual ^ustom. And to give some balance to the other
party, the same Edict contained, that all Delinquencies found in matter of
Religion before the publication thereof, should be pardoned; The ju^gment of
heresy committed to the Bishops.
and that for the future all accusations or complaints of Heresy, should be
brought to the Bishops, their Vicars, or Surrogates; and the Civil Magistrates
to be assisting to them upon all occasions; and that they should not proceed
against those convict of Heresy further than banishment, but abstain from any
corporal punishment, or effusion of blood.

This Deliberation comprehended in a solemn Edict, approved, and subscribed by
the King, the Queen, and all the Princes and Lords of both Factions, absolutely
restrained the liberty of Religion, and gave heart to the Catholic party,
which was not a little dejected. But the Prince of Conde and the Admiral
grieving at the depression of the Hugonots, in whose number and force they had
founded the strength of their Faction, not able other ways to hinder the
execution of the Edict, (which being embraced with great affection by the
Parliaments, and the greater parts of the inferior Magistrates, they durst not
oppose) they advised, to procure that the Calvinist Ministers should desire a
conference in the Kings presence, accompanied with his Prelates, to propose and
examine the Articles of their Doctrine; hoping by indirect ways to bring it so
about, as again to introduce a liberty of Religion. This demand of the Hugonots
was opposed by many of the Catholic Prelates, and in particular, by the
Cardinal of Tournon, showing that it was useless to dispute matters of Faith
with men so extremely obstinate, and who persisted in opinions condemned by the
Holy Church; yet if they had a mind to have their reasons heard, they might
address themselves to the General Council at Trent, where under safe conduct
they should be permitted to propose and dispute their opinions. But the
Cardinal of Lorain was not against it, either moved through hope by evident
reasons to convince the Doctrine of the Hugonots, and by that means disabuse
the Consciences of simple people, or set on (as those that were emulous said)
with the vanity to show his learning and eloquence, and to render himself in
such a public Assembly so much the more eminent and renowned. Howsoever his
intentions were, certain it is, that he, not contradicting the Ministers
demand, drew to his opinion the other Prelates: and finally, they all consented
to the King of Navarre; who, being desirous to hear a solemn dispute for the
settling of his own Conscience, solicited it with great earnestness in favor
of the Hugonots.

Safe conducts then being sent to the Ministers that were retired to Geneva,
and Poissy (a Town five leagues from Paris) appointed the place for the
conference; besides the King and the Court, there came thither on the Catholic
party the Cardinals of Tournon, Lorain, Bourbon, Armagnac, and Guise, and with
the Bishops and Prelates of best esteem, many Doctors of the Sorbon, and other
Divines sent for from the most famous Universities of the Kingdom. The
conferen^e of Poissy.
There appeared for the Hugonots Theodore Beza, head of all the rest, Peter
Martyr Vermeilo, Francis de St. Paul, John Raimond, and John Virelle, with many
other Preachers, which came some from Geneva, some out of Germany, and other
neighboring places. There Theodore Beza with great flourishes of Rhetoric,
having first proposed his opinions, and the Cardinal of Lorain with strength of
Reason, and authority of Scripture, and of the Fathers of the holy Church,
strongly opposed him, The Council of State thought it not fit that the King,
who being but young, and not yet able to judge or discern of the truth, should
come any more to the Disputation; lest he should be infected with some opinions
less exact, or less conformable to the Doctrines of the Catholic Church.
Wherefore the Dispute, from being public, by degrees grew more private; and
finally, after many meetings, brake off, without any conclusion or benefit at
all. The diverse opinions of the Heretics.
The Catholic party got only this advantage, that the King of Navarre himself
remained little satisfied with the Hugonots, having discovered, that the
Ministers agreed not amongst themselves about that Doctrine which they too
unanimously preached; but that some followed strictly Calvin's Opinions, others
inclined to the Doctrine of Ecolampadius and Luther; some adhering to the
Helvetian Confession, others to the Augustan: at which uncertainties being very
much troubled, from thence forward he began to leave them, and incline to the
Roman Religion.

But the Hugonots got much greater advantage by the Conference, to which end
only they desired it: For being departed from the Diet, they divulged abroad,
that they h^d made good their Opinions, convinced the Catholic Doctors,
confounded the Cardinal of Lorain, and gotten license from the King to preach.
Whereupon, they began of their own authority to assemble themselves in such
places as they thought most convenient for their purpose, and to celebrate
their preachings publicly; and were frequented with such a confluence of the
Nobility, and common people, that it was not possible any longer to suppress or
hinder them. And if the Magistrates molested them in their Congregations, or
the Catholics attempted to drive them out of their Temples, they were grown to
that insolence, that without respect of any authority, they took arms to right
themselves. Whereupon cruel contentions arising with the name of Heretic and
Papist, the whole Kingdom was turned up-side down; the Magistrates opposed in
their Jurisdictions, the People disquieted, the Collectors for the Kings
Revenue not suffered; and in the midst of a full peace were seen the effects of
a tacit, but destructive War.

Those that sat at the Helm moved with this necessity, and finding that the
severity of the Edict of July had rather increased than diminished the
disorders; they called another Assembly of all the Eight Parliaments of the
Kingdom, There are Eight Parliaments in France.
to consider the state of every particular Province, and by common consent to
make such Ordinances as should be thought most expedient for the settling of
this business. Which, continually varying with the interest of State, and
passions of great men, it is no marvel, though after so many, and such diverse
orders taken, it became more confused and disordered. For, through inconstancy
and often change, it could not receive that form which proceeds only from
constancy and an exact obedience to the supreme power.

This Assembly met in Paris in the beginning of the year 1562; where, 1562.
the Queen consenting (as altogether intent to balance the Factions, and not to
suffer the one to advance, or to oppress the other, lest she should remain a
prey to that which got the superiority) and most of the Council approving it:
(partly persuaded, that so great a multitude moved with the zeal of Religion
could not easily be restrained; partly moved with pity, to see so much blood
spilt unprofitably) that famous and so much celebrated Edict of January was
made: The Edict of January.
by which was granted to the Hugonots a free exercise of their Religion, and to
assemble at Sermons, but unarmed, without the Cities, in open places, and the
Officers of the place being present and assistant. The Parliaments, though at
first they refused to accept this Edict, and the Magistrates greatly opposed
it; notwithstanding by reiterated Orders from the King and his Council, it was
at length registered and published by way of provision, with this express clause
and condition; Until such time as the general Council, or the King himself
should order it otherwise.

This Edict dismayed the Heads of the Catholic party; and not willing that the
World should believe they consented to what was done, the Duke of Guise, the
Constable, and the Cardinals, (amongst which the Cardinal of Tournon was lately
dead) with the Mareshals of Brissac and S. Andre, left the Court, already
contriving how they might hinder the execution of the Edict, and oppose the
Hugonot Faction. But because they saw, that whilst the King of Navarre stood
united with the Regent, they had no manner of right to intermeddle with the
Government of the Kingdom, and therefore whatsoever they should do, would prove
of no effect, they proposed to themselves to dissolve that union. And knowing
that the Queens thoughts and intentions were disposed to continue with the same
power till her Son came of age, they thought it more easy to gain the King of
Navarre. It hindered not, but rather advanced the design, that they were absent
from the Court. For the business being of such difficulty and length, it might
be managed with the greater secrecy; and there came in under hand to treat it,
Hippolito d' Est, Cardinal of Ferrara, the Popes Legate, and Don Iuan
Manriquez, Ambassador from the Catholic King; The Cardinal Hippolito d' Est
Legate in France.
who being favored by the Counselors of that Faction, found an easy way to
promote their intentions.

The King of Navarre was already very much averse to the Hugonots Religion, by
reason of the different opinions he found amongst those of that sect about the
points in controversy. Wherefore after the conference held at Poissy, having
there not found the same constancy in Theodore Beza, and Peter Martyr Vermeil,
which they used to show in their Sermons when no body opposed them, he sent for
Doctor Baldwin, a man skilled in holy Scripture, and versed in the disputes of
Religion, by whom he was wholly taken off from the Helvetian and Augustan
Confession, and persuaded to reunite himself to the Religion taught in the
universal Catholic Church. And although he consented to the Edict of January,
he did it rather through an old opinion, That men's Consciences were not to be
forced, and through the persuasions of those who affirmed that it was a means
to quiet the troubles and tumults in the Kingdom, than for any particular
liking of it; having already an intent to reconcile himself with the Church.
Which inclination of his being known to many, by means of his near Counselors
of late disposed to serve secretly the Catholic party, it gave courage to the
Legate and the Spanish Ambassador, to enter into their proposed Treaty.

But to accompany the Spiritual Considerations with profit, and Temporal
Interests, they jointly proposed, that repudiating Queen Jane his wife with a
Dispensation from the Pope, by reason she was manifestly tainted with Heresy,
the Guises should obtain for him the Queen of Scotland their Niece, widow to
Francis the second; who, besides her youth and excellent beauty, brought with
her a Kingdom. But seeing that, through love to her children, he consented not
to the Divorce, they went about to introduce that Treaty so often proved vain,
to give him with certain Conditions the Isle of Sardinia for Navarre; knowing,
that it was the trial, which, as it touched nearest, would work most inwardly
with him. And although the hopes thereof were almost quite lost; yet the Treaty
being never absolutely broke off, the Ambassador Manrique with the wonted arts
began so effectually to revive the thoughts and belief of it, that he was soon
raised to new hopes. For, besides the ordinary assurances of the Catholic
Kings affection, Propositions to exchange Nava^re for Sardinia.
they were gone so far, that they already treated the manner of the change, and
the quality of the Tribute that in acknowledgment of superiority he should pay
to the Crown of Spain: seriously disputing upon the Capitulations and Articles
of Agreement, as if the Treaty were meant really to be effected.

That which furthered the Catholics design, was his natural inclination, by
which he was disposed to plain honest counsels. It availed them, that he began
to discover the passions and interests which were covered under the vail of
Christian charity, and the cloak of Religion: besides, it conduced not a little
to their ends, that he was entered into a suspicion, that the Admiral with his
too much knowledge sought to arrogate to himself such an Authority, as to make
the World believe he swayed and ruled his actions. But above all, the way was
facilitated to persuade him, in that he saw the whole Faction made their
addresses to the Prince of Conde, admiring and exalting the boldness,
generosity and promptness which he showed; and on the contrary, despised his
facility and too much mildness. He was moved with one Consideration more of
exceeding great consequence; seeing the King of France and his Brothers were in
an age unable to have Children, by nature of a weak complexion, of little heat,
and subject to dangerous indispositions; he was not altogether without hope,
but that in a short time he might attain to the Crown, which as first of the
Blood belonged to him. In which case he knew, that to be a favourer and Head of
the Hugonots, would be a great obstacle unto him, and almost an invincible
impediment. Wherefore desiring to remove all such contrarieties as might hinder
him in that pretense, he inclined to join himself with the Catholic party, and
to gain the Popes favor and the King of Spains, together with the forces of
the best united and most powerful Faction. To all these respects being added
the effectual promises and lively persuasions of the Legate, and the Ambassador
Manriquez, and growing suspicious of his Wives counsels, as given without
measure to Calvin's opinions, and naturally an enemy to thoughts of peace, he
resolved finally to enter into a league with the Constable and the Duke of
Guise, professing by their speeches, and declaring in writing that they were
confederated for the defense of the Catholic Religion. But the truth was in
effect besides those Considerations, the King of Navarre left that party in
which he knew he was inferior to his Brother, to join himself with this, which
fed him with many great hopes. Likewise the Guises were moved with desire of
rising again to their former reputation and greatness.

The union of the King of Navarre with the Duke of Guise and the Constable,
which the Hugonots called the Triumvirat.
This was the Union which taught the French Subjects without their Kings consent
to enter into any combinations; and which with so many execrations and
maledictions, was by the Hugonots, in respect of the three chief Confederates,
called the Triumvirat.

Queen Jane was incredibly displeased at this so unexpected deliberation of her
Husband; and, not able to endure to see him a principal Persecutor of that
Religion which she constantly professed, and into which she conceived she had
not only persuaded, but absolutely confirmed him, through disdain thereof, she
resolved to leave the Court; and thereupon carrying with her Prince Henry and
the Princess Catherine her children, whom she brought up in the Calvinists
Religion, she retired into Bearne; being determined to separate her self from
the counsels and conversation of her Husband. But if Queen Jane were greatly
afflicted at so sudden and almost incredible a change, the Queen Regent was no
less terrified; who, seeing with this union her designs destroyed, of balancing
the Factions, and that equality so unequally broken, in which consisted (with
such jealousy and discontent of the Princes) the security of the State, began
greatly to fear the ruin both of her Sons Kingdom, and her own greatness:
conceiving, that these reciprocal changes, and this uniting of interests so
wholly different, could not be without some hidden design of great attempts,
and a foundation of high hopes.

She knew the Guises had already discovered her arts, and that full of desire
and pretensions, they sought by all manner of ways possible to attain to the
Government. It appeared to her, that the King of Navarre would not have been
induced to leave the friendship of his Brother and his other adherents, to
unite himself with those who had been his bitter enemies, without great reward
for such a lightness. She well knew what power Ambition and the thirst of Rule
had over the minds of men, though never so just; and looking round about her,
she discovered her own weakness, and the crasie uncertain condition of her
young Sons. In which Consideration, neither believing, nor relying any longer
upon the sincerity of the King of Navarre, nor the professions the Catholics
made, that they would not innovate any thing in the State, being full of fears
and jealousies, she saw not where securely to rest her thoughts. Insomuch as in
the long watchings and frequent consultations which she held with her
Confidents, amongst whom the principal were the Bishop of Valence, and the
Chancellor de l' Hospital, at length she concluded (being advised by them, and
what more imported, being forced by necessity) to make a league with the Prince
of Conde and the Admiral; and fomenting their designs, make her self a Buckler
of their Forces; Queen C^the^ine in opposition to the Triumvirat joins with the
Prince of Conde and the Admiral.
by this means, equalling and counterpoising as much as was possible, the power
of the Factions: this reason prevailing among many other, that even God in the
Government of the World oftentimes draws good from evil; and since the Hugonots
had till then been the cause of so much care and trouble, it was but reasonable
to make use of them for the present, as an antidote to cure those evils which
with their venom were like to infect the most noble and most essential parts of
the Kingdom.

The Hugonots, by the publication of the Edict of January, being free from the
fear of punishment, had already begun to take strength and vigor; and
assembling themselves publicly upon all occasions, it appeared that their
number was great and considerable, not only for the quantity, but also for the
quality of the persons; insomuch as their force was not contemptible. The
Prince of Conde took upon him openly to be the Head of them, who, though in
appearance reconciled by the Kings command with the Guises, persevered firmly in
his former designs, and burnt impatiently with desire to revenge his past
affronts upon those that were his chief persecutors. His power and boldness was
moderated by the wise counsel of the Admiral of Chastillon; who, through desire
of Rule, was together with his Brothers, more straightly united with the
Hugonot party. Their Authority led after them, being of the same Faith, the
Prince of Porcien, the Count de la Roch-fou-caut, Messieurs de Genlis, de
Grammont, and Duras, the Count of Montgommery, the Baron des Adrets, Messieurs
de Bouchavane, and Soubize, and many other the principal in the Kingdom; in
such manner, that upon every little heat that they received from those who
governed, they presently put themselves into a posture of defense, and boldly
opposed the contrary Faction.

Wherefore the Queen being forced to take hold of the opportunity of this
conjuncture for her own defense and her Sons, and being reduced into necessity
to embrace for the present any whatsoever dangerous party, leaving the issue
thereof to future occurrences, began to feign that she was moved with the
Doctrine and reasons of the Hugonots, and inclined to entertain their Religion.
To confirm them in which opinion as much as she could with outward testimonies,
The Queen feigning an inclination to the Hugonots Religion.
she would often hear their Preachers argue and discourse in her own Chamber,
confer with great confidence and professions of affection with the Prince of
Conde and the Admiral; and was often in discourse with the Duchess of
Montpensier, whom (making her believe whatsoever she pleased with her excellent
dissimulation) she used as a means to entertain with hopes many other the
principal of them. And to lead them on with open demonstrations to a belief of
her private protestations and practices, she wrote obscure letters of ambiguous
sense to the Pope, one while demanding a Council, such in every point as the
Calvinists desired; then license to call a National one; sometimes desiring
that the Communion might be administered under both Species; otherwhile
requiring a dispensation for Priests to marry; now soliciting that Divine
Service might be said in the vulgar tongue; then proposing other such like
things wished for and preached by the Hugonots; in which she knew so well how
to dissemble, by the help of Monsieur de l' Isle Ambassador at Rome, that
putting the Pope in doubt, and the Catholic party, and so necessitating them
to proceed warily, lest they should finally alienate her wholly from the Roman
Religion: at the same time she won the Hugonots, making them believe that she
was altogether inclined to favor them, that of bitter enemies they became her
greatest friends and confidents.

Nor were the vulgar only deluded by these artificial dissimulations, but the
Admiral also, who was by nature so wary, and of such a subtle wit, gave such
credit to them, that he was induced to give the Queen a full account of the
number of the forces and designs of his Faction, of the adherents they had both
within and without the Kingdom, and every other particular; She seeming
desirous to be informed at large, before she declared her self; and promising
openly to take that party, when they were once so established and provided with
force, as she should not need to fear the power of the Catholics, or the
Triumvirat.

Thus with a sudden, and in appearance incredible change, the King of Navarre
went over to the Catholic party; and Queen Catherine, though dissemblingly,
took upon her the protection of the Hugonots. Which change, to them that knew
not the true secret reasons of it, appeared strange and extravagant, and
therefore many did then attribute it to lightness in the one, and womanish
inconstancy in the other; and many that have written since, ascribe the fault
also to the same causes, not penetrating into the hidden foundations upon which
the engines of this counsel were moved.

The End of the Second BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The THIRD
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Third Book relates the Deliberation of the King of Navarre to drive the
Prince of Conde (already become formidable) out of Paris; for this purpose he
sends for the other Catholic Lords to Court. The Duke of Guise makes a Journey
thither, and passing by Vassy, lights upon an Assembly of Hugonots at their
devotions; thereupon follows accidentally a bloody conflict; to revenge
themselves of which, the Hugonots rise in all parts of the Kingdom. The Prince
of Conde leaves Paris: The Queen, together with the King, because she would not
be constrained to declare her self for either party, retires to Fountain-bleau:
On the other side, the Princes of each Faction endeavor to possess themselves
of the persons of the King and Queen; The Catholics prevent the Hugonots, and
lead them both to Paris. The Prince of Conde, having lost his opportunity,
takes other resolutions; possesses himself of Orleans, and prepares for the
War. The Catholic Lords under the Kings Name likewise raise an Army. Many
Writings are published on each side. Both Armies go into the Field. The
Queen Mother avoids the War, and labors for a Peace: To this end she comes to
a parley with the Prince, but without success; notwithstanding she continues to
treat of an Agreement, which at length is concluded. The Prince by the
persuasion of the rest, repents himself thereof, and again takes arms:
purposes to assail the Kings Camp by night, but fails of his design. Forces
come to the King out of Germany, and many thousands of Swisses: thereupon the
Prince is forced to retire unto the Walls of Orleans; where not being able to
keep the Army together, he divides it. He sends for succors into Germany and
England: consents to give Havre de Grace to the English, and to receive their
Garrisons in Deipe and Rouen, to obtain aids of them. The Queen is offended, and
grievously afflicted therewith, and for that cause joining with the Catholic
party, causes the Hugonots to be declared Rebels. The Kings Army takes Blois,
Tours, Poictiers and Bourges; besieges Rouen and takes it: The King of Navarre
is killed there. Succors come to the Prince out of Germany, with which being
reinforced, he makes haste to assault Paris: The King and the Queen arrive
there with the Army; wherefore after many attempts, he is necessitated to
depart. Both Armies go into Normandy, and there follows the Battle of Dreux; in
which the Prince of Conde is taken prisoner on the one side, and the Constable
on the other: The Duke of Guise being victorious, lays siege to Orleans, and
is ready to take it, but is treacherously slain by Poltrot. After his death
follows the general Peace, and the Kings Army recovers Havre de Grace from the
English. The King comes out of his minority; The Queen uses diverse arts to
work the discontented Princes to her will; and to compass her ends, together
with the King, makes a general visitation of the Kingdom; comes to a parley at
Avignon with the Popes Ministers, and at Bayonne with the Queen of Spain. It is
agreed between the most Christian and Catholic King, to aid each other in the
suppression of seditions. The Queen of Navarre comes to the Court. The King
makes a reconciliation between the Families of Chastillon and Guise; but
within few days after, they return to their former enmities. The Queen of
Navarre in distaste leaves the Court, and plots new mischiefs. Diverse Marriages
are celebrated, but the civil dissentions nevertheless continue.

AFfairs of the State being thus on the sudden put into another posture, there
were none so short-sighted who did not clearly perceive that the animosity of
the Factions would finally show it self in a War; and that there wanted nothing
to make this cloud break into a storm, but the conjuncture of some fit
occasion. Which (as if all things had concurred to hasten the calamity of
France) did forthwith arise from a mavelous opportunity.

The King of Navarre, after he had declared himself of the Catholic party,
stayed, as by chance, in Paris; which City, as it is placed in the middle of
France, so in frequency of people, riches, dignity, and power, far surpasses
all others in the Kingdom. Wherefore believing that the rest would follow the
example which that should give, he endeavored very sollicitously, as was
agreeable to the natural inclination of the inhabitants, to hinder there the
preachings and assemblies of the Hugonots; and in all his other actions of the
Government, having still a regard to that end, he hoped with the benefit of
time, by degrees to take away their credit and force; and lastly, their liberty
of Religion; which maintained in being, and gave increase to that party.

The Prince of Conde was likewise in Paris; who on the contrary, encouraging
the Preachers, and enlarging as much as he could their license and liberty,
under color of making the Edict of January to be observed, arrogated to
himself (more by force than reason) a great authority in all the affairs of
State.

It appeared necessary to the King of Navarre, by some means or other to make
the Prince of Conde leave Paris. For already, either the desire of peace, or
the envy that he bore him, had rendered him exceeding violent against him; and
Reason persuaded to preserve that City from tumults and seditions upon which
the Catholic party chiefly relied; but knowing his own forces were not
sufficient, or willing to communicate this resolution with the other
Confederates before any thing were put in execution, he sent for the Duke of
Guise and the Constable, that they might unite all their forces in the same
place.

The Duke of Guise, after he retired from Court, dwelt at Iainville, a place of
his own, upon the confines of Champagne and Picardy; and having received advice
from the King of Navarre, being accompanied with the Cardinal his Brother, with
a train of many Gentlemen his dependants, and two Squadrons of Lances for
Guard, was upon the way to be at Paris at the time appointed. But the first day
of March in the morning passing through a little Village in the same confines
called Vassy, his people heard an unusual noise of Bells; and having asked what
was the reason of it, answer was made, That it was the hour wherein the
Hugonots used to assemble at their Sermons. The Pages and Lacqueys of the Duke
that went before the rest of the company, moved with the novelty of the thing,
and a curiosity to see, (for then those Congregations began first to be kept in
public) with jesting speeches, and a tumult proper to such kind of people,
went toward the place where the Hugonots were assembled at their devotion; who
understanding that the Duke of Guise was there, one of their chief persecutors,
and seeing a great troop come directly toward them, fearing some affront, or
else indeed incensed with the words of derision and contempt which the rudeness
of those people used against them, without any further consideration, presently
fell to gather up stones, and began to drive back those that advanced first
toward the place of their assembly. In a conflict between the Duke of Guise
his servants and the Hugonots, the Duke is hurt wi^^ a stone.
By which injury the Catholic party being incensed, (who came thither without
intent of doing them harm) with no less inconsideration betaking themselves to
their Arms, there began a dangerous scuffle amongst them. The Duke, perceiving
the uproar, and desiring to remedy it, setting spurs to his horse, without any
regard put himself into the midst of them; where, whilst he reprehended his own
people, and exhorted the Hugonots to retire, he was hit with a blow of a stone
upon the left cheek, by which, though lightly hurt, yet by reason he bled much,
being forced to withdraw himself out of the hurly-burly, his followers,
impatient of such an indignity done to their Lord, presently betook themselves
to their Firearms, and violently assaulting the house where the Hugonots
retired to secure themselves, killed above sixty of them, and grievously
wounded the Minister; who climbing over the tyles, saved himself in some of the
adjoining houses. The tumult ended, the Duke of Guise called for the Officer of
the place, and began sharply to reprehend him for suffering such a pernicious
license to the prejudice of passengers; and he, excusing himself, that he could
not hinder it, by reason of the Edict of January, which tolerated the public
Assemblies of the Hugonots. The Duke no less offended at his answer than at the
thing it self, laying his hand upon his Sword, replied in choler, This shall
soon cut the bond of that Edict, though never so binding. A saying of the Duke
of ^uis^ which made him thought the author of the ensuing War.
From which words, spoken in the heat of anger, and not forgotten by those that
were present, many afterward concluded, that he was the author and contriver
of the ensuing War.

But the Hugonots, exceedingly incensed by this chance, and being no longer
able to keep themselves within the limits of patience, not contented with what
they had done formerly, both in Paris (where killing diverse men, they fired the
Church of S. Medard) and in other Cities all over the Kingdom; now full of
malice and rage, stirred up such horrible tumults and bloody seditions, that,
besides the slaughter of men in many places, the Monasteries were spoiled,
Images thrown down, the Altars broken, and the Churches brutishly polluted. By
which actions every body being much incensed, and the people in all places
running headlong to take Arms, the Heads of the Factions upon the same occasion
went about gathering forces, and preparing themselves for a manifest War.

But the Lords of both parties saw plainly, that in the state things were then
in, they could not take Arms without running into an open Rebellion; there
being no pretext or apparent color that covered with the show of Justice the
raising of Arms: for the Catholic party could not oppose the Edict of January
without apparently contradicting an Act of Council, and trespassing against the
Royal Power by which the Edict was authorized: and on the other side, the
Hugonots having the Liberty of Conscience given them which was appointed by the
Edict of January, had no just cause to stir. Wherefore each Faction desired to
draw the King to their party, and seizing upon his person, by abolishing the
Edict, or interpreting it under his Name according to their own sense, to make
a show of having the right on their sides; and the contrary party by opposing
the Kings will, and resisting him in person, to run into an actual Rebellion.

The Queen Mother, very well knowing these designs, and desiring as much as was
possible to preserve her own liberty and her Sons, continued her wonted
artifices so to balance the power of the great ones, that by their tyranny they
might not prejudice the security of the State; and having left Paris, that she
might not be constrained by either Faction, she went to Fountain-bleau, a house
of pleasure belonging to the Kings of France; which being a free open place,
she conceived she could not be forced to declare her self, and hoped by
doubtful speeches and ambiguous promises to maintain her credit with both
parties. Where she gave assurances to the Prince of Conde and the Lords of
Chastillon, (who being inferior in strength to the Catholics, were gone out
of Paris to arm themselves) that she would join with them as soon as she saw
they had assembled such a force as might be sufficient to resist the power of
their Adversaries. And on the other side, she made protestations to the King of
Navarre, the Constable, and the Duke of Guise, that she would never forsake the
Catholic party, nor ever consent to the establishment of the Hugonots further,
than granting them a moderate liberty, such as by the advice of persons
well-affected should be thought necessary for the quiet of the State. Her
Letters concerning this business were no less ambiguous than her words; nor did
she declare her self more openly abroad to foreign Princes, than at home within
her own Kingdom: but often changing the tenor of her discourse, and varying
the instructions she gave to Ambassadors in other Courts, and particularly to
Monsieur de l' Isle who resided in Rome, sometimes restraining them, other
while giving them a larger scope, so confounded the understandings of all men,
that they could not conclude any thing.

But now she began to have a hard task. For the heads of both parties were
grown by experience to be no less their Crafts-masters than her self; and in
such a long time that she had held the Regency, they had had the commodity to
discern and understand her arts; besides now that the King began to grow of
age, she was necessitated to cut off those delays which she formerly used; many
things being in appearance just, which when He should come to years to govern of
himself; depended absolutely upon his judgment and arbitrament; which none
could oppose without manifest delinquency of Felony; whereas at the present
every one might pretend that they did not withstand the Kings will, but the
wicked pernicious counsels of his Ministers.

The Duke of Guise, who being of a more violent disposition and resolute nature
than the rest, absolutely swayed the resolutions of his party, having already
drawn to his opinion the Constable and the King of Navarre, persuaded them that
going presently together to Court, they should bring the King and the
Queen Mother to Paris, and afterward make them confirm such Determinations and
Edicts as seemed necessary for the present times; and not by expecting, run the
hazard of being prevented, or suffer their Adversaries to seize first upon the
Kings person, and so invest themselves with the authority of his Name.

The Prince of Conde had the same intention; who when he left Paris, retired
first to Meaux, a Town in Brye, ten leagues distant from thence; and then to la
Ferte, a place of his own, there to assemble his Forces. To this resolution he
was advised by the Admiral, invited by the promises of the Queen Mother, and
perhaps further induced by the design of the Catholics, which was not
concealed from him, (as for the most part in civil dissentions, through the
infidelity of Counselors and frequency of spies, it is very easy to penetrate
into the very thoughts of the Enemy.) But the Catholic Lords with their
ordinary followers were sufficient to manage this design; besides, they were
near to Paris, which depending absolutely upon their wills, afforded strength
and commodity to effect it: Whereas on the other side, the Prince of Conde
being far weaker than they, and but few of his men armed, he was forced to
expect the other Lords and Gentlemen of his party; who being sent for from
diverse Provinces of the Kingdom, were not speedily to be brought together.

In the mean while the Catholics prevented them, and on a sudden appeared in
great numbers at the Court. Yet the Queen, nothing dismayed at their so
unexpected coming, though doubtful that her former arts would no longer
prevail, began to persuade the King of Navarre, that the Princes and other
Lords that came with him should presently withdraw themselves from about the
Court, that every one plainly perceived the cause of their coming; which was,
to force her being unarmed, and the King yet in minority, to order things in
the State according to their humors, and to accommodate public affairs to
passions and private interests; which was not only far from the loyalty and
integrity they professed, but absolutely contrary to the peace and safety of
the Kingdom, which they pretended only to desire. For to seek new Edicts and
new Institutions different from those which were already enacted, was no less
than to arm the Hugonots; who, bold enough of themselves, and ready for
Insurrections, would believe and publish to all the World, that they had reason
on their side, if without any cause that Edict should be recalled, which by a
general consent was confirmed and established. That it was expedient, whilst
the King was under age, to avoid the necessity of a War, and the troubles and
inconveniences that accompanied it; left besides the universal prejudice, a
greater brand of infamy might be fixed upon them who held the greatest
authority in the Government. That she for this reason consented to the Edict of
January; for this cause left Paris; to take away all manner of pretense and
opportunity for that mischief to break out, which secretly crept up; and that
to return to a place suspected, and to disturb the Edict already published,
would be openly to foment the violence of it. Withal, she put the King of
Navarre in mind, Persons of desparate ^ortunes, the incendiaries of Civil Wars.
and the other Catholic Princes, that to raise Civil Wars was only proper to
those who were either of unsettled or desperate fortunes: and not for such who,
possessing riches, dignities, estates and honors, lived in a flourishing
eminent condition. That the King of Navarre should enjoy the principal Command
of the whole Kingdom, which already without contradiction he was possessed of;
the other Princes should enjoy their estates, greatness and dignities; and
should comply with the people, that by enjoying, or believing they enjoyed a
borrowed and momentary liberty, they might suffer the King without War to
accomplish the age of his majority. That nothing had been done which was not
forced by an absolute necessity; That only was given, which could not be sold;
and that liberty granted to the Hugonots, which of their own power they
arrogated to themselves. And therefore the Catholic Princes should have
patience, that this so frantic humor might be overcome with art and
dexterity; and not wilfully be an occasion, by anticipating the remedies before
the time the King came of age, to anticipate likewise the disease; which would
carry along with it many adverse revolutions and dangerous accidents: and if
they were positively resolved to regulate the Edict, that it was to be done
insensibly, and with opportunity of times and occasions, and not with such open
violence, which would afford that commodity to the seditious, which they
themselves desired and sought after.

These reasons effectually expressed and reiterated, would have moved the King
of Navarre, and perhaps the Constable also, if the Duke of Guise had consented
thereunto. But he having settled his hopes, not only to recover, but enlarge his
former greatness by the fortune of the war; and desirous, as ancient Protector
and Head of the Catholic party, that those things resolved upon without his
consent should by any means whatsoever be disturbed, and the honor of
disturbing them redound apparently upon himself; he peremptorily opposed all
the Queens arguments; showing, that they should at the same time lose their
credit and reputation, when they suffered themselves to be so easily deluded by
a woman, who did all with a design to throw her self into the arms of the
contrary party; if fondly giving credit to her words, they should so easily be
persuaded to depart from the Court; that it would too much prejudice the
justice of their cause, if it should appear by their own confession, that the
end of their coming was not for the public good or preservation of the Royal
Authority, but through private passions, and particular interests; and that
through an inward guilt, they had not pursued those intentions which they
purposed to effect. That they ought not, by the artificial persuasions of the
Queen, to be diverted from a deliberation so maturely weighed, and unanimously
resolved upon; nor to satisfy her will, suffer those things to be laid aside
which were dictated by Reason, prescribed by Justice, and commanded by
Religion; the preservation and respect of which had chiefly brought them
thither: But howsoever, it was no longer seasonable to defer or spend time in
discourses: The Prince of Conde with an armed power was already at hand, the
Hugonots had already joined their forces; who without doubt would carry the
King along with them, if they did not first take order for his security. And
therefore this being a business not to be determined by persuasions, it was
necessary to use force, and carrying away the King, leave the Queen to take
that party which pleased her best. For having with them the person of the
lawful King, and the first Prince of the Blood, to whom the Government
naturally belonged, they needed little to regard what she should do with her
self. And it was true, that the Prince of Conde, joined with the Lords of
Chastillon, and the rest of his adherents, already drew near to the Court.
Wherefore the Constable and the King of Navarre being confirmed by these
reasons, and seeing it was necessary to break off all treaties and delays, gave
the Queen personally to understand, that she must instantly resolve; for they
had determined, whatever happened, to carry the King and his Brothers with them
to Paris, le^t they should fall into the hands of the Hugonots, who, (as they
had advertisement) were not far off; that it was not fit for them to leave
their lawful Prince a prey to Heretics, who desired nothing more than to have
him a prisoner, that they might under his name subvert the foundations of the
Kingdom: That there was now no time to be lost, nor means to put it off; that
they would dispose of the King as their allegiance and the common good
required. For what concerned her self, that they would not determine any thing,
but, as it was their duty, leave her free to do what she pleased.

Though this intimation were peremptory and sudden, yet the Queen was not at
all surprised therewith, having long foreseen it, and designed what in such a
case would be fittest to do. Wherefore being necessitated to declare her self,
though it were against her will, and she foresaw War would quickly ensue
thereupon; she would not by any means separate her self from the Catholic
party; not only because reason and justice so advised, but because she likewise
conceived, that both her own safety and her Sons depended upon their strength.
So that with her wonted vivacity of courage presently resolving, she returned
answer to the King of Navarre and the Constable; That she was no less a
Catholic, nor less sollicitous of the general good of that Religion, than any
other whatsoever; that for this time she would rather believe the counsel of
others, than her own judgment; and since all agreed that it was best to go, she
was ready to satisfy them. And so without any other reply, she presently put
her self in a readiness to depart: The Queen is forced to declare her self f^r
the Catholics, and at the same time maintains ho^es in the Hugonots.
notwithstandig, at the same time she dispatched Letters to the Prince of
Conde, lamenting that she could not discharge the promise she had made to put
both the Kings Person and her own into their hands; for the Catholics coming
first, had carried them by force to Paris; but that they should not lose their
courage, neglect their care for the preservation of the Crown, nor suffer their
enemies to arrogate to themselves the absolute power in the Government. So
being mounted on horseback with the King and her other Sons, and compassed
about with the Catholic Lords, who omitted no observance or demonstrations of
honor that might appease her, they went that night to Melun, the next day to
the Bois de Vincennes, and with the same speed the morning after to Paris.

Charles the IX. wept at his restraint.
It is most certain, that the young King was seen that day by many to weep,
being persuaded that the Catholic Lords restrained him of his liberty; and
that the Queen Mother being discontented that her wonted arts prevailed not,
and foreseeing the mischiefs of the future War, seemed perplexed in mind, and
spoke not a word to any body; of which the Duke of Guise making little account,
was heard to say publicly, That the good is always good, whether it proceed
from love or force. But the Prince of Conde having received this news upon the
way, and finding that he was either prevented by the Catholics, or deluded by
the Queen, he presently stopped his horse, and stood still a good while, doubtful
what resolution to take; all those future troubles that were like to ensue
representing themselves before him with a face of terror. But the Admiral, who
was somewhat behind, overtaking him, they conferred a little together, and
after a deep sigh, the Prince said, We are gone so far forward, that we must
either drink or be drowned; and without any further dispute, taking another
way, he went with great speed toward Orleans, which he had formerly designed
to possess himself of.

Orleans is one of the principal Cities of the Kingdom, some thirty leagues
distant from Paris, of a large compass, abundance in provision, commodious for
buildings, and very populous; which being in the Province of Beausse, stands as
it were the Navel of the Kingdom, upon the River of Loire, anciently called
Ligeris, a great Navigable River; which passing through many Provinces, at
length runs into the British Sea. This City, by reason of the Navigation, the
fertility of the Soil* the eminency of it, and the mutual commerce it had with
many other places, seemed to the Prince very convenient for a standing quarter,
and to oppose against Paris, by making it the principal seat for their Faction.
For which reasons having many months before cast his thoughts upon it, he had
taken pains to hold secret intelligence with some of the Citizens which were of
Calvin's Religion, and by their means to raise a great party of the youth, who
were of unquiet spirits, factious, and inclined to a desire of Novelties. So
that the disposition of the Inhabitants answering the instigation of the
accomplices, already a great part of the people were willing to take Arms. And
that things might be done in due order, the Prince had the day before sent
Monsieur de Andelotte to the City, who entering thereinto secretly, (at the same
time that the Prince seized upon the Court) should endeavor likewise to make
himself Master of the Town. But though it so fell out, that the Prince could
not arrive at Court; Andelotte not knowing what had happened, armed three
hundred of his followers, and at the day appointed suddenly seized on S. John's
Gate. Upon which accident Monsieur de Monterau, Governor of the City, getting
together some few men of Monsieur de Sipierres company, who by chance were then
thereabouts, very hotly assaulted the Conspirators, with no little hope that
they should be able to drive them away, and recover the entrance of the Gate,
where they had not had time enough to fortify themselves; so that joining in a
bloody fight, after a conflict of many hours, Andelotte at length began to
yield to the multitude of the Catholics, who ran thither armed from all the
parts of the Town, and had surely received an affront, if he had not been
opportunely assisted by an unexpected succor. For the Prince of Conde, not
finding the Court at Fountain-bleau, and therefore desisting from his voyage,
returned much sooner than he thought, and marching with great diligence,
approached near to Orleans at the same time that the fight began; and knowing
it to be very violent by the continual shot and incessant ringing of Bells,
which might be heard many miles off, he presently gallopped with all his
Cavalry toward the City to succor his Confederates, who were already in great
danger of being defeated.

They were more than three thousand horse, and ran headlong with such fury,
that the peasants, though astonished with the unusual spectacle of civil arms,
in the midst of their fright and wonder could not forbear to laugh, seeing here
a horse fall, there a man tumbled over, and nevertheless without regarding any
accident, run furiously one over another as fast as their horses could go, upon
a design which no body knew but themselves. But this haste, so ridiculous to
the Spectators, had very good success to the Princes intentions. For coming
with such a powerful succor, and in so fit an opportunity of time, the
Governor being driven away, and those that resisted suppressed; at last the
Town, which was of exceeding consequence, was reduced into his power, and by
the Authority of the Commanders preserved from pillage. But the Churches
escaped not the fury of the Hugonot-Souldiers, who with brutish examples of
barbarous savageness, laid them all waste and desolate.

Thus the Prince having taken Orleans, and made it the seat of his Faction,
Orleans made the seat of the Hugonot Faction.
he began to think upon War. And first having appointed a Council of the
principal Lords and Commanders, he advised with them of the means to draw as
many Towns and Provinces to his Party as was possible, and to get together such
a sum of money as might defray the expenses, which at the beginning of a War
are ever very great.

The Catholic party were intent upon the same ends; who being come to Paris
with the young King and the Queen, held frequent consultations how best to
order the affairs for their own advantage: in which Councils the Duke of Guise
openly declared, that he thought it most expedient to proceed to a War with the
Hugonots, so to extinguish the fire before it burst out into a consuming flame,
and to take away the roots of that growing evil. On the contrary, the
Chancellor de l' Hospital, secretly set on by the Queen, proposing many
difficulties, and raising doubts and impediments upon every thing, persuaded an
agreement; by which both parties absenting themselves from the Court, the power
of the Government should be left free and quiet to the Queen and the King of
Navarre. But being sharply reproved by the Constable, and after the news of the
revolt of Orleans, injuriously treated, under pretense of being a Gown-man, he
was excluded from the Council, that was now called the Council of War; by which
means also a principal instrument was taken from the Queen, who having no power
left in that Council, for there were newly admitted to it Claud Marquess de
^oisy, Honor Marquess Villars, Louis de Lansac, Monsieur de Cars, the Bishop
of Auxerre, the Sieurs de Maugiron, and la Brosse, (who all absolutely depended
upon the Constable and the Guises) every thing on that side likewise tended to
the raising of Arms.

At the first (as it ever falls out) their pens were more active than their
swords. The Prince of Conde's Manifest.
For the Prince of Conde and his adherents, willing to justify in writing the
cause of their taking Arms, published certain Manifests and Letters in print,
directed to the King, the Court of Parliament in Paris, the Protestant Princes
of Germany, and to other Christian Princes; in which very largely, but no less
artificially dilating themselves, they concluded, that they had taken Arm^ to
set the King at liberty, and the Queen his Mother, who by the Tyrannical power
of the Catholic Lords were kept prisoners; and to cause obedience to be
rendered in all parts of the Kingdom to his Majesty's Edicts, which by the
violence of certain men, that arrogate to themselves a greater Authority in the
Government than of right belonged to them, were impiously despised and trodden
under foot; and therefore that they were ready presently to lay down their
Arms, if the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Mareshal de St. Andre,
retiring themselves from the Court, would leave the King and the Queen in a
free place, in their own power; and that liberty of Religion might be equally
tolerated and maintained in all parts of the Kingdom.

The Parliament at Paris answered their Manifest, and the Letters, showing,
that the pretense was vain, The Parliament of Paris Answer to the Princes
Manifest.
by which they sought to justify their taking of Arms, which they had
immediately raised against the Kings Person and his Royal Authority: for so far
was the King or the Queen his Mother from being deprived of liberty, or
retained in prison by the Constable and the Guises, that on the contrary they
were in the capital City of the Kingdom, where the chief Parliament resided;
and in which commanded as Governor Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, Brother to the
Prince of Conde, and one of the Princes of the Blood. That the King of Navarre,
Brother also to the same Prince of Conde, held the chief place in the
Government, and the Queen Mother the charge of the Regency; both chosen by the
Council, according to the ancient custom, and confirmed by the consent of the
States General of the Kingdom: that every day they assembled the Council
composed of eminent persons to consult of fit remedies for the present evils;
that the Edict of January was entirely observed with full Liberty of Conscience
to those of the pretended reformed Religion, (notwithstanding it depended
wholly upon the Kings will to call in those Edicts whenever he should think
sit, especially that of January, made by way of provision, and which was
accepted by the Parliaments only for a time;) That the Hugonots had of
themselves violated the Edict made in their favor; because, contrary to the
form thereof, they went to their assemblies armed, without the assistance of
the Kings Officers, conditions expressly mentioned in the same. And besides this
rashness, they were likewise so bold, as in all places to raise tumults, and
commit disorders and slaughters. Wherefore their rebellion could not be excused
with so slight a pretense, seeing many Towns were openly seized upon, Soldiers
raised, the Munition consumed, Artillery cast, Moneys coined, the public
Revenues spent, Churches thrown down, the Monasteries laid desolate, and
infinite other proceedings, no way agreeing to the Duty of Subjects, but
express acts of Felony and Rebellion. Wherefore they exhorted the Prince of
Conde, that following the example of his Ancestors, he should return to the
King, abandoning the society of Heretics and factious persons, and not so
cruelly wound the bosom of his own Country; the welfare whereof, as Prince of
the Blood, he was obliged to maintain with the hazard of his own person, even
to the last period of his life.

The Constable likewise and the Guises made an Answer in their own behalf; and
after a long narration of the services they had done to the Crown, concluded,
that they were ready not only to depart from the Court, but to enter into a
voluntary exile, upon condition that the Arms taken up against his Majesty
might be laid down, the places kept against him delivered up, the Churches that
were ruined restored, the Catholic Religion preserved, and an entire obedience
rendered to the lawful King under the Government of the King of Navarre, and the
Regency of the Queen Mother.

After which Declarations past on both sides, the King and the Queen together,
by the advice of the Council, The Answer of the King and Queen.
made another Answer to the Prince of Conde, and caused it to be divulged in
print, in which they avowed, That they were in full liberty, and that they had
voluntarily removed the Court to Paris, to remain there in great security, and
to advise with the Officers of the Crown, how to remedy the present disorders:
That they were ready to continue the observation of the Edict of January, and
to see it should be entirely kept, until such time as the King came of Age: And
since the Catholic Princes, whose loyalty and virtue was sufficiently known to
all France, were contented to retire themselves from Court: That the Prince of
Conde nor his Adherents had any manner of excuse longer to keep at such a
distance, and in Arms; but that they ought presently to put both themselves and
the places they possessed into obedience of the King; which if they did,
besides a pardon for what was past, they should be well looked upon by their
Majesty's as good Subjects, and punctually maintained in all their privileges
and degrees.

Whilst these things were in agitation, the Queen endeavored to bring it so to
pass, that both parties (to color their proceedings, and not to seem to
condemn themselves of any violence to the Kings person) should retire to their
several charges, and leave the Government of the State to her and the King of
Navarre; who being of a facile nature, was a fit instrument for the
establishment of her Sons in the Kingdom. But after much Treating, and many
Declarations on both sides, all was reduced to this point, That neither of them
would be the first to disband their forces; and upon this cavil they made large
Propositions in writing, without concluding any thing in fact.

At the same time that these Manifests were published to the world, and every
man busy about the Treaty, the Prince of Conde and the Admiral used means to
draw all the greatest Towns, and those that lay most convenient for them, to
their party. To which purpose, having scattered men of understanding and trust
in the several Provinces, they with diverse policies, by the assistance of the
Hugonots, and other seditious persons which abounded in all parts of the
Kingdom, easily made themselves Masters of the principal Cities, and other
strong places of greatest consequence. With these practices revolted the City
of Rouen, (the residence of the Parliament of Normandy) and in the same
Province Diepe and Havre de Grace, situated upon the Ocean on that Coast that
looks toward England. In Poictou and Touraine, with the like skill they got
into their hands Angiers, Blois, Poictiers, Tours, and Vendosme. In Daulphine,
Valence; and at last, after many attempts, the City of Lions also; and in
Gascoigne, Guienne, and Languedoc, where the Hugonots swarmed most; except
Bordeaux, Thoulouse, and some other Fortresses, they had in a manner possessed
themselves of all the Cities and walled Towns. By which Insurrections all
France being in an uproar, and not only the Provinces, but private houses and
families divided amongst themselves, there ensued such miserable accidents,
that every place afforded spectacles of desolation, fire, rapine and bloodshed.

And because the Contributions they had from the Hugonots, (though they gave
very largely) and their own private Revenues, with the pillage they had in
those Towns that they took, was not sufficient to maintain the charge of the
War; The Prince of C^nde coyn^ the Plate belonging to Churches.
the Prince of Conde made all the Gold and Silver in the Churches to be brought
to him, and coined it publicly into money, which was no little help to them.
For the ancient piety of that Nation had in every place adorned the relics,
and filled the Temples with no small Treasure. Nor was their diligence less to
provide Munition and Artillery. For in the Towns which they surprised* and
particularly in Tours, having found a great quantity, they sent it to Orleans
to supply their present occasions; where, having appointed the Convent of
Franciscan Friars for a Magazine, they kept there in very good order all the
Stores and Provisions that they made with exceeding industry for the future.

But the Governors of the Kingdom having resolved and determined a War, with
no less diligence brought the Catholic Army together near about Paris; where
entering into consultation what they should do concerning the Edict of January,
though there was some difference in their opinions, they all concluded it
should be observed: partly, not more to sharpen the humors already too much
stirred; and partly, not to add strength or color to the Hugonots cause; who,
whilst the Edict was maintained, had no manner of reasonable pretense to take
Arms.

But because the People of Paris reverencing (as in the greatest troubles they
have ever done) the Catholic Religion, instantly desired that no Congregations
of the Hugonots might be permitted amongst them; First to take away an occasion
of tumults and dange^s in the principal City, which was the foundation of the
Kings party, it being besides very indecent that where his Majesty remained in
Person any other Religion should be exercised but that which he himself
professed: These reasons laid together, An Edict published at the instance of
the Parisians to forbid the Hugonot Assemblies in their City, or ne^^ the Court.
they resolved the Edict of January in all things else remaining in force, to
forbid the Hugonots to keep any Assemblies in the City of Paris, or the
Precincts thereof; or in any other place where the Court resided, where none
could live that were not conformable to the Rites of the Catholic Religion
observed in the Roman Church.

After the publication of this Decree, followed other Provisions in pursuance
of the Civil and Military affairs. And the Cardinal of Bourbon, who loved not
to engage himself in troublesome businesses, having in these times of
difficulty surrendered up the Government of Paris, they conferred it upon the
Mareshal of Brissac; that they might be sure to have in the power of one they
trusted the most potent City in all France; which alone gave more assistance to
that party it favored, than half the rest of the Kingdom could. They appointed
other Commanders in diverse other parts to withstand the attempts of the
Hugonots; amongst which the principal were Claude Duke of Aumale in the
Province of Normady; Louis de Bourbon Duke of Monpensier in Touraine; and in
Gascoigne, Blaise, Sieur de Monluc, a man famous for wit and valor, and much
more for experience in the War.

But having already a great power on foot, those who commanded in chief
resolved to go directly toward Orleans, where the Prince of Conde and the
Admiral gathered their Forces, and not to give them longer time for the
provisions that they made, but to endeavor to suppress them before they
increased in strength or reputation. The Kings Army consisted of four thousand
Horse, the chief Gentry in the Kingdom, and six thousand French Foot, all
chosen men and old Soldiers; and the Swisses were expected, who being hired by
the King, were already advanced to the confines of Burgundy. With this number
of men, and a convenient train of Artillery, the Army moved toward Orleans,
The Kings Army mov^s toward O^leans.
commanded by the King of Navarre with the Title of the Kings
Lieutenant General; but with the consent and authority of the Duke of Guise and
the Constable, who for their experience and age had the chief credit in
directing businesses of weight or consequence.

On the other side, the Prince of Conde and the Admiral, by whose advice all
things were governed, having already assembled such a force as was able to
encounter with the Kings Army, resolved to issue out of Orleans, and to take
the field likewise; judging it the best way to uphold their reputation, which
in all, but especially in Civil Wars, is always of great moment to maintain and
increase a Faction; there being an infinite number of men that follow the
rumor of fame, and prosperity of fortune. Being marched forth into the field
with three thousand Horse and seven thousand Foot, they quartered themselves in
a place naturally strong, some four leagues distant from the City, just upon
the great Road; that so they might cut off the Catholics passage to the Town,
and with greater facility have provisions brought them in from the Country
about.

But whilst the Armies thus approached one another, the Queen was greatly
troubled in mind to see things at last break out into a War, in which she
doubted she should certainly remain a prey, whosoever obtained the Victory;
believing that she could no more trust her self to one party, than be secure of
the other. For though the Catholic Lords made show of paying her a great
respect, and seemed to promise, she should continue her wonted authority of
Regent; she feared not without good ground, that the contrary party once
suppressed, and the obstacle taken away that contained them within the bounds
of reason, they would make but little account of a P^pil King, or a woman that
was a stranger, and prefer their own greatness before all other respects. And
for the Prince of Conde, who, besides his restless disposition and vast
thoughts that wholly swayed him, thought himself also injured and betrayed by
her, she could by no means depend upon his support. Besides, the exaltation of
the Hugonots she knew would absolutely subvert the State, and kindle such a
lasting fire, that the miserable Country of France would never be able fully to
recover the quiet it formerly enjoyed. Wherefore desiring a peace, and that
things should remain in machination, and (as they call them) Brigues a French
word signifying factions, or contentions.
Brigues of the Court, without breaking out into the violence of Arms, she
endeavored to promote propositions of accommodation by means of the Bishop of
Valence; who at last, after many difficulties, concluded a parley between her
and the Prince of Conde, in a place equally distant from both Armies; that by
discoursing together they might find a means to secure and satisfy both
parties. To which purpose the Queen, being come to the Catholic Camp,
accompanied with the King of Navarre and Monsieur d' Anville the Constables
Son, she advanced as far as Toury, The Cardinal of ^hat^llin changing his
Religion, calle^h himself Count of F^^^vais. The Parley between the
Queen Mother and the Prince of C^nde.
(a place about ten leagues from Orleans) whither came the Prince of Conde with
the Admiral and the Cardinal his Brother, who called himself Count de Beauvais,
(of which place he held the Bishopric though he had changed his Religion.)
Where meeting altogether in an open Campaigne which on every side extended as
far as they could discern, the Prince and the Queen withdrew themselves from
the company, and discoursed very long together; but what passed between them
was unknown; only it is certain, that they parted without concluding any thing;
and each of them retired to their own company in great haste. This meeting
satisfied those who doubted it, that the Queen only dissembling with the
Hugonots for her own ends, would not in any wise forsake the Catholics. For
she was there in such a place, that she might have gone away with the Prince if
she had pleased; who perhaps came to the parley principally through such a hope.

Now the Prince being returned to his Army, The Prince of Conde's demands in
favor of himself and the Hugonots.
(as if he had received courage from the Treaty he had with the Queen, or else
to increase the jealousies which the Catholics generally had of her) proposed
much higher Conditions than formerly, and so exorbitant, that they moved a
disdain even in the King himself, though yet in such an age that he referred
all things to the arbitrament of his Council. For he demanded, That the Guises
and the Constable should depart out of the Kingdom; That the Hugonots might
return again to live in the Cities, and have Churches publicly appointed them;
That all the Edicts should be nullified that were made since the Duke of Guise
returned to the Court; That he might hold the Towns he was possessed of, till
the King was out of his minority, and command in them as free absolute Lord;
That the Popes Legate should be commanded to leave the Kingdom, that the
Hugonots might be capable of all charges and public Magistracies; That the
Emperor, the Catholic King, the Queen of England, the Republic of Venice,
the Duke of Savoy, and the Commonalty of the Swisses, should give security,
That neither the Duke of Guise, nor the Constable, should return into the
Kingdom, or raise any Army, until such time as the King came to the age of two
and twenty years. Every man being incensed with these Conditions, the
Governors of the Kingdom resolved to send Monsieur de Fresne, one of the Kings
Secretaries, to Estampes in the midway between Orleans and Paris, who with a
public Proclamation should warn the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, Andelot, and
the rest of their Adherents, within ten days after to lay down their Arms, to
deliver up the Towns they possessed, and to retire privately to their own
houses: which if they did, they should obtain pardon and remission for all that
was past; but if they refused to obey this his Majesty's express Command, it
being an immediate Act of Treason and Rebellion, they should be deprived of
their estates and dignities, and proceeded against as Rebels. Which being
published accordingly, The Kings Edict slighted by the Hugonots.
it was so far from working any thing upon the Hugonots, that on the contrary,
either through desperation or disdain become more resolute, they united
themselves by a public Contract in a perpetual Confederacy, to deliver as they
said, the King, the Queen, and the Kingdom from the violence of their
oppressors; and to cause obedience to be rendered to his Majesty's Edicts
through all his Dominions. They declared the Prince of Conde Head of this
Confederacy, and with their wonted liberty published in print a long Narration
of the causes and end of this their Union.

The Queen for all this, still employed her thoughts how to compass an
agreement. For besides the hopes she had to effect it, nothing was more
advantageous to her then gaining of time; and by delaying the War, to keep
things from coming to an issue, till her Son was out of his Minority, which
they pretended was at fourteen years of age. She began already to endeavor by
her usual arts to regain the Constable and the Guises; and having given evident
proof of her resolution to persevere in the Catholic Religion, and continue
constant to that party, since when she was even in the Hugonots Camp she
returned notwithstanding back to them again; she had in great part removed and
purged her self of those jealousies which they were wont to have of her
inclinations; insomuch as, besides that they left her a more absolute power in
the Government, they sought by complying, to make her approve of their
proceedings. Wherefore having more hope than ever to find some means of
accommodation, she began to deal with the Catholic Lords under the pretense of
Justice, and detestation of a Civil War; that to shame the Hugonots, and for
their own honor, they should be content to depart first from the Court, as
they were the first to come thither. She laid before them, how greatly it would
commend their sincerity, The Queen persuades the Duke of Guise and the
Constable, and the Mareshal de S. And^^, to leave the Court, which they promise.
by one action only to extinguish that horrible flame which was now kindling in
every part of the Kingdom to consume all things both sacred or profane. That
they would merit much more of their Country by this so pious a resolution, than
by all their former exploits put together, though never so glorious and
beneficial. For this would bring safety, whereas those added only greatness and
reputation. She told them further, that to absent themselves from the Court,
was but a ceremony of a few months: for, if nothing happened before to make it
necessary to call them back again, when the King came to age, which would be
shortly, he would soon s^nd for them; and in the mean while, this short time of
absence might be employed to their honor and advantage. For every one retiring
to their several Governments with which they were entrusted, they might with
industry keep the Provinces in peace, and purge those that most needed it, of
the pestiferous humors that infected them; whereas staying at the Court, they
served for nothing else but to foment and stir up a War. She assured them, she
would never change resolution in matters of Religion, or the Kings Education;
that never any thing of importance should be determined without their privity;
that the present Insurrections once quieted, she would take care, that with the
first possible opportunity they should be recalled; and that in all times they
should find her gratitude answerable to so great a benefit, if really they
resolved to perform what she proposed. With which kind of practices she so far
prevailed, that at the last the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Mareshal
de St. Andre, were contented to depart first from the Court and the Army;
provided, that the Prince of Conde came presently without Arms to render
himself to the Queens obedience, and to follow such orders as she should think
most expedient for the welfare of the Kingdom: which though every one of them
thought a very hard condition, yet such was the general applause that resulted
from thence to their own augmentation and glory, and so firm the belief, that
the Prince would never be persuaded to return to the Court unarmed as a private
person, that they were induced to consent to it; believing withal perhaps, that
there could not want pretenses and interpretations speedily to license their
return; and so much the rather, because the King of Navarre, being then so
exasperated that they thought him irreconcilable with his Brother, remaining
still an assistant in the Government, they were in a manner secure, that the
form of things would not be changed, and that they should have the same power
in their absence as if they were present.

But the Queen having gotten this promise from them, and keeping it very
secretly to her self, forthwith sent the Bishop of Valence, and Rubertette, one
of the Secretaries of State to the Prince of Conde, who having given them this
answer, That if the Catholic Lords departed first, he would not only lay down
his Arms and return into obedience to the Queen; but also for the more
security, forthwith leave the Kingdom; and often reiterating, and making large
professions of the same; though with an assured opinion, that those Lords would
neither for their reputation nor safety be willing first to lay down their Arms
and depart: The Bishop and Rubertette praising his readiness, desiring he would
write what he had said to the Queen; showing, that whereas for the present he
was held for the Author of these scandals, and of the War, by this free offer
he would silence his enemies, and confound the Faction of the Guises;
justifying to all the World the candor of his intentions and counsels. The
Prince, persuaded by the fair appearance of the proposition, and with hope to
add to his force a show of reason, (which is always of very great moment among
the people) was content to write to the Queen, That when the Catholic Lords
were retired to their houses without either Arms or command; he, with the
principal of his Adherents, for the Kings satisfaction, and the quiet of the
State, willingly promised to go out of the Kingdom, and never to return till he
were recalled by the general consent of them that governed.

The Queen having received this ratification written and subscribed by the
Princes own hand, instantly advertised the Catholic Lords, that they should
forthwith retire themselves, only with their ordinary followers; who readily
obeying her command, having put over their men to the King of Navarre, went to
Chasteau Dame, with a full intention to be gone as soon as the Prince on that
part began to perform his promises. The Queen having it under the Princes hand
that he would retire himself, the Catholic Lords leave the Camp.
The Lords having left the Camp on a sudden, the Queen without any delay, the
very same night let the Prince know by Rubertette, that the Catholic Lords
being already departed from the Army, and their commands, it remained that he
with the same readiness and sincerity should perform what he had so assuredly
promised under his own handwriting.

This unexpected resolution not a little perplexed the Hugonots, having never
imagined that the Constable and the Guises would yield to this condition.
Wherefore repenting themselves that the Prince through his facility had
promised so much, they began to consult how they might break off and hinder the
Agreement. The Admiral making little account of outward appearance, and deeming
that after a Victory all things seemed just, and justice by an overthrow would
lose her authority; advised presently to send back Rubertette, and without
further ceremony to break off the Treaty. Andelot, according to his manner,
mingling brags with his reasons, wished that he were so near the Catholics,
that he might come to try it out by force; and it should soon appear whom it
concerned most in reason to abandon their Country; it being against all right,
that so many gallant men, who voluntarily had taken Arms, should be deluded by
the crafty Treaties of the Queen and the Catholics It appeared hard to the
Prince to gainsay his word, and hardest of all to relinquish his command in
the Army, and at one Treaty to fall from such great hopes, to a necessity of
forsaking his Country, without knowing whither to retreat.

The Hugonot Ministers interposing their Divinity with matters of State,
alleged, that the Prince having undertaken the maintenance of those who had
embraced the purity, as they called it, of the Gospel, and made himself by Oath
Protector of Gods Word; No obligation afterward could be of force to prejudice
his former oath or promise. Others added to this reason, that the Queen having
at the beginning failed of her word to the Prince, when she promised to bring
over the King to his party, he likewise was not bound by any promise made to
her, who first committed such a manifest breach of Faith. Amongst which, rather
tumultuous than well directed opinions, applying themselves (as in matters of
difficulty it is usual) to a middle way, it was at last, not without much
dispute, determined, that the Prince should go to the Queen, making show to
perform his promise, and confirm a peace; but that the morning after, the
Admiral and the other Hugonot Lords coming on a sudden, should take him away
suddenly as by force, and carrying him back to the Camp; giving out that he had
not violated his promise, but that he was constrained by those of his party to
observe his first Oath, and the confederacy a little before so solemnly
contracted. That which made them think of this deceit, was the great commodity
of putting it in execution; for the Queen, to meet with the Prince, being come
to Talsy, six miles from the Army, where she was accompanied only with her
ordinary Guards, and the Courtiers, the Prince could not fear the being stayed
by force; and the other Lords of his party might go thither and return, without
any danger or impediment.

So it was punctually effected as they had resolved amongst themselves. For the
Prince, accompanied with some few attendants, went to the Queen, with great
show of humiliation, and was received with much familiarity. But whilst he
raised difficulties, and interposed delays in subscribing the condition, which
by order from the King and the Council were proposed to him by Rubertette; and
whilst Monsieur de Lansac, a man of sharp wit and understanding, sent by the
Queen, persuaded him to perfect the specious promise he had made, the Hugonot
Lords arrived, who had license to come to salute the King and the Queen; and
seeming greatly offended that the Prince had abandoned them, made him as it
were by force get on horseback. And though the Queen, angry to be so deceived,
loudly threatened every one of them, and the Bishop of Valence, Lansac, and
Rubertette, endeavored to persuade the Prince to remain at Court, without any
further mention of leaving the Kingdom; yet the desire of command and interest
of rule prevailing, without more delay, The Prince of Conde returns to his
Army.
the Queen not having time to use force, he returned the same day, which was
the 27 of June, to the Hugonots Camp, re-assuming, to their great content, the
charge of Captain General in this Enterprise. Thus all hopes of Peace being cut
off, ROYALISTS and HUGONOTS.
the War was kindled, and began between the two Factions under the name of
ROYALISTS and HUGONOTS.

The Treaty of an Agreement being broken, which the Queen, with wonderful
policy keeping things from coming to an issue, had continued many months; the
Prince of Conde, desirous to abolish the infamy of breaking his word by some
notorious famous action, determined the same night to set upon the Kings Army
in their own quarters. Two things chiefly encouraged him to so bold a
resolution: the one, that the Duke of Guise and the Constable were absent,
whose valor and reputation he esteemed very much: the other, that at that time
a Peace being in a manner concluded, and published, many were gone from their
colors, and the greatest part of the Cavalry, for commodity of quarter, were
scattered up and down in the neighboring Villages; by which means the Army was
not a little diminished and weakened. These hopes moved him to venture upon this
attempt, though it appeared a new thing to undertake the surprisal of a Royal
Camp within their own trenches. But he was necessitated also to try the
fortune, though doubtful, of a battle; knowing, that the Kings Swisses were
within a few days march; and when they were joined with the rest of the Army,
he should not be able, being far inferior in number, to keep the field; but be
constrained to withdraw his forces to defend those forts he was possessed of; a
matter, through the little hope of succors, both difficult and dangerous.
Wherefore he desired to do something whilst he had time, to free himself from
that necessity which he saw would fall upon him. With this resolution he
departed when it was dark, from la Ferte d' Ales where he lay; and the Army
being divided into three Squadrons, the first of Horse led by the Admiral, the
other of Foot under the conduct of Andelot, and the third mingled both with
Horse and Foot* which he commanded himself, he marched with great silence and
expedition to assault the Enemies Camp about midnight.

The Hugonots through the faults of their guides, march all night without
advancing
But fortune frustrated his design: for though the way were plain through a free
open Country, yet the guides that led the first Squadron, either through
treachery or amazedness, or else through ignorance, losing their way, they so
wandered up and down, that the next morning at break of day he found that he was
advanced but little more than a league from the place whence he set out over
night, and still two great leagues from the Kings Camp. Notwithstanding,
necessity compelling to attempt the greatest difficulties, the Commanders
resolved to pursue their design, and the same order to perform that in the day
which they could not effect in the night. But Monsieur d' Anville, who with the
light horse quartered in the front of the Kings Army, having presently
advertisement by his Scouts of their coming, had by shooting off two pieces of
Cannon, given notice thereof to the Camp that lay behind him. Whereupon the
Soldiers and Gentlemen running from all parts to their colors, he going
before to make good the highway, that they might have time to put the Army in
order, having divided his Horse into diverse little Squadrons, began to skirmish
fiercely with the first Troops of the Hugonots. By reason whereof they being
forced to march slowlier and closer together, often making halts through the
heat of the skirmish, and not to diso^der themselves in the face of the Enemy,
the King of Navarre had more commodity of time to get his men together, and to
order them for a Battle. So the Princes Army still advancing, and the King of
Navarre ranging his men in a Battalia upon the plain, but with the Camp behind
them, at the last about noon both Armies faced one another, that there was
nothing between them but a little plain, without any manner of impediment. But
though the Ordnance played fiercely on both sides, yet no body advancing to
begin the battle, it was perceived, the Commanders were not of opinion to
fight. For the Prince, who thought to have surprised the Catholics on a
sudden, The Armies face one another, and retreat without fighting.
before they could either get together, or put themselves in order, seeing them
all together, and drawn out in excellent order for the Battle; and not
believing that his men, who were but newly raised, would be able to stand
against the Kings Foot, that were all choice old Soldiers, had more mind to
retreat than to fight. And the King of Navarre, who knew, that within a few
days his forces would be increased, would not in absence of the other Catholic
Lords, expose himself without any provocation to the hazard of a Battle.
Wherefore after they had stood still facing one another at least three hours,
the Prince retiring more than a league backwards, quartered with his Army at
Lorges, a little Village in Beausse, and the King of Navarre drew off his men,
but in much better order, to the place where they encamped before.

The same evening arrived from Chasteadune at the Army the Constable and the
Duke of Guise, being sent for in great haste; and causing all the Guards to be
doubled, they commanded quite through the Quarters, at every hundred paces great
piles of wood to be made; which being set on fire, if the enemy came to assault
them by night, the Soldiers might the better see what they were to do, and the
Canoneers how to point their Ordnance. Which orders being known to the Prince
of Conde, and finding that the enemy was not to be surprised; after he had
stayed three days at Lorges, the second day of July in the morning he rose with
all his Army, and went to take Baugency, a great walled Town, and with the
pillage thereof to refresh his Soldiers, which were in great want of money,
and not over-abounding with victuals. Nor was the enterprise of any great
difficulty; for the wall being battered with four pieces of Cannon, brought
thither for that purpose, and an assault given in another part by the Regiment
of Provensals, at a certain breach they made by sapping, it was taken the same
day, and sacked, with great slaughter of the inhabitants.

Whilst the Hugonots assaulted Baugency, there arrived at the Kings Army ten
Cornets of German Horse, led by the Rhinegrave; and six thousand Swisses, under
the conduct of Ierosme Freulich, a man for experience and valor of great
esteem among his own Nation. With which Forces the Catholic Lords designed
without any delay to set upon the Enemies Army. But the Prince of Conde being
advertised of the arrival of those foreign supplies, having slighted Baugency,
that the Catholics might make no use of it, in great haste retired to Orleans,
absolutely quitting the field, without making any other attempt.

In Orleans it was no longer possible to keep the Army together, partly through
want of money to give the Soldiers their pay, without which, being shut up in
the Town, they could not possibly live; partly, because the Nobility that
followed the War as Volunteers, having spent what they brought with them, could
no longer subsist. Wherefore having called a Council, the chief of the Hugonots
determined to turn this necessity to their best advantage. For not being able
to resist the Kings Army with the Forces they then had, nor to remain shut up
within those walls; they took a resolution to separate themselves into diverse
places, and to defend those Towns and fortresses which they held in other parts
of the Kingdom; in this manner subsisting as well as they might, until they
could have such aids from their friends and confederates, that they might again
meet the Enemy in the field.

Their chief hopes of Succors were from the Protestant Princes of Germany, The
Protestants of Germany are Lutherans.
(so they call those, who separated from the Catholic Church, do follow the
opinions of Luther) and from Elizabeth Queen of England, not only an adherent
to the same Religion, but also desirous, through the ancient Maxims of that
Nation, to have some footing in the Kingdom of France. The Princes of Germany
had already freely promised them their aid; and there wanted nothing but only
to send Commanders and Money to conduct and pay the Soldiers. Conditions
offered by Queen Elizabe^h of England to the Hugonots.
But the Queen of England proposed harder and more difficult conditions,
without which she denied to afford them any Succors. For she offered to
embrace the protection of the Confederates, and to send into France an Army of
eight thousand Foot, with a great train of Artillery, at her own charge* and to
maintain it there till the War were fully ended; that at the same time with her
Fleet manned with Landforces she would invade the Coasts of Normandy and
Brittany, to divert and divide the Kings Forces; but upon these terms, That the
Confederates should promise in recompense, to cause Calais to be restored to
her, (a strong place situated upon the narrow Sea in Picardy, held many years
by the Kings of England her Predecessors, and at last recovered by the Duke of
Guise in the Reign of Henry the Second.) But because the Hugonots were not
Masters of that place, she demanded that in the mean time they should consign
to her Havre de Grace, a Fortress and Port of less consequence upon the coast
of Normandy; and that they should receive her Garrisons into Diepe and Rouen.
These conditions seemed to many intolerable, and not to be consented unto
through any necessity whatsoever; knowing the infamy and public hate they
should undergo, if they made themselves instruments to dismember the Kingdom of
such important places, and bring into them the most cruel implacable enemies of
the French Nation. But the Ministers, who in all deliberations were of great
Authority, and in a manner reverenced as Oracles, alleged, that no
consideration was to be had of worldly things, where there was question of the
heavenly Doctrine, and propagation of GOD's Word. Wherefore all other things
were to be contemned, so as Religion might be protected, and Liberty of
Conscience established.

The Prince of Conde and the Admiral being desirous to continue their Commands,
and necessitated by their own private affairs to pursue the enterprise, were of
the same opinion: so that their Authority overcoming all opposition, after many
consultations, it was at last concluded, to satisfy Queen Elizabeth, and by
all means to accept the conditions proposed. To which effect they presently
dispatched Monsieur de Briquemaut, and the new Vidame of Chartres, with Letters
of credit from the Prince and the Confederates to confirm the agreement in
England. Andelot and the Prince of Portian, with such a sum o^ money as they
could get together, went to solicit the levies of the Germans; the Count de la
Roch-foucaut went to Angoulesme; That Montgomery who killed H^n^^ the Second.
the Count de Montgomery retired into Normandy; Monsieur de So^bize to Lions;
the Prince, the Admiral, Genlis, and Bouchavenes, stayed to defend Orleans, and
the places adjacent. But many of the Commissioners for the confederacy which
was treated with England, not being able to endure such dishonorable
conditions, began to forsake them: amongst which, Monsieur de Pienne went over
to the Kings Army, and the Sieur de Morvilliers, chosen by the Prince to be
Governor of Rouen, that he might not be forced to admit an English Garrison
into a Town of such consequence, leaving that charge, retired into Picardy to
his own house.

Whilst by these means the Hugonots endeavored to provide themselves with
Forces, the Catholics designed to make an attempt upon Orleans, as the chief
sourse and seat of all the War. But in regard it was exceedingly well provided
for Defense, and furnished with Munition of all kinds, they knew it was an
enterprise of great difficulty. Wherefore first, to cut off from it the hopes
of succors, they resolved to take in the places round about, that so they
might afterward with more facility straighten it with a siege; or being
deprived of succors* assault it by force. For which purpose they raised their
Camp the 11 of July, and the Duke of Guise leading the Van, and the King of
Navarre the Battalia, whilst every one of both sides expected to see them
settled before Orleans, they leaving that Town on the left hand, and passing
sixteen leagues farther, on a sudden assailed Blois; which though it were full
of people, beautified with one of the noblest Castles for a Kings house in the
whole Kingdom, and situated upon the same side of the River of Loire; yet it
was not so fortified that it could hope to make any long resistance against the
Kings Army Wherefore, after the Soldiers which were in guard saw the Cannon
planted, being terrified with the danger, they passed the River upon the
Bridge, and throwing away their Arms, sought to save themselves by flight:
which though the Duke of Guise knew, who with the Vanguard was nearest to the
wall, yet being more intent to take the Town than to pursue those that ran
away, whilst the Citizens dispatched their Deputies to capitulate, he sent a
party of foot to make an assault; who finding the breach forsaken that was made
by a few Cannon shot, took the place without resistance; which by the fury of
the Soldiers (their Commanders not forbidding them) was miserably sacked.

From Blois the Army marched toward Tours, a much more noble, populous and
ancient City, Blois taken and pillaged by the Kings Army, and Tours the first
Assault.
wherein the name of the Hugonots first took vigor and force: but the people,
who for a few days at the bginning of the Siege made show that they would stand
resolutely upon their defense, when they perceived the Trenches were made, and
the Artillery planted, of their own accord cast out the Commanders, and
rendered the place, saving their goods and persons; which conditions were
entirely observed.

In the mean while, the Mareshal de St. Andre with the Rear of the Army went
another way to besiege Poictiers, a City likewise famous for antiquity, great
and spacious, where the ^atholicks thought they should find a strong
resistance. But it fell out to be a work of much less difficulty than they
imagined. For the Mareshal having battered it two days together with his
Artillery, and made an assault upon the Town, rather to try the resolution of
the Defendants, than with any hope to gain it; the Captain of the Castle, (who
till then had showed himself more violent than any other of the Hugonot party)
suddenly changing his mind, began to play from within with his Cannon upon
those who stood ready to receive the Assault: by which unexpected accident the
Defendants losing their courage, not knowing in such a tumult what way to take
for their safety, as men astonished, left the entry of the breach free to the
Assailants; who not finding any resistance, entered furiously into the Town,
which by the example of Blois, Poictiers taken and sa^kt.
was in the heat of the fight sacked, and many of the peole put to the sword.

The Catholics having thus in a few days taken those Towns which from Poictiou
and Touraine backed and succored Orleans, and stopped the passage for supplies
from Guyenne, Gas^oigne, and other places beyond the River; it remained, that
turning backwards, and passing to the other side, they should take in Bourges;
so to cut off those aids that might come from Auvergne, Lyonoise, and other
Provinces joining to Daulphine. Bourges (anciently called Avaricum) is one of
the greatest and most populous Cities in France; a residence for Students of
all sorts, but especially famous for the Civil Law. This Town being within
twenty leagues of Orleans, and by reason of the Traffic of Wool, as also
through the great concourse of Scholars, much replenished with strangers, was
at the beginning possessed by the Hugonots; and afterward, as an important
passage for the Commerce of those Provinces that being nearest depended upon
it, diligently guarded and fortified; so that now foreseeing a Siege, Monsieur
d' Yvoy Brother to Genlis, was entered thereinto, with two Thousand French
foot, and four Troops of horse, a Garrison both in consideration of it self, and
for the reputation of the Commander, esteemed sufficient to make a long
defense; and indeed with these Forces at the first coming of the Kings Army,
which was the tenth of August, the Defendants showed such fierceness and
confidence, that they not only valiantly defended the Walls, but continually
sallying out night and day, vexed the Camp with hot skirmishes; in one of which
advancing just to the Trenches, though they could not do so much hurt as they
intended, yet they killed five Captains, with many Gentlemen and common
Soldiers; and Monsieur de Randan, General of the Foot, was so grievously
wounded, that notwithstanding the great care that was had of him, he died
within few days after.

In the mean while, the Admiral issuing out of Orleans, overrun all the
Country about with his horse; and having had intelligence of a great quantity
of Artillery and Munition that was going from Paris to the Army, he set upon it
in the night at Chasteaudune, where after a long dispute, having defeated the
Convoy which was of four Companies, he brake the greatest pieces, and burning
the Engines that belonged to them, carried the lesser to Orleans, together with
such Munition as could be saved from the fire and pillage of the Soldiers. But
the Duke of Guise being very intent upon his business at Bourges, after he had
so far advanced the Trenches, that he began to batter the Wall, and with diverse
Mines had thrown down many Bastions that the Hugonots raised to defend the
weakest parts thereof; Monsieur d' Yvoy not answering the opinion that was
conceived of him, began to hearken to propositions of agreement, which were
proposed to him from the Camp. Wherefore the Duke of Nemours being gone with a
safe conduct to treat, Bourges re^dred upon condition.
upon the last day of August he delivered up the Town upon these conditions,
That he and all his that were with him should have a pardon for what was past;
That the Soldiers should be free to go where they pleased; yet with this
Obligation, neither to bear Arms against the King, nor in favor of the
Hugonots; That the City should not be plundered, and the Inhabitants enjoy a
Liberty of Conscience in all points conformable to the Edict of January. Which
Capitulation, though it were afterward performed, Yvoy not being able to bear
the ^ate and ignominious reproaches that were cast upon him by his accusers,
retired himself to his own private house; and St. Remy and Brichanteau, men of
known courage, went over to the Kings service.

In the mean while, matters in the State were drawn into another course
contrary to the former. For the resolution of the Hugonot Lords being known not
only to introduce foreign power into France, to which end they had sent two of
their principal men into Germany, but also to alienate Havre de Grace, and to
put Diepe and Rouen, places of such importance upon the frontiers of the
Kingdom, into the hands of the English, who in all times had been bitter
enemies to the Crown; there was not only a general hate conceived against them,
but the Queen her self, who till then had earnestly endeavored a peace, and
formerly supported that faction as a counter-poize to the Guises, (for she
never believed that they would ever fall into such pernicious deliberations)
now with an incredible hate, and through fear that the English might be brought
in to settle themselves in these places; resolved sincerely to unite her self
with the Catholic party, and to make a War in good earnest upon the Hugonots:
desiring to make it clear to all the World, that she held no intelligence with
them, (contrary to that which was believed at the first) esteeming it a double
loss and a double shame, that the English, who by her husband were victoriously
driven out of Fran^^, should get footing there again during the time of her
Government. Wherefore stirred up with an implacable displeasure against the
Hugonots, being so perplexed in mind that she could find no rest, she
determined with her self, not to interpose any further delays or impediments,
but to endeavor with all her force their final oppression. And for a preamble
to what was to be done, having brought the King solemnly to the Court of
Parliament in Paris, after grievous complaints made by the High Chancellor of
the insolences of those his Subjects, who not content to overrun and spoil
their Country, and to usurp all the Offices and Regal power, had perfidiously
conspired to bring in the English and Germans to the destruction of his
Kingdom, The Heads of the Hugonot Faction are declared Rebels.
caused Gaspar de Coligny late Admiral of France, Francis d' Andelotte, with
Odett de Chastillon, his Brothers, and namely all other notable persons of that
party to be declared Rebels; depriving them of their Charges, Honors,
Nobility, Goods and Revenues, as confiscate to the State. And because the
Hugonots with their riots laying desolate Cities and Provinces, destrowing the
Churches, throwing down Monasteries, and filling all places with rapine and
Blood, were become so outrageous, that it was impossible longer to suffer them;
they were likewise declared public enemies to the King and the Crown; and
authority granted to the people at the ringing of the Toquesaint an allarum
Bell used as the ringing of the bells backwards with us.
Toquesaint to rise up in arms against them, and to kill or take their persons,
and deliver them over to Justice. The Prince of Conde was not at all mentioned;
but, making use of that Art first invented by the Hugonots, it was spread
abroad both by report and in writing, that he was by the violence of the other
Confederates withheld by force, and against his will remained in that Army;
the Rebels making use of the Authority of his Person, though he were in his
heart averse to all their proceedings.

After which businesses, the Queen publicly bewailing her self that the
Hugonots had abused the Clemency which she had showed in supporting them, and
oftentimes in favoring them also; and desiring to make it appear how zealous
she was against them, and by any means to expel foreign Forces out of the
Kingdom, went her self in person with the King to the Army before Bourges;
where she showed a manly courage, in going up and down in the Camp, though very
much anoyed by the Cannon from the Town; and with a singular constancy animated
the Soldiers and Commanders to perform their duties. But Bourges being taken,
and all ways of succors cut off from Orleans, the Catholics intended without
any other delay to besiege it, if the Queen had not proposed, That it was
better first to recover Rouen, being so principal a City, of so large an
extent, and lying so opportunely to invade the bosom of France, before the
English had established themselves there, by making the Fortifications stronger
than they were at the present. The English received by the Hugonots to Havre de
Grace, Diepe, and R^^en.
For the confederacy between the H^gonots and Queen Elizabeth being already
concluded, the English had passed the Sea, and received Havre de Grace into
their possession, and placed Garrisons in Diepe and Rouen.

The opinions in the Kings Council were very diverse. Some thought it most
expedient first of all to make an attempt upon Orleans, and to cut off at one
blow the head of the Hugonot Faction. For the chief of that party being
suppressed, who were in the Town, and the Magazine destroyed, all the rest
would be overcome with ease and facility. But the King of Navarre and the Queen
more intent to cast out the English than any thing else, thought, that Rouen
once taken, and the aids of England cut off from the Hugonots, Orleans would be
more easily reduced, which for the present they thought very difficult, and a
work of much time; by which the English would have the commodity to confirm
their possession, and perhaps make themselves Masters of all the Province of
Normandy, where the Duke of Aumale had so inconsiderable a force* that he was
not able to make head against them. This opinion at last through the Queens
inclination prevailed; and it was resolved without any delay to go upon that
design.

The situation and commodities of Rouen are admirable. For the River Seine,
upon which it stands, rising out of the Mountains in Burgundy, and distending
it self through the plains of the Isle of France, after it joins with the
Matrona, commonly called Marne, and by the confluence of many other little
streams, is made deep and Navigable, passes through the midst of the City of
Paris, and then running with an impetuous torrent quite through Normandy, falls
with an exceeding wide channel into the Ocean; which ebbing and flowing, and
continually filling and feeding the River with salt water, affords spacious
room for Vessels of any burden to ride. On the right hand of the mouth, where
the River at last falls into the Sea, over against England stands Havre de
Grace, a secure large Port, which with modern Fortifications, being reduced
into the form of a Town by King Francis the First, serves for a defense against
the incursions of the English. But in the midway between Havre de Grace and
Paris, near to the place whither the salt waters flow, mingled with the fresh,
about twenty two leagues from the Sea, stands the City of Rouen upon the River,
grown noble, rich, abundant, and populous by the commerce of all Northern
Nations. From one side of the fortress of Havre de Grace upon the right hand, a
tongue of land advancing many miles into the Sea, makes as it were a spacious
Peninsula, which the common people call the Country of Caux, and in the
extremest point and promontory thereof is Diepe, placed The Author is a little
mistaken in his Cosmography; for D^epe stands just over against ^ye.
directly opposite to the mouth of the Thames, a most famous River in England.
These places which lie so fitly to damage France, and to be supplied by their
Fleets, the English had made themselves Masters of. For though at Diepe and at
Rouen French Governors were chosen by the Council of the Confederates; yet the
Garrisons kept there by Queen Elizabeth being very strong, they could so curb
them, that all the rest was absolutely at their dispose.

The Resolution being taken to besiege Rouen, the King and the Queen marching
together with the Army, in fourteen days arrived at Darnetel, at which place
less than two leagues distant from the City, the whole Camp lodged the 25 day
of September. The chief Commanders of the Army, considering that the body of
the City is defended on the one side by the River, beyond which there is
nothing but the Fauxburg S. Sever, and on the other side by S. Catherines
Mount, upon the top of which is placed an ancient Monastery reduced into the
form of a Modern Fortress; they thought it best to make themselves Masters of
the Mount: it appearing very difficult to make any attempt or assault upon the
Town it self, if they did not first gain the Fort without, which flanked and
commanded the entrances on all parts. Upon this deliberation, Sebastien de
Luxemburg Signeur de Martigues made Colonel General of the Foot in the place of
Randan, advanced the night of the 27 of September, and sat down under St.
Catherines Mount, in the great Highway that goes toward Paris; which being
hollow almost like a Trench, covered them in great part from the shot of the
Fort.

The Count of Montgomery who commanded in the Town in chief with 2000 English
and 1200 French Foot, four Troops of Horse, and more than 100 Gentlemen of
quality, besides the Citizens, having foreseen, that the enemy must of
necessity first take the outworks, besides the old fortifications on the top
of the Mount, had raised half way up the Hill a Half Moon of earth; which
having the Fort behind, and fronting upon the campaigne, might not only hinder
the ascent, but also flank the walls of the Town, and force the Catholic Army
to spend much time and lose many men in the taking of it. Nor* was the effect
contrary to what he intended: For though Monsieur de Martigues, leaving the
direct way, and ascending in a crooked line, advanced by help of the spade
between the Fort and the Half Moon to gain the top of the Hill; yet the work
proceeded with much difficulty and great slaughter of the Soldiers; who the
more the Foot advanced with their gabions and trenches, were so much the more
exposed to the Cannon planted upon the Fort, to the annoyance of the Musket
shot, to the fury of the fireworks, and other inventions, with which they
within very resolutely defended themselves. To these main difficulties was
added the quality of the weather, which being in the beginning of Autumn, as it
always falls out in those parts, was very rainy: so as the waters continually
falling from the top of the Hill into that low place where the Army lay, it was
no small inconvenience unto them. Likewise the great Sallies the Hugonots made
night and day were not of little moment: For though they were valiantly
sustained, so that the success thereof was not very doubtful; yet they kept the
whole Army in motion, and in work. Nor were their Horse less diligent than the
Foot in their Trenches; insomuch as many times the Siege was interrupted and
hindered.

Considering these so great impediments, it would have proved a tedious painful
business, if the negligence or arrogance of the defendants had not rendered it
very short and easy. For Iean de Hemery Signeur de Villers, who afterward
married a Sister of Henry Davila's that wrote this History, being upon the
guard in the Trenches with his Regiment, observed, that about noon there was
very little stirring in the Fort, and that they appeared not in such numbers
upon the Ravelins as at other times of the day. Wherefore having sent for a
Norman Soldier called Captain Lewis, who two days before was taken prisoner in
a Sally they made out of the Fort, he asked him as by way of discourse, What
was the reason that at certain hours so few of the Hugonots were to be seen
upon the Rampart? The Soldier not concealing the truth, without looking
farther what the consequence thereof would be, told him that they within had so
little apprehension of the Catholic forces, and despised them in such a
manner, that they used every day, for recreation, and to provide themselves of
necessaries, to go in great companies to the Town; and that through custom and
for convenience, they made choice of that time of the day. By which words
Villers apprehending an opportunity to surprise the Fort, acquainted the Duke
of Guise and the Constable with his design; who not being wanting to so good an
occasion, secretly causing ladders to be provided, commanded, that at the hour
appointed, when they saw least stirring, they should on a sudden assault St.
Catherines Fort, and at the same instant the Half Moon also, so much the more
to divide the enemies forces.

Martigues, whose place it was to have a care of the business, chose the same
Villers to make the assault upon St. Catherines, and St. Coulombe a Colonel of
Foot likewise for the Half Moon; and having without noise put all things in a
readiness, at the time prefixed with a Cannon shot gave the Signal to fall on.
Whereupon Villers with his men instantly running up the steep of the Hill,
fastened his ladders to the Walls, before the enemy could possibly have time to
make use of their Cannon or small shot to keep them off. But yet those within,
though few in number, courageously presenting themselves at the assault, there
became a hot bloody conflict with short weapons, in which as the manner is, the
valiantest falling at the first encounter, the defendants were so weakened,
that they could scarce longer resist. On the contrary, Villers being supplied
with fresh men, and aided by Martigues, began to get the better of the enemy;
and though grievously wounded with a Pike in the face, and a Musket shot in
the left thigh, yet continuing the fight, he at last planted the Kings Flag
upon the Keep of the Castle. Whereupon, two great Squadrons of Foot that were
appointed for a reserve running to his assistance, in a short time they made
themselves Masters of the Fort, The Fort of Rouen taken.
before the Defendants could be succored either by the Town or their
Companions. The same success had the assault made upon the Half Moon, and in as
short a time; but the Catholics gained the Bastion with loss of much blood;
and the Defendants not having means to retreat, died all valiantly, fighting to
the last man.

St. Catherines Mount being taken, there remained still without the Walls, the
Faux-Bourg of St. Hilary, well fortified, and a good Garrison placed in it by
the Hugonots. Against which having planted their Cannon, by reason the works
were of earth, it wrought little effect; notwithstanding the Catholic
Commanders caused a fierce assault to be made upon it; which proving likewise
vain by reason of the strength of the Ramparts, and valor of the Defendants,
at length changing resolution, they planted twelve great pieces in the middle
of St. Catherines Hill: from the advantage of which place they began with great
noise and slaughter to batter the houses and rampires which the enemies had
raised; by the fury whereof the whole Faux-Bourg being in a manner beaten down,
and the Catholics ready to renew the assault, those within having fired the
houses that were left, retired safe into the Town, which was now naked of all
defense but the Walls only. But the Defendants by their frequent sallies, and
diverse assaults made upon them, losing many of their men, the Count of
Montgomery, having recourse to the last remedy, sent to desire succors of the
English at Havre de Grace, though he saw plainly it was a thing of exceeding
great difficulty for them to effect. For the Kings forces having taken
possession of Quilbeuf and Harfleur, two places in the midway between Rouen
and Havre de Grace, upon the River, they placed there diverse pieces of Cannon
to hinder the passage of Ships or other little Barks, which helped by the Flood
that enters there with great force, mount the stream to Rouen. Notwithstanding,
the English, desirous by any means to help their friends, resolved to expose
themselves to the worst of danger; and stealing up the River in the night, in
great part avoided the violence of the Cannon, which being shot at random in
the dark, did them but little hurt. Wherefore by the advice of Bartolomeo
Campi, and Italian Engineer, the Catholics caused diverse Vessels laden with
stones and gravel, and fastened together with chains, to be sunk in the River,
which so stopped and pestred it, that neither the enemies Ships nor Galleys
could pass: only some small Bark drawing but little water, with much ado got
safe into the Town. But this supply being insensible, and Rouen still in
necessity, there appearing no other way possible to succor it, the English
resolved to make their last attempt; and being come in the night with a good
number of Vessels to the bar, though through the fury of the Cannon and
fireworks, part of them perished, and others returned back; yet in one place
the chain being broken, three Galleys and one other Vessel got through, which
carried seven hundred men, munition and money for their present relief.

In the mean while the rains of Autumn still increasing, by reason whereof the
Catholic Army that lay in a low dirty place, suffered very much; yet the
Commanders not disheartened by the little supplies that were conveyed into the
Town, pressing the siege, began to batter from St. Hillaries Gate to the Gate
Martinville; between which advancing with their Trenches, they had pierced the
counterscarp. The second day so much of the Wall was thrown down in the middle
of the Curtain, that the Squadrons might easily march on to the assault; and
already Sarlabous, Villers, and Sancte Coulumbe's Regiments that were to keep
the first front, prepared themselves for the onset; when the King of Navarre,
An^ho^y of Vendo^^ne King of Navarre shot in the shoulder.
being gone into the Trenches to discover how things stood, received a Musket
shot in the left shoulder, which breaking the bone, and tearing the nerves, he
presently fell down upon the place as dead. This accident put off the assault
for that day; for being carried to his own quarter, before they looked to his
hurt, all the other chief Commanders went thither, and being afterward dressed
with great care in presence of the King and Queen, his wound, by reason of the
great orifice the Bullet had made, was judged by the Physicians to be mortal.
So as between that time and the Council which was called thereupon, the day was
so far spent, that the assailants without any farther attempt were sent for
back to guard the Trenches.

Yet this slackned not the siege: For besides the care of the Duke of Guise and
the Constable, who from the beginning had in effect the charge of the Army, the
Queen also assisted her self in person; who by her presence and speeches adding
courage to the Soldiers, caused the battery still to be continued in the same
manner; till with two thousand shot there was such a large breach made, that
they went on in very good order to the assault: which being begun with great
fierceness by the assailants, and received with no less resolution by the
Hugonots, continued with great slaughter on both sides from twelve of the clock
at noon till the evening; the Catholics not being able to make themselves
Masters of the wall. The night after the assault, those of Diepe endeavored to
put succors into the Town: to which purpose the Sieur de Corillan being
advanced into a wood not far off, with four hundred firelocks, he thought by
the benefit of the night to delude the guards, and to steal in at the gate that
answers to the lower part of the River. But being discovered by Monsieur d'
Anville, who with his light horse scoured the fields, he was with little
difficulty defeated and routed, and the Town remained hopeless of any aid.
Wherefore having already so many days sustained such hot skirmishes, and the
violence of the Cannon, and it being therefore known, that they within were
reduced almost to nothing; the twenty sixth of October in the morning about
break of day, the Catholics, Rouen taken by the Catholics, and sacked.
not to lose more time, went very fiercely, but in good order, to make another
assault: which they of the Town, through weariness and weakness, being not able
to withstand; Sancte Coulombe, he that took the Bastion upon the Mount, was the
first with his men that passed the breach, and entered into the City, right
against the Celestines street, though mortally wounded, and falling upon the
place, within three days after he ended his life. At the same time Villers
Regiment forced their passage at another breach; and Sarlabous entered at the
Street of St. Claire, but not without some difficulty, by reason of a barricado
of cask that was made in the way. After these that were the first, entered
furiously the whole Army, and with great slaughter of the Soldiers and
Inhabitants, sacked the Town, in the heat of their anger sparing no persons
whatsoever, but putting all to the Sword both armed and unarmed; only the
Churches and things sacred, by the great diligence and exact care of the
Commanders, were preserved from violence.

The Count of Montgomery, when he saw things in a desparate condition, and the
Town reduced into the power of the enemy; getting into one of the Galleys that
brought the succors, wherein he had before imbarqued his wife and children,
passing down the River through all the Catholics Cannon, saved himself in
Havre de Grace, and from thence without delay passed over the Sea into England.
There saved themselves with him Monsieur de Columbiere, and some few of his
servants; all the rest being left to the discretion of the Conqueror, came to
diverse ends. Captain Iean Crose, who had introduced the English into Havre de
Grace, being fallen into the Kings hands, was as a Rebel, drawn with four
Horses. Mandreville, who from being the Kings Officer, carrying his Majesty's
money with him, becam^ a follower of the English; and Augustine Marlorat, who
from an Augustine Friar, turned to be a Hugonot Minister, were both condemned
to be hanged. Many were slain, and many remained prisoners in the Army, who
afterward redeemed themselves for a ransom.

The City continued forty eight hours at the mercy of the Soldiers; the third
day the King making his entry at the breach together with the Parliament and
the Queen his Mother, who in the heat of the sack sent all her Gentlemen and
the Archers of her guard, to take care that the women which fled into Churches
might not be violated; there was an end of the slaughters and rapines committed
by the Army, which being drawn out of the City, quartered in the neighboring
Villages.

In the mean while, the King of Navarre through the pain of his wound finding
no rest either in body or mind, would by all means imbarque upon the River to
go to St. Maure, a place near Paris, whither by reason of the wholsomness of
the Air, and privacy, he used often for recreation to retire himself; and
nothing prevailing that the Physicians could say to the contrary, he caused
himself to be carried into a boat, accompanied by the Cardinal his Brother, the
Princes de la Roche-sur, and Ludovico Gonzaga, with some few servants, amongst
which some were Catholics, and others Hugonots, and the principal among them
Giovan Vicenzo Lauro, then a Physician, by birth a Calabrian, who was
afterward Bishop and Cardinal. But he was scarce arrived at Andeli, a few
leagues from Rouen, when through the motion of the journey his fever
increasing upon him, The King of Navarre dies.
he began to lose his senses, and in a short time after died.

He was a Prince, as of high birth, so of a noble presence and affable
behavior; and if he had lived in other times, to be remembered amongst the most
famous men of his age. But the sincerity and candor of mind with which he was
endued, and his mild tractable disposition in the distractions of a Civil War,
held him all his lifetime in care and pain, and many times doubtful and
ambiguous in his deliberations. For on the one side, being drawn by the
headlong violent nature of his Brother, and spurred on by the ardour of his
Faction, in which he was the principal person; and on the other side restrained
by his love of justice, and a natural inclination disposed to peace, and averse
from civil broyls; he appeared many times fickle in his resolutions, and of a
wavering judgment. For at the first he was reckoned and persecuted amongst
those that fought to disturb the quiet of the Kingdom; and afterward was seen
head of the contrary Faction, bitterly pursuing those that were up in arms. And
for matters of Religion, sometimes through his Wives persuasion and Beza's
preaching, inclining to the Calvinists party; sometimes through the general
opinion and the Cardinal of Lorain's eloquence, to the Catholic Religion; he
became mistrusted by both parties, and left behind him an uncertain doubtful
report of his belief. Many were of opinion, that being in his heart a
Calvinist, or rather inclining to that which they call the Augustan Confession;
yet nevertheless his vast insatiable Ambition withdrew him from that party,
which, perceiving the Prince his Brother through his high spirit and
resolution, was of much greater reputation amongst them, made him choose rather
to be the first among the Catholics, than the second among the Hugonots. He
died in the two and fortieth year of his age, and in such a time when
experience had made him so wise, as would perhaps have produced effects very
contrary to the common opinion that was conceived of him. He left behind him
his Wife Queen Ieane, with the title and relics of the Kingdom of Navarre, and
only two children, Henry Prince of Bearne then nine years old, and the Princess
Catarine an Infant, who remaining at Pau and Nera^ with their Mother, by whom
they were very carefully brought up, at the same time received deep impressions
of the Hugonot Religion.

Now whilst so much blood was spilt on both sides at Rouen, Andelot with great
pains and diligence raising the aids of the Protestant Princes of Germany, had
gotten together a great company of Horse and Foot; and in the Territories of
Strasbourg being joined with the Prince of Porcien, who brought with him a
Convoy of two hundred Horse of the French Gentry, he considered the best he
could what course was to be taken to join his Forces with the rest of the
Confederates.

The Mareshal of St. Andre being sent upon the Frontiers with thirteen Troops
of Ge^s d' Arms, and two Regiments of Foot to hinder his passage, lay upon the
way which by Rheims and Troy leads directly out of Germany into France: and
Francis of Cleves Duke of Neve^s, who was Governor of Champaign, staid with
all the Forces of the Province between Chaalon and Vitry, to stop the other
passage from Lorain to Paris. But Andelot, considering if he were encountered by
the enemy, he could not long keep his men together for want of money; and if he
prolonged his journey, he should not come soon enough to succor his friends
already reduced to an extreme point of necessity, resolved rather to contend
with the difficulties of the passage, and impediments of the ways, than the
opposition of the enemy. Wherefore to deceive the Catholics, making show to
keep the ordinary way, and having marched so two days, till he came to the
confines of Lorain, he raised his Camp silently in the night, and taking the
way on the left hand, through rough places full of swift and rapid streams,
marched with exceeding diligence out of the great Roads, till he came into
Burgundy; and from thence, notwithstanding the continual rain and dirt which in
that Country is every where very deep, preventing even Fame it self, brought
all his men, though toiled and weary, to Mountargis; where at last he joined
with the Prince of Conde and the Admiral, having led five thousand Foot and
four thousand Horse so many leagues, excepting from the injury of the weather,
safe from all other disasters.

This so powerful and seasonable supply took off in great part the grief and
terror the Hugonots were stricken into for the loss of Rouen. But their hopes
were exceedingly diminished by a defeat given at the same time to the Baron of
Duras; who being a man of great dependences, had raised a great number of men
in Gascoigne and the adjacent Provinces, so as they amounted to five thousand
Horse and Foot; with which force endeavoring to make his passage between the
Catholic Towns to succor his party at Orleans, being set upon in the way by
Monsieur de Monluc, and Monsieur de Bury, who commanded for the King in those
parts; the most of his men were cut off, and he himself with some few Horse
escaped with very much difficulty. The Hugonots in diverse places received many
other, though not great losses; by which misfortunes the reputation of the
Faction every where diminishing, the Prince and the Admiral resolved to
undertake some notable Enterprise, to recover their lost credit; and so much
the rather, because being straightned for money, they knew not how to maintain
their Germans, if they did not feed and pay them by the pillage of the Country.
But what the Enterprise should be, they agreed not between themselves. For the
Prince, measuring all things by the greatness of his own thoughts, had a mind
on a sudden to assault Paris; persuading himself, that in such a multitude of
people, there must needs be many favorers of the Hugonots party, and many
others inclined to his name; who when an opportunity was offered, would
presently show themselves. He believed farther, and sought to persuade, that
the Kings Army, being employed in Normandy, could not come soon enough to aid
that City; by the invasion and taking whereof, they should not only get great
store of provisions of Arms, Munition, and Artillery, of which they began to be
in no little want; but also have it in their power, with the contributions of
so rich and numerous a people, to furnish themselves abundantly with money; by
means whereof, they should both gain a great reputation, and an exceeding
advantage over the contrary Faction.

The Ministers adhered to this opinion, through the bitter hate they bare to
the Parisians, ever constant reverencers of the Catholic Religion, and
implacable enemies to their preachings. But the Admiral Andelot, and the more
experienced Soldiers, esteeming the enterprise rather impossible than
difficult, dissuaded them from it; alleging, that the Mareshal of Brissac, the
new Governor, had cast out all those who were suspected to depend on their
party; wherefore there was no reason to hope for any motion among that people,
so united together for the preservation of the Catholic Faith; and that the
Kings Army, having had good success at the siege of Rouen, and secured
Normandy, would have time sufficient to aid that City, from which it was but
eight and twenty leagues distant; whereas they on the other side were to pass
four and thirty leagues, through places infested with the enemy, which would
very much retard the expedition of their march; And what Artillery, what
provisions for War had they, wherewith they designed to assail Paris? a City of
so vast an extent, and by nature so replenished with people, who through custom
were ever armed, having but four pieces of Battery, and very little quantity of
munition? How should they draw on their Army to an Enterprise which would prove
of such length, not only without money, but also without means to sustain and
nourish their men? That it would be better to recover the places near about
Orleans, and open the way for provisions and supplies, nourishing the Army with
the pillage that was near at hand and secure, than to hazard themselves upon an
attempt that would infallibly prove vain. But these reasons took no effect: for
the Prince, persuaded by his own will, and the consent of the major part of his
adherents, resolved to venture all upon this Enterprise. Wherefore the Army
being mustered together, and such provision of victuals made as the present
necessity would permit, it moved without further delays that way.

In the mean while, after the taking of Rouen, the Town of Diepe, having cast
out the English Garrison, rendered it self to the King: the same did Caen and
Talaise, Towns in the lower Normandy, which largely extends it self upon the
coasts of the Ocean beyond the banks of the River; nor was there any place that
remained in the power of the enemies, save only Havre de Grace, which the Queen
had resolved to set upon with the whole Army, that so they might be absolutely
freed from the fear of the English. But news being come of the arrival of the
Germans, and that the Prince with great preparations moved with the Camp
through Beausse, (so they call that Country which lies between Orleans and the
Isle of France) the Queen with the Duke of Guise and the Constable, in whose
hands remained the power of the Government, resolved, putting off the Siege of
Havre de Grace, to bend their course to meet with the Hugonots Army. Wherefore
having left Monsieur de Villebon Governor of Rouen, and the Rhynegrave with
his Horse to secure the Country of Caux, and hinder the English from making
in-roads into the Country, the King and the Queen, with all the remainder of
the Army, marched along the Seine toward Paris.

The Prince of Conde going to besiege Pa^is, amuseth himself before Corbeil, by
which means he fails of his principal design.
The Prince marching very close through the Enemies Country, took without much
difficulty Piviers, Monthery and Dordane; and having given the pillage thereof
to his Army, went on with all possible expeditions to Paris. But Corbeil, a
little inconsiderable Town upon the River of Seine, interrupted his journey:
For four Companies of French Foot being, contrary to the Princes expectation,
entered thereinto, it made such a resolute defense, as held his army play many
days to no purpose, being through anger rather than mature deliberation,
obstinately bent whatever happened to take it. But the Mareshal of St. Andre
following Andelot, though at a distance, with an intent to get into Paris,
having by another way gotten before him, he was constrained to raise the siege
with loss of time and credit, besides the total ruin of the principal design;
which depended wholly upon expedition. For having spent many days there in
vain, the Catholic Commanders in the mean while discovering his intent, had
with the King and Queen in person brought the whole Army unto the Walls of
Paris; and with much ease and commodity fortified the Suburbs, and distributed
their men in very good order to their several quarters. The Prince lodged the
twenty third day of November at La Saussayea Nunnery, who in that terror had
abandoned it; and the twenty fourth day at Ville-Iuif, two leagues from the
Suburbs of Paris. But the twenty fifth day in the morning, though much fallen
from their hopes, yet resolved to try their fortune, the Army being put in a
readiness, advanced to assault the Faux-Bourg of St. Victor. This attempt at
the first seemed very successful. Six hundred light Horse that were sent out to
skirmish and discover the proceeding of the enemy, when they saw all the Army
come resolutely toward them, ran away in such a headlong manner, that many
doubted they fled rather through treachery than fear. With which unexpected
tumult the Foot being disordered who guarded the Ramparts of the Faux-Bourg,
they began already to think of retiring themselves into the City; and the
people full of terror and confusion cried out to shut the Gates, and abandon
the Suburbs. But the Duke of Guise coming thereupon, so settled all things with
his presence, that there was no more to be feared for the present, or the
future. In this occasion Philip Strozzi issuing out with 1200 Foot to back the
Horse, gave a notable testimony of his valor; for being abandoned by his men,
and finding himself engaged in the midst of the Hugonots Army, he retired under
the ruins of a broken Windmill, being a place, by reason of the height, of
some advantage, and there so resolutely defended himself, that it was not
possible by all they could do, to drive him from thence; but he alone made it
good against a multitude of the enemies that used their utmost endeavors to
take that Post. The Prince nevertheless, not amusing himself therewith, but
encouraged with the success of their first encounter, fiercely assailed the
Faux-Bourgs in diverse places; and for the space of two hours that the fight
endured, not only the Art and Discipline of the Captain appeared, but also the
readiness and courage of the Soldiers; notwithstanding, finding every where a
gallant resistance, and the Cannon upon the Ramparts continually beating and
galling upon his flank, he was constrained to draw off the Army for that time
from the Walls, that he might have day enough to take up convenient Quarters.
The weather was rainy, and the season cold; wherefore the Soldiers, not being
able to lie abroad, the Army being divided into four parts, Monsieur de Muy and
the Prince of Porcien lodged at Gentilly, Genlis at Monteriau, the Prince and
the Admiral at Areveil, and Andelot with the Germans at Cachan. There making
many fires on high, and a great number of Cannon shot, they endeavored to
strike a terror into the people, In Paris were 800000 Inhabitants; yet during
the Siege neither the Lecturers nor the Lawyers discontinued their Lectures o^
Audie^^es.
which might stir up some commotion in the Town; and yet notwithstanding, the
City which is inhabited, as the report goes, by 800000 persons, from the
beginning of those disorders to the last, remained in such quiet, that the
Professors in the University never discontinued their Lectures, nor the Judges
forbore to sit in the Courts of Justice.

The third day the Prince, having put his men in order, advanced into the
middle of a plain, inviting the Catholic Army to a Battle. But in stead of
fighting, the Queen, desirous of a peace, to rid the Kingdom of foreign forces,
or else by a Treaty of Accommodation to slacken the first heat of the Hugonots,
to whom she knew nothing was so pernicious as delays, sent first Monsieur de
Gonnor, and afterward Rambouillette, and the Bishop of Valence, to treat with
the Prince of an Agreement; which in a few days advanced so far, that first the
Constable, and afterward the Queen her self coming to a parley with him, it
was hoped a peace would follow; such large reasonable Conditions being proposed
on the Catholic party, that the Hugonots themselves knew not how to refuse
them.

But the Prince and the Admiral, not knowing how to take off their minds from
the hopes of rule and domination of France, and the Ministers never ceasing to
demand liberty and security; they could not agree upon any reasonable
Conditions that were offered unto them; and the manifest desire that they saw
in their adversaries to obtain a peace, as a sign of weakness, increased the
ardour and obstinacy of the ignorant. Whereupon the Treaty having continued
till the seventh of December, and the Hugonots not being able for want of money
or means to nourish their Army to continue still in the same Quarters, the
Treaty being absolutely broken, they resolved (to go off with the best
reputation they could) the night following to assault with four thousand men
the Faux-Bourgs of St. Germain, guarded by the Regiments of Champagni^ and
Picardy, which were counted not so good men as the rest, and being far on the
other side from the enemy, not so carefully guarded. But advice thereof was
given to the Duke of Guise, who thinking to assault the assailants in the
flank, caused all the Cavalry to stand armed and in readiness from the
beginning of the night till next morning; and in the mean while with great
diligence visiting the guards, kept the Foot awake, and under their Arms. Yet
there was no need thereof; for the assailants, partly through the great compass
they were to make, that they might not be discovered, partly through the
darkness of the night, which is always full of errors, so spent the time, that
they came not before the Faux-Bourg till break of day. By reason whereof,
finding, besides, that the Catholics were ready courageously to receive the
assault, they retired for that day, without making any trial of their fortune.

The night following they had the like design upon the Faux-Bourg of St.
Mar^eau: but that was hindered by the deliberation of Genlis, who either
perceiving, as he said himself, the wicked intentions of the chief of the
Hugonots, or else offended as others said, that the Prince made but little
account of him and his Brother after the rendering of Bourges, went over the
same night with all his men into the City: by which accident, the Hugonots
being very much troubled, and believing for certain, that he who was present at
the deliberation had discovered the plot, they not only feared that their
design upon St. Marceau would prove vain, but also that it might produce some
sinister event. Wherefore they resolved, the same night to raise the Camp. To
which purpose, whilst the Catholics in readiness expected the assault, and the
Duke of Guise thought on a sudden to fall upon one of their Quarters; they
being risen in great silence without any noise either of Drum or Trumpet, first
the carriages marched away toward Beausse, after which many hours before day
followed the Germans; and la^^ly, the Prince and the Admiral, having fired
Arcueil and Cachan where they lay, and many other neighboring Villages,
departed in great haste as soon as the light began to appear; taking the same
way with the rest of the Army, not upon any certain design, but only with the
best commodity they could to get food for their men.

In the mean while, the Catholic Army was exceedingly increased. For whilst
the time was artificially delayed in the Treaty, the Infantry of Gascoigne led
by Monsieur de S^nsac arrived by the way of Mance: and the King of Spain,
desirous also to have the Hugonots suppressed, had sent the King a supply of
three thousand Spanish Foot. So that, not to keep such a great Force idle
within the Walls of the City, the Kings Army the day after moved the same way
that the Hugonots had taken; the Constable commanding as General, but with the
authority and assistance of the Duke of Guise; and the King with the
Queen Mother resolved to remain together at Paris.

The Hugonots, having three days after taken and pillaged the Castle of St.
Arnoul, were uncertain what resolution to take. For long to maintain the Army
was altogether impossible, through the want of money; having no revenue but
their rapines, and for the insatiable importunity of the Germans, who never
ceased begging or demanding their pay; and to meet the enemy, and give him
Battle, being much inferior in Foot, Artillery and other Provisions, appeared
too rash and desparate a resolution. The Prince was of opinion, since the chief
of the Catholics with the whole Army had left Paris, and followed him into
Beausse, to return thither with the same expedition that he departed; hoping he
might enter the City upon a sudden, and seize upon the persons of the King and
the Queen Mother, before they could recover any succors from the Army. But
this Proposition being made in their Council, was rejected by all the rest;
considering the enemy would follow them so close, that he would come upon them
either whilst they were making the assault, or else (supposing their design
succeeded) whilst they were sacking the City; in either of which cases their
Army would be manifestly ruined.

At the last, after many discourses, the Admirals opinion was approved of; who
advised, That they should depart as secretly as they could with all the Army
into Normandy. For if the Catholics followed them not, they might make a prey
of that so fertile and rich a Province, where they should have commodity to
raise Moneys and recruit their Forces; and if they did follow him,
notwithstanding they should have such a great advantage, that if they marched
with any expedition, they might arrive at Havre de Grace before they could be
overtaken; and there being joined with six thousand English, provided with
twenty pieces of Cannon, store of Munition, and fifteen thousand Ducats, which
Queen Elizabeth, according to the Articles of Agreement, sent to their aid;
they might with such an addition of strength, either hazard a Battle, or
continue the War with such counsels as should then be thought most expedient.
With this determination, having all their unnecessary carriages and horses in
the Castles of Beausse, they marched away out of the Territories of Chartres
the 14 day of December, in the close of the evening, to get clear of the Enemy
before he should be advertised of their departure; and so with great diligence
took the way of Normandy.

The Catholics knew not of the Princes rising till the day after; and to have
certain intelligence how they bent their course, staid till the evening of the
16 in the same place; so as the Hugonots got in a manner three days march
before them. But passing through places full of Rivers and other impediments,
in the worst season of the year, they were necessitated to lose much time;
whereas the Catholics taking the way over the Bridges through the Towns which
all held for their party, made a more easy and expedite journey. The Admiral
with the Germans led the Van, that they might be provided with the most
convenient Quarters, and to feed and content them with the pillage of the
Country; having nothing else to satisfy their wonted complaints and frequent
mutinies. The Prince followed with all the Infantry in the Battle. The Count de
Roch-fou-cault and the Prince of Porcieu, with the greatest part of the French
Cavalry, brought up the Rear: and so the Army was disposed with the best advice
that could be. For the Germans preying upon the paisants that were yet
untoucht, more easily supported the want of pay; and the French Cavalry
marching behind all the rest, were more ready to sustain the charge of the
Catholics if they should be overtaken. But the Prince passing near Dreux,
entered into hope by some means or other to possess himself of it: and
therefore confounding the Orders that were given, without making the Admiral
acquainted with the design, hastened his march with such diligence, that his
Battle was become the Van; the Rear of Horse, that followed with the same
Expedition, was placed in the middle; and the Germans being left behind,
contrary to the Order given, made the Rear. In the mean while the Enterprise of
Dreux proving vain, the Admiral grievously offended at this lightness, thought
it best to stay a day in the place where he was, that the Army might recover
the Order it was in before. Which delay having given time to the Catholics to
overtake them, brought by consequence both Armies into a manifest necessity of
fighting a Battle.

Dreux is twenty six leagues distant from Paris, situated upon the confines of
Normandy, joining to those Plains which were anciently called the Plains of the
Druids; and on the one side of it runs a little River, which being Foordable in
all places, is by those of the Country commonly called Eure. This River the
Hugonots had passed the nineteenth, and being lodged in the Villages adjoining,
expected to continue their march the morning after with like haste as before.
But the Catholics Army following them without staying any where, and a shorter
way, arrived the same night at the River, and lodged in the houses thereabouts;
so that there was nothing between both the Armies but the current of the water.
Yet by reason of the Shrubs and many Trees that grew upon the banks, they could
not see one another, though they were so near. It is most certain, that the
Prince, who lodged next the River, lay there with such negligence, Negligence
the ordinary defect of the Hugonots.
(a fault which has ever proved fatal to the Hugonots) that without placing
the wonted Guards, or sending out Scouts* or any other care whatsoever, he took
his rest all night, and knew not of the Catholics coming till next morning
very late. But the Constable quite contrary, being a practiced, experienced
Captain, very well knowing the advantage he had, and making use of the Enemies
carelessness, passed all his Army over the River the same night by Moonlight,
without any obstacle or impediment; and going on a league forwarder upon the
place where the enemies were lodged, possessed the way by which, following their
design, they were of necessity to pass. There, between two little Villages, the
one called Spinal, the other Blainville, which stood by side the great Road, he
placed his men with great commodity and no less silence.

The Army was divided into two parts; the first the Constable led, the other
the Duke of Guise; but they disposed their Squadrons in such a manner, that in
the Right-wing of the Constables were the Swisses flanckt by the Regiments of
Firelocks of Brittany and Picardy; and in the Left-wing of the Duke of Guise,
the Germans flanckt with the Gascon and Spanish Infantry; and both the Wings
closed and sheltred with the houses of the Villages, having Spinal on the
right, and Blainville on the left hand; and besides the defense of the houses,
they placed their Carriages and Artillery on each side; for the enemy being
stronger in Horse, they doubted to be compassed in, and charged in the flanck.
The main body of Cavalry being divided into little Troops of Lances, that they
might use them the more conveniently, and were placed between the Squadrons of
Foot; which in a manner flanckt and covered them; and only the light Horse
taking their station out of the Battalions, were drawn up at the point of the
Right-wing where the Champagn began to open it self, and with a large front
possessed the pass of the great Road. But the Duke of Guises Battalion, which
was in the Left-wing, though it was nearest to the enemy, yet was it so covered
with a number of Trees that it had in flanck, and the houses of Blainville,
that it could hardly be perceived by the Hugonots: and on the contrary, the
Constable having his light Horse ranged upon the Champagn was easy to be
discerned afar off; and by the largeness of their Front, might well be taken
for the whole body of the Army.

The day being come, and the Admiral, who was farthest from the River,
beginning according to the order given to march; on a sudden the Constables
Squadrons appeared; and being assured by his Scouts, that they were the
Catholics, exclaiming against the negligence of his Officers, he turned about,
saying aloud to them that were next him, The time is now come that we must no
longer trust to our feet, as we have done hitherto; but like Soldiers, rely
upon the strength of our hands: and having sent word to the Prince, that the
enemy was arrived, he caused his Division to make a halt, that the rest of the
Army might draw up to join in a Body upon the Champagn. The Prince, though he
were advised by many to turn to the left hand, to recover a Village thereby,
that he might either prolong, or else wholly avoid the necessity of fighting;
yet the nearness of the enemy inciting his natural fierceness, he resolved
rather to make a day of it without advantage in the open field, than to be
afterward forced to disband the Army without making trial of his fortune. So
hastening his march, he joined with the Van in the middle of the plain; and
having with great diligence put his men in order, continued on his way, with an
intention not to provoke the Catholics, and to pursue his journey; but if he
were provoked by them, not to refuse the Battle.

The Hugonots marching in this manner, and not having discovered the Squadrons
of the Duke of Guise, (who causing his Foot to set one knee to the ground, and
his Horse to retire into the Street of the Village, stood as it were in ambush)
passed on without perceiving they left a part of the Enemies force behind them,
and came up to the place where the Constables Battalia was drawn up: who
perceiving the great advantage he had, (for the Duke of Guise fetching a little
compass about, (they having inconsiderately engaged themselves) might set upon
them in the Rear) commanded the signal to be given to the Battle with fourteen
pieces of Cannon that were placed on the outside of the left Wing. Whereupon
the Prince, though his light Horse were somewhat disordered, therewith putting
himself in the head of his Division, led them on with great animosity to
assault the Battalion of the Swisses, which in a manner fronted him. The first
that fell in upon them were Monsieur de Muy, and Monsieur de Avaray with their
Horse; then the Prince charging himself, and by his example the Baron of
Liancourt, the Count de Saul, Monsieur de Duras, and the other Captains de
Gens d' Arms, the whole force of that Battalia was turned upon the Swisses:
some charging them in the Front, others in the Flank, with all the earnestness
and violence that might be; believing, that if they were routed, the victory
would infallibly incline to their side.

But the Swisses, charged and compassed in on every side by such a number of
enemies, valiantly charging their pikes, received the shock of the Cavalry with
such a courage, that though diverse of their pikes were broken, and many of them
trodden under foot by the Horses; yet they stood firm in their order, repulsing
and abating with exceeding great slaughter the fury of the enemy.

At the same time the Count de la Roch-fou-cault and the Prince of Porcien, who
brought up the Rear, entering fiercely into the Battle, first fell in upon the
light Horse, which made but weak resistance, and afterward upon the Regiments
of Picardy and Brittany that flankt the Swisses on that side; and the
Firelocks being broken and routed, they likewise assaulted the same Squadron
in the Rear; where though the danger and loss of blood were great, yet they
found a resolute and hard encounter. For the Swisses standing in a close order,
made a Front every way, and bravely resisted on all sides; so that two Terti^'s
of the Hugonots Army were fruitlesly employed in the same place, being
obstinate to break the Battalia of the Swisses, to whom (if they had been
abandoned by all the rest of the Army) they must either voluntarily have
yielded, or at least retired with much loss.

But the Admiral, who led the Van with better conduct and more advantage, had
in the mean while charged the Constables Cavalry, and having in the first
encounter killed his Son Gabriel de Momorancy, The Battle of Dreux.
Sieur de Monbrun, and laid upon the ground the Count de Rocheforte, who
likewise remained there dead; (though on all parts it were valiantly fought)
yet he began to make the Catholics yield ground; and thereupon the German
Horse coming up in two great Squadrons, armed with pistols, with a new and
furious assault mingled themselves in the conflict, and absolutely disordered
the whole Battalion of the Catholics; so that being defeated and routed, they
manifestly ran away. There the Constable fighting valiantly, and seeking to
keep his men from flight, being compassed in by the multitude of the Germans,
(who if they can once find a breach open, The Constable taken prisoner, and his
Son with many others killed.
easily overthrow any body of men) his Horse falling under him, and being
wounded in the left arm, was at length taken prisoner. The Duke of Nevers,
Monsieur de Givry, and many other Gentlemen and Cavaliers being fallen dead by
his side.

The Duke of Aumale and Monsieur d' Anville were near the Constables Battalion
with two Squadrons of Lances; who moving to succor that party which they saw
already began to yield, came boldly on to rush into the fight: but those that
were chased by the Admiral and the Germans fled in such haste, that
overrunning their own men, they disordered the Duke of Aumale's Squadron; who
being thrown down, and his Horse falling upon him, was maimed on the left Leg;
and Monsieur d' Anville retiring out of the tumult of the run-aways, to avoid
(seeing nothing was to be done) the like encounter, was constrained to return
back to the same place from whence he came. So all the Constables Cavalry being
routed, and the French Foot that were with him defeated; The Constables
Division being broken, ^he Swisses only with exceeding gallantry sustain the
fight.
only the Swisses, beset on all sides, but standing firm in a close order and
doubled Battalia, having beaten back and destroyed the German Foot, who were so
bold as to assault them, though they had lost their Colonel and the most of
their Captains, made still a very obstinate resistance; and the report is most
certain, that the valiant resolution, even of the meanest Soldiers of that
Nation, was such that day, that many of them, when their pikes were broken, and
their swords lost, fought resolutely with stones.

But the Duke of Guise, when he saw the left Wing wholly routed, and knew the
Constable was taken prisoner; there being now no danger to be overrun by the
fugitives who ran away scattered in the Champagn, and perceiving the enemy was
disordered and wearied with the fight, gave the signal to his Squadrons to
move; and putting on his Arms, in few words encouraged his men, showing them,
that they had a great advantage to fight with an enemy already wearied out and
scattered, who because they had routed the Constables Cavalry, thought
themselves secure of the Victory. He had the Spanish foot on the right hand,
and the Gascons on the left; which bending on the form of an half Moon, covered
his Horse, that for the more security were placed in the middle; and about an
hundred paces before all the rest, marched the forlorn hope of Foot, led by
Monsieur de Villers, the same that took St. Katherines Fort at the siege of
Rouen: which being resolute old Soldiers, were placed there to sustain the
first shock of the enemy. In this order, but composedly and quietly, with their
Squadrons closed together, he marched with great fierceness to the Battle, and
being in the head of his Cavalry, seemed to make but little account of the
victorious Army of the Enemy.

On the other side, the Prince and the Admiral, not perceiving that they had
left the Catholic Van behind them, and believing they had gained an entire
Victory; when they saw such a great force come upon them, rallying their men,
and joining again with the Reiters, (who when they found they could not break
the Battalia of the Swisses, were in pursuit of the Enemy) came separately to
the Front; but with a diverse event, and diverse resolution. The Prince seeing
the Forlorn hope in his way, which, despising all danger, set upon him, filling
every place with death and confusion; and the Gascoigne Musketeers, which
entered courageously into the fight, playing upon him in the flank, before he
could bring up his men to charge the Horse, was so shaken and disordered, that
his Division was with much ease dissolved and overthrown, and himself,
environed by Monsieur d' Anville, The Prince of Conde thinking he had won the
Battle, being charged a^resh by the Duke of Guise* is taken prisoner.
(who through grief of his Fathers imprisonment, fought desparately) being
wounded in the right hand, and all covered with sweat and blood, finally
remained prisoner. On the other side, the Admiral, seeing the fierceness with
which the Spanish Foot, pouring out their small shot, came to charge him in the
flank; and that at the same time the Mareshal de S. Andre with diverse companies
of Lances which were yet fresh and entire, began to move toward him; and
finding his men and horses through weariness could scarcely be kept in order,
he went not up to the Front of the Battalia, but wheeling about, and
skirmishing lightly, endeavored to rally his men which were scattered in the
field, watching an opportunity to retreat in the best order and with the most
reputation that he could. Notwithstanding, making diverse charges, and fighting
continually with his Pistols, he sustained a long time the fury of the enemy;
especially, after that the Mareshal, being mortally wounded, left the field.
But at last, being charged by the Duke of Guise, who after the Prince was
taken, advanced with diverse Troops of his Gens d'Arms, to environ him; and the
Foot arriving on all sides, The Hugonot^ lose ^he day
that with their shot destroyed his horses; all hope of rallying his men being
lost, he resolved to save himself in time; and getting as many of his men
together as the enemies pursuit would permit, in great haste made toward the
woods; and without staying or taking breath, with his horses tired and men
wearied, in the close of the evening came to Neufville.

At the beginning of the disorder Andelot was retired to the same place; who by
reason of a quartan Ague, being unable to endure the fight, having gotten to an
eminent place, when he saw the Duke of Guise's Troops move, after, as he
thought, the Kings Army was utterly defeated; he asked what men those were? and
answer being made, that they were the Duke of Guise's, which had not yet
fought: he said many times, that this tail was impossible to be flayed; and
setting spurs to his horse, thought to secure himself without expecting the
issue of the Battle. Both the Brothers then being come to Neufville, they
endeavored to get together those relics of the Army that had escaped the
Enemy; which following the example of the Commanders, came scattering in. So
the night coming on, through the darkness whereof they could not be pursued,
the Prince of Porcien, the Count de la Roch-fou-cault, and the Germans, who led
the Constable Prisoner, all met in the same place; where, with a great applause
of every one, the Admiral was declared General of the Hugonots Army. Who, The
Admiral made General of the Hugonots.
not to expose himself to the inconveniences of the night, stayed there till
next morning break of day; when having put those few men that were left in
order, he marched with great diligence toward Orleans, seeing the passage to
Havre de Grace was already possessed and cut off by the Enemy, who lodged just
in the middle of the great Road.

The Duke of Guise remaining Master of the Field, together with all the Enemies
Artillery and Carriages, The two bitter enemies Conde and Guise sup and lie
together in the same bed.
and having received the French Infantry to mercy, which after a little
resistance yielded themselves at discretion; being overtaken by the night,
lodged very inconveniently upon the place at Blainville; whither the Prince of
Conde being brought to him, it is very remarkable, that those two Princes,
formerly and in the present Battle such mortal enemies, reconciled by the
variety of fortune, supped together at the same table, and for want of
carriages, and through streightness of lodging, lay together all night in the
same bed. For the Duke of Guise using his Victory modestly, receiving the
Prince with all demonstrations of honor, offered him part of his. In which the
patience of the Conquered in the desparate estate of his present defeat, was no
less considerable than the modesty of the Conqueror i^ the prosperity of his
Victory.

The first news that came to Paris, was of the defeat and imprisonment of the
Constable, brought by those that ran away at the beginning of the Battle; which
filled the Court with great sadness and infinite fear: but a few hours after
arrived there Monsieur de Loss, Captain of the Kings Guard, dispatched by the
Duke of Guise; who bringing such a contrary relation, with the assurance of a
Victory, dissipated their grief for particular losses, in which the greatest
part of the Kingdom had a share: for besides many Lords and Cavaliers of great
esteem and reputation, there were slain on both sides 8000 persons.

Various were the opinions and discourses of men concerning this Battle: for
many accused the negligence of the Prince of Conde, when having the Enemy so
near, he believed he was still far off; which necessitated him to fight against
his will: Many blamed the haste they saw in the Admiral to retire; believing
that if he had vigorously charged them when the Mareshal de S. Andre was
killed, he would have routed and defeated that part of the Catholic Horse, and
put his party in a condition to recover again their loss. And on the other
side, there wanted not those, who making a sinister interpretation of the Duke
of Guises proceedings, were of opinion, that he might at the beginning, coming
behind the Enemy, have rendered the Victory more easy and more secure, without
expecting first the disaster of the Constable, and the slaughter of the Horse
and Foot; but that being desirous of the Constables ruin, and to remain sole
Arbitrator of the Catholic Faction, he had craftily suffered the Enemy to rout
the right Wing, on purpose to assume all the glory and command to himself. To
which notwithstanding, he and his partisans made answer, That he moved not at
the beginning, first to let the Enemies pass, and then to avoid the blind fury
of them that ran away, by which he might have been disordered, as were the Duke
of Aumale and the Constables Son himself; but that he had patiently expected an
opportunity to accomplish the Victory with security; which by an inconsiderate
haste would have proved uncertain and dangerous. Howsoever it were, it is
certain, that as the Duke of Guise gained all the glory of the day; so the
reputation of the Hugonots, rather by accident than any real loss, was in great
part diminished. The Duke remained in the same place three days after; as well
to put in order and refresh the Army, as to provide for the wounded men, The
Duke of Guise made General of the Kings Forces.
and the burial of his dead: and being by the King and Queen declared General
of all the Forces, of which charge he took possession with the Victory, not to
give the Enemy time to recover himself, directed his course toward Orleans.

In the mean while, the Admiral with a great part of his Forces, and
particularly the German Horse, which received but little hurt in the Battle,
was returned into Beausse; where granting a Warlike liberty to gain and assure
the affections of the Soldiers, he at last brought them to Beaugency, to take
such resolution as was most expedient for the present necessity. There a
Council being called of all the French Lords and German Commanders, it was
disputed with great variety of opinions, what in that change of fortune was
fittest to be done. It was not to be doubted, but the Duke of Guise pursuing
his Victory, would come directly to besiege Orleans, which in the bowels of
France was the chief seat and foundation of the War. Wherefore it was expedient
to think how to defend that City, and also to provide for it in time a fitting
supply: which being very hard to be done, by reason many already wavered in
their affections, and the fortune and reputation of the Hugonots declined in
all parts of the Kingdom; the two Brothers of Coligny boldly took upon them the
charge of taking care for both. For Andelot profferred himself, with the German
Foot, and part of the French Horse, to defend Orleans; and the Admiral, laying
before the Reiters (so they call the German Horse) the booty and riches of
Normandy with the near succors of England, persuaded them to follow him into
that Province; where whilst the Duke of Guise was in person employed in such a
difficult siege, they might have opportunity to join with the English, receive
the moneys sent by Queen Elizabeth, and bring all their succors together: with
which forming a great body of an Army, they should be able afterward time
enough to succor and relieve the besieged.

With these counsels the heads of the Hugonots directed their Actions. 1563.
But the Duke of Guise, not to lose by delays the fruits of his Victory, at the
beginning of the year put all things in readiness to besiege Orleans; having
sent for the great Cannon from Paris, with all other provisions necessary for
so great a work: at which siege, as well to hasten the issue thereof, as not to
trust wholly to any one person, the Queen resolved to be present; and having
past over with exceeding patience the sharpest and most incommodious season of
the year, came with the King to Chartres; and staying there some few days, at
the last arrived at the Army, lodging with much incommodity at the adjacent
Villages. At the coming of the Kings Army, Piviers, Estampes, and all the other
places thereabouts were already rendered: after the taking of which, the Duke of
Guise, having gotten all his men together, drew toward the Town the fifth day
of February, and encamped between the Faux-bourg d'Olivette, and the Town of S.
Aubin; a convenient Quarter, and being placed upon the River of Loire,
abounding with provisions. There were in Orleans, besides Andelot, who
commanded all the rest, Monsieur de St. Cyr, Governor of the City, the Sieurs
d' Avaret, Duras, and Bouchavenes, fourteen Companies of Foot, partly Germans,
and partly Gascons, and five Troops of French Horse, consisting for the most
part of old experienced Soldiers: and besides these, the Citizens, refusing
neither labor nor danger for the defense of their Town, being divided into
four Squadrons, with wonderful readiness hazarding themselves upon all services.

Orleans is divided, though not equally, by the River of Loire; for on one side
stands the whole body of the City, and on the other lies only a great
Faux-bourg vulgarly called the Portereau. The Portereau is joined to the City
with a fair Bridge, at the entrance whereof toward the Faux-bourg are two
Forts, called the Towrelles, which hinder and shut the entry of the Bridge; at
the other end whereof is the Gate of the City strengthened with good Walls, but
without any Rampart, defended with a high square Tower built after the ancient
fashion, of a great thickness. The Walls of the City were in themselves of
little strength; but the Defendants had repaired and made them more defensible.
Amongst other things, they fortified also the Portereau, raising two great
Bastions before it, which might entertain and keep off the Enemy for a time
from the Town: the one being right against the place where the Catholics
encamped, was guarded by four Companies of the Gascons; and the other which was
farther off, was kept by two Companies of the Germans. The Siege of Orleans
sustained by Andelot with the relics of the Hugonot Army.
The Duke of Guise upon very good reasons thought it best to begin the Siege on
that side. First, that his men being conveniently lodged, might the better
support the incommodities of Winter; then, because, esteeming it an easy
matter to take the works of the Portereau, he designed to make use of the
commodity of the River to assail and batter the Walls of the City with a great
number of Barks covered with Gabions, and full of other Warlike Instruments,
which would in wonderful manner facilitate the assault. Besides on that side
those within had neither Rampart of Earth within the Wall, nor any allarum
place capable to receive a body of men. Wherefore the next morning the whole
Army advanced in very good order within sight of the Town; Monsieur de
Sippierre leading on the first Divisions of the Catholics with six hundred
Horse, and two Regiments of Foot, with which force he easily beat back again
into the Faux-bourg those who to show their courage sallied out to skirmish.
Whereupon his men being heartned with such good success at the beginning, he
caused a furious assault to be given to the Bulwark guarded by the Gascoigns;
at which the Duke of Guise coming in, and making show to draw all the forces of
his Army to that place, at the same time sent Sansac's Regiment to surprise by
Scalado the other held by the Germans; who being amazed with the suddenness
thereof, made so little resistance, that the Bulwark being taken, the
Catholics entered the Faux-bourg before any body perceived there was an
attempt made upon that part. By which means the assailants having already made
themselves strong within the Rampart, and all the Army that stood in order
marching to them, the Defendants were constrained to abandon the Suburbs of the
Portereau; but not without great terror and confusion: in which Duras being
slain, with many other persons of remark, they were so closely pursued by the
Catholics who came up to them on all sides, that if Andelot himself, fighting
valiantly with a great Squadron of Gentlemen, had not withstood them, they had
in that fury entered the Towrells. But he standing at the entry of the Bridge
all covered with Arms, and bravely assisted, they were with much difficulty at
length repulsed; and the Ports of the Towers and the City being shut, that
bloody conflict ended with the day. The Faux-bourg being secured, the Army
approached to the Towrells; which proving very hard to be taken, by reason of
the strength of the place, the Duke of Guise notwithstanding with Gabions,
Trenches and Engines of War, so far advanced the work, that he found they could
not long maintain that Post; though from the Cannon planted in certain Islands
in the middle of the River, those upon the banks received much molestation and
damage.

In the mean while, the Admiral with his Reiters and some few French Horse,
having left all their carriage and baggage at Orleans, passing the Loire at
Georgeau, marched with such expedition, that the Mareshal of Brissac, who
endeavored to lie in their way, could by no means stop them in any place, or
hinder them from passing into Normandy; which Province the Reiters,
slaughtering, firing, pillaging and destroying all things both sacred and
profane, overran without resistance; there being no forces in that Country
which were able to hinder their incursions. So passing through all places like
a horrible and fearful tempest, they came at last to the coasts of the Ocean at
S. Sauveur de Dive. There the Germans not knowing in what part of the World
they were, and seeing the Sea grow furious and enraged with the tempestuousness
of the weather, and no news at all appearing of the succors so often promised
from England, began fiercely to mutiny; demanding with clamor and threats the
arrears of their pay, and calling upon the Admiral to observe his promise: who
coming out of his Lodging, and showing them with his finger the swelling of the
Sea, and the impetuous contrary winds, excused with the perverseness of the
weather, and the season, the delay of their expected supplies. But the Germans
not to be appeased with any thing, he could hardly obtain of them the patience
of a few days; though to satisfy their greediness, he gave them free license
to plunder all, as well friends and adherents, as adversaries and enemies.
Wherefore destroying with barbarous cruelty all the tract of that Country which
with wonderful fertility and richness of the inhabitants extends it self along
the Ocean, he stayed so long expecting about the Seacoasts, that at length the
storm ceasing, they descryed from Havre de Grace the English Ships, which
brought with them both the 150000 Ducats, and the two Regiments of Foot,
besides fourteen pieces of Cannon, with all manner of munition proportionable.
The English under the conduct of the Count of Montgomery and Monsieur de
Colombiere, being received with incredible joy, and the Reiters satisfied for
their arrears; the Admiral having sent for the Count de la Roch-fou-cault and
the Prince of Porcie^, who brought succors out of Brittany and the
neighboring Countries, making in all eight thousand Foot and four thousand
Horse, put himself in order with great diligence to go to the succor of his
Brother with all the speed that was possible; I^^n P^l^rot feigns to forsake
the Hugonot party, leaves Orleans, insinuates himself into the Duke of Guises
C^urt, whilst the Duke gives order for an assault, shoots him in the shoulder,
whereof he dies.
hoping, either by force or art to make them raise their siege from that place.
But the Duke of Guise having already, though with loss of much blood, taken the
Towrelles, the Defendants were reduced to great straights; nor could the
Admiral have arrived soon enough to succor the besieged, if other stratagems
and means had not been used to deliver them from that imminent danger.

There was among the Hugonots Faction one called John Poltrot Sieur de
Mereborn, of a noble Family near Angoulesme. This man being of a ready wit, and
by nature subtle, having lived many years in Spain, and afterward embracing
Calvin's opinion, being made cunning by the preachings and practices of Geneva,
was esteemed by all (as he was indeed) fit to undertake any great attempt.
Whereforefore being known to all the heads of the Hugonot Faction as a proper
Instrument for any such designs, which are the daily effects of Civil Wars, he
was persuaded, as they say by the Admiral and Theodore Beza, to endeavor to
kill the Duke of Guise; the one proposing to him infinite rewards and
acknowledgments; the other laying before him, that by taking out of the World
so great a Persecutor of their Faith, he should merit exceedingly of God. Which
persuasions working upon Poltrot, feigning to have abandoned the Calvinists
party, he went to be a Soldier in the Kings Army; and there insinuating
himself likewise into the Duke of Guises Court, watched an opportunity to put
in execution his purposed mischief. So the 24 of February in the evening, being
the Feast of St. Matthias the Apostle, the Duke having given order for an
assault, which the day after he intended should be made upon the Bridge of
Orleans; and retiring unarmed to his lodging, was was little less than a league
from the Trenches. Poltrot, lying in wait on Horseback upon a swift Jennet, and
seeing him come alone discoursing with Tristan Rostine a servant of the Queens,
discharged a Gun at him, laden with three bullets, which all three hit him on
the right shoulder, and passing through the body, laid him upon the ground for
dead. At which sudden accident, his Gentlemen, who, not to seem to hearken to
what their Master said, rode a little before, running to help him: Poltrot
aided by the swiftness of his Horse, saved himself in the neighboring Woods;
and the Duke being carried to his lodging, showed at the first dressing very
little hopes of life. At the News of this sad accident, the King and
Queen Mother, with all the Lords of the Army, went presently to see him; but
neither the diligent care nor remedies that were applied taking any effect, the
third day after his hurt he died, with great demonstrations of Religion and
Piety, and discourses full of constancy and moderation.

He was a man of mature wisdom, singular industry, and sprightly valor; wary
in Council, quick in execution, and most fortunate in conducting his designs to
their intended ends. For which qualities, he was reputed by the general consent
of all men, the chief Captain of his time. Likewise by the merit of his own
Actions* he acquired the title of Defendor and Protector of the Catholic
Religion; and dying, left the glory of his Name to be celebrated and renowned
to all posterity.

The Murderer, as if he had been besides himself, either through consciousness
of the fact, or else through fear that he had to be pursued from every part;
not finding the way to Orleans, wandered all night in the ways and woods
thereabouts, and at last in the morning, neither he nor his horse being able to
bear themselves longer upon their legs, Pol^rot taken and condemned.
he fell into certain companies of Swisses that were in guard at the Bridge
d'Olivette; by whom being taken, and carried before the Queen and the Lords of
the Army; First, he confessed voluntarily the whole plot of the Fact; and
afterward, being put upon the torture, ratified the same confession: wherefore
being led to Paris, he was by sentence of Parliament publicly quartered.

The Admiral and Theodore Beza endeavored, by large Writings scattered in all
parts of Christendom, to clear themselves of the suspicion: but the common
opinions of men, confirmed not only by reason, but from the mouth of the
Delinquent, refuted all their excuses; and the memory of it stuck close to his
posterity, till the consummation of their revenge. The proceedings of the
Queen Mother were much different; to whom a Hugonot Captain commonly called la
Motte having offered himself to find a means to kill Andelot; She causing him
to be apprehended by her Guards, A Hugonot Captain off^ring to kill Andelot,
the Queen sends him to the same Andelot.
sent him bound to the same Andelot, that he might punish him as he pleased
himself. Which though some interpreted sinisterly, believing that the Queen had
either discovered a treacherous intent in the assassine, or else that she hoped
to win Andelot, by such a kindness, in gratitude to deliver up Orleans, which
they found hardly to be reduced by force; yet it is certain, that the greatness
of the Queens mind made it generally believed, that she used no dissimulation
in so generous an Action: and surely there are few examples of the like in any
of our modern Stories.

After the death of the Duke of Guise, an Accommodation followed without
difficulty, the treaty whereof was never intermitted in the greatest fervor of
the War. For the Queen being freed from the King of Navarre and the Duke of
Guise, the one of which through his nearness to the Crown, and the other by
reason of his immense power and great esteem amongst men, was always suspected
by her; She desired by a domestic quieting the troubles of the Kingdom, to
drive out the foreign forces before they settled themselves. Neither had she now
any jealousies of the Prince of Conde or the Constable. For they had so
offended each other, that she believed it was impossible that they should ever
be sincerely reconciled. Besides, the Constable being grown decrepid with age,
had neither force nor thoughts to aspire to the Government; and the Prince of
Conde, though in the quality of first Prince of the Blood, for things past, and
particularly for the Agreement made with England, was become odious to the
whole Kingdom, except only those that followed the Hugonot party Wherefore
thinking it most expedient for the pr^sent to settle a peace, that with their
united Forces they might without diversion attend the recovery of Havre de
Grace, the alienation of which place into the hands of so powerful Enemies,
more than any thing else troubled the Queen; that those things might be
effected, and the Reiters expelled the Kingdom, (who without regard destroyed
the Country, and with unheard of cruelties oppressed the people) She was
inclined to grant very large Conditions. Also this other consideration was no
small motive to persuade an agreement; That the Duke of Guise being dead, and
the Constable prisoner to the Enemy, there was no Captain of like Authority and
esteem, who having the command of the Kings Army, could in any degree equal the
Admirals weariness, or the fierceness of Andelot. For the Duke of Aumale,
Brother to the late Duke of Guise, though he were a man of great courage, yet
he was not esteemed answerable in counsel or wisdom. Besides, he was for the
most part held unfortunate in the War; and which imported most, he was at that
time, by reason of the hurts he received in the Battle, unfit for labor; and
the Mareshal of Brissac, though a Captain of great experience, and known
valor, had not such an Authority as was requisite for a General of the Kings
Army, composed of the chief Princes and principal Lords of his Kingdom. To
these was added one reason more, that it made it very necessary to desire a
peace: For the devastations of a Civil War had so wasted, broken, and hindered
the Kings Revenues; and the excessive expenses which the beginning of a War
brings along with it, had so exhausted the Public Treasury, that they were not
only unable to pay the interests of those debts contracted by the former Kings,
but the King was constrained to make them greater, having received in the time
of her necessity a considerable Sum from the great Duke of Tuscany, and 100000
Ducats from the Republic of Venice. Wherefore having not wherewithal to
continue the War, she thought it wisdom to lay hold on the advantage of the
present conjuncture.

On the other side, the Prince of Conde seeing himself prisoner to the Enemy,
to obtain his liberty, ardently desired a Peace; and Andelot, being reduced to
a necessity of yielding, thought it would be more for his reputation to be
included in a general accord, than to deliver up the Town upon a capitulation
made only by himself. The Admiral was of a contrary opinion; who neither
trusting to the Kings reconciliation, nor the Queens promises, and knowing he
was inwardly hated and detested, chose for the best, rather to continue the War
now the chief Leaders of the adverse party were gone, than to expose his person
to the danger of a suspected and dissembled Peace. But he being absent, and the
accommodation treated at Orleans, where the Queen was in person in the Camp,
and the Constable prisoner in the City; whither also came about the same
business Madam Eleonor wife to the Prince of Conde; without having any regard
to the opinion of the Admiral, the Peace was concluded and established upon
these Conditions; That all those that were free Lords over the Castles or Lords
that they possessed, Conditions of Peace concluded at Orleans the 18 of M^^c^,
^563.
not holding of any but the Crown, might within their Jurisdictions freely
exercise the Reformed Religion; and that the other Feudataries, who had not
such dominion, might do the same in their own houses, for their families only;
provided, they lived not in any City or Town. That in every Province certain
Cities should be appointed, in the Faux-bourg whereof the Hugonots might
assemble at their devotion. That in all other Cities, Towns and Castles in the
City of Paris, with the Jurisdiction thereof, and all places whatsoever where
the Courts resided, the exercise of any other but the Roman Catholic Religion
should be prohibited. Yet every one to live free in his Conscience, without
either trouble or molestation. That the Prof^ssors of the pretended Reformed
Religion should observe the holy days appointed in the Roman Calendar; and in
their Marriages, the Rites and Constitutions of the Civil Law. That all the
Lords, Princes, Gentlemen, Soldiers and Captains, should have a full Pardon
for all delinquencies committed during the time, or by occasion or ministry of
the War; declaring all to be done to a good end, without any offense to the
Royal Majesty; and therefore every one to be restored to his Charges,
Dignities, Goods, Privileges and Prerogatives. That the Germans should be
sent, and have safe conduct out of the Kingdom; and that it should be in the
Kings power to recover all his Places, Towns and Castles, from any persons
whatsoever that presumed to withhold them from him.

This Capitulation being published in the Camp, and in the Court, the
eighteenth day of March the Prince of Conde and the Constable came out of
prison; Andelot delivered the City of Orleans into the Queens hands; the
Nobility no less wearied with the toils than expenses of the War, very
willingly departed; and the Reiters being conveyed to the confines and
satisfied for their pay, returned to their own houses.

The Eight Parliaments of the Kingdom, but particularly those of Paris,
Toulouse, and Aix, those three being always more averse than the rest to the
Hugonot party, refused to accept and register the Edict of Pacification. But
the Cardinal of Bourbon and the Duke of Montpensieur appearing in the name of
the State at Paris; at Toulouse, the Vicount de Ioyeuse; and the Count de Euze
at Aix, they laying before them, that the King thought it most convenient for
the quiet of the Kingdom and the welfare of his Subjects, that the Pacification
should be accepted and approved; at last the Articles were published: yet still
reserving a power in his Majesty, whenever he should think fit, to correct,
or revoke it. There was no less resistance amongst the enemies and Hugonot
Ministers, seeing the Edict of January so straightly moderated; and it was
exceedingly resented by the Admiral, who had conceived a great hope to overcome
the War. But the Prince of Conde being pleased it should be so, and the
Nobility greedily concurring with him, they were forced to comply for the
present; though in the mean while contriving among themselves new and more
dangerous revolutions.

The Peace being agreed on and published, the Queen not giving her self leisure
to breathe, having sent the Army into Normandy under the command of the
Mareshal de Brissac, went thither in person; designing, without delay to reduce
Havre de Grace by force, and to order matters by her own presence and
directions. Whereby, besides that she was secured from the arts and treacheries
of the great Ones, and her Councils were more effectually directed to their
proper ends; she also gained the affections of the Soldiers to the King, who
being brought up amongst the Armies, and present at all Councils and Actions,
was replenished with generous lively thoughts; daily learning by experience the
practical part of governing his Kingdom.

Charles was of magnanimous and truly Royal nature, of a sharp ready wit; and
for the Majesty of his aspect and gravity of manners in so tender an age, not
only esteemed, but greatly reverenced by those that were about him. On the
other side, the English which were to the number of 3000 in Havre de Grace
under the command of the Earl of Warwick, failed not, carefully to provide for
and fortify themselves; hoping by the strength of the place to be able to make
a bold resistance, until the arrival of their Fleet, which was coming with
great preparations, not only to succor that place, but also to land men, and
to infest the borders of the lower Normandy, and all the coasts toward the
British Sea. But the Queen having summoned them by an Herald, within the term
of three days to deliver up the Town, which contrary to the Articles of Peace
they had unjustly usurped; that short time being expired, the Army was brought
before it, and Batteries raised in diverse parts.

Not many days after, the Constable arrived at the Camp; whose presence added a
greater vigor to the Assiegents; and however the pains and directions was
divided between him and the Mareshal de Brissac, all the authority and command
remained in the Queen; who lodging in the Abbey of Fecan, rode every day to the
Army, soliciting the advancement of the siege in such a manner, that one of
the Towers which stood at the entry of the gate being already taken, and
Colonel Sarlabous with a good number of Foot lodged therein, the Defendants
were reduced to great extremities; which daily more and more increasing by
reason of the heats, it being then about the middle of July, the Town was
infected with such a grievous Plague, (to which the English through the temper
of their bodies and manner of diet are exceeding subject) that a horrible
mortality consumed in few days the greatest part of their men. Wherefore the
Earl of Warwick, not being able longer to resist the force of the Army, and the
anger of Heaven, at length, upon the seventeenth day of July, Havre de Grace
delivered up upon condition^.
agreed to render himself upon these Conditions; That he should freely deliver
up Havre de Grace into the hands of the Constable for the use of the most
Christian King; with all the Artillery and Munition belonging to the French,
and all the Ships and Merchandise taken or seized upon since the War began.
That all the prisoners on both sides should be set at liberty without ransom;
and that the English within the term of six days should transport their arms
and baggage, without receiving any impediment whatsoever.

The Capitulation was scarcely confirmed, and Hostages given on both parts,
when the English Fleet, consisting of sixty Ships, and well furnished with men,
appeared at Sea, steering their course with a very favorable wind directly to
the Haven. But the Earl of Warwick, thinking it dishonorable not to stand to
his Capitulation, gave notice to the Admiral of the Fleet, that the Town was
already rendered. Wherefore casting anchor till he had received the Soldiers of
the Garrison aboard, when they were all embarked, he set fail again, and without
making any other attempt returned into England.

The Queen having with such facility dispatched the strangers, she presently
applied all her endeavor to pacify the troubles of the Kingdom, and to reform
things in the Government. Her intention was, since the King was in the
fourteenth year of his age, to cause him to be declared past his Minority, and
capable to govern of himself; knowing that such a Declaration would take away
from the Princes of the Blood and other great Lords the right of pretending or
aspiring to the Government; and that through the Kings youth, and the absolute
authority her counsels had over him, she should still continue in the same
power and administration of the Kingdom. But this design was opposed by the
opinions and authority of many Counselors and Lawyers, who disputed, That the
King could not be freed from the Government of his Tutors, nor have the Rule
put into his own hands, nor be declared out of Minority, if he had not fully
finished and altogether accomplished the time prefixed of fourteen years; of
which he yet wanted many months. With the Archives of the Crown that are kept
in the Monastery of Monks at St. Dennis, amongst the Acts of the Court of
Parliament, there is a Constitution of Louis the Fifth King of France, (he that
was surnamed the Wise) made solemnly in the Parliament of Paris in the year of
our Salvation 1363. sealed by the High Chancellor Dormans, and subscribed by
the Kings Brothers, the Princes of the Blood Royal, and a great number of the
chief Barons and Lords of the Kingdom; by which it is declared, That the Kings
of France may in the fourteenth year of their age assume to themselves the
Government and Administration of the Kingdom: But it is not clearly specified,
whether this Constitution be of force at the beginning, or else at the end of
the fourteenth year. For which reason many Counselors, particularly those of
the Parliament of Paris, (perhaps knowing they had greater power during the
Minority of the King, and therefore desiring to enlarge the time of exercising
it) affirmed, That it could not be said the Pupil was come to the age of
fourteen years, if he had not fully accomplished them; nor could by any means,
before that time, free himself from the obligation of a Minor. On the other
side, the High Chancellor de d' Hospital, a man of profound learning, and those
that favored the Queens intentions, alleged, That in matters of honor and
dignity, they were not to count the minutes of time, as is usual in the Livery
made ^o Wards.
Reintegration of Pupils; the Laws having an aim to be gracious in the favor
of those in minority, to whom it was a benefit to have the time prolonged,
before they be settled in their Estates. But in confe^ring honors, it was
matter of advantage and favor to abbreviate the term, and cut off delays; that
the space of a few months was of no moment for the confirming the judgment and
understanding of a man; and that the Laws prescribe the age of fourteen years
for a man to remain in his own power. These their reasons they proved with the
same testimony of the Imperial Laws, by which all Christian Potentates are
governed, and with the clearest and most famous Expositors of them; who in the
distribution of Honors and Offices, In matters of ^avour the year begun is
taken for the year ended.
have, by a common rule practiced in civil right, ever reckoned the year begun,
and as they say, inchoatus, for the year ended and finished. But because the
Parliament of Rouen had ever showed it self more obedient to the Kings commands
than all the rest, and in the late restitution of the City the particular
Counselors thereof had received many special graces and favors from the
Queen; they resolved to make this Declaration pass in that Parliament, rather
then expose themselves to the contradiction of the Counselors of Paris, who
had gotten a custom to take upon them to moderate by their sentences the Royal
Decrees. So the King and the Queen, after the reduction of Havre de Grace,
returning with great reputation to Rouen; the 15 day of September they went
solemnly with all the Court-Lords and Officers of the Crown, to the Parliament;
where, Aft^^ much opposi^i^n, (...) the Ninth is declared out of minori^y by
^he Parliam^nt of Rouen.
in the presence of the Councillors, the King took upon him with the wonted
Ceremonies, the free absolute Government of the Kingdom.

The Parliament of Paris exceedingly resented, that a business of such great
weight should be decided and determined in any other feat than theirs, which
has the pre-eminence of all the rest, and is ordinarily held as a general
Council of the whole Nation. But the King being already declared out of
Minority, and by nature of a manly masculine Spirit, was much the more
offended, that the Parliament of Paris presumed to interpose in matters of
Government, which belonged not to them; and sharply admonished the Councillors
that they should busy themselves to do Justice, to which they were deputed,
and not meddle with the affairs of State, which depended wholly upon his will
and arbitrament. By which admonitions the Councillors being somewhat
mortified, they accepted and published without farther contest the Declaration
of his Majority.

The King having assumed the power of the command in name and appearance, the
Queen (whose counsels were of more authority than ever) turned all her thoughts
to quiet and pacify the Kingdom, which (like the Sea when the storm is newly
past) after the conclusion of the Peace remained troubled and unquiet. It was
no longer necessary to keep the parties divided, and balance the force of the
Factions, since on the one side the Kings Majority had removed all pretenses of
affecting the Administration of the Government; and already his Authority,
partly by such no^able Victories, partly by taking the power into his own
hands, was so confirmed and established, that the past suspicion ceased of the
machination and treachery of the great ones; who, it was doubted, aspired, by
casting the Pupils out of the Royal Seat, to transfer the Dominion of the Crown
upon themselves: and on the other side, the death of the King of Navarre and
the Duke of Guise, had so notoriously weakened the Catholic Faction; and the
rash proceedings of the Prince and the Admiral had so abated their credit, and
diminished their followers, that the power of both parties being suppressed,
discords quieted, and civil dissentions removed, the Kingdom might easily
reassume that form in which the preceding Kings had so many ages past enjoyed
it. Upon this, the Queen bent all her intentions, (having devised together with
the King, and the High Chancellor de l' Hospital, who by their secret counsels
wholly managed the affairs) to try all means possible to draw the Prince of
Conde from the protection of the Hugonots Faction; to appease the Admiral and
Andelot; who being full of suspicion, stood as it were retired from frequenting
the Court; and having in this manner deprived that party of Heads and
Protectors, by little and little, without noise or violence, to eradicate and
destroy them; so that at the last, as in former times it has happened with
many others, it should fall of it self, and be extinguished as it were
insensibly. By these arts, dissimulations, wariness and dexterity, they hoped
so to work, that the Kingdom should be settled again in that sincerity of quiet,
to which by violent sharp means, by force and the sword it was very difficult
and dangerous to seek to reduce it.

For the effecting these ends, it was necessary to have a peace with England;
to renew the confederacy with the Commonalty of the Swisses; and to maintain a
good intelligence with the Protestant Princes of Germany; that the Hugonots
might be deprived of such support, and stranger Nations of pretenses to come
into the Kingdom, from whose invasions they had lately freed themselves with
such infinite labor, danger and prejudice, both public and particular. To
this purpose an Overture of a Treaty was made with Queen Elizabeth, by Guido
Cavalcanti a Florentine, who was conversant in the affairs, and understood the
interests of both Kingdoms. To the Protestant Princes of Germany they sent
Rascalone, a man formerly employed in that Country by the Duke of Guise, to
quiet and gain the Protestants; with power besides to treat of diverse things
that concerned the mutual instruments of both Nations. And to the Republic of
the Swisses went Sebastian de l' Aubespine Bishop of Limoges, to renew the
ancient Capitulations made with the Father and Grandfather of the present King.
But with the Prince of Conde they used all subtle arts to convert him sincerely
to his obedience. For the King and the Queen receiving him with great shows of
confidence, and respecting him as first Prince of the Blood, presently
conferred upon him the Government of Picardy, the taking away of which was the
first spark that kindled in him a desire to attempt alterations in the State,
and entertaining him as much as could be at Court with Plays, Feasts, and all
manner of pastimes, sought to make him in love with the ease and pleasures of
peace; and in some measure at least to forget the fierceness of his nature. To
these practices being added the death of Eleanor de Roye his Wife, a woman of
an unquiet nature, and that continually spurred him on to new undertakings, the
Queen persuaded Margarite de Lustrac, Widow to the Mareshal de S. Andre, who
was left very rich both by her Father and Husband, to offer her self to him in
marriage; believing, that the Prince by this match supplying the necessity of
his fortune, and living at ease, and in the splendour belonging to the greatness
of his Birth, would not easily be induced hereafter to involve himself in new
troubles, which had already proved so disastrous and dangerous.

But to separate and withdraw him from the friendship of the Chastillons, whose
conversation, it was plain, stirred his thoughts to innovations; they
endeavored by the same Court-flatteries to make him believe, that the loss of
the Battle of Dreux proceeded from the cowardice and treachery of the Admiral
and Andelot, who either too careful of saving themselves, or envying the valor
with which he began to conquer, fled a great deal too soon, leaving those alone
that fought courageously, and principally him, in the hands of the Enemy; which
things being pressed home and instilled into him, might distract his mind, and
put him in diffidence of his ancient friends and confederates. But he being
exceedingly enamoured of Limeville, one of the Queens Maids, whom (she not
seeming to take notice of it) he enjoyed, having besides the hope of so rich a
match that was offered him, these two Considerations contributed more to the
pacifying of his natural fierceness, than all the arts that were used to
withdraw him from the adherence of the Admiral and the other Brothers of
Chastillon; who, not trusting in the Queen, nor believing she could ever have
any confidence in them, could by no means be secured; but continually
practicing to raise new hopes in the Hugonots, stood upon their guard at a
distance from the Court.

The common peace and the Queens intentions were not more opposed by the
Hugonots, than the Catholic party intent to revenge the death of the Duke of
Guise, and impatient to see a toleration of Religion.

Francis Duke of Guise, by his Wife Anne d' Est Sister to Alphonso Duke of
Ferrara, left three male children, Francis Duke of Gu^s^ left his wi^ow Anne
d'Est, sister to the Duke of Ferrara, with three sons, Henry Duke of Gu^se,
Lodovick that was Cardinal, whom H^n^y the Thir^ caused to be murdered, and
the Duke of Mayenn^, who was afterward Head of the Catholic League.
Henry Duke of Guise, a youth of singular hope and exceeding expectation,
Lodovick destined to the Church and the dignity of Cardinal, and Charles, first
Marquess, then Duke of Mayenne, (he who in the late Wars maintained the
Catholic League against Henry the Fourth.) These Sons, who neither for
greatness of mind nor courage degenerated from their Father, though they were
very young, yet being upheld by the fierceness of the Duke of Aumale, and the
authority of the Cardinal of Lor^in, their Uncles, boldly attempted to make
themselves the Heads of the Catholic party: and therefore endeavored to gain
credit in the world, and to promote new motives to maintain the ardour of the
Faction. For which cause having assembled a great number of their kindred and
servants, they went together all clad in mourning to the King, demanding very
earnestly, and with great clamor, of the people of Paris (who ran in
multitudes to this spectacle) that justice might be done upon those who had so
bruitishly caused their Father to be murdered, whilst in the service of GOD
and the Crown loyally and gloriously bearing arms, he labored for the good of
the Commonwealth. To which demand the King not being able to make other answer,
than that in due time and place he would not fail to do exemplary Justice upon
those that were found guilty of so heinous a crime; the Brothers of Coligny
became more diffident than before, and were brought as it were into an
inevitable necessity again to arm their Faction, that they might be able to
withstand the powerful enmity of the Guises.

But if all Arts were used to raise the Catholic party; the endeavor was yet
greater to suppress the Calvinists. For the Cardinal of Lorain, knowing that
the interests of his Nephews being united and mingled with the cause of
Religion, they would gain greater honor, and render themselves more strong and
powerful; as soon as the Council of Trent was broken up, which happened this
present year in the month of November, The Council of Tr^n^ breaks up in
Nov^mb. 1563. in the Papacy of Pi^s Quartus.
he went to Rome, and persuaded the Pope Pius Quartus (who was ill satisfied
with the Peace concluded in France) that he should press the King and the
Queen Mother to cause the Council to be published and observed in their
Kingdom: promising, that his Nephews, with the whole house of Lorain, and the
greatest part of the French Nobility, would be ready and united to cause
declaration thereof to be made, and sufficient afterward by force to suppress
the followers of the Hugonot Doctrine. The Pope was solicited to the same
effect by the Catholic King, and the Duke of Savoy, being entered into a
jealousy, that the nearness and introduction of the Hugonots might endanger
their States, seeing the Low Countries belonging to King Philip were already
infected, and not only Savoy, but even Piedmont also exceedingly pestered with
them* where through the neighborhood of Geneva they had sowed the seeds of
their heresy. Wherefore they both desired, that this dangerous fire kindled in
so near a Country, might without further delay be extinguished. Nor was it a
difficult matter to persuade the Pope to be earnest in a business which more
than any thing else concerned the greatness of the Apostolic Sea, and the
Authority of the Papacy. For which reasons, they resolved to join together to
send Ambassadors to the King of France, to exhort him that he should cause the
Council to be published and observed, with proffers of forces and aid to expel
and extirpate heresy out of his Dominions. This Embassy (which to give it the
more credit was sent in the names of them all) exceedingly troubled the King
and the Queen Mother: For though they concurred with the Pope and other
Princes, to irradicate and suppress the Hugonot Faction, which they knew to be
the source of all the troubles; yet they judged it not agreeable to their
interests to do it tumultuously, and with such a noise on a sudden; nor to
precipitate their deliberations; which being designed with great wisdom, were
not yet come to maturity. And they took it wondrous ill, that the Catholic
King, and much more the Duke of Savoy, should presume as it were by way of
command to interpose in the Government of their State: Besides, that this so
pressing solicitation put them in an evident necessity, either to alienate the
Pope from them, and with public scandal and ignominy of their names to
separate themselves from the obedience of the Apostolic Sea; or else to
discover the designs, with which proceeding leisurely, they had determined
without the hazard of War to attain (by the benefit of time) to the same end:
but if they were by this means discovered, whilst they endeavored with their
uttermost skill to conceal them, it was evident, that the knowledge thereof
coming to the Hugonots, not only a Civil War would be kindled again in the
bowels of the Kingdom, but a way opened for stranger Nations to invade and
spoil the best parts of France; as the example of the past War had sufficiently
proved. For which reason, there being no other way but by art and dissimulation
to render this negotiation of no effect, they received the Ambassadors
privately at Fountain-bleau, The Pope, the King of Spain, and the Duke of
Savo^, send Ambassadors of C^arles the Ninth to solicit the publication of
the Council.
(a house remote from the concourse of people) that by the little ceremony used
at their reception, their business might be thought of less consequence.
Afterward they endeavored by delaying their answer and dispatches, to make the
Negotiation antiquate it self, and by degrees fall to nothing. And lastly,
sought by ambiguous speeches, capable of diverse interpretations, to leave the
Ambassadors themselves doubtful of their intentions: concluding in the end,
that they would forthwith send Ministers of their own to the Pope and the other
Princes, to acquaint them particularly with their resolutions.

The Ambassadors being thus dispatched away at the end of January in the year
1564. the King and the Queen resolved to visit all the Provinces and principal
Cities of the Kingdom, meaning by this progress to advance those designs, which
was the only end they aimed at for the present. 1564.
For coming to a Parley with the Duke of Savoy in Dolphine, with the Popes
Ministers at Avignon, and with the Catholic King, or else with the Queen his
Wife upon the confines of Guienna, they might communicate their counsels to
them without the hazard of trusting Frenchmen, (who either through dependence
or kindred had all the same interests) to have them revealed to the Hugonots.
So that in this manner preserving the amity of the Pope and the other Catholic
Princes, they might by common consent have leisure enough to bring their
projected designs to maturity. They thought it also no little help to have the
opportunity to treat in person with the Duke of Lorain; and by his means, with
the Protestant Princes; with whom they hoped to make so firm an alliance, that
they should not need to fear they would any more show themselves in the favor
of the Hugonots, or interpose in the affairs of their Kingdom. From this
journey arose another benefit of great importance; that by visiting the
principal Cities, and informing themselves particularly what condition they
were in, they might take order to secure them with new Forces, or the change of
Magistrates and Governors, so that at another time they might not apprehend
their revolt. Besides this, they hoped, that by appeasing the tumults, and
satisfying the complaints and grievances of the people, the King would greatly
augment his authority, and so gain the affections of his Subjects, that by
degrees they would turn to their ancient loyalty, which by nature and custom
they used to pay with such devotion to the persons of their Sovereigns. The
voyage was also r^quisite in regard of Queen Ieane: For she, after her Husbands
death, being wholly abandoned to the worship and belief of the Hugonots, had by
public Edicts; and with open violence, The Queen of Navar^^ causes Churches
to be ruined, and expels the Priests. Whereupon the Pope sends out a
Monitory against her, which is opposed by the King of France.
taken away the Images out of the Temples, banished the Priests, possessed the
Churches, and thrown down the Altars; commanding that all the People subject to
the Principality of Bearne should live according to the Rites and Ceremonies of
Calvin's Religion. At the noise of which proceedings, the Catholic King, either
watching all occasions to conquer the relics of the Kingdom of Navarre, or
else through an apprehension that the infection of Heresy coming so near might
penetrate into his Country of Spain, made great complaints thereof to the Pope;
advertising him without further delay to provide against so great an
inconvenience. And the Pope moved not only by the advice and exhortations of
the King of Spain, but also the open prejudice the interests of the Apostolic
Sea received thereby; first, kindly admonished the Queen by the Cardinal of
Armagnac, a near kinsman and ancient dependent upon that family, not to
introduce such an intolerable innovation; and afterward, seeing those
admonitions profited nothing, sent out a Monitory; whereby he required her, to
desist from persecuting the Catholic Religion, and to return within the Term
of six months into the bosom of the Church; or else threatened, when the time
was expired, to expose her to the Ecclesiastical censures, and grant her
Country to those that could first conquer it.

The King of France openly declared himself against the Monitory; alleging,
that the States of Jane being held directly of him, the Pope could not through
any fault in her, who was simply a Feudatary, make a grant of them; but that
they devolved immediately upon him, as the Supreme Lord. By which opposition,
the vehemence and ardour of the Pope being somewhat abated, Queen Jane
continued so much the more resolute by new Laws, and promulgation of new
Orders, to banish the Catholic, and establish Calvin's Religion. But the King,
not willing that any Act of his should give the Spaniards a colorable pretense
to intermeddle with businesses on this side the Mountains which separate France
from Spain; or whilst he was busied with the Insurrections of his Subjects,
that such a large passage should be opened to enter into his Kingdom; gave
order to the Parliaments of Thoulouse and Bourdeaux, that they should oppose
the attempts of the Queen of Navarre; pretending that she could neither make
new Laws, nor introduce a new Religion in those States without the consent and
permission of the King of France, who was the chief Lord. Which though it were
true of Nerac, Oleron, and the County of Bigorre; yet it was not so for the
Principality of Bearne, The Principality of Bea^ne ho^^s not of the Crown of
France.
that had been many times brought into controversy, and always declared
independent upon any but the King of Navarre. But the state of the present
affairs, and the apprehension of the future, to prevent the growing disorders,
caused these disputes to be revived, which has been so long buried and
decided. Wherefore the King and the Queen thought it very material in visiting
all parts of the Kingdom, to pass likewise upon those Confines, to try whether
they could alter Queen Jane in her opinions; or if they could not effect that,
to bring away her Son Prince Henry, that being first Prince of the Blood he
might not be brought up in the Doctrine of the Hugonots, whereby to prepare new
protection and support for the men of that Faction. These be the reasons that
moved them to undertake this Voyage. The King and the Queen make a general
visitation of the whole Kingdom.
But not to discover to those upon whom they had designs, what was the end or
secret intention of this Visitation; they made show, and were content every
body should think, that the King, only through a youthful vanity to show
himself in all parts of the Kingdom, and to taste several delights in several
places, desired to make this progress; and that the Queen consented thereunto
through an ambition to let the World see the Magnificence of her Government,
and through a desire to visit her Daughter the Queen of Spain. Wherefore with
an appearance much different from their inward designs, they made public and
plentiful Preparations of sumptuous Liveries, of all manner of things for
several kinds of Huntings, for Stage Plays, and Royal Entertainments; with a
great train of Courtiers fitted for Pomp and Delights. Which things when they
were ready, not farther to delay the business in hand, as soon as the season of
the year would permit, they went through Brye and Champagne to the City of Bar,
(placed upon the confines of Lorain) whither came to receive them the Duke
himself, with the Duchess Claudia his Wife the Kings Sister, The Queen treats
wi^h the Protestants of Germany.
and Daughter to the Queen. There, by Rascalone and the Ministers of the Duke
of Lorain, the Queen began to treat of an interview with the Duke of
Wittembergh, the chief of the Protestant Faction in Germany, believing if she
could treat in person with him and the other Princes of the same Religion, by
her Arts to draw them to such a confederacy with the Crown of France, that they
should not need for the future to fear any opposition from them. But the Duke
of Wittembergh through the infirmities of age refusing to come, they began
(though with less hope) by way of Treaty to persuade him and the other Princes
to receive pensions from the King, with honorable Title and other large
Conditions; conceiving, that in reason they would rather desire to have certain
Stipends and assured Conditions from the King, than the uncertain promises and
vain offers from the Hugonots. Notwithstanding, the Count Palatine of Rhine,
Wolphangus Duke of Deux-ponts, and the Duke of Wittembergh, inclining to favor
the Hugonots, though more for the common interest of Religion than any other
consideration, refused to accept pensions of the Crown of France; and only with
good words promised in general, not to send any Aids to the Faction of the
Malcontents, except in case they were molested in their Liberty of
Conscience. On the contrary, John William, one of the Dukes of Saxon, and
Charles Marquess of Baden, either through emulation of the other Princes, or
else moved with the profit proposed, accepted the Kings Stipends; promising to
serve him in his occasions with a certain number of men, and to bear Arms
against all his Enemies.

From Bearne the King continuing his Visitations came to the City of Lions,
Lions the first that rebelled, and the last that returned to obedience.
in which the Hugonots had so great a party, that in the last War it was one of
the first that rebelled, and the last that returned into obedience. Wherefore
considering the importance thereof, the neighborhood of Geneva, and Germany,
with other conditions of the place, it was resolved in the Council to build a
Citadel between the Rhofne and the Saone, (two great Rivers that run through
the Town) whereby to bridle the people, and secure the City from the treachery
of its neighbors. The foundation of which Fortification being laid then in the
presence of the King, it was afterward brought to perfection by the diligence
of Monsieur de Loss, newly put into that Government by the discharge of the
Count de Saut, who had rendered himself suspected by favoring the Hugonot
party. From Lions the King being come to Valence in Dolphine, he caused the
City to be dismantled, and built there a new Fortress; that Town having ever
been a great place of receipt for those that were in rebellion. But being
arrived at the Castle of Roussilion, An Interview between the King and the Duke
of Savoy
Filibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy came thither post to meet him, with whom having
treated of such things as concerned both States, this Prince was sufficiently
informed of the Kings intentions, and of the way designed to free himself
without noise or danger from the molestation of the Calvinists. So that being
fully persuaded and satisfied, he promised such aids as could be sent from
those parts.

From Roussilion the King went to Avignion, The King meets with the Popes
Ministers at Avignon.
immediately under the Jurisdiction of the Pope, where Fahritio Serbelloni the
Governor, and the Bishop of Fermo Vice-Legate, received him with very great
solemnity: and Lodovico Antinori, one of the Popes trusty Ministers a
Florentine, being according to the Queens desire come thither, they began to
confer about businesses of common interests. There the King and the Queen gave
an Answer to the Popes Embassy, which they would not trust to the Ambassadors;
showing, that they were ready to extirpate Calvinism, and to cause the Council
to be observed in their Dominions: but to avoid the Introductions of the
English, with the Incursions of the Lutherans of Germany, and to effect their
purpose without the danger or tumult of new Wars, in which so many thousands of
Souls perished, and the Christian Countries were miserably destroyed, they had
deliberated to proceed warily, with secret stratagems, to remove the principal
Heads and chief Supports of that party, to reduce the Prince of Conde and the
Brothers of Chastillon to a right understanding, to fortif^e such Cities as
were suspected, re-establish the Kings Revenues, gather Moneys, and make many
other provisions, which could not be had but by the progress and benefit of
time, that they might be able afterward to work their ends with more security,
without those dangers and prejudices which a too precipitate haste would plunge
them into, with little hope of good success. By the appearance of which reasons
the Pope being persuaded, who was by nature averse from cruel counsels, and the
effusion of Christian Blood in civil dissentions, he consented, that the
publication of the Council should be deferred till such time as they had
brought their designs to maturity.

It was now the beginning of the Year 1565. when the King continuing his Voyage
through the Province of Languedock, 1565.
and celebrating the Carnival with youthful pastimes, Charles the IX. and the
Queen Mother come to an interview with the Queen of Spain at Bayonne.
arrived at Bayonne, situated in the Bay of Biscay, and upon the confines of
Spain, just in that place where ancient Writers describe the Aquae Augusti. The
Queen of Spain being come to this place, accompanied with the Duke of Alva and
the Count de Beneventa, whilst they made show with triumphs, tournaments, and
several kinds of pastimes to regard only their pleasures and feastings, there
was a secret conference held for a mutual intelligence between the two Crowns.
Wherefore their common interest being weighed and considered, they agreed in
this, That it was expedient for one King to assist and aid the other in
quieting their States, and purging them from the diversity of Religions. But
they were not of the same opinion concerning the way that was to be taken with
more expedition and security to arrive at this end: for the Duke of Alva, a man
of a violent resolute nature, said, That to destroy those Innovations in
Religion, and Insurrections in the Commonwealth, it was necessary to cut off
the Heads of those Poppies, to fish for the great Fish, and not care to take
Frogs (by these conceptions he expressed himself:) for the winds being once
allayed, the billows of the common people would be easily quieted and calmed of
themselves. He added, That a Prince could not do a thing more unworthy or
prejudicial to himself, than to permit a Liberty of Conscience to the people;
bringing as many varieties of Religion into a State, as there are capritious
fancies in the restless minds of men; and opening a door to let in discord and
confusion, mortal accidents for the ruin of a State: and showed by many
memorable examples, that diversity of Religion never failed to put Subjects in
Arms, to raise grievous treacheries and sad rebellions against Superiors.
Whence he concluded at the last, That as the Controversies of Religion had
always served as argument and pretense for the Insurrections of Malcontents;
so it was necessary at the first dash to remove this cover, and afterward by
severe remedies, no matter whether by sword or fire, to cut away the roots of
that evil, which by mildness and sufferance perniciously springing up, still
spread it self and increased.

On the other side, the Queen fitting her deliberations to the customs and
disposition of the French, desired to avoid as much as was possible the
imbruing of her hands in the Blood of the Princes of the Royal Family, or the
great Lords of the Kingdom; and reserving this for the last resolution, would
first try all manner of means to reduce into obedience and the bosom of the
Church, the Heads of the Hugonots; who being withdrawn from that party, they
should likewise take away, though not by the same means, the fuel that
nourished the fire of civil dissentions. She said, that she well knew the
inconveniences that were derived from a Liberty of Conscience; and that it
would have been indeed expedient, to have provided against it by severity at
the beginning, when it was newly planted; but not now, that it had taken root,
and was grown up: that the motives of Religion are so universal and
efficacious, that where they once take footing, it is requisite to tolerate
many things, which without that necessity would not be endured; and to make a
long various navigation to that Port, where they could not arrive by steering a
direct course: showing withal, that in the Government, they were to do what
they could, not all that they would; and in matters of Conscience, it was
requisite to proceed with great dexterity: for they are fires that flame out
with too much violence. Wherefore it was necessary to slacken them by degrees,
and secretly to suffocate them, before by breaking out they filled all places
with desolation and ruin: and by so fresh an example as the late War,
demonstrated unto them, how near the Kingdom of France was to be dismembered and
ruined, not only by the English, but also by the Germans. In which regard she
thought it most requisite, as much as was possible to avoid the necessity of a
War. The opinions were thus diverse by reason of the diversity of circumstances,
the variety of customs, difference of interests; and above all, the different
quality of the natures of men, rendered the matter diverse, and administered
different counsels: notwithstanding they disagreed not in the end. For both
parties aimed at the destruction of the Hugonots, and the establishment of
obedience. Wherefore at last they made this conclusion, That the one King
should aid the other either covertly or openly, as was thought most conducing
to the execution of so weighty and so difficult an enterprise: but that both of
them should be free to work by such means and counsels as appeared to them most
proper and seasonable; praying to God, that severity and clemency (ways so
different) might nevertheless succeed to the same end.

The enterview of Bayon being ended in this manner, The King not being able to
persuade the Queen of Navarre to change Religion, moves her to restore the Mass
and Priests to their forme^ liberty.
and Queen Elizabeth departed to return into Spain, the King, following his
Voyage, went toward the Territories of the Queen of Navarre; whom not being
able to persuade to return to the Rites of the Catholic Church, yet he
required, that in all places where Mass had been forbidden, it should be
restored; and that the Priests should be re-established in their possessions.
He obtained of her further, that she with her children should follow the Court;
which seemed no hard condition: not that she was affectionate to the Kings
Person, or approved the manner of the present Government; but there being at
that time a matrimonial process depending before his Majesty, between the Duke
of Nemours and Frances de Rhoan her Niece, (whom, being of the same Religion,
she exceedingly loved) it seemed necessary for her to be present at the
discussion of a business in which she was so much concerned. Being therefore
resolved to follow the Court; the King, the more to invite her to stay there,
made great show of kindness both to her children and her self: but his having
seen with his own eyes through all the Provinces of Aquitan the Churches
destroyed, the Altars profaned, Images thrown down, Monasteries burnt and
destroyed, and even the bones of the dead raked out of their graves, and thrown
up and down the fields; made him inwardly conceive such an hate against her,
and against all the Hugonots, that he ceased not afterward to persecute them
most severely, until the rage which was kindled in his breast against them were
fully satisfied. But the general visitation of the Provinces being ended, and
desiring to remedy the disorders which they had discovered in diverse parts by
the complaints of the people, he caused an Assembly of the most eminent persons
of the eight Parliaments of the Kingdom to be summoned for the year following
to meet at Moulins, in the Province of Bourbonois, there to give such orders as
should seem most proportionable to the present affairs. His Majesty designed in
so noble a presence of his chief Subjects to reconcile the Houses of Guise and
Chastillon, which were so bitterly incensed against each other; their private
enmity drawing along with it by consequence the division of the people, and
dissension in the Kingdom. He thought by this occasion to get the Prince of
Conde and the Admiral to come to Court, to work by some fit means to separate
them from the commerce and protection of the Hugonots, to take them off by a
present certainty from future machinations, to make every one taste the
benefits of peace, with the advantage of public and private repose; and by
this way to deprive that party of their Authority and Conduct, that they might
be able afterward more easily to restrain and suppress them.

But all these attempts were in vain. For the Admiral, who had laid down his
arms unwillingly; and Andelot, who only to free himself from the Siege at
Orleans, consented to a peace; were more intent than ever to contrive new
matters; and neither trusted the Kings demonstrations, nor the Queens
dissembling; nor believed they could ever be sincerely reconciled with the
Guises. And the Prince of Conde, always voluble, and of vast thoughts, satiated
with the delights and pleasures of the Court, despising the marriage with the
Widow of St. Andre as unequal to him in birth, had taken to Wife Mary Sister to
the Duke de Longeville, and was more than ever united with the Lords of
Chastillon. So that what the Queen built up with her Art, the disposition of
the Prince, and the subtilty of the Chastillons threw down. There was no less
disorder threatened from the dissension that arose in the Constables Family;
which being kindled before, brake forth now with greater violence. For Francis
Mareshal of Momorancy (his eldest Son) drawn by nearness of kindred, and a
certain ill-understood ambition, which inclined him (though with a mind and
understanding much inferior) to imitate the Admiral; more than ever openly
declared himself for the Lords of Chastillon* professing for their sakes a
passionate enmity to the Guises. And on the contrary, Henry d'Anville, in
respect of his Wife (who was Niece to Madam Valentine) allied to the Duke of
Aumale, and puffed up by being newly created Mareshal in the place of Brissac
lately deceased; through emulation also of his Brother, clearly depended upon
the Catholic party, and the friendship of the Princes of Lorain. By reason of
which discord, they not only divided the followers of their Family, but also
held the judgment and counsel of their Father in great suspense* seeing they
manifestly prepared, the one to side with the Hugonot party, and the other to
foment the resolutions of the Catholics; by their private contentions
augmenting the public distractions.

It happened at the same time the more to incite the animosity of the parties,
that the Cardinal of Lorain returning from Rome, and offering to enter Paris
with a certain guard of armed men, as he had power to do by a Brevet (so they
call it) from the King, sealed by the High Chancellor, and subscribed by the
Queen; the Mareshal of Momorancy, after the death of Brissac made Governor of
that City, first injuriously forbad his entry, and afterward in a tumultuous
manner put him out of the Town; pretending he knew not that the Cardinal had a
License from the King and the Council. In which tumult the Admiral, who was
near, seeking an occasion of new stirs, and burning with a desire to appear the
Arbitrator, and as it were the Oracle of France, ran thither, accompanied with
a great train, and appearing in the Parliament, a thing not usually done except
in great necessity, but by the King himself, or by his Authority gravely
advertised the Counselors, promising his care to pacify the uproars of the
people, and to free them from so imminent a danger. Which kind of proceeding
exceedingly offended the King and the Queen; it appearing to them, that those
people presumed too evidently to counterpoise the Royal Authority. But the end
at which they aimed made them artificially dissemble their displeasure. With
these seeds of discord ended the year 1565.

At the beginning of the year following, the King and Queen being really
intent, though inwardly exasperated, 1566.
to put an end to the troubles of the Kingdom rather by the arts of Peace, than
the violence of War, went to Moulins; where those that were summoned met from
all parts at the Assembly; The Assembly at Moulins, and the decree made there.
in which the complaints of the people being proposed and considered, and the
abuses introduced; according to the advice of the High Chancellor, there was a
long punctual decree formed, in which was prescribed a form of Government, and
a manner of proceeding for the Magistrates, taking away those corruptions and
disorders that use to give the subject just cause of complaint. At the same
time the King, insisting upon the pacification of his subjects for the general
peace of the Kingdom, a reconciliation was endeavored between the Houses of
Guise and Chastillon, at which appeared on the one side the Mareshal of
Momorancy with the Chastil^ons; on the other, the Cardinals of Lorain and
Guise: but with such backwardn^ss in both parties, that there was little hope
of sincere intentions, where there appeared so much disorder, and such an
adherence to private interests. For on the one part, the Duke of Aumale,
Brother to the Cardinals, had absolutely refused to be present thereat; and
Henry Duke of Guise, yet in age of minority, came thither, only not to
displease his Tutors; but carried himself in such a grave, reserved manner,
that it clearly appeared, though his Governors brought him against his will,
when he was once come of age, he would not forget the death of his Father, nor
observe this peace, to which he could not, being then so young, remain any way
obliged. But on the other part also the Mareshal of Momorancy, not enduring so
far to humble himself, denied to speak c^rtain words appointed by the Queen and
the Council for the satisfaction of the Cardinal of Lorain, nor would ever have
been brought to it, if he had not been forced by his Father* who if he refused,
threatened to disinherit him; and the Chastillons opposing by their Actions this
se^ming Agreement, ceased not to calumniate and make ^inister interpretations
of the proceedings of the Guises. An interview between the Princes of Guise and
the Chastillons; ^ut no reconciliation.
At the last they were brought together in the presence of the King, where they
embraced and discoursed, but with a general belief* even of the King himself,
that the reconciliation could not long endure; which within a few days proved
so indeed. For the Duke of Aumale arriving at the Court* denied expressly to
meet with, or use any act of salutation or civility to the Admiral* or the rest
of his Family. On the contrary, in the Queens presence he said, that the
Admiral laying to his charge that he had hired one to kill him, he should think
it a great happiness to be shut up with him in a chamber, that he might hand to
hand let him know* ^e had no need of help; but that he was able to determine
his own quarrels himself. And because the Queen being moved therewith,
answered, That they might meet in the field; the Duke rep^yed again, That he
came thither with fifty Gentlemen, but would return only with twenty; and if he
met the Admiral, he might perhaps make him ^ear mo^e: and in this fury he would
have left the Court, if the King had not laid an exp^ess command upon him to
stay. After which new exasperations, Andelot se^king all ^ccas^o^s of new
s^^^dals, publicly charged the Duke of Aumale in the Council, that he had set
one Captain Attin to murder him: to which the Duke replied with great show of
resentment, It was necessary to lay hold of Attin; who not being found culpable
in any thing, was at last released. Both parties ceased not mutually to
persecute each other both in words and deeds, each of them accusing their
adversaries, that they went about to raise men, and had an intent to disturb
the quiet of the Kingdom. Which (though diligently inquired into) proving but
vain surmises, at length it was thought the best way to continue the peace,
that the Lords of both parties should absent themselves from the Court, where
daily new occasions arising of con^estation between them, the things already
quieted were disturbed and subverted. To this end, and to give example to the
rest, the Constable with the Mareshal d'An^ille his Son, taking public leave
of the King and the Queen, went to their Castles in the Isle of France. So the
great Lords following the same resolution, within a few days after they all
departed; and particularly the Prince and the Admiral, went severally to their
own houses; and the Duke of Aumale being left Heir to Madam Valentine his
Mother-in-law, who died about that time, retired himself to Anet, a place of
pleasure which she had built. There remained at the Court only the Cardinal of
Lorain, whom the King employed in all businesses of importance; and the
Mareshal Momor^^cy, whose Government of Paris the Queen meant by some slight or
other to take away; that so powerful a people might not be under the command of
a person that was inclined to innovations; and that the chief support of the
Kings Authority for the present might be put into such hands as depended
absolutely upon himself.

At this same time happened the distastes and departure of the Queen of Navarre
from Court. For sentence being given by the King against Frances de Rohan, by
which the contract of marriage between Her and the Duke of Nemours, though
subscribed by their own hands, was made void; and he having concluded to marry
Anne d' Este, Widow to the late Duke of Guise; Queen Jane, after infinite, but
vain attempts in favor of her Niece; at the last, (just as they were Marrying
in the Kings presence) caused one whom she had hired with promise of Reward to
interpose, and make a Protestation in the name of Frances: but he being taken
and imprisoned, without interruption of the Marriage, and finding her designs
took no effect; equally offended withal, thinking her self injured and
despised, she resolved to leave the Court, and retire into Bearn: designing in
her mind, to raise new and more dangerous troubles. She took for occasion and
pretense of her departure, That she could not be suffered a free exercise of
her Religion. For the King being advertised by the Popes Nuncio, and diverse
others of the great resort of persons of all sorts to her lodging, to hear
Hugonot Sermons; and knowing the Parisians were greatly scandalized thereat; he
one day sent his Provost de l' Hostel (as they call him) to seize upon her
Minister: Provost de l' Hostel (called now adays le grand Provost de l' Hostel)
is the ordinary Judge of the Kings Household; his power extends to all
unpriviledged places within six leagues of the Court.
and though he were not taken, (for the Provost gave him secret notice, that he
might be gone) yet Queen Jane esteeming it as an huge affront, and having made
many complaints thereof to the Queen, pretended that this was the cause of her
departure. But the Court was full of joy and feasting for the Marriage of the
Duke of Nemours and Madam de Guise; besides many other Weddings that were
celebrated, made the Carnival appear indeed a time of pomp and pleasure; that
custom of the Nation giving a testimony to those who govern, That to lead a
merry pleasant life, is a way in some measure to mitigate the fierceness of
men's minds, by reason of such great dissentions then amongst them not a little
enraged.

The Feasts were continued with great solemnity for the Marriage of Prince
Lodovico Gonzago, before contracted, and now consummate. Lodovico Gonzago Son
to Frederick Duke of Man^ua, marries Henrie^^a de C^eve, Sister to the late
Duke of Nevers who was killed in the Battle of Dreux. This was Father to
C^arles Duke of Nevers, now Duke of Mantua.
This second Son of Frederick Duke of Mantua coming, when he was but a youth,
to the Court of France, by the advantage of his Birth and nobleness of
presence, but much more for quickness of his wit and Courtly behavior, got a
great reputation; which continually increasing, by giving upon all occasions
large testimonies of his valor, there was not any that surpassed him either in
the Kings favor, or general esteem of the Court.

It happened, that as the young Cavaliers of France used to court some Lady whom
they pretend to marry, this Prince, full of modesty and prudence, passing by
those which flourished in beauty or wealth, and were therefore sought after by
many, made his addresses to Henriette de Cleve, Sister to the Duke of Neurs, a
Lady of great discretion and wise behavior; but neither for beauty nor portion
equal to many others in the Court. But the Prince liking her, and she esteeming
his affection; after her Brother was killed in the Battle of Dreux, and she, as
eldest Daughter remained Heir to the State; with a rare example of gratitude,
declared freely, that she would not choose a Husband amongst any of those that
newly pretended; but whatever came of it, would marry the Prince Gonzaga. For
she had sufficient testimony, that he, being her Servant when she was poor and
forsaken, loved her person; whereas all the rest could not deny, but that they
sought her at the present, only in regard of her fortune. So this greatness of
mind being approved of both by the King and the Queen, the Marriage followed
without delay, and at this time was solemnized: After which was celebrated the
Wedding of the Prince Dolphine, Son to the Duke of Monpensier, who married the
only Daughter and Heir of the Marquess de Meziere; which was an unequal match
for Birth, but she brought him forty thousand Franks yearly Revenue; and having
been before promised to the Duke of Mayenne, second Son to the late Duke of
Guise, those of the Hugonot Faction hoped that this Alliance would breed
discord between the Houses of Monpensier and Lorain. But the Cardinal and the
Duke of Aumale, with the rest, who knew how much it concerned them not to break
friendship with a Prince of the Blood, and for Estate the most considerable
amongst them, wisely dissembled this injury; seeing it was impossible to hinder
the Match already concluded. After these principal ones, many other lesser
Weddings following, the Court seemed in appearance altogether turned to pomp
and delights; but nourished inwardly the pestiferous seeds of long discords and
bloody Wars.

The End of the Third BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
FOURTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Fourth Book relates the occasion of the Second Civil War: the sudden
rising of the Hugonots to take the King and Queen Mother Prisoners, who were at
Monceaux a place of pleasure in Brye: their fright, flight and retreat; first
to Meaux, and afterward to Paris: the deliberation of the Hugonots to besiege
that City, and famish it; to this purpose they take the Towns about it, burn
the Mills, go close under the Gates, and possess themselves of the Bridge at
Charenton: the Queen promotes a Treaty of Agreement, which is drawn out in
length by many parlies; but takes no effect: Foot and Horse come to the King
from all parts: so that having gotten a great Army, the Constable issues out
of the City to make the Enemy retire: the Battle of St. Denis follows, in
which the Hugonots are routed, and the Constable is killed: they take the way
of Champagne to meet with Aids sent them out of Germany; and in the place of
the other, the King makes Henry Duke of Anjou his Brother, General of the
Army: Supplies arrive out of Flanders, sent by the Catholic King, and from
Piedmont, and diverse other places: the Duke of Anjou pursues the Hugonots to
fight with them before they join with the Germans; he overtaketh them near
Chalons, but through the discords and impediments put in by his Counselors,
the Battle is hindered: The Hugonots pass the Meuse, and join with Prince
Casimir, and the other German Supplies. They return with new courage and force
into Champagne: The Queen Mother goes to the Army to remedy the disorders;
where it is resolved not to fight with the Hugonots who were grown so powerful,
but to draw out the War in length: wherefore the Armies go on, both the same
way: this counsel troubles the Prince of Conde and the Admiral, unable through
want of Money to keep the Army long together: They resolve to besiege Chartres,
whereby to provoke the Catholics to Battle: The danger of Chartres, brings
on a new Treaty of Peace, which at last is concluded: The Armies are disbanded;
but the Hugonots restore not all the places that they held; and the King
dismisseth neither the Swisses nor the Italians; whereupon new differences
arise; the King seeing the Conditions ill performed upon which he promised a
pardon, gives order to apprehend the Prince of Conde and the Admiral, who with
a good Guard were retired to Noyon in Burgundy, upon advice given, they fly and
save themselves at Rochel; raise an Army, make themselves Masters of Xaintonge,
Poictou, and Tourain: the King sends the Duke of Anjou with all the Army
against them: the Armies draw near each other at Jesenevil, but fight not: they
march toward Loudun, but the contrariety of the season hinders their fighting:
both Armies, overcome ^ith cold, retire; and being infected with sickness,
suffer a great mortality: they return into the field in March: The Hugonots
pass the River Charente, break the Bridges, and stop the Passages: the Duke of
Anjou finds a stratagem to pass the River; the Battle of Jarna^ follows; in
which the Prince of Conde is slain, and the Hugonots are defeated. The Admiral
causes the Prince of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, Son to him that was
killed, to be declared Heads of the Faction; and by reason they were young, the
direction of the War remains in him; he divides all his forces to defend the
Cities belonging to his party. The Duke of Anjou pursues the Victory, and
lays siege to Cognac; but finding it strongly defended, raises the Camp, and
takes diverse other Towns. A new Army of Germans comes into France in favor of
the Hugonots, under the Command of the Duke of Deux-ponts; he marches toward
the Loire; takes the la Charity, and there passes the River. The Duke of
Deux-ponts, General of the Germans, dies of a Fever; and Count Mansfield
succeeds him in his Command. The Prince and the Admiral go to meet the Germans:
The Duke of Anjou, that he may not be encompassed by them, retires into
Limosin; the Hugonot Forces join; follow the Kings Army; skirmish hotly at
Rochabeille; through the barrenness of the Country the Hugonots are forced to
retire. The Queen Mother comes to the Camp: it is resolved to separate the
Kings Army, to let the Enemies Forces consume with time: the Army disbands, and
the Duke of Anjou retires to Loches in Touraine.

WHilst these things were in agitation at the Court, all other parts of the
Kingdom groaned under several afflictions, and frequent Insurrections. For the
Hugonots arrogating to themselves a much greater liberty than was granted them
by the Edict of Pacification, endeavored in many places, without any regard of
the Magistrates, by tumults and violence to extend it to the uttermost: and on
the other side the Catholics desiring to have that power which was permitted
them restrained, sought by often complaints, and sometimes by force of Arms to
molest them: whereby in the midst of Peace, the War was in a manner kindled
again in all parts.

These distractions in the Provinces, not only troubled the Parliaments, which
were wholly employed how to remedy the disorders that proceeded from matters of
Religion, but also the Kings Council, together with the whole Court, where all
the weight of the business falling at last, there arise many obstinate disputes
between the Protectors, and Favorers of both Factions; the Mareshal of
Momorancy and the Admirals Adherents laboring to obtain an enlargement, or at
least a confirmation of the liberty granted to the Hugonots, and the Cardinal
of Bourbon, but much more the Cardinal of Lorain pressing that the Catholics
might be satisfied in their desires, and the liberty of the other suppressed.
Wherefore the contestations so increased when any thing of this subject came to
be handled, and the minds of men were so swayed by passion, that it was thought
necessary to appoint the Duke of Anjou, the Kings second Brother, though yet a
Youth, President of the Council, and to make an order that no business
concerning Religion should be debated, if the King or the Queen were not
present: nor was this sufficient, for the persons engaged on both sides
accustomed now to a liberty of speech as well as of action, all reverence due
to the Royal Majesty being laid aside, appeared exceeding violent in their
disputes, showing clearly that they were more inclined to the interests of the
Factions, than either to the public peace, or preservation of the Commonwealth.

Notwithstanding the Queen still remained constant to her own rules, and the
King persisted in the resolution already taken to dissemble with all possible
patience and sufferance, the insolences that were committed, and to endeavor
that policy rather than force might at length put an end to these evils. And
therefore by plausible Declarations sometimes in favor of one party, and
sometimes of the other, they sought so to appease both, that things might not
come to a manifest rupture, but that by prolongation of time, those wounds
might be healed which were yet open and fresh bleeding* for this reason the
King bestowed many favors upon the Admiral; and his dependants and followers
got more than the Courtiers themselves: for this cause the Prince of Conde was
suffered to enjoy such an absolute power in his Government of Picardy, that
showing a dislike to have the Mareshals of France in their ordinary Visitations
of the Frontiers to visit that Province, the King gave the Mareshal d' Anville
particular order not to go thither: and in this consideration, the complaints
brought in continually against the Hugonots were passed over; as also the
resentments of the Catholics put up with silence, that so these discords might
be buried in oblivion, and the troubles cease of themselves.

At the same time, the Constable who through age, and indisposition of body,
desired to retire himself, made suit to the King, that he might surrender his
Office to his Son Memorancy, which the Queen by reason of his humor and
inclinations absolutely disliking, the King was persuaded by her to return
answer, That having already designed whenever the Constable left off, or
could no longer exercise his charge, to make the Duke of Anjou his Brother
Lieutenant General, it was not at all necessary to think of any body to supply
that place; nevertheless not wholly to distaste the Constable, nor by this
refusal absolutely to lose his Son, they were content to admit Memoran^y into
the Council of the Affairs, a thing which he had sought after before, but could
never compass; and besides gave him 30000 Francks to pay his debts, though it
were in a time when Money was exceeding scarce. And though the Constable very
much troubled to receive a repulse, was not altogether satisfied with these
other demonstrations, yet at last he gave over his suit: but such was the
inconsiderateness of the Prince of Conde, being governed rather by violence
than reason, that as soon as he heard mention of surrendering the Constables
Office, he openly pretended to it for himself, without any consideration of the
Memorancy's Allies; which not only rendered the Kings denial excusable, who
being solicited by two such powerful pretenders, made choice of his Brother as
a mean between both, but also made an absolute breach between him and the
Constable, and in some measure took off Memorancy, who was before so much
inclined to favor his proceedings.

To this good success the Queen endeavored to add the reconciliation of the
Cardinal of Chastil^on, who being openly a Hugonot, and the Pope soliciting by
the Bishop of Ce^eda his Nuncio in the Court of France, that he might be
commanded to lay by his Cardinals Hat, and quit the Ecclesiastical preferments
that he held, the Queen with diverse excuses always putting off that business,
by offering the Cardinal a liberal recompense in temporal revenues and
preferments, sought by fair means to effect that which could not be done by
force. But these delays (which as the instances were greater from R^m^) still
increased, together with the favor that was shown at Court to the Bishops of
Vsez and Valence, whom the Pope as Heretics had degraded from their
Bishoprics, and many other such like things, made Pius Quintus, newly
succeeded to Pius Q^^^tus in the Apostolic Sea, conceive a very hard opinion
of the Queen, Pius Quin^us who succeeded Pius Quar^us, requires tha^ the
Cardinal of Chastillon be deprived of his Cardinals habit, and Ecclesiastical
preferments, because he follows the belief of Calvin; which being delayed,
for that, and other things, he i^ displeased with the Que^n.
which was yet more increased by a rumor spread abroad by her ill-willers,
that she had sent a Gentleman expressly to Constantinople to persuade the great
Turk to send an Army against the Christians, that so being busied in their own
preservation, they might not persist to think of, or interpose in the affairs
of the Kingdom of France: which opinion, though it were not grounded upon any
reason, yet it being generally believed for a truth that there was a Gentleman
sent to Porta, the Pope, little satisfied in other matters, was not alone moved
therewith, but also the Republic of Venice, the Senate there thinking it not
only a thing pernicious to all Christian Princes, but very contrary to what
they expected from the Queen in gratitude, whom they had so readily assisted in
her greatest extremities with their counsel, and much more with supplies.
Insomuch that the Nuncio made many complaints of it at the Court, and the
Venetian Ambassador by order from the Senate demanded, and had an Audience to
the same purpose both of the King and Queen, at which he modestly desired
repayment of the 100000 Ducats, which in courtesy were lent by the State for
the service of the Crown, alleging this reason, That the Turk (as report
went) coming so near them, they were necessitated to make use of what they had,
and to arm themselves for their own security.

The Queen being troubled at these rumors, and the ill opinion that was
conceived of her, and desiring above all things to preserve the friendship of
the Princes in confederacy with France, but especially the Pope and State of
Venice, because upon them she had grounded many hopes, thought it necessary to
send the Chevalier de Seurre expressly to Rome to clear her of those jealousies,
which business he knew so well how to manage, laying before the Pope all those
reasons that Ludovica Antenori had represented to his Predecessor, that his
Holiness though he were of a difficult scrupulous nature, remained fully
content and satisfied. She omitted not to perform the like Ceremony with the
Venetian State, the ^mity and wisdom of which she always made great account of,
having for that purpose dispatched away one of her Gentlemen, who with the
Leiger Ambassador at Venice was to negotiate that business: but he falling sick
upon the way, and dying afterward at Milan, the Ambassador took the whole care
of it upon himself, and at an Audience he had of the Prince in the presence of
the Seignory, which they call the College, he said, That the King his Master
had sent a Gentleman on purpose to treat of certain business with the
Republic, which he was now forced to do alone, for the said Gentleman being
arrived at Milan, fell sick there and died; That his Majesty commanded him to
say, That the amity and affection King Francis his Grandfather and King Henry
his Father always bore to the Republic were very great, but his alone
surpassed them all, by reason of the great benefits he had received from it,
and especially the supplies of money it sent him in his greatest necessity;
that he would not only satisfy the debt, but return the like or a greater
courtesy; that his Father by reason of the long War he had, left him many
debts, which he might well enough have paid, and gotten beforehand with money,
if it had not been for the Civil dissentions of his Kingdom; that if they were
ceased, yet the expense would not be taken away; for the jealousies that
continued would necessitate him still to keep an Army on Foot; that the
suspicion of War is worse than War it self; for there is one certain fence
against this, but that requires a vigilance on all sides; that to this was to
be added the great scarcity which equally afflicted all parts of his Kingdom,
and the tumults in Flanders, which being so near, obliged him according to the
Maxims of State, to make preparations, with great expense, for his own
security: Wherefore he desired to be excused if he did not immediately satisfy
the whole debt, that he would presently lay down a third part, and in some time
after the rest, and that if the Republic had occasion, he would not only pay
what was due, but furnish as much more if it were required; wherefore they
might make account of that money as if they had it in their own Treasury: that
the more his Majesty grew in years, the more he grew to the knowledge of the
love and friendship of the Republic, and the obligations he had to it, both
for his own particular and his own Kingdom. To this the Duke made answer, That
in repayment of the money the King might take his own convenience, for it was
lent to serve his occasions.

Then the Ambassador continuing his discourse, said, That the second thing he
had in charge, was concerning a bruit spread abroad that his Majesty had
solicited the Great Turk to send his Army against the Christians, which it
seemed proceeded from a Letter written by one of Raguze, which was afterward
divulged with additions by the Emperors Ministers, and the Spaniards who were
in that City, it being interpreted by them, that the Gentleman the King sent
the May before to Constantinople, was to this effect, though the truth were,
the occasion of sending that Gentleman, was to solicit the release of certain
Provincial Slaves, that the King being desired to call home the Gentleman that
was resident there, had granted his request, and established this other in his
place, who seemed to like of the employment; that his Majesty would continue
his ancient correspondence with the Turks, just upon the same terms that his
Father and Grandfather had done before, without innovating any thing therein,
that if he had any business to treat with the Turk, or a new capitulation to
make with any Prince on Earth, he would never do it without the privity, advice
and consent of the Republic; for he so well knew the amity and affection which
that State bare unto him, and the prudence and wisdom thereof to be such, that
it would never approve of any thing that should not be beneficial to France,
and all Christendom; that if the Republic would continue as it had done
hitherto with the Turk, he would do the same* and if it changed resolution, he
would follow the like steps, for the King would never separate himself from it,
but ever go along in all things that concerned their common interest. The
Senate was very well content with so ample a Declaration* and desired the
Leiger Ambassador to testify both to the King and the Queen their satisfaction
therein, by which means all the distastes at Rome and Venice being removed, and
the ancient intelligence with both those States confirmed, the whole care was
directed to the particular affairs of the Kingdom.

But all the pains and industry used to appease the Prince, and to secure the
Chastillons was in vain: He knew not how to leave his natural disposition, nor
would these by any means trust to the Arts of the Court, and the Hugonots
aiming at such an ample liberty as was granted by the Edict of January, could
not contain themselves within the limits of the Articles agreed upon at the
Pacification: Wherefore following the example of the Catholics, who by a joint
Embassy from the Pope, and the other Princes, solicited the publication of
the Council of Trent; they procured likewise from the Protestant Princes of
Germany to send an Embassy of some eminent persons, who complaining that those
of the same Religion with them were very ill treated, should desire the King,
that in consideration of those Princes, and for the quiet of the Kingdom, he
would permit the Hugonots a full liberty to assemble themselves in all places.

This Embassy sent by the Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Wittembergh, The
Pro^^stant Princes of Germany send Ambassadors to the King in favor of the
Hugonots, and receive a sharp answer.
the Duke of Deux-ponts, one of the Dukes of Saxony, the Duke of Pomerania, and
the Marquess of Baden, many thought it was made at the expense, and with the
money of the Hugonots; for the interests of those Princes were not such, that
they should make this Expedition, which was so extraordinary, at this time.
However it were, the Ambassadors having first conferred with the Prince, the
Admiral, and the rest of that faction, went afterward to the King, who was
returned to Paris, and at their Audience, in a tedious formal Narration
testified the good will of their Princes, and the intentions they had to
continue their ancient friendship with the Crown of France; after which
preamble, they desired first the observance of the Edict of Pacification, and
afterward by little and little expressing themselves more at large, demanded
that the Ministers of the Reformed Religion might preach both in Paris, and in
all other places of the Kingdom, and that the people might freely in what
numbers they pleased go to hear them.

The King by nature beyond measure choleric, and by reason of his long
conversation in the War, of a rough behavior, being now of an age to discern
good from ill, was before exceedingly offended, knowing since they came into
the Kingdom they had first treated with others besides himself, but afterward
when he heard their demands, he was so out of order, that he could hardly
answer them in short, that he would preserve a friendship and affection for
those Princes, as long as they did not interpose in the affairs of his Kingdom,
as he did not meddle in their States: and after he had recollected himself a
little while, said, with manifest show of disdain, That he had need likewise to
solicit their Princes to suffer the Catholics to preach and say Mass in
their Cities and Towns; and with these words took his last leave of the
Ambassadors: Notwithstanding, that they might not remain altogether
unsatisfied, and return with this distaste to their Princes, the Queen, to make
them some amends for the liberty her Son had used, besides many other honors,
gave order that they should have great and noble Presents.

The Kings anger was wrought to the height by the carriage of the Admiral, who
being come to Court in this conjuncture, and fearing to lose his reputation
with his party, or else ashamed whilst stranger Princes solicited in the
behalf of the Hugonots not to show himself, the morning after being in the
Kings Chamber, and seeing there by chance a Declaration published a little
before; That at the Preachings tolerated in private houses, none should be
present but those of the Family, he took occasion to make great complaint
thereof; saying, In this manner we are deprived the liberty of admitting a
Friend who comes by chance to our houses in a visit, to hear the Word of God;
whilst on the other side, the Catholics are permitted to assemble wheresoever
they please, without prescribing their number, manner, or any other
circumstance of their meetings: at which words, the Constable being present,
sharply reprehended his Nephew, and answered, The case is not the same, for the
King does not give a Toleration to the Catholics; but it is the Religion he
himself professes, which is derived to him by a long succession from his
Ancestors; whereas on the contrary, the exercise of the new Religion was simply
a grace of his Majesty, for what time, number or place he was pleased, Charles
the IX. sharply answers the Admiral, and takes a severe resolution against
the Hugonots.
or should be pleased to grant it them. And the King in choler added, At the
first you were content with a little liberty, now you will be equal, within a
little while you will be chief, and drive us out of the Kingdom. The Admiral
held his peace, but was much troubled in his countenance; and the King in a
great chase went to the Queen-Mothers Chamber, where aggravating the business,
he said in presence of the Chancellor, That the Duke of Alva's opinion was
right, that their Heads were too eminent in the State, that no arts could
prevail with such subtle Artificers, and therefore it was necessary to use
rigor and force: and though the Queen endeavored to appease him, from that
time forward he was so fixed in that belief, that it was not possible to alter
or make him of another mind.

Daily something or other happened to increase and augment the Kings anger: For
the Queen of Navarre showing as much malice as she could, had a little before
made a sudden Insurrection at Pamiers, a City in the County of Foix, where the
Hugonots taking a scandal at a Procession on Corpus Christi day, betook
themselves to their Arms, and falling upon the others that were unarmed, made a
great slaughter among the Chruchmen, and in the same fury burnt and ruined
their houses; and by her instigation, with the other principal Heads of that
party, strange tumults were raised at Montaban, Cahors, Rhodez, Perigieux,
Valence, and other places in Languedoc and Daulphine; in which, though no great
matter happened, no killing of men nor shedding of blood; yet, as it came to
their turns, either the Catholics or the Hugonots were driven out of their
Countries, according as the one party or the other was most powerful in the
place, with perpetual trouble to the King and Queen, who many days together
were very much in doubt of the revolt of Lions, where through the great
concourse of people that from all parts, but especially from Savoy, fled
thither for Religion, the Hugonots were so increased, and raised such
commotions, that the City had certainly remained in the power of that party, if
Renato of Birago, President, who was afterward Chancellor, and successively
Cardinal, had not with great dexterity and courage suppressed those tumults;
after which, though the first fury were over, yet the Factions ceased not
continually to persecute each other, and in particular, the Hugonots were
accused to have wrought a Mine a thousand paces long under the Bulwarks, with
an intent, whilst the people were in these distractions, to give fire to it,
and surprise the City: and though they excused themselves, by showing that the
Cave found under ground was the relics of an ancient Aqueduct; yet the King
remained not without jealousies, and sent the President order to reinforce the
Garrison, and to use all possible diligence to secure the Town; who providing
with great care and rigor to hinder the Assemblies of the Hugonots, they were
exceedingly offended, and murmured thereat in all parts.

The like suspicion was at the same time had of Avignon, which the Kings of
France, through common respects and interests, have ever no less than their
own, taken into their care and protection. For all those who dissented from the
Roman Catholic Faith, being by order from the Pope expelled that City, they
retired to the adjacent places in Provence and Languedoc, where they practiced
underhand to surprise it; and so far their design was advanced, that they had
already intelligence to possess themselves of one of the Gates; but the
business being discovered by the vigilance of the Citizens, the Cardinal of
Armagnac, who was Governor there, causing diligent search to be made after the
accomplices, apprehended some of them, and sent Scipione Vimarcato post to the
Court, to render an account thereof to the King, who sent a positive command to
the Count of Tend Governor of Provence, to Monsieur de Gordes Lieutenant of
Dauphine, and to the Viscount of Ioyeuse Lieutenant of Languedoc, that they
should furnish such forces as were necessary for the securing of it; by which
means the attempt of the Hugonots at length proved vain; who not being daunted
with this ill success, were still ready to embrace any new occasion, having
likewise laid a plot to enter into Narbon: and indeed their practices kept all
the Provinces and Fortresses of the Kingdom in perpetual apprehensions, but
especially the King and Queen, who seeing the fire already kindled in so many
places, reasonably enough feared the flame thereof would at length burst forth
with greater violence, and in some place or other cause a notorious ruin.

The Hugonots were no less bold with their pens than their swords; for at the
same time a Minister, who was born at Orleans, preached seditiously against the
Kings Authority; and had likewise printed a Book in which he maintained, That
the people of France were no longer obliged to be obedient to the King, because
he was turned Idolater; and for this reason affirmed, That it was lawful to
kill him; An Hugonot Minis^er prin t a B ook and preaches that it is lawful to
kill the King.
from which impious diabolical seed afterward sprang up in other times and in
other persons, that pernicious Doctrine, which with such horrible perversion of
all humane and divine Laws, instructed men, under the pretense of Piety and
Religion, to imbrue their hands in the Blood of their lawful Kings, by GOD's
Ordinance appointed over them as His Deputies. And perhaps by this Doctrine,
which sounded well in their ears, because agreeable to their designs, the
Admiral and the rest of his party were persuaded to plot, not only against the
Queen Mother, but even against the Person of the King himself; of which (either
truly or falsely) he was accused by a Gentleman; A Prisoner confesses that he
was hired by the Admiral to kill the King.
who (being imprisoned for another great offense) sought to obtain his pardon
by discovering, that he and two other Gentlemen were seduced, and suborned with
money by the Admiral to kill the King when they should find a fit opportunity;
and though at the first there was not much credit given to what he said, yet
being confronted with those whom he named as Accomplices, with unexpected
Questions he so amazed and silenced them, that the King was put into an
exceeding jealousy; yet the proofs not being sufficient for so great a
conspiracy, the business was passed over with silence, and the Gentleman for
his other offenses condemned to die.

To this great suspicion was added this other accident, The Queen Mother is
threatened in a Letter to be killed.
that the Queen Mother going one morning out of her Chamber to Mass, there was
found at her feet a long Letter directed to her self, in which she was
threatened, that if she changed not her course, and suffered not those of the
Reformed Religion to enjoy full Liberty of Conscience, she should be murdered,
as the Duke of Guise was formerly, and Maynard, President of the Parliament of
Paris; who at the beginning of the tumults about Religion, for having passed a
severe Vote against the Hugonots, was killed at Noonday with a shot, it never
being known by whom. Wherefore the Queen was admonished to guard her self from
the wrath of GOD, and the desperate resolution of men.

All these things laid together, and continually multiplying on all sides,
exceedingly incensed and exasperated the King, who as he grew in years,
conceived still a more inveterate hate against those who obstinately opposed
his will; wherefore his nature suiting with the Duke of Alva's counsel, and the
Hugonots not ceasing continually to offend and provoke him, he was every day in
secret consultation with his Mother to find some prompt expedite remedy to
extirpate this evil. The Queen remained doubtful, or rather of a contrary
opinion, and much more the Chancellor de l' Hospital, being both of them averse
to those dangerous violent proceedings, as altogether disagreeing to the
disposition of the French; insomuch that together and apart they earnestly
desired and advised the King to be patient, and dissemble his anger; even the
Cardinal of Lorain himself, with his Brothers and Nephews, though they were
very well pleased to see him so passionate, yet wished he would have kept
himself more reserved until some seasonable fit opportunity had been offered.
But there was no end of the complaints of the people, nor of the jealousies and
dangers stirred up by the Heads of the Hugonots: all parts abounded with bloody
mournful dissentions; the Prince and the Admiral sometimes leaving the Court,
sometimes returning, but ever with some new complaints or pretensions, gave
great occasion both of jealousy and offense: and the King being passionate and
furious, could no longer endure them; so that at length it was resolved
together with policy to employ force, and to bridle the excessive Liberty of
the Rebellious Faction. And the Catholic King sending at the same time the
Duke of Alva Governor into Flanders, to curb the insolences of those (who
under a pretense of Religion, but truly through the hate they bare to the
Spanish Government, had at once withdrawn themselves from their obedience to
the Catholic Church and the temporal Jurisdiction) the Treaty of Bayonne was
renewed, and by consent of both Princes an Agreement made, that by mutually
aiding each other, they should endeavor the suppression of such eminent
persons who were the Incendiaries to nourish Rebellion in their several
Dominions.

The Duke of Alva went with great force toward the Low Countries, which in
diverse places border upon France, so that this occasion served the King and
Queen for pretense to arm, who feigning to have great apprehensions of the
Spaniards, gave present order to hire a considerable number of Swisses,
commanded all the Provinces to have their forces in a readiness, levied men in
Lyonoise, under color of sending diverse companies of French Infantry into the
States beyond the Mountains, and getting money from several parts, made a
bargain with certain Italian Merchants, to furnish eight hundred thousand
Crowns, with a full intent to employ these preparations to restrain and humble
those insolent Spirits, who after so many attempts would hardly ever be
appeased of themselves, and to put an end to the miserable distractions of the
Kingdom.

But the very same reasons that necessitated the King to this resolution,
necessitated the Heads of the Hugonots likewise to be vigilant for their own
preservation; for having many testimonies of the Kings averseness to them,
seeing the Pope reconciled with the Queen, who before in show seemed to favor
them, perceiving the Princes of Lorain powerful at Court, and finding all the
policies that were used tended only to their suppression, if at first the
restlesness of their natures only made them desire to return to arms, they
thought it now an unavoidable necessity; and though the passage of the Duke of
Alva gave sufficient color to their proceedings, yet they saw that quite
contrary to what was pretended, the King and the Queen Mother (notwithstanding
the High Chancellor opposed it) were resolved not only to furnish Victuals and
all other commodities for the Spaniards, (who in their passage into Flanders
were to touch upon their Dominions) but also to send provisions into Bresse and
Savoy, which wanted them, and could not possibly otherwise have nourished such
a multitude of people as were to pass there. Besides this, they had advice that
the Count of Brissac, Colonel of the French Infantry beyond the Mountains, who
entertained five Companies of Foot, every one consisting of two hundred men,
though he said he was to pass into the Marquisate of Salusses to secure the
places in that State, yet he left the greatest part of them at Lions, and the
rest under excuses remained in Daulphine, as places suspected to be at the
devotion of the Hugonots: of which to be the more assured, they persuaded
Andelot as General of the Foot, to desire the charge of those Levies, and saw
he was refused it. They observed, that no occasion was omitted to restrain the
liberty of Religion, and that the injuries the Catholics did the Hugonots were
not so ill interpreted as any the least action of the others. They marked the
repulse was given to Momorancy when he pretended to the Con^^ableship, because
he inclined to favor them, and that the Marquess d' Elbeuf General of the
Galleys being dead, his place was presently bestowed upon the Baron de la
G^rde, that Monsieur de Meru, Momorancy's Brother, might not have time ^o make
suit for it, a man who had ever applied himself to the profession of the Sea,
but of the same inclinations with his Brother. They took notice likewise that
when the Mareshal de Burdillon died, Monsieur de Gonnor, Brother of the
Mareshal de Brissac deceased, was the very same night chosen in his place, to
hinder the pretenses of Andelot and Muy, who had a promise of it before. All
these things considered together, they doubted that the King of France holding
intelligence with the King of Spain, would at length chastise them for their
past insolences, and force them to live conformable to the Catholic Religion:
and though the King sent the Viscount de Ioyeuse to besiege Pamiers, that had
openly revolted, where the Rebels at first sight of the Cannon abandoned the
Town, and fled into the Mountains; yet by the advice of his Mother* he still
made show of bearing great respect to the Authority of the Hugonot Lords,
excused and palliated the things that were done; and to keep them in their duty
until such time as the Swisses were come, and the other forces gotten together,
continued a seeming affection to the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, withal
assuring them, his int^ntion was that they should enjoy a Liberty of
Conscience, and live according to the Capitulation, omitting no kind of art
^^at might any way conduce to please or secure them. And the Queen Mother (upon
whose actions the wariest of the Hugonots chiefly cast an eye) to cover with a
more profound dissimulation the secret of their Counsels, and to take away the
suspicion which some hasty actions, or any the least inconsiderate speech of
the Kings might give them, making use of the common report spread abroad that
King Philip had resolved to pass himself in person into Flanders* and divulgi^g
and making more of it then was yet spoken of, seemed to have exceeding
jealousies, and to apprehend that this Voyage of his was with some further end
than merely to suppress the Gueux, for which the forces of the Duke of Alva
were more then sufficient, Gueux, a Sect of Heretics.
whereupon she put on such a show of perplexity, that she made most men indeed
believe all those preparations of men and money were only for this occasion,
which that it might be the more credited, diverse of the Lords were sent for to
the Court, and making a kind of assembly, whereat many of the Hugonots were
present, they entered into a consultation of the means not only how to defend
the Frontiers, but also to make an offensive War against the Spaniards, if they
found the Catholic King came with any sinister intention; and as it were by
the advice of this assembly they resolved to send young l' Aubespine the
Secretary into Spain, who pretended he went for no other purpose but to
dissuade that King from coming, or else by observation to make probable
conjectures of the end, and designs of his Voyage; but the truth is, he was
sent to confirm the former agreement. Withal to be sure that these
dissimulations should be well acted on both sides: the Queen dispatched away
post Father Hugo a Franciscan Friar, who having communicated to the Catholic
King the intention of their proceedings, ordered it so, to give the more color
to the jealousies in France, that he should receive l' Aubespine without any
manner of respect, delaying his Audience, and making no account of him, and in
all other occurrences show little confidence or satisfaction either from the
King or the Queen Mother, who on the other side ceased not to complain in
public of the Spaniards, discovering a design and resolution suddenly to move
with their Forces against them; which was so excellently dissembled, that not
only the common sort of people who were not concerned in the affairs, but even
the Pope himself so far believed all that was done to be real, that he very
earnestly interceded by his Nuncio to persuade the Queen, that the Catholic
King intended nothing at all against the King her Son, and therefore it was not
necessary to make such great preparations of Soldiers, who if they were led
upon the Confines, might perhaps be an occasion of some mischief, which was not
thought on before. The Queen answered the Nuncio with ambiguous artificial
spee^hes, neither denying nor affirming the War, expressing a mistrust of the
Catholic Kings designs, and complaining of him, that he had in no measure
answered the confidence she had of his integrity, and the care that was taken,
that the Insurrections in France might not encourage his Subjects to rebel; but
at the same time declared, That the King her Son intended not to violate the
League with the Spaniards, nor to resolve upon a War, unless he were
necessitated and provoked first by them: Which uncertain kind of discourse
rather increased the doubts, than any way satisfied concerning the truth.

The Pope was not alone deceived with these dissimulations* The Prince of C^nde
persuades the King to make war with Spain, and offers him a great number of the
Hugonots, whi h more exasperates the King*
but the Prince of Conde, of a disposition apt enough to receive any new
impressions, counseled the King to take this occasion to make War with the
Spaniards, offering to bring him a great number of men of the Hugonot Faction,
which served only to exasperate the King* who could not be well pleased, that
any body should presume to have a greater credit or authority in his own
Kingdom, and with the Subjects thereof, than himself; and though the Queen
perpetually desired him to dissemble his pass^on, and the other Catholic Lords
did ^he same; yet he could not forbear to express his displeasure with the
Prince, and to reprove him for what he had said, though afterward he excused
himself to the Queen, that he treated him so on purpose to take him off from
the hopes of being Constable; for which the Prince at length moving the King
himself, the Duke of Anjou, being first thoroughly instructed by his Mother,
without expecting the Kings Answer, replied in a disdainful manner, That his
Majesty having promised to make him his Lieutenant General, he was not of such
a temper, to suffer that any body else should pretend to command the Army but
himself; which repulse displeasing the Prince, he shortly after left the Court,
the same did the Admiral and Andelot with much greater reason of discontent;
for the Colonels Brissa^ and Strozzi having refused to obey the command of
Andelot General of the French Infantry, the Council through hate of him,
determined it, contrary to custom, in their favor.

Nevertheless the Queen continuing her wonted a^ts, endeavored by many
demonstrations of kindness still to entertain the Hugonot pa^ty with hopes,
often discoursing of her diffidence in Spain, of the jealousies of the Duke of
Alva, of the troubles in Scotland, where there were commotions of great
consequence, for which she seemed to take exceeding thought, by reason of the
reciprocal intelligence ever held (...) that Crown, and of the little
correspondence with England* for having refused upon the instance of that Queen
to restore Callais, with many more things of the like nature, which all tended
to lull the restless curiosity of the Hugonots. But it is a hard matter to
deceive those who are full of jealousies, and careful to observe every little
accident. The Prince of Conde and the Admiral, who knowing the guilt of their
own Conscience, put no trust in the flatteries of the Court, calling to mind
all the past occurrences, and considering them thoroughly, resolved not to be
prevented, but to gain the advantage of being first in Arms. Wherefore, at the
beginning of the Summer in the year 1567. six thousand Swisses arriving in the
Isle of France under the conduct of Colonel Fifer, 1567.
a man of great esteem amongst his own Nation, the Heads of the Hugonots being
come to Valeri, showed their adherents certain secret advertisements which they
said they had from a principal person at Court, in which they were advised to
stand upon their guard; for the intention of those that governed, was, to seize
upon the persons of the Prince and the Admiral, with a resolution to keep the
first in perpetual imprisonment, and presently to put the other to death; then
making use of the Swisses and other Soldiers, on a sudden to clap Garrisons
into those Cities which they thought inclined to the Reformed Religion, and
revoking the Act of Pacification to forbid the exercise thereof in all parts of
the Kingdom.

At the beginning there were many different opinions amongst them, for diverse
gave no credit to this advertisement, others were diffident of their own
strength, and a great part abhorred the necessity of a War; insomuch that they
left Valeri, with a resolution not to proceed any further till they were better
assured of the truth of their intelligence: but the Swisses being already come
into the Isle of France, who at first it was said should stay upon the
Confines, and the Cardinal de S. Croix from his Bishopric of Arles arrived at
Court, The Hugonots jealousies of the Kings preparations, resolve upon a War.
who, the Hugonots suspected, came as Legate from the Pope, to authorize with
the Kings consent the observation of the Council of Trent, the chief Leaders of
the Faction re-assemble themselves at Chastillon, where the Prince, the
Admiral, and Andelot, persuaded them without further delay to take Arms; which
opinion, though with some difficulty, at length prevailing, they presently
entered into a consultation what course they should take in the administration
of the War.

Some thought it best to get possession of as many Towns and places as they
could in all parts of the Kingdom, to the end to separate and divide the Kings
Forces. Others by the example of the late War thought this advice both
unprofitable and dangerous; and persuaded, having made themselves Masters of
two or three strong places at a reasonable distance one from the other, where
the Forces of the Faction might assemble, as soon as was possible to put it to
a Battle, seeing without some notable Victory they could never hope to bring
their business to a prosperous end.

But the Admiral who with long premeditation had thoroughly weighed these
opinions, placing all his hope in expedition and prevention, proposed a more
desperate indeed, but far more expedite way, and advised, that before they were
thought of, they should make an attempt on a sudden to seize upon the persons
of the King and Queen Mother, who imagining they had with their arts brought
the Hugonots into a stupid security, or else believing they could not so soon
or so easily bring their Forces together, passed their time without any
apprehensions for the present at Monceaux, a House of the Queens, and at some
other places of pleasure in Brye, where they might with much facility be
surprised and carried away. He made appear to them that by this sudden
alteration they should gain that power, that appearance of reason, and those
Forces which in the late War their adversaries had, and through which the
Victory at length inclined wholly to their side, and concluded, that though the
King and the Queen for their security kept the Swisses in the same Province, in
a place not far from the Court, yet if they came upon them on a sudden they
would not have time to expect their aid; so the King being taken, they might
presently set upon the Swisses, who being divided in their quarters would be
easily suppressed, and they once defeated, there remained in no part of the
Kingdom a body of men together, that could make resistance, or hinder the
progress of their Arms. This stratagem wonderfully pleased them all, and
without further dispute they appointed to meet armed with as many Horse as they
could get the 27 day of September, and assigned Rosay, a Town in the Province
of Brye very near Monceaux where the Court remained, for their general
Rendezvous.

Many have reported, and some who in several occasions were taken in Gascony by
Monsieur de Monlu^ and put to their trial, confessed upon the torture, that the
chief scope of this enterprise was to murder the King and the Queen, with all
her other Children, that the Crown might come to the Prince of Conde; but so
great a cruelty was not generally believed of all men.

Now whilst the Hugonots made their preparations in diverse places, and whilst
their Confederates and Dependents assembled themselves together, the enterprise
was carried with mavelous secrecy: but when they began to move from several
parts to the place appointed, the Queen though late, and when it was even ready
to be put in execution, had advertisement thereof, who never imagining that the
Hugonots could so soon, or with such secrecy unite themselves, or make any
insurrection, that she should not have notice of it long before; and thinking
her self secure through the strength of her Swisses who lay so near, was at
this time surprised with danger, when she least dreamt of any molestation,
having perhaps too much relied upon those dissimulations and arts which she
used to appease the restless minds of the Hugonots, yet not being at all
daunted with the greatness of the danger, believing her preservation depended
wholly upon quickness, as soon as ever she received the news, she presently
with her Son and some few near about them took Horse, and leaving all their
carriage and train behind, went in great diligence to Meaux, which was the
nearest Town, not having time to save themselves in any place that was stronger
or better defended. There they sent one Messenger after another for the
Swisses, who quartered in the same Province but a few Leagues off, and the
Mareshal de Momorancy was dispatched away to the Hugonots to demand of them in
the KINGS Name the cause of their taking Arms.

Momorancy, as is said before, in his heart favored the Princes and the
Admirals Factions: but his natural averseness to action, the respect he bore
his Father, his modesty of mind, and the little satisfaction he received from
the Prince of Conde, made him nevertheless hold with the Catholic party, and
therefore he was thought a fit person to serve the Queens design, which was to
amuse the Hugonots Forces till the Swisses were come to Court. And it fell out
according to their desire, for meeting the Prince and the Admiral upon the way,
whilst he informed himself of their reasons for this commotion, whilst he
disputed with them the unjustice of the open violence they intended to the
Kings person, and whilst they were consulting and debating with contrariety of
opinions amongst themselves, what answer the should return to the Queen, the
Swisses not losing any minute of the time, but beginning presently to march
with wonderful speed, as if it had been to run a race, arrived where the King
was, and the Hugonots lost the opportunity of effecting so great a design.

But the Swisses being already come, and knowing the Hugonots would be there
also within a few hours after, the Kings Council entered into a debate whether
it were better to stay in the Town, and abide a Siege, or else endeavor to
make a retreat to Paris, which was ten leagues off, and hazard fighting with
the Enemy upon the way. The Constable believing for certain the Hugonots would
set upon them in their march, and thinking it very dangerous, having no
considerable company of Horse, to fight in such an open champion Country,
persuaded all he could, that it was not fit to expose the persons of the King
and Queen to such an evident certain hazard.

The Duke of Nemours on the other side, thought it not only dishonorable, but
much more dangerous likewise to expect a Siege in a little Town, that had no
Defense but an old broken Wall without any provision, or method of War: between
which opinions they remained long in suspense, and the Constables advice had at
length prevailed, if Colonel Fifer, having desired to be admitted to the Kings
presence whilst he was in Council, had not with great effectual speeches humbly
requested his Majesty not to suffer himself to be besieged in such a poor
place, by a company of insolent rebellious Subjects, but that he would be
pleased to commit himself and the Queen his Mother to the fidelity and courage
of the Swisses, who being six thousand strong, would with the heads of their
Pikes make a way for him through any Army whatsoever of his Enemies. To this
speech the Swisse Captains, who staid at the Council-Chamber-Door, adding their
earnes^ desires, the Queen standing up, and with gracious speeches commending
their fidelity and virtue, gave order they should refresh themselves those few
hours of the night that remained; for in the morning she would freely commit to
the protection of their valor the Majesty and welfare of the Crown of France:
At which resolution the Air redounding with the shouts of all those of that
Nation, they went to prepare themselves for the next day, and the Lords of the
Court were very diligent to put the Archers of the Kings Guard and their own
servants in order.

Presently after midnight, the Swisses with great cheerfulness beating up their
Drums, went a mile out of the Town to put themselves in order, and the King
with the Court taking the shortest way, just at day break was ready upon the
place, where the the Swisses having received him and the Queen, with the
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, and all the Ladies of the Court into the midst
of their Battalion, began to march with such a fierceness and bravery, that in
many years France had not seen so remarkable a spectacle.

They had not marched thus above two miles, (the Duke of Nemours with the Horse
of the Kings Guard going before, and the Constable with the Gentlemen of the
Court following after the Battalion) when they saw some Troops appear of the
Hugonots Horse which advanced a good pace to charge them. Colonel Fifer with
6000 Swisses saves the King, the Queen, and the Royal Family, from a great Army
of the Hugonots, and marching in an excellent order fighting wi^h the ^nemy,
conducts them safe to Paris.
The Swisses closed their ranks and charging their Pikes, showed such an
undaunted courage to receive the assault of the Enemy, that the Prince of Conde
and the Admiral being come up to the Rear with a party of six hundred Horse,
making caracols, and wheeling about the field* durst not charge their
Battalion, who standing in a very close order, and fiercely shaking their
Pikes, showed little fear of the fury of their Horse: But the Count de la
Roche-fou-cault with a Troop of three hundred Horse, and Andelot with another
of two hundred being joined with them, they returned furiously to charge them
again in the Rear. At the same instant the Swisses with admirable nimbleness
faced about to fight, and the King with great ardour spurred on his Horse to
the front of the Battle, being followed by the chief Lords of the Court, but
for the most part without any weapons but their Swords, none of them finding in
such haste Arms either defensive or offensive fit for such an occasion. The
Hugonots made some shot as if they meant to fall in upon them in good earnest;
but seeing the frank resolution of the Swisses, they wheeled off, and
caracolled again, and began to keep at a distance. Thus sometimes advancing,
sometimes making a stand to receive the charge of the enemy who followed them
in the Rear seven Leagues together, they kept on their way with an admirable
constancy, till the Hugonot Captains being wearied, and seeing they could do no
good, partly through the daring courage of the Swisses, partly because their
Forces arrived not soon enough at the place appointed, left off pursuing them,
and perceiving the night draw on, retired to lodge in the adjacent Villages:
which when the Catholic Lords knew, (not to expose themselves the next day to
a greater hazard) they resolved, leaving the Constable and the Duke of Nemours
with the Swisses, that the King and Queen should go on toward Paris, which
they did with more than an ordinary pace, not without some fear, and very much
danger; for if the enemy had been advertised thereof, and sent but two hundred
Horse before to lie in their way, they might very easily have taken them. All
that were present were exceedingly moved to see the Queen with all her Sons so
environed by their Enemies, that in an instant all the Royal Family might have
been lost, and it was a great chance it fell out otherwise, nor less good
fortune that the Swisses had such an address; for without them it had been
impossible to escape the hands of the Enemy.

The King being come to Paris, was received with great joy of the people, even
shedding tears through tenderness; and the Duke of Aumale, who was there
before, went with three hundred Horse that he had gotten together to meet the
Swisses, who arrived not till after midnight in the Suburbs. The next morning
they entered the City with the same order and bravery, being received by the
King himself at St. Martins Gate, who having highly commended their valor, and
made them a donative of a pay, the reward of Conquerours, they were sent back
to the Suburbs, where Quarters were provided for them.

The Cardinal of Lorain saves himself by flight from the Hugonots.
The Cardinal of Lorain, of whom the Hugonots had a principal design to rid
themselves, at the same time the King and Queen marched away, went with a samll
train out of the great road through by-ways toward his Archbishopric of
Rheims in Champagne, and falling unawares into certain Hugonot-Troops which
were gathering together in those parts, The Hugonots resolve to besiege Paris,
stop the passages whereby provisions are conveyed to the City, make incursions
into the Suburbs, and burn the Mills.
leaving his coaches, and losing his baggage, with much difficulty saved
himself by flight.

But the Prince and the Admiral, though they saw the miserable ill success of
their design, which wholly depended upon expedition and prevention, yet they
resolved they would besiege Paris, being of opinion that a City so replenished
with people, and not at all furnished with victuals, would in few days be
brought to such extremity, that it must be delivered up to them of necessity,
for there was not any Army ready that was not any Army ready that was able to
succor or relieve it. To this end they began to possess themselves of all the
passages of the Rivers, by which provisions are conveyed to Paris, fortifying
and placing Guards in all the little Towns about the City, which being but
weak, and unprovided of any defense, in this sudden commotion were with little
delay, and less pains reduced into their power; so that being Masters of
Montereau, Lagny, S. Denis, the Bridge of S. Cloud, Dammartine, and all the
places thereabout, the fifth of October they made incursions even to the walls
of Paris, and burnt the windmils without the Ramparts, between S. Honore's gate
and the port de Temple, with great terror to the Parisians, and extreme
offense to the King, who in the heat of passion, could not forbear with threats
and rough language to express an anger full of revenge. In the mean while, the
Queen, upon whose prudence and care the whole welfare of the State depended,
employed all her industry to get an Army soon enough together, to raise the
enemy from the Siege. To which purpose, besides the general order given all
over the Kingdom, that the Catholics should take arms, the Colonels Brissac
and Strozzi were sent for in all diligence with the old French Infantry, the
Sieurs de Sansac, Savigny, Tavanes, and Martigues, with the Gens d' Arms, the
Duke of Guise from his Government of Champagne, the grand Prior from that of
Auvergne, the Mareshal d' Anville with the Forces of his Family, and particular
Orders and Letters directed to all the Catholic Lords and Gentlemen of the
Kingdom, to hasten them away, who at the first report of the Kings danger
instantly ran together; wherefore though the occasion were pressing and urgent,
yet it was hoped all these aids would arrive before the City were reduced to an
extreme necessity, which by the help of the Swisses, and readiness of the
Parisians was able to hold out many days But the thing that troubled the Queen,
was the great scarcity of money: wherefore having called together the Catholic
Princes Ambassadors that were resident at Court, she very effectually
recommended to them the present occasions of the State, and desired every one
of them to procure some convenient aid from their Masters: nor content with
this, dispatched away Annibal Ruccelai post into Italy, to get what
considerable Sum he could of the Pope and the great Duke: with Giovanni Corraro
the Venetian Ambassador, she treated in private with great show of confidence,
to dispose the Senate to lend 100000 Ducats: To the Duke of Ferrara she writ
very earnestly that he would give her leave to make use of 100000 Francks and
more that remained in France to satisfy certain debts; and into Spain sent
Monsieur de Malassise to the same purpose. But foreseeing the slowness of these
Supplies in respect of the urgency of the present occasions, the King calling
together the chief Citizens of Paris, obtained of them 400000 Francks; and it
fell out very opportunely, that the Prelates being assembled at the same time
in Paris, to consult of the affairs of the Clergy, agreed among themselves to
make the King a present of 250000 Crowns toward the present maintenance of the
War: besides these provisions which were presently brought in, the King being
informed that certain Merchants sent 60000 Reals of Eight into Flanders, and
exceedingly offended that they would not furnish him with any part of it,
caused the money to be stopped, which was an exceeding help in so pressing a
necessity

Nevertheless the Queen, to protract the time till supplies of men and other
necessary provisions arrived, and to abate the fervor of the Enemy, being
constrained to have recourse to her wonted arts, excellently dissembling those
so fresh injuries, and the late danger she passed, began to make overture of a
Treaty for an Accommodation by Monsieur de S. Sulpice, a person in whom she
reposed much confidence, and that was not ill thought of by the Hugonots, who
not showing themselves altogether averse from peace, there went to them in a
place equally distant from both Armies the High Chancellor, the Mareshal of
Momorancy, and la Vieux-Ville, Monsieur de Morvilliers, and the Bishop of
Limoges; to whom though they proposed insolent exorbitant conditions, such as
Conquerours use to impose upon the Conquered; yet to gain the benefit of time,
they artificially spun out the Treaty still, giving them hopes of condescending
to their desires.

The Propositions of the Hugonots were these: That the Queen Mother should have
nothing to do in the Government: That those who till then had managed the
affairs, should render an account to them of their proceedings: That the King
should disband all his Forces: That all strangers should be sent out of the
Kingdom, and particularly the Italians, to whom they attributed the invention
of their new Impositions and Any kind of imposition, espe^ially that which is
paid unto the King upon sale of Salt.
Gabelles: That the Edict of January should be reauthorized, and punctually
observed with a free exercise of the Hugonot Religion in all places, and
particularly in Paris: That Metz, Calais, and Havre de Grace, should be
consigned to them for their security: That all Taxes should be taken away: That
a general Assembly of the States should be called: That Justice should be done
them against the Princes of Guise, by whom they said they were persecuted and
calumniated, and other things not unlike these; which seeming rather ridiculous
than matter of hate, chiefly that Article in which they demanded a present
disbanding of the Kings Forces, whilst they had an Army on foot at the Gates of
Paris, afforded no hopes at all of an accommodation: yet the Queen sending
every day new persons to treat, according to her design, drew out the business
in length, and gained time to free her self from so great an exigence. Nor were
these delays displeasing to the Hugonots, who thinking it more proba^le to
prevail by a Siege, than by strength, did what they could to stop all the
passages to the City, hoping rather by famine than force to reduce it into
their powers; and in the mean while expected a supply of men from their party,
which were raising with exceeding diligence in all parts of the Kingdom. But
these aids that were hoped for on both sides, bred grievous and dangerous
Insurrections in the Provinces: For in Normandy, Picardy, and Champagne, (which
lie nearest to Paris, and environ it on all sides) the Hugonots were assembled
together in great multitudes, with a resolution to succor their party, and the
Governors did the same for the King; so that being kept in play there, they
could not go to join with the Army before Paris: by which commotions the
Villages and Towns were pestered with Soldiers, and the ways so broken, that
all intercourse and traffic was hindered and destroyed.

The City of Orleans taken again by the Hugonots and diverse others.
At the same time the Hugonots possessed themselves of the City of Orleans and the
Fortress; which being scarcely finished, and ill guarded, was easily reduced
into their power. The taking of this place was of very great importance; for
besides the benefit of having so considerable a City so near Paris, they found
there three Cannons and five Culverins, which was very advantageous to the
Army, that before had never a piece of Artillery. In Burgundy they took Auxerre
and Mascon, but the last not without some blood, for the Catholics made a
valiant resistance. In Daulphine they got Valence; Lions was full of tumults,
and the Sieur de Ponsenac taking arms in their favor, brake the ways, and
fomented the commotions within the City. The Count de Montgomery surprised
Estampes, which was of so much more consequence, because near Paris. In
Languedoc, Nismes and Montpellier were revolted to the Hugonots. Metz, a strong
place of very great importance upon the Frontiers of Lorain, was upon the point
of revolting, Monsieur de Disans who commanded the Garrison, having declared
himself for the Hugonots: whereupon not only the Mareshal de la Vieux-Ville the
Governor of that place was constrained to leave the Court, but the Duke of
Guise also took a resolution to march that way. Upon the coasts of the Ocean
they made themselves Masters of Diepe; and in Gascony they were so strong, that
Monsieur de Monluc having such an enemy to deal with, could not send those aids
that were intended to Paris.

These stirs that were not without much bloodshed, rapine, and frequent
encounters, retarded for some days both the Kings supplies, and the recruiting
of the Hugonots Army. But the first that arrived, were the Kings Forces; for
Timoleon Count of Brissac, and Philip Strozzi who commanded the Infantry,
though Andelot and Muy (having left the Camp on purpose, lay in the way to
hinder their passage, yet) coasting the Country through Woods and Vineyards,
and having carriages to flank them, arrived safe in Paris with four Regiments
of Foot; and the Catholic Nobility at the news of the Kings being besieged,
came together from all parts in great diligence to the Court.

The King having now no more occasion to dissemble, sent an Herald to summon
the Prince and the rest of his Confederates assembled at St. Dennis, within the
space of four and twenty hours to lay down their arms and return to their
obedience, or else to pronounce them Rebels and Traitors. At the appearance of
the Herald, who brought the Summons in writing, the Prince of Conde in a fury
protested, If he said any thing that touched upon his Honor, he would presently
cause him to be hanged: to which the Herald knowing himself backed with the
Royal Authority, answered boldly, I am sent from your Master and mine, nor
shall words terrify me from executing my Commission; and put the Writing in
his hand, which being read, the Prince said he would return an answer within
three days; but the Herald replied with the like boldness as before, that he
must resolve within four and twenty hours: so that the same Herald being sent
again the next day, carried back an answer in much milder terms than ordinary,
the Heads of the Hugonots professing, They were resolved still to remain his
Majesty's loyal Subjects, nor to desire any thing but the conservation of their
Propriety; their Religion, and their Lives; and only demanded such conditions
as they thought necessary for security of the same, which they would ever
acknowledge as testimonies of his Royal favor and goodness.

This kind of proceeding renewed the hopes of an Accommodation; whereupon it
was concluded, that the Constable should the next day have a conference with
some principal persons of that party; so that going out of the City with about
two thousand Horse, when he was in the midway toward St. Denis, he commanded
his company to stand, and advanced himself, accompanied only by the Mareshal de
Cosse, his Son Momorancy, and l' Aubespine Secretary of State. The same was
done by the other side; for the rest staying behind, the Prince, the Admiral,
the Cardinal of Chastillon, Roche-fou-cault and Andelot came to meet them. The
Prince spoke very modestly, though he departed not at all from the conditions
already proposed; but the Cardinal of Chastillon told the Constable, who
persuaded him to rely upon the Kings word, without seeking any further
security for their Propriety and Lives, that they could not trust to the King,
and much less to him, who had broken his word, The Constable comes to parley
with the Hugonots; the lie passes between him and the Cardinal of Chast^llon,
and no hopes remain of an agreement.
and was an occasion of the present calamities, by having counseled his
Majesty to violate the Edict of Pacification. Whereupon the Constable gave him
the Lie, and so they parted with ill language, no hopes remaining of an
agreement. Wherefore the King having called together the Princes, Knights of
the Order, Captains of the Gens d' Arms, and Colonels of Foot, in the presence
of many of the Nobility and others, made a Speech full of courageous resolute
expressions, in which he told them, That there was nothing he desired more than
the peace and quiet of his Subjects, which had induced him to grant the
Hugonots many things repugnant to his own inclinations, and contrary to his
nature; but notwithstanding so many graces and privileges, some of them
abusing his favors, with diverse scandalous imputations sought to raise a
Rebellion in the Kingdom, and were grown so bold in their wickedness, that they
durst conspire against him, the Queen and his Brothers, for which enormous
Treason he might justly chastise and cut them off; nevertheless, nothing
altering him from his first resolution, on the contrary, to the prejudice of
his own Authority, and to the diminution of the Royal Dignity, he had sent some
of the principal persons in the Kingdom to treat with them, to whom they were
not ashamed to make those Propositions which were already well known to every
body: therefore he had at length determined to have that by force, which he
could not obtain by their consents; and that he was confident easily to effect
his desires by the assistance of those Lords he saw there about him, who having
been ever faithful to the Kings his Predecessors, he hoped would not abandon
him now in so great a necessity, and in so lawful and just a cause; wherefore
he desired them courageously to embrace the occasion of meriting both from
their King and Country, and not to consider those dangers to which he would
first expose his own Person for the preservation of the Commonwealth.

The Constable answering for all, said, Entreaties were not necessary, for
every one there was ready to venture his life and fortune in his Majesty's
service: and then turning about to the Nobility, continued his Speech in this
manner; Gentlemen, there is no such true real Nobility as that which is
acquired by Virtue; and you that are born Gentlemen, not to degenerate from
your Ancestors, cannot better employ your selves than in defense of our King
against those, who to make a King for their turns, endeavor to extinguish this
Race. Be resolute then, and as with one accord you inviron his Majesty in this
place, prepare your selves with your Courage and Virtue to encompass him in
Arms; and I who have the charge of the Militia, though I am old, promise to be
the first to assail the Enemy. Which Exhortations were followed by general
Acclamations and consent of all that were present, though for the most part it
was believed the Constable and his, more in words than in deeds favored the
Kings party, and gave too willing an ea^ to the discourses of the Hugonots, who
were no less hated by the Nobility, than detested by the Parisians, and not
without reason.

The City began to feel the incommodities of a Siege, and suffered extremely
through want of Victuals; for the Admiral in a bravery at Noonday, Paris
besieged and straightened for victuals.
in the face of the Kings Army, possessed himself of the Bridge at Charenton, a
league distant from the Walls, whereby the passage of the River being cut off,
all manner of provision began to be at an excessive rate; but the greatest
difficulty was how to nourish such a number of Horse as were then in the Town:
for which reason the Constable, provoked by the cries of the people, and
impatient, having a much greater Army than the Enemy, that the City, to the
small reputation of the Kings Forces, should be so straightned and
incommodated, issued out of Paris the ninth day of November, and quartered his
Vanguard at la Chappelle, a place upon the highway between the City and the
Enemies Camp, which resolution obliging the Hugonots to lie close together in a
Body, that they might not be surprised apart, they quitted the Villages about,
so that the passages were again open, and the ways free to carry all things
that were necessary into Paris. They sent likewise to call back Andelot, who
with eight hundred Horse and about two thousand Foot had passed the River to
streighten the Siege on that side, believing that the Constable (as it was
true) being much superior in force, would advance, and presently either shut
them up in St. Denis, or else force them with great disadvantage to fight.

The Prince of Conde with the Battle lodged close under the Walls of St. Denis,
keeping that Town for his security behind him; the Admiral with the Van lay on
the right hand, at St. Ouyne, a Village near the bank of the River, which
served him both for a fence against the Waters and the Enemy; and Muy and
Genlis with the Rear at Aubervilliers, a Town on the left hand; and because on
one side of them was a great open champagne, they made a ditch, and raised an
indifferent work to secure them from being assaulted in the Flank, and placed a
guard there of six hundred small shot. But the Hugonots entering into debate,
what was best to be done, being so much inferior in number to the Kings Army,
in which were sixteen thousand Foot, and more than three thousand Horse, many
were of opinion it would do well to retreat till the Supplies they expected
from diverse parts were arrived; the Prince of Conde and the Admiral thought it
impossible to retreat without receiving an absolute defeat; for the Kings Army
lying so near, they could not possibly march away without being discovered, and
consequently followed and assaulted: wherefore they judged it best, as well to
maintain their reputation, which to the Heads of a popular Faction, and
especially at the beginning of a War, is ever of great consequence, as also
that they might the better make a retreat, to give them battle; for the days
being at the shortest, it would quickly be dark, and soon stay the fury of the
fight, in which they hoped their Horse (which were very good) would so damnifie
the Kings Army, that they would not be able to follow them that night, by the
benefit whereof they might retire, and meeting Andelot with fresh supplies,
secure themselves from danger.

Whilst the Hugonots were in this consultation, the Constable was not idle, but
being confident they would either make a retreat; or if they came to fight, be
totally ruined: the morning after, being the Vigil of St. Martin, one of the
Protectors of the Crown of France, On St Mar^ins Eve the Kings Forces meet with
the Hugonots Army out of Paris.
having put the Army in order, sent resolutely to assail the Enemy. The Duke of
Aumale and the Mareshal d' Anville led the Van, and were placed against the
Admiral: the Duke of Nemours with a great number of Horse which were ranged
upon the champagne brought up the Rear, and the Battle commanded by the
Constable was placed against the Prince of Conde, after whom followed the
Swisses in their orders flanked by the Count of Brissac and Strozzi's Foot. It
was already past midday when the Constable seeing the Enemy resolved to give
them Battle, not to lose time, advanced with his Squadrons in such haste to
charge them, that the Foot marching in order were left a great way behind, and
could not come up to fight; which falling out according as the Hugonots
desired, they with their Cavalry (in which they had much the advantage) drew up
behind the Constables Battle, and charging him courageously quite through, made
a great slaughter amongst his men. The Duke of Nemours thought to stay the fury
of the Enemy by charging them in the Flanck; but the Ditch being in his way,
and a gallant opposition made by the Hugonot Musketeers at the work, there was
so much time to be spent there, that he could not make such haste as was
requisite to succor the Constable. The Duke of Aumale and the Mareshal
d'Anville attempted the same, but were hindered by the Admirals Van, who having
moved from his place, and retired almost to the bank of the River that he might
not be surrounded, mingled valiantly with them, by which means the Constables
Battalion being assailed and shaken by diverse Troops of their Horse, besides
the Princes own which was in the midst, remained without receiving any
succors, so over-matched by the Enemy in number, that in a short time it was
absolutely rou^ed and destroyed.

The Constable had four little hurts in his face, and a great blow with a
Battle-axe upon the head, yet he still continued fighting valiantly, and was
endeavoring to rally his men, when Robert Stuart a Scotch-man rode up to him
with his Pistol bent toward him, whereupon the Constable said, Do thou not
know me? I am the Constable; he replied, Yes I do, and because I know thee, I
present thee this, and instantly shot him in the shoulder, which made him fall;
but as he was falling, he threw his Sword (which though the Blade were broken
he held still in his hand) with such a violence at Stuart's face, that he beat
out three of his teeth, brake his jaw bone, and laid him upon the ground by him
for dead. The Constable lay a good while abandoned by his men that ran away,
and left him in the power of the Enemy; but the Duke of Aumale, and Monsieur d'
Anville having routed and defeated the Admirals Van, when they once saw them
flee, left the pursuit, and came up to succor and sustain the Battalia, by
which means the Constable was redeemed out of the hands of the Hugonots, who
were then carrying him away prisoner, and his Son with much difficulty conveyed
him though already half dead to Paris. The Duke of Nemours having in the mean
while passed the Ditch, and with great slaughter driven the Hugonots out of
their Work, with the like Massacre brake their Rear, and having chased those
that ran away into their quarters, rallied his Horse, and returned furiously to
mingle with the Enemy in the hottest of the fight. So the Catholic Van and
Rear which had put to flight the Hugonot Van and Rear coming close up to the
Princes Squadrons, charged them so furiously in the Front and in the Flank,
that many of his Troops being disordered, the Victory manifestly inclined to
the Catholics. In the mean while the night overtook them, which was very dark
and rainy, by favor whereof the Prince of Conde, who having had his Horse
killed under him, with much difficulty recovered another, and the Admiral who
by the fierceness of a Turkish Horse that he rid that day, was so far engaged
amongst the Enemies, that he had like to have been taken prisoner, retired in
haste to St. Denis, In the Battle of St. Dennis the Catholic Army prevails,
but is much damnified.
leaving the Field and the possession of their dead as an assured token of a
Victory to the Enemy. The Catholics though victorious, partly through the loss
of their General, partly through the darkness of the night, left pursuing them,
and the Foot having not had time to mingle in the fight, returned entire to
their Quarters.

The slaughter on both sides was much more considerable in regard of the
quality than number of the dead; for on the Kings party none fighting but the
Horse, and on the contrary those Foot only that defended the Ditch which
flanked the Rear, they that were killed were without doubt the most part
Gentlemen or Persons of Note, amongst which, those of the Hugonots side were
the Count de Suze, the Vidame of Amiens, the Count de Saut, Messieurs de
Piguigny, Canisy, S. Andre and Garenna: of the Kings men few were killed, but
very many hurt, as Monsieur de Sansac, a Cavalier of great courage and
expectation. The day after the Battle the Constable died, having at the 80th
year of his age fought fiercely, with a youthful courage, and showed no less
ardour of mind than vigor of body. At his death he had no disturbed thoughts,
but on the contrary testified an exceeding constancy, insomuch that a Confessor
coming to his bedside to comfort him, he turned about, and with a serene quiet
countenance desired he would not molest him, for it were a brutish thing having
lived fourscore years, not to know how to die a quarter of an hour. He was a
man of an exquisite Wit, and mature Wisdom, accompanied with a long experience
in the changes of the World, by which Arts he acquired happily for himself and
for his posterity exceeding great Wealth, and the chief Dignities in the
Kingdom; but in his Military Commands he had always such ill fortune, that in
all the Wars of which he had the Government, he ever remained either a Loser,
or grievously wounded, or a Prisoner; which misfortunes were occasion, that
many times his fidelity was questioned; even in this last action, where
fighting he lost his life, there wanted not some who were envious enough to
accuse him, That having the command of the Kings Army against his own Nephews,
he charged so late, and left the Foot behind on purpose, because he would not,
though he might, gain a complete Victory.

Those that spoke without passion, gave him three principal attributes, That he
was a good Soldier, and a loving Servant, but an ill Friend; for in all his
actions he was ever swayed by the consideration of his own interest. The same
day died Claud de l' Aubespine, chief Secretary of State, a man of very great
esteem, and a faithful Instrument of the Queen-Mothers, in whose place was
substituted Nicholas de Neuf-ville, Seigneur de Ville-ray, his Son-in-law, he
who with great reputation of wisdom, following the steps of his Predecessor,
continued in that place to an extreme old age.

The same night after the Battle, Andelot joined with the Hugonots at St.
Denis, who having passed the River with great difficulty by reason the
Catholics had sunk or carried away all the Boats, could not come soon enough
to the fight; but by his counsel the next morning, being the Eleventh of
November, judging, as indeed it fell out, that by reason they had lost their
General, the Catholics would not appear again in the Field; the Hugonots
showed themselves in a body without the Trenches ready again to give Battle,
maintaining with this bravado the reputation rather of Conquerors than
otherwise. They stood still in that manner a quarter of an hour, and in their
retreat carried off some of their dead bodies: but having lost the greatest
part of their Foot, and most of the principal Gentlemen amongst them being
either killed or grievously wounded, they resolved not to stay any longer, lest
the Kings Army, being provided again with a General, should resent their former
loss; but having sent advice to their friends that were already advanced to
succor them, the fourteenth they began to march in great haste toward
Champagne, with an intent to pass that way into the Confines of Lorain.

The Prince and the Admiral at the beginning, when the Swisses raised by the
Kings Order entered the Kingdom, sent Messieurs de Francfurt, and Chastelliere
into Germany; and persuaded Prince Casimir, Son to the Count Palatine of the
Rhine, to raise an Army in their favor; to which purpose they had already
furnished some small sum of money, with a promise, when he was arrived upon the
Borders, that they would give him 100000 Crowns of the Sum for the payment of
his men, which promise, with the hope of booty, and prey, stirring up Prince
Casimir, and diverse other Captains used to live in Armies, and by the benefit
of War, they got together (not long after they were in Arms, seven thousand
Horse, and four thousand Foot, and the Hugonots had advertisement that they
were ready with these Forces to enter upon the Confines of Lorain. For this
reason they took a resolution to march that way, that they might as soon as was
possible join with the Germans, and be enabled with this addition of Force to
pursue the War with such counsels as the times and occasions would administer.
The Army kept very close together, being all the way to pass through the
Enemies Country, nor did any one man disband from the principal divisions,
necessity having taught them discipline; Andelot only with Harquebushiers
scoured the Country, on all sides cleared the passages, discovered the
situations of places, and brought in provisions; nevertheless they made all the
haste they could to arrive upon the Confines, though being straightened of
victuals to nourish their men, they were forced likewise to assault diverse
little weak Towns upon the way, with the pillage and prey thereof to supply the
wants of the Soldiers, notwithstanding they proceeded with such celerity and
address, that they lost not much time, nor suffered any of their men to disband
or straggle from their company. In this manner without using their Cannon they
scaled and took Bre-Conte-Robert, Nogent upon the Seine, and Pont-gone,
populous great Bourgs, in which, and in the Villages about, they found such
store of Horses, that having mounted all their Foot, they marched with less
difficulty and more expedition.

In the mean while the Queen being by the death of Momorancy freed from the
power and reputation of the great ones, and left sole Moderatrix and Arbitress
of the Catholic party, not meaning by the Election of a Constable or General
of the Army again to subject her self to the danger of being overawed, but
desiring to preserve an absolute Authority in her self and her Son, persuaded
him with many arguments to confer the command of the Army upon his Brother
Henry Duke of Anjou, a Youth of singular wit, and wonderful expectation, but
scarce sixteen years of age; and so much the rather because the Council thought
it not honorable for the King to go himself in person to command the Army, or
to take Arms against his Subjects, because it would give them too great a
reputation.

Wherefore in this manner hindering all emulations or pretentions of the great
ones, and not advancing any body to so supreme a power, Henry Duke of Anjoy
made Lieutenant General of the Ar^y.
Henry was in the Kings Council declared Lieutenant General of the Army; but
because he was so young, there were appointed for his assistance Francis
Siegneur de Carnavalet, under whose discipline he was brought up from the
beginning, and Arthur de Cosse, Mareshal de Gonor, a man for the opinion was
had of his wisdom and courage ever held in great esteem. Besides these, there
were in the Army the Dukes of Monpensier, Nemours, and Longeville, Sebastian de
Luxembourg, Signeur de Martiguies made Colonel General of the French Infantry,
Jasper Viscount of Tavanes, Timoleon Count of Brissac, and Armand de Byron then
Master, or (as they call it) Mareshal of the Field, who for his valiant
exploits, will be often mentioned by us in the ensuing story. Neither the
Mareshal de Momorancy nor d' Anville followed the Camp; for the Duke of
Monpensier being appointed as Prince of the Blood, to lead the Van, they
pretended that Dignity belonged to Momorancy as first Mareshal of France, who
after the General, is to have the chief place in the Army. But the King not
being willing to recall what was already done, as well not to disoblige the
Duke, as because he was not confident of Momorancy, and thought it dangerous to
commit that part of the Army which was first to front the Enemy to his trust;
the two Brothers in discontent chose rather to remain near the Kings person
than to prejudice their right. The Duke of Aumale likewise left the Army,
having the same pretentions with the Mareshals as he was the antientest Captain
in France, yet he did not declare himself, because he would not break with the
Duke of Monpensier, but under pretense of going to assist with his advice the
young Duke of Guise his Nephew, (in whose Government, when the Germans, who
were expected, came, the chief weight of the business would fall) went with the
King and Queens approbation to employ himself where there was most need of his
assistance.

In this conjuncture arrived the Count of Aremberg, sent out of Flanders by the
Duke of Alva according to the former agreement at Bayonne, with one thousand
two hundred Lances, and three hundred Harquebushiers; a supply very
considerable in it self, but wrought a far greater effect through the Union
that was seen to the same end between those two Crowns. With these Commanders,
with eighteen pieces of Cannon, and the whole Army, the Duke of Anjou moved to
follow the Hugonots, hoping to overtake and to fight with them* before they
could join with the Germans; which undoubtedly he had done, if there had been
as much prudence and union amongst his Counselors, as there was in him des^re
of glory, and a readiness to encounter the Enemy.

The Prince with all his Army was come near Sens, the chief City in Brye, but
neither by art nor nature much fortified, wherefore he thought he might take it
as he had done diverse other Towns in his march, by scaling; but the Duke of
Guise, who with the forces of his Government had already reduced Men's into the
Kings obedience, and placed the Mareshal de la Vieux-Ville Governor there,
taking that way which he heard the Enemies Army inclined, entered very
opportunely into that City, and being prepared to defend it courageously, was
an occasion that the Prince despairing to take it, not to interrupt the
principal or necessary design, with his wonted readiness turned another way; so
that having received at Monterolle a recruit of certain Troops of Horse, which
came out of Gascony, together with three Fieldpieces that were taken at
Orleans, which they brought with them, he continued on his march; in which,
though he used all possible diligence, yet he was unawares interrupted by a
weighty and dangerous accident; for being now advanced as far as Chaalon, the
principal City in Champagne, he met there the Marchioness of Rotelline his
Wives Mother, being sent from the Court to make a new overture of peace, with
an intention, as many said, only to hinder the Princes Voyage, and amuse him
till the Kings Army was come: and the issue confirmed this suspicion; for she
having imprudently proposed a suspension of Arms for three days, in which the
Kings Deputies were to come to a place appointed, and the Prince having no less
imprudently accepted it, with a purpose to refresh his Army, tired with their
hard march, the Deputies appeared not; but the Duke of Anjou hast^ing his march
with exceeding diligence, as the truce expired, arrived so near the Camp, that
reason persuaded without farther delay to se^ upon them; for he knew the
Hugonots with their speedy march were so tired and broken, and were
necessitated to lodge upon the plains of that Province in such an open
disadvantagious place, that they could neither defend themselves, nor refuse a
Battle; and fighting, there was no doubt (being so far superior in number) to
give them a total overthrow.

The Count of Brissac, who led the first Troops of the Army, believing all the
rest followed, as it was before resolved, and according to which resolution
they had marched with great expedition in the Bourg of Sarri, furiously
assaulted the last Squadrons of the Enemy, commanded by three Captains,
Blosset, Boi^ and Cleri, and having with little resistance put them to flight,
pursued the rest, who ran away as fast as they could to save themselves.
Monsieur de Martigues with part of the Van followed the Count of Brissac's
example, and having overtaken three hundred Horse which being placed in the
Enemies Rear made their retreat, began a hot skirmish to keep them in play till
all the Army came up; but whilst the Mareshal of Gonor, and Carnavalet who were
the Dukes chief Counselors, either took too much care to range the Army, or
else, as it was said, interposed artificial delays on purpose to hinder the
destruction of so many of the Nobility, who were of their own blood, they gave
the Hugonots time to save themselves; for the Prince and the Admiral having
given order, That the three hundred Horse which were in the Rear, On Christmas
Eve the Catholics having an opportunity to fight with the Hugonots, would not,
to prevent the effusion of so much of their own blood, by which means the
Hugonots save themselves.
should as long as they could sustain Martigues charge, they in the mean while
endeavored to get off their men, and retreated with such speed, that in three
days they marched more than twenty French Leagues, and staid not till they had
passed the Meuse, a River upon the Confines of France, and gotten out of the
Kingdom into a place of security, where though freed from the danger of being
overtaken, or oppressed by the Enemy, they were stricken with a much greater
fear; for being arrived near Pont a Mousson, a place in the State of Lorain,
where they thought to meet the Germans, but neither finding them, nor hearing
in the Country about any news of their approach, the Soldiers seeing that hope
fail for which they had suffered so many miseries, and finding themselves out
of their Country, in a strange place, and which was worst of all, without any
provision of victuals, entered into such a fright, that they were resolved to
disband, and make the best shift they could by separating themselves, either
through Flanders or Lorain to return to their own houses, and many doubting
they could not escape the hands of the Catholics, through whose Country they
were of necessity to pass, resolved upon a voluntary exile, and to shelter
themselves in the Cities of Germany till more quiet times. But the Prince and
the other Commanders, with their entreaties, comforts, authority and reasons so
far prevailed, that for the present they stayed them from this resolution,
deferring for a few hours so desperate a purpose, till they were altogether
destitute of any manner of means to subsist.

They stood still thus in this perplexity of mind two whole days, till the
morning of the third day, whilst despair suggesting against the same thoughts
as before, arrived unexpectedly the desired news that Prince Casimir was upon
his way, Prince Casimir Son to the Palatine of the Rhine, enters F ^nce with an
Army, and joins with the Hugonots.
and not far from them. Then every private Soldier, as if restored from death
to life, with exceeding expressions of joy, tenderly embraced each other, and
with frolic cheerful speeches went forth to meet the Germans, as their
benefactors and deliverers: but the chief Leaders were again more perplexed and
troubled than ever: for having promised Prince Casimir and his men at their
arrival upon the Confines to pay them one hundred thousand Crowns, and being
unfurnished not only of the whole Sum, but of the least part of it, they were
assured the Germans would advance no farther, and saw all their hopes, through
which they had undergone so many hazards, vanish away to nothing. At length the
Prince of Conde having called together all the Army, discovered the condition
they were in; showing* that since the generel welfare depended upon the union
and readiness of the Germans to assist them, it was necessary, though with
private loss, to sustain the public occasions, and dispoiling themselves a
little sooner of that poor remainder which was left, with the price thereof to
redeem their liberty and common safety. So exhorting all to contribute what
they could; and two Ministers being chosen, in whose hands the money, or
whatever else was brought in, should be deposited, he was the first that gave
not only all his money and plate, but even the rings off his fingers, and every
thing else he had of any value, depositing it to be given to the Germans. By
this example, and with the same readiness the Admiral following, and all the
chief Officers of the Army, and from hand to hand the Gentlemen, with the
common Soldiers, and even the Footmen and Boys in the Camp, they made up the
sum of 30000 Crowns; with which, and the addition of infinite promises, the
expectation of the Germans being satisfied, the Armies joined upon the eleventh
day of January, in the year 1568.

1568.
The Armies thus united, and the men having reposed some few days, they resolved
to return the same way through Champagne to Beausse, as well to nourish the
Soldiers in a plentiful Country, full of Towns, in the which they might
shelter themselves from the incommodities of winter, as to streighten again the
Country and City of Paris, which was the head of the Catholic party, and in
the possession whereof the Victory was ever thought to depend through the whole
course of the Civil Wars. They were spu^red on to this resolution through the
desire they had to succor Orleans, which they knew was hardly pressed, and to
gain an opportunity to join with the Forces of Provence and Daulphine, which
they were advertised marched in great numbers that way.

Francis Seignieur de la Noue, a man of great wisdom, and no less virtue, who
in his time held the chief place among the Hugonot Faction, at the first
breaking out of these troubles had possessed himself of Orleans, and taken the
Castle, which by order from the King was begun to be built, but not so far
perfected that it could make any defense, and into that place, as more secure
than any other, all the wives and children of the principal Lords of that
Faction were retired for safety; but not with such provisions that they could
make a long resistance against a powerful Enemy; wherefore Monsieur de la
Valette Colonel of the light Horse, and the Count Siarra Montinengo Bressan of
the Kings party, having gotten together seven hundred Horse and four thousand
Foot, came before that City, which being ill furnished with men, and other
things necessary to maintain a Siege, was so straightened, that in a few days it
would either be rendered to the Catholics, or else taken by force, if it were
not very speedily relieved.

In this regard the Hugonot Army made all the haste it could into those parts,
the Leaders thinking they might perhaps meet an occasion upon the way of
fighting, which they would not have refused; for wanting the foundation to
continue a long War, they were constrained to think how, as soon as they could,
to bring it to the issue of a Battle. The Duke of Anjou in his heart was not
averse to their intentions, who being young, and desirous of glory, thought by
the success of a Battle to gain a great reputation at the first, and to render
himself known and considerable to other Nations: but the Queen, who had other
designs, soon removed her Son from this opinion* She resolved notwithstanding
the impediments of the season, to go in person to the Duke of Anjou's Army; for
not relying upon any body so much as her self, she intended to be certainly
informed concerning the report that was spread abroad, and to remedy those
disorders which it was said hindered the late Victory; wherefore being with
extraordinary speed, much more than women use to make, arrived at Chaalon, she
went afterward to the Camp, where hav^ng called a Council of all the chief
Commanders, she desired to understand particularly the reasons why they omitted
the opportunity to fight with, and suppress the Enemy. The Duke of Monpensier,
a dextrous ready man, not to offend any body, spoke ambiguously of the late
passages, commending the Duke of Anjou, and imputing the cause of the disorders
to their ill fortune. The Duke of Nemours excused himself, that he marching
before to follow Martigues, knew not what was done or determined in the Camp.
But Monsieur de Tavanes speaking more freely, though he named no particular
person, blamed the doubts, demurs, idle delays, and impediments that were
interposed; intimating, that the discords which were amongst those of the
Council, and the compassion some had of the Hugonots, were the occasion of so
much coldness in so great an Army.

After this they entered into consultation what course was to be taken for the
future; in which debate, many to please the General having concluded that it
was best to fight, the Queen in a grave discourse showed, that the even^s of
the Battle were different; for if the King lost the day, he would put the
Kingdom in great confusion, and in a manner leave it totally a prey to the
Enemy; whereas, if the other side happened to be overthrown, they hazarded
nothing but some wretched baggage that they carried with them, and that
desperate fortune which they saw in time must of necessity come to nothing: she
laid before them likewise the difference there was in the means to maintain a
War, for the King had wherewithal to keep his Army a long time, and to feed and
sustain it; but the Hugonots being hindered of all supplies, and reduced to such
extreme misery, that they had nothing to live upon, but that little that they
go^ by pillaging the Country, could not long satisfy the craving and
greediness of the Germans; and so scattering of themselves, would leave an
absolute Victory to the King; which if they came to fight, would depend much
upon chance: She considered that there wanted not diverse other ways to
dissipate this Army* and when all failed, they ought rather by an Accommodation
to separate and divide the Enemies Forces, than by a destructive miserable War
to expose his Majesty's Subjects to be devoured and eaten up by strangers; and
for the Duke of Anjou, it was no less worthy a great Prince and a great
Commander, to overcome by policy and conduct, than by violence and force of
Arms; and that at his first entering into an action, he ought to be careful of
showing himself prudent and moderate, as well as bold and valiant.

The General being persuaded by these reasons, it was determined, that he,
following the Enemies Army at a distance that they might not destroy the
Country, should still keep near them, by some good Town in fast quarters, that
he might not be forced to fight, and endeavor by drawing out the War in
length, to shake and ruin the weak foundations of the Enemy. And because
Carnavalet and the Mareshal of Gonor were both of them no less suspected in the
Camp, than at the Court, to have held intelligence with the Hugonots, that were
removed from about the Dukes person, and Brissac and Martigues put in their
places; that for courage, and this for conduct held by the Queen the fittest
men for this employment. Notwithstanding she made the Duke of Aumale the chief
amongst them, who after the Enemy had repassed the Meuse, came back again to
the Army, and to him, as to the antientest Captain in the Kingdom, she
publicly recommended the counseling and directing her Son.

Now whilst Champagne was thus become the principal seat of the War, the other
parts of the Kingdom were not a quiet; but through the frequent continual
Insurrections of the Hugonots all places were full of tumults and blood: for
they having at the beginning of these commotions gotten many Towns in all parts
into their hands, the Provinces were so divided, that through the animosity of
both Factions, a dangerous War was kindled in every the most remote hidden
corner in France. In Languedoc Monsieur de Acher ruled all the Country, the
Vicount de Ioyense, who commanded there for the King, not having force
sufficient to suppress the multitudes of the Hugonots, or to oppose the
industry and boldness of their Leader. In Provence, Mouvans and Mont-brun, men
that by their violent proceedings got themselves an esteem, with more than
ordinary success crossed the Catholic party under the Command of the Count de
Summerive. In Gascony there wanted not store of troubles, that Province being
all in Arms; but Monsieur de Monluc, an old experienced Captain, had in so many
incounters abated the fury of the Hugonots, that the Incendiaries thought it
best for them to quit the Country, and many of them, though with much
difficulty, fled to their main Army. In Daulphine des Gourdes the Kings
Lieutenant, and the Sieurs de Monsalez and Terride, who were in their march
toward Paris, many times fought with Hugonots forces and beat them, and at
last forced Monsieur de Ponsenac to leave those parts* by which means the ways
to Lions were open; but he being afterward joined with the Vicounts de
Montclair, de Paulin, and Bourniquet, valiantly incountred the forces of
Auvergne and Daulphine; and though the fight were long, obstinate and bloody,
the Kings Party in the end got the advantage, with so much the greater
detriment to the Enemy, by reason that Ponsenac (who by his violence more than
any thing else, gave life to the War) was at last in the retreat (together with
many others) killed.

The Pope sends aids to the King.
At the same time Lodovico Gonzaga Duke of Nevers, who brought four Troops of
Horse out of Piedmont, that were raised in Italy by the Pope, together with six
companies of Italian Foot, two French Regiments, and four thousand Swisses that
were newly entertained to join with the Duke of Anjou's Army, arrived
opportunely in Burgundy to suppress the remainder of the Hugonots in those
parts: for having diverse times encountered and defeated them, he at length laid
siege to Mascone, which being taken, the Rebels had no place of retreat left
whither they could retire for safety. From Burgundy the Duke went to join with
the Duke of Anjou; but not many days after, as he returned with a few Horse to
visit his own Country, he was set upon by the Enemy; and though with his wonted
Valor he put them to flight, yet he received such a grievous wound in one of
his Knees, that he continued lame ever after.

But the Kings Party received a greater and more considerable blow in Xantonge:
for through the negligence or connivence of Monsieur de Iarnac the Governor,
and through the diligence of Tracares the principal Deputy, called by them the
Or Judge.
Scabin of Rochel, that City revolted to the Hugonots, which standing upon the
Ocean over against England, Roc^el revolts to the Hugonots, which ever after
serves them for a Sanctua^^.
strong of situation, being every way encompassed with marsh grounds, or the
Sea, rich with traffic, numerous in people, abundant in provisions, and
commodious to receive succors from other parts, has ever since been the
Sanctuary and main prop of all those who adhered to that Faction.

In the mean while both Armies continued their march through Champagne, keeping
the direct way that leads to Paris. The Hugonots kept close together, and durst
not attempt the taking of any Towns by the way, for fear of giving the
Catholics an opportunity to fight with them at an advantage. The Kings lodging
in strong secure quarters, had no other design but to hinder the Enemy from
effecting any important enterprise, with which circumspection they both kept on
their march till they were arrived, at the end of February, the Hugonot forces
in Beausse, and the Kings not far from Paris. But the Prince of Conde having
raised the siege at Orleans, (for at the news of his approach la Valette and
Martinengo, not having forces to resist him, retired of themselves) was brought
into great difficulties through the Counsels of the Duke of Anjou, who he saw
was resolved to avoid all occasions of fighting, and to draw out the War in
length; by which kind of proceedings knowing his Army would be soon destroyed,
by reason he had neither money nor provisions to sustain or keep his own men
together, that were all Volunteers, nor wherewithal to satisfy the importunity
of the Germans, who were ever craving, he was in a mighty perplexity, and every
day held a Council of War to advise what was best to be done in so great a
straight. At length, to try whether the Catholics might be forced to that
which otherwise they would not do willingly, he resolved to besiege Chartres,
for extent and numerousness of people one of the principal Cities in France,
and so near Paris, that with the Country about it furnished a great part of the
provisions that went thither, believing that the Duke of Anjou, for his own
credit, and the reputation of the Kings Army, would never suffer that place to
be taken for want of relief, and not to give them longer time to reinforce the
Garrison, or fortify it, having in two days with his Horse marched twenty
leagues, which are forty English miles, the second day of March sat down before
it. There went to command in the Town Monsieur de Lignieres, a Cavalier of much
esteem, and with him entered fifteen Companies of old Foot, and about two
hundred Horse, with which forces at the beginning of the siege he exceedingly
annoyed the Enemy, and by frequent skirmishes kept them off a while; but was at
length forced to keep in to maintain the Walls: for the Hugonots having taken
all the passages, and placed guards upon the advenues, with four pieces of
Cannon, so furiously battered that part of the Wall which joins to Dreux-Gate,
that the sixth day they had made an assault, if the Defendants had not with
great labor and diligence raised a Rampart within, with Casemats and other
works, which hindered them from entering upon the breach.

But the siege of Chartres changed the face of things, and put the Catholics
to a great straight: for to relieve the Town with all their Army was contrary
to their former resolution; and to let that City be taken, was, besides so
considerable a loss, a very great prejudice to their reputation; and that which
then happened to Chartres, would afterward be the condition of many other
great Towns; by succouring of which they should hazard the uncertain issue of a
Battle; The Hugonots having besieged Char^res, the Queen makes new motions for
an Accommodation.
and if they succored them not, they would be lost before their eyes:
wherefore, after many attempts had been made, but in vain, to put men and
munition into the Town, the Queen in this difficulty having recourse to her old
remedy, which had so often succeeded, began to press a Treaty of Accommodation.

When she left the Camp, she began to make new o^^^tures of peace: for seeing
strangers already entered into the Kingdom, and the Crown again in danger to be
hazarded against desperate Enemies, she thought it necessary to keep the Treaty
still on foot, that having many strings ready to her bow, she might make use
of them as occasion should require: wherefore having had a conference at
Chaalon with some that were sent to her from the Prince to treat, returning to
Paris, she carried with her Odetto then Cardinal of Chastillon, Teligny,
destined to be the Admirals Son-in-law, and Monsieur Bouchavanes, a man of
great esteem among the Hugonots; but not being willing they should go into the
City for fear of some disorder among the people, who being furiously incensed,
abhorred the name of peace, they staid at the Bois de Vincennes, and at length
came to the Convent of The Order of St. Francis of Paul.
Minimes, a mile without the Town; where after diverse parleys about the
business, which at first went slowly on, when Chartres was besieged, they were
so quickened, that the Hugonots with little difficulty obtained very large
conditions.

But the Deputies being returned with the Propositions, the Prince of Gonde,
the Admiral, the Vidame of Cha^tres, and some others, the chief amongst them,
who not believing they could ever be secured by a peace, choosing rather a
dangerous War than a reasonable agreement, refused to accept them, alleging,
that the larger or more advantageous the conditions were, so much the more they
were to be suspected; and that if some strong places were not put into their
hands, whereby they might stand upon their defense, The Hugonot^ accept not the
conditions of agreement.
they ought not by any means to accept of an agreement, but pursue the War, and
leave the hidden event thereof to Gods will and pleasure; which the Queen
having notice of, (knowing that the generality of the Hugonots being weary of
the expense and danger of the War, so they might enjoy a Liberty of Conscience,
and break off with a show of reputation, desired a peace) she sent Lewis de
Lansac, Robert de Combalt, and Henry de Memmie, Seignieur de Malassise,
popular, well-spoken men, to their Camp, who under pretense of treating with
the chief of them upon the same Articles, began (as it easily falls out, by
chance) to discourse of the matter with some of their kindred, and in the
assemblies of the Nobility, and meetings of private persons, to lay open the
justness and largeness of the conditions, to which the King, to save the
effusion of his Subjects blood willingly consented; promising besides that all
severe Edicts should be abolished, and a free exercise of their Religion
granted them as before; that every one should be put again in possession of
their goods and dignities that they enjoyed before the War, that they should
remain secure of their lives, exempt from those charges that had ruined and
impoverished their families, be restored to their Country, their honors, to
the fruition of their Wives and Children, and from being wanderers and exiles,
return to their former felicity and quiet; so that the reasons and jealousies
ceasing, for which they had taken Arms, there remained no occasion to continue
the War: whence it was manifest how far their intentions were from the public
good and quiet, who were against an Accommodation, and how under pretense of
Religion they sought only to usurp an unjust Authority, and pernicious
greatness. By these speeches which were related again and infused into the
people, covered over with the plausible sweet name of Peace, on a sudden such
a tumult was raised in the Army, that the Nobility and private Soldiers (as in
popular Insurrections every body will mingle their advice, and pretend to a
share in the Government) unanimously cried out, and threatened to forsake the
Prince if he did not accept the Conditions that were proposed; and Prince
Casimir himself, either moved with the evidence of the reasons, or else the
rewards and gains not answering his hopes, being besides moved with the
certainty of having his pay presently, which the King offered in a great part
to disburse for them, favored and commended those that demanded a Peace.

Nevertheless the chief Leaders persevering in their opinions, the Admiral
being most earnest, and speaking in the name of all the rest, labored to make
it appear, that this was a manifest policy of the Enemy, who seeing they could
not suppress them whilst they had such a strength, and remained united for
their common defense, sought to separate and disarm them, that they might the
more easily destroy them one by one, that the business was now brought near an
end; and there wanted but some few days patience to see the event of it; for if
the Catholics came to fight with them, they had Gods Providence and the
strength of their own hands to rely upon; and if they let them take Chartres
without offering to succor it, their fear would be seen to all the World, and
such a (...) be cast upon Paris, being chiefly furnished from thence, that it
would starve for want of provisions; that they had many times tried the little
assurance and sincerity of promises; for though the King always intended to
keep his word, yet such was the power and subtilty of the Queen Mother, and the
Princes of Lorain had so great credit, that they perverted all his
deliberations, and turned that into poison which appeared to many in the
administration wholesome Physic; wherefore they should expect a few days longer,
and not by a precipitate impatience ruin those counsels which were thought by
every body most conducing to their common safety. But the inclinations of the
Army so obstinately opposed their reasons, and there appeared such a
disposition in the Nobility to abandon the enterprise, and to return in all
haste to their houses and families, wherein they suffered much prejudice by
their absence, through the horrible outrages that were committed in all parts
of the Kingdom, that the chief Heads were constrained by force to accept of a
Peace.

The Ministers enveighed bitterly against the Prince of Conde, accusing him,
That he through inconstancy desiring to return to the delights and pleasures of
the Court, had suffered himself to be too easily overcome by a popular clamor.
The Parisians with no less liberty blamed the Queen, That she not desirous to
put an end to these distractions, but that the discords and troubles might be
continued, by the same means to continue her own greatness, had forced the King
to consent to an Accommodation. And not only the Parisians, but the Pope also,
and many other Catholic Princes were astonished and ill satisfied with this
agreement; the issue appearing to them very unlike the beginning; and this
resolution exceeding contrary to that earnestness wherewith the Queen had
solicited them to send her supplies of Men and Money: which coming to her
knowledge, who was very inquisitive to learn what was said, she began to make
her excuses to their Ministers; but had a long private conference to that
purpose with the Venetian Ambassador, who being less interessed, and more
moderate than the rest, was likeliest to credit her reasons; wherefore
beginning with the original of things, she related to him at large every
particular circumstance: That King Francis the Second her eldest Son being very
young when he came to the Crown, and of a disposition rather to be governed,
than to exercise the charge of a King, was forced of necessity to confer upon
her the Supreme Power in managing the affairs, that it might neither fall upon
the Princes of Bourbon, not only the chief pretenders to the Crown, but
infected with Heresy, and inclined to favor it; nor yet upon the Guises, men
full of ambition and high pretenses, who nevertheless were so far Masters of
the Kings will, in regard of his Marriage with their Niece, that she was
constrained to admit them to a great part in the administration of the
Government, and in many things to yield to them, for fear they might to the
prejudice of the public, and her own private disgrace, have cast her out of
the Court, and perhaps out of the Kingdom also: That she had nevertheless ever
endeavored so to carry matters, that the Kingdom might remain in quiet, and
enjoy the blessing of peace, under a pious religious King; and tender of the
preservation of his people, if the violence of the Prince of Conde, and the
malicious subtilty of the Admiral had not disturbed the course of things, by
turning not only against the Guises, with whom they professed an open enmity,
but even against her self, contriving through hate by wicked practices to
deprive her of her life: That the conspiracy of Amboise being discovered, when
all the Council concurred to proceed with extreme severity, she used her
uttermost endeavor that a moderate way might be taken to quiet those troubles,
forgetting through desire of the common good, her own private injuries and
dangers: That the Prince having continued to raise Insurrections in the Cities
and Provinces, and to plot even against the King himself, at length fell into
her hands, at which times she ever proposed ways very far from cruelty or
revenge, saving the King of Navarre, and diverse others that were privy to the
Princes counsels, which was manifestly to be known when the Kings infirmity
began to be mortal; for the Princes of Guise pressing very earnestly that the
sentence of death might be put in execution against those of Bourbon, she
resolutely opposed it, approving rather gentle means than violent sharp
remedies: That she being afterward left with the King, a young Child not
obeyed, and her other Children yet as it were in the Cradle, and her self a
stranger with very few Confidents, but an abundance of persons of interest
about her, though she had more need than ever to guard her self from those who
plotted some one way, some another, the ruin or division of the Kingdom, and
her death and her Childrens; yet overcome by so great and so straight a
necessity, to preserve the peace, maintain the Crown and her Childrens
Patrimony, and to gain time till ^he King came of age, she many times suffered
the Princes fury, and the insolences of the Hugonots; but that the impatience
of the great ones with their discords and enmities, the ambition of the Princes
of Lorain, and the contumacy of the Hugonots, had at length raised a War; to
avoid which, God was witness with her, how much she had done and suffered; that
seeing the Kingdom through the infection of Heresy in a general combustion,
and the English and Germans called in to invade it, she resolved to try whether
by a resolute War she could extinguish, and eradicate this evil, and not be
wanting in any thing that might be justified by Religion, she had resolved to
put it to a Battle, which her Letters written to the Constable, that were
certainly amongst his Papers (for she knew he kept them) would still testify:
That in the Battle the Constable was taken prisoner, and the Mareshal of St.
Andre killed; and though the Victory inclined to the Kings Party, with the
taking of the Prince of Conde, yet the Admiral remained still with a
considerable Force, to which was added the succors sent from England, and a
fresh powerful supply that came out of Germany: That since this, happened that
accident to the Duke of Guise, whereby the Kings Party were deprived of a Head,
because for he^ to command the Army was neither agreeable to her Sex or
profession, and there was not any body else fit to be trusted with so great a
charge; whence being led by the persuasions of many, and particularly by the
advice the Duke of Guise gave her just at his death, to which she gave so much
the more credit, because at that time men use to forget private interests and
speak truth, succeeded a Peace, by granting to the Hugonots a Liberty of
Conscience, though for no other end but to stay those enormous outrages,
desolations, plundrings, rapines, sacriledges, violences and tyrannies that
destroyed the whole Kingdom, hoping time would spend that humor which she was
very well assured proceeded rather from private enmities, and desire of ^ule,
than from love of Religion: That she knew diverse Princes very much blamed her
for this Treaty, by the same token there wanted not those who raised doubts
concerning her belief, but that she being satisfied in her own Conscience,
having placed her hopes in God, expected from him her Justification: That it
could not be denied but the peace had rid the Kingdom of the Reiters, who
cruelly wasted the Country, and driven the English out of Havre de Grace, who
were neasted there; and given the poor people time to breathe from so many
troubles and calamities, by which they were ruined and devoured: That the Peace
brought one great advantage by taking from the Hugonots all manner of pretense
to rebel: That many things were done and suffered for no other purpose but to
reduce the great ones to reason, and to mitigate the fury of heresy, trying
diverse means to arrive at this just holy end, and to maintain the union of the
Kingdom so profitable to Christianity, and establish Peace so beloved of
mankind, but no remedies or agreement prevailing, the Hugonots at length came
to the taking of Arms: That she had used all possible endeavor speedily to
assemble the Kings Forces, that the Enemy might not have time to receive
supplies from abroad: That she had very much pressed a Battle, as it followed
at St. Denis, but with so little success, that it was notoriously known things
were afterward in a far worse condition than ever: That since she had procured
of the King to make the Duke of Anjou General of the Army, to be assured no
private in^erests should hinder the public good: That she hoped on
Christmas-Eve last there would have been an absolute decision of the
differences and dissentions in the Kingdom: That her Son had not failed in his
part, who though he were young, and not accustomed to inconveniences, had
marched a whole night, with a resolution to fight, but that which she had
formerly feared in the General, was fallen out in the Counselors, for the
Enemy had time given him, she knew not how, to pass the Meuse, and join with
the Germans: That all things were running on to ruin and destruction, which
she had ever so much abhorred, for she saw certainly that this body of France
losing so much blood on all sides, could not escape a violent death: That the
Siege of Chartres had produced an unavoidable necessity, either to hazard the
whole Kingdom upon the cast of a Die against an Army of desperate Gamesters, or
else to endeavor to put an end to these mischiefs by a Peace: That by this
Capitulation the Germans were again dismissed, time given to take breath, the
Enemy divided, the danger removed for the present, and the care of the future
left to Gods Providence, with some lively reasonable hopes at length to attain
to the desired end, and that one day the candor of her intentions would
appear, and the justness of her designs.

But though the Ambassador communicated these reasons to whom he thought good,
and the Senate ever favoring Peace, disliked not this counsel; yet the more
turbulent Spirits forbore not to find fault with the Accommodation, and to make
sinister constructions of the Queens intentions. Nevertheless, those that
governed the affairs agreeing upon it, and the Capitulation being signed, on
the 20 of March the Peace was published, with these conditions: That those of
the pretended Reformed Religion should have free exercise of their Religion in
all parts of the Kingdom, according to the former Act of Pacification; and that
all Edicts published since to the prejudice thereof, should be held as void:
That the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and the rest should not be liable to
those sentences which had passed against them, the King declaring he was
certified whatsoever had been done was with very good intentions, and for the
public good: That the Hugonot Lords should be restored to their Estates, and
that they should send away Prince Casimir with his Army, the King contributing
a certain sum of money toward their payment; but before they left the Confines
of the Kingdom, the King should dismiss all the Swisses, the Italian Forces
both Horse and Foot, and those the Catholic King sent into France: That of the
money which was disbursed to Casimir, part should be held as a gift from his
Majesty, and the rest be repaid within a certain time by the Prince of Conde
and the Hugonots: Lastly, That all the Commanders and Gentlemen of the Religion
might retire whither they pleased, enjoying their offices and goods without any
let or contradiction. Which Agreement being published by the Parliaments, the
Articles began to be put in execution; but neither the one side nor the other
proceeded therein with that readiness and candor, as was necessary for the
quiet of the Kingdom; on the contrary, both sides endeavoring what they could
to hinder it, interposed difficulties and impediments upon every the least
thing whatsoever: for the Hugonot Lords, who consented to the Accommodation
against their wills, though they had dismissed Prince Casimir, who having
received the pay promised by the King was marched toward Lorain, and from
thence after much spoil done in the Country retired into his Fathers Dominions;
The conditions of the treaty are not performed.
yet they came not to an entire restitution of the places, but still held
Sanserre, Montauban, Albi, Millaud and Castres, and the Cities of Rochel
denying that they were to submit to a Capitulation made without their consent,
not only refused to admit the Governor and Garrison sent them by the King, but
prepared with much diligence to defend and fortify themselves.

The Prince and the Admiral not daring to go to the Court, and much less to
remain disarmed, were retired, the one to Noires, and the other to Chastillon,
and there stood upon their guard to watch for an advantage, or to embrace any
occasion whatsoever; and still maintained a Negotiation with the Protestant
Princes of Germany, to enter into a new league, and to make new levies. Many of
the common Soldiers who knew they could not be safe at their own houses, and
had not wherewithal to live or subsist, assembled upon the Confines of Picardy,
with a pretense to pass into Flanders, to aid those that were up in Arms there,
a thing expressly forbidden, and which the King had by diverse severe Edicts
prohibited: but having put themselves under the command of Monsieur de
Coccaville, they got possession of the Castle of St. Veleri in the County of
Caux, a place opportunely situated, as well for a passage into the
Low Countries, as to hold a commerce with England, which was conceived they
durst not have done without the approbation and incitement of the Prince of
Conde and the other Hugonot Lords. On the other side the King alleging that
all the places were not returned to their obedience, neither dismissed the
Swisses, nor disbanded the Italians, but with sundry exceptions, and under
diverse pretenses restrained in many things the liberty of Religion granted to
the Hugonots, who were many of them ill treated by the people, and many, though
in appearance for other reasons, punished by the Magistrates, and driven out of
the Cities. At which time the King and the Queen consulted perpetually what
course was to be taken to free themselves from these troubles, and then was
first established, and not before, that Council which is called the Cabinet
Council, which consisted not of those persons which by their birth, The
beginning of the Cabinet Council.
or privilege of their places are usually admitted, but of a few choice men
that the King liked, to whom he imparted secretly in his own private Chamber
his most hidden inward thoughts. The first chosen to this confidence, besides
the Queen Mother, upon whom the deliberations for the most part depended, were
the Duke of Anjou, the Kings Brother, the High Chancellor de l' Hospital, Lewis
de Lansac, John de Morvilliers Bishop of Orleans, Sebastian de l' Aubespine
Bishop of Limoges, Henry de Mesmes, Seignieur de Malassise, the President
Renate d^ Birague, and Ville-Roy Secretary of State. These consulting together
of the present affairs, through the diversity of reasons, found it a very hard
matter what to resolve; for taking Arms again, the same difficulties would
arise which in the greatest fervor of the War made them choose and conclude a
Peace; and on the other side, it was not possible by policy to put the former
counsels in execution; for the Heads of the Hugonots were not in any degree
disposed to return to their obedience, and to make sure of their persons was
not at all easy; for neither the Prince, the Admiral, Andelot, nor any of the
rest the chief amongst them would be persuaded to come to Court; but being full
of jealousies, kept themselves armed in several places at a distance,
diligently observing every thing that might be plotted against them; which
difficulties having held the Council long in suspense, and in the mean while
complaints coming from all parts of new insurrections and tumults, which were
raised either through the impatience of the Catholics, or the too obstinate
wilfulness of the Hugonots, but ever with blood, uproars and danger; at last
they concluded, that to take away the roots of these continual perverse
tumults, it was necessary to proceed with more resolution and less
circumspection. The King, to chastise the Heads of the Hugonots, takes occasion
to demand the money paid to Prince C^simir upon their account.
Wherefore taking occasion upon the money disbursed to Casimir, and that Sum
the Hugonot Lords were obliged to pay within a certain time, which was then
expired, the King signified to the Prince of Conde, that he should provide to
make payment thereof; advertising him withal, he understood not the money
should be raised by way of contribution upon the Commonalty of the Hugonots:
for he would not that any body should have the power or liberty to lay Taxes
upon his people; but that he meant the Heads of them, who had been Authors of
the late War and Commotion, should, as they had promised, out of their own
Estates satisfy this debt which they had contracted without the advice or
approbation of particulars, when for their own interest they called Casimir
with the German Army into the Kingdom.

This signification touched the Prince to the quick* for the debt amounting to
the Sum of 300000 Crowns, he saw the King was resolved by this means to ruin
him and the Admiral, with all the principal persons of the Factions: for not
any of them being able to furnish so much ready money as might discharge them
of their promise, their goods and estates would be seized upon at a low value;
which being resolved not to endure, having sent for the Admiral to come to him,
after a long consultation of the business, he answered the King resolutely,
That this not being his own private or particular debt, but contracted for the
service of those, who to preserve their lives and Religion had put themselves
under his protection; and the Articles of Peace containing, that he and all the
rest of his party should be engaged for the satisfaction of it, it was not
reasonable, that now to ruin him, the payment should be required of him alone,
and some few other Lords, who were already too much undone by resisting the
persecutions of their enemies; and that if his Majesty were positively resolved
to be presently paid, which might well be deferred to a more seasonable quiet
time, it was necessary to permit them to raise the money upon the Reformed
Churches, The Prince of Conde answers and incenseth the King with a Letter of
Protestation.
who he assured would willingly submit to the burden; but if he would not
permit it, his Majesty might well foresee, that many through despair would be
constrained to think of new violent courses, against his will and intentions:
That he well knew this proceeded from the malice of his enemies, who not
desiring the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, infused such precipitate counsels
to renew the War: That this was not their first attempt; for already in many
places, cruelly murdering those who with his Majesty's permission assembled at
their devotions, they had put Arms into the hands of the most seditious people
in France: That he desired his Majesty to inform himself of that which happened
at Rouen, Amiens, Bourges, Orleans, Troys, Clairmont in Auvergue, Angiers,
Lagni, and in many other places, to do justice to the oppressed, and cause his
own promises to be observed: and at length concluded, That his Majesty
considering with himself what was possible and just, without being obscured or
palliated by the persuasions of others, would not tie him to do that which he
could not by any means perform.

This Letter absolutely confirmed the King and his Cabinet Council in their
resolution to proceed without any regard, because it seemed rather a
protestation and threatening, than an excuse; and they knew well, whilst the
Prince and the Admiral had any power, the Peace would neither be secure, nor
the danger taken away of the Germans coming again into the Kingdom. Order given
by the King to take the Prince of C^nde and the Admiral prisoners.
Wherefore all doubts being removed, they determined to try whether they could
on a sudden surprise the Prince and the Admiral, who contrary to their first
resolution (to keep in several places, that they might not be both taken in one
trap) were now both together at Noyers, upon the Confines of Burgundy, a Town
not very strong, nor so well guarded, that it could make any long resistance.
But because it was a business in the managing whereof secrecy was more
required than strength, Jasper Count de Tavanes Lieutenant to the Duke of
Aumale in the Government of that Province, where he had fourteen Companies of
Gens d' Arms, and the Count Siarra Martinengo, who with the Italians quartered
likewise in those parts, had order to go so on a sudden upon that place and
secure the passages, that neither of them might find any way to escape. The
King thought he might justly do this; for besides their past actions, and the
obstinate perverseness with which they stirred the people to rebellion, the
Hugonot Lords had not in many things performed the Articles of the
Capitulation; by which, and by nothing else, he was obliged to pardon them: but
he had the more hope easily to effect his purpose, because Noyers being
besieged, he might send such a strength into those parts, that it would be
necessarily reduced before they could receive any succors; and the Prince and
the Admiral being once removed out of the way, he believed neither Andelot nor
any of the rest had authority enough to renew the War.

But this design was no sooner resolved upon, than known to those very persons
against whom it was intended; wherefore though they saw themselves environed on
all sides by the Kings Forces, for Martinengo having put two Companies of Foot
into Orleans, and advancing still under pretense of changing his Quarters, was
not far from them; the Duke of Montpensier and Monsieur de Martigues kept the
passages of the Loire; the Duke of Guise with seven Companies of Lances was
upon the Confines of Champagne; and the Mareshal de Cosse was in Arms in
Picardy, having (to clear the suspicion the King had conceived of his fidelity)
gotten a Commission to suppress those who were in St. Veleri; and the Count de
Tavanes lay nearer than all the rest, and but a little distant from them; so
that they were compassed in on every side as with a net: Nevertheless, being
forced by necessity (before the Kings Forces, which were still advancing, drew
near) to take some speedy resolution, and thinking it a desperate course to
stay to be besieged in Noyers, they determined to save themselves by flight,
and to retire into some place where they might not only be secure, but raise an
Army, and gather together their partisans and followers.

According to this resolution, which they kept concealed from their own
servants, the first of September in the night, getting secretly on horseback
with their Wives and Children, accompanied only with two hundred Horse that
they might go the faster, and not be so easily discovered, they marched in
great diligence toward Rochel, end left Captain Bois behind with so many Horse
more to hinder, as much as was possible, the advancing of the Enemy, if he
offered to follow them, that so they might have time to save themselves; and by
good fortune, through the extraordinary drought of the Summer, the waters were
so exceeding low, that they might foord the Loire (a great rapid River) without
any danger at Rouen, which otherwise, all the Bridges being possessed by the
Kings Forces, they could not possibly have passed. Captain Bois had not the
like success, who being followed by Martinengo, and overtaken near the River,
his men were without much dispute absolutely broken and defeated, and he flying
to a certain Castle not far off, was constrained to yield himself at discretion
to Martinengo, who sent him prisoner to the Court. But the Prince and the
Admiral, The Prince and the Admiral save themselves by flight at Rochel, where
all the Hugonots and the Queen of Nav^rre come to them with great forces.
who had foorded the River long before without any impediment, marching an
incredible pace, arrived without being overtaken in a few days at Rochel, a
place in all considerations most proper to make the principal seat for their
party, their place of Arms, and their Arsenal for the War: for the Princes
having lost those great strong Towns Orleans and Rouen, which lay so convenient
to found and maintain the Faction, it was necessary for them to provide some
other place, which being situated in a rich fertile Country, had the commodity
likewise of a Haven; nor could they choose any more advantageous for them then
Rochel; for possessing that Port, and the Neighboring Islands that were
fruitful and populous, they might at pleasure receive succors out of Germany,
Flanders, England, Scotland, Britany and Normandy, all Countries full of their
partisans, and settle themselves in a Town very hardly to be taken from them;
so that in the streights they were then in, there was not much doubt to be made
of the place whither they should retire. Wherefore being received with great
joy by the Bourgers of Rochel, and by many of their chief Ministers, who were
retired thither before for their safety, they began to dispatch Curriers and
Letters into all parts, summoning their Friends and Adherents to come in to
them without delay, as well to secure their own persons from the treacheries of
their Enemies; as to unite themselves, and form such a body of an Army, that
they might be able to resist those Forces which they knew were intended against
them.

There was no need of many invitations, for at the report only of the flight
and danger of the Prince of Conde, all those of the same Faction began to rise;
and that they might be ready as soon as they were called upon, presently took
Arms, even those very persons which at the conclusion of the Peace were so
violent for it, now (as that Nation is of an unconstant voluble disposition)
being weary of lying idle a few months, already desired a War, and were more
ardent than the rest to embrace it. So the sign being given, within a few days
they assembled all their Forces together at Rochel: Those of Poic^ou under the
conduct of Messieurs d' Ivoy and Blosset, those of Perigor^ under Soubise and
de Puviaut, those of Cabors under Piles and Clairemont, those of Normandy under
the Count of Montgomery and Colombiere, and those of Britany under the Vidame
of Chartres and Lavardine. Andelot and la Noue having in their passage over the
Loire had diverse skirmishes with the Duke of Montpensier and Monsieur de
Martigues, though in three or four encounters they lost many of their men, yet
they arrived safe with a good number of Horse at the same place. At length the
Queen of Navarre, either doubting no less than the rest her own safety, or
desirous to animate and strengthen her party, and to advance the fortune of the
Prince her Son, now fifteen years of age, Od^t^o Cardinal of Ch^still^n who
called himself Count of Beauvai^, flies disguised like a Mariner into England,
and afterward remains with that Queen as Agen^ for the Hugonots.
having raised a considerable number of Horse and Foot in Bearn, came her self
in person to the general rendezvous at Rochel. Only Odetto late Cardinal of
Chastillon, who lived at Beauvais, and was encompassed with the Kings Forces,
not thinking it possible to make such a long journey in safety to join with the
rest, went disguised in a Mariners habit to the Seaside, and from thence
passed with much danger into England, where being received with great respect
by the Queen, he afterward did very good service to his party, remaining in
that Court as Agent for the Hugonots.

But the Hugonot Lords having in a short time raised a great Army about Rochel,
according to their old custom, before they would do any thing, to justify
their reasons, and give a fair pretense for their proceedings, published a
Manifest, in which after a long Narration made of all the injuries done in
diverse places, and at several times to those of the Reformed Religion, setting
forth at large the great danger they were continually in, A Manifest of the
Hugo^ots, and Letters of the Queen of Navarre.
whilst they continued unarmed to be abused and oppressed, concluded at last,
That they had taken Arms only for the defense of their Liberties, Lives and
Religion, which under God they professed, without any other end or design;
desiring still to live as Subjects in obedience to his Majesty, so they might
be secured for their Lives and Consciences. At the same time Queen Jane
published certain Letters, directed to the most Christian King, the Duke of
Anjou, and the Cardinal of Bourbon, in which, repeating the same things the
Hugonots had set forth in their Manifest, she declared, That she could do no
less than join with the Prince of Conde and the rest of the same Religion with
her self, as well for the maintenance of that Doctrine in which she only
believed, as to secure her self from the treacherous designs which the Cardinal
of Lorain on the one side, and the Spaniards on the other had continually upon
her life and her Sons, and upon the miserable relics of the Kingdom of
Navarre: which reasons, though they were set forth with great flourishes of
Rhetoric; yet it appeared plainly, she either invented or added to them, and
that nothing moved her more than the exceeding desire she had that Calvin's
Religion flourishing and increasing, her Son should become the Head of that
Faction, as the Prince of Conde then was, and as her Husband the King of
Navarre had been formerly.

But the most Christian King, and the Queen his Mother, seeing in a moment all
the Hugonot Commanders not only retired into a place of security and advantage;
but an Army raised on a sudden, and a War begun, which with so many arts and
dissimulations they had sought to avoid, plainly perceived the secrets of the
Cabinet Council were revealed, nor could any body be suspected thereof save
only the High Chancellor, who besides his not consenting to what was resolved
upon concerning the Prince and the Admiral, it was known his Wife, his
Son-in-law, and his Daughter, were all three of the Hugonot Religion, and that
he himself held a great correspondence with Teligny, destined for the Admirals
Son-in-law, a young man full of subtilties and dissimulation, The King enters
into a jealousy of the High Chancellor de l' Hospi^al, and putting him out of
his office, confers it upon Monsieur de M^rvilli^rs.
and therefore liked of by him to marry his Daughter, as understanding those
arts wherewith he ordinarily governed his actions: which jealousy of the High
Chancellor, grounded only upon report, and a general consent, prevailed so
much with the King, that though there were no material proofs against him
whereby he could be deprived of his Office; yet the King not only put him out,
but commanded him from the Court, and gave the Seals to Monsieur Morvilliers, a
man of great experience and no less wit, who being an Ecclesiastical Person,
was very averse to the Faction, free from any intelligence with the Hugonots,
and a dependant upon the House of Guise.

Michael de l' Hospital being removed from the Court and the affairs, the King
and the Queen desiring to take away all matter that might administer fuel to
the fire that was again ready to break out, caused an Edict to be published, in
which they promised to observe the Capitulation, and that accordingly a Liberty
of Conscience should be tolerated to all those who remaining peaceably in their
Houses, abstained from Arms, and from joining with them who went about under
several pretenses to stir up the people to Rebellion. But not many days after,
either persuaded by the reasons the Catholics alleged against this Edict, as
a means to advance the designs and practices of the Enemy, or else seeing that
the Hugonots, neither restrained by fear, nor pacified by the Kings favor,
were with a general consent, and with the same intentions as before gone all to
Rochel, nor could not, with any promises whatsoever be withheld from running
furiously to take Arms, being willing to satisfy the requests, and to confirm
the fidelity of the Catholic party, which at that time was the main prop of
the Royal Authority, and desirous likewise to gain the Amity of the Pope Pius
Quintus, who both by threatening messages, and particular graces granted to the
King, perpetually solicited the prohibition of the Hugonot Religion; and being
resolved to declare their affections in this point, till then much doubted of
by all Christendom, The King sets forth an Edict against the Hugonots, by
which all the former are revoked.
caused another Edict to be published, in which the King, after a long distinct
Narration of the indulgence and benignity he had showed to reduce the Hugonots
to a right understanding, and after a particular mention of the seditions and
conspiracies by which contemning his Majesty's grace and goodness, they had
continually disquieted and molested his Kingdoms, bringing in strangers and
mortal Enemies, to the French Nation, to possess and invade the strongest
places, and most flourishing parts of the Kingdom; at length, revoking all
Edicts published concerning Religion during his minority, and nullifying the
last Capitulation made pro interim, and by way of provision, ordained and
commanded that the exercise of any Religion whatsoever, except the Roman
Catholic, ever observed by him and the Kings his Predecessors, should be
prohibited and expressly forbidden and interdicted in all places of the Kingdom:
banished the Calvinist Ministers and Preachers out of all the Towns and places
under his Dominion, commanding them upon pain of death within the term of
fifteen days to avoid the Kingdom; pardoned through special grace all things
past in matters of Religion, requiring for the future under pain of death a
general conformity to the Rites of the Catholic Church; and finally ordained,
that no person should be admitted to any Office, Charge, Dignity, or Magistracy
whatsoever, if he did not profess and live conformable to the Roman Religion.

This Constitution being published with an incredible concourse of the
Parisians, and received with exceeding joy by all the Parliaments, gave a clear
testimony, that the King and Queens intentions had ever been to suppress and
destroy the Hugonot party, but desired to do it without the noise of War, and
with as little prejudice to the people, or danger of dismembring the Kingdom as
was possible: Wherefore their arts and dissimulations, after so long patience
proving all vain, at length taking off (as the saying is) their Mask, they
declared an implacable War against the followers of the Hugonot Faction.

They were not less diligent to make provisions for the War, New preparations
for War.
than severe and resolute in their decrees: For the Duke of Anjou being
declared Lieutenant General of all the Provinces, presently got an Army
together, with a resolution immediately to advance into Xaintonge, to suppress
the Hugonot Forces before they received any succors from other parts, or from
the Queen of England, or the Protestant Princes of Germany: On the other side,
the Prince and the Admiral, remembering the success of the late Accommodation,
had obliged themselves and all the rest by a solemn Oath at Rochel, to
persevere until death in the defense of their Religion, nor ever to condescend
to an agreement without the general consent of all the Commanders, and
sufficient security for the preservation of their lives, and to enjoy a full
Liberty of Conscience. After which Covenant thus sworn and established amongst
themselves, they sent forthwith into England and Germany, to procure Aids from
thence. And because the Admiral, a man who by long experience had learned the
true discipline, knew that food and other necessary provisions are the only
means whereby Armies subsist and prosper, (wherefore he usually said, An Army
is a certain Monster, which begins to be formed by the belly) seeing they were
shut up in a corner, which though fruitful, was ye^ straightened on the one side
by the River Loire, and on the other by the Mountains, which from Languedoc and
Gascony extend themselves to the Pirenees; persuaded the Prince and the other
Chiefs, that all manner of care should be used to get store of Corn, Money and
Munition, whereby they might supply their present occasions, and the
necessities of the ensuing Winter: The Hugonot^ set out a Flee^ to fetch in
provisions.
to which end they made ready a Fleet of thirty sail of several kinds and
burden, which should scour the Sea, and run up into the Rivers, robbing
Merchants ships, and little Towns upon the coasts, not only to bring what Corn
they could from other places to Rochel, but to take what booty they met with in
money to supply their present want. Nor was this counsel without effect; for in
the space of a few months, having taken many Vessels, which without any fear of
such an encounter, put freely to Sea, they got such a considerable Sum as was
sufficient to defray the expenses of the Army for some time after: but they had
much more help by the industry of the Queen of Navarre, who with often Messages
and earnest Letters so solicited the Queen of England, that she disposed her,
notwithstanding the peace newly made with the most Christian King, not only to
accommodate the Hugonots with Ships, Corn and Munition, but with 100000 Crowns
also for the payment of their Army; in which she pretended not to have broken
the conditions of the Peace, for the Forces raised by the Hugonots were for the
Kings service, and assistance of the Crown, against the Oppressors of the Royal
Liberty, and the Persecutors of the true Worship of God.

In the mean while the Prince and the Admiral marching forth with the Army,
possessed themselves without opposition of all the Neighboring Towns, and had
such good success, that in a few weeks they were Masters not only of all the
Country of Xaintonge, but of the most part of the Cities of Poictou and
Tourain, which either by force or agreement joined with the Confederates, and
received Hugonot Garrisons. These proceedings were not at first hindered by the
Duke of Montpensier, who being sent to that Province with an inconsiderable
number of men, could not make resistance against so strong and powerful an
Army: wherefore the Hugonots being Masters (without dispute) of the Field,
overrun, burnt and pillaged all the Country, and every moment multiplied in
strength and adherents; for those that governed the affairs were not careful
enough at the first to send a sufficient force after to suppress them, or at
least to hinder their increase, and now they were constrained to spend much
time in getting men together from other parts, and making them march so far
from their own Country.

But Henry of Lorain, Duke of Guise, the Count of Brissae, and Messieurs de
Biron, Martigues and la Valette being at length joined with the Duke of
Montpensier, they unanimously agreed that they would lie abroad in the field,
to curb the insolences and incursions of the Enemy, and to defend those Towns
that were not yet in the power of the Hugonots; and so it happened, that at the
same time that the Duke of Montpensier leaving Angiers went to lie with his
Army upon the Banks of Vienne, Messieurs de Mouvan^ and Acier who had raised
all the Hugonot Forces of Daulphine, Provence, Auvergne, and Languedoc, going
to join with the Army, arrived at the same place. They were about 18000 Horse
and Foot, but for the most part tumultuary people, and not accustomed to the
War; who partly to secure themselves from the severity of the Magistrates,
partly in hope of the boo^y that was proposed to them, had voluntarily joined
with certain of the Nobility. Nevertheless they were very strictly obedient to
their Officers, and marched in exceeding good order, divided into two Battles,
the first led by Messieurs de Mouvans and Pierregourde, the other by Monsieur
de Acier himself, and for the most part lodged so near, that in a little time
they might easily succor one another, with which kind of discipline having
overcome all difficulties, they were arrived, laden with booty, from the
farthest parts of Lionoise and Daulphine, upon the borders of X^i^^onge.

The Duke of Montpensier being advertised of their coming, resolved to fight
with them; and so much the rather, because the Van, through their long march,
or whatever else were the reason, forsaking their wonted order, was advanced a
good way before the Battle. Wherefore departing from Vess^nne two hours before
day, on the 30 of October, he disposed the order of the assault in this manner:
That whilst he with frequent skirm^shes kept the main body in play, which was
with Acier in the second Squadron, the Count of Brissac and the Duke of Guise,
with all the Cavalry should charge Mouvans and Pierregourde, who with the
lesser number went before, and invironing them with their Troops, fight with
them as they marched into the Champagne, where the Foot, of which they had good
store, but no Pikes, had so much disadvantage, that he thought it easy without
much contention to defeat them. But the Duke of Guise and the Count de Brissac
mounting 1200 Foot in Cr^ope, made such haste, that contrary to the order
given, they came upon the Enemy whilst he was yet lodged in the Village of
Mess^^nac before he began m^rch, insomuch tha^ they lost that advantage by
which they hoped with a lesser number to overcome a greater. Notwithstanding
seeing the Hugonots, fearing the Horse, kept in, and stood upon their defense,
not to seem to come in vain, they assaulted the Village with great force; and
the fight was so hot there, that for the space of two hours they stood to it
obstinately on both sides, till the Catholic Commanders, finding they labored
to no purpose, and through the strong situation of the place, exposed their men
to an evident danger, resolved to sound a retreat; and returning the same way
they came, placed themselves in ambush in a Wood, a little distant from
Messignac, which extended it self largely behind a hill, expecting there to see
what the Enemy would do. Mouvans and Pierregourde believing the Kings Forces
were gone to meet with their Foot, with an intent to come again to assault them
in the same place, hoping before their return they might gain Riberac, a strong
place held by the Hugonots, and but five leagues off, without taking any care
to discover the Country, began to march with great diligence, to prevent the
return of the Catholics, who they thought were by that time a good way from
them. But they were scarce advanced into the midst of the field without
Messignac, hastening to recover a Wood which reaches from thence to Riberac,
when the Catholics coming upon them with their Horse divided into diverse
Troops, charged them furiously on all sides; and though they were not very well
able to defend themselves, all their Foot being Musketeers, without any Pikes,
in a plain open place, yet fighting with exceeding constancy, made the Victory
bloody to the Enemy. Mouvans and Pierregourde were killed, and together with
them remained dead upon the place about two thousand Foot, and more then four
thousand Horse: the Catholic Soldiers having by command from their Officers
not endeavored to take prisoners, which, redeeming themselves for a small
ransom, would perversely return to the service of the Hugonots.

The Duke of Montpensier having in the mean while overtaken the Enemies
Battalia at S. Chatier, which was in a great body flanked with good Horse of
Provence and Daulphine, purposed not to charge them with all his force, but
thinking it sufficient to keep them at a bay, so that they might not succor
their Van, entertained them with frequent hot skirmishes till the evening, when
night coming on, he being retreated toward Vesunne, they taking the advantage
of the dark, marched all night without in^ermission, so that about break of day
they arrived at Riberac; and the day following, which was the first of
November, joined with the Prince and the Admiral at Aubeterre.

But the Duke of Anjou with the Army marching in great diligence, was now come
to Amboise; wherefore the Duke of Montpensier and the other Commanders after
the Victory at Messig^ac, leaving to molest the Enemy, went away with all their
forces to join with him; and the tenth day of November both the Armies met at
Chastel-rault, a Town in the Confines of Poictou upon the River Vienne.

Great was the expectation every body had of the valor and generosity of this
Prince, who in the first flour of his age, being adorned with most noble
Endowments, seemed as it were born on purpose to sustain the weight of the
greatest Empires in Europe; for to his excellent form of body, was added such a
perfect constitution, that the delicateness of his complexion hindered him not
from supporting all the inconveniences that belong to a Soldier; and in his
mind appeared such signs of courage, magnanimity, prudence, and a generous
Spirit, that his Virtue was thought much beyond his years; which ornaments
being accompanied with a natural eloquence, and the knowledge of such Letters
as belong to a Prince, gained him not only wonderful love, but a singular
reverence likewise, both from the Army, the Nobility, and from the whole
Nation. And though his actions indeed gave some testimonies of a humane
condition, which is never altogether free from the marks of moral frailty; yet
his inclinations to pleasures were imputed to the tenderness of his youth, and
his profuse liberality to his domestics and servants, thought rather a
magnanimity of mind not yet fully settled, than any weakness or want of
judgment. In this great esteem was the Duke of Anjou with all men, to which
that his actions might correspond, he desired without further delay to meet the
Enemy in the Field, and being straightened by the season of the year already
inclining ^o Winter, forthwith making a general Muster of his Army, in which
were 7000 Horse, 6000 Swisses, 2000 Italians, and 12000 French Foot, moved with
all his Forces marching through the same f^uitful Country of Poictou, toward
the place where the Hugonots were.

At the same time the Prince of Conde being Master of all the Country about,
seeing such a powerful Enemy come against him, was with twenty four thousand
Foot, and little less than four thousand Horse, upon his march, with a
resolution to approach as near as he could to the Kings Army, without
abandoning the Towns belonging to his party, and opportunely to embrace the
advantage of any occasion that the propitiousness of his fortune should
present. Both the Generals had the same design, a thing rarely falling out,
that two Enemies should concur in the same opinion for the managing of the War;
for the Duke of Anjou who thought himself superior, not only in number, but
also in the courage of his Soldiers, and discipline of War, desired to come to
a Battle, hoping to suppress the Hugonots before their succors came out of
Germany; and the Prince of Conde likewise, who commanding Volunteers, which for
the most part served without pay, knew the ardour and union of his Soldiers
would not long continue, thought it better to make use of them whilst their
fervor lasted, than by prolonging the War run into those inconveniences, of
which he had formerly had too much experience.

But the desire and determinations of the Generals was crossed by the
contrariety of the season, for it being then about the end of November, the
extraordinary cold, great ice, and snows, hindered the progress both of the one
and the other; for the days being short, and the nights exceeding cold, they
could not (the ways being broken, and covered with snow) either easily fetch in
provisions, or march with their Army, or advance with their Cannon, wherefore
they were forced by making short journies, and lodging in convenient quarters,
to ease the grievous labor of the Soldiers: for neither the men nor the
Horses could by any means lie in Tents, by reason of which incommodities, both
Armies advanced very slowly. But at length all difficulties being overcome,
with a wonderful constancy on both sides, they came so near together between
Poictiers, Chastel-rault, and Lusignan, that they were not above four French
leagues a sunder, which, as is said before, answer to eight English miles.

The Duke of Anjou with the gross of the Army quartered at Iaseneuil, a Town
upon the great Road, which from Poictiers lead directly to the Enemy, and part
of the Cavalry with some few Foot for the more convenience lodged at Sanse, a
Village but a league distant from Iaseneuil. The Prince of Conde on the other
side marching with all his Forces toward the Catholics, was come to lodge at
Colombiere, two leagues out of Lusignan, at which Town all his Army quartered
very commodiously. In the midway equally distant from both Camps was a Village
called Pamprou, upon which each General had a design with an intent to lodge
his Van there, that he might be the nearer to vex and trouble the Enemy. It so
happened that Martigues on the Catholic side, and Andelot on the Hugonots,
advanced both at the same time, with the first Troops of their Armies to
possess it. At their meeting there was a fierce bloody skirmish between them,
which was gallantly maintained many hours, though with various success to both
parties: but whatsoever were the occasion, the Catholics began to yield, and
the Village at last remained in the power of the Hugonots, who pursuing their
Victory, advanced to follow the light Horse which were upon their retreat.

In the mean while arrived the Duke of Montpensier on the Catholic side, who
bringing with him above six hundred Lances, Andelot being much inferior in
strength retired to the descent of a Hill, which was between him and the
Village, where extend^ng the Front of his Horse, and placing in Foot in each
wing, the Enemy could neither take a view of his Flanks nor his Rear, but
seeing such a large body toward him, thought their whole Army had been brought
thither, and so lost the opportunity to rout and defeat Andelot. But the
condition of things was soon changed, for within a little while the Prince and
the Admiral appeared with all their Forces, insomuch that they were exceedingly
too strong for the Catholics, who had nothing with them but their Van, all the
rest of the Army being left behind in their Quarters in Iaseneuil. Montpensier
and Martigues knowing the insufficiency of their strength, and doubting if the
Enemy perceived it, they should be charged with disadvantage, by little and
little left off skirmishing, and retreated to a great thick Wood which was
behind them, and there put their men in order, drawing into as large a Front as
they could, and placing the Muskiteers among the trees to make the greater
show: but the Hugonot Commanders seeing it grow late, and believing through the
same mistake, that all the Catholic Army was drawn out as well as theirs,
thinking they had done enough to draw them from Pampron, staid there to lodge
under covert, and had not any thought to assail the Enemy that night; wherefore
Montpensier and Martigues having caused the Swisses to beat their Drums till
midnight, to make the Hugonots believe all the Kings forces were there, and
particularly the Swisses of whom they had a great esteem, and causing lighted
matches to be hanged upon the hedges, and up and down in the woods to confirm
the mistake of the Enemy, in the dead of the night retired with exceeding
silence to Iasenevil; avoiding, by the benefit of the dark, so evident a danger
of being utterly defeated.

The Prince and the Admiral finding in the morning the error by which they had
lost so great an opportunity, not to lose their time likewise in vain, resolved
to set upon that part of the Army which was quartered as Sanse, with an
intention, the Duke of Anjou not moving, to break and scatter it, and
afterward advancing to try the fortune of a day in the open fields. But the
Duke of Anjou had the same morning upon the Enemies approach, sent for all his
Forces to the head Quarter, and quitting the Village, brought the whole Camp to
Iasenevil, which being unknown to the Hugonots, they by the favor of a thick
mist, setting forth early in the morning, marched with the whole Army, in great
silence toward Sanse. But coming to a place where two ways part* the one
whereof goes to Sanse, and the other to Iasenevil, the Admiral taking the left
hand, went on as he intended toward the Village, and the Prince through
mistake turning on the right hand, took that way which led directly to the
Catholic Camp at Iasenevil, neither did he perceive by reason of the mist,
that he was out of the way, till he was so near the Kings quarter, that he came
afront the Enemy in a plain open place, and was so far engaged that he could
not make a secure retreat. The Duke of Anjou seeing the Enemies approach, not
knowing their mistake, thought they came with a resolution to assault him;
wherefore he drew up his men into a place of advantage, though somewhat too
straight for his Horse, and expected with a daring courage to join Battle. But
the Prince of Conde at length finding his error, and not knowing where the
Admiral was with the Van, going himself to view the ground, presently resolved
what to do, and with all the haste he could made himself master of two little
hills on each side the way, where he placed his Foot being drawn into two
divisions, among the stakes of the Vines, making himself a defense of the
ditches and banks, which are usual in that Country to enclose their grounds.
The Foot being lodged in such a place of advantage, and in a manner out of
danger, the next care was to secure the Horse, which being ranged upon the
highway, could not refuse to fight whenever the Catholics would charge
them; wherefore that they might not discover a fear, still moving softly on,
the Prince made show as if he would join Battle in the plain, which lay between
the two hills and the Kings Camp.

The Duke of Anjou believing the Prince meant to fight, when he saw the Enemies
Horse in the plain, commanded fire to be given to all the Cannon, of which he
had a great number placed in each Flank, hoping thereby to terrify them, and
withal to scatter two great wings of light Horse, which being in the Front of
the Army, before the rest, marched toward him. But the Prince taking his time
whilst the smoke of the Cannon covered the plain, retired dexterously with his
Horse behind the hills, and presently began to draw a Ditch cross the highway,
so that being covered on both sides with the hills, and having cut off the
Enemies passage, he placed there four Fieldpieces, and 600 Gascon Musketeers
to defend that Post. The smoke being vanished, the Duke of Guise and the Count
de Lude with two Squadrons of Horse advanced to charge, but found the field
void and abandoned by the Hugonots; wherefore having marched up as far as the
hills without meeting any encounter, they returned to their Body with news that
the Prince began to entrench in the plain. The Duke of Anjou almost confounded
with this uncertain proceeding of the Hugonots, presently sent the Count of
Brissac with the French Musketeers, and Monsieur de la Valette with four Troops
of Horse to second him, toward the hills, to try whether by skirmishing they
could engage them to fight; but the Enemy not stirring from their place, and
scouring the plain under them with their Musket Shot, the rest of the day was
spent in light skirmishes; for neither the Prince moved from the hills, but on
the contrary went on with his trenches, nor would the Duke of Anjou set upon
the Hugonots in their works with so great disadvantage.

In this interim the Admiral understanding by the noise of the Cannon what had
happened, without attempting any thing at Sanse, was returned in great haste to
join with the Prince: complaining that fortune heaping error upon error,
should with such frowardness delude the prudence and wariness of his counsels.
The Armies stood to their Arms, with great diligence guarding their posts all
that night, but the next morning both sides being vanquished by the violence of
the cold, and the exceeding sufferance of two nights watching continually in
Arms, the Generals resolved to retreat, and so as it were by mutual consent,
the Duke of Anjou marched away to Poictiers, and the Hugonots to Mirebeau.

The Duke thought by retiring into an open plain Country, either to invite the
Enemy to fight upon equal terms, or else by often moving and changing Quarter,
to approach so near to them, that he might gain some seasonable advantage. But
the Hugonot Commanders, not to give the Enemy such an opportunity as he sought
after, thought of another way, and resolved marching from the Catholics to
fall on a sudden upon Saumur, a City upon the Loire, where there is a very fair
Bridge, which is one of the principal passes over that River, to enter into the
other Provinces of France, or to receive supplies from them, and particularly
to enable them to join with those forces that come to their aid out of Germany:
for the Loire dividing in a manner the whole Kingdom into two parts, separates
the Country anciently called Aquitania from the two Gallias, Celtica and
Belgica; a great part whereof are yet subject to that Crown. They hoped
likewise by besieging and streightning a place of so much consequence, that the
Duke of Anjou rather than suffer it to be taken before his eyes, would be
brought to fight with some disadvantage; for though the one side and the other
very much desired battle, yet they both studied to contrive it so, that they
might be in a manner assured of the Victory. But this stratagem proved
fruitless; for the Duke knowing that Saumur being a strong place, and
reasonably well guarded, might easily hold out against the Hugonots, resolved
to raise them by a diversion, without bringing himself into a necessity to
fight at their pleasure: wherefore letting the Prince march toward Saumur, he
departed two days after with good store of victuals for his men from Poictiers,
and went directly to assail Mirebeau, which was forced and taken with great
loss to the Hugonots, (for the remainder of the Army with a great part of their
carriages were left there) and without losing any time, advanced farther into
the Enemies Country to besiege Loudun.

Monsieur d' Acier commanded in the Town with twelve Companies of Foot, who
though he showed a great readiness to defend it, principally through the
confidence he had of the badness of the season, which was such, that by reason
of the Ice, the Catholics could neither raise any batteries, nor advance their
trenches; yet seeing such a powerful Army sat down before it, he perpetually
solicited the chief Commanders of the Army, that considering his danger, they
would come to succor him; who being moved with his earnestness, but much more
to see the Duke already so far advanced into that Country from whence they had
all their provisions and support, presently left Saumur, without having been
able to attempt any thing, and marched toward the Catholic Army, being reduced
to that necessity to fight at a disadvantage, to which they thought to have
forced the Enemy. But advancing with great circumspection, and in such order as
was behooveful for experienced Commanders, the twentieth of December they came
to lodge in the Suburbs of Loudun, and with exceeding diligence encamped on the
other side of the Town, opposite to that which was battered and assaulted by
the Catholics.

Between the two Armies stood the Town, and on each side a large spacious
champagne, Whilst the Duke of Anjou batters Loudun on the one side, the Prince
of Co^de coming to relieve it, lodges in the suburbs on the other, and being
both resolved to fight, they are hindered by the coldness of the season.
without banks and ditches, or any other impediments, which was wonderful
commodious for the Armies to skirmish, or to fight upon equal terms with
Ensigns displayed; but the natural commodity that the place afforded was
hindered and interrupted by the quality of the season; for the cold was so
extreme, that the Soldiers limbs were in a manner stupefied and dead, and
through the abundance of Ice and frozen snow, the ground was so slippery and
hard, that every hour an infinite company of Soldiers were brought out of the
skirmishes into the tents, who falling down were maimed, and unable to do
service. The Cavalry was more inconvenienced; for the ground being low and full
of water, was covered all over with such hard Ice, that the Horses finding no
foot for their feet, fell one upon another, and the men being armed, if they
offered to move or turn, could not advance a step without disordering their
Squadrons, and confounding the Files, through which difficulties it being
impossible for the Armies to fight, (for that party which stirred first, would
rout and disorder it self) after they had stayed four days, and both sides
beginning already to suffer want, 1569.
(for the season hindered the Suttlers to bring in provisions) the Duke of
Anjou, who lying in the open field suffered most, not to consume his Army to no
purpose, resolved to retire back four leagues from the Enemy, and getting a
little River before him, quartered his men in the neighboring Villages and
Towns; which when it was known to the Hugonots, believing that the Army for
this commodity of lodging being divided in diverse places, could not easily be
brought together, they resolved to fall into the Duke of Anjou's own quarter,
hoping to gain a Victory before the rest of the Army could come to assist them.
But being come in the morning, which was the twenty seventh of December, to the
banks of River, thinking to pass without any resistance, they found it so
resolutely defended by the guards that were placed upon the foords, that after
having tried twice or thrice in vain to force their passage, they were
constrained to retire; which they did so much the rather, because two pieces
being shot off, they conceived rightly that they were a signal for the
Catholics to come to the several passes of the River, which they were before
appointed, if occasion were, to defend; so that they concluded it was
impossible to pass over without too evident a danger.

After this retreat, a grievous sickness, through their past sufferance,
Through their past sufferings a great mortality seiseth upon the Armies.
beginning to grow in the Army, and the Soldiers continually murmuring that
they were led to fight not against men, but against the perverseness of the
weather, and the very force of Nature, the chief Commanders resolved to retire
to some place at a good distance, where they might lie secure until such time
that the sharpness of the winter being in some measure past, the season would
again permit them to go on with the War: for these reasons the Prince and the
Admiral being retreated into the lower Poictou, toward the confines of
Xaintongue, the Duke of Anjou following the like counsel, went with all his
forces to Chinon, where they began to feel the effects of their former
sufferings; for such a cruel infection entered into both Armies, that in the
space of a few days above four thousand men died on each side; as if Fortune
seeing the intentions of the Generals, and the strength of the Armies equal,
would likewise distribute amongst them equal sufferings and losses.

The year 1568. being spent in these actions, began the year 1569. which was
full of great accidents and infinite blood: 1569.
in the beginning whereof the Prince of Conde having left the care of the Army
to the Admiral, went himself in person to Rochel, to solicit for money, and
other provisions to maintain the War, which coming slowlier than they imagined,
had brought them into extreme want of every thing; for being driven into a
corner, though one of the most fertile in all France, and lying in a Country
that held with their party, though they lived for the most part upon
free quarter, and at the charge of the peasants, yet they had no occasion to
plunder, with which they used in other places to maintain and satisfy the
Soldiers. The 100000 Ducats sent by the Queen of England were already spent,
besides the money brought in by their Fleet, which they sent out to rob the
Merchants ships; and the Citizens of Rochel, though they were ready to part
with all their sustance toward the maintenance of the War, yet tra^fck
failing, and the contributions falling so heavy upon them, they were so
exhausted, that they were not able to furnish much more; The Hugonots being in
a straight, the Prince of C^nde sells the goods of the Church.
wherefore the Prince of Conde being forced by necessity, took a resolution to
sell the Treasure of the Church which was in Xaintonge, and the other Provinces
under his command; and the more to encourage men to buy, the Queen of Navarre
engaged her own Estate for their security.

With this sale, for which (to the incredible scandal of the Parliaments, and
contempt of the Royal Authority) they gave public Commissions to particular
persons, and with certain Contributions gathered in Rochel and the adjacent
Islands, they got together such a sum of money as was sufficient to supply the
Army for some months, hoping in the mean while the season would grow more
favorable to advance into a larger Country, where they might with their wonted
plundering satisfy the clamor and evident want of the soldiers.

The rest of the Provinces were not at quiet; on the contrary, all parts of the
Kingdom suffered diverse changes and miseries; for Monsieur de la Chastre
Governor of Berry, and the Count Siarra Martinengo having besieged Sancerre
upon the Loire sometimes with good, sometimes with ill success, but ever with
great slaughter on both sides, continued to batter and assault it: and the
Prince of Conde and the Admiral having left Noirs, the Count de Barbesieux with
the Forces of Champagne assaulted and took it; The Monastery of St. Michael in
^remo destroyed by the Rochelle^s Anno 1569.
the Rochellers likewise made themselves Masters of the Isles near Xaintonge,
and with great desolation had ruined that most noble ancient Monastery of St.
Michael de desert, destroying with fire and sword those most venerable relics
of the devotion and piety of their Ancestors.

Whilst these things were done, the violence of the Winter was past; wherefore
the Duke of Anjou having received fresh supplies, (for the Marquess of Baden
had brought 1500 German Horse, and the Count de Tande the Gentry of Provence)
about the beginning of March leaving Chinon, and keeping along the Charente,
marched toward the Hugonots. On the other side, the Prince and the Admiral
having received advertisement that the Viscount de Montcler and Bourniquet, and
the other Gentlemen of Languedoc and Gascony, with a great number of Horse and
Foot were coming to their aid, and doubting the Catholic Army might hinder
their passage, leaving the Territory of Rochel, where they stayed to refresh
themselves, and passing the Charente, advanced to meet them. But having notice
afterward of the Duke of Anjou's moving, they stopped their journey, and
breaking all the bridges, and placing sufficient guards where the water was
foordable, staid at Iarnac, a Town two leagues from the River, with an intent
either to hinder the passage of the Kings Forces, or to starve them; for all
the Country held for that party; or else, if they attempted to force their way,
to set upon the Troops that first got over, not doubting, they being disordered
in their passage, to gain an assured Victory.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Anjou having taken by the way the Castle of Mele,
and Ruffec, came to Chasteau-neuf, a frequent ordinary pass over the Charente,
there he found that the Hugonots had already broken the bridge beyond
Chasteau-neuf, and left a Garrison of 1000 Foot in the Town, which the Prince
thought a sufficient strength to defend that place. But experience showed he
was mistaken, for the Count of Brissac having drawn the French Infantry
thither, and with his Cannon beaten down some of their works, those within
being terrified, without expecting any succors, abandoned the Town, and
passing the River in certain boats that they found ready, retired to the Army
which lay two leagues off The taking of Chasteau-neuf nothing advantaged the
Duke of Anjou; for the bridge being broken, and the Enemies standing prepared
on the other side to hinder his passage, it was a very difficult matter to
repair the old bridge, or to make a new one, and much more dangerous to force a
passage against so powerful an opposition: wherefore the Catholics showing
their skill, to surmount those difficulties by policy which they could not
overcome by force, having left Monsieur de Byron Master, or as they say,
Mareshal of the Field, with such orders as were necessary at Chasteau-neuf, the
Duke with all the Army moved toward Cognac, marching along the river, and
making show to seek some more easy expedite convenience to pass over.

At the same time the Admiral moved with the Hugonots Van on the other side of
the river, and advanced the same way, so that there being nothing between the
two Armies but a narrow stream, they continually played upon one another with
their shot. In this manner they marched all day, though very slowly; but night
drawing on, the Admiral having given order that the light Horse, and certain
chosen companies of Foot should stay to guard the passes, he not to incommodate
his men, who being Volunteers could not, or would not longer endure to lie in
the open Field, removed about a league from the River, and lodged with the Van
at Bassac, a reasonable great Village which was sufficient to receive them all,
and the Prince with the Battle not being yet moved from his quarters; staid
still at Iarnac, in a manner right against Chasteau-neuf.

The next day the Duke of Anjou having observed how the Enemy quartered that
night, desired to confirm them in the opinion that he went seeking an
opportunity to pass over; and having put some small Barks upon the River, with
a good number of Musketeers, made show of forcing the Hugonots guards; but
finding a strong resistance in every place, continued his march in the same
manner as before until toward night, when through the frequency of the
skirmishes having advanced little more than a league, and the Admiral being
already retired to lodge in covert at Bassac where he quartered the evening
before, the Duke having in the beginning of the night caused the Rear under the
command of the Duke of Guise, to wheel about, and so one Body after another,
the whole Army, marching with great expedition, returned in a few hours to
Chasteau-neuf: where he found that Monsieur de Byron had with exceeding
diligence mended the broken bridge, and made another very commodious one of
boats, so that though it were late in the night, yet being very clear, and fit
for his design, he presently caused the Duke of Guise and Monsieur de Martigues
to pass over with two Squadrons of Horse, after whom followed the whole Army in
very good order, and in it the Duke himself without meeting any opposition
whatsoever; for the Count of Montgomery and Sieurs de Soubise and de la Love,
who with the light Horse had the charge to guard the banks of the River,
watching at those passes toward which the Catholics marched the day before,
did not believe they could turn back so quickly, or pass over just in that
place where the main of the Army lay ready to defend the passage of the River:
but such was the negligence both of the Soldiers and Commanders, partly
through the security they thought themselves in, partly through the usual
disobedience of Soldiers in civil Wars, partly likewise because the Country
being ruined, the Commissaries and Sutlers not keeping any order, were forced
to seek and fetch in victuals afar off, that it was already day, and the
greatest part of the Catholic Army was drawn up upon the banks on the other
side, before the Scouts had any notice of what was done. The first that gave
advertisement of it was Captain Montaut, who riding the Round with fifty Horse,
to see if the guards did their duty, as soon as he perceived the Enemy was
gotten over, spurred as fast as he could to advertise the Admiral, who being
not only confounded with so important and unexpected an accident, but in a
manner desperate that his wisdom should be deluded by the industry of a young
man, whom he ever held and esteemed as a Child, resolved to retire to Iarnac,
to join with the Battle, and there to consult with the Prince what course, as
things went, was best to be taken.

But it was first necessary, not to leave them a prey to the Enemy, to send for
the Foot that were appointed to guard the passes of the River, and to get
together the light Horse, which for want of victuals and commodity of quarter,
were dispersed into several places; in which, though all possible diligence
were used, yet so much time was spent, that he found himself contrary to his
purpose in a necessity to fight: for the Duke of Anjou having imbattelled his
Army, and resolved whatever happened, to make a day of it, sent all the light
Horse before, and in the head of them Monsieur de Martigues, called generally,
The Soldier without fear, to fall in upon the Enemies Rear, that so he might
hinder their march, and gain time for the rest of the Army to come up.

Martigues coming upon the Hugonots just as they left Brissac, began to
skirmish so hotly, that the Admiral being forced to stay, gave order to make an
halt, and facing resolutely about, perceived it was impossible any longer to
avoid the encounter of Battle; wherefore having sent the Prince of Conde word
of the danger he was in, he placed the Sieurs de la Noue and Love in the Rear,
commanding them to maintain their ground against the light Horse, and to hinder
their advancing, whilst he passed into a certain place full of ditches, and
encompassed with water, beyond which he meant to draw up his men in order, that
the strength of the situation might in some measure supply the defect of his
forces, or at least defend them in the Flank from the multitude and fury of the
Enemy. These Commanders sometimes skirmishing, and sometimes courageously
mingling amongst them, sustained a good while the charge of the Catholics; but
Monsieur de la Valette, the Count de Lude, Monsieur de Monsalez and Malicorn
coming up with four Squadrons of Lances, they set upon them with such violence,
that the Captains being taken prisoners, all the rest of the men plainly ran
away: Whereupon the Admiral finding he could not long make resistance, and
desiring as far as he was able to avoid the necessity of fighting piecemeal,
left Andelot with 120 Horse to make good that place of advantage, that he might
hinder the Enemies passage, and himself with all the rest of the Van retired a
good trot to meet the other part of the Army, which was already marching
toward them with great diligence.

The Prince of Conde understanding the Admirals danger, came with all the Horse
to succor him, and left order that the Foot should follow softly after,
conceiving he should have time enough to join with the Van, and bring all the
Army together to fight. But when he saw part of the Admirals men routed, and so
hotly pursued by the Enemy, who every moment increased in number and strength,
he made a stand upon the highway, having on one Flank a pool, which defended
him on the right hand, and a little hill which covered him on the left, and
with exceeding wariness ranged those forces he had with him, taking all the
advantage that was possible of the situation of the place. In ordering of his
men he left a free void place for the Admiral, who though he arrived a full
gallop with the Horse, took his post without making any disorder, and facing
about to the Enemy, put himself in a readiness to fight, keeping the left Flank
at the foot of the hill. In the mean while the first Squadrons of the
Catholics Horse had set upon Andelots post, who finding himself seconded by
Puviauts Musketeers, which being placed behind the hedges, and the banks,
filled every thing with smoke, cries and blood, bravely opposed the Enemy; and
it was a spectacle worthy the remembrance, that in the charge he encountered
the Duke de Monsalez, (who behaved himself no less courageously) and came up so
close to him, Andelot mingles with the Enemy in such manner, that lif^ing up
the Duke of Monsalez Beaver, he discharges a Pistol in his fa^e.
that with his bridle-hand he lift up the Beaver of his Helmet, and discharged
a Pistol in his face, of which shot he fell down dead upon the ground;
nevertheless the Hugonots yielding to the superior number of the Catholics,
could not maintain that post above half an hour, but setting spurs to their
Horses, gallopped away to the main Body of the Van, and ranged themselves on
the place that was appointed for them.

Whilst these things were doing, the Duke of Anjou having without tumult or
confusion disposed his Army in very good order, advanced readily to begin the
Battle, the beginning of the day giving great hopes of an assured Victory.
Without any detraction both sides showed an equal resolution, and boldness of
courage; but the other circumstances were not equal, and especially their
Forces: for part of the Hugonots Foot, which were distributed upon the banks of
the River, hearing of the Enemies passage, and believing they could not
possibly join with the rest of their Army, were passed over the River, and
retired to a place of security; and the rest that were with Monsieur d' Aciere,
according to their orders, following the Prince of Conde, could not come soon
enough to the fight, but dispersed themselves in several places without making
trial that day of their fortune. Notwithstanding the Hugonots being defended on
one side by the Lake, and on the other by the Hill, and therefore sure they
could not be hurt in the middle, bravely sustained the fierceness of the
encounter; the Commanders no less than the common Soldiers fighting boldly on
both sides, and with great courage disputing the success of the day.

The Duke of Guise charged the left wing, where were the Admiral and Andelot,
with a great number of the Nobility of Provence, Britany and Normandy, and
there the fight was very hot, the event of the Battle remaining very doubtful
for many hours: but the Catholics being continually furnished with fresh
supplies, the Hugonots being no longer able to resist so much a greater number,
all the Van was at length utterly routed; and the Commanders seeing the
Admirals own Cornet upon the ground, by reason of the imprisonment of Monsieur
de Guerchy that carried it, the Baron de la Tour General of the Rochel Fleet
killed, and Saubise, Languilliers and Monteran the principal Barons of their
party taken prisoners, they resolved before they were too much pressed by the
Enemy, to provide for their own safety by flight. The same did the Count de la
Rouch-fou-cault, and the Count de Montgomery, who were in the right wing of the
Battle by the Lake; for they being furiously charged by the Duke de Montpensier
who led the Catholic Van, after a long obstinate defense, leaving Chandenier,
Rieux, and Corbouson dead upon the place, with a great number of the Nobility
of Provence, Languedoc and Gascony, despairing of the Victory, sought to save
themselves. Only the Prince of Conde, who in the beginning of the fight
encountered the Duke of Anjou's own Squadron, though he were broken and often
charged through, still rallied his men, and with a wonderful courage maintained
the force of the Battle, but after the flight of the Van, and afterward of the
Rear, being charged on all sides by the Conquerors, and an innumerable company
of the Enemy, yet he fought desperately with those that stood to him till the
last: for as he was rallying his men, being hurt with a blow on the leg by a
Courser of the Count of Roch-fou-caults, having afterward his own Horse killed
under him in the fight, In the Battle of ^riss^c the Prince of Conde is shot in
the head, of which he dies the 16 of Marc^ 1569
and being grievously wounded in diverse places, he still with one knee upon the
ground courageously defended himself, till Monsieur de Montesqueou the Dukes
Captain of his Guard shooting a Pistol in his head, laid him dead upon the
place.

There was slain by his side Robert Stuart, he who in the Battle of St. Denis
killed the Constable; Tabaret, Melare, and in a manner all the Nobility of
Poictou, and Xaintonge, who being environed by the Catholics Squadrons, could
not find any way to save themselves; in the heat of which Battle the Duke of
Anjou fighting valiantly beyond the force of his age, in the head of his
Squadrons, and having his Horse killed under him, was in exceeding danger of
his life, if he had not been succored by the courage and address of his
Soldiers, and of his own valor, and those that were near about his person had
not defended him from the fury of the Enemy, who fighting desperately,
compassed him on all sides. But after the death of the Prince, and the
defeating of his Squadron, in which were the most valiant Soldiers in the
Army, there was no body made any resistance, but every one thinking how to save
himself, fled a several way, and the night that was drawing on advantaged them
not a little in their escape. The Admiral and Andelot went to St. Iean d'
Angely, Acier to Cognoc, Mongomery to Angoulesme; all the rest, and
particularly the Foot, which had not fought, dispersed themselves into several
places, not any one Regiment save only Pluviauts and Corbousons being present
at the business.

This was the Battle of Brissac that happened the sixteenth of March, in which
the quality of the slain was much more considerable than the number: for the
Hugonots lost not in all above seven hundred men, but they were most of them
Gentlemen and Cavaliers of note; for their chief strength consisted in their
Cavalry: and on the Catholic side very few were killed, but amongst those
Monsieur de Monsalez, Hypolite Pic, Count de la Mirandole, Prunay, and
Ingrande; for Monsieur de Lignieres whom some have named amongst the dead, died
many days after at Poictiers of a natural death.

The Duke of Anjou pursuing the Enemy, The body of the Prince of Conde was
carried in triumph upon a Pack-horse by the Catholics, and afterward restored
to his Nephew the Prince of Navarre.
entered the same night of the Battle victorious into Iarnac, whither the body
of the Prince of Conde was carried as in triumph upon a poor Pack-horse, all
the Army making sport at such a spectacle, which whilst he lived were terrified
with the name of so great a Person. The Duke permitted not any contempt or
violence to be used to the body, being satisfied that what could not be done by
Policy or Justice, was effected by the War: wherefore a few days after, to show
that respect to the dead which he thought due to the Royal Blood, he restored
it to Henry Prince of Navarre his Nephew, who without any other pomp, save only
the abundant tears of all the Faction, caused him to be buried at Vendosme, in
a Tomb belonging to his Ancestors.

Thus lived and thus died Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Conde, who by having so
many times stirred up Civil Wars in his own Country, and with the brand of
having been the chief Disturber of the Catholic Religion in the most Christian
Kingdom, obscured those excellent endowments of the mind, which for boldness,
constancy and generosity, would otherwise have rendered him most considerable
amongst the first Princes and Captains of that age.

The day after the battle those who in the terror of the flight were scattered
in diverse places, understanding that the most part of the Foot, being
untouched, was retired to Cognac, endeavored by several ways to get all to the
same place; so that before many days were past, besides Monsieur de Aciere who
saved himself there at the first, there met there the Counts de la
Roch-fou-cault, and Montgomery, Monsieur d' Ivoy, who, with his Brother being
killed, called himself Ienlis, Jacques Boucbard, Teligni, Bouchavanes; and at
length the Admiral himself and Andelot came thither from St. Iean d' Angeli.

After this defeat the affairs of the Hugonots were in a very uncertain
tottering condition; for there was no doubt, the Prince of Conde being dead,
but that the first place either for dignity or reputation of wisdom was due to
the Admiral: and it was not forgotten, that after the Battle of Dreux in which
the Prince remained Prisoner, the charge of the Army was by a general consent
conferred upon him; but there were many who for birth, riches, and other
advantages did not willingly yield to him: on the contrary, at this very time
there was a common slander laid upon his reputation, That through his sloth and
negligence, the Catholics got an opportunity to pass the River, whilst he
suffered himself to be deluded by the stratagems of a youth, who then only
entered upon the rudiments of War; and that after the passage of the Army he
had basely yielded in all places; giving a beginning, by his flight, to the
success and victory o^ the Enemy; which imputations, though he fully answered,
showing that the passage of the Catholics happened only because his Orders
were not obeyed, and because those who were appointed to guard the passes, for
convenience of quarter, left their posts without leave; so that he, who could
not be every where, was not advertised soon enough to remedy it; yet that his
flight ought indeed to be attributed to greatness of courage; for the Army
being routed, and the Victory desperate, he chose rather to save himself, that
he might rise again as a new Anteus to the ruin and perdition of his Enemies,
than by despairing of the future, through dejectedness of mind to die
unprofitably out of season, and without having effected any thing: nevertheless
partly through envy, partly through ambition, partly through grief of the late
loss, and the death of the Prince, he was spoken against and hated by many.

Besides this, it was thought that wanting the Authority and Name of a Prince
of the Blood, the foundation and credit of the Faction would fail; for neither
the people would so readily believe and follow a man of private condition, nor
stranger Princes much trust to his fidelity; nor would the reasons of their
cause have that wonted pretense to make War for the public good, and service
of the State; the nature of this charge being such, that whosoever undertook
it, ought to be the nearest allied Princes of the Blood Royal. To this was
added, that many accustomed to the liberality, candor and integrity of the
Prince of Conde, abhorred and feared the disposition and carriage of the
Admiral, who was thought a man exceeding covetous, of deep thoughts, of a
treacherous subtle nature, and in all things inclined wholly to attend and
procure by any means his own ends. And it happened at the same time, Andelot
after the loss of the Battle dies of grief.
that Andelot and Jacques Bouchard, the one Brother, and the other straightly
united by interests with the Admiral, either spent with labor, or overcome
with grief and trouble of mind, fell both into a grievous sickness, of which
they died not many months after, whereby that party which desired the greatness
and advancement of the Admiral, not knowing how to manage their business,
remained extremely weakened. But he with his subtilty overcoming all these
impediments, resolved by despising ambition, and speciousness of titles, still
to retain in himself the chief Power and Authority: for transferring the name
of Heads of the Faction, and the titles of Generals of the Army to Henry Prince
of Navarre, and Henry Son to the deceased Prince of Conde, he saw the common
cause would not only keep the same authority and the same reputation of being
upheld by the Blood Royal; but they being both in a manner children, the sole
administration of the whole business should still remain in him; so to quiet
the ambitions and pretenses of the great ones, so to satisfy the expectation
of the people, and by this means to renew again that league amongst the Faction
which through diversity of opinions seemed now in a manner broken.

With this resolution, not attempting that which could not be obtained, he
presently sent to Queen Jane to come to the Army, showing her the time was now
come to advance her Son to that greatness which properly belonged to him, and
to which she had so long aspired. Queen Jane wanted neither willingness nor
courage, being before fully resolved, despising all danger, to make her Son
Head of that Faction; wherefore with a readiness and quickness answerable to
the occasion, she went instantly with both the Princes to the Camp, which was
then at Cognac, full of discords within it self, and in a condition rather to
dissolve, than to keep together, to remedy the disorders and losses already
happened. There the Queen of Navarre after she had approved the Admirals
counsels, the Army being drawn together, with wonderful courage and manly
speeches, exhorting the Soldiers to remain united and constant in the defense
of their Liberties and Religion, proposed to them the two young Princes, whose
presence and aspect moved the affections of them all, to be their Generals;
encouraging them under the auspicious conduct of those two branches of the
Royal Blood, to hope for a most happy success to their just pretentions and the
common cause: The Prince of Navarre, and Henry Son to the Prince of C^nde, are
approved of and received for Heads of the Hugonot Faction.
at which words the Army, which through the past adversities, and present
discords, was in a manner astonished and confounded, taking new vigor, the
Admiral and the Count de la Roch-fou-cault first submitted and swore fidelity
to the Princes of Bourbon; by whose example the Gentlemen and Commanders doing
the same, the common Soldiers likewise with loud applause approved the
Election of the Princes for Protectors and Heads of the Reformed Religion.
Henry of Bourbon Prince of Navarre was then fifteen years of age, of a lively
spirit and generous courage, altogether addicted and intent to the profession
of Arms; The Prince of Navarre was fifteen years of age, and the Prince of
Cond^ a child.
wherefore through the inclination of his Fate, or the persuasions of his
Mother readily without any demur attempting the invitation of the Army, in a
short Souldier-like speech he promised them, To protect the true Religion, and
to persevere constantly in the defense of the common Cause, till either death
or victory brought that liberty they all desired and aimed at. The Prince of
Conde rather by his actions than words consented to what was done, for he was
so young that he could not express himself otherwise; so that in all other
things likewise yielding to the maturer age, Money coined by the Queen of
Navarre with her ow^ figure on the one side, and her Son^ on the other.
and pre-eminence of the first Prince of the Blood, the chief Authority of the
Faction was established in the Prince of Navarre: wherefore Queen Jane, in
remembrance of this Act, caused afterward certain pieces of Gold to be coined,
which on the one side bore her own Effigies, and on the other her Sons, with
this word, PAX CERTA, VICTORIA INTEGRA, MORS HONESTA.

The Princes then being chosen Heads of the Faction, they presently called a
Council of the chief Commanders to deliberate in the presence of Queen Jane how
to manage their business, what remedies were expedient to repair their past
losses, and how to divert the extreme danger that threatened them. There before
any thing else, it was determined, That the Admiral, by reason of the minority
and little experience of the Princes, should govern the Army and all things
else belonging to the War; but Monsieur de Aciere should be General of the
Foot: which charge first by the infirmity, The care of the A^my committed to
the Admiral.
and afterward by the death of Andelot, was vacant, and Monsieur de Genlis
General of the Artillery which was formerly supplied by Bouchard. After which
Elections, discoursing how to proceed with the War, many not yet assuted from
their fears, would that the Army should be drawn into the Cities and strong
holds about Rochel, showing it would be impossible for the Duke of Anjou to
make any attempt upon those places which were so environed with waters, and
marsh grounds, whilst there was any reasonable strength to defend them: but
this appeared to the Admiral (the other Commanders of best esteem being of the
same opinion) a too cowardly resolution, and therefore it was determined, That
all the Army should be divided into the several Towns upon the Rivers, to keep
them, and to hinder the progress of the Conqueror, till they had certain news
of the forces the Duke of Deux-ponts was bringing to their aid out of Germany,
who when he came near the Army should draw together again to meet him
wheresoever he was, and use their utmost endeavors to join with him: for by
obtaining that end, they should remain at least equal, if not superior in
strength to the Kings Army; and if they could not effect it, they should be
separated and carry the War into diverse places, and the King likewise being
constrained to divide his Forces, they might make War upon even terms; which
things being resolved on, Queen Jane went to Rochel to solicit for new aids
and provisions, the Admiral with the Princes retired to S. Iean d' Aug^li,
Monsieur de Piles took upon him the Defense of Xaintes, Montgomery and P^viaut
turned about to Angolesme, Monsieur d' Aciere with the greatest part of the
Foot remained at Cognac, and Genlis with a strong Garrison shut himself up in
Loudun, all places either for strength of their situation, by help of art, or
in regard of the Rivers, (which in that Country are many and very deep) likely
to hold out a long time.

In the mean while the Duke of Anjou, having given three days to refresh his
men, who were wearied out with continual labor, and busied in dividing their
booty, by the advice of his Captains, resolved to set upon those very Cities
the Hugonots meant to possess, as the most ready way to manage the War; to
which purpose he sent for the great pieces of Battery from Poictiers, having
for the more expedition marched only with fieldpieces. This time of respite
retarded for some days the course of their Victory, and gave the Hugonots
leisure to put their beforementioned designs in execution; besides the
expecting Orders from the Court which was far off, and where the resolutions
are not always easy and positive, produced at least delays and loss of time.
The first place they moved against was Cognac; but it soon appeared they had
undertaken a long and difficult enterprise; for the late Victory was gained
rather by industry in passing the river, and the death of the Prince of Conde,
than any great loss or slaughter among the Hugonots; and their running away,
which proceeded only from a sudden terror as it was a cause of losing their
General, so it preserved the Army, which being now divided, with abundant
provisions to defend the strong places, burnt with a desire by some remarkable
valiant actions to cancel the infamy of their late flight; whereby the taking
of the principal Cities became exceeding difficult.

There were in Cognac seven thousand Foot, and more than six hundred Horse with
Monsieur d' Aciere, and diverse of the Nobility and chief Commanders, who as the
Army approached, and several days after sallied out in such numbers, that their
encounters seemed rather little Battles than great skirmishes; and besides the
fierceness and courage the Hugonots showed, they did likewise great damage to
the assailants, so that they had no leisure by reason of the continual sallies,
to think either of making their approaches, or raising batteries, but were
forced for their own securities, and to avoid the fury of the Enemy, to keep
the Army in perpetual duty, and in arms; by which difficulties the Duke of
Anjou concluding it was in a manner impossible, in the state the Town then was,
to take it; not to spend his time in vain, or to consume the Army to no
purpose, resolved to advance farther, to assemble and clear those places more
in the heart of the Enemies Country, which were neither so strong, nor so well
provided, so that they being taken, Cognac would remain like an Island cut off
from all commerce, and fall of it self; which in time he hoped undoubtedly to
effect: for experience had in all occasions manifestly shown, that there was no
poison so deadly to the Hugonots as delays.

Wherefore the Duke of Anjou at the end of four days leaving Cognac, and
marching toward St. Iean d' Angeli, he, or some of his Commanders, by the way
took Tifange, Montaut, Forest, and Aubeterre, and at length came to besiege
Mucidan. There the Count of Brissac with his wonted courage tending his
batteries, whilst he resolutely advanced to view the breach, was shot in the
right thigh, of which wound he died, generally lamented by all men. His
misfortune slackned not, but on the contrary added to the fierceness of the
Catholics, in so much, that having made a furious assault and taken the Town,
in revenge of his death, not only all the Soldiers, but the Inhabitants
likewise were put to the Sword.

Wolf^ngus of Bavaria with an Army of 14000 men comes to the aid of the
Hugonots.
In this interim Wolfangus of Bavaria Duke of Deux-ponts, moved by the money and
promises of the Hugonots, had by the aid of the Duke of Saxony, and the Count
Palatine of the Rhine, and by the persuasions and assistance of the Queen of
England, gotten together an Army of 6000 Foot and 800 Horse, Monsieur de Muy
and Monsieur de Morvilliers with 800 Horse, and Monsieur de Briguemaut with
1200 French Musketeers being sent into Germany to join with them. In this Army
were William of Nassau Prince of Orange, with Lewis and Henry his Brothers; who
being driven out of Flanders, to avoid the severity of the Duke of Alva,
followed the same Religion, and the same fortune with the Hugonots.

The King of France and the Queen his Mother had endeavored, first by
Embassies to the Protestant Princes, and afterward by the authority of the
Emperor Maximillian the Second, with whom they entertained a straight league,
to hinder the raising of this Army; but the Protestants being much more zealous
to advance their own Religion, and the hope of gain and booty more prevalent
than either the Kings promises, or the Emperors threats, they brought their
Forces together with a firm resolution, despising all dangers, to pass without
delay to the aid of the Hugonots. But the King and the Queen Mother, who to
shelter themselves from this tempest, were gone to Metz upon the borders of
Lorain, when they saw this Army raised, to hinder which they had used all
manner of arts, gave commission to the Duke of Aumale, with the Cavalry of
Champagne and Burgundy, and 6000 Swisses newly received into pay, to enter the
Confines of the Protestant Princes, wasting their territories and spoiling
their people, to force them to keep the Army at home for their own defense, so
that they might not pass that year into France; believing the Emperor, in
consideration of the justice of their cause, and the league they had with him,
would not oppose this resolution. But the Duke of Aumale having in the
territories of Strasbourg, one of the free Towns of the Empire, met with, and
made a great slaughter among a certain number of French that were going from
Geneva and the Country about, to join with the Duke of Deux-ponts his Army, not
only the other Towns, and all the Princes of the Empire, but even the Emperor
himself was so offended thereat, that the King and the Queen, not to exasperate
them further, or raise new Enemies, sent directions to The Duke of Aumale, that
he should presently withdraw his forces into Burgundy, to keep things in order
at home, being already assured through the perverseness of stranger Princes,
that they should have work enough in their own Kingdom.

The Duke of Deux-ponts with his Army presently followed the Duke of Aumale
into Burgundy, The Duke of D^ux-ponts enters into F^ance, wasting and spoiling
the Country.
with exceeding cruelty wasting and spoiling all the Country through which he
passed; nor could the Duke of Aumale, being so much inferior in strength,
either hinder his march, or fight with him in the field; wherefore retiring
into the Towns, he only kept him from entering into the strong places, or making
that spoil and those incursions which he would have done, if finding no
resistance, he had made himself Master of the Country. In this manner the
Armies skirmishing almost every day, though sometimes with loss, they marched
all over Burgundy, till the Duke of Aumale, seeing the Enemy for want of pieces
of battery could not force the strong Towns, and knowing to follow them at a
distance would be to no purpose, went directly through the Country of Auxerre
with that strength he had, to the Duke of Anjou, that being so joined, they
might be the better able to resist the Enemy.

But the German Army being advanced to the Loire, was in exceeding pain how to
pass over; for all the bridges upon that River are either within the Towns, or
else close under the walls, and were then held by the Kings forces; for the
Duke of Anjou being certainly advertised of the Germans coming, leaving the
Enemies Country, had drawn all his Army to the River, and having placed strong
guards upon the passes, expected what resolution they would take; by reason
whereof the Germans were in great straight, there being no means to pass the
River, but by making their way through the Towns; and they had neither pieces
of Battery, nor other provisions fit for such a purpose: insomuch, that they
began to fear this great Army, which was raised with such a noise, would at
length be destroyed without effecting any thing.

Nevertheless, the baseness or treachery of men rendered that very easy, which
was of it self exceeding difficult: for the Commanders of the German Army
resolving to fall upon la Charity, a Town upon the River, rather with an intent
not to spend their time idly, than with any reasonable hope of taking it; and
meaning to batter the Walls, which were of the old fashion, with those few
small pieces that marched with the Army, he was scarce encamped before it, when
the Governor (without any apparent cause) (for at that time) as it is usual in
Civil Wars, men were led by diverse unknown interests and inclinations) fled
secretly out of the Town; whereupon, the Soldiers running away in disorder,
the Townsmen were so terrified, that they began to enter into a Treaty of
yielding themselves; during the which, being negligent of their guards, they
without on a sudden fastened their Ladders to the Walls, and finding no
opposition, Briquemauts men first, and after them the whole Army entering,
miserably sacked that Town, whilst the Duke of Aujou being certainly advertised
of the Germans attempt, sent a considerable force to relieve it. So the German
Army having at the same time gained a convenient pass and retreat, on the
twentieth of May passed over the River.

In the mean while the Admiral with the Princes, under whose names all things
were governed, made ready to march toward the Germans, with this
consideration, That if they could join their forces, the Army would be by that
means much the stronger; and if they could not, the Duke of Anjou lying between
the two Armies would be compassed in, and exceedingly straightened on all sides:
Wherefore Monsieur de la Nouc being left Governor of the Militia at Rochel,
for all things else were directed by the Queen of Navarre, and the Count of
Montgomery sent to the aid of Bearne, (of which Province Messieurs de Monluc
and Terride the Kings Lieutenants in Gascony and Guyenne were absolute
Masters;) they marched with 12000 Foot, and 2000 Horse toward the Loire, daily
increasing in strength through the continual concourse of the Nobility, that
came in to them from the adjacent Provinces; but being not yet certainly
advertised of the Duke de Deux-ponts passage, they were not fully resolved
which way to take, but advanced very slowly, reasonably enough doubting that
they might be assailed by the Catholics before they could join with the Duke
of Anjou, after the German Camp had passed the Loire, fearing to be engaged
between the two Armies, withdrew his Forces from the River and retired into
Limosin, conceiving the Woods and Mountains in that Country would still secure
his Quarters, and that the Germans who were accustomed to lie covered and live
in plenty, through the barrenness of the soil could not long subsist there. The
Duke of Deux-pon^s dies of e^ce^^ of drinking before he joi^^ with the Pri^^e^.


On the other side the Duke of Deux-ponts when he had passed the Loire, being
desirous to join with the Princes, hastened his march all that he could; but
death crossed his design, for either through the incommodities of so long a
journey, or as some said through the excess of drinking, he fell into a
continual Fever, which soon becoming malignant killed him in a few days after,
leaving it doubtful (having marched so far through the Enemies Country without
any loss, and passed so many great deep Rivers) whether it were to be
attributed to fortune or his own conduct that he had so happily advanced to
join with his Confederates into the furthest parts of all Aquitaine.

The Duke being dead, the charge of the Army fell upon Count Volrade of
Mansfield, who was his Lieutenant General, Count Mansfield succe^ds him in the
charge of the Army.
without any opposition either of the Princes or other great Commanders in the
Army, who avoided it more through the apprehension of many imminent dangers,
than either through modesty or want of pretenses. The third day after the death
of the General, the German Army joined with the Admiral and the Princes upon
the banks of the Vienne, where having made a muster, and given them a months
pay out of the moneys which the Queen of Navarre had with great pains raised
upon the Rochellers, and out of the contributions of the neighboring Towns,
they marched together toward the Duke of Anjo^, being desirous to fight before
any new accident happened to diminish their forces.

The Duke of Anjou had recruited his Army with the succors that came out of
Italy and Flanders: The Pope, the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Alva
send supplies to the King.
for the Pope desirous to have the War continued against the Hugonots, and for
the reputation of the Apostolic Sea, had sent to his Majesty's aid 4000 Foot
and 800 Horse under the command of Sforza Count di Sancta Fiore a Person of
Quality, and an experienced Soldier: and the great Duke of Tuscany had added
200 Horse and 1000 Foot under Fabiano del Monte. The Duke of Alva likewise sent
Count Peter Ernest de Mansfield out of Flanders with a Regiment of 3000
Walloons and 300 Flemish Lances, being desirous to destroy the German Army in
which were the Prince of Orange and his Brothers, who though exiles, retained
so great a power and credit in all parts of the Low Countries.

But notwithstanding these supplies, their miseries, sickness, and want of pay
had so diminished the Army, that it was rather inferior than superior in
number to the Hugonots; wherefore the Duke of Anjou being unwilling to fight,
having retired into the Country of Limosin, staid at Rochebeille in a secure
quarter; for the main body of the Army lying upon the top of a steep rocky
hill, of difficult ascent toward the plain Country, a little on each hand were
two other craggy hills full of steems, and trees, in either of which stood a
Village. In that on the right hand was Philippo Strozzi, whom the King had
declared Colonel General of the Infantry, with two French Regiments, and in the
other on the left the Count di Sancta Fiore, Fabiano del Monte, and Pietro
Paulo Tosinghi, with the Popes and the Tuscan Foot. On the top of the hill the
Cannon was planted, which commanded all the places about, and between the
Head-quarter and the Villages where the Foot was entrenched in the plain, but
with a running stream in their Front, lay the light a Horse with the Duke of
Nemours, and the Italian Commanders. Being thus disposed in their several
Quarters, having the City of Limoges a little behind them, the Camp abounded
with victuals, of which by reason of its barronness there was great scarcity in
the Country about.

The Admiral, who with the Princes and the Army was advanced within half a
league of the Catholic Camp, considering the advantage of the place where they
lay, and the difficulty to nourish his men amongst barren Woods and stony
Mountains, resolved at the same time to set upon Strozzi's quarter and the
Italians, knowing if he could beat them from thence and get possession of the
Villages, he shoud so streighten the Enemies Camp, that losing the use of the
plain, and not having wherewithal to feed such a number of Horse, they would be
constrained to retreat with evident danger of being routed. The Armies front
each other, and the Admiral sets upon S^rozzi's quarter, who through his too
much forwardness is taken prisoner
Upon which grounds the twenty third of June he with his Van (the Foot under
Piles, Briquema^t, and Rouvray) going first; then Count Lewis of Nass^u with a
Regiment of Germans; and lastly, de Muy, Teligny, and Saubise with their Horse,
marched directly toward Strazzi's Quarter; and the Princes with the Battle
commanded by the Count de la Roch-fou-cault and the Prince of Orange, in which
were Beaudine's, Blacon's and Pouillier's Foot, another Regiment of Germans,
and the Marquess of Renel, Mombrun, Aciere, and Ambrus with their Horse,
advanced to the Italians Quarter; the most part of the Germans and two
Regiments of Musketeers under the command of the Count de Mansfield and Genlis
staying with the Cannon in the champagne.

But the assault which was appointed to be given two hours before day, by
reason of the shortness of the night, began just as the light appeared, when
the Admiral falling upon Strozzi's Quarter, called Piles his Musketeers to go
on first, after whom the rest following, which were about 4000. there began a
most fierce and bloody fight, the Hugonots relying upon their number, and the
Catholics upon the strength of the situation; for being covered with trees and
hedges, and having the advantage of an higher ground, with their small shot
they exceedingly annoyed the Enemy, who on the other side being so much
superior in number, that they fought four to one with continual supplies of
fresh men, made a fair attempt to overcome the inequality of the place, and to
beat the Catholics from their post, which would have been impossible, if too
much ardour (considering how they disposed themselves) had not rendered their
resolution vain: for Philippo Strozzi being incensed beyond his usual temper by
the cries of the French, (who having the Count of Brissac fresh in their
memories, reproached him with his name, and showed a kind of disdain to be
commanded by an Italian) advanced to the head of his men, and earnestly
encouraging every one with fair words and his own example to follow him,
leaving the advantage of the place, fell in with such fury upon Briquemauts and
Piles his Musketeers, that he forced them to retire in great disorder: But the
Admiral seeing him through the heat of the fight, and eagerness to pursue those
that ran away, advance inconsiderately into an equal place, and come into the
plain champagne where the Horse might be useful, advanced likewise with all the
Van, hemming him in on every side; and though with the help of his Soldiers he
courageously defended himself, yet being overborn by the Horse, and full of
wounds and blood, he was at length taken prisoner, which occasioned many to
pass this censure upon him, That his courage was more commendable than his
wisdom: but it was almost impossible, that a man who has in him the thoughts
of honor, when he finds himself provoked, though by them that are ignorant,
should keep within those limits which he himself knows are prescribed and
dictated by reason.

There remained dead upon the place St. Loup and Roqueleaure, both Lieutenants
to Strozzi; 22 Captains, some that were reformed, some that had Companies; and
350 of the best Soldiers; and on the Hugonots side 150 Horse and Foot, amongst
which Trememont and la Fountain, both Commanders of great power and esteem.

The Admiral bravely pursued the remainder of Strozzi's men, who retreated
fighting to their Post; but the place was of such a nature, that the Horse
could do no good, and the Foot being weary and disordered, could not so briskly
renew the assault; wherefore the Catholics, who were still a considerable
number upon the hill, easily sustained the charge, till the light Horse which
were near, seeing the danger their friends were in, came to succor them, and
being joined, beat back the Hugonots, to the great honor of Francisco Somma of
Cremona, a Captain of the Italian light Horse, who with the greatest part of
his men, lighting from their Horses, fought amongst the Hedges and the
Chesnut-trees in the first ranks with wonderful courage, and exceeding
detriment to the Enemy. On the other side, whither the Prince of Navarre and
Conde led the Battalia to assail the Italians, there happened less execution on
either side; for the Count de S. Flour not being so precipitately rash as
Strozzi was, nor moved by the unexperienced forwardness of his Soldiers;
maintaining his ground, defended himself without any ill success, resolutely
sustaining the assault of Baudine and Pouilliers, who with a great number of
Foot endeavored to beat him from it, and though the fight endured with great
ardour on both sides an hour longer than at the other quarter which the Admiral
attempted, yet it ended with little blood, for there were not killed in all
above 120 men.

This was the first day in which Henry Prince of Navarre hazarded himself in
the War; for though he was carefully brought up by his Mother in all Warlike
Exercises that were used amongst us, as Riding and Handling his Arms, yet till
that day he never was present in any real occasion; but then charging in the
Front of his men, he showed such a noble courage and boldness, which was so
much the more remarkable, bacause danger at first seems most terrible, that he
gave sufficient testimony of such a Virtue as was likely to fill the World with
the renown of his Actions.

The business being thus ended, the Princes and the Admiral, that they might
the more streighten the Catholics, resolving to encamp in the same place where
they had fought, judging that by reason of the narrowness of the quarters the
Kings Horse must necessarily be reduced to great extremity: but within a few
days they found how prejudicial that resolution proved; for by the means of
Limoges which lay behind him, the Duke of Anjou was abundantly furnished with
victuals, which they could no way prevent; but in their Camp the barrenness of
the Country, and the power of the Catholics over the adjacent Towns, The
Hugonots for want of provision are forced to rise from before the Catholics
caused such a dearth of all provisions, that they were forced to rise, and
marching toward Perigord to seek a more fertile Soil, whereby to satisfy the
greedy appetites of so many Germans, who being led on by the hopes of plenty
and rich booty, found want of food and lying in the field so much the more
insupportable.

About this time the Queen Mother came to the Duke of Anjou's Camp, accompanied
by the Cardinals of Bourbon and Lorain, to consult and resolve how to manage
the War: for not only in the Kings Council, but much more in the Army the
Commanders were of diverse opinions; some parallelling the Kings Forces with the
Hugonots, thought it most expedient presently to come to a Battle, believing
that the old bands (so they call the Kings standing Regiments) and the firm
Battalion of the Swisses, by so many actions already become terrible to the
Enemy, could not receive the least opposition by the Hugonots new-raised men,
and that the Catholic Horse consisting of the Flour of all the Nobility in the
Kingdom, would easily master the Squadrons of the Reiters, (so they call the
German Horse) which besides the Officers and some few Gentlemen, are made up of
people taken out of Stables, and such like mean drudges, very unproper to bear
Arms: Wherefore they concluded, That in a few hours they might deliver France
from the infinite distractions and calamities of War, and with one blow
suppress the obstinate perverseness of the Hugonots; whereas keeping things
with wary counsels and slow resolutions from coming to an issue, the People
were consumed, the Nobility destroyed, the Kings Revenues brought to nothing,
and the Country ruined, with a general desolation over the whole Kingdom; still
giving time and opportunity to the Enemy by his industry to gain advantages,
besides the evident danger, if a new supply came out of Germany, as it was
already reported, That the Kings Army being weary and decayed with a continual
War, would at length remain a prey to the force of the Enemy.

Others thought it a rash precipitate counsel, to hazard a Kingdom upon the
uncertain event of a Battle, against an Enemy that had not any thing to
venture; for all the Germans fortune consisted in their Arms and that little
Baggage they carried with them; and the Hugonots could lose nothing, but what
they had taken and usurped from the Crown: wherefore it was too visible a
danger to fight without any hope of gain against a desperate multitude; that
more solid secure resolutions ought to be taken, and by prolonging the War
suffer the German Forces to consume away of themselves, as they always use to
do; for being brought into a climate so contrary to that where they were born,
when the heats of Summer came, and Grapes were ripe, of which they are
exceeding greedy, sickness would without doubt enter amongst them, by which
their Army would remain, if not absolutely defeated, at least notably
diminished and weakened; that if the Heads of the Hugonots determined, as it was
likely they would, to attempt the principal Towns held by the Catholics, they
would be sure in assaults and skirmishes to lose their best men, which was a
certain way to ruin them; that though time, want of money, scarcity of
victuals, and the unhealthfulness of the season did not utterly destroy the
Hugonots, yet it was a much safer counsel, when the Kings Army had rested, to
return again with fresh men and a greater strength to the trial of a Battle
against a body languishing and decayed with long continual labor; which now on
the contrary, by reason of the fresh supplies, was very powerful and vigorous:
that for the present year they needed not apprehend the coming of more Germans,
who it was known had not yet made any Levies; and therefore they ought not
through a vain fear to precipitate those resolutions, which being managed with
prudence and moderation, might bring the business to a certain issue, and a
happy end.

This opinion, as most secure, at length prevailed, especially with the Queen,
who in her nature and judgment was disposed to follow these counsels which were
furthest out of the power of fortune, and which might be effected with least
danger or blood, being wont to say, That members, though never so putrified,
use not to be cut off without extreme necessity; and whenever they are cut
off, the body not only suffers sharp pains, but a dangerous debilitation, and
too great a defect: Wherefore in her heart she was always inclined to favor
those resolutions, which suppressing the Heads of the Hugonots, might cure the
madness of the people, and preserve the welfare of the Crown; for which reasons
she abhorred the trial of a Battle, by which (besides the uncertainty of the
event) the body and strength of the Kingdom would remain exceedingly weakened.

This determination being approved and concluded of by the King, the Duke of
Anjou (after he had placed sufficient Garrisons in the Towns that lay next to
the Hugonots) dismissed the Nobility, The Duke dismisseth the Nobility of his
Army, sends the rest into Garrison, and goes himself to Loches.
and divided the re^^ of the Army into a fruitful convenient Country, with a
command, That by the (...) of Octo^^^ next they should all return to their
Colors, purposing then to reunite hi^ ^orces, and to proceed according as the
occasions should require; and he himself wit^ ^ small train of Lords and
Officers, (that he might be near, if any accident should happen) went to
Loches, a strong place upon the Confines of Touraine.

The End of the Fourth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The FIFTH
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Fifth Book relates the determination of the Hugonots to take in the Cities
of Poictou and Xaintonge: The Siege of Poictiers, the Duke of Anjou's design to
relieve that City by a diversion, to which end drawing his Army together he
sits down before Chastel-rault: The Admiral raises his Siege, and causes the
Duke of Anjou to do the like: Monsieur de Sansac besieges la Charity, but
without success: The Count Montgomery conquers the Kings party in Bearne,
besieges, and takes Monsieur de Terride. The King causes the Admiral to be
proclaimed Rebel, his goods to be confiscate, and his houses demolished; he
continues the War vigorously. The Duke of Anjou grown very strong, desires to
give Battle: the Admiral endeavors to avoid it, but forced by the tumultuous
consent of his whole Army, prepares to fight, and yet tries to march away. The
Duke of Anjou follows, and overtakes him near Moncounter; they skirmish hotly
toward the evening, and the Cannon does great harm to the Hugonots: Under
favor of the night, the Admiral passes the River, and retreats, the Duke
passes the same River in another place: The Armies face one another upon the
plain of Moncontour, and fight valiantly; but the Victory is the Duke of
Anjou's, with infinite slaughter of the Hugonots; many of them are disheartened,
the Admiral encourages them, and with many reasons persuades them to prosecute
the War. The Princes quit all the Country except Rochel, St. Jean d' Angeli,
and Angoulesme, and retire with the relics of their Army into the Mountains
of Gascogne and Languedoc. The Duke lays Siege to St. Jean, and takes it, but
with the lessening of his Army, and loss of time; he goes sick to Angiers, and
thence to St. Germains: The Princes join with the Count Montgomery in Gascogne,
they pass the Winter in the Mountains, and at the Springtime draw into the
plains, pass the Rhosne, and enlarge themselves in Provence and Daulphine: They
march toward Noyers, and la Charity, with an intent to come near Paris: The
King sends an Army against them under the command of the Mareshal de Cosse, a
slow man, and not desirous to ruin the Hugonots: They meet in Burgogne, but
the Princes shun the Battle; a Treaty of agreement is begun, and in the end
concluded at the Court. The Princes and the Admiral retire to Rochel; the King
endeavors to beget an assurance in them, and for that cause offers to give his
Sister the Lady Margaret in Marriage to the Prince of Navarre, and to make War
with the Spaniard in Flanders; the Match is concluded, and they come all to
Court: The Queen of Navarre is poisoned, after her death the Marriage is
celebrated, amidst the triumphs whereof the Admiral is shot in the Arm: The
King resolves to prosecute and free himself of the Hugonots; upon St.
Bartholomews-Eve at night the Admiral and all the rest of them are Massacred in
Paris, and many other Cities of the Kingdom: The King attempts to surprise
Rochel, and Montauban, but neither design takes effect; many Treaties pass to
bring the Rochellers to subjection, but they resolving to defend themselves,
the Duke of Anjou draws his Army together, and besieges them with all his
Forces: They hold out many months, till the Duke of Anjou being Elected King of
Poland, condescends to grant them very good conditions, with which they in
appearance return unto the Kings Obedience. The King of Poland departs: The
Duke of Alancon his next Brother pretends to succeed him in all his Dignities;
is repulsed, whereat being discontented, he applies his mind to new designs.
The King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the House of Momorancy, and the
Hugonots unite themselves with him, and plot a Conspiracy; which being
discovered, the Duke de Alencon, the King of Navarre, and many others are
imprisoned; the Prince of Conde escapes into Germany: The King falling into a
dangerous sickness, commits the troubles of the Kingdom unto his Mothers care:
Armies are raised in Poictou, Languedoc and Normandy, where the Count de
Montgomery coming out of England, lands, and takes many places. Monsieur de
Matignon goes against, defeats, besieges, and takes him; he is brought to
Paris, condemned and executed. King Charles having declared his Mother Regent,
yields under the burden of his disease, and departs this Life in the flower of
his Age.

THE Duke of Anjou's resolution to dissolve his Army for a time, and draw into
Garrisons, put the Hugonots affairs into a very hard condition: for having such
a multitude of men, and so little means to nourish and maintain them, which way
soever they turned their thoughts, they met with exceeding great difficulties.
To pass the River of Loire, as many advised, and to endeavor the subduing of
the largest and most spacious Provinces of the Kingdom, and even Paris it self,
the Seat and Basis of the Catholic party; though it represented hopes, by
cutting the sinews of the contrary Faction, to end the War victoriously; and
though visibly it administered occasion to rob and plunder, (the only end of the
Germans, and the only way to keep them together;) yet in effect it appeared a
design full of danger, and uncertainty, for putting themselves (without money,
ammunition, good store of Cannon, order for Victuals, and which imported most
without any Town, or strong place whither they might upon any occasion retreat,
and defend themselves) into the middle of an Enemies Country; they saw plainly,
that any the least sinister encounter, or light impediment that crossed their
attempts, was enough absolutely to ruin and destroy them; nor were the hopes
of gain or success such as could counterpoize this danger; for the principal
Towns were strongly guarded, and the Kings Army being rather divided, than
dissolved, was easily to be reunited upon any occasion, and capable to drive
them into great streights, if rashly they engaged themselves amongst the
Enemies Forces, without convenience to retire, or provide against necessities,
which would be likely daily to grow upon them.

On the other side to spend their time in besieging those Towns, which in
Aquitaine, and beyond the Loire, held yet for the Catholic party; and by
taking them to gain the absolute Dominion of that Country, whereof they already
possessed the greatest part, and from which they expected the chief support for
their Army, had two weighty oppositions; the first, That in besieging the
strong places one by one, which were so well provided of all things necessary
for their defense, would occasion the loss of much time, and greatly waste the
Army, a thing well foreseen by the Catholics, and one of their chiefest aims:
the other, That by staying there they should destroy that Country with taxes
and contributions from which they had their subsistence; so that they should
neither be able to raise money enough to pay the Soldiers, nor to get such
booty as would satisfy their greediness, and impatience.

But it being necessary of two evils to choose (as it is usual) the least; the
Princes, and the Admiral at length resolved, to attempt those which were
nearest, so to make an absolute conquest of all that Country beyond the Loire,
and establish their party securely in that Canton (as I may so say) of France;
hoping to have such supplies of money out of England, and by the prizes taken
by the Fleet, (since the death of la Tour, commanded by Monsier de Sore) as
would suffice to supply the Army for some time, in which interim, an occasion
might perchance arise, of a more fortunate, and more happy progress.

The Hugonots resolve to take in as many places as they can, by intelligence
possess themselves of Chastel-rault and Lusignan, with the Castle there.
With this deliberation, having taken the rich Monastery of Branthome, and to
make them more ready and obedient, granted the pillage thereof to the Germans,
in which manner they used diverse other lesser places, the Admiral with the Army
went to Chastel-rault, in which Town he had many days before held secret
intelligence with some of the inhabitants; nor was the enterprise at all
difficult; for the Conspirators having raised a tumult, and made themselves
masters of one of the gates, let in the Hugonots: which unexpected accident
struck such a terror in the Governor who held it for the King, that he fled
away to Poictiers without making any resistance, and the Town without dispute
remained absolutely in the Admirals power, who received it as he did all the
rest, in the name of the Prince of Navarre, by whose authority (as first Prince
of the Blood) all matters were dispatched and governed.

Chastel-rault being taken, the Admiral advanced to besiege Lusignan; and
having taken the Town without much difficulty, sat down before the Castle,
which is esteemed one of the strongest places in France, and had formerly
(though often boldly assaulted) held out with good success a long time against
the English; but now the resolution of the defendants was not answerable to the
virtue of their predecessors; for having scarce staid for the battering, (which
though it made a large breach in the Wall, yet the Castle standing upon the top
of a Rock, it was almost impossible to go on to the assault) they began to
treat of delivering it up, and in a few days capitulated to march out, with
flying colors and all their baggage, which agreement (contrary to their
custom) was exactly observed. Lusignan thus taken, before which Messieurs de
Breuil and du Chesny, Soldiers of great reputation, were killed by the Cannon;
the Admiral taking six great pieces with him which he found in the Castle,
resolved to march toward Poictiers, after Paris a City of the greatest circuit
of any in the Kingdom, and head of the adjacent Provinces, whither were carried
as into a place of security, Poictiers after Paris a City of the greatest
circuit of any in France.
all the wealth and treasure of those Countries; judging, that if he could
reduce this so considerable a place to his devotion, all the rest would without
much difficulty yield of themselves.

But when it was known at Loches, where the Duke of Anjou lay, that the Admiral
made preparation of Pioneers, Artillery, and other things necessary to lay
siege to Poictiers; though the fierce warlike disposition of the people, gave
hopes that it would be stoutly maintained: yet the Council thought that so
spacious a place, so thinly peopled, and so subject to be annoyed by the Enemy,
would require a great number of valiant men to defend it, as well to secure a
Town of so great importance and reputation, as also so much the longer to amuse
the Hugonots, and by the difficulty of this attempt discourage and tire out
their Army; which was their chief design at the beginning, when they divided
their forces. Wherefore besides the ordinary Garrison that was in Poictiers,
under the Count de Lude Governor of the City, the Duke of Guise resolved to
put himself into it, a young man, who with singular expectation showed himself
as Head of the Catholic party, to renew by his brave and notable example in
that beginning of his Warlike actions, the glory of his Father, who by
defending Metz against the Forces of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, made his
way to a high degree of power and estimation. This example of the Duke of
Guise, was followed by Charles Marquess de Mayenne his Brother, the Sieurs de
Montpezat, de Sessac, de Mortemer, de Clairiaux, de la Rochebariton, de Rufec,
de Fervaques, de Briancon, de Chastilliere, and many other Gentlemen, noble by
birth and valor; in whose company were also Angelo Cesis, and Giovanni Orsino,
with 200 Italian Horse: so that there were then in the City 800 Cuirassiers,
and about 400 light Horse; to these were added 4000 Foot, of the best
disciplined in all France, under the command of Bassac, la Parade, Verbois,
Bonneval, Charry, and many other Colonels of great reputation; six companies of
Townsmen, each of four hundred very well armed and exercised, besides 300
Italian Firelocks commanded by Paulo Sforza, Brother to Sancta Fiore. There
were also in the City a very great number of Peasants, by whose labor the most
suspected places of the ramparts were fortified with great care, and Cannon
planted, where they saw the Enemy was likely to encamp. Besides all this, the
City was plentifully stored with provisions for the War, especially fireworks
of diverse kinds, which made the defendants confidently hope to repel the
assaults of the Enemy.

Notwithstanding all these preparations, the Admiral (either ardently desirous
to suppress the two young Guises his particular enemies, and therefore
preferring that before all other respects; or despising the advice of the other
Commanders, who judging the enterprise very difficult, counseled to turn their
Forces another way) sat down before the City the 24 of July, and in his march
caused the Infantry to storm the Suburb that lies without the port of St.
Lazarus, no ways fortified, but defended only by Colonel Boisvert with 400
French Musketeers, who having valiantly sustained the assault for the space of
three hours, at last by the multiplied Forces of the Hugonots, were constrained
to quit it, being a place utterly impossible to be kept: but the Duke of Guise
sallying forth in person, gallantly resisted the fury of the Enemy, till the
houses near the gate, and about the works were burnt, and levelled with the
ground, lest they should have that convenience to lodge and offend the Town.
The Army lay that night two miles from the walls, and the next morning the
first Troops of the Camp skirmishing hotly with the Cavalry that sallied out in
many places, the Admiral encamped with very good order in those quarters which
with prudent consideration were before resolved on.

The platform of Poictiers is of a great circumference, and unequal situation;
for extending it self in a stony, rugged way from East to West, sometimes it
ascends, sometimes descends, here crooked, there in a direct line, but three
sides of it lie open to the Cannon from the rocks that encompass it, only the
fourth is even, and so high, that no place without can command or annoy it; and
though indeed it may be battered from diverse places without, yet it is no easy
matter afterward to advance to the assault; for the Clain that runs about a
great part of it, and a deep lake caused by the same river, make it in a manner
inaccessible, and the unevenness of the rocks that afford means to offend it,
yield also commodious retreat to the defendants; for the steep craggy cliss
upon which it is seated, is so easy to be wrought into, that almost of it self
it makes stairs, and narrow passages, very advantageous to be long made good
against the Enemy. The Admiral taking notice of this situation, endeavored to
enlarge himself, and inviron as much of the circuit as he could possibly,
playing at once upon several parts of the City, so far distant one from
another, as he might both divide the courage and forces of the besieged. To
that end he placed the German Infantry at the farthest corner of the City
beyond the river, quartering them in the Hospital and Mill near to it, joining
them together with a bridge drawn cross the river with ropes, which likewise
served the foot of Gascony and Provence, who lay along the banks of the river
as far as the Fauxburg, called Rochereuil; himself with the Van lodged in the
Monastery of St. Benet; the Prince who led the Battle, with the Count de la
Roch-fo^-cault and Count Mansfield, at St. Lazarus; Briquemaut, Piles and Muy,
with the Rear at the Fauxburg of Pierre Levee, taking up in this manner all
that space of ground which reaches from the North to the West, and from the
West to the South; and the Cavalry quartered in the Villages about, spreading
as far Crustelle, almost two leagues from the Town.

Scarce was the Infantry encamped about the City, when Monsieur de Sessac, the
Duke of Guise's Lieutenant, accompanied with Giovanna Orsino, and 120 of the
most resolute Horse of the Garrison, sallying out at the gate of the Trench,
fell into a quarter of Cavalry in a Village called Marne, and finding them in
disorder and unprepared, as they were about to take up their lodging, with
small trouble killed a great number, and dispersed the rest; and afterward in
his return meeting Briquemaut with 200 Reiters, and diverse French Horse, he
charged them so boldly, that at the first encounter, they all ran away, leaving
above forty of their men dead upon the place: wherefore the Admiral
necessitated to hinder such unwelcome sallies, caused Colonel Blacon with 2000
Foot, to lie in the ruins of the Suburb, and with Fortifications and Trenches
to make his approaches so near to the gate, that they played upon one another
continually with Musket Shot: but nevertheless Colonel Onoux who had left St.
Maixent as a place too weak to be held, with only 600 Foot but chosen men,
marched nine leagues in six hours, and arriving at the beat of the Reveille,
passed happily through all the works they had made, and in spite of the
opposition of Blacon and all his men, entered through the same gate of the
Trench, to strengthen the Garrison of Poictiers.

But the siege being laid and settled, the first days were spent in sharp
skirmishes, of which though the event were diverse, according to the variety of
fortune, yet the Hugonot Army was exceedingly endamaged by them: for besides
the loss of their stoutest Soldiers, whereof very many were killed, they were
likewise hindered in their works, which nevertheless by the diligence of
Monsieur de Genlis General of the Artillery, still went on, who making his
approaches in diverse places, raised a battery, where he planted fourteen Cannon
besides diverse small pieces, which being at last brought to perfection, though
with much difficulty, because the whole Camp was perpetually molested with shot
from the City; upon the first of August they began to batter, and in three days
made a breach in the Ravelin, and brake down the Tower, which joining to the
port of St. Cyprian, guarded and flanked the entrance on that side; but the
bottom of the Tower being filled with earth, so that notwithstanding the upper
parts of it were fallen, it still defended it self: the fourth day it was
assaulted in vain, being resolutely maintained by Colonel de l' Isle with his
French Foot, which the Admiral perceiving, and that the attempt of that gate
proved more difficult than was expected, he turned his Cannon on the other
side, and the fifth day began to batter the Curtine, which lying along the
River, reaches to a place commonly called the Abbesses meadow: for though the
water which ran between his Trenches and the Town-walls were some hinderance to
him; yet he knew the works were much weaker there than in other places, because
the Engineers thinking it was enough secured by the River, had been more
careless in fortifying thereabouts: by the tenth of August, (which was the
Feast of St. Laurence) the Artillery had made so large a breach as might very
commodiously be assaulted, and the bridge by which one might easily pass the
River, was already cast over; when the Admiral causing the breach to be viewed,
and being informed that there were Casamats, and works very well contrived, to
make it good on the inside, besides that by the advice of the Count de Lude,
four Troops of Lanciers were sallied out of the gates to fall upon the
assailants at the same instant, when they had passed the bridge, and were in
that open plain space between the Wall and the River, not willing to send his
men into so manifest danger without hope of success, gave out that by reason of
the weakness of the bridge, which perchance might break, he would not run so
evident an hazard of drowning his Soldiers; whereupon they retreating to their
Quarters, who all were ready for the assault, he gave command for the making of
another bridge, which might not only serve to pass over the assailants in
better order and more security, but also some number of Horse, to make Head
against the Cavalry of the City. But the night following Biagio Capizuchi, a
Roman Gentleman under Paulo Sforza, with two companions, all excellent Swimmers
and good Diverse, (whilst the Enemy was amused by frequent alarms, and the
Cannon, besides a party sent out with Monsieur de Fervaques) swom under the
bridge, and cut the ropes that held it together, so that on a sudden, before
the Hugonots were aware, it was utterly loosed, and car^ied away with the
stream; and whilst it was repairing, the Defendants had leisure to fortify
themselves within the breach; in which business the Duke of Guise himself took
great pains, carrying the earth upon his own shoulders, whose example generally
moved no less the women than the men to further the work, by which means in a
very short space they raised a breast-work stronger and thicker than the first.

But the Admiral re-inforcing his battery with great violence, and causing
three bridges to be made, all stronger than the first, upon the eighteenth day
gave a terrible assault to the Wall, and they were already, though with much
blood; masters of the breach, when they discovered a Cavalier raised within the
Covent of the Carmelites, from whence many small pieces of Artillery played,
which lighting upon the place, that was possessed by the Hugonots, before they
could sufficiently shelter themselves, they were forced within a little while
to forsake it, leaving dead upon the place Monsieur de Mon^aulph, a man of
great account amongst them, with seven Captains and many Foot-Souldiers;
besides an infinite number that were wounded, amongst which Monsieur de la Noue
received a Musket Shot in his left arm; and the Baron de Conforgine another in
the right thigh, of which hurts it was very long before they could be cured:
nor did the Defendants escape without loss, there being killed that day Monsieur
Biglie of a very noble Family, and Antonio Serasone a Roman, who with great
praises of valor and industry, was employed in the Office of an Engineer.

They continued shooting all the next day, and the sooner to make an end of the
business, brought eight Culverins more to the battery, by which means the
Ramparts of the City were in a few days made wholly indefensible: but the
industry of the besieged found a remedy against so imminent a danger; for
having stopped the course of the River on the lower side, near the Tower of
Rochereuil with banks and piles of wood, they made the waters swell to such a
height, that the under part being left almost dry, they drowned all the
Abasses meadow, and overflowed the very breach in the Wall, so that the
Hugonots could not possibly come to assault it; upon which occasion the Admiral
being forced to take a new resolution, commanded the battery to be removed
lower, to play upon, and take the Tower of Rochereuil, below which the
Catholics had made their dam, that so being masters of that place, they might
free the course of the River, and take away from them the so useful defense of
the water. To this purpose the Cannon having beaten down above sixty yards of
the Wall, upon the 24 day they gave a general onset at the Tower of Rochereuil,
and the Curtine joining to it; Piles fell on first, seconded by Briquemaut, and
at last by the German Infantry, where no less the Commanders and Volunteers,
than the common Soldiers, fought on all sides with singular valor and
constant resolution; the gallantry of the Duke of Guise appearing most clearly
in this action, by whose Squadron the Enemy was in the end beaten off, and
driven back with great loss, they having with no small difficulty brought off
Piles, who was extremely wounded, and almost half dead, though afterward being
cured, he recovered his former health and vigor: yet all this ill success
abated not the courage of the Hugonots; but continuing with great obstinacy to
batter the work which the Defendants had cast up behind the breach, they
resolved to give it an unexpected assault about midnight, thinking to surprise
the Catholics either asleep, or at least in confusion, and unprovided; but
being come to the place, they found (contrary to their expectation) the
Defendants in so good order, and so ready to receive them, that without any
more ado they gave over the attempt, being bravely followed by the Italian
Foot, who sallying through the same breach, pursued them into their very
Trenches, doing great execution upon them, by reason of the difficulty and
narrowness of their retreat.

But in the midst of so many sufferings, A great mortality in the Hugonot Army.
The Admiral sickneth, yet desisteth not from the siege of Poctier^.
the excessive heats of Summer began to cause the usual sickness of that
season, of which there died not only many of their common Soldiers, and
particularly of the Germans, but the principal Officers of the Army were
likewise grievously infected with it, amongst which the Count de la
Roch-fou-cault had left the Camp to be cured, and Messieurs de Briquemaut and
de la Nocle were retired to Niort with small hope of life, for which cause the
Princes with no other train but their own families, resolved to go to St.
Maixent, and by change of air to avoid the malignant Fever that was so mortal
in the Camp, leaving the Admiral almost alone to command the Army, who worn out
with continual toil and watching, fell sick at last of the Flux; yet though he
was exceedingly spent and weakened with the Disease, the vigor of his mind was
not at all diminished, but he persisted with the same ardour to prosecute the
end of his design; for conclusion whereof he commanded the assault to be given
in many places upon the second day of September, causing the French and German
Infantry to fall on severally, that the emulation of one another might animate
them to fight with a greater courage and resolution: the assault lasted most
part of the day, the violence of the Enemies being resisted by the Duke of
Guise on one side, and on the other by the Count de Lude, with so much valor
and gallantry, that the Hugonots being beaten, not only by the Cannon and small
shot, but with stones, pikes and fireworks in great abundance, they were in the
end forced precipitately to quit the wall, leaving dead and wounded above seven
hundred upon the place, amongst which Monsieur de S. Vane Brother to
Briquemaut, and who commanded his men, was killed with a granado.

But this Victory gave little comfort to the besieged; for being by the death
of Monsieur d' Onouz, Colonel Passac, and many other valiant men reduced to a
small number in respect of the greatness of the place, and their horses for
want of meat being brought to extreme weakness, they could not find the ardour
and perseverence of the Hugonots at all abated; wherefore with frequent letters
and many messages they solicited for the relief which the Duke of Anjou had
promised them within a few days.

The Duke re-uniting the Army sooner than was intended at the dividing of it,
had drawn his forces together at the beginning of September, resolving rather
to try the fortune of a day, than to suffer Poictiers to be taken, with so many
of the Nobility, and the Duke of Guise himself, who was at that time very much
beloved by him: wherefore he marched away from Loches, and sat down before
Chastel-rault, assuring himself, that the Hugonots to succor that place, where
a great number of their sick men lay, would leave the siege of Poictiers, about
which they might easily perceive, they should but tire themselves in vain, it
being favored by so great, and so near a power. Nor was the event different
from the Dukes design; for the Admiral having by the failing of his last
enterprise lost all hopes of taking the Town, and seeking some plausible
occasion to leave it, as soon as he had intelligence that the Army moved, he
resolved to raise the siege; After many assaults bravely sustained, the Admiral
quits the siege, and goes to relieve Chast^l-rault.
and drawing off his Artillery, upon the 15 of September marched with all his
forces toward Chastel-rault: and on the same day the Count de Sanze, and
Pietro Paulo Tosinghi entered Poictiers with 300 French Horse, and 800 Italian
Foot, and supplies of money and victuals, whereby the City was at once freed
from the siege, and opportunely furnished with necessary provisions. Thus ended
the siege of Poictiers; in which, as the Princes Army diminished both in
strength and hopes, The Duke of Guise, who had sustained the siege, gets great
reputation.
by the loss of 3000 men, and two months of the Summer; so the Duke of Guise
came out of it with so great applause and reputation, that all the Catholic
party began to turn their eyes upon him as a Pillar of the Roman Religion, and
a Worthy Successor to his Fathers Power.

The success of the Kings forces at the siege of la Charity was not unlike to
that of the Hugonots at Poictiers at the same time; for the Duke of Anjou
purposing utterly to cut off the passage of the Loire from the Army of the
Princes, and to take away all hopes from them of oppressing those Provinces
which are on this side the River, had given commission to Monsieur de Sansac to
gather the forces of Beausse, Nivernois, Bourbonois, and part of Burgundy, and
to besiege la Charity, which had before been taken by the Germans in their
passage, The Catholics besiege la Charity, which being stoutly defended they
give it over.
and was the only place upon the River in possession of the Hugonots: but so
firm was the resolution of the Soldiers, and so constant the courage of the
Townsmen, commanded by Monsieur de Guerchy, Cornet of the Admirals own company
of Gens d' Arms, that sustaining all the assaults and attempts of the
Catholics, they finally constrained Monsieur de Sansac to give it over, having
in the siege lost many Gentlemen, and no inconsiderable number of Soldiers.

In the mean time the affairs of both Factions were prosecuted in Bearn,
whither the Prince of Navarre, sollicitous to preserve his own patrimony, had
sent the Count of Montgomery to oppose Messieurs de Monluc and de Terride, the
first of which possessed the Confines of the Province, and the other with a
great power battered Navarines, the only place that after many losses and
troubles of the Country remained in the power of the Hugonots: but in
conclusion, whatsoever the fault was, (for the Commanders laid it upon one
another) the business went very prosperously for the Prince of Navarre; for
Monsieur de Terride being risen from before Navarines, was in his retreat
fought withal, surrounded, and taken prisoner; and Monsieur de Monluc not being
able, or not coming time enough to help him, was fain to retire into Gascony;
so that all the Country began to submit to the devotion of Montgomery, who
using strange unaccustomed cruelties, had with terror constrained even those
places that were best manned, and most strongly fortified to yield themselves
up into his hands.

In the interim, the Duke of Anjou, who because he was not yet strong enough to
raise the siege of Poictiers, had encamped before Chastel-rault, to obtain the
same effect by that diversion, conceived some hopes of taking the place, and
persisted in battering it with much violence; but the issue proved very
contrary; for when there was a a sufficient breach in the wall, he made the
Italian Infantry to fall on, who putting themselves forward by reason of their
emulation with the French, possessed themselves at first very prosperously of
the breach, but with more rashness and fury than discretion; for being played
upon with great execution both in the front and flank by the Artillery planted
opportunely upon the ramparts that were cast up within, which they had not (as
according to the Rules of War they ought) been careful to discover, after they
had fought in vain above three hours, Fab. del Monte Head of the Tuscan forces
killed before Chastel-rault.
they retired to their trenches with the loss of above 250 men, amongst whom
were Fabiano del Monte, and many other Gentlemen and Officers.

The next day their thoughts of assaulting the Town were changed into those of
marching away: for the Admiral, with all his Army, desirous to recover the
time, and recompense the losses he had received at Poictiers, had in three
several quarters possessed himself of the Suburbs on the other side
Chastel-rault, opposite to the place where the Catholic Army lay, and resolved
by any means to try his fortune, if he could do it without disadvantage; for
which cause the Duke of Anjou knowing himself much inferior in strength, the
Nobility not being yet joined with him, nor many Companies of Foot which were
too far from the Army, thought it best to retire; and therefore took the
opportunity to do it at the same time that the Admirals Soldiers (being
quartered to refresh themselves after their march, in one of the Suburbs of the
Town, that lay beyond the River Vienna) were either securely sleeping, or
making provision of victuals and lodging; it not being probable, the day being
so far spent, that either side would change their quarter that night. So taking
the opportunity of the time, the Duke caused his Artillery to be drawn off with
good order, but incredible expedition; and having sent them before with all his
baggage, some two hours after, it being about Sunset, he marched without noise
away, neither the Admiral, nor any of his party at all perceiving it, till the
last Squadrons were moving; who made good the retreat, being led by Monsieur de
Chavigny, Monsieur de la Valette, and the Count di Sancta Fiore. At that time
it being far in the night, the Hugonot Army was at rest in their quarters, or
else scattered up and down; therefore the Admiral seeing his men weary,
dispersed, and unfit for the pursuit, thought it not best rashly to follow the
Catholic Army, which being many hours before him, The Catholics raise the
siege from before Chastel-rault.
retired quietly without any disorder or confusion. Thus the Duke of Anjou not
being followed nor molested by the Enemies, the same night passed the River
Creuse at Port de Piles, four leagues from Chastel-rault, and the next morning
having left the bridge sufficiently guarded on both sides of the River, he drew
his Army to Selle, a very strong and well-fortified quarter.

At break of day the Admiral marched after the Catholics; and being come to
Port de Piles, he sent forth Monsieur de Soubise, with a party well-horsed, to
discover the state of the Enemy; who having routed and put to flight many
scattered Soldiers that were cast behind the Army, fell on, hotly skirmishing
even to the very Turnpike of the Bridge; the Infantry seconding him resolutely,
assaulted the barricadoes of the Catholics, using their uttermost endeavor to
drive away the guard, and to gain that pass; but notwithstanding the redoubled
onsets, made with exceeding courage by the most valiant Commanders of the
Hugonots, la Valet, and Paulo Sforza with the French light Horse, and the
Italian Foot defended the Bridge, and being helped by the strong situation of
it, beat off the Enemy with much loss, and frustrated all their attempts:
whereupon the Admiral giving over that design, made a foord to be sought for in
some other place, which being easily found by reason of the shallowness of the
water, he passed over the next day four leagues below Piles, and came so near
to the quarter of the Duke of Anjou, that he hoped to force him to give battle:
but seeing that the Duke, containing himself within his trenches, was very well
stored with victual, because all the Country behind him were his friends; and
that on the other side his Army suffered great scarcity, being forced to make
his provisions afar off, because two Rivers were between him and the Country
that was well-affected to him; he despairing to force the Catholics to fight
against their will, resolved the third day to retire; and having passed the two
Rivers of Creusa and Vienna, marched to Faye la Vineuse, and lodged his Army in
the neighboring Villages to refresh his men after so much toil and sufferance;
who being all (especially the Germans) impatient, and unaccustomed to lie in
the fields, began to grow very mutinous and disorderly.

The Duke of Anjou took the like course, who withdrawing his Army to Chinon in
Turain, went to see the King his Brother, and the Queen his Mother, who
according to their ordinary custom of being near the Army, were come to Tours,
where likewise was arrived the Duke of Guise, Henry Duke of Guise admitted to
the Cabinet-Council
laden with honor and reputation for his famous and prosperous defense of
Poictiers. Here they began to advise of the means of managing the War; and this
was the first time the Duke of Guise, being received into his Fathers place,
was admitted to the Cabinet Council, and the participation of the most secret
affairs. The cause and beginning of this trust, besides the nobleness of his
Blood, the merits of his Father, his own Virtue, and the protection of the
Cardinal his Uncle, was chiefly the implacable hatred the King bare the
Admiral; for after the death of the Prince of Conde in the Battle of Bassac, he
had entertained confident hopes, that the Hugonot party (being deprived of the
Authority of so great a Prince, and having lost their principal Head, upon
whose valor and reputation chiefly depended the conduct of so weighty a
business) would dissolve and dissipate, or at least incline to the yoke of his
obedience: but he found on the contrary the Authority of the Blood Royal, by
the sagacity of the Admiral, revived in the persons of the two young Princes,
and the union of the Hugonot Faction founded on their proper strength and
valor, to occasion more mischiefs, and to bring the state of affairs into
greater dangers than ever formerly they had been in the revolution of so many
years: and therefore having with a public and heavy sentence divulged in many
languages, The Kings decree Against the Admiral.
made him to be declared Rebel by the Parliament of Paris, he also caused his
effigies to be dragged through the streets, and to be hung up in places where
they used to execute public malefactors; and so ordered the matter, that his
houses were razed to the ground, and his goods sold by the Officers of his
Courts; after all which, continuing a resolution to persecute him to death, he
began to exalt and favor the House of Lorain, and particularly the Duke of
Guise, who desirous to revenge the death of his Father, professed a public and
irreconcilable hatred to the Admiral.

The Kings Cabinet Council coming now to debate of those courses that were to
be taken in ordering the War, at first their opinions disagreed; for the
Mareshal de Cosse (by his severe proceedings against the Hugonots in Picardy,
having purged himself of the suspicions conceived against him, and regained his
former credit and estimation of wisdom) thought it best to try rather by time,
than force, to overcome the Enemy: who being without money, without means to
victual their Army, without retreat, without any considerable supply from
abroad, and full of want, disorder, discord and desperation, would quickly be
vanquished by their own necessities, and dissolve to nothing of themselves. On
the other side, the Count de Tavanes represented, that the Hugonot Army was
lessened, wearied out, and put into confusion by the long and fruitless siege
of Poictiers, and therefore very easy to be overcome, and that it was
necessary to fight presently, and not to stay till the Prince of Orange, who
was gone disguised into Germany, had time to make new levies, or that the Count
Montgomery, who had gotten the better in Bearn, should come with the Forces of
Gascony to join with the Admiral; for so the War would be again renewed, which
could not by any means be more certainly extinguished than by fighting, and by
eager pursuing of the Enemy, now they were diminished both in number and
courage.

The resolution would have been hard to agree upon, but the Duke of Anjou
cutting off all dispute of different opinions, concluded that it was expedient
to fight with the Army of the Princes, now that tired and wasted with their
late losses and sufferances, they were not likely to have force and vigor
enough to resist the Catholic Army, which fresh, in full strength, and well
recruited, had an ardent desire to see the Enemy in the field. With this
intention he departed from Tours, in the company of the Dukes of Guise and
Montpensier, and so gathering together thirty Ensigns of Foot, and 2000 Horse
of the Nobility and Gentry that held their lands of the Crown, who about that
time came to the Army, he advanced with his whole body toward Faye la Vineuse,
where the Hugonots were encamped with a design to meet them, and as soon as
possibly he could, force them to give him Battle.

But matters were not so resolved among the Hugonots; for though the Gentry,
who for the space of a whole year had lived from their own houses, spending all
they had, thinking they had done much more than either the nature or custom of
the French is wont to bear, desired earnestly to meet the Enemy, or to be
dismissed the Camp, and that every hour were heard the groans of those that
wished for an end of those miseries, or of their lives; though Count Volrade
with his Germans, weary of suffering and lying in the field, and deprived of
their fancied hopes of rich booty, in a mutinous way demanded their pay; and to
be led on to encounter the Enemy: yet the Princes, the Admiral, and the most
experienced Commanders of the Army, knowing the valor of the Kings Soldiers,
and the weariness and disunion of their own, inwardly disapproved the advice of
coming to a final trial, and desired to govern their affairs with the same
prudence which they had observed in the Catholics, who when they found
themselves inferior in strength, had always avoided the hazard of a Battle,
though now being assured of the advantage, they very much desired it:
Therefore, as when the Duke of Anjou shunned the encounter, they had used all
possible means to provoke him to it; so now that he came resolved to do the
like, they endeavored to prolong the event of things, and to proceed with more
slow and more secure advice, but they dared not to make show of this intention,
for fear of filling the Army with tumults and discontents, being certain the
Gentry would presently forsake them, and the Germans undoubtedly mutiny, as
soon as they should know there was no hopes of putting it to a Battle:
Wherefore letting themselves be led by necessity, and by the inclination of the
Army, as a man does for the most part that rides a fiery ill-managed horse,
they seemed to consent to the opinion and desire of the Soldiers, and made
show of readiness and resolution to give battle: but the Admiral, who thought
he could compass any thing by his arts and subtilties, deluding their
expectation, and declining all occasions, absolutely determined in himself,
with all possible care to avoid the doubtful issue of a battle.

To this end, as soon as he heard the motion of the Catholics toward him, the
Princes being made privy to his counsels, he marched with his whole Army from
Faye, which is in the Confines of Poictou and Anjou, to pass the Rivers that
are near, to gain the other side called Basse Poictou, bordering upon Guienna,
where by reason of its strong situation, and the many Cities that were there of
his Faction, he thought it more easy to delay the Battle, or else to fight
with so much advantage, that the Victory might not at all be doubtful: and to
the end the Gentry and the Germans might more willingly follow him, he caused a
report to be spread through the whole Army, that the Count de Montgomery, grown
strong and victorious in Bearn, was upon his way to join with him, and that he
was already near Parthenay, a Town not above twelve leagues distant, where he
pretended it was necessary to meet him, lest the Enemy getting between them,
should keep them still asunder, or should defeat the Count, whose number was
inferior to theirs.

By this device he labored to win them to follow him willingly, till he were
gotten amongst the Cities of his own Faction, where always lodging himself
under the protection of some strong place, he hoped by many, but not dangerous
skirmishes, to abate the fury of the Kings Army, and partly to qualify his own
Soldiers desire of fighting, till the beginning of the Winter (which was not
far off) should of it self hinder them from further action; in the mean time,
by the nearness of Rochel, and the diligence of the Queen of Navarre to supply
him, he was confident he should not be destitute of provisions; whereas the
Duke of Anjou, by reason of the Rivers that were behind him, would probably be
reduced to great want and scarcity. But the diligence of the Duke who out of a
desire to fight had marched with great expedition, frustrated these wary
counsels; for the Admiral marching with his Army in several divisions toward
Moncontour, where he had designed to quarter the last day of September; and the
Camp-Royal advancing the same way with great expedition, as soon as they heard
of his moving; whilst the Admiral deceived by the negligence of his Scouts,
believed for certain, that the Catholics were many miles from thence: their
Vanguard commanded by the Duke of Montpensier came so near to the Reer-guard
of the Princes, (in whose last Squadrons was Monsieur de Muy and 300 Horse, and
four Ensigns of French firelocks) that they could no longer avoid the
encounter of one another. Yet the Admiral still persisting in the same design,
having considered the situation of the Country on every side, resolved to pass
a water that ran through a moorish plain, judging that the Catholics would not
dare to come over the same place in the view of all his Army; or if they did,
he might by fighting with them hinder their passage, and have an admirable
opportunity of winning the Battle, whilst they were in so great disorder: for
which purpose he commanded Muy to sustain the shock of the Catholic Vanguard,
and in the mean time he with all the rest of the Army passed the Moor, though
with no small difficulty and confusion.

In this interim, the Duke of Montpensier marching in very good order; to try
all ways possible to provoke them to fight, commanded his light Horse boldly to
begin the skirmish, which at first was stoutly received, and courageously
opposed by Monsieur de Muy, one of the most valiant Soldiers in all France:
but Martigues coming up, whose valor was always wont to lead the way in the
most desperate occasions, the Hugonots were charged with such fury, that not
being able to resist so much a greater number, Muy having lost fifty Horse, and
above two hundred Foot, took flight as fast as he could, and passing hastily
over the water, joined himself orderly with the rest of their Forces. But the
Duke of Montpensier who had pursued him even to the water, when he saw all
their Army drawn into Battalia on the other side, made a stop, and considering
that he could not pass his men over in a full body, but only twenty in Front,
which would have caused a great disorder amongst them, he took time (coldly
skirmishing) to send word to the Duke of Anjou, and to expect his Orders for
what he should do in that occasion.

The Admiral seeing the coolness of the Catholics, and how they delayed to
pass the water, believed for certain that the body of the Army was still a
great way behind, and that Montpensier with only that small party, had advanced
unadvisedly further than he should have done: whereupon not to lose that
opportunity, taking courage, and bravely animating his Soldiers, he repassed
the water, with two gallant Squadrons of Gens d' Arms, and charged the Cavalry
of Martiques so resolutely, that they retreated above two hundred paces, but
the body of the Army coming up on every side, he was forced to return in
disorder, and to recover the shelter of two strong Squadrons of Infantry that
were upon the bank; in which place the valor of Monsieur de Clairmont of
Ambois was very remarkable, who sick, and unarmed with only twenty Horse,
opposed the fury of the Catholics, till the Admiral was gotten under the
protection of his Squadrons.

But the Duke of Anjou knowing it was too difficult and dangerous to pass over
in the face of the Enemy, resolved, (the ground favoring his purpose) to try
if he could drive them away with his Cannon, and make them quit the other side
of the water, and that place of so much advantage whereof they were possessed.
Wherefore Monsieur de Byron Field-Mareshal, having caused the Artillery to be
drawn thither, with great expedition and much judgment planted all the Cannon
and Culverins, which were 22 in number, partly on the right hand, partly on the
left of the bottoms of those hills that were within shot of the Hugonot Army;
and began to let fly very terribly at their flank, doing infinite execution
upon those Squadrons which stood in Battalia at the entry of the Moor, that was
on the other side the water. Yet the French and German Infantry being in a low
place, and commanded by their Officers to lie flat on the ground, could not so
easily be annoyed: but the Cavalry lying open to the shot, could hardly be kept
in order, sending many Messengers to desire they might be drawn from thence,
where they perished miserably without being able to give any testimony of their
courage and valor. But the Admiral would not consent that they should remove,
for fear of leaving the passage free to the Catholics, which would after force
them, their Army being weary and half disheartened, to fight in the plain
champagne; therefore, whilst the service continued thus hot at the pass, the
Catholics Artillery still playing without intermission, the German Horse, who
stood more open to the shot than any of the rest, ( Charles Count of Mansfield,
Brother to the General, being killed there, with many others) were about to
retire, and quitting the post they held upon the right hand, began to leave the
passage open to the Enemies: but the Prince of Navarre spurring his horse up to
them, and putting himself in the same danger of the Cannon, prevailed so far by
his presence and persuasions, that he made them stay for a while, and
constantly to expect the beginning of the Battle; wherein appeared the powerful
Genius of this young Prince, the respect of whom was able to bridle fear, which
has no Law, and to stop the flight of the precipitate Germans, that are so
obstinate in their resolutions. But no remedy in the world could have done much
good, for the Enemies Cannon would at last have routed and broken all their
Army, if the coming of the night had not oppo^tunely relieved the Hugonots in
so great an extremity.

The darkness ended the skirmish that had been in the plain, and the Catholics
not being able to level their Artillery aright, played not so fast, finding they
shot but in vain, and wounded the Air to no purpose; which the Admiral wisely
making use of, began about nine of the Clock at night to retire without Drum or
Trumpet; and before it was day had passed the River with his whole Army, and
drawn it up in the plain of Moncontour; his purpose was, continuing in the same
determination, to retreat with all speed, and marching on to get as far as
possibly he could from the Catholic Camp, and from the danger of the day. But
this resolution was not only opposed by the Commanders and Gentlemen of his own
Nation, but far more mutinously by Count Volrade with his Germans, who breaking
forth into seditious speeches threatened, That if there were not an end made of
so many miseries, they would leave the Princes and go over to the Kings party,
being sure to be received with very good conditions: by which mutiny, the
French Infantry being also stirred up, (as men are more ready to follow ill
examples, than to be kept within the limits of reason) exclaiming and
threatening cried out to give Battle: nor did many of the Officers dissent from
the general desire of the Army, thinking it impossible to go forward, and not
be cut off; the Enemy at their backs following with all speed resolved to fall
upon them; and their own Soldiers tired, wearied out, and frighted with the
terror of a retreat, which resembles a flight uses to dishearten an Army,
and to abate the courage and boldness of raw men, believed it was much better
to make use of the readiness of their Soldiers, and give Battle in the field
with hope of Victory, than fighting disorderly in their retreat, expect to be
miserably defeated and scattered. Wherefore the Admiral, and the Princes, not
being able to withstand the general opinion, resolved to stay for the Catholic
Camp on the bank of the River, and there with the best advantage they could to
remit the success to fortune.

The Admiral divided his Army into three Battalions, and he (according to his
custom) commanded the Vanguard, the Princes with Count Lodowick of Nassau the
Battle, Count Volrade and Muy the Rear; the Cannon were planted in the Front of
the Army, and before all was the Forelorn-hope, which when the Enemies drew
near, were to begin the Battle.

In the mean while the Duke of Anjou having passed the water which the Hugonots
had left, on the first day of October in the morning, advanced with a greater
desire than ever to fight with them; but finding the hinderance of the River,
(on the further side whereof the Enemy stood in Battalia) he was fain to make a
halt, because the night was drawing on, and quartered that night in the same
place where the Hugonots were encamped the day before. The next day desirous to
free himself from the danger of passing the River (though but a little one) in
the face of the Enemy, having made very diligent discovery of all the Country,
he took a large compass upon the right hand, and passed the night before the
third of October at a place called la Grimaudiete, where the River not being
yet joined with another Brook that fell into it, was not at all troublesome
either to Horse or Foot; there being neither water enough to wet one to the
mid-leg, nor banks that could hinder the marching, or order of his divisions.
As soon as they were passed over without any let or impediment, Monsieur de
Byron, and the Count de Tavanes, Mareshals of the Field, divided the whole Army
into two Battalions, whereof one was led by the Duke of Montpensier, the Duke
of Guise, and the Count di Sancta Fiore; the other by the Duke of Anjou
himself, The Marquess de Villars made Admiral in the place of Coligny.
with whom were the Dukes of Aumale and Longueville, the Mareshal de Cosse, the
Marquess de Villers, (by the King made Admiral in the place of Coligny) Peter
Ernest of Mansfield sent with the supplies by King Philip, the Marquess of
Baden, Monsieur de Carnavalet, Guilliaume de Momorancy Lord of Tore, and many
other Lords and Gentlemen. In each Battalion were Squadrons of Swisses, flanked
with the French and Italian Infantry, and in the front of each wing was placed
the Artillery. In this order having before them a large spacious champagne,
without trees, banks or ditches to hinder them, the Catholic Army marched
toward the Hugonots with a great noise of Drums and Trumpets.

But the Admiral, who in vain had tried again if he could persuade his
Soldiers to retreat to Hernaut, a place hard by and proper to receive them;
and seeing himself necessitated to fight; to confirm the courage of his men,
moved softly toward the Enemy, and put himself in order to encounter them,
without advantage of ground in the midst of the open field.

The Princes having seen their Army drawn up by the Field-Mareshals, and with
fitting speeches recommended the Religion and Liberty of them all to both
Nations; when they saw every one ready to do his part, retired with their guard
to a place something more remote behind the Camp, not to expose themselves in
so tender an age, to the hazardous perils of War, leaving the weight of the
Battle unto the wisdom and valor of their Commanders. The Sun was already two
hours high when the two Armies facing one another, The Armies join Battle.
the Admirals Artillery began to play; which being presently answered from the
Catholic Camp, they filled the whole field with terror and slaughter: after
which impetuous fury of so many Cannon, the men fell on with so much courage on
both sides, that it was many hours uncertain which would remain victorious: for
after the volleys of Muskets, and the shocks of their Lances, not only the
Horse and Foot were mingled pell-mell in the heat of the Battle, but even the
very Boys, Suttlers and Pioneers, and the rabble of other suchlike people that
use to follow the Camp, fought stoutly and desperately each for their party;
and in this universal fury, the number was so equal, that almost every one had
a particular Enemy to deal withal. Nor were the Commanders in less danger than
common Troopers and Soldiers; for the Duke of Anjou himself rushing into the
thickest Squadron of the Enemy, (where the Marquess of Baden was killed by his
side, and many other of those Gentlemen that fought under the Royal Standard)
he was many times in danger to lose his life, the safety whereof he ought no
less to attribute to his own valor, than to the courage and fidelity of his
Soldiers; and on the other side, the Admiral (not sparing himself, but acting
the part of a Soldier, as well as of a General) furiously encountered the
Rhinegrave, (who in the Head of his Cavalry came up to charge him) and having
from him received a Pistol-shot in the cheek which broke four of his teeth; he
discharged his own in the very face of the Rhinegrave, and laid him dead upon
the ground, nor ceased after to fight most gallantly, though the blood ran so
fast from his wound, that it filled his Helmet and Gorget of Mail. But though
the number, boldness and constancy of both parties were almost equal, yet their
strength and valor were not; for the Squadrons of the Kings Swisses, famous by
many and almost numberless proofs, and tried in so many other Battles; fighting
with Enemies of less experience, that were wasted and tired out with their past
wants and sufferings, did at last break into the Battalion of the Germans, whom
they charged in the beginning of the day; and having routed and disordered
their Ranks, made so great a slaughter of them, that of four thousand not above
two hundred escaped alive; and the Kings Cavalry entire in strength, and full
of courage, did in the end overthrow and scatter the Cavalry of the Hugonots,
no less conquered by the weariness and weakness of their Horses, harrassed with
long toil and duty, than by the force and valor of their Enemies.

The Admiral wounded, flees with the Princes.
The Admiral seeing his Army defeated, his voice quite spent, his jaw wounded,
and all imbrued in blood, took with him the Princes, (who had withdrawn
themselves with the Sieurs de Muy, Teligny and Love) and with three hundred
Horse retired to Partenay, after whom many other stragglers followed in
disorder. Count Lodowick of Nassau, and Count Volrade rallied about 2000 of
their Reiters; and though they were pursued by the Duke of Aumale and Monsieur
de Byron, they made their retreat without any disorder, and defending
themselves bravely at every Pass of advantage, got that night to the same
place. All the rest that fled from the fury of the Conquerours, dispersed
several ways as their fortune guided them: some got to Angoulesme, some to
Rochelle, and some followed the track of the Commanders. The Duke of Anjou
after he had routed and put to flight the Enemies Cavalry, being come to the
place where the Swisses had obtained so bloody a Victory of the Germans,
commanded quarter to be given to three thousand of the French Infantry, who
being encompassed on every side, had thrown down their Arms, and begged their
lives of the Conquerors: then finding no more resistance any where, he took the
Colors, Baggage and Cannon of the Enemy, and drawing his Army together,
marched victoriously to Saint Genez.

The number of the slain on the Princes side, reckoning also the Boys and
Suttlers, and such like hangers on, who all died fighting, were computed by the
Catholics to 17000: but those that more moderately counted only the Soldiers,
ghessed them to be about 10000, whereof few were persons of quality; especially
of the French, because the chief Heads fled betimes for their own safety; the
greatest slaughter falling upon the Gascogne Foot and the Germans. Yet there
were killed Puygreffier, Antricourt, Tannaquille, Byron the Brother of Armand
who was in the Catholic Army; St. Bonnet and St. Oyre, who in the eightieth
year of his age fighting valiantly till the very last, had given wonderful
proofs of his courage in the retreat. There was slain also 27 German Captains
of Foot, of but 28 that were in the whole Army, besides two Colonels of the
same Nation, above 70 French Captains of Foot, and two Colonels of Reiters, the
other two saving themselves with the Count of Nassa^ in the Body that made the
retreat. Monsieur de la Noue one of the Heads of the Faction, (whose ill
fortune almost always left him in the Enemies hands) was there taken prisoner,
besides Monsieur d' Acier General of the French Infantry, and Monsieur de
Blacon Colonel of Firelocks.

On the Kings side were killed few above four hundred; but among those, many
principal Officers of the Army, especially strangers; Philibert Marquess of
Baden, the Elder Rhinegrave, Monsieur de Clairmont one of the chief Gentlemen
in Daulphine, Count Francisco de Sassatello, Scipio Piccolomini Lieutenant to
Otti de Montalto, In the Battle of M^n^oniou^, the Catholics took all the
Baggage, Cannon and Ammunition of the Hugonots, and 200 colors.
and many Foot-Captains. The Duke of Guise, Peter Ernest of Mansfield, the
other Rhinegrave, and the Lords of Schombergh and Bassompier Germans, were
wounded, but all cured in a short time after. They took about nine hundred load
of victual, all the baggage of the Germans, eleven pieces of Cannon, and above
two hundred Colors, whereof twenty six (taken by the Italians) were sent to
Rome by the Count di Sancta Fiore, and in manner of a Trophy dedicated to the
Church of St. John de Lateran. The News of this Victory was carried to the King
and Queen Mother by Alberto Gondi Count of Retz a Florentine, much favored by
them; The Count St. Fiore sends to Rome 26 Ensign^ taken by his Soldiers.
whereat there was very great rejoicing: and the same thereof spreading into
the Neighbor Countries, particularly into Italy, filled the Duke of Anjou's
Name with Glory and Renown; to whose Valor and Conduct, the chief honor of
the day was attributed, having overreached the so cried-up wisdom, and so
feared policy of the Admiral.

The greatest part of the Commanders that escaped the defeat, got the same
night to Partenay, whither the Princes and the Admiral were come before, who
presently began to advise what was best to be done, in the difficulty and
misfortune of their present affairs. The most part of them were quite
disheartened by so many unhappy successes, and the terror of this last
overthrow, seeing their Army cut off, themselves shut up in a corner of the
Kingdom, without money, forsaken by their friends, with very little hopes, and
less reputation, and among their public consultations, calling to mind their
private interests, the distance of their own houses, the vast expenses, dangers
and disquiets wherein they were perpetually involved; many of them seemed to
sink under the misery of their present condition, and were inclined to yield
themselves to the Kings mercy, and by the best means they could procure pardon
for what was past, which by the mild and gentle nature of the Queen, and the
Duke of Anjou, whose advice bore the chief sway in the Government, and by the
desire of peace, they thought might easily be obtained, if with humble
submission they should cast themselves altogether upon his Royal Clemency. But
the Admiral not at all losing courage, though so wounded in the mouth that he
could hardly speak, but rather exasperated by the severe sentence pronounced
against him in Parliament, and hardened by the adversity of his present
fortune, began to show that things were not yet brought to so great extremity,
that they should let fear transport them to so much despair; that they had lost
other Battles before this, and always rose again to be more powerful, and more
terrible to their Enemies; that he had learned by experience, that a War is not
utterly lost for the miscarriage of a Battle, so that the courage fail not, in
the constancy and vigor whereof consists the happy issue of all enterprises;
that though they had lost many of their men, yet the basis and foundation
whereupon they built all the hopes of their party, was still firm and unshaken;
that Germany, the unexhausted mine of men and arms, still persevered in unity
and friendship with them; that England continued in the same confederacy, which
would increase their supplies in measure as their need now required; that he
held intelligence for the revolt and surprisal of many Cities in diverse parts
of the Kingdom, the loss of which would divide the forces, and much distract
the designs of the Conquerors; that the Count of Montgomery in Bearn was grown
great both in number and courage, with whom they might join in a few days; and
that with his forces fresh and entire, it was easy to begin the foundation of
a gallant and powerful Army: That therefore they should revive the undaunted
courage which they had shown in so many other occasions, and that they should
believe his counsels; for in a few days he would re-establish their affairs in
their former condition; that he promised no such new things, as for their
strange improbability should hardly gain credit among them; but that he had an
inward assurance he should be able to do the same for the present, which every
one of them might remember they had so often seen him do in times past; and
though they should gain nothing else by perseverance, and setting an Army again
on foot, at least they might by that means facilitate the way to an agreement,
and obtain the better conditions; which if they should rashly demand during the
heat of this Victory, they would of necessity be forced to submit themselves to
the insolent will of the Conquerours; whereas by deferring it* and bringing it
opportunely to pass, they might (having a little patience) treat and conclude
with advantage.

These words were hearkened to with great attention by the Prince of Navarre,
who being already accustomed to command, could hardly bend his mind to stoop to
the obedience of others. Nor did the Prince of Conde hear them with a less
inclination, though of more tender years, yet no way inferior in either vigor
or courage: Count Lodowick of Nassau, and Volrade of Mansfield, concurred with
the Admiral; for they being strangers, had nothing there to lose, and therefore
desired that the War should continue: These reasons so well fitted, agreed with
the humor of many, who could not yet willingly quit their former hopes, nor
did they displease the rest that wished for peace, hoping by standing out, to
procure more reasonable conditions, and upon better terms to submit themselves
to the Kings obedience: wherefore their drooping spirits being revived, and
their first determination changed, all the Heads of the Faction with one accord
resolved to follow the Princes with an unshaken constancy, and to let
themselves be governed by the prudence of the Admiral: After which agreement
they dispatched messengers the same night into England and Germany, to give an
account of the Battle unto those Princes, and to demand new supplies of them;
they gave notice to their Confederates in the several Provinces of all that had
happened in the Battle; but at the same time comforted them with the like
reasons, that they might not be disheartened; promising, that within three
months they should have a greater and more powerful Army than the first: and
then the Princes and the Admiral being withdrawn together, they determined to
leave Poictou, (not having force enough to defend it against a victorious Enemy
there present) and to hold themselves to the defense of a few places, keeping
Rochel, St. Iean d' Angely, and Angoulesme, Towns which by reason of their
strength they thought might easily be maintained, and they with the remainder
of their Soldiers, resolved to quit the plains of those Provinces, and leaving
their baggage behind them, retire into the Mountains of Gascony, Auvergne, and
Languedoc, thereby to hinder the Conqueror from following them so easily.
Their design was to unite themselves with the Count of Montgomery, whom fortune
seemed to have purposely made ready to piece up and recruit their broken
forces; and being once joined with him, they hoped to shelter themselves in
those Mountainous Countries, till the Queen of England and the Germans had time
to send them assistance, wherewith being reinforced, they were confident they
should be able to regain in a few days all that the Catholics could take in
many months in the depth of Winter, which makes the assaulting of Towns so much
more difficult.

They had moreover some concealed hopes in the Mareshal d' Anville, Governor
of Languedoc, with whom they held secret intelligence, and found him very much
inclined to their affairs. Henry de Momerancy Mareshal d' Anville, whilst the
Constable his Father lived, was always one of the chief of the Catholic Party,
and an open Enemy to the Hugonot Faction, which was occasioned by his emulation
of Francis Mareshal of Momorancy his Brother, who was an intimate friend to the
Prince of Conde and Monsieur de Coligny his Kinsmen; and that which confirmed
him in it, was the favor and esteem which he received from the Guises, who
skilful in deep dissimulation, according as opportunity required, were diligent
in trying all possible arts to hold him fast to their party, that by his means,
as with the strictest bonds they might keep the Constable united to them, by
whom, for his valor and greatness of mind, he was most tenderly beloved above
his other children. The Queen Mother feigned the same; for by the minority of
her Son, finding her self necessitated to make the great ones her friends, she
made use of the Mareshal d' Anville to keep her in good correspondence with the
Constable; after whose death those reasons being taken away, neither did the
Queen care to employ d' Anville, no^ did the Guises make such account of him,
as they had done formerly; but rather as a branch of that Family, with which
they had so long a continued enmity and emulation, they endeavored to pull
down and abase him; the arts and persuasions of the Cardinal of Lorain being
suff^ciently powerful with the King to that effect. For which cause d' Anville
having observed in what manner they dealt with him, and likewise the emulation
between him and his Brother Momorancy ceasing after his Fathers death, angry
that the dignity of Constable so long enjoyed by his Father was not conferred
upon one of them, they having sued and made means diverse times to procure it;
he began in heart to draw near to the friends and kindred of his own Family,
and privately by secret, but doubtful hopes, to keep the Admiral in a good
opinion of him. This was the reason that he relieved not Monsieur de Terride in
Bearn, when he might have done it, and the same motive induced him to slacken
his proceedings against those places of the Hugonots in Gascony and Languedoc;
and this inclination was greatly increased in him by seeing that the Admiral
was old, and continually exposed to manifest dangers; wherefore if he should
chance to die before the Princes were out of their minority, he hoped to
succeed him in the Government, finding in himself neither want of judgment not
courage to undergo the weight of that Employment. To all these considerations
were added the jealousies which not without reason he had conceived long
before, left if the King and the Guises should come to extinguish the Princes,
the Admiral, and all the Hugonot party, he should in the end turn to suppress
the House of Momorancy, which would only be remaining of all the ancient
emulous and suspected Families. All these things were well known to the wisdom
of the Admiral, who moved by this hope and the other reasons formerly alleged,
persuaded the Princes to follow his advice; so the resolution was settled to
leave the plain, and retire among the Mountains bordering upon Languedoc, till
such time as the supplies of their Confederates might give them a capacity of
rising to a more prosperous condition.

But lest the Conquerours meeting with no opposition, should have opportunity
to follow and overtake them in the march they were to make, with tired horses,
and men wearied and discouraged, they agreed to leave Monsieur de Muy at Niort,
who by delaying the fury of the Conquerours for a day or two, might give them
leisure without any impediment to arrive at the places they had appointed; with
this resolution, not trusting themselves to stay any longer at Partenay, they
marched the same night very silently toward Ni^rt, where leaving Muy with the
small remainder of the Foot that had escaped the slaughter, and only an hundred
Horse, they continued with the same speed their intended Voyage. But the
constancy of the Princes and their Commanders, was greater than the patience of
the Soldiers and French Gentlemen; who being got to such a distance from the
Catholic Camp, that they were freed from fear of being overtaken* began
secretly to disband; part, because pillage and plunder ceasing, they had no
longer wherewithal to maintain themselves; part, because their horses were so
tired and spoiled with a whole years tedious service, that they were not able
to march so fast as the Princes; and part, because much dejected by their many
losses and mishaps, they were utterly out of hope ever to buoy up their
shipwrackt fortunes, or to restore the oppressed power of their party; and
therefore to escape future dangers, some hid themselves in the Cities of
Poictou and Xai^tonge, others avoiding the great highways, in disguised
habits, and under many pretenses, endeavored to return to their own homes; so
that before the Princes were come to Rochel, they were reduced to few more than
nine hundred French Horse, besides two thousand Reiters, who wanting
opportunity to return unto their own Country, followed them then, rather out of
constraint, than affection. This disbanding of the French doubled their
necessity of retiring to the Mountains, as well to shun the fury of the
Conquerours, as to gain more time to recruit their broken Army: for which end
leaving at Rochel the Count de la Roch-fou-cault, and Monsieur de la Noue, who
through the carelessness of those that kept him prisoner, had escaped the next
day after the Battle; Monsieur de Piles at St. Iean d' Angely, with all the
Foot that could be drawn from their several Garrisons; and at Angoulesine
Monsieur de Pontivy, a Kinsman of the Queen of Navarre's, and bred up by her,
they made long marches toward Montauban. The Duke of Anjou recovers many
places from the Hugonots.


In the mean time the Duke of Anjou (to whom since the Victory, Portenay,
Lus^gnan, Fontenay, Chastel-rault, and St. Maixen^, had yielded themselves,
besides all the other Towns and Castles in those parts) was drawn with his Army
to Niort, which made show of some resistance, and encamping there, began to
plant his Artillery. Monsieur de Muy knowing that in his present condition it
was more requisite to show valor than strength, to amuse and delay the
proceedings of the Enemy, with his Horse (though but a few) and a certain
number of Foot sallied out boldly, and fell upon the Army as they were about to
make their Quarters; which skirmish having lasted very hot and bloody till the
evening, whilst he full of courage and good hopes was making his retreat into
the Town, he was shot in the back by one of his own Soldiers, whereof he died
a few days after, and Niort, whose defense consisted chiefly in his valor and
experience, without further delay was yielded up; which example was followed by
Xaintes, Cognac, Lusson, and all the other Cities, except only those three into
which the Princes had put their Garrisons.

The King and the Queen Mother came about that time to the Army, and entering
victorious into Niort, held a Council of War there concerning the prosecution
of their good success: many pressed earnestly that the Duke of Anjou with the
Army, or at least the greatest part of it, not losing the fruits of their
Victory by delays, might follow the Princes and the Admiral, and pursue them
without intermission, till he had either utterly suppressed them, or driven
them quite out of the Kingdom; being certain that the Root once cut up, the
Branches would wither; and the Faction of the Hugonots, which so often had been
pulled down, and built up again, the foundation being once destroyed, would
suffer a total and final ruin. But many considerations opposed this advice;
the season of the year, drawing toward the end of October, began to bring such
Snow and Frosts, as were hardly to be endured in the plains, much less in the
sharpness of the Mountains; the barrenness of the Country where the Princes
were retired, not yielding provisions for so great an Army; the narrowness of
many passages where a few men might make head against any how great a number
soever; the diseases which grew very frequent and mortal in the Camp; but above
all, the want of Money necessary to maintain so great and so continued an
expense; for, the Provinces every where being very much troubled and
disquieted, the people up in Arms, the Cities sacked, the fields laid waste and
desolate, the Kings Revenue in many places was shrunk almost to nothing; and
the War being in so many several parts of the Kingdom, consumed that in a few
days, which with much pains was gathered together in many months. For all these
reasons (fomented perhaps by some particular interests) it was concluded that
the care of prosecuting the Princes and the Admiral, should be committed to the
Mareshal d' Anville Governor of Languedoc, whose designs were yet
undiscovered, and to Monsieur de Monluc Lieutenant General in Gascogny, who
with the Forces of those Provinces were to endeavor their final ruin and
destruction; judging that in those barren, narrow, and mountainous places, what
could not be done by the Forces of the Country, which were many, could neither
be effected by a greater number, which being an hinderance to themselves, in
the streightness and scarcity of those parts, would rather be troublesome than
advantageous. And at the same time they resolved, that the Duke of Anjou with
the Army, should be employed about the recovery of those places which were held
by the Hugonots in Poictou and Xaintonge, to deprive them utterly of that nest,
wherein they had settled the hopes and laid the foundation of their Faction,
which being destroyed, they would have neither place remaining which were
proper to assemble themselves, nor means or power to gather Forces that could
be considerable to renew the War.

According to this resolution, the King in person, with the Queen Mother and
the Duke of Anjou, laid siege to St. Iean d' Angely, a place of small circuit,
but excellently fortified, Monsieur de Piles defends S. Iean d'Angely 46 days,
and after yields it upon honorable conditions.
and furnished with all necessary provisions; wherein was Armand Sieur de
Piles, with all the remainder of the Hugonot Infantry: and though the Duke of
Anjou (who governed the Army, albeit the King was present) spared neither pains
nor danger, making terrible Batteries, and frequent, though bloody, Assaults,
Piles made good the Town for the space of six and forty days: after which, not
having the least hopes of relief, he gave it up with honorable conditions, and
had a safe conduct for himself and his men to Angoulesme, having given his word
not to serve the Princes in that War, during the time of four months; which
promise, under many pretenses, was not so really observed by him.

After the taking of St. Iean d' Angely, according to the first resolution, the
Army should have proceeded to the siege of Rochelle, which besides being in a
manner blocked up by Land, by the loss of all the places about it, was also
besieged by Sea, by the Kings Navy, which under the command of the Baron de la
Guard Vice Admiral, was come from Provence into the Ocean Sea. But the end of
December drew near; the Army in the siege of St. Iean was very much decreased
both in strength and number, there having been killed above four thousand
Soldiers, besides Monsieur de Martigues a Commander of great valor and
reputation: The Pope and the King of Spain had recalled their supplies, as if
the business had been perfectly finished, and the War absolutely ended by the
Victory at Moncontour; and, which imported most of all, the Duke of Anjou by
continual pains and watchings, which were far above the endurance of either his
age or constitution, being fallen into an indisposition of stomach which
threatened worse, sought rather for cure and rest, than any new important
occasion that required toil and sufferance; for which reasons the Council being
of opinion, that Rochelle, so straightened almost on all sides, and deprived of
all hope of relief, would in the end render it self; Francis of Bourbon Prince
of Daulphine, Son to the Duke of Montpensier, was left to command the Army,
which was exceedingly diminished, in Xaintonge, and the King with the Queen,
and the Duke of Anjou, at the very beginning of the year 1570. retired to
Angiers, disbanding a great part of their Army, 1570.
which for the want of money, and in the depth of Winter, In the beginning of
the year, the King disbands part of his Army; which advice in the end proves
very hurtful.
could not have been maintained without much difficulty. Some have been of
opinion, that this resolution, which by the event appeared to have been most
pernicious, was propounded and determined by the Duke of Anjou, partly through
a desire of rest, and a mind to enjoy the pleasures of the Court, to which he
was above measure inclined; and partly because he thought it not advantageous
to his affairs, that by the total ruin of the Princes, the War should be put
to a final end; during which, all the Kings forces, and the principal Command
over them, were in his power; which there would no longer be occasion for him
to exercise, when by the extirpation of the Hugonots the Kingdom was once
reduced to a firm and settled peace; which if it were true, it concerned him
more nearly than any body else, in the process of time to repent so great an
error.

In the mean time the Princes and the Admiral, (who if they had been close
followed from the first, would very probably have been destroyed) after that
according to their first wish, they saw the Army busied before St. Iean d'
Angely, went into the confines of Montauban, where the Prince of Navarre at the
age of sixteen years, surpassing himself and the expectation that was conceived
of him, with his Authority, Industry and Entreaties, solicited and armed the
Nobility and people of those parts, among whom the Kings of Navarre his
Ancestors had very great dependencies, by the neighborhood and near alliances
which in some years past they had contracted in those Provinces; to which
authority and diligence of the Prince, the Admiral joining his wisdom and
experience, they had got within a few weeks above three thousand Foot to follow
their colors, with which, plundering all the Country, The Hugonots not being
opposed, do great outrages and rise with considerable forces.
and giving up all things both sacred and profane to the free pillage of the
Soldiers, they continued daily increasing and recruiting their Forces: There
business being in this condition, the Count of Montgomery came with two
thousand Foot and eight hundred Horse, all brave and valiant Soldiers, and
quartered at Condom, whilst the Princes and the Admiral having passed the
Dordogne at St. Marie, went to try Again, and the other Cities of Gascony; and
though Monsieur de Monluc, by breaking a Mill on the upper part of the River,
and letting it drive down the stream, had beaten to pieces the Bridge which
they had made, and divided the Armies from one another; yet not having strength
to fight with either, the Count Montgomery his Forces passed over nevertheless
in Boats, and joined with the Princes, whereby their Army grown powerful and
considerable, they were absolute Masters of the Field, and overran all those
Countries without opposition. At the same time they had by the means of their
adherents (besides many other places) surprised Nismes, a principal City of
Languedoc, which afforded them an exceeding great convenience of refreshing
themselves; for though the King had given strict Commissions, and had also sent
thither Monsieur de la Valette, a man of eminent valor and fidelity, with a
good strength of Horse; yet did not his Officers oppose their progress and
incursions, because the Mareshal d' Anville, though he thought it not wisdom to
lay open his intentions unseasonably, the Hugonots being in such an ebb of
fortune, yet he desired they should rise again and recover new Forces; for
which cause he cunningly gave them many opportunities to arm and strengthen
themselves, and keeping close in the City of Toulouse upon pretended doubts of
the Citizens fidelity, he permitted them to make Insurrections, and to pillage
all the Country round about; and Monsieur de Monluc, and Monsieur de la
Valette, bitter Enemies of the Princes Faction, who for their own honors
desired to suppress those relics of the Hugonots, without the help of d'
Andille, were too weak to execute their designs. By reason of a conspiracy
discovered against the Queen of England; the Hugonots despair of help from from
thence; whereupon a Treaty is begun, but not concluded.
But for all these advantages, the Princes and the Admiral were in very great
perplexity of mind, because they had received news from England, That by reason
of the discovery of some intended conspiracy against the Queens Person, that
Kingdom was in such distraction, that they could not expect much help from
thence; besides, they found not that readiness which they had imagined in the
Princes of Germany, and they knew that Nation could not move, to come into the
Kingdom without a good sum of money, to raise and furnish their Army: They saw
likewise that the Prince of Orange, who was sent to solllicite the Protestants,
was a great deal more careful of the Low Country affairs (wherein he had a very
great interest) than of the business of France, wherein he was not so much
concerned: whereby finding themselves destitute of moneys, and unprovided of
all other things, without other means of living than what they got by rapine,
which already was grown very scarce, every one having conveyed their goods into
the strong Cities; their horses tired and lamed, not having so much as means to
shoe them; for which cause they had lost above four hundred of them by the
way: they foresaw that at last they must necessarily be ruined and destroyed by
the Kings Forces, against whom in the end they could not possibly make
resistance, though for a few months they might be able to defend themselves.
For these reasons the Princes with a desire to conclude, but the Admiral only
to gain time, by the means of the Queen of Navarre, began to introduce a Treaty
of Peace, and to that end with great humility and submission, sent Monsieur de
Beauvais, and Monsieur de Teligny to Court, with a safe conduct, who
nevertheless propounded conditions very far different from what the King
intended to grant; (who holding himself as Conqueror, pretended they should
submit themselves wholly to his mercy) so they were sent away without any hope
of agreement; but they obtained, That Monsieur de Byron should go back with
them to the Princes Army, to know their final determination; who returned to
the Court, with nothing but general terms; matters not being yet ripe, nor the
Princes resolution settled for any conclusion.

But in the beginning of Springtime, Fortune varying (as the chance of War
uses to be uncertain) the state of affairs varied also: for the Princes having
past the sharpness of the Winter in Languedoc with five or six thousand Foot,
and two thousand five hundred Horse, (for toil and hard duty had brought the
Reiters to the number of but one thousand two hundred) were come down from the
Mountains to the banks of the Rhosne, to enlarge themselves in a more fertile
the Country: the greatest difficulty they had there, was to pass the River; for
Monsieur des Gordes the Kings Lieutenant in Daulphine, had placed himself there
with a considerable strength, to hinder them: yet Monsieur de Mombrun knowing
the Country very well, found means to pass over his Regiment in boats, unknown
to the Catholics, and defeated them who advanced in disorder to fight with
him; in the heat of which Victory having made a Sconce close by the River,
Count Lodowick under favor of it, passed over first, and at last the Princes
with all the Army; The Admiral being sick, is carried along with the Army in a
Litter.
and the Admiral, who sick of a malignant Fever, made himself be carried,
almost half dead, in an open Litter. Being past the Rhosne, and come into the
Country of Forests, thence into Beurbonis and the Duchy of Nevers, sacking and
spoiling all they could, they endeavored to draw near to la Charity, and the
places adjoining, which yet held of their party, not only to reinforce
themselves by the addition of those Germans, but also to supply their want of
Powder, and other Ammunition, whereof their store was totally exhausted, and
without which their Arms seemed to no purpose. Their design was, when they were
recruited, and provided with those necessaries which they wanted, to overrun
and pillage the Countries about Paris, to open to themselves, by that last
attempt, some way to a better and more tolerable state of fortune, remembering
that the Hugonots had never obtained advantageous conditions of agreement, but
when they had made the seat of the War in the heart of the Catholic party, and
brought both fear and damage unto the City of Paris it self, whose danger and
jealousy had always extorted an assent to peace from those that bore the sway
in the Government: But if they could not grow to a strength sufficient for the
execution of that design, they resolved to repass the Loire, and return into
their old nest Xaintonge; where since the departure of the Duke of Anjou, they
heard the state of their affairs was not a little amended; for Monsieur de la
Noue with admirable conduct, and no less valor, sallying out of Rochelle, had
recovered many places near unto it, given a great defeat to Pugalliard one of
the Kings Commanders, taken one of the Galleys of the Fleet, and overrunning
all the Country, ceased not sometimes by cunning surprises, sometimes by open
force to improve the condition of his party; and though (giving a sudden
assault to Fountenay) he had received a shot in the arm, for which it was
necessarily to be cut off, yet being cured, and returned to the exercise of
Arms fiercer than before, he kept the whole Country in fear and trouble.

The King by this means seeing the War renewed contrary to his expectation, and
and the Duke of Anjou's sickness still continuing, (for which cause he was gone
to St. Germains a place of pleasure few miles distant from Paris) was
constrained to put his Army again in posture to oppose the Princes, and as soon
as it was in order, The Duke of Anjou being sick, the Army is commanded by the
Mareshal de C^sse, who inclining to Calvin's Doctrine, makes no progress
against the Hugonots.
he unadvisedly resolved to give the Command thereof to the Mareshal de Cosse;
for (not daring to put it in the hands those Subjects, who for greatness,
power, adherents, or animosity, were very much suspected by him) he trusted it
to a person, who not at all digressing from his wonted inclinations, gave
greater opportunities to the Enemy; for inclining to Calvin's Doctrine in his
heart, he was nothing forward in prosecuting the Princes of the Blood; and
being a man of a slow heavy nature, his intention was only to hinder the
Hugonots from getting foot in those Provinces which they aimed at, but not at
all to venture the hazard of a Battle, and much less totally to suppress that
party, as he easily might have done, finding the Princes far inferior to him
in strength, without Cannon, without Victual, without Money, and their
Soldiers with long marches quite wearied and disheartened, having gone above
three hundred leagues in the space of a few months. This counsel was attributed
by many to the Duke of Anjou, who by reason of his indisposition not being
able, or for some private ends not willing to make a perfect end of the War,
would have been displeased that another should enjoy the glory, and reap the
fruits of his labors; wherefore rendering all the other Princes and Soldiers
suspected to the King, he caused the enterprise to be committed to one, who he
was confident would make no great progress in it.

The Princes were come to Rene-le-Duc a weak Town in Burgundy, with a purpose
to take and sack it, as they were necessitated to do, to relieve and feed their
Soldiers, when the Mareshal de Cosse arrived with his Army, wherein were six
thousand Swisses, and as many French Foot, twelve pieces of Cannon, and little
less than four thousand Horse; there was no doubt to men of understanding, but
that fighting upon equal terms, the Princes would have the worst, so great was
the difference both in the number and vigor of their Forces; but the Mareshal
proceeding slowly according to his resolution, carried himself with so much
caution in the business, as gave them time and opportunity to possess
themselves of a place, strong and advantageous enough to supply the defect of
their weakness; for putting themselves in order, they fronted toward a small
River, having a great Wood behind them, and lining the Hedges and Vineyards
with their Foot, their Horses were divided into many Squadrons, and set in the
fittest places to defend themselves, and receive their Enemies; where they
sustained the skirmish (though hot and furious) all the day without much loss,
after which trial of the Hugonots valor and constancy, the Kings Army
proceeding so much the more warily, the Mareshal either through the slowness of
his own nature, or through his secret determination letting the Enemy still
gain the advantage of ground, went prolonging the event of things, perchance
out of a belief, that the benefit of time would without danger force the Enemy
to take some new deliberation; or else out of desire that necessity should
force the King to hearken and consent unto a peace. Now were the Princes slack
in making use of these advantages, which his connivence offered them; for the
Prince of Navarre commanding the Army in stead of the Admiral, (who being
recovered of his dangerous sickness, was now gathering strength) laid hold of
these opportunities with so much quickness and circumspection, that fighting
and skirmishing often, he still retired into places of advantage, and maintaing
his reputation with exceeding art, he made as if he would give their whole Army
Battle, but yet avoided the Encounter, supplying his want of force by wary
cunning resolutions. But as soon as the Queen Mother by many probable
conjectures, found that the Mareshal de Cosse of the one side, and the Mareshal
d' Anville on the other, concealed some secret purpose in their minds, Through
suspicion of the Mareshal de C^ss^ and d' Anville, the Treaty is renewed.
which was not hard for a Woman of so great wisdom to discover, having made her
Sons acquainted with it, she began to persuade them to lend their Ear to an
Accommodation; knowing, that through the perfidiousness of Men, and through the
interressed dependencies of great Ones, the War was managed with great danger.
This advice was much forwarded by the news out of Germany, where they began
already to raise Forces under Prince Casimir in favor of the Hugonots; besides
the scarcity, or rather necessity of money, whereof there was so great want,
that they knew not how to find any means to clear the arrears of the Swisses
and Italians, who were many pays behind; the ruins of the Countries and
people, the smalness of the Kings Revenue wasted almost to nothing, the
perpetual and general disquietness of mind, the abundance of blood which was
shed daily, were all no small inducements to the same, having made the War so
odious to every one, and the name of Peace so lovely and desirable. Wherefore
the King, the Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and the Cardinal of Lorain being
privately met together, resolved to follow the old and so often interrupted
counsels, and grant a Peace unto the Hugonots, to free the Kingdom of
strangers, and then by opportunity and artifices, to suppress the Heads of the
Faction, who once removed out of the way, there was no doubt but the common
people, who were only moved by their instigation, would yield of themselves,
and be reduced to perfect obedience. By these proceedings, they hoped to attain
those ends, which the falseness of the great Ones would not suffer to be
accomplished by force: a counsel often propounded, often received, but which
(through the difficulty of execution, or infidelity of those employed) had
always failed of the happy desired success.

Nor were the minds of the Princes averse from Peace, provided it were joined
with their liberty and security; for they saw themselves in all things reduced
to extremity; Count Volrade with his Reiters, who while they were in those
remoter Provinces had been quiet and obedient, now that they were upon the
confines of Germany, began to talk of leaving them: only the Admiral, constant
to his own intentions, dissuaded and avoided Peace as much as possibly he
could; but now being brought to necessity, he was fain to yield perforce to
those counsels, which were most opposite to his nature and resolution. Both
parties therefore consenting to embrace an Agreement, The Peace is concluded
and published, but full of jealousies.
and the same Beauvais and Teligny being sent again to Court, and with them
Monsieur de la Chassetiere the Prince of Navarre's Secretary, upon the eleventh
day of August the Peace was concluded, wherein besides Liberty of Conscience,
the public profession of the Reformed Religion, and pardon of all things past,
with the accustomed clauses inserted in the former Treaties with the Hugonots,
the King gave leave to the Princes and the Admiral to stay, for their security,
either at Rochelle, Cognac, la Charity, or Montauban, which places they
promised within the space of two years to give up to his Majesty's Obedience,
provided the Articles of Peace were observed, which were after published, and
registered in the Parliaments. The Princes and the Admiral, when at the confines
of Burgundy they had dismissed Count Volrade of Mansfield and the Reiters
(whereof few remained of so great a number) without ever going to the Court, or
so much as appearing in the Kings presence, went straight to Rochelle, not only
to consult with the Queen of Navarre, concerning matters that appertained to
their common interests, but also for their better security to dwell there, and
fortify themselves.

But the Peace being concluded and established, (though full of fears and
jealousies from the very first, as appeared plainly by the determination of the
Princes and the Admiral not to go to the Court) the engines framed in the mind
of the King and Queen, to bring the principal Hugonots into the net, began to
move, and to work that by policy, which so often attempted by the means of War,
had always proved fruitless and dangerous. And though these very stratagems had
been formerly put in practice, and still produced very little or no benefit,
either because treacherous Ministers had revealed them, or because the Queen
had carried her self with too much caution and respect, or because the Hugonot
Princes had always mistrusted her nature and designs; yet now they hoped a more
full and prosperous issue, because these secret practices were not managed by
any but such as were deeply engaged, and the King himself also lent a hand to
the work, who being now come to the age of two and twenty, of a resolute
nature, a spirit full of resentment, and above all, an absolute dissembler, did
of himself, though by the advice of his Mother, manage the business of the
Government; whereby matters proceeded not only with more efficacy and security,
but also with more wary and powerful counsels. The principal difficulty was, to
beget a confidence in the Hugonot Lords, and from those jealousies which
possessed them, to bring them to such an assurance as might make them venture to
come unarmed to the Court; for which cause (it being necessary to begin at the
end) the King and Queen Mother imparting their private thoughts only to the
Duke of Anjou, the Cardinal of Lorain, the Duke of Guise, and Alberto Gondi
Count of Retz, (who because greatly favored, and from a small fortune exalted
to a considerable estate, was very much trusted, and very faithful to them)
they dispatched strict Commissions to all Magistrates and Governors of
Provinces, for the executing and observing the Articles of Peace, in favor of
the Hugonots, to whom they sent as far as Rochelle, the Mareshal de Cosse, who
was now discovered to incline to their party, giving him not only authority to
interpret, and to make the Edict to be fulfilled, in those places where it was
doubtful and obscure, but also most ample command to assure the Princes and the
Admiral of the Kings favor, and sincere intentions to observe his promises
totally and inviolably: Nor were his actions different from his words; for the
King being minded to grant the Hugonots all possible satisfaction, with severe
Orders punished the Insurrections of the Catholics, (which in Provence,
Daulphine and Normandy, were many against the Hugonot Ministers) and in things
doubtful, inclined always to interpret the Edict graciously to their advantage:
on the other side, showing himself toward the Catholic party, either too
sharply severe, or of a disposition very little favorable. By which
demonstrations he not only settled the minds of the common people, but even the
Admiral himself, who was most obstinate in not believing, and firmly resolved
not to trust them, began to conceive some hope, that the King, weary of the
distractions and dangers of a Civil War, beginning now to govern of himself,
and not by the counsels of his Mother, might at last desire sincerely to
preserve and establish the Accommodation.

But to make the greater proof, and penetrate more deeply into the Kings
intentions, the Princes and the Admiral having conferred of many things with
the Mareshal de Cosse, dispatched to Court Teligny, Briquemaut, and Arnauld
Cavagnes a Senator of the Parliament of Toulouse, and a principal Counselor of
the Admirals, to represent their many grievances to the King, and chiefly to
insist, That the Cardinal of Lorain, and the Guises might be put from the
management of affairs of State; showing, that while matters of the Government
were swayed and administered by them, they could not believe the agreement of
peace would long continue; nor did right require, that coming to the Court,
where those Lords remained with so great authority, they should put their
safety into the hands of their bitter enemies. With these they joined many
other demands; That the High Chancellor de l' Hospital should be recalled to
the execution of his place: That the Marquess de Villars (whose election to be
Admiral was void by virtue of the Agreement) might not be Lieutenant to the
Prince of Navarre in the Government of Guienne; but that the Prince might have
leave to choose such a one as he liked, Villars being no way acceptable to him,
and most to be suspected by the Admiral of Chastillon: That the Prince of Conde
might have the Castle of Vallery restored to him, then in possession of the
Lords of Achon, who pretended a right unto it: That the Bastard of Navarre
might have the Bishopric of Cominges, already destined to one of the sons of
Monsieur de Lansac: That the Queen of Navarre might have free dominion in her
Country of Armagnac, where she might exercise her Jurisdiction without
control: Which things (especially the abasement of the House of Lorain) were
propounded not so much for any hope they had to obtain them, (being neither
included nor named in the Accommodation) as out of a desire, by the effects
thereof, to find out more clearly the intentions of the King, and the designs
of the Queen Mother.

These Lords arrived in a time when the Court was wholly taken up with the
Celebration of the Kings Nuptials; who desirous of issue, Charles the IX.
marries Isabella the daughter of Maximilian the Emperor, Anno 1570.
had taken to Wife the Lady Isabella, second daughter of the Emperor
Maximilian of Austria: and amongst those Feasts and Triumphs, these complaints,
rather than pretensions of the Hugonot Lords, were treated of; which were
favored with much efficacy by the Ambassadors of the German Princes, who being
come to congratulate the Kings Marriage, exhorted him earnestly to observe and
maintain peace, which their Princes had learned by experience could not be
kept, but by full Liberty of Conscience, and by a sincere and confident Union
between the Prince and all his Subjects. The King and Queen Mother knew very
well that these complaints and Propositions had no other ground nor end than to
discover their intentions, and to search into the bottom of their designs; and
therefore purposing to amuse the Hugonots by the same arts wherewith they
themselves were sounded, after some weak denial, not to give them greater
suspicion by a too easy willingness, they consented to many of the demands,
and artificially gave probable hopes of yielding to the rest. To the Queen of
Navarre they granted liberty of disposing all things in the County of Armagnac,
by Laws and Ordinances after her own mind. They for a while suspended the
Commission, and delayed the sending of the Marquess de Villars into Guienna,
reserving themselves to treat thereof more particularly with the Prince of
Navarre. They granted many profits and Ecclesiastical revenues unto the
Bastard; promised the restitution of Vallery to the Prince of Conde; but
excused themselves by the age of the Chancellor de l' Hospital, not thinking
his many years, and weak constitution, able to undergo such a weight and
multiplicity of business; and as concerning the Lords of the House of Lorain,
which was the highest and most difficult proposition, they showed a seeming
desire of consenting to the Hugonots, but with the opportunity of occasions
which time should offer, it not being just or reasonable, nor peradventure
safe, to deprive them all at once (without any cause) of those Honors and
Offices which they so long had possessed and executed. Notwithstanding the King
with effectual discourses, alleged to the Commissioners, that the Government
now consisted chiefly in himself: and though the Lords of the House of Lorain
enjoyed some Offices in the Court, yet he would order them according to his own
mind, nor did he suffer himself to be guided by any other person whatsoever;
wherefore the Princes of Bourbon, the Admiral, and the rest of their party,
needed not fear to suffer any prejudice by the authority of their Adversaries,
who though they continued at Court, did now live there as Subjects, not as
Masters, having no power to do any thing more than duty and reason permitted,
not daring to meddle with those matters to which they were not called.

With these Treaties on every side full of deep dissimulation, began the year
1571: in the beginning whereof the Commissioners returning to Rochelle, 1571.
carried back the Conditions they had obtained, and many interpretations of the
Edict touching the exercise of Religion, all favorable to their party;
wherewith the Princes being satisfied, and in part also the Queen of Navarre,
only the Admiral remained doubtful and incredulous till he saw more real
demonstrations. But the King and the Queen desirous once to accomplish their
determinations, resolved to make use of more powerful Engines, and to try more
secure efficacious means to induce the Hugonot Lords to come to Court:
wherefore having sent to Rochelle Monsieur de Byron, (who from Field-Mareshal,
was for his great valor made General of the Artillery) they propounded to the
Queen of Navarre (for the better establishment and confirmation of the ancient
Consanguinity and present Peace concluded with her) that the Lady Marguerite
the Kings Sister, should be given in Marriage to her Son the Prince of Navarre,
after which conjunction, there would be no more cause to doubt of the love and
concord between them, nor of those prerogatives and honors which as first
Prince of the Blood did justly belong unto him, nor would any body be so bold
as dare to interpose, or sow dissension between two so near Allies: They
propounded to the Admiral and the Count of Nassau, (who for his security
remained with the rest at Rochelle) that the King, desirous at last to make an
end of Civil Broils, seeing that by reason of the warlike nature of his people,
he could not so easily do it, without beginning at foreign War, to busy the
minds and employ the forces of his Soldiers, had resolved in revenge of those
many injuries received, to make War with the King of Spain against the
Low Countries, which were full of Commotions, and ready to receive the
Government of any other Prince, and therefore not knowing any more faithful
Counselors, or more proper instruments for that business, than the Admiral and
the Count of Nassau, (so principal a man banished out of those Countries) he
desired both of them to come to Court, that he might communicate his designs
with them, and take that resolution which by common consent should appear best
grounded and most profitable. The King and the Queen believed (as it was true)
that the hope of this War would work sensibly upon the Admiral, and therefore
gave order to treat more effectually upon that than any other particular. These
things were propounded very discreetly by Monsieur de Byron, who though in the
War by his great valor and industry, he had done much harm to the Hugonot
Faction; yet by his counsels in the Treaties of Peace, he had showed himself
very favorable to their interests, perhaps through a secret envy which many at
that time bore to the greatness of the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of
Lorain, who in that very conjuncture of time, having agreed secretly with the
King, seemed to be very ill satisfied with the conclusion of the Peace, and the
favors done to the Hugonots; but much more because the Duke of Guise, having
from his childhood conceived hopes to obtain in marriage the Lady Marguerite,
the Kings Sister, and to that end had long courted and served her, now saw her
destined to the Prince of Navarre his Enemy: and it was true, that the Duke of
Guise had been many years very much in love with the Lady Marguerite and no
less beloved by her again; whereupon it was commonly believed, that there was
not only a particular friendship between them, but that already they had with
reciprocal promises contracted themselves together secretly: but whether the
ardour of the Duke of Guise's affection were in part abated, (as it often
happens that men who are easily enamoured, as easily forget their passion, and
prove unconstant) or that governed by the counsel of his Uncle, he preferred
his own greatness, and the Admirals ruin, before all other considerations;
yielding at that time to the Kings desires, he consented privately that the
Lady Marguerite should marry the Prince of Navarre, but in outward appearance
showing himself infinitely offended and troubled at it, he increased the
satisfaction and confidence of the Hugonot Lords: and the King with the like
dissimulation (a quality wherein he much excelled) seemed many times
unsatisfied even with the Government of the Queen his Mother, of whom he knew
the Hugonots were not a little mistrustful, and much more did he seem
displeased with the Duke of Anjou his Brother; and to show an open desire by
some occasion to get him from the Court, he had moved the Admiral that by the
means of Monsieur de Beauvais his Brother (who had been Cardinal, and lived
then in England) there might be a treaty of marrriage begun, between the Duke
of Anjou and Queen Elizabeth, with certain Conditions belonging to the matter,
and exercise of Religion; which they did not so much with hope to conclude it,
(for the Queens disposition was sufficiently known to incline but little to the
yoke of Matrimony, and to the Government of a stranger Husband) as partly to
beget more assurance in the minds of the Hugonots; partly to show a desire of
putting the Duke of Anjou as far as possibly could be from the Government of
the Kingdom; partly also out of a suspicion that the Queen of England (the
minds of women being variable) might perchance agree to marry with the Prince
of Navarre, who was of her own Religion, and upon whom she might impose such
Laws and Conditions as she pleased, which would strengthen the Hugonot party
with new interests, and more powerful assistance; for which cause the Duke of
Anjou was propounded, that in case she resolved to marry, she might have
occasion to make choice of him, not only because he was a greater Prince, but
also of greater reputation, and riper years, and which best might suit with the
Queens inclinations of a person most exactly handsome. And because the Lady
Marguerite not considering the interests of State, but led wholly by her own
affection, refused any other Husband but the Duke of Guise, it happened that
one night when there was a Ball, he coming into the great Hall gallantly
attired, and adorned with exceeding rich Jewels, (the grace of all which
received an addition from his affable behavior and noble carriage) the King,
who stood at the door, (without showing any of his accustomed favors) asked
him, Whither he went? to which he answering, The Kings answer to the Duke of
Guise, The Duke of Guise resolves to marry Katherine de Cleves.
That he came to serve his Majesty; the King replied, That he had no need of
his service; which, whether it was spoken in jest or earnest, touched him so to
the quick, that the next day he resolved to take to Wife Katherine de Cleves,
Sister to the Duchess of Nevers, and Widow to the Prince of Porcien, who,
though of very noble Blood, and enriched with a plentiful Dowry, was in every
respect, but especially in beauty, much inferior to the Kings Sister: but his
ambition of governing, and desire to revenge his Fathers death, the persuasions
of his Uncle, and chiefly fear to offend the King, were more powerful with him
than any other considerations whatsoever.

These practices were carried with so much efficacy and dissimulation, that not
only most part of the Hugonot Lords were persuaded of their reality, but the
Pope himself began to grow jealous of them; for the King and the Queen his
Mother, for fear they should be discovered, had not imparted to any body those
their so secret counsels: whereupon the Pope, doubtful of their proceedings,
did not only deny to give a Dispensation for the Marriage between the Prince of
Navarre and the Kings Sister, but also sent Commission to his Nephew Cardinal
Alessandrino, then his Legate in Spain, to go with all possible speed to the
Court of France, to break the Treaty of that Match, and to persuade the King to
renew the War with the Hugonots. Nor was King Philip without suspicion of the
French designs; for he saw that many ships rigged and manned in the port of
Rochel, the King allowing, or not opposing it, made incursions into the Indies,
and the coasts of Spain; he perceived also a gathering together of Soldiers
about the confines of Picardy; who under Hugonot Captains, gave out that they
were to go into the Low Countries to assist the Prince of Orange, with the
other Lords and people there up in Arms; for which causes, besides having made
complaint at the Court of France, whereto he only got ambiguous general
answers; he exhorted the Legate Alessandrino to be exceeding careful to sound
and discover the intentions of the King of France. The Duke of Savoy grows
suspicious of the Admiral for having against his will married Madam d'
Antramont, a Savoyard.
But the Duke of Savoy was in greater trouble: for besides the same jealousies
which gave suspicion to the others, it fell out about that time, that the
Admiral being left a Widower by the death of Charlotte de la Val his first
Wife, married Madam d' Antramont, a very rich Lady of his Country, who contrary
to the Dukes will and command, was gone to Rochel to consummate the Marriage,
desirous (as she said) to be second Martia of that second Cato: for which
reason the Duke greatly feared, lest the Admiral, so great and politic a
Contriver, should by help of the nearness of Geneva, kindle the same fire in
Savoy that he had done in the Kingdom of France.

But these respects slackened not the proceedings, nor interrupted the counsels
of the King and Queen Mother, being assured that the conclusion would at last
satisfy all the world of their intentions: Wherefore, persevering in their
resolution they had taken, they purposed to go to Blois, that being in a place
so much nearer, they might more conveniently treat with the Princes that were
at Rochel, amongst whom were various opinions; for Count Lodowick (as banished
men are commonly inclined to hope, and as one who had less offended, and was
less engaged to the King than any of the rest) was willing to go to Court, to
solicit and resolve upon the War which the King made show to desire against
the Spaniards: but the Queen of Navarre, and the Admiral, who by their
consciousness of things past, measured their prognostics, of the future, were
still averse and doubtful; neither willingly consenting to the Princes
Marriage, nor to the journey to Court. Wherefore Count Lodowick called, and
encouraged by the King, took a resolution to go thither alone, but very
privately, to negotiate his own business by himself, to settle a safe coming
for the rest, and to ripen those designs which with so much approbation he
nourished in his mind, of the Hugonots desired enterprise against Flanders.
Wherefore departing from Rochel with only two in his company, giving out that
he went to his Brother the Prince of Orange, when he was a few miles distant
from the Town, he took post, and arrived by night secretly at the Court: where
being received with many demonstrations of favor and affection, he treated
confidently with the King himself, not assisted by any of his Council,
concerning the propositions of his party; for Charles, the better to increase a
confidence in them, continuing to make show of governing his Kingdom by
counsels very different from those which his Mother had followed during his
minority. The conclusions of which meeting were, That the Prince of Navarre
should have the Lady Marguerite in Marriage, with 400000 Ducats; whereof
300000 should be paid by the King, and sufficient security given for them; the
rest to be paid by the Queen his Mother, and the Dukes of Anjou and Alencon his
Brothers; That the Low Country design against the Spaniards, should be put in
practice with all speed; in which War Count Lodowick should go before, and
order matters with those that were banished out of Flanders, and the Admiral
should be Captain General of the enterprise; concerning which consultations, he
was presently to come to Court, having liberty for the guard of his Person to
keep about him fifty Gentlemen, that might wear all kinds of arms, even in the
City of Paris, or wheresoever else the Court should be; and that to gratify
Count Lodowick, the Kings Garrison and Government should be drawn out of the
City of Orange, and left free to the Prince his Brother, who might absolutely
dispose of it and his Subjects as he pleased, the King not meddling in the
Government or Superiority to which he had pretended; which things, with many
other of less moment, being granted and established, Count Lodowick returned to
Rochel to persuade the Queen of Navarre and the Admiral to come to Court; and
the King departing from Blois, went into the Countries about Paris, where
feigning only to intend hunting, and other youthful pleasures, he gave time
leave to ripen the counsels which had been taken to procure that meeting; for
the facilitating whereof, the Cardinal of Lorain, the Duke of Guise, and his
Brothers, seeming angry and troubled for the honors and favors which the King
so liberally granted to all those of the Hugonot Faction, left the Court; and
the King, either showing himself unsatisfied with them, or little to regard
them and their merits; received nearer to his person, and into a more eminent
degree of managing the affairs of State, the Mareshals of Momorancy and Cosse;
both partial to, and by nearness of blood and friendship interessed with the
Princes and the Admiral: wherefore the Duke of Montpensier, who had newly
married one of the Duke of Guise's Sisters, showing the same dislike with the
rest of the kindred, was also gone from Court, as likewise the Prince of
Daulphine his Son.

But about that time the Kings designs which with so much care and diligence
had been kept secret, were like unexpectedly to have been discovered. The Duke
of Anjou did much favor, and was very familiar with Monsieur de Ligneroles, a
young Gentleman of very acute wit, and high spirit, who often discoursing
intimately with the Duke of the present state of affairs, induced him at last
to impart the Kings most secret designs to him; partly, because he was most
confident of his fidelity; partly, to hear his opinion upon so important a
business, and to receive his advice and counsel in that, as he was wont in many
other things: Ligneroles by means of his favor being grown into such esteem,
that the Queen Mother, the Duke of Guise, and even the King himself made great
account of his wit and courage. He being one day in the Chamber with the King,
who much displeased at the high insolent demands of some of the Hugonot Lords
after he had dismissed them with show of favor, letting loose his anger, and
laying aside dissimulation, showed some tokens of being extremely offended;
either moved with ambition to appear not ignorant of the nearest secrets, or
with the lightness incident to youth, which often over-shoots discretion, told
the King in his ear, that his Majesty ought to quiet his mind with patience,
and laugh at their insolence and temerity; for within a few days, by that
meeting which was almost ripe, he would have brought them all into the net, and
punished them at his own pleasure: with which words the Kings mind being struck
in the most tender sensible part, he made show not to understand his meaning,
and retired into his private lodgings; where, full of anger, grief and trouble,
he sent to call the Count de Retz, thinking that he, who was likewise familiar
with Ligneroles, had revealed this secret to him; and with sharp injurious
words reproached him with the honors and benefits he had conferred upon him,
threatening to take vengeance on that perfidiousness, wherewith forgetful of so
great favors, he had betrayed him, and discovered his most secret intentions;
but the Count constantly denying it, and offering to be shut up in prison till
the truth were known, he called the Queen Mother, and complained grievously to
her, that she had made known those thoughts which he with such patience, and
constraint of his own mind, forcing his nature, had so long dissembled: to
which words the Queen smiling answered, That she needed not to learn the art of
secrecy from him, and that he should look whether by his own impatience he had
not discovered something of that, which he thought to be revealed by others*
the King (as he was exceeding choleric) fretting and storming very
impatiently, sent at last for the Duke of Anjou; who, without further urging,
confessed freely, that he had imparted the business to Ligneroles, but withal
assured them they needed not fear, that he would ever open his lips to discover
so weighty a secret. No more he shall not, answered the King for I will take
order that he shall be dispatched before he have time to publish it. The Duke
of Anjou either not daring to oppose that so sudden, resolute determination, or
else angry at the lightness of Ligneroles, and for fear of the worst not caring
to divert it; the King sent to call George de Villequier Viscount of Guerchy,
who (as Masters are seldom ignorant how their Servants stand affected) he knew
bear a secret emulous hatred to Ligneroles, Ligneroles killed by the Kings
command for showing that he knew that which the King desired keep secret.
and commanded him by all means to endeavor the taking away of his life that
very day; with which resolution the King presently taking horse, with the Duke
of Anjou, as he often used to do without staying for any attendants, went to
hunt in the fields and woods not far off; which the Courtiers no sooner heard,
but as fast as their horses could be brought, they followed severally straggling
after the cry of the Hounds, and Ligneroles by their example instantly did the
same; but the Viscount de la Guerchy and Count Charles of Mansfield, who was
privy to his purpose, mounted upon fiery unquiet horses, hunted in the same
company with Ligneroles, and drew near under color of talking and discoursing
with him; which while he endeavored to avoid, not being able to keep his horse
in order among theirs that was so quarrelsom and unruly; and while they
persisted still following him as it were in sport, they presently came to high
language, and then to challenges; whereupon the Viscount suddenly drawing his
sword, and Count Charles at the same instant, they fell so furiously upon him,
that before he could be rescued by those that came to help him, they left him
dead upon the place; which being come to the Kings knowledge, with great show
of anger and trouble, he caused them both to be taken and imprisoned in the
Palace; from whence in process of time, by the intercession of Monsieur d'
Angoulesme, the Kings Bastard-brother, and by particular grace and favor they
were after set at liberty.

This business being passed over, which for a while had troubled the whole
Court, the next was to overcome the obstinacy of the Lady Marguerite, who more
fixed than ever to her former thoughts, denied now absolutely to marry at all,
since she was forbidden to take the Duke of Guise; to which the Popes continued
denial of a dispensation being added, the conclusion of that marriage remained
still uncertain. The Queen Mother, by the means of the Bishop of Salviati the
Popes Nuncio, to whom she was near allied, endeavored to persuade them at
Rome, that the effecting of that match would conclude to the good of the
Catholic Religion; for, to draw the Prince of Navarre into so near a relation
and confidence with the King, would be an occasion that not only he being
young, and easy to be won to better opinions, would come into the bosom of the
Church; but also infinite others; part moved by his example; and part out of
fear to lose so considerable a prop as the first Prince of the Blood, would do
the like; that they often had tried in vain to overcome the Hugonots with
sharpness and violence; therefore it was now fit to try some gentle remedies.
But when they saw the Popes mind could not be changed by persuasions, they
began to try if they could alter it by neglect; the King and the Queen saying
openly, That being necessitated to make a match with one of another Religion,
they would do it howsoever, without caring for any dispensation; nor would they
suffer the peace and quietness of their Kingdom to be disturbed, and by the
Popes obstinacy involved in the former wars, dangers and inconveniences: Which
things confirming the assurance and boldness of the Hugonots, the Admiral in
the end persuaded by Count Lodowick of Nassau, and the counsels of Teligny his
Son-in-law, and of Cavagnes, a man great in his esteem; but much more by the
fear of being prevented by the Queen of Navarre and the Princes, who already
were setting things in order to go to Court, took his journey with a great
train of his Dependants, The Admiral after so many wars with the King,
prostrates himself at his feet, and is graciously received
and came unto the King, before whom humbly bowing himself, and kneeling down
in token of greater humility, he was received with as great demonstrations of
love and affection. It was very remarkable, that the Admiral, who was grown old
in ambitious thoughts, and high pretensions, now conscious of the errors he
had committed, should in the Theater of all France, and in the very presence of
his own principal adherents, bring himself to so public a penance as to be
seen with tears in his eyes, kneeling at the feet of that King which in times
past he had so heinously offended and despised. But it was much more
remarkable, that a King so young, and of so hasty choleric a nature, seeing
the man before him who so often had brought the power of his Crown and Kingdom
to such doubtful hazards, should know so perfectly how to dissemble, that
calling him Father, and lifting him up with his own hand, he made all the World
believe he was heartily and sincerely reconciled to him.

After these great demonstrations of favor, followed effects correspondent to
them; for the King commanded 100000 Franks, which amount to ten thousand pounds
sterling, to be paid him presently out of the Treasury, to make up those
particular losses which he had suffered during the late Wars; and assigned him
an Annuity of those Ecclesiastical Revenues which belonged to the Cardinal his
Brother, who died in England a little before that time; and gave him all his
rich and costly household stuff, which, as the goods of a Criminal, had lately
been confiscate: And though all other Admirals in Council and public
Ceremonies had ever given place to the Mareshals of France; yet, for his
greater honor, it was the Kings pleasure that he should sit next Monsieur de
Momorancy, who was the first Mareshal, and above all the rest. To Teligny,
Cavagnes, and to all his dependants and followers, the King voluntarily did
many favors; and at Councils, in his own lodgings, and abroad in public he
was still encompassed by many of them. All graces and favors were granted by
their intercession, nor was there any thing so difficult, which the Admiral
with a word might not bring to a speedy and happy issue; which was proved in
the person of Villandry, a young Gentleman, who playing with the King, had so
exceedingly offended him, that he was therefore condemned to die; for having
denied his pardon to the Queen Mother, the Queen his Wife, the Duke of Anjou,
and the Duke of Montpensier, at the first word of the Admiral he was set at
liberty, and restored to his former degree of familiarity in the Court. With
this assurance, and to increase it the more, the enterprise of Flanders was
presently set on foot; for the effecting whereof, the Mareshal of Momorancy was
sent into England, to treat of a reciprocal confederacy with the Queen; and the
Count of Schombergh into Germany to exhort the Protestant Princes to accept
pensions, and to unite themselves with the Crown of France against the
Spaniards. These things resolved on, which all were managed by the Admirals
advice and direction, he with the Kings leave went to Chastillon to order his
private affairs, and so return to Court to perfect matters already agreed upon.

About this time, being the beginning of the Year 1572. arrived the Legate
Alessandrino, to hinder the progress of these resolutions, 1572.
which tended manifestly not only to the ruin of the Spaniards, then employed
for the defense of Christendom, in War by Sea against the Turk; but much more
to the destruction of the Catholic Religion, and the establishment of the
Hugonots. Great were the contestations that passed in this interview* for on
the one side, the Legates reasons were home and evident; and on the other side,
the Kings answers were so obscure and ambiguous, that the business seemed not
possible to be determined, without alienating his mind utterly from the Pope;
to whom it appeared most intolerable, that the most Christian King, who he
hoped (mindful of so great assistance received from him) would have favored
the Christian League now by making an unseasonable War against the King of
Spain, The King dissembles so with the Hugonots, that he is suspected by
stranger Princes.
should be an occasion of breaking it, and a means of giving so great
opportunities to the common Enemy, of doing mischief to all Christendom: But it
seemed no less strange unto him, that so much money having been spent, and so
much blood shed of late years to suppress the Calvinist party, the King now
perverting all his old determinations, should put all good Catholics away from
him, and of a sudden give himself a prey to the Hugonots, treating Leagues and
Confederacies with foreign Princes excommunicated by the Apostolic Sea, to the
damage and prejudice of those that were most firm and affectionate to the
Romish Religion. Nor was he at all satisfied by the Kings answers; who
sometimes urging the weak and troublesome estate of his Kingdom, excused the
peace concluded with the Hugonots; sometimes with obscure words that might
receive a double interpretation, affirmatively promised, that at last all
should end to the satisfaction of the Pope, and the benefit of the Catholic
Religion; which nothing abated the doubtfulness of the Legates mind, seeing his
words and actions so different. Yet ceased not the King with most effectual
demonstrations to try all means possible to content him, honoring him in
public, Cardinal Alessandrino Legate to Pius Quintus, refuses a rich jewel
presented to him by the Kings own hand.
making much of him in private, using all manner of art and industry, even to
the presenting him a wonderful rich Jewel with his own hands; which the
Cardinal refused to accept, saying, That by his Majesty's unexpected falling
from the Zeal of the Catholic Religion, all his most valued and precious
Jewels were no more than dirt in the estimation of all good Catholics: the
sharpness of which words, and many other open signs of distaste, were not a
little resented by the King, knowing the bottom of his own intentions. Nor
could this so hard a knot have been unloosed without a manifest breach,
especially because the dispensation was absolutely denied, had it not been for
the news of the Popes desperate sickness, for which cause the Legate departing
suddenly, businesses remained still uncertain, and undetermined.

Pius Quintus being dead, about the latter end of April, Gregory the
Thirteenth, Gregory the 13 succeeding Pius Quin^us, grants a Dispensation^
for the marriage between the Prince of Navarre and the Kings Sister.
of a more mild easy nature, succeeded in the Chair; who in the beginning of
his Papacy, persuaded by the Cardinal of Lorain, (who partly to seem
discontented at the Court of France; partly, to manage the present affairs with
more secrecy, was gone to Rome) granted the Bull of dispensation; but in such
form as did not then satisfy the Cardinal of Bourbon, and after brought in
question the validity of the Contract: but the King and Queen not looking so
narrowly to the Dispensation, having the Popes consent in what manner soever it
were, solicited now to bring it to a conclusion; for the Lady Marguerite,
partly by her Mothers persuasions, partly by her Brothers threatenings, partly
not to bring her honor in question, which already was something doubtfully
spoken of; though she gave no absolute consent, yet denied no more so openly to
marry the Prince of Navarre.

But all these practices being ripe, in the beginning of June the Queen of
Navarre comes to Paris, received with so much joy of the whole Court, that
France had not seen a day of greater rejoicing in many years. Two days after
arrived the Prince of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, accompanied with Count
Lodowick, the Count de la Roch-fou-cault, and all the Trains of the Princes,
being the chief Commanders, Cavaliers and Gentlemen that had held the Hugonot
party: among which, Piles, Briquemaut, and Pluvialt, Colonels, who in the
course of that War had by their Valor acquired so much glory and renown; the
Sieur de Guerchy, he that defended Sanserre, the Marquess de Renel, the Sieurs
de Noue, de Colombiere, and Lavardin, famous Commanders of Horse, and a great
many other men of quality and reputation.

The League Offensive and Defensive was already concluded with the Queen of
England; Prince Casimir and William his Brother, both Sons of the Elector
Palatine of the Rhine, were already persuaded to receive pensions from the
King, when the Admiral, forgetting all his former jealousies, full of
incredible pride and intolerable pretensions, returned to Court with a great
train of his adherents; and to put the King upon a necessity of making War with
the Spaniard, even against his will, he so ordered the matter, that Count
Lodowick, and the Sieurs de Genlis, and de la Noue, who were gotten to the
confines of Picardy, The Admiral causes the Hugonots to surprise the City of
Mons in Heinault in Flanders, to force the King to a War with Spain: he is
displeased, but dissembles it.
where a great many Hugonot Gentlemen and Soldiers were privately drawn
together, suddenly surprised the City of Mons in the County of Heinault, a
principal place, and of very great importance to the Provinces of Flanders;
which rashness, though it inwardly much troubled the Kings mind, yet with
admirable patience seeming very well pleased with, he thereby took occasion
presently to dispatch Philippo Strozzi with a great many old Companies into
places near about Rochel, under pretense of imbarking them in Ships, that were
made ready in that Port, to pass them over to those coasts of the Low Countries
which were held by the Confederates of Flanders; but indeed they were to be
ready upon all occasions to surprise and possess themselves of that City, as
soon as the present designs were brought to maturity: Thus with cunning
policies they went deluding the subtilties of the Admiral, who held in the
highest esteem, as Arbitrator of the Court and Government, seemed alone to rule
the Genius, and direct the will of the King of France.

And because to begin a War of so great moment, it appeared necessary to take
away the obstacle of civil discords, the King earnestly entreated the Admiral,
that the enmities between him and the House of Lorain, might by some means or
other be accommodated; which was propounded for no other end, but because the
help of the Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Aumale, and the forces of the
Catholic party were necessary for the execution of the designs that were in
agitation; they sought that color to bring them to the Court without suspicion
of the Hugonots. Under this pretense the Lords of the House of Lorain being
come to Paris with all the train of their Faction; The Lords ^f the House of
Lorain and the Admiral are seemingly made friends before the King.
they promised, as also did the Admiral, in the presence of the King, that they
would no more offend one another, referring all their differences either to his
Majesty's arbitrament, or to the opportunity of other times, when the King and
his Council should think fit: by which ambiguous promises, the inveterate
hatred and enmity which had so many years continued between them, and which was
the original cause of all the present miseries and troubles, seemed rather
smothered for a time, than utterly extinguished.

But now matters were not only brought to the point intended, but the execution
of them could no longer be deferred; for on the one side the Ambassador of the
Catholic King after the taking of Mons, had not only left the Court, but was
also gone out of the Kingdom: The War against the Spaniards breaks out against
the Kings will
and on the other side, the Hugonots without expecting further order or
Commission, tumultuously ran to the aid of their adherents, with too great
boldness, and too dangerous commotions; whereby, contrary to the Kings
intentions, the War with the Spaniards was kindled in the Confine of his
Kingdom.

The Queen of Navarre is poisoned with a pair of gloves.
The first thunderbolt of so great a tempest fell upon the Queen of Navarre; who
being a Woman and a Queen, they thought fittest to take her away by poison,
administered as was reported in the perfume or trimming of a pair of Gloves; but
in such secret manner, and in such just proportion, that having worn them a
while, a violent Fever seized upon her, which ended her life within four days.
She was a Lady of a most high spirit and invincible courage, much above the
condition of the female sex; by which virtues she not only bore up the degree
and estimation of a Queen, though she had no Kingdom; but assaulted by the
persecutions of so many, and so powerful Enemies, she sustained the War most
undauntedly; and finally, in the greatest dangers, and most adverse fortune of
her party, she built up that greatness of her Son, from whence, as from the
first root, in after years sprung forth the exaltation of his State, and the
renowned glory and immortality of his Name; qualities (besides her chastity and
magnificence) worthy eternal praise, if (thinking it lawful for her, without
the help of learning to search into, and expound the deepest mysteries in
Divinity) she had not obstinately persisted in the opinions of Calvinism. Queen
Jane being dead, because the Hugonots began to suspect something by that so
unexpected accident, the King knowing that the poison had only wrought upon her
brain, caused the body to be cut up in open view, the parts whereof being all
very sound, the head, under color of respect, was left untouched, and the
testimony of skilful Physicians divulged, that through the malignity of her
Fever she died of a Natural Death.

After her Funeral, her Son assumed the Arms and Title of King of Navarre; The
Prince of Navarre assumes the title of King.
but his Marriage with the Kings Sister was deferred for a few days, not to
mingle joy unseasonably with that grief for which the King himself and the
whole Court had put on mourning; about which time the Citizens of Rochel
(constant in not trusting any body, not willing to return unto the Kings
obedience, but fortifying continually, and even in the midst of Peace providing
all things necessary for War) persuaded the Prince and the Admiral to retire
from the Court: which exhortations, as well of the Rochellers, as those of
Geneva, and others of that party, were more earnestly reiterated after the
Queen of Navarre's death; every one thinking that so sudden an accident was the
unhappy omen of an unfortunate conclusion. But the Admiral in his present
felicity having utterly forgot his ancient Maxims, and wholly laid aside his
former diffidence; either believing that by his wisdom he had really gotten the
Kings favor, and eclipsed the credit of all others; or deluded by the cunning
dissimulations of the Court; or else drawn by the hidden power of Fate,
presumed so much upon himself and his own authority, and was so infinitely
pleased with the thoughts of the enterprise of Flanders, that he was far from
doubting any sinister event; but despising all others, and even the King also,
he esteemed himself the Oracle of France, and believed himself with small pains
able to overturn all the attempts and practices of his enemies; and if any of
his friends put him in mind of the Guises being at Court with so great a train,
and the number of Ships of War and Soldiers which were made ready by Strozzi,
and the Baron de la Guard about Rochel; he answered, Those preparations were
made by his advice, to make incursions upon the coasts of Flanders; and the
presence of the Guises at the Marriage, was only to give them some little
satisfaction, being at one instant deprived of the Kings favor, and the
management of affairs of State; that they should neither fear nor doubt, for
his wisdom and counsel had at last overcome all the malice of his Enemies; and
now that he had once set foot in the counsels, he was sure his decrees should
be the guide and rule of the whole Government for the time to come: with which
conceit he was so puffed up, that growing to an unmeasurable height of pride,
he spoke so boastingly of himself, that he became almost intolerable to his
nearest and most partial friends; and was often heard to say, that neither
Alexander the Great, The Admiral prefers himself before Julius Caesar and
Alexander the Great.
nor Julius Caesar could be compared to him; for both of them had always had
favorable and prosperous success; but he having lost four Battles, had in
spite and to the shame of ill fortune, by his valor and policy, always risen
again more dreadful and terrible to his Enemies: and lastly, when all men
thought he had no way left to save his life, but to flee, and wander about the
world, he had managed his affairs so well, as brought his Enemies to a
necessity, not only of making peace with him, but also of granting him
conditions more proper for a Conqueror, than one that was overcome. These
discourses were not approved by some, and amongst others, Langoiran, who
resolved to be gone; and when he took his leave, being asked by the Admiral why
he went; I go (said he) because I see you too much made on, and I had rather
save my self with fools, than perish with those that are too wise.

In the interim, the time appointed for the marriage being come, it was
celebrated the eighteenth day of August in this manner: The King of Navarre,
and the Lady Marguerite led by the Cardinal of Bourbon, and accompanied by the
King and the whole Court, went to Nostre-Dame, the Cathedral Church of Paris;
where having left the Lady Marguerite kneeling at the Altar, (the Cloth of
state being there set up) the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the
Admiral, and the other Hugonot Lords went out of the Church, that they might
not be present at Mass; which being ended, and they recalled by the Mareshal d'
Anville, the Marriage was celebrated by the Cardinal of Bourbon; The Lady
Marguerite being asked if she would have the King of Navarre for her Husband,
answered not; but being urged by the King, bowed her head.
in which many observed, that the Lady Marguerite being asked if she would take
the King of Navarre to be her Husband, answered not one word; but the King her
Brother having with his hand made her yield and bow down her head, it was
reported that she showed her consent by that action; though she both before and
after, when she could speak freely, declared always, that not only to be
deprived of the Duke of Guise, to whom she had formerly engaged her promise,
but also to make his capital Enemy her Husband, were things wherewith she could
not possibly bring her mind to be contented. But the King of Navarre, either
through the goodness of his disposition, much liker to his Fathers candor,
than the hardened pertinacy of his Mother; or else the condition of the times
counselling him to dissemble, not only carried himself with infinite reverence
and respect toward the Queen his Wives Mother, and the King his
Brother-in-Law; but with a great deal of nobleness and discretion bore also
with the humors and frowardness of his Wife, showing himself so liberal and
courteous to every one, and so full of thoughts of honor worthy the greatness
of his birth, that stopping the mouth of Envy, which had so long been open
against the Princes of the Blood, his Name formerly so detested at the Court,
was now at last become popular: which noble demeanor spreading far abroad, and
winning the minds of the King and the Queen Mother, who besides the powerful
tie of Blood, conceived daily greater hopes of his goodness and moderation, was
likewise the cause that wrought them to a resolution of sparing his life and
the Prince of Conde's; as well not to imbrue their hands in the shedding of the
Blood Royal, (so venerable to the French Nation) as also for the assured hopes,
that being taken out of the company, and separated from the conversation of
factious men, they might prove as great pillars to uphold the Royal Family for
the future, as in times past they had been hindrances to the peace and quiet
of the Kingdom: Thus, either because of their ingenuity, or because the hidden
will of Heaven had so decreed, a resolution was taken to spare the lives of the
Princes of the Blood; and to deliver them from the counsels and government of
the Admiral, the King commanded the Duke of Guise that the intended designs
should be put in execution.

The King takes order with the Duke of Guise to have the designs put in
execution.
The Duke of Guise was come to Court, with the Duke of Aumale his Uncle, the
Duke of Nemours his Father-in-Law, the Duke d' Elbeuf his Cosen, and the Dukes
of Nevers and Montpensier his Brothers-in-Law, and a great company of Barons
and Knights that held of the Catholic party, whereof by the consent of all he
had the title of Prince, by long succession derived from his Father, and
confirmed by the eminent authority of the Cardinal of Lorain. In the number of
his followers, were many Commanders and Gentlemen of diverse Nations, who living
upon his pensions liberally bestowed upon them, were ready upon all occasions,
though with the danger of their lives, to execute whatsoever he commanded.
Wherefore having in order to the secret designs, received liberty by the Kings
Commission to take away the life of the Admiral, he put those arts in practice
which the other was suspected to have used before, in causing the death of his
Father, and committed the business to one Maurevell, (the same who had slain
Monsieur de Muy at the siege of Niort) giving him charge to take away his life
as he came from Court, not at all suspecting any such matter. Maurevell having
received this order, and being of a nature and inclination ready enough to put
it in execution, found out a little house near the Louvre, which with some
others thereabouts was appointed for the Dukes Family, and wherein no body else
lodged; and having locked himself up in a lower room, and covered the Iron-bars
of the Window with an old Cloak, he lay there with great secrecy and patience,
watching his time to perform what he had undertaken; nor had he waited above
three days, when the Admiral coming out of the Court in the morning, on the 20
day of August, to return to his own house, whilst, followed by his servants, he
walked softly on foot to read a certain paper, he had opportunity to shoot him
with a brace of Bullets, one of which took off the forefinger of his right
hand, and the other wounded him grievously near the left elbow. The Admiral
feeling himself shot, knew the Window whence it came, Maurevell shoots the
Admiral in the left elbow, and saves himself by flight.
and showing it to his followers, the door was presently broken open, and the
house searched, wherein they could find no body but a little Boy; for Maurevell
escaping out at a backdoor, took an horse which he had appointed to be there
ready for him, and was already fled out at the Port St. Antoine; so that the
Boy neither knowing the Name of him that had done the deed, nor the way he
took, it was not possible to have any certainty concerning him at that time.
The news of this accident was brought to the King while he was playing with the
Duke of Guise at Tennis in the Court of the Louvre, and feigning himself
exceedingly troubled at it, he presently left play, and departed, threatening
and protesting aloud, that he would inflict most severe punishment upon those
disturbers of his quiet, who durst presume to commit so heinous a crime even at
the gates of his Royal Palace. He commanded all the City gates to be shut,
except two only for the bringing in of provisions, at which very careful guards
were placed; and gave order that they should be kept with the greatest
strictness that might be, pretending left the murderer should make escape; but
the truth was, lest any of that party should get out and save themselves by
flight. The apprehension they had of the fierceness, wisdom and power of the
Admiral, was peradventure the cause that they began with him; the Council
doubting, that if he were alive, and in health, he would find some means for
the safety of himself and of the rest of his Faction: but the principal motive
that induced them to do so, was the opinion of Alberto Gondi Count of Retz, who
at the consultation about that business, said, he was really of opinion, that
to kill all the Hugonots together was both very easy, and very just; but he
desired also that the execution might appear to carry some handsome color; that
causing the Admiral to be killed alone, every one would believe it was done
only by the Lords of Lorain; whereat the Hugonots, according to their custom,
would certainly be enraged, and break out into some uproar against the Guises,
to whose assistance the Parisians, and all the Catholic party running
together, the Hugonots would be shut up in the net, and utterly suppressed; and
so mere chance should effect their designs, and the matter be imputed to
private enmities, and not to the public determinations of the State. But
however it were, the King, The King and the Queen Mother visit the Admiral, and
under pretense of defending him, set strict guards upon his house.
who still seemed very much afflicted, having dined in great haste, went with
the Queen Mother and the Duke of Anjou to visit the Admiral; to whose lodgings
were already come the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the Mareshal d'
Anville, and all the chief of the Hugonot Faction: There the Admiral, finding
that he was brought into a very ill condition by his wound, which had broken
the bone, and torn all his elbow; as also because he knew he was in the power
of his Enemies, asked the King leave that he might retire to Chastillon; where,
free from the tumults and dangers of Paris, a City ill-affected to him, and
depending upon his Enemies, he might be more safely and speedily cured: but the
King complaining, and taking it unkindly, that he should not think himself safe
in his protection, encouraged him, and (the Physicians joining in the same
advice) persuaded him not to take such a journey, for fear the motion should
cause some more dangerous accident, and entreated him to take his rest quietly
without suspicion. To which words the Admiral replying, That he doubted not of
his Majesty's love and favor, but his fear for himself and his friends was of
the insurrections of the Parisians: the King seeming careful and desirous to
secure him, commanded that al^ his chief dependants should be lodged near the
house where he lay, to the end they might be more safe, and more united to
defend themselves from the tumults of the people; and gave order to the Duke of
Anjou, that drawing the Regiment of his guards into the City, he should appoint
a Company for the safety of the Admiral and those of his party: who presently
obeying the Kings Command, drew in all the guards armed; and to watch that
house and quarter where the Hugonots were lodged together, he chose Monsieur de
Cossens with his Company, a man who, besides his fidelity to the King, depended
nearly on the Guises Faction. The Admiral seeing he could not possibly get
away, recommended his affairs to the trust and protection of the King, and with
his accustomed Spirit (all his followers raging on every side) demanded justice
of the insolence committed against him; to which both the King and Queen having
answered with great signs of reality, and extreme resentment for the accident
that had befallen him, they returned to the Louvre, committing the care and
custody of the City of Paris to the Duke of Anjou.

That night and the next day were spent in consultations on both sides; for the
Hugonots coming all about the Admirals Bed, debated not only about the means of
securing themselves from the present danger; but being stirred up with anger,
and exasperated with the injury, plotted how to renew the War without delay: in
which deliberations, though some exhorted their Confederates to rely upon the
Kings promises, yet the Visdame of Chartres spoke so earnestly against it, that
they determined whatsoever came of it, to remove the Admiral out of Paris, and
retire together to Chastillon. Teligny being confident he should get the Kings
leave; and the rest offering, in case it were denied, to carry him out of the
City by force; resolving afterward unanimously to take up Arms, and never to
lay them down till the Catholic party were utterly destroyed, and the House of
Lorain quite rooted out; every one speaking so fiercely in those tumultuous
consultations, that they neither spared the King, the Queen Mother, the Duke of
Anjou, nor the King of Navarre himself, whom already they reputed for their
Enemy; which being discovered by means of the accustomed intelligence, was a
spur to hasten the intended designs, and gave a more specious color to those
excuses that were after framed for the justification of them.

But when the Kings Council saw that the Hugonots venting their fury only in
words, proceeded not to any action that could give occasion to the
Insurrection; they resolved to lose no longer time, but presently to bring the
suppression of them to a period; yet were there very great controversies about
the execution; for the Duke of Guise was urgent to have the King of Navarre and
the Prince of Conde slain with the rest of the Hugonots; but the Queen Mother,
and all the rest abhorred to imbrue their hands in the Blood Royal, it seeming
(to them) a thing too cruel, too abominable, and to be detested in all Ages,
that two young Princes of the Royal Family, in the flower of their age, in the
embraces of their dearest Wives, and under the protection of so near and so
late a conjunction, should be so miserably murdered: besides, they hoped
confidently, that the Princes, united now by so straight a bond of
consanguinity, would be sincerely reduced to the Kings obedience, and to the
profession of the Catholic Faith, as soon as they should be freed from the
Government of the Admiral, and deprived of the company of their factious
fomenters, to which opinion the King inclining, who was more then indifferently
affectionate to the virtue of the King of Navarre, in the next place was
debated whether amongst the other Hugonots they should comprehend the Mareshal
d' Anville and his Brothers, who professing the Catholic Religion, were both
by blood and interest nearly united to the Admirals Faction. In this also the
result inclined to mercy; as well to spare the effusion of more blood, which
was the endeavor of many; as also because the Mareshal de Momorancy their
eldest Brother, and he that was most strictly united to the Hugonots, being
newly returned from his Embassy into England, was absent at that time;
wherefore they thought it would rather kindle than extinguish the flame of
Civil War, if taking away the younger Brothers, the eldest should be left in a
condition to revenge their death: besides, they thought many things might be
deferred till another occasion, when they might be effected with less noise,
and more dexterity, (nor was that so urgent as the business of the Admiral, who
(if one may say) mad with wrath and fury, did already contrive new wars and
practices, by stirring up new commotions.) A counsel truly which in the like
cases has often proved fatal; men in the midst of bloody designs unadvisedly
seeking to be praised for mercy and clemency; and not remembering, that in cases
of extremity, it is neither laudable nor safe to use a mean; for the relics of
the disease by dangerous relapses, do frustrate the vigor of the most approved
remedies.

But all things being resolved on, the Eve of the 24 of August approaching,
which was the Feast of St. Bartholomew, being Sunday, about twilight the Duke
of Guise went from Court, with order from the King to find President Charron,
Prevost des Merchans, the chief Head of the people of Paris, giving him
direction to provide two thousand armed men, who should wear every one a
Shirt-sleeve upon their left arm, and white crosses in their hats, which upon
notice given were instantly to execute the Kings commands: That he should cause
to be in readiness the Sheriffs ( Echevins as they call them) of the several
Wards, and that upon ringing the Bell of the Palace-clock, lights should be put
in every window through the Town; which things, by the inclination of the
people, and the great authority of the Duke of Guise, besides Commission from
the King, were presently performed. The Dukes of Montpensier and Nevers, with
many other Lords of the Court took Arms, and accompanied by their friends,
guarded the Kings person, all the guards being in Arms at the gate, and in the
Court of the Louvre. At the prefixed hour, the Duke of Guise, the Duke of
Aumale, and Monsieur d' Angoulesme, Grand Prior of France, the Kings
Bastard-Brother, with other Commanders and Soldiers to the number of three
hundred, The Duke of Guise besets the A^mirals house.
went to the Admirals house, and finding it (by the Duke of Anjou's order) all
in Arms, and Cossein's Company with their lighted matches placed for a guard
before it, they forcibly entered the gate of the Court, kept by a few of the
King of Navarre's Halbardiers, and the servants of the house, which were all
killed without mercy. Being come into the Court, the Lords staid there below,
and one Besme a Lorainer, a Creature of the Duke of Guise's and Acchille
Petrucci, a Gentleman of Siena, one of those strangers which he maintained,
with Colonel Sarlabous, and the other Soldiers went up to the Admirals
Chamber. He hearing the noise, got up, and kneeling down, leaned against his
Bed, when seeing Cornason, one of his servants, come frighted in, he asked him
what noise it was: who answered, My Lord, God calls us to him, and ran out
hastily at another door. They presently entered, and knowing the Admiral, made
toward him; at which he turning toward Besme, who already had drawn his Sword
against him, said, Young Man, thou ought to reverence these my gray hairs;
but do what thou will, for thou can shorten my life but a very little; after
which words Besme ran him into the breast, The Admiral is slain, thrown out at
the window, and dragged into a stable.
and the rest, when they had made an end of killing him with their daggers,
threw his body out of the window into the Court, and it was presently dragged
into a stable: In the same Palace were slain Teligny the Admirals Son-in-law,
and Guerchy his Lieutenant, who wrapping his cloak about his arm, fought for
his life very manfully, Colonel Montaumar, and Roura Son to the Baron des
Adrets, with all the rest that had relation to him.

The King being come into the Chamber of the Queen his Mother, and having heard
what had passed, sent for the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, who went
thither in great perplexity, seeing that none of their Gentlemen nor attendants
were suffered to go in with them: and at the same time Monsieur d'O, Colonel of
the Kings guards, began to call the principal Hugonots that were in the Louvre
one by one; who being come in to the Court, were all killed by the Soldiers,
All the chief Hugonots in the Louvre are killed.
that stood in two long ranks with their arms ready for that purpose: there
died the Count de la Roch-fou-cault, the Marquess de Renel, Piles who had very
gallantly defended St. Iean d' Angely, Pont breton, Pulviault, Bandine,
Francourt Chancellor to the King of Navarre, Pardillan, Lavardin, and others to
the number of 200.

At the same time the Bell of the Palace-clock gave sign to the Provost des
Merchands; and those that were prepared for the deed, At the ringing of the
Bell the Hugonot^ are massacred, and amongst them Denis Lambin.
having received order what they were to do from Marcel, who a while before had
had the same Office, and was of great authority among the people, they fell a
killing the Hugonots throughout all the lodgings and houses where they were
dispersed, and made an infinite slaughter of them, without any distinction of
age, sex or condition. All the people were up in arms under the Masters of the
Parishes, and candles were lighted in every window, so that without confusion
they might go from house to house, executing the directions they had received;
but though those that commanded were very diligent about it, yet could they not
take so good order, but that many of the Catholics, either through public
hatred or private spleen were slain amongst the rest, as Denis Lambin, and
Peter Ramus, men very famous for learning, and diverse others.

The Louvre was kept shut all the day following, The King of Navar^e and the
Prince of C nde are kept in the Kings chamber during the massacre, and after
are kept prisoners.
and in the mean time the King and Queen comforted the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, alleging that they were constrained to do that, which the
Admiral had so often endeavored, and had still a purpose to do to them; but
they whose errors were excused by their youth, and pardoned for their nearness
of alliance, were reserved alive, and should for the future be loved and
cherished, so they would but profess the Catholic Religion, acknowledging, and
yielding obedience to the King: to which words the King of Navarre, serving the
time, and dissembling that which could not be helped, being resolved to
preserve himself for a better fortune, answered with very great compliance,
That he was ready to obey the Kings will and commandment: wherewith Charles
being very well pleased, to gratify him, saved the lives of the Count de
Granmont, and Monsieur Duras, who as they promised, served him faithfully ever
after. But the Prince of Conde, either through the inconsiderateness of his
age, or a natural fierceness derived from his Ancestors, in his answer made
show of opposing the Kings commands, saying, He desired only that no violence
might be used against his Conscience; whereat the King exceedingly displeased,
reproved him bitterly, often calling him insolent, mad, stubborn Traitor,
Rebel, and Son of a Rebel, and threatened to take away his life, if he did not
within three days turn Catholic, and give evident signs of his repentance; so
guards were placed both upon him and the King of Navarre, all their chief
Servants being taken from them, and presently cut in pieces; in whose places
new ones were provided by the King according to his own mind. Those Hugonots
that were lodged in the Fauxburg St. Germain beyond the Seine, among which were
the Count de Montgomery and the Visdame of Chartres, (who presaging some
mischief, would not remove to the Admirals quarter) when they heard the noise,
the Parisians not making haste enough to hinder their passage, instantly fled;
but were followed by the Duke of Guise, (who at break of day passed the water
with a great many Horse and Foot) and being overtaken, some without shoes,
some without arms, some without saddles, some without bridles, but all equally
unable to make resistance, were scattered and cut off, except the Count of
Montgomery and the Visdame of Chartres, who with about ten in company saved
themselves, and after many difficulties, getting unknown unto the Sea side,
escaped over into England.

Ten thousand Hugonots killed in Pa^^^, whereof five hundred (...) Barons, and
men of (...) to the Admirals ^ody
There were killed in the City that day and the next above 10000, whereof above
500 were Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, who had held the chiefest employments
in the War, and were now purposely met together from all parts to honor the
King of Navarve's Marriage; Monsieur de Briquemaut, and Arnauld Cavagnes were
taken prisoners, and by sentence of the Parliament were afterward quartered as
Rebels. The Admirals body was pulled out of the stable, and cruelly abused by
the fury of the common people, who detesting his very name, tore his head from
his shoulders, cut off his hands, and dragging him through the streets to
Montfaucon the place of execution, left him hanging by one of his feet upon the
Gallows; and a few days after, (all the people rejoicing at it) they set fire
on the same Gallows, half burning it, their barbarous cruelty finding no end,
till two Servants of the Mareshal de Momorancy stole away the relics of his
miserable carcass, and buried them secretly at Chantilly. Thus died Gasper de
Coligny the Admiral, whose name for the space of twelve years had with no less
fame than terror filled the Kingdom of France; an evident example to the whole
world, how ruinous and sudden the end uses to be of those, who not considering
any thing but their own interests, think by subtle cunning practices to
establish a lasting greatness upon the sole foundation of humane wisdom: for it
is not to be doubted, but that he, bred up from his youth in the chief Commands
of War, and brought by his valor and conduct to the highest pitch of honor,
would have equalled, if not exceeded all other Soldiers of his time, and have
attained to the degree of Constable, and all the greatest Offices in that
Kingdom, if against the authority of his Prince, he had not chosen to exalt
himself by factions and civil dissentions; since that the clear lights of his
industry, valor, constancy, and above all, a mavelous ability in managing
the greatest designs, shined forth even in the deepest obscurity of discords
and insurrections.

The day after the Admirals death, the Duke of Anjou going from the Louvre,
accompanied by the Regiment of the guards, went through all the City and
Suburbs, causing those houses to be broken open that made any resistance; but
all the Hugonots were either already dead, or else being terrified, had put
white crosses in their hats, which was the general mark of the Catholics;
endeavoring by that means, and by hiding themselves, to save their lives; but
being pointed at in the streets by any one, or discovered any other way, they
were without mercy torn in pieces by the people, and cast into the River.

The like Commissions against the Hugonots sent through the whole Kingdom.
Where executed, and where not.
The day before this terrible execution, the King dispatched posts into diverse
parts of the Kingdom, commanding the Governors of Cities and Provinces to do
the like; but this Commission was performed with more or less severity,
according to their several inclinations; for the same night at Meaux, and the
days ensuing at Orleans, Rouen, Bourges, Angiers, Tholouze, and many other
places, but above all at Lions, there was a most bloody slaughter of the
Hugonots, without any respect of age, sex, or quality of persons: on the other
side, in those places where the Governors were either dependents on the
Princes, or followers of the Family of Momorancy, the order was but slowly and
remisly executed; and in Provence the Count of Tend refused openly to obey it;
for which cause, being within a while after at the City of Avignon, he was
secretly made away, and as it was believed, by the Kings Commission. Most sad
and lamentable stories might be here related; for this cruelty was prosecuted
in so many several places, with such variety of accidents, against people of
all conditions, It is reported that 40000 Hugonots were killed in the Massacre.
as it was credibly reported that there were slain above forty thousand
Hugonots in a few days: but the rule I have hitherto observed of following
precisely the order of this History, will not not suffer me to digress in
making the tragical Narration of those passages.

The third day after the death of the Admiral, the persecution of the Hugonots
not being yet ended, the King, accompanied by all the Princes and Lords of his
Court, went unto the Parliament, and though at first he had both by words and
letters attributed the whole business to a popular tumult, yet there unmasking
his designs, with a long relation he laid open the reasons for which he had
commanded all those Rebels against his Person and Kingdom to be destroyed, who,
notwithstanding his gracious Pardons so often granted to their former offenses,
returned still with perfidious obstinacy to plot new treasons and
insurrections; that at last he was necessitated to prevent them, for fear of
being prevented, having miraculously discovered their conspiracy to take away
his life; and not his alone, but the lives of the Queen his Mother, and the
Dukes of Anjou and Alancon his Brothers, and even the King of Navarre's also,
who because he was alienated from their party, was esteemed no less their Enemy
than all the rest: Wherefore he thought good to make those his Magistrates
acquainted therewith, to the end they might proceed with the same sharpness
against so wicked a conspiracy, and make known to all the world the just and
necessary causes that had forced him to use such rigor and severity. After
these words wherewith he earnestly endeavored to persuade them, that the
business had been sudden, and not premeditate, happening in a manner by chance,
and urged by necessity, not ripened by long plotted contrivance, he gave order
it should be recorded among the ordinary Acts of that Court, that whatsoever
had befallen the Admiral and the rest of his Faction, either in Paris, or any
other part of the Kingdom, was done by his will, order, and express commission*
Then he commanded them to proceed to the examination of the prisoners, to
defame the memory of the dead by laying open their rebellions, and by
inflicting such punishments upon them as the strictness of the Law enjoined;
and lastly, he caused to be published, not only in the Parliament, but likewise
in all the streets of Paris, That they should desist from further effusion of
Blood, that which was already spilt having abundantly satisfied his just
severity; which availed something in Paris, where the number of the Hugonots
was already almost extinct and brought to nothing; but in other Cities whither
the order came too late, it was more or less obeyed according to the distance
of places. The Parliament readily embraced the Commission of proceeding against
the Hugonots, and with the examination of the prisoners, legally making their
process, they condemned Briquemaut and Cavagnes, who were imprisoned in the
Palace, to be publicly torn with Pincers, and their bodies quartered;
commanding also a Statue of the Admirals to be broken in pieces and burned,
declaring him a Rebel, a Disturber of the Kingdom, a Heretic, and an Enemy to
all good men; not having any bounds to their cruelty against his memory, The
Admirals Statue burned, and his Palace razed.
the Magistrates sentenced the Hostel de Chastillon to be razed to the very
ground, and all his posterity to be deprived of Nobility, and made incapable of
bearing any Office, or possessing any goods in the Kingdom of France; and that
their deeds might be answerable to their words, the King dispatched his Grand
Provost, with all diligence to seize upon his Wife and Children; but his eldest
Son, with the Widow Lady his Mother-in-law, the Wife of Teligny, and Monsieur
de la Vall the Son of Andelot deceased, were already fled secretly to Geneva,
and the better to avoid their danger, went to live among the Swisses in the
Canton of Bearn; the younger Children, both male and female, were condemned to
death in their tender years, coming to that end, which in the variety of
worldly affairs accompanies the ruin of great Families.

At the same time this execution was done at Paris, la Charity, which was still
held by the Hugonots, was surprised by the Gens d' Arms of the Duke of Nevers,
who going into the Town under pretense of being mustered and receiving their
pay, possessed themselves of the gates, and principal places of the City so
suddenly and discreetly, that the Townsmen durst not stir to make opposition;
and so the City remained in the power of the Kings Officers. The same was
attempted by the Viscount de Ioyeuse at Montaubon, and by Philippo Strozzi at
Rochel, which if they had succeeded, there might have been some hopes that
France would have been quieted; but the inhabitants looking warily to
themselves, and keeping very strong guards, both the enterprises failed of the
expected event, all those provisions being to no purpose, which had been made
under color of the War of Flanders. But the Viscount de Ioyeuse having with
him only some Gentlemen of that Country, his design being discovered, dissolved
his party, and retired to the places under his Government: On the other side,
Strozzi having sufficient strength both of Foot and Horse, began to besiege and
streighten Rochel, still exhorting and persuading the Citizens to avoid the
trial of strict justice, and the hazards of a desperate War, by returning
willingly to the Kings obedience; to which they answered ambiguously to gain
time, were resolved not to hearken, not only because they presumed upon the
strength and situation of the Town, but also because, by the great number of
Hugonot Ministers and Preachers who were fled thither, they were daily stirred
up and encouraged to preserve the liberty they enjoyed, and not to trust the
promises of the Catholics, whose Doctrine allowed them to break their Faith
with any, who being of different Religion were by them accounted Heretics;
against which Strozzi opposing other reasons, and showing the necessity of
obedience to the King, and the ruin which by their stubbornness they would
bring upon themselves, the time was more spent in treaties and messages, than
in any action or enterprise of War; yet both Horse and Foot lay near on all
sides of the Town, and the Fleet scoured all those coasts, to keep them from
supplies of men or victual.

In this interim the Conversion of the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde was
labored at the Court, the Queen and all the Council being of opinion, that the
Princes now taken from the Hugonot party, and the malcontents deprived of the
pretense and countenance of the Blood Royal, the State would remain quite
purged from those humors which for so many years had with obstinate violence
disturbed the quiet of it; finding the severeness of the late executions
produce such hopeful effects, that an abundance of Hugonots already professed
the Catholic Religion, and many leaving their Country, were gone to live out
of the Kingdom. The effecting of this Conversion was most diligently
endeavored by the Cardinal of Bourbon, Uncle to both the Princes, a man of
great integrity and extraordinary virtue, omitting no means which he thought
might help to bring their tender minds to the Catholic Religion, and every day
with Father Maldonat a Jesuit, and other ^octors, spending many hours to
instruct them. It happened very opportunely that Monsieur des Rosiers, who had
been a Hugonot Minister, and about that time was converted, either because he
clearly saw his former errors, or to avoid the imminent danger, and to get the
favor of those in power, disputed with great eloquence and learning against
the Doctrine and opinions of Calvin; which gave the Princes a reasonable
color, and specious pretense of coming fairly into the bosom of the Church,
following the Conversion of him that had been a principal Teacher and
Maintainer of their former Faith. The King of Navarre turns Catholic.
The King of Navarre was the first, who yielding to the time, and having
resolved to conform himself to his present condition, with less difficulty, and
greater expressions of approbation reconciled himself to the Church, the
greatest part of his Servants that were left alive, following his example: But
the Prince of Conde, who though of a younger age, perhaps for want of
experience, was of a more wilful obstinate spirit, notwithstanding he was
assaulted by continual threats and persuasions, refused still to turn
Catholic, till the King, exasperated by his stubbornness, causing him to be
brought unto him for his last trial, with an angry voice and terrible aspect
spoke only these three words unto him, Words of the King to the Prince of Conde.
MASS, DEATH, or BASTILE, not suffering him to reply one word to the contrary;
which terror joined to so many other motives that were made use of to overcome
him, bent his mind at last to follow the example of all the rest; and being
instructed by the Cardinal his Uncle, he came publicly to Mass, together with
the Princess his Wife, Sister to the Duchess of Nevers and Guise; and the same
did Lowis Prince of Conty, and Charles, Count of Soissons his younger Brothers,
who persevered afterward sincerely in the Catholic Religion. The Prince and
his Brothers turns Catholics.
From the Conversion of all these Princes the King and Queen conceived infinite
hope of more peaceable times; and for the better confirmation of it, the King
of Navarre and the Prince of Conde sent Ambassadors to render public obedience
to the Pope; who rejoicing at their conversion, which happened in the beginning
of his Papacy, answered their Embassy with many demonstrations of affection;
the whole Court of France being in the mean time very much satisfied, that by
those designs the Kingdom was brought into a most probable hope of a settled
Peace and tranquillity: for the perfecting whereof they endeavored all
possible means to reduce the City of Rochel.

But as bloody violent counsels are seldom seen to produce prosperous effects,
the wilfulness of men, or the providence of God had already disposed otherwise:
for all those that by diverse chances had escaped the slaughter of the Hugonots,
and did not comply with the Catholic profession, according to the several
qualities of places, took different courses and resolutions. Those of Britagne,
Normandy, and Picardy, Provinces along the coast of the Ocean Sea, just over
against England, fled in great numbers into that Island, not only to live there
according to the Doctrine of their Faith, but also uniting themselves under the
command of the Count de Montgomery, by the favor and protection of Queen
Elizabeth, to repass the Sea, and some where or other to disturb the
tranquillity of France. Those of Daulphine, Provence, and Lionois, retired into
Swisserland, where writing and enveighing continually against that cruel
Massacre of all those of the same Religion, they labored to raise the
Protestant Cantons, and to make them break that ancient Confederacy whereby
they were united to the Crown of France: among these, as we have said, were the
Sons of Andelot and the Admiral, who by the fame of their Fathers authority,
and the tenderness of their years, and the misery of their present condition,
stirred up the minds of every one to great pity and compassion. Those of
Champagne and Burgundy were gotten into the Cities of Germany, and there
endeavored to make the actions of the King of France to be suspected and
ill-interpreted by the Hans-towns, and Protestant Princes. But those near the
Mediterranean, and the inner parts of the Kingdom, having no other way to save
themselves, took refuge into four strong Towns which were held by those of that
party, and there with all their might prepared for their own defense. Those of
the Isle of France, Beausse, and Nivernois, had possessed Sanserre: the
inhabitants of Gascony and Languedoc fortified themselves in Nismes and
Montauban: and those of Anjou, Poictou, Xaintonge, and part of Guienne, were
fled to Rochel, as into a secure harbor. There under the command of Jacques
Henry Mayor of the City, (whose authority is chief in the Civil Government) all
the inhabitants had armed and divided themselves into four Companies, each of
two hundred, and were daily exercised to learn the use of their arms: besides
which, the Common Council, to the number of an hundred and fifty, were listed
under Colors apart, as the Colonels Company, and commanded by Arandel the
Mayors Lieutenant, a man of great valor and experience: besides these Trained
Bands which served without pay for their own defense, one thousand five hundred
other Soldiers were gathered together from the neighboring Provinces, who
under several Captains were paid by the contributions of the Cities and Towns
near adjacent, being all men of a resolute courage, and who for the most part
had been exercised in the late Wars. To these were added about sixty Gentlemen
fled thither from places thereabout, and fifty seven Ministers* who amidst the
noise of Arms, and toils of their Fortifications, ceased not to stir up and
encourage the people to defend themselves to the last man. The preparations of
Ammunition, Cannon, and other Warlike Instruments were not inferior to the
stoutness and readiness of the people; for besides the abundance of Powder,
which they made continually, having set up Mills for that purpose, there were
in the City-Magazine great store of Pikes and Muskets, nine very great
Culverins, eight Cannon, twelve Sacres, thirty eight Fieldpieces, and above
seventy Faulconets, and Harquebuzes a Croc; the managing whereof the Citizens
daily practiced with great diligence: No^ was their care less in providing
victual, for neither sparing pains nor cost they had filled their Storehouses
with Corn and Wine, whereof the Isles near to them bore great abundance, as of
all other things needful for the sustenance of men in the longest Sieges.

Against all these preparations for War, the King and Queen opposed not the
gathering together of Arms, but treaties and inducements to Peace; for desiring
to enjoy the fruits of their designs without new dangers and troubles, they
sought to reduce the Rochellers, if not to a real, at least to a seeming
obedience, and to extinguish the remainder of that fire which might kindle and
break forth in new commotions. For this cause they appointed Monsieur de Byron
Governor of Rochel, a man generally held to be a favourer of the Hugonot
Faction, and by many thought to have a tincture of Calvin's opinions; but indeed
the course of his life showed him afterward to be a true Catholic, though
envy made him an enemy to the house of Guise, and his own interests a desirer
of War. But though the King and Queen were once minded to have taken away his
life among the rest in the late Massacre, yet by reason of their many favors
formerly conferred upon him, they were unadvisedly confident of his fidelity in
this employment, and were persuaded that the Rochellers would trust him also,
and admit him at least into a seeming, if not an absolute Government; by which
means they might save the Kings reputation, secure their own lives, and the
liberty of the City. But the event showed how little faith there is to be given
to those men, who graving the injuries they receive in marble, while the doers
write them but in sand, forget not those dangers, but inwardly conceal thoughts
and designs very different from the outward appearance; for Monsieur de Byron
being come to Rochel, either desiring the continuance of the War, wherein he
had placed the hopes of his advancement; or through a natural pride angry that
his services were not sufficiently acknowledged* or because already suspecting
the Catholic party, he was loath it should prevail absolutely; or fearing they
had given him that imaginary Government, thereby to take away his command of
the Artillery; or doubting that all that were suspected in the present
Government, should be destroyed one by one; and for his own particular
mistrusting the House of Guise, or for what other cause soever it were, he
persuaded the Rochellers under hand neither to receive him nor any body else
into their City, for that the admission of a Governor would bring them to a
necessity of submitting absolutely to the Kings obedience, whose intention he
knew was not only to destroy the Hugonot party, but also to take away the
immunities and privileges of the City it self, and to bring it to a slavish
subjection, to the end it might never more be a receptacle or a foundation for
the disturbers of the Kingdom: by which secret intimations the Rochellers were
confirmed in their obstinacy; and though Monsieur de Byron seemed outwardly
very desirous, and made show of taking great pains to procure his admittance,
they still refused, alleging that it was directly contrary to the liberties
and privileges which the King had always protested he would allow them.

Many days were spent in these treaties, and in the mean time the arts of Byron
being suspected by the Queen, she began to think of some more fitting
instrument to persuade and mollify the hardness of the Rochellers; nor did
fortune delay to present a man that seemed very proper for that purpose; for
the Hugonots in the Admirals life time, having (to assist their Confederates)
passed under Count Lodowick of Nassau into Flanders, taken the City of Mons,
and begot great jealousies in the Spaniards, who not understanding the
artifices of the French King, were inclined to believe that action was done by
his consent, to give a beginning to the enterprise that was divulged against
the Low Countries; all the Forces of the Catholic King drew that way, to
quench so dangerous a fire in its beginning, and to interrupt the course of
that War which they most confidently accounted real: but the Massacre of the
Hugonots following presently after, and the Kings intentions being laid open to
all the world, the Surprizers of Mons were not only deprived of their credit
and reputation, but also of all hope of relief; and being put to great straits
and necessities in the siege, were forced to yield, dispersing themselves into
Picardy, and the Countries thereabout, where they were sharply persecuted by
the Governors; and Monsieur de Genlis their chief Commander, after his forces
were defeated and cut off by Monsieur de Villers, Governor of Chausne, lost
his life, with a great many of his Soldiers and Officers. Only Monsieur de la
Noue, he who in the late Wars had been Governor of Rochel, and had with so
much honor defended Xaintonge for the Princes, was secretly saved by the Duke
of Longueville, Governor of that Province, who having obtained a safe conduct
for him, brought him to the King, by whom he was graciously received, as one
worthy of high esteem, both for his wisdom, valor, and experience in Arms.

This was a personage thought proper to be made use of to deal with the
Rochellers, judging that by reason of the brave exploits he had formerly done
in their service, he was likely to have great power in persuading them, and by
his policy and eloquence to overcome the stubborn wilfulness of the people; for
which end the King and Queen acquainting him with their intentions, and that
their aim was not to reduce the liberties and privileges of the Rochellers to
a strict servitude; nor to force their Consciences to forsake the Faith they
professed, nor the Doctrine they believed; but only to secure themselves that
the City might be no more a receptacle of the Enemies and Disturbers of the
State, and with their wonted privileges, and full Liberty of Conscience, to
make them acknowledge and obey their natural King; he undertook the employment,
though some say, against his will, and departed from Court in the company of
the Abbot Guiovanni Baptista Guadagni a Florentine, to make trial of the last
resolution of the Citizens. But the minds of that people, partly by the secret
advice of Byron, partly by the continual exhortations of their Preachers, were
already so hardened, that it was utterly vain to use any further means of
bringing them to submit unto the Kings obedience; Monsieur de la Noue sent
Governor by the King to Rochel, turns General to the Hugonots.
and Monsieur de la Noue being received (though but coldly, and with little
show of honor) into the City, whether it were his first intention, or whether
the doubt of his own safety moved him to it, in stead of persuading them to
yield to the Kings mercy, resolved not only to stay there with them, but also
to accept the Office of their Captain General; which they, wanting a man of
valor and authority to command their Forces, had offered to him. Wherefore the
Abbot Guadagni that came with him, returning to Court, the excuses he sent the
King for having accepted that charge, were, the hopes he gave to reduce the
people in time to his Majesty's obedience, and the fear that (he refusing it)
their necessity might cast them into the hands of some other person, who by
giving way to the seditious and to foreigners, might endanger the peace and
safety of the Kingdom; with which pretenses endeavoring to save his credit, he
cunningly held the King in doubt till the succeeding accidents did in part give
proof of his present assertions.

This was the second error committed at Court, in procuring the reducement of
Rochel; for in stead of using force at first, whilst the Citizens were doubtful
and uncertain, and the City then not so well fortified and provided of
Ammunition, they fearing to renew the War, and perchance slighting that
business as a thing of no difficulty, tried to effect it by a Treaty; and first
by sending Monsieur de Byron they increased the courage and obstinacy of the
inhabitants; and then by employing Monsieur de la Noue, they furnished them
with a Commander, which was their greatest want. Now because they knew at last
that policies and persuasions failing, it was necessary to use force, and found
that their example encouraged Nismes, Sanserre, Montauban, and some other
lesser places surprised by the Hugonots, to make the like resistance, the King
being resolved (though too late) by one means or other to end the business,
gave order that Monsieur de la Chastre Governor of Berry, without further
delay should besiege Sanserre; that the Marquess de Villars being at last
declared the King of Navarre's Lieutenant, should go into Guienne; that
Monsieur de Ioyeuse, in whom the King and Queen confided very much, should
undertake Nismes and other places adjacent; and that Philippo Strozzi and
Monsieur de Byron (whose arts they either knew not, or nevertheless would not
deprive themselves of his valor) should lay close siege to Rochel, whither
also the Duke of Anjou was presently to march with all the Forces of the
Kingdom.

Of these, Monsieur de la Chastre, a man very well affected to the Catholic
Religion, and a dependant of the Guises, encamped presently before Sanserre, a
City within the Government of Berry near the Loyre, and by help of that River
easily to be relieved from many places; Sanserre taken after eight months siege.
but when he saw the fierce assaults he made against it were all fruitless,
though bloody, resolving to take it by famine, he encompassed it so closely on
every side, that after the patient endurance of a great deal of misery in a
tedious siege of eight months, it was forced to yield at last, having felt all
the necessities which can possibly be born by humane nature.

The Marquess de Villars (again confirmed Admiral in the place of Gasper
Coligny) went into Guienne with the same resolution, where chasing the Hugonots
from every place, and recovering the Towns which they had taken, he drove them
all into Montauban, where he shut them up so close, that they were reduced to
great extremity, and held out more through wilfulness, than power to defend
themselves.

1573.
On the other side, the Mareshal d' Anville (without whom Ioyeuse could do
nothing, because having left the Court, he resided personally in his
Government) being averse from the total ruin of the Hugonots, both because he
knew himself not much favored by the King, and to have been in great danger of
being made one in the Massacre at Paris, nourished other thoughts in his mind,
and seeking to spin out the business by artificial delays, contrary to the
opinion of Monsieur de Ioyeuse and many other Commanders, he let alone Nismes,
the seat and foundation of the Hugonots, and besieged Sommier a little
inconsiderable Town in that Country; and though he took it at last to save his
own reputation, yet he lost so much time, and so many men before it, that he
was fain afterward to be only an idle Spectator of the event of things.

But the chief expectation was of the siege of Rochel, every one knowing that
the taking of it would be the utter destruction of the Hugonots: wherefore it
having been already straightly besieged many weeks by Strozzi and Byron, at
length the Duke of Anjou came thither also in the beginning of February 1573.
and with him all the Cavalry, The Duke of Anjou with mighty preparations goes
to the siege of Rochel.
all the Infantry both French and Swisse, and the greatest part of the
Catholic Nobility, with wonderful preparation of all things necessary for the
taking in of a place of strength. There was in the Army the Duke of Alancon the
Kings third Brother, the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, to take all
hopes from the Rochellers of the protection of the Princes of the Blood: there
were also the Dukes of Montpensier, Aumale, Guise, Mayenne his Brother, of
Nevers, Bouillon, d' Vzes, and Longueville, the Prince Daulphine, the Count de
Maulevrier, the Mareshal de Cosse, the Bastard d' Angoulesme, the Count de
Retz, Monsieur de Monluc, and all the Commanders and Gentlemen that had any
reputation in War; so that it plainly appeared, they all believed the safety of
the Kingdom, and the sum of all businesses to consist in the success of that
enterprise. The Rochellers having had time to fortify the City exactly well,
and to provide themselves at leisure of all things necessary against so great
preparations, were resolved to hold it out to the last man; and had given the
charge of the Government to Jacques Henry the Mayor, with a Council of Citizens,
and the care of their defense to Monsieur de la Noue.

The strong situation of Rochel.
The seat of Rochel is wonderful strong by nature, environed with Fenns for the
space of many miles toward the Land, having only one way to it on the
North-side that led to a gate of the City, which was fortified after the modern
way, with moats, walls, bulwarks and ramparts, exceedingly favored by the
situation, and drawn in an excellent form to guard and flank one another; Art
and Nature concurring equally to make it impregnable. Toward the Sea it has a
very fair Haven, but so ordered by Nature, that the way to it is by many Bays,
and Points commanded by several winds; so that which way soever it blow, Ships
may come in from one place or other; nor can a great and powerful Navy hinder
the entrance of them, for the shore being very flat and shelvy on every side,
and without other ports, they cannot lie there with any safety, nor ride at
anchor to block up the Haven, by reason of the long and frequent tempests of
that Sea; so that it is in a manner impossible to keep the City from relief
that way; and as it was very easy to besige it by Land, so it was most
difficult to storm or assault it; for on that side which is dry and firm,
though the situation without is so high, that it almost commands the Town; yet
the fortifications were so near, so high, so many, and so firmly wrought
together, that to force an entrance was almost impossible; besides, just within
the works there was an open large place, so convenient, that the defendants
might there draw up in bodies, and march in order to receive the assault.

Such was the situation and strength of that place, and such the preparations
that were made against it; nor did the issue of the siege differ from what was
expected of it; for the onsets and assaults made against the City in the space
of five months were almost innumerable, the Duke of Anjou sparing neither cost,
pains nor danger, but using all military force and industry to storm it: yet
the Citizens and Soldiers, and even the very women as well as men defended it
with admirable valor and constancy, sustaining for a long time the force and
power of a whole Kingdom, and holding out against hunger and famine no less
than against the assaults and batteries of the Enemy. Amongst the various
events of this Siege Monsieur de la Noue had opportunity to regain the Kings
favor, and get leave to live privately at his own house; for while the Council
of the Citizens treated of yielding to that force which they saw they could not
much longer resist, he being fallen into a contestation with some of the
Ministers, whose authority was infinite over the minds of the common people,
and who without any regard to reason, exhorted them still to constancy, one of
them named la Place was so bold and inconsiderate, that after having basely
abused him, and many times called him Traitor, he insolently offered with his
hand to strike him in the face; which injury though he seemed to pass by for
quietness sake, and though the Minister was kept in prison many days for a mad
man, yet inwardly it troubled him very much: and moreover, foreseeing that at
the arrival of the Count Montgomery, who was expected with supplies from
England, the chief command would be taken from him, and conferred upon the
Count, with whom* by reason of an ancient emulation, he had no very good
correspondence, he resolved within himself to leave the Town, and the next day
sallying out of the works, as he often used, to skirmish with the Enemy, he
went over with some few in his company to the Duke of Anjou's camp, making that
pass for the fulfilling of his promise to the King, which upon new
considerations he resolved to do, either for revenge of the affront he had
received, or for the securing of his own safety, which he saw exposed to the
calumnies, and practices of the Ministers. But whatsoever the motive was, his
example was followed by a great many Gentlemen and Officers: yet all that
shaked not the perseverance of the Citizens, nor abated the courage of the
Soldiers, supporting with gallant resolution the furious bloody assaults which
night and day were made against them on every side, and enduring with constancy
of mind the great scarcity of victual, and the perpetual duty which they were
forced to undergo without intermission. For toward the Sea were raised two
Forts, one at the point called de Coreille, the other over against it in the
place which they call Port-neuf, which being manned with a thousand Soldiers,
were kept by Captain Cossein, and Captain Gas, each with fifteen pieces of
Cannon; and between them a great Carack was fastened at anchor, which furnished
with Culverins, shot into the mouth of the Haven, and hindered the entrance into
it; so that by continual industry it was blocked up on that side; and on the
other toward the Land all the Princes and Lords of the Army had divided the
work among them in such manner, that the Trenches and Redoubts touched one
another every where, not did they cease to redouble their assaults every hour;
and yet the resistance of those within equalled the courage and industry of
those that were without. The valor and constancy of the Defendants was much
increased by the intelligence which they secretly received from their friends
which were in the Camp; for not only among the private Soldiers, but also
among those that commanded, there were some that did not desire the destruction
of Rochel, nor the extirpation of the Hugonot Faction* and Byron, who commanded
the Artillery, following his former intentions, did with great dexterity (as
many were of opinion) delay the progress of the Batteries, and strengthened the
resolution of the besieged. But for all these arts, their most constant
Citizens, and most valiant Soldiers were already consumed: the hopes of relief
from England and Germany were vanished of themselves; for the Protestant
Princes persuaded by Gaspar Count of Schombergh, who was sent to them by the
King, had resolved not to interpose in the commotions of France; there being
now no Prince of the Blood, who with his authority and supplies of money might
maintain the War: and the Queen of England, to whom the King had sent Alberto
Gondi for the same cause, had refused to send them either men or shipping; and
the Count de Montgomery being departed to relieve the besieged with a good
number of ships, but ill manned and armed, though with much ado he got a ship
of Ammunition to enter the Haven; yet being chased by the Kings Fleet, and
despairing to do any more good in the business, he made out to Sea, laid aside
all thoughts of raising the siege, or relieving the City now brought to
extremity, and only as a Pyrate annoyed the coasts of Britagne and Normandy.
Their victuals were likewise quite spent, and their ammunition almost all
wasted; and on the other side, though the Duke of Anjou in a siege of so many
months had lost the Duke of Aumale killed in the Trenches with a Cannon-shot,
an infinite number of Gentlemen and Officers, and above twenty thousand
Soldiers killed and dead of the sickness, and the Duke of Anjou himself,
whilst he was viewing the works, wounded, though but lightly, in the neck, in
the side, and in the left hand by a Harquebuze a croc charged with tarling, had
more need of rest than continual action; yet neither the fierceness nor
frequency of the assaults were at all allayed, but there arriving daily new
forces at the Camp, among which six thousand Swisses newly entered into pay,
the siege grew rather streighter, and the service hotter than at first, so that
the City was reduced to an impossibility of holding out longer, and would at
last have been taken by force, and utterly ruined by the King, if a new
far-fetcht occasion had not saved it, and prevented its so imminent destruction.

The Duke of Anjou, not to prejudice his election to be King of Poland, moves
slowly in the enterprise of Rochel.
There had been a treaty many months before, of electing the Duke of Anjou to be
King of Poland, the hope whereof being begun in the life of Sigismund Augustus
King of that Kingdom, with this proposition, That the Duke taking Anne the
Kings Sister to Wife, should by the States of those Provinces be declared
Successor to the Crown; after his death it was much increased, for though
Ernest Archduke of Austria Son to the Emperor, and Sigismond King of Sweden
were both Competitors in the same design, yet neither of them seemed comparable
for valor and glory to the Duke of Anjou, whose name, by reason of his many
victories, flew through all parts of Europe with a most clear same of singular
virtue and renown. The King of France applied his mind wholly to that end, and
much more the Queen Mother, for the infinite love she bore to that Son; and
therefore they neither spared money, promises, pains nor industry necessary to
effect that business, which being brought very forward by the Sieur de Balagny,
who under color of traveling to see the World, stayed there, and had gotten
the acquaintance of many principal men of that Kingdom; it was afterward
managed with more life by Joan de Monluc Bishop of Valence, and Guy Sieur de
Lansac, and other persons of less quality, but not of less esteem, appointed to
treat with the States of that Kingdom. The greatest impediment which the Kings
Agents found, was the opposition of the Evangeliques of that Kingdom, (in
Poland they so call the followers of the new opinions in matter of Faith) who
had but small inclination to the Duke of Anjou, partly, because the Victories
he achieved had been against those of the same belief; partly, because the
Massacre of Paris, variously spoken of by the Protestants in those places so
far remote, made them fear, that being chosen King, he would molest and
disquiet those that were averse from the Apostolic See, and not of the
Catholic Religion, whereof they knew he was so sincere a Professor. The fears
of the Evangeliques were fomented by the Letters and Embassies of many
Protestant Princes of Germany, much displeased at the slaughter of the Hugonots
in France, and ill-affected to the Duke of Anjou's greatness. For which cause
the King endeavored by diverse writings, and by means of his Ambassadors, to
remove the opinion which was commonly held, that the Massacre of Paris was
contrived long beforehand, attributing the business (as sudden and accidental)
unto the temerity of the Admiral, who seeing himself wounded by his Enemies,
began rashly to plot a new conspiracy against all the Royal Family; and
declared, that he would tolerate a Liberty of Conscience, though not the free
profession of Calvin's Doctrine: nor did this seem sufficient, but fearing more
to exasperate the minds of the Protestants and Evangeliques, he began to
proceed more coldly in the enterprise of Rochel, lest the Duke of Anjou taking
it by force, should stir up more hatred against him, and by the desolation of
the City should increase the difficulties of his Election, which seemed to be
in a fair way of coming to a happy issue. Nor was the King alone of this
opinion, but his Ambassadors in Poland, and particularly the Bishop of Valence,
very much pressed the King, that to facilitate that business, he would proceed
more gently against the Hugonots in France. For these respects new treaties of
agreement were begun with the Rochellers; yet still continuing their assaults
and batteries, till news came, that upon the ninth day of May, Henry Duke of
Anjou was with a general consent elected King of Poland: Wherefore he seeking
to come off from that siege with such moderation, that his reputation might be
safe, and the minds of his new Subjects not unsatisfied, from whom he
endeavored to remove all suspicion of his taking away their Liberty of
Conscience, he proceeded not so violently against the Hugonots; who quite tired
out, and in despair of defending themselves any longer, forgot their wonted
constancy, and were desirous to obtain their peace. This was favored by the
natural inclination of the Duke, who was weary of the toils of War, and
desirous not only to return to the pleasures of the Court, but also shortly to
go take possession of his new Kingdom. Wherefore the City having often sent
their Deputies into the Camp to treat, Rochel yielded to the King.
after many difficulties they agreed at last upon the Eleventh day of July,
that the City should yield it self unto the Kings obedience with these
conditions: The Conditions.
That the King should declare the inhabitants of Rochel, Nismes, and Montaban,
to be his good and faithful Subjects, and should approve of all that they had
done from the month of August the year before, being 1572. until that present
time, pardoning all faults and enormities whatsoever had been committed during
the Civil War by the said Inhabitants, their Soldiers or Adherents, declaring
all to be done by his order. That in those three Cities he should allow the
free and public exercise of the Reformed Religion, they meeting together in
small numbers, and without Arms, the Officers appointed for that purpose being
there amongst them. That in all other outward matters, except Baptism and
Matrimony, they should observe the Rites and Holy days observed and commanded
by the Roman Catholic Church: That the King should confirm all the Liberties,
Immunities and Privileges of those three Towns, not permitting them to be in
any part diminished, altered or violated. That the Rochellers should receive a
Governor of the Kings appointment (but without a Garrison) who might freely
stay there, inhabit, go, and return into the City at his pleasure; and that
they should be governed by the Laws, Ordinances, and Customs with which they
had been governed under the Kings of France ever since they were Subjects to
that Crown: That they should break all Leagues, Friendships, Intelligences, and
Confederacies whatsoever within or without the Kingdom, not lending any relief
or assistance to those which should continue up in Arms, though of the same
Religion. That the use and exercise of the Catholic Religion should be
restored in those Cities, and all other places whence it had been taken,
leaving freely unto the Churchmen, not only the Churches, Monasteries and
Hospitals, but likewise all the profits and revenues belonging to them. That
all Lords of free Manors through the Kingdom might in their own Houses
lawfully celebrate Baptism and Matrimony after the manner of the Hugonots,
provided the assembly exceeded not the number of ten persons. That there should
be no inquisition upon men's Consciences, and that those who would not dwell in
the Kingdom, might sell their Estates, and go live where they pleased; provided
it were not in places that were Enemies to the Crown: and that for the
observing of these Articles, the said three Cities should give hostages, which
should be changed every three months, and always should follow the Court. When
these Conditions were established, and the hostages given, which by the Duke
were presently sent to Court, Monsieur de Byron, the Governor appointed by the
King, entered Rochel with one of the Public Heralds, took possession of the
Government, The Peace is published, and the Army dismissed.
and caused the Peace to be proclaimed; after which the Duke of Anjou (now King
of Poland) having dismissed the Army, went with a noble Train of Princes, Lords
and Gentlemen, unto the City of Paris; where assuming the Title of his new
Kingdom, and having received the Polish Ambassadors, he prepared for his
journey to go take possession of the Crown.

In the mean time Sanserre, which was not comprehended in the Capitulation of
the Rochellers, because it was not a free Town under the Kings absolute
Dominion as the rest, but under the Seigniory of the Counts of Sanserre, being
reduced to extreme misery by famine, without all hope of relief, yielded it
self to Monsieur de la Chastre, who having by order from the King to gratify
the Polish Ambassadors, pardoned all their lives, fined the Town in a certain
sum of money to be distributed to the Army, and causing it to be dismantled,
and the Gates, Clock and Bells to be removed, to take away from it all form of
a City, and bring it to the condition of an ordinary Village, he put a Garrison
into the Castle, caused the goods and revenues of the Clergy to be restored,
and the Churches to the use of the Catholic Religion; and a while after (as it
was reported) he commanded Guilliaume Ioanneau the Bailiff of the Town, who had
been chief Head of the late sedition, to be secretly thrown into a Well; though
many say, that he being fallen mad with despair, cast himself wilfully into it.

This was the end of the Insurrection, which began after the Admirals death's
wherein through want of care in those that commanded, or want of fidelity in
those that were to execute the severity of those remedies not being used, which
with small trouble and less difficulty would absolutely have plucked up the
very roots of those evils, the sparks were only covered for a time, and not
utterly extinguished, from whence afterward brake out more violent flames, and
more lasting dangerous mischiefs. But no fear of that troubled the Court, which
full of pomps and triumphs for the Coronation of the new King, thought it
enjoyed a secure quiet in the midst of so many delights; which having lasted
for the space of two months, the King of Poland, accompanied unto the confines
of Lorain by his Mother and the King his Brother, about the beginning of
October went to take possession of his Kingdom. But the King was no sooner
returned unto his pleasures, intent only upon hunting and other youthful
sports, when those humors began to discover themselves, which were more like
than ever to disturb his Kingdom with infinite troubles and commotions.

After the departure of Henry King of Poland, the first place of dignity and
preeminence belonged to Fran^is Duke of Alancon the Kings next Brother, who was
not only young, and therefore void of experience, but also by nature endowed
with no great abilities of understanding, of so fickle a mind, and so puffed
up, that he seemed more to incline to rash precipitate advices, than to a
discreet, moderate rule of living; and as he had inwardly been very much
displeased at the Power which had been given to his Brother the Duke of Anjou,
and was deeply pricked with the secret sting of envy at his valor and glorious
actions, esteeming the greatness and reputation of his Brother to be a
dishonor and lessening to himself; so he bore a concealed hatred to all those
that had any relation to, or dependence upon Henry, loving and admiring the
Admiral de Coligny, and his adherents, (as was often plainly observed) but as
it were tacitly reprehending the Kings deliberations, and secretly desiring to
be the Head of that Faction; and though the Queen his Mother knowing his
disposition, endeavored always to keep discreet experienced men about him,
which might wisely moderate his humors and resolutions; yet was he utterly
averse from them, and through a conformity of nature, let himself be rather
wholly guided by Boniface, Sieur de la Mole, a man of ordinary quality, but
full of vast unmeasurable thoughts, and by Hanibal, Count de Coconas, a
banished Peidmontois, who (as it is commonly the custom of Exiles) not being
able to enjoy quietness himself, labored to molest and disturb the repose of
others.

The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde were from the beginning united to
the Duke of Alancon, because they saw themselves but lightly esteemed by the
Duke of Anjou, Head of the Catholic party, and because they watched all
occasions that might give them opportunity to revive and raise again their
oppressed persecuted Faction; and not they alone, but also the Mareshals of
Momorancy and d' Anville, William Lord of Tore, and Charles Lord of Meru, all
Brothers, who not being able of themselves to attain to the dignity of their
Father, nor to the credit and authority he held in his lifetime, but
continuing (especially after the death of the Admiral) meanly regarded, or
rather hated and suspected by the King, by reason of their near alliance to
him; and jealous that their ruin was no less aimed at then that of others,
sought to unite themselves unto that party, whose power might bear them up to a
greater height of fortune. To these was also joined the Mareshal de Cosse, who
was but little favored by the Catholic party, and all those that either
secretly or openly had been inclined to the Admiral; and not they only, but
likewise all who for particular interests, having taken distaste at the present
condition of affairs, were still contriving new forms of Government; these
being received, and filled with hopes and boldness, chiefly by the Lords of
Momorancy, who carried themselves very cunningly in the business, A third party
called Politics and Malcontents, composed of Catholics and Hugonots.
framed a third party, which making no ground nor difference of either
Religion, but wholly applying themselves to the reforming of the State, began
to be called the Faction of Politics or Malcontents.

But these new practices and machinations, which while the Duke of Anjou was
present, were managed more covertly, for fear of his valor and authority; the
curb being now taken away, began to sprout out more freely, not only because
the Duke of Alancon, who favored them, remained in possession of the chiefest
place; but because the power over the Catholic party was still in the hands of
the Duke of Guise and his Brothers, the ancient, emulous, inveterate Enemies of
the Families of Bourbon and Momorancy; whereby their linking and knitting
themselves together to counterpoise the excessive greatness of their
adversaries, seemed more necessary, and was in appearance more excusable.

The opportunities for the breaking forth of this mischief were much increased
by the Kings being sick, who through too much exercise in hunting, running,
wrestling and riding, wherewith he was beyond measure delighted, falling into a
long dangerous sickness, could not with that vigor which was proper to his
nature intend the rooting up of those growing disorders; but gave greater means
to the Duke of Alancon to discover and foment his own pretensions: wherefore
the Duke of Anjou being gone away, he began apparently to pretend to, and
procure the same Title and Authority which his Brother had so many years
possessed, being set on to it by the counsels of the Mareshals of Cosse and
Momorancy. But this was not only opposed by the King and Queen Mother, who
neither approved his humor nor his actions; but also by his own disability,
which rendered him much inferior in wit and valor to the Duke of Anjou, and no
ways able to undergo so great a charge; besides that, the King being now of
riper years, and of a wary suspicious nature, was nothing willing to grant so
great a power to any body again, having perhaps more ardently favored the
Election of the King of Poland, because he thought he could neither so easily,
nor so handsomely by any other means deprive him of that Authority and Power,
which being voluntarily given him at the first, he afterward confirmed upon
himself by his own courage and renowned Victories. For all these reasons the
King refusing him the Title and Power of his Lieutenant General, his Mother
began to entertain him with other hopes of procuring for him some free State,
as they had done for his Brother, propounding to him a marriage with the Queen
of England, or the command of the States of Flanders, which had shaken off
their obedience to the Catholic King; the Treaties concerning both which were
begun, more out of a design to feed him with hopes, and to keep him in good
correspondence united with his Brother, than out of any grounded reason or
belief that either of them could be effected.

But his hasty impatient nature gave no leisure to her politic delays: Pranc^s
Duke of Alancon the Kings youngest Brother, makes himself Head of the
Malcontents with hope to usurp the Crown.
for as soon as the Hugonots and Malcontents knew that he was spitefully
enraged at this repulse, and that his mind was ready to attempt new designs;
with a common consent they offered him the command of all their party, telling
him, that he might by that means create unto himself a more free and absolute
Power than that which his Brother had injuriously refused him. The King of
Navarre consented to this deliberation, having from the beginning sought some
opportunity to advance his own fortune, and to free himself from that
imprisonment (rather than subjection) which he lived in under the King and
Queen, his Brother and Mother-in-law: besides, disagreeing and displeased with
his Wife, he hoped by those tumults and changes to remedy all those
inconveniences, and open some way to his own greatness, or at least to his
liberty, which by nature he was very much inclined to. The Prince of Conde
consented to it likewise, being well assured to have great Authority among the
Hugonots, if they by any means could rise again; whereas by reason of his
Fathers memory he was much depressed among the Catholics: but above all the
rest this design was approved by the three Mareshals, de Cosse, Momorancy, and
d' Anville, the Heads of the Malcontents, knowing that they should sway and
moderate the will of the Duke d' Alancon, who unable to govern of himself,
would doubtless give them the same power the Admiral had in the minority of the
Princes of Bourbon.

After many contrivances and consultations, the web of the business was laid by
them in this manner; That the Duke of Alancon should suddenly and privately
depart the Court; and that for his more secure retreat, some Troops of Hugonot
Cavalry which were drawing together, should secretly go to meet him: That the
Mareshals of Momorancy and Cosse should go along to advise and counsel him in
his actions: That the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde should get secretly
away within two days after, and follow them the same way: That the Mareshal d'
Anville Governor of Languedoc, should go into that Province a while before,
and draw cunningly to himself the absolute power of those places, gather as
many of the Nobility as he could, and endeavor the same in Guienne, and the
parts adjacent, by means of his Nephew the Viscount de Turenne, and of his
Brother-in-law the Duke of Vantadour, to the end that the Princes departing
from the Court, might have a secure place to retire unto, and also Forces to
defend themselves; to these grave solid resolutions were joined also light
youthful follies by some Servants of the Duke d' Alancon, proposing by
witchcrafts and enchantments to take away the Kings life, who already was in
great danger by reason of his sickness; and he being dead, and the King of
Poland far off, to settle the Duke d' Alancon in the Crown: with these various
designs, the taking up of Arms was again endeavored.

The Mareshal d' Anville went into Languedoc with the Kings consent, under
color of visiting his Government, and there began craftily to sound the minds
of the Gentry, and of the Governors of places; but as a man of great wariness
and discretion, doubting his plots might be discovered, he sent Chartier his
Secretary unto the King and Queen Mother, showing that he treated with the
Hugonots of Nismes, Montpelier and other places, to reduce them to his
Majesty's obedience; and that if men of trust might be sent to treat, he hoped
with honorable conditions to bring them unto an absolute subjection: with
which hopes the King being moved, pres^ntly dispatched Monsieur de S. Sulpice,
and Secretary Villeroy to treat jointly with d' Anville about the reducing of
the Hugonots: but he having by this artifice gotten a liberty of treating with
the Hugonots without being suspected at Court, when he heard the Kings
Commissioners were arrived at Avignon, he sent the same Chartier to let them
know, that matters not being yet ripe, it would be best for them to stay there
a while, and defer their coming to him till he had settled a surer foundation
for that business. So holding the Commissioners in hand, and in the mean time
treating in every place, he went by little and little opening his way to an
absolute Authority in Languedoc; and the same did the Viscount de Turenne, and
the Duke de Vantadour in other places.

But while the rest, not managing their business so cunningly as d' Anville,
spread these designs abroad by discovering them to the Hugonots through all the
Provinces of the Kingdom, and that Coconas and la Mole passing yet further,
conspired the Kings death, and the usurpation of the Kingdom; the Duke of
Alancon inconstant in his resolutions, and of a mind very unfit for so great an
enterprise, imprudently gave some suspicion of it to his Mother; and while by
her wonted arts she sounds the depths of those secret treaties, and searches
the bottom of those designs, the Hugonots impatient of delay, perfected the
discovery of the plot; for the Duke having given them notice that he with the
King of Navarre and Prince of Conde intended to leave the Court, and retire
into the places of their party, there to declare himself Protector of the
Reformed Religion, and of the Malcontents of the Kingdom; they not staying
for a more mature advice, nor a more fitting opportunity, appeared unexpectedly
upon Shrove-tuesday, to the number of about two hundred Horse, running up and
down armed under the command of the Sieur de Guitry, near unto St. Germains,
The Hugonots begin again to take Arms.
where the Court then was, to secure the passage of the Princes, who were
secretly to leave the Court; at the news whereof the Duke of Alancon and his
Counselors frighted and dismayed, because their designs were not yet ripe, and
not thinking that small number of Hugonots sufficient to execute their
deliberations, were so different and unresolved in their opinions, that they
stirred not at all; and the King and Queen now certain of what they before
suspected, retiring with all speed to Paris, imprisoned the Duke d' Alancon,
the King of Navarre, and all his Counselors and dependents, as also the
Mareshals of Cosse and Momorancy, with many others whom they thought privy to
their designs. Only the Prince of Conde and Monsieur de Tore escaped, The Duke
of Alancon and the King of Navarre imprisoned.
fleeing first to those places which belonged to the Prince in Picardy, and
from thence without delay unto the Hans Towns of Germany which adhered to the
Protestant party.

The Duke of Alancon and the King of Navarre either trus^ed to their nearness
of Blood, or to shift off the fault of this conspiracy from themselves, and lay
it (as the custom is) upon the weakest, confessed freely that they had been
solicited to depart from Court, and become Heads of the Hugonots and
Malcontents, and that sometimes they had lent an ear to those motions, rather
to discover the intents of those Seducers, than out of any desire to adhere
unto them; and that they waited an opportunity to discover the whole plot unto
the King, as soon as they were fully informed of it; and that in the mean time
the Duke had given some hint of it, though but obscurely, to his Mother, which
might serve to prove the sincerity of their intentions: upon the ground of
these confessions, which contained many particulars* the accomplices of meaner
quality being kept close, and strictly examined, la Mole, about whom were found
certain Images of the King in Wax, encompassed with enchantments, charms and
other fooleries, the Count de Coconas convicted of many crimes, and diverse
others were condemned to die: the Mareshals of Momorancy and Cosse, to the
great satisfaction of the Parisians, were put into the Bastile; and for the
Princes, it sufficed only by a Declaration to manifest unto the World, that it
was never their intention to alienate themselves from the Kings obedience, nor
to offend his Person in any manner whatsoever, much less to make themselves
Heads and Protectors of the factious and seditious party of the Kingdom: but
that it had been falsely and cunningly divulged by men of turbulent malicious
Spirits; to stir up and seduce the people under that pretense; a thing utterly
disallowed and detested by them, who desired that such rebellious and seditious
persons might be brought to condign punishment, that by their sufferings the
fuel might be taken from that fire, with which they had endeavored to inflame
the Kingdom. After which Declaration they were nevertheless not restored unto
their former condition; but on the one side were used as Kinsmen, and on the
other with diligent guards were kept as Prisoners. Those that make a sinister
interpretation of all the actions of Princes, say, That the Duke of Alancon had
no other end but to make himself King after the death of his Brother, which he
saw drew near, and that the counsels of the Mareshals and his other adherents
aimed at that very mark; but that the Queen Mother, who loved the King of
Poland much better, and under his Reign promised her self the absolute
Government* made the business seem different from the truth, and caused the
King to imprison the Princes and the Mareshals, to secure the Kingdom to the
true Successor, which was the King of Poland, whose Reign was abhorred by all
those that were Enemies to the House of Guise, (...) had any dependence upon
the Hugonots.

These matters, whatsoever they were, or from what cause soever derived,
happened in the beginning of the Year 1574. a Year destined to renew the old
wounds of France: for toward the latter end of March, 1574.
and all the month of April following, the Hugonots already up in Arms by
reason of the late designs, and suspecting themselves to be discovered the
fomenters of that Conspiracy, breaking again the bridle of all respect,
attempted every where to surprise Forts, Castles and Cities; and as if the
business at St. Germains had succeeded just according to their own desires,
they ran hastily without stop to the taking up of Arms in all Provinces; and
that with so much the greater boldness and security, because they were freed
from the general fear they were wont to have of the valor and celerity of the
King of Poland, whom they had to their exceeding loss found to be so resolute
and powerful an Enemy.

The first commotion was begun by Monsieur de la Noue, who staying in Poictou,
A new Insurrection of Hugonots, stirred up by Monsieur de la Noue.
gathered Forces suddenly and possessed himself of Lusignan, Fontenay, and
Mesle, and with the help of the Rochellers, raised and disordered the whole
Country, showing manifestly by that action, that neither his desire of peace,
nor his promise made to the King, had caused him to leave Rochel when it was
besieged, but trouble for the affront he had received from the Ministers, and
fear lest the Citizens should confer the chief Command upon the Count
Montgomery. The signal of War being as it were given by this Insurrection, it
was followed by many others in Daulphine, Province, Gascogne and Languedoc,
every private Captain, and every Gentleman among the Hugonots endeavoring with
his own Forces to seize upon some strong place, from whence robbing and
pillaging all the Country, cutting off passages, laying taxes upon the people,
and plundering the rich houses, they in a few days brought the whole Kingdom of
France into great confusion.

But a more dangerous fire was kindled on the Seacoasts of Normandy; for the
Count Montgomery, after he was hindered by the Kings Fleet from relieving
Rochel, being returned into England, and recruited, landed in the Country which
they call le Pays de Constantine, belonging to the Province of Normandy, but
bordering upon Bretagne, where being welcomed by the Hugonots, and the
discontented party of that place, in a few days he made himself Master of
Danfront, Carentane, St. Lo, and Valognes, and seditious people running to him
from all parts, as to a Head of great Authority, it was beginning to be doubted
that Queen Elizabeth, invited by this opportunity, (though she made show not at
all to favor or assist the Count) had resolved once again to set foot in that
Province just over against her Kingdom, which in times past had long been in
possession of the Kings of England her Predecessors. At the so freq^ent news of
these tumults and insurrections, the King who by nature was very choleric,
brake forth into such terrible rage and fury, that his sickness became daily
more violent and dangerous; wherefore neither having strength of body, nor
ability of mind to undergo so weighty a business, often changing and varying
his resolutions, by that uncertainty gave them that were up in Arms far greater
opportunity to increase their Forces; which as soon as he perceived, his
disease, which could find no remedy, still continuing, he resolved to refer the
whole business to the counsel and authority of his Mother, ever giving order
and directions to take sharp severe courses, which could hardly be done,
because the condition of the present affairs would not permit that Armies and
Governments should be trusted in the hands of any but persons of great
maturity, and long experience, who by reason of their age and gravity were
averse from bloody violent resolutions; wherefore the Queen being brought into
great streights and difficulties, and unto a necessity of proceeding not only
against her Son-in-law, but even against her own Son, endeavored to find some
moderate way between the Kings anger and their unquiet designs; which was not
to be managed according to the proper nature of affairs, and the ancient
practice of experience; for it being apparent, that to remove the effects it is
necessary to take away the causes, she quite contrary was forced by mere
necessity to endeavor the taking away the effects of those tumults and
insurrections in the several Provinces, thereby to preserve the Duke of Alancon
and the King of Navarre, from whom their principal cause and original proceeded.

The Queen sends three Armies into three parts of the Kingdom to suppress the
Insurrections.
She resolved to send three several Armies into three several parts of the
Kingdom, one commanded by the Duke of Montpensier, who should oppose Monsieur
de la Noue in Poictou; another by the Prince Daulphine his Son, which should go
into Daulphine, and the Confines thereabout; and the third to resist
Montgomery, commanded by Jacques Sieur de Matignon, a man of tried fidelity, and
not inferior in valor, who was then Lieutenant to the Duke of Bouillon in the
Government of Normandy. In the mean time the taking away of the Government of
Languedoc from the Mareshal d' Anville was endeavored; to which end Count
Sciarra Martinengo was dispatched with all speed to S. Sulpice and Villeroy,
who were thought to be with him, that they might use some means to take away
his life; or if they could not do so, at least to get a Government of so great
importance out of his hands. But Martinengo finding those Commissioners still
at Avignon, without means to execute the Kings intentions, it was necessary to
follow the second directions, to take from him all, or at least some of the
Cities of that Province, which began to be diligently prosecuted by the help of
the Cardinal of Armagnac, the Duke d' Vzes, the Viscount de Ioyeuse, and the
Sieurs Maugiron, de Quelus, de Rieux, and de Suze, Lords who had very great
dependents in those parts.

But the sagacity of d' Anville was very great, and great was the inclination
of the people to his name, he having by his liberality and politic Government,
generally gained their affections; whereupon when he received the news of what
had passed at Court, feigning on the one side that he was not at all offended
at his Brothers imprisonment, and that he did not in any thing participate of
his counsels, and publicly testifying, that he would not only lay down his
Government, but moreover his Office of Mareshal, until the King being certified
of his loyalty, should willingly restore him to his former dignities, he
labored on the other side to assure himself of the Forts and Cities, The
Mareshal d' Anville Son of Anna de Momorancy is by the Kings decree deprived of
his dignities.
and to bring the Gentry and Soldiers as much as he could to his own devotion:
by which arts he presently put himself into a posture of defense, and the
Commissioners not having effected any thing, were fain to return to Court;
which when the King knew, being infinitely offended, he caused him by public
decree to be deprived of his dignities, and commanded the Prince Daulphine to
march thither with his Army.

The Duke of Montpensier being entered into Poictou, had already taken Talmont,
and laid siege to Fontenay, seeking all possible means to draw Monsieur de la
Noue into the field, who being again declared General of the Rochellers, was
exceeding diligent in gathering Soldiers and Gentlemen together; but finding
himself not able to keep the field, he resolved to defend the strongest places,
which he had furnished with all things necessary, endeavoring by advantage of
situation, by conduct, industry and diligence to do some mischief to the
Enemies: in which time Monsieur de Matignon desirous to show his fidelity to
the King and Queen, by whom he found himself to be much esteemed, and to raise
himself to a more eminent degree of fortune, marched with the third Army
directly to the place where the Count of Montgomery was, much increased both in
strength and courage. His Army consisted of five thousand French Foot, and
twelve thousand Horse; to which were added many Gentlemen and Volunteers, who
excited by Letters and Commands of the King and Queen, very sollicitous for
this enterprise, came thither to serve without pay: besides, there were
fourteen pieces of Cannon, which were taken out of the Fortress of Caen, and
other Cities adjacent, with a sufficient proportion of all sorts of Ammunition.
The Field-Mareshal was I^an d' Hemery, Sieur de Villers, Villers Brother-in-law
to the Author.
who stirred up by his own valor and natural ingenuity, far from those
dissimulations and double dealings which were then every where in fashion, and
being of one mind and counsel with his General, a man also of a clear
uncorrupted loyalty; having to deceive the Enemy, made show of moving toward
Volognes, (a place less defensible, but more abounding in spoil and plunder) he
set forward about Sunset, marching all night with infinite diligence toward
St. Lo, in which place was the Count of Montgomery, with his Son and his
Son-in-law.

St. Lo is a Town in the lower Normandy, not very great, but indifferently
strong, being seated near the Sea, upon the River Vire, which falling into the
Ocean not far from thence, is by the help of the Tide made navigable to the
very gates of the Town; and as a safe Harbor secureth those Ships that come ^n
from the frequent storms of that coast; here lay those Ships which had brought
the Count Montgomery out of England, ready upon all occasions to weigh anchor
and put out to Sea. But Villiers arriving, unexpectedly with the Van of the
Army at the very peep of day, sent the Sieur de St. Colombe with his Regiment,
St. Lo is besieged by the Catholics, Montgomery being in it.
that might be some twelve hundred French Foot, and four small pieces of
Cannon, to possess the bank of the River below the place where Ships lay at
anchor, to hinder them from getting out of the Port. St. Colombe advancing with
the expedition which was requisite for that purpose, instantly took his post
upon the bank of the River, and at the same time began to entrench himself and
plant his Cannon; which he performed so well, that the passage of Montgomery's
Ships being cut off within a little time by reason of the narrowness of the
River, he being inferior in strength, could no longer hope to save himself
with his Fleet. Villers as soon as he saw that passage stopped, wherein
consisted the chiefest point of the enterprise, placed himself with the light
Horse, and the Regiment of Lavardin at the foot of a hill right against the
gate toward the Sea, and began to fall upon those of the Town who were come out
to discover the Forces of the Enemy; and whilst they were kept in a hot
skirmish on that side, Monsieur de Matignon arrived on the other with the rest
of the Army, and presently made good those passages toward the Land; so that in
less than three hours the City was blocked up, and besieged on every side. In
the mean time the Squadrons of Cavalry under Malicorn and Meleray being come
up, those that sallied out were within a little while beaten in again, though
with loss on both sides, there being slain above sixty of the Catholics, and
about eighty of the Hugonots. The Catholic Army being divided, lodged it self
into two several quarters, shutting up the ways both by Sea and Land; for it
was their chief design to keep the Count from any means of saving himself; and
as soon as it was quartered, they presently began their trenches, and to plant
their Cannon, believing the Town was able to hold out but a very few days. But
the Count knowing his weakness, and making it his chief aim to save himself,
having the night following often given them their alarms in several places to
try and amuse the Catholic Camp, at last he with a few of his Soldiers forced
a Corpse de Guard of the Sieur de Luce his Regiment, which kept a passage toward
the Land, Montgomery flees from St. Lo.
and knowing the Country very well, by the help of the night saved himself
undiscovered in certain low moorish grounds, which use to be overflowed by the
Tide, and then passing an arm of the Sea in certain small Fisher-boats which he
found by chance, went to Danfront, having left his Son and Son-in-law at St.
Lo, but with an assured hope of relieving them within a few days.

His flight was not known unto the Catholics, (for the darkness of the night,
the small number of his company, and his means of getting away had concealed
his escape) till grown strong in Horse by the help of many Gentlemen of his
party, he began to run about the Country, cutting off passages, and making show
that he would relieve the besieged, whereby being at last assured that he was
slipped out of the net, and insulted furiously over the neighboring Country,
they called a Council of War, wherein the opinions being various, the Sieurs de
Fervaques, Ruberpre, and many others counseled the prosecution of the siege of
St. Lo, (a business which they esteemed but of a few days) to take away that
secure retreat from the Enemy, and cut off all hopes of saving themselves by
Sea; but Villers and St. Colombe were of opinion, that leaving St. Lo still
besieged, to divide the Forces of the Enemy, they should with the same celerity
they came thither follow the Count de Mongomery, thinking that to suppress him
would quite extinguish the War. This resolution being approved by Matignon,
having left Fervaques and Mali^orne to block up St. Lo, he himself with Villers
and St. Colombe, taking with them two Regiments of Foot, six hundred Horse, and
only four small pieces of Cannon, marched so speedily to Danfront, that they
prevented the Enemies intelligence; who though the Walls of the City were very
weak, yet trusting to the River Mante, that runs about one side of it, and
to the Fort, which seated upon the top of a Hill guards it on the other side,
were resolved constantly to defend the place. The night following the Cannon
were planted, and in the morning, there being hardly forty yards of the wall
beaten down, Villers despising the hindrance of the River, passed over at the
head of the Infantry up to the breast in water, and assaulted it so boldly, that
the Soldiers being terrified, fled without resistance into the Castle, and the
Town remaining in the power of the Catholics, was by the fury of the Soldiers
almost utterly ruined and destroyed: Much greater was the difficulty of
assaulting the Castle, seated upon an entire Rock, where the Sap could do
little good, and so high above the plain, that they were forced with infinite
difficulty to raise Cavaliers for the planting of their Ordnance, which while
the Catholics put in execution, with the same speed and courage, the Hugonots
still molested them with sharp bloody sallies, which at last ceased; for one
Cavalier being finished, they began furiously to batter the Curtin. After the
battering followed a fierce assault, in which though the Catholics lost St.
Colombe with a great many Volunteers, and about two hundred of their most
valiant men, the Hugonots received so much loss by the death of a great many
Gentlemen, and the greatest part of their Soldiers, that they were able to
hold out no longer; for which cause, lest the assault which was preparing with
more Forces than at first, should be renewed the next day, they yielded
themselves the same night to the discretion of the Conquerours: and Monsieur de
Matignon entering the Castle, caused the Soldiers to be pillaged, and let them
all go, keeping only some few Gentlemen prisoners, The Count Montgomery is
taken in Danfront, sent to the Court, and executed.
and the Count de Montgomery; who with a very strong guard was brought to
Court, where by the sentence of the Parliament of Paris, he was publicly
executed as a Rebel, in the place appointed for Malefactors: The King and Queen
not only rejoicing that they had freed themselves of so fierce an Enemy, who
held perpetual correspondence with foreign Princes, but also that they had
revenged the death of Henry the Second, slain by him, though accidentally, (as
we have said) in a Tournament, from the occasion of whose death proceeded
afterward all those following calamities.

Danfront being taken, Monsieur de Matignon returned to St. Lo, which he began
to besiege m^re straightly; and the seventh day Villers storming it with the
chief of all the Infantry, remained Master of the wall, (though with the loss
of much blood) and of a Tower which placed in the flank, defended the Avenue
that led toward the gate. The assault being renewed in the morning by break of
day, the victorious Army entered the Town, where the Son-in-law of Montgomery
being slain, and Monsieur de Colombiere, a Soldier of great valor and noble
birth; Monsieur Lorges Son to the Count was taken, who being condemned to the
same punishment which his Father ^ad suffered, corrupted his guards, and saved
himself by flight. Carentan^ and Valognes yielded without staying to be
besieged; that (...) being thus extinguished, which with so much danger had
been kindled in the most suspected parts of the Kingdom.

But at that time the Kings life was drawn almost unto the last period; for
having begun some months before to spit blood, being afterward oppressed with
a slow, but a continued internal Fever, he had in the end utterly lost all
strength; whereby knowing himself to be already near his death, he caused all
the Lords and Officers of the Crown which were then at Court, to be called unto
him; and having told them the danger of his sickness, and nearness of his
death, he declared his Brother Henry King of Poland to be his Successor in the
Kingdom, and until his coming, the Queen his Mother to be Regent; strictly
commanding the Duke of Alancon, the King of Navarre, and all others, under pain
of Rebellion to obey and serve her faithfully until the arrival of the lawful
King. After that the Secretaries of State, and Renato de Birago, (who a while
before was chosen High Chancellor in the place of Michael de l' Hospital
already dead) had passed the Patents for these matters, and registered them in
the Parliament, the King recommending the Peace of his Kingdom to his Council,
and his little Daughter the only Child which he had by the Queen his Wife, and
Charles his Bastard Son, who was yet a Child, unto the care of his Mother, with
grave and pious discourses, Charles the IX. dies the 30 of May, 1574.
having dismissed all those that were present, he held his Mother still fast by
the hand, and ended the course of his troublesome Reign upon the Thirtieth day
of May, before he was full Five and Twenty years of age; leaving his Kingdom,
after the revolution of so many Wars, in no less danger and confusion than he
had found it in Fourteen years before, when he came a Child unto the Crown.

The End of the Fifth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The SIXTH
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Sixth Book contains the Arts used by the Queen Regent, to hold matters in
suspense till the coming of the King, Henry the Third, out of Poland. He
departs secretly from that Kingdom, and passing through Italy, comes to Turin:
The Queen sends thither to inform him of the affairs of France; and thither
also comes the Mareshal d' Anville. The King denies to resolve upon any thing
till he have conferred with his Mother; he restores those places to the Duke of
Savoy, which for security, had till then been kept from him. He passes at Pont
Beauvoysin; is met by the Duke of Alancon and the King of Navarre; by him they
are set at liberty: He meets the Queen his Mother, and they enter the City of
Lions. The Kings designs and ends, to which he intends to direct the course of
his Government, are particularly set down; he desires Peace, and to procure it,
resolves to make War coldly. He treats of Marriage, and resolves to take to
Wife Louyse of Lorain, Daughter to the Count de Vaudemont. He is Crowned at
Rheims, and there marries her. He labors to get his Brother elected King of
Poland; but he is put beside it: The War continues in the mean time, and
Mombrun, Head of the Hugonots in Daulphine, is defeated, taken, and executed.
The King alters the manner of Government, to lessen the Authority of the Great
Ones. The Duke of Alancon deprived of the hopes of Poland, and not being able
to obtain the Title of Lieutenant General, flees from Court, and becomes Head
of the Politics and Hugonots: All the other Lords of that party, put
themselves under him, and the Prince of Conde sends him great Supplies out of
Germany; which passing through Champaigne, are routed and dispersed by the Duke
of Guise. The Queen Mother goes to confer with the Duke of Alancon, and
concludes a Truce: in the mean time the King of Navarre leaves the Court, flees
into Guienne, and declares himself Hugonot: The Prince of Conde advances with
the German Army, and at Moulins joins with the Duke of Alancon: The Queen
returns, and concludes a Peace, but with such exorbitant Conditions, that all
the Catholics are offended at it. The Duke of Guise and his Brothers lay hold
of the occasion, declare themselves Heads of the Catholic party, and make a
League to oppose the Establishment of the Hugonots; the grounds and progress of
that League are related: The King of Navarre thereupon pretending, that the
Catholics began first, by the means of the Prince of Conde, takes up Arms. The
King assembles the States General in the City of Blois, to settle things in
order; but after several attempts and contrivances, they break up without
concluding any thing. The King desires Peace; but seeing the Hugonots inclined
to War, raises two Armies against them: The Duke of Alancon with one of them
takes la Charity, Isoire, and other places; the Duke of Mayenne with the other
takes Thone-Charente and Marans. From War they come to a Treaty of Agreement:
Peace is concluded, and the Queen Mother goes to confer with the King of
Navarre to make it the stronger. The King intent upon the design of his hidden
thoughts, imploys his time wholly in Religious Exercises, assumes all Offices
to himself, and disposes of them to his Favorites; among whom, the Dukes of
Joyeuse and Espernon are especially exalted by him. He Institutes a new Order
of Knighthood called du S. Esprit. The Queen Mother goes from the King of
Navarre, and visits a great part of the Kingdom. The Duke of Alancon, to obtain
Queen Elizabeth in Marriage, goes over into England, is much honored; but,
notwithstanding public demonstrations, nothing is determined. The Hugonots
renew the War; the Prince of Conde takes la Fere in Picardy, and the King of
Navarre possesses himself of Cahors, and other places: The King dispatcheth
several Armies against them, by which la Fere is recovered, but little done in
other places: The Duke of Alancon being returned into France, interposes and
settles the Peace again. He goes into Flanders to command the States that had
cast off their Obedience to the Crown of Spain, does little good there, returns
into France, and dies.

THE death of Charles the Ninth happening just at that time when the remedies
used by him, to purge the humors of his Kingdom, were in the height of their
operation; He left not only all parts of France in great disorder and
confusion; but also the state of the Crown in exceeding danger and uncertainty,
by the subversion, or at least weakening of all the foundations of the
Government: For, besides the lawful Successor, so far distant in a strange
Country, who if he had been present, might by assisting at the Helm in a time
of so great peril, have steered and moderated the doubtful, troublesome course
of the Commonwealth, all the Instruments of Rule and Power were also either
very much weakened, or utterly perverted; and even those means which usually
maintain and preserve others, were universally bent to the distraction and
ruin of that Kingdom.

The Duke of Alancon and the King of Navarre, nearest of the Blood Royal, and
by that prerogative chief of the Council of State, were held as guilty of a
most heinous crime, and straightly guarded as prisoners. The Prince of Conde,
though very young, yet of an ancient reputation by the same of his Ancestors,
not only absent and fled from Court, but protected by the favor of the
Protestant Princes, and ready by foreign Forces to bring in new Inundations.
The Hugonots up in Arms in every Province, and manifestly intent by all means
possible to surprise and possess the chiefest Cities and Fortresses. Many of
the greatest Lords, some secretly, some openly, were alienated; and diverse of
those who had most experience in affairs, most authority with the people, and
most reputation in war, were already (if I may use that word) Cantonized in
their several Provinces and Governments; the Treasury empty, or rather
destroyed; the Gentry wearied and impoverished; the Militia wasted and
consumed; the people ruined and undone; and yet not only the dissentions in
matters of Religion, but also the emulations and enmities of the great ones
were still more than ever kindled and stirred up. In this miserable condition
no other prop upheld the State from a final subversion contrived and plotted by
so many, save only the wisdom and magnanimity of the Queen Mother, who by long
use accustomed to resist the heaviest strokes of Fortune, having presently
after the Kings death taken possession of the Regency, endeavored constantly
by the best means she could, to stop the dangerous precipice of the present
affairs.

But the diseases of that Kingdom were not so light, nor the humors that
distempered it so weak, as could by gentle medicines be cured in a short time,
especially in the Kings absence; wherefore the Queen, by the experience of so
many years, well acquainted with the nature and quality of the sickness, not
presuming more upon her own strength than in reason she ought to hope; thought
in that present conjuncture, she should do enough, if she could keep the state
of the Kingdom from growing worse, and preserve it from falling into greater
distractions, suspending the present disorders till the Kings coming; who
afterward with a well-grounded resolution might apply such remedies as he
thought most proper: and in this she imitated the ordinary custom which
Physicians observe in the cure of the most desperate maladies; who having in
hand a body full of gross, corrupt humors, either in the heat of the Dog Days,
or the extreme cold of Winter, (both times unfit to cleanse and purge them
away) endeavor by gentle lenitive medicines to allay the violence of the
disease, till the convenience of the season gives them opportunity to make a
perfect cure. She was the rather persuaded to take that course, because she
knew not what the King would resolve on; who though he had severely persecuted
the Hugonots, during the Reign of his Brother, yet men's opinions and
resolutions changing, according to the alteration of affairs, she could not be
certain whether he would incline to Peace or War; and therefore she thought
best to reserve things in such manner, that he might have power to follow that
which he most approved. Wherefore being resolved to dissemble, and to value the
substance more than the appearance of things, she determined first of all to
make preparations for War, that she might not be taken unprovided; and then in
other matters, with delays and prolonged hopes to lull and entertain the
expectations and inclinations of the Great Ones, endeavoring chiefly to keep
Foreign Armies from invading any part of the Kingdom.

With this resolution she with all speed sent Gaspar Count of Schombergh, to
raise six thousand Swisses, and some Troops of German Cavalry; to the Duke of
Montpensier (who by reason of the Kings desperate sickness was come to Court)
she gave charge, that returning presently to the Camp which was left in
Poictou, he should recruit both the Horse and Foot as much as he could: and the
same commission she gave to the Prince Daulphine, who with the other Army was
in the confines of Daulphine and Languedoc: and nevertheless at the same time
having still a regard to those ends she had secretly proposed to her self,
though she took not away the guards which were placed upon the Duke of Alancon
and the King of Navarre, yet she began to use them with wonderful shows of
honor and affection; for alleging that it stood not with their reputation to
be set at liberty without some previous testimony of their innocence, and
without the decree and consent of the lawful King, lest the nearness of blood
and relation might seem to have had greater power with her than truth and
reason; in all other things she showed such an entire confidence in them, that
she did nothing of importance without their advice; and promised besides to be
a particular Instrument in effecting their hopes and pretensions: by which
means the Duke of Alancon, being of an unconstant nature, and allured by his
Mothers flatteries, suffered himself to be easily guided by her subtilty: and
the King of Navarre, finding no opportunity to advance his fortune, feigned to
give credit to all she said. Thus these two Princes either drawn (though not
sincerely) to her party, or quieted, and as it were lulled asleep, the Regency
being confirmed in her without opposition, she jointly with her Son and
Son-in-law, writ to the Magistrates, Governors of Provinces, and other
Officers of the Crown; not because their assent was necessary to make her
Orders authentic, nor because she had any great confidence in them; but to
show she was both in mind and counsel united with those Princes, and to take
away all hopes of their protection from those, who desiring new changes, had
set their eyes upon them with wondrous expectation. These Letters, besides the
notice of the Kings death, and his election of the Queen Mother to be Regent,
contained also the confirmation of those Edicts granted (by Charles lately
deceased) to those of the Reformed Religion; as Liberty of Conscience, the free
permission of their Ecclesiastical Rites; and finally, an effectual exhortation
to them all, to live under the obedience of those Edicts, and of the ordinary
Magistrates, in quietness and tranquillity; on the other side, exhorting those
Magistrates to conserve all persons in their own just rights, and to prohibit
any kind of molestation to all sorts of people whatsoever; which things were by
Monsieur de Villeroy Secretary of State, her most assured Confident, laid open
with many artificial flourishes, and with interpretations, and commissions
favorable to the Hugonots: to withdraw the fuel from that fire; and among so
many discords, in part to qualify and mitigate in the minds of such as were
most credulous, those so turbulent dissentions kindled in matters of Religion.

To these satisfactory words, joining deeds no less proper and efficacious, she
dispatched the Abbot Giovanni Baptista Guadagni, to Monsieur de la Noue, to
treat of a cessation of Arms in Poictou and Xaintonge, where the Duke of
Montpensier still increasing his Army, did purposely slacken his proceedings;
it being the intent of the Queen Regent, rather to suspend the causes, than
prosecute or hasten the effects. With the same directions she dispatched
Monsieur* de St. Sulpice to the Mareshal d' Anville, to the end that by giving
him hopes of his Brothers liberty, and of his confirmation in the Government of
Languedoc, he might endeavor to settle the commotions also in those parts, and
bring things to a truce, which she was resolved to accept of, though upon
disadvantageous conditions. The Abbot Guadagni's negotiation produced its
effect; for the Rochellers, and other people thereabouts, who by woeful
experience had sufficiently known the valor and severe resolutions of the new
King, when, as his Brothers Lieutenant, he made War against the Hugonots; In
the absence of the new King Henry 3. a Truce is made for two months.
being in very great fear of him, inclined easily to the Truce, as it were to a
forerunner and introduction of Peace; for which cause it was concluded, that
there should be a Cessation of Arms for two next ensuing months, July and
August, and for as much longer as the King should think fit, to whom they
remitted themselves in that business; and that 12000 Crowns should be paid unto
them by the Regent, to maintain their Garrisons without annoying or molesting
the Country.

But the Treaty of St. Sulpice wrought not the same effect; for though the
Mareshal d' Anville was more disposed to maintain himself by arts and
dissimulations, than by force, and therefore inclined to the Truce; yet of his
own party Mombrun in Daulphine, who made War rather like an Outlaw against
every body, than like a Soldier against a certain Enemy, would not hearken to
any agreement, which would necessitate him to lay down his Arms, and cease to
overrun and spoil the Country: And on the other part, the Catholics of
Languedoc, and especially the Parliament of Toulouse, were so enflamed against
the Mareshal d' Anville, that they hardly yielded to the Cessation, though
commanded by the Queen Regent; it would at last have been effected, if d'
Anville at the same time aiming by any means to secure and possess himself of
those places that depended on him, arrogating the Kings power to himself, had
not by deeds contrary to his words, summoned the States of that Province, and
by means of his own adherents, published Decrees and Ordinances, The Parliament
of Toulouse ordains, that the Truce shall not be accepted no^ executed.
which had more of an absolute Prince, than of a Governor. Whereupon the
Parliament of Toulouse, infinitely incensed at those proceedings which did
manifestly impair their authority, not only refused the Truce themselves; but
forbad all those of the Catholic party either to accept, or put it in
execution.

But neither the injuries of her Enemies, nor the disobedience of her Friends,
could alter the Queens determination; who making small account of outward
appearances, minded only the compassing of her own ends: Wherefore continuing
the businesses which were set on foot, she treated still with him, and with his
Agents, to gain the benefit of time by the same arts, wherewith he endeavored
to settle the foundations of his own Estate: Which things, while they were in
agitation, the Rochellers, fickle and unconstant in their resolutions, either
because they were excited by those of Languedoc, or because the 12000 Crowns
which were paid them, were not sufficient to maintain their Soldiers, who
wanting the spoils of War, disbanded and forsook them daily, upon a sudden
broke the Truce, The Rochellers break the Truce.
which a while before was so willingly accepted and concluded, and in all
places round about committed most grievous cruel outrages: 1573.
Yet neither for all this was the Queen any thing dismayed; but dissembling all
injuries with mavelous patience, to accomplish her own designs, dispatched
new Agents to the Rochellers, and to d' Anville, that they might renew the
Treaty; it sufficing her, though the business could not be effected, that till
she had notice of the Kings arrival, the time might be spun out, without new
troubles and distractions; and therefore every where mingling Treaties of
accommodation with actions of War, both sides proceeded with equal slowness,
not concluding any agreement, and employing the Armies only in the business of
small importance.

And now affairs were brought almost to the point which the Queen before
desired; for Monsieur de Montpensier with an Army kept the Forces of the
Hugonots at a Bay in Xaintonge; the Prince Daulphine, with another, opposed
their attempts in Daulphine; and d' Anville, who, doubtful in his mind, thought
more to establish himself, than to make any new conquests, being held in hand
with arts and promises, drew out the time, without making any more express
Declaration. But the Prince of Conde, residing in Strasbourgh, one of the Hans
Towns in Germany, was already resolved (following the steps of his Father) to
make himself Head of his party; and therefore treated with the Protestant
Princes about the raising of new Forces, and by Messages solicited the
Hugonots of France, to unite and gather themselves together, and to assist him
with some reasonable sum of money, whereby while the King was absent, he might
without delay enter with a powerful Army into Burgongne.

For this cause the Deputies of the Hugonot Provinces (they then called them
the Reformed Churches) being met together at Millaut, with the Agents of the
Mareshal d' Anville, (who, though he feigned the contrary, and entertained the
Queen Regent with words and promises, was yet secretly united to them) they
consulted as well about the means of procuring money, as about the conditions
upon which they should admit the Prince unto that command; which the Queen no
sooner knew, but she presently dispatched fitting persons (whereof she
judiciously chose many, and with her liberality maintained a great number) who
under color of treating an agreement, should by sowing doubts and discords,
hinder and delay the resolutions of that meeting: nor did the Deputies agree
very well among themselves; for though they all knew well enough, that without
the name of a Prince of the Blood, that should, both within and without the
Kingdom, want authority and reputation, and by consequence the strength of all
their Forces; yet were their opinions diverse concerning the Prince: for many
had yet set their eyes upon the Duke of Alancon; Henry the III. ill affected to
the King of Navarre and Prince of C^nd^, Heads of the Hugonots; as also to the
Duke of G^ise, Hea^ of the Catholics
many desired the King of Navarre; and some were unsatisfied with the youth of
the Prince of Conde, doubting that his want of years and experience would be
accompanied with weakness and contempt. To this was joined the ambiguousness of
d' Anville, who though his chiefest aim was his own security, and the
conservation of his Government of Languedoc, yet could he not altogether
withdraw his thoughts from pretending to the first place, which though he could
not obtain for himself, yet he desired at least that he that had it, should
acknowledge it principally from him: nor could it much please la Noue, whose
power with the Rochellers was very great to see a Superior chosen, whose
eminence and reputation would much eclipse and diminish the authority of his
Command. But neither the Queens policy, nor their own particular divisions
could restrain the general ardour and inclination with which most of them
voluntarily concurred, to put themselves under that Prince, whose Ancestors
they were accustomed to obey, and whose very name alone made deep impressions
in the minds of the people, by reason of the so famous, and so much deplored
memory of his Father. Wherefore the Articles of Agreement were set down in the
name of the Provinces, ( d' Anville and la Noue assenting to them of necessity,
though secretly whereby after their wonted pretenses and protestations, the
power and command of that party was conferred upon the Prince of Conde, The
Prince of Conde is made Head of the Hugonots.
committing to his protection both the Liberty of their Consciences, and the
ordering of that War which was thought so necessary for their common safety. To
these Capitulations joining a convenient sum of money, they appointed three
Deputies to assist the Prince, both in the conduct and sudden expedition of the
Germans, and to relate to him the state of their affairs, and their common
resolutions.

At this very time the Hugonots using all possible means to help themselves,
printed an infinite number of little Pamphlets under diverse Titles, but all
with biting stings and fabulous Narrations against the Actions and Government
of the Queen Regent, to whom many of them being brought, and the Council
purposing to decree severe punishments against the Authors and Printers of
those defamatory Pamphlets, and seditious Libels; she opposed that opinion,
alleging, that to prohibit them, was a certain means to make them authentic;
and that there was no greater proof nor trial of the good, than when they were
hated, and abused by malicious people; and persevering in her resolution, not
to regard outward appearances, she dissembled all those injuries with admirable
patience; but when she saw the preparations for the coming of the Germans,
being most resolute to oppose them with force, if policy were not sufficient,
she went from Paris accompanied with the Duke of Alancon and the King of
Navarre, who not yet set at liberty, followed her, but without constraint; and
being come into Burgongne, she her self mustered the Swisses and Germans,
confirming the affections of the Commanders with liberal gifts, and many
favors; and then marching with them toward the Provinces that were up in
Arms, which were the same where the Kings coming was expected, and through
which the Army of the Protestants intended to enter the Kingdom, she resolved
to stay in Lions as a convenient place to move which way soever need required.

In the mean time, the King having had notice of the death of Charles, brought
to him by Monsieur de Chemeraut, within thirteen days, though the Nobility of
the Kingdom of Poland, infinitely satisfied with his valor and comportment,
did use all possible means to stay him there; yet he not willing to forego his
hereditary right to France, for the elective Kingdom of Poland, there being so
great a difference between them; and solicited by those urgent affairs which
called him away, to remedy such violent dangers, departed secretly by night
with a small retinue, and passing through Austria with all possible speed, went
forward toward his own Kingdom by the way of Italy. He was continually hastened
by Letters and Messages from the Queen Regent, who with much ado smothering the
sparks of that fire, which was ready to break into a flame, infinitely desired
her Sons presence, that she might without further delay apply such remedies as
were proper for the malignity of the disease: wherefore the King suspending no
longer time than just what necessity required in the entertainments of the
Princes of Italy, and particularly in the delights of Venice, where he was
received with wonderful pomp and honor, about the end of August arrived at
Thurin, where it was expected he would begin to prepare, and lay the
groundwork of his designs.

The Mareshal d' Anville, upon security of the Duke of Savoy's word, came
thither to him, as also Philippe Huraut Viscount of Chiverny his old
Chancellor, Gaspar Count of Schombergh, Bernard de Fizes, and Nicholas de
Neuville Sieur de Villeroy, both Secretaries of State, who all were sent from
the Queen Regent, to give him an account of the affairs of his Kingdom. But the
King having heard their relation, with the secret designs of his Mother, and on
the other side the pretenses and excuses of the Mareshal, though not only Roger
Sieur de Bellegarde, and Guy de Pibrac his favored Counselors; but also the
Duke of Savoy, and the Lady Margaret labored all they could to bring him to
some determination that might be favorable to d' Anville; yet nourishing high
thoughts in the depth of his mind, and making his excuse that he would resolve
nothing without the assistance and approbation of his Mother, to whose
vigilance and prudence he was so much obliged, he dismissed d' Anville with
ambiguous answers, and hastened his journey so much the more, lest he should be
put upon a necessity of referring that to the determinations of others, which
he purposed to reserve to the execution of his own premeditated designs; for
the better compassing whereof, seeing he had so many businesses to settle in
his own Kingdom, that for many decads of years it would be in vain to think of
any enterprise on that side of the Mountains; and desiring absolutely to gain
the Duke of Savoy and the Lady Margaret, that he might make use of them
afterward in the effecting of his purposes, Henr^ the III. returning out of
Poland, stays at Thurin, and restores certain places to the Duke of Savoy, kept
by the Kings of France for s^curity.
he resolved to restore unto them Pignerol, Savillan, and la Vallee de Perouse,
which for security of the intentions of those Princes, had been held by the
Kings his Predecessors; thinking it superfluous to keep places with a vast
expense, out of his own Kingdom, which were of no other use but in
consideration of those hopes, which as affairs then stood, were very far off,
and unlikely. Yet many condemned that his precipitate restitution of them, and
Lodovico Gonzaga Duke of Nevers Governor of those places, and a man of equal
wisdom and loyalty, after having used all possible endeavors that they might
not be restored, laid open his opinion finally in writing, which he desired
might be kept for his discharge, among the Records and Charters of the Crown;
whereat the King was offended, though he wisely dissembled it, thinking them
vain and ambitious, who would seem to know more of his own secrets than he
himself.

The fifth day of September, he came into the confines of his own Kingdom at
Pont-Beau-voysin, where the Duke of Alancon, and the King of Navarre expected
him, who having till then (though with much gentleness) been kept as prisoners,
were with demonstrations of much honor and affection fully set at liberty by
him at the first meeting; and to give the greater testimony of his good will
toward them, he placed himself in the midst between them both, to receive his
subjects which were come thither to the confines to show their dutiful respects
unto him. The next day he met the Queen his Mother, who was purposely come to a
little Castle near Lions; and being entered together into the City, they began
without further delay, to treat of businesses, concerning the Peace, or War
which they were to make with their armed subjects.

The King knew very well not only the wavering troublesome estate of his
Kingdom, but also the miserable condition to which he himself at that time was
reduced; for the whole Kingdom being divided into two different factions, the
one of the Catholics, the other of the Hugonots, both which had their chief
heads appointed and established long before hand, and through the long
reiterated distractions, not only the Cities and Provinces, but also all
particular persons divided between them, he found that he was left (as we use
to say) dry between two Rivers; and that his power being shared and dismembered
between those two great parties, he retaining nothing but the name of a King,
was utterly deprived both of his forces, and due obedience; and moreover, that
to avoid misery and contempt, he was necessitated to become factious, and
partial; and mixing in the dissentions of his subjects, to make himself the
author of his own misfortunes, and a necessary instrument to imbroil and
destroy his own Kingdom. For though the Hugonots and Politics were called by
the name of Rebels, as those who first had shaken off the yoke of their
obedience to the King, and openly opposed him; and though the Catholics fought
under a color of so specious and so necessary a cause as the defense and
preservation of their Religion; yet for all that the malice of mankind had
mingled with it the venom of private interests, and under that honorable
pretense, the ambition of the Great Ones had to the prejudice of their Kings,
built up their own Power, and established a kind of unsufferable Authority.

The Guises, whilst in the Reign of the late Kings they bore the principal sway
in the Government, had very fair opportunities to raise and confirm their own
Greatness, by putting the commands of strong places, and the Governments of
Provinces into the hands of their own Creatures, and nearest Confidents; by
placing their dependants in the Courts of Justice, in the Kings Council, in the
chief honors of the Court, and the management of the Finances; and by drawing
an infinite number of men to their own devotion, who were straightly engaged to
them for many favors, gifts, riches and dignities obtained by their means;
which things, whilst the minds of men were passionately inclined to that party,
and taken with the specious mask of Religion, to many seemed tolerable, and to
many very reasonable and just: But now they were taken notice of to be united
in one body of a Faction, they appeared as a great engine erected to oppose,
and upon any fit occasion to resist even the authority and pleasure of the King
himself. But on the other side, the Hugonots had no less convenience of
establishing themselves, and strengthening their own power; for having by the
ostentation of liberty, and by promising Offices and Authority, drawn unto
themselves all the malcontents and turbulent spirits, who once entangled,
could no more dis-ingage themselves; and the Edicts of so many several
Pacifications, having still confirmed those Offices and Governments to those
upon whom they had been conferred by the Princes and Heads of the Faction; in
process of time, the Provinces were incumbered with them, places of strength
possessed by them, many chief Offices of the Crown replenished with their
adherents, and a great part of the Nobility, with many popular men, were united
and interested with them through the whole Kingdom. Wherefore the late Kings,
who by reason of the shortness of their Reigns, had given greater opportuity to
the building up of those two powerful Factions, remaining utterly deprived of
all the means and instruments of Government, were forced by necessity to become
Champions of the passion, and Promoters of the greatness of other men; so that
being unable of themselves to execute any solid resolute design, in stead of
governing, they were governed; and in stead of bridling that violence, they
themselves were carried away by the impetuous stream of those Factions: which
indignities being seriously considered by the present King, full of high
thoughts, and of a lively generous spirit, had made such an impression in him,
that though he used his uttermost endeavors to dissemble and conceal it, he
could not but with deep sighs often break forth into the words of Lewis the XI,
(one of his Predecessors) Qu' il estoit temps de met^re les Roys hor^ Page.
That it was now high time to put Kings out of their Page-ships: meaning, that
they having so long been subject to the lash and discipline of the Heads of
those Factions, it was then seasonable to shake off their Empire and Dominion.
With these considerations having even in the time of his Brothers Reign begun
to observe and deplore that weakness of the Kings, and insolence of the
Subjects, and having made a greater reflection upon them in the thoughts of his
late Voyage, after the Crown was fallen into his hands, he resolved with
himself to use all possible force to shake from his neck the wretched
dishonorable yoke of those Factions, and to make himself a free absolute King,
as so many of his glorious Ancestors had been.

But as this thought was certainly very necessary for one that desired to
Reign, and very just in the lawful possessor of a Crown; so was it also
infinitely hard and difficult to be put in execution. He wanted the sinews of
the Treasury, already wasted and consumed; he wanted the obedience of his
Subjects, who were so obstinately interested in their several Factions, that
the Majesty and Veneration of a King was already become fabulous and
contemptible: he wanted faithful trusty Ministers; for every one by some strait
tie or other was engaged to one of the parties; and the business of it self by
reason of their so excessive power, was a work of mighty art, extraordinary
cars, infinite diligence; and for the perfecting thereof, propitious Fortune
was no less requisite than great length of time. But notwithstanding all these
so weighty obstacles, the Kings mind being so inwardly wounded, that he could
not take himself off from the perpetual meditation of that design, and thinking
no enterprise (how painful or difficult soever) impossible to his youth and
valor, firmly determined to apply all his most powerful endeavors to compass
that end, which he was not only persuaded to by public respects and his former
considerations, but was also moved and incited thereunto by his own private
passions and particular inclinations; Henry the III. ill-affected to the King
of Navarre and Prince of Conde, Heads of the Hugonots; as also to the Duke of
Guise, Head of the Catholics.
for having conceived an inveterate hatred against the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, from the time that he was employed against them, in that War
wherein he had been nourished and brought up from his very childhood; he
ardently desired to see the ruin of them, and of all the rest of their
Faction; from whom, by reason of former injuries, he believed he could never
have any real nor faithful service: and on the other side, calling to mind the
offense received from the Duke of Guise in the person of his Sister the Lady
Margaret then Queen of Navarre, (of whom it was reported that he had obtained
more than ordinary favors) he had converted all the love which he formerly
bare him into so great a spleen, that (although he dissembled it) he burned
with a most fervent desire of revenge; and for her sake could not endure any
interest, dependence or alliance of blood with the house of Guise; so that
public causes concurring with private enmities, he so much the more easily
resolved to destroy both those so potent Factions.

But in contriving proper means to attain that end, the first doubt he met
withal was this, Whether the establishment of Peace or continuance of War were
more profitable for the advancement of this design; and though partly to
discover their inclinations, partly to draw from them some considerations
agreeing with his own intents, he heard the opinions of his Councillors in
that point; some exhorting him to embrace Peace, and others encouraging the
prosecution of the War; yet he concluded with himself, that War continually
nourishing and increasing the force and power of the Factions, was
disadvantageous for his present purpose; and that Peace which would lull asleep
turbulent spirits, and with the benefit of time quiet the passions and
animosities of both parties, was much more helpful and proper to the effecting
of his desires. For whilst the War continued, new Abettors and Adherents were
daily added to the Factions, new places fortified, which were in the power of
the Heads of those parties, new Garrisons brought in, and youth was bred up in
the profession of Arms, and in the obstinacy of civil dissentions: whereas by
Peace, the feuds and enmities between particular men would be extinguished, the
course of the Factions stopped, the fortifications already made (as the custom
is) would be demolished, the number of those, who (wanting other means of
living) maintained themselves by War, would be dissipated, the remembrance of
past hatreds buried, and the old engaged Leaders (so accustomed to discord)
dropping away, young men, free from passion, and bred in peaceful thoughts,
would spring up in their places. To these reasons was also added this other
important respect, That it being necessary for the execution of so great a
design, to furnish the Treasury with some store of moneys for the foundation of
his own power, and the sufficient maintenance of his Greatness, and Forces
proper for a King; this could not be put in practice but by the benefit of
Peace, since War did continually destroy and consume the public stock, wasting
that in a few months, which with much labor was a whole year a gathering from
the people. Besides this, that old consideration wrought also, which had ever
produced the conclusion of Peace; for the Prince of Conde being ready to come
out of Germany with a great foreign Army to the evident danger of France, it
seemed much more to the purpose to divert that tempest by an agreement, than by
resisting it with force in that weak beginning of his Reign to put the state of
his Kingdom in so manifest an hazard. These reasons, which perchance by the
desire of Rest, and of the delights of the Court, (to which he was very much
inclined) were made to appear more valid and powerful, persuaded him to embrace
an accommodation; yet because the occasions of the War were so just and
reasonable, and because the Hugonots on their part provoked him daily with new
injuries, in so much as Mombrun coming from the mountains of Daulphine, had
plundered his own carriages as they passed from Savoy to Lions; and on the
other side, because the Catholic Princes unanimously exhorted him not to
forsake that path of constancy and valor which in former times he had so
gloriously trodden, for the suppression and extirpation of heresy; he feared
his designs would easily be discovered, if it were observed, that he, a young
warlike Prince, should refuse to show himself against the Rebellious, and not
care to punish the insolence and contumacy of his own Subjects: for having no
cause to think that his former actions could argue him guilty of either
baseness of mind, or weakness of understanding, they would rather believe he
had directed his aim at some further and more important ends, which he thought
it would be impossible for him to compass, when once they were laid open by
more than probable conjectures: wherefore resolving to make use of the
continued ordinary means of dissimulation, which by nature and custom he was
very well versed in, he determined in himself to continue the War, but with
such cold faint proceedings as should not alter the state of affairs; and in
the mean time by convenient opportunities dexterously and dissemblingly to
bring in Peace, upon the ground whereof he would after go on to nearer, and to
more effectual means; for feigning sometimes to be taken up with exercises of
devotion, sometimes with pleasing delightful entertainments, he thought by a
show of negligence and carelessness in time to delude the wisdom of the most
politic Observers, as if nourishing only soft effeminate thoughts, he had
wholly given himself over to ease and devotion.

With those arts he thought he might easily lull the vigilance of the Faction,
and afterward have both time and opportunity, as occasion served, to build up
his designs. He purposed to cherish, and exalt in Court quick-witted and
crafty-natured men, to whom he might securely commit the administration the
Government; in time he intended to draw into the hands of his Creatures and
Confidents, not so much the name and title, as the substance and essence, both
of the greatest Civil and Military Offices; he hoped with those opportunities
which time uses to afford, by degrees to take away the greatness and reputation
of powerful factious men, either by depriving them of their place, diminishing
their adherents, lessening their credit, or finally by cutting them off; by
which means prudently managed he promised himself, (though with some length of
time) that he should ruin and pull down by little and little, those powers
which had been built up, and now appeared so eminent and terrible; which things
wisely disposed, and discreetly contrived, might perhaps in the end have
succeeded happily, if the King in process of time had not suffered himself to
be transported by his own nature and inclinations.

Now being upon these considerations, resolved to continue the name, but to
flacken the effects of War, he recalled the Prince from the command of the
Army, who with an ardour equal to his courage, and a sincerity equal to his
nature, had done his business so handsomely, that having taken and sacked
Paufin, a place of very great consequence, and overrun all the Province of
Vivarez, he had filled the Hugonots with infinite terror; which progress being
contrary to the Kings intention, having sent for him from the Army, under
color of being present at his Consecration, he committed the charge thereof
unto Roger Sieur de Bellegarde, newly created Mareshal, who was not only an
interested friend to d' Anville, with whom chiefly he was to make War in that
Province, but one esteemed by the King so faithful to him, that he was
confident he might dispose of him at his own pleasure; and because the Duke of
Montpensier on the other side, having razed Lusignan, taken Fontenay, and other
adjacent Towns, pressed the Hugonots so home, that they were already, as it
were, shut up in Rochel, he commanded away some of his Forces, pretending, that
they were more necessary in Champagne, to hinder the entrance of that foreign
Army, which under the Prince of Conde, was not far distant from the borders of
the Kingdom; and because Henry Duke of Guise, the principal Head of the
Catholic party, Governor of Champagne, had the command of the Forces of that
Province, he made Armand Sieur de Byron his Lieutenant; who no less famous for
wisdom, than valor, had already showed himself very favorable to the Hugonots.

Matters of War being settled, and balanced in this manner, the King began to
think of Marriage; for, the hopes of the Family depending upon him, and the
Duke of Alancon, both without Children, it was necessary to provide for the
succession of the Kingdom. Before he went into Poland, he was not a little
taken with Louyse, the Daughter of Nicolas Count of Vaudemont, and Niece to the
Duke of Lorain, being besides the beauty of her person, infinitely pleased with
the modesty of her disposition, and discreet behavior; but the fear of
augmenting the greatness of the House of Lorain, and of bringing the Cardinal
into the management of affairs, whose genius was wont to rule the wills, and
sway the affections of his Predecessors, did much dissuade him from that
thought; and recalling to mind the late occurrences, under the Reigns of
Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, and the great pretentions and
authority of the Cardinal, he could not bend his mind, to suffer by that means,
a new increase of that Power, the abatement whereof he had with so much labor,
and so long patience propounded to himself. For which considerations turning
his thoughts another way, he purposed to demand Elizabeth Sister to John King
of Sweden, The King demands the Sister of the King of Sweden to Wife.
a Princess for wit and beauty not inferior to any; and Secretary Pinart was
presently sent to treat about the match. But in the mean time while the King
stayed at Avignon, the Cardinal of Lorain (whose power and wisdom he so much
feared) chancing to die of a Burning Fever, he suddenly changed his
determination, The death of the Cardinal of Lorain.
recalling Pinart from his treaty, and being swayed by affection, which in all,
but especially in great minds, prevails above all other respects, he took to
Wife Louyse de Vaudemont, who in the beginning of the next year was brought to
Rheimes by the Duke, and Duchess of Lorain.

The Kings third consideration, was, how to settle his Brother the Duke of
Alancon, who being of a seditious spirit, and fickle turbulent nature, was not
likely to be more quiet in the Reign of the present King, whom he already hated
and envied, than he had been in the late Reign of Charles, who had not given
him such causes of hatred and emulation. Two Propositions came into his mind
for that purpose; one was to procure Elizabeth Queen of England in Marriage for
him, but that had been often treated of, and always waved, by her resolution
not to marry: the other to resign the Crown of Poland to him, but that could
not be done, but by the consent and election of that people, the which (they
believing themselves injured and deprived by the King, in his so secret
departure from them) was very hard to be obtained. But not being to be
discouraged by difficulty, from making trial what might be done, he chose two
Ambassadors to treat about the business, Guy Sieur de Pibrac a man of great
learning and experience, one of his intimate Counselors, and Roger Sieur de
Bellegarde, substituting in the command of the Army Alberto Gonai Count of
Retz, who because he was an Italian, brought up, and raised by King Charles,
and the Queen Mother, was infinitely trusted by him, and made partaker of many
of his most hidden secret intentions.

With these designs, but with a show of feasts and triumphs, began the year
1575. For the King being departed from Avignon, 1575.
to be consecrated with the accustomed Ceremonies, was come to Rheimes, where
the holy Oil is kept in a Viol (commonly called the Sancte Ampoule) destined by
ancient Veneration, for the anointing of the Kings of France. The Ceremonies
were performed with solemn State, by Lewis Cardinal of Lorain, The King is
consecrated at Reims by Lewis Cardinal of Lorain, Brother to the Duke of Guise,
and next day marries Louyse de Vaudemont Niece to the Duke of Lorain.
the Duke of Guises Brother; and the next day after the King married the
Princess Louyse; all the sadness of former troubles, dissolving it self into
delightful thoughts, dances, tournaments, and all manner of pomp and jollity:
then having visited the Church of St. Maclou, where the Kings with a fast of
nine days, and other pennances, use to receive that famous Gift of Healing the
Kings Evil with nothing but a touch, the King in the end of March came into the
City of Paris.

In the beginning of April, the Deputies of the Prince of Conde, the Mareshal
d' Anville, and of the associated Provinces, were come thither by his
permission, to treat of Peace; to whom were joined the Ambassadors of the Queen
of England, and of the Cantons of Swisserland, to exhort and persuade the King,
to grant those conditions to the Hugonots, which they thought necessary for
their security: but their demands were so exorbitant, though the King were of
himself inclined to embrace Peace, yet could he not bend his mind to hearken to
them; and the Catholic party with bitter murmurings spoke openly against the
insolence, and impertinence of their propositions: wherefore after a long
ambiguous Negotiation, the Deputies took leave, returning to relate the Kings
pleasure to those that sent them; and left Arenes one of their number at the
Court, to keep the business i^ agitation, and not utterly to cut off the treaty
of Peace, which was so much desired on both sides.

About this time (though it were contrary to the Kings intent) the War was not
at all less active, than it was before; for men's minds being inflamed of
themselves, by the fire of each faction, much blood was daily spilt in several
encounters; and it happened, Mombrun who had taken the Kings carriages is taken
himself and executed.
that Mombrun, grown proud by the success of many Victories, thinking to have
his wonted fortune, in a sudden disorderly charge, which he gave the Forces of
Monsieur de Gordes the Kings Lieutenant in Daulphine, was not only repulsed,
but also so streightened, between a River and a Hill, by the multitude of the
Catholics, that all his men being defeated and scattered, he was first
wounded, and after taken prisoner; so that being brought to Grenoble, he was by
public decree of the Parliament condemned to death, and the sentence executed
without delay; he not only bearing the punishment of those infinite troubles,
which he had brought upon that Province, but also of his boldness in daring to
plunder the Kings own Carriages and Servants. From this battle wherein Mombrun
was defeated, escaped Francis de Bonne Sieur de Lesdiquiers, Francis Bonne made
Head of the Hugo^ots, and after High-Constable of the Kingdom.
a man of great wisdom, and no less boldness and vivacity, who in process of
time, being made Head of the Hugonot Faction in Daulphine, advanced himself by
his prudence and courage so far above his own private condition, that in the
end he came with incredible reputation to be made High-Constable of the
Kingdom.

Nor was the state of affairs any quieter in the other Provinces; for the
Marshall d' Anville having called a meeting at Nismes, and another afterward
at Montpellier, had declared himself Head of the Politics, and joining in
confederacy with the Hugonots, had openly attempted those places, which held of
the Kings party; In the Province of Perigort, Henry de la Tour Viscount of
Turenne, had caused many places to revolt unto the Hugonots, in Normandy the
Rebels had taken the Mount St. Michaell, though within a few days after it was
recovered by the care and valor of Matignon; and in all those Provinces, there
happened daily little, but frequent encounters, which though they altered not
the condition of businesses in the main, yet did they nourish discord in men's
minds, and augment the power of the Faction; which reasons confirming the King
so much the more in his resolutions of procuring a Peace, he sent Monsieur de
la Hunaude, a man of much popular eloquence, to treat with la Noue and the
Rochellers, to try if by any means they might be removed from those high
conditions they demanded; and still continued the Negotiation of Agreement with
the Agents of the Prince of Conde and Monsieur d' Anville. He also very
politickly gave a beginning to those arts which were already contrived, and
showed openly that his mind was averse from the troubles of business, and the
toils of War; and on the other side, much addicted to a devout solitary life*
entertaining himself with softer pleasures, and more gentle quiet
conversations: but in the mean time he ceased not to consult privately, and as
much as he could to draw forward his design; which that it might be kept the
more secret, he continued his custom of not propounding his most weighty
affairs in the open Council of State, but to treat of them only in the
Cabinet-Council, which was begun in his Brothers time, and by him reduced to a
very small number, which were the Queen his Mother, Renato di Birago an
Italian, High Chancellor, Alberto Gondi Count of Retz, Philip Hurault Viscount
of Chiverny, Pompone Sieur de Bellieure, Sebastian de l' Aubespine Bishop of
Limogss, Rene Sieur de Villeguier, and the two Secretaries, Pinart and
Villeroy. To these not communicating the whole secret, but only those things
which were presently to be done, he resolved as he saw occasion; and daily drew
persons of wit and valor to the Court, but such as, taken from moderate
fortunes, ought to acknowledge their advancement only from his hand. And to
bring the disposing of the public moneys, and the giving of all grants into
his own power, that so men might be obliged to him alone, Henry the III. frames
a new Model of Government.
and the dependence be taken away from the Heads and Princes of the Factions;
seeming to find fault with the ill-ordering of those two most principal things
in his Brothers time, he decreed that the Treasurers, not giving other account
to the Chamber appointed for that purpose, nor to the Superintendent of the
Finances, might make up their accounts and reckonings with nothing but
acquittances signed with his hand; by which means disposing of moneys according
to his own pleasure, he caused it secretly to be conveyed where he thought most
convenient, without making any body acquainted with it but himself. In the
business of grants and favors, he commanded that no one should intercede or
beg for another, The manner observed at Court in the granting of Petitions.
but that every one should present their own Petitions, which being once signed
with his hand, the Secretaries of State were presently to dispatch them without
delay, reply or contradiction: for during the Reigns of the late Kings, the
Princes and great men of the Kingdom, and the Favorites of the Court were wont
to present Petitions for private men, favoring their requests by their
Authority, and the Petitions were sent to the Secretaries of State and the High
Chancellor; who, if they found any thing in them contrary to Law, or the
Institutions of the Kingdom, rejected and refused them without further
consultation: But if they were such things as might be granted without
inconveniency, they registered them in a Roll orderly head by head, which Roll
was always read once in so many days before the King and his Council, and every
request being maturely weighed, those that were granted, were signed by the
Kings hand, and those that were denied, were crossed out of the Roll, and that
being copied fair, was called the Counter-Roll; which was no sooner done, but
the High Chancellor sealed it, and then the Secretaries dispatched them
presently. But Henry desirous to deprive the great ones of that means of
gaining adherents and dependents, resolved to alter that course, and therefore
ordained that private persons should bring their Petitions immediately to
himself, which he reading at convenient times, signed those which he was
pleased to grant, and would have the Secretaries of State without further
debate or exceptions instantly to prepare the Warrants; which new custom,
though it seemed strange to the great persons of the Kingdom, and gave occasion
of distaste to many, yet brought it the grant of all Gifts, Pardons and Offices
into the Kings absolute disposing, taking away by little and little the
followers that flocked after the Heads of the Factions, and reducing all
Petitioners to acknowledge their Obligations particularly to himself.

On this manner did Henry go politickly advancing his designs; but as all
things which must be effected with length of time, receive diverse alterations,
according to the variety of worldly accidents, there happened a thing, which for
a season crossed and interrupted the Kings purposes. The Duke of Alancon had
till then been kept in hand by the hopes of attaining the Kingdom of Poland:
For though Monsieur de Bellegarde discontented at many things, and seeing
himself lessened in the Kings favor, was retired into the Marquesate of
Saluzzo, whereof he was Governor, and had refused to treat concerning that
Election; yet Monsieur de Pibrac, a man of perfect abilities, went thither, and
for a time hoped to bring it to an happy conclusion* But when he once saw that
expectation vanished, (for the Nobility and Commons of Poland being much
displeased with the Family of France, The Duke of Alancon excluded from the
Crown of Poland, and Stephano Battori a Hungarian elected to succeed Henry the
Third.
had elected Stephano Battori, an Hungarian of great fame, and remarkable
valor) not being able to live under his Brother, and expect the changes of his
fortune from his will and pleasure, he fell upon a new design of building up
his own greatness by himself; for finding he was repulsed in his pretending to
the Office of Lieutenant General, and that, to sow discord between him and his
friends, it was sometimes given out that the Duke of Lorain, sometimes that the
King of Navarre should have it, he thought that making himself Head of the
Hugonots and Catholic Malcontents, as were the House of Momorancy, and the
Marshall de Bellegarde, either he should obtain a very absolute power among
them, or else constrain the King to grant him that by force, which he despaired
to obtain by his good will. Having given some little hint of these his vast
thoughts to Madam de Sauve, (of whom he was passionately enamoured, but not
answered with a reciprocal affection) and she having in part signified her
suspicions unto the Queen Mother, his discontents increased very much by the
bitter words and unkind looks which he received daily: Wherefore being by
disdain and anger brought unto a violent resolution, he determined rashly to
absent himself from Court, and to make himself the Head of those who had often
wooed and persuaded him to it. This resolution (he being a man of mean
capacity, and more ready to undertake, than able to manage so great an
enterprise) was put in execution so unseasonably, and with so little appearance
of reason, as made many doubt that it was a plot agreed upon by the King his
Brother, and the Queen his Mother, that he should feign himself discontented,
and alienated from them, to deceive the Hugonots, and, under color of
friendship and assistance, to open a way to the suppression and destruction of
those that were up in arms. But it is most certain, (and I have heard it
affirmed by a person who having had principal Offices in the Government, was
partaker of the most hidden secrets which were then in agitation) that this
action of the Duke of Alancon was so far from being contrived by the King and
Queen Mother, that on the contrary it was so terrible and so unpleasing to
them, that being as it were astonished with the blow, they neglected no
possible means, nor thought scorn of any indignity how great soever it were, so
they might but withdraw him from the party of those factious men, and restore
him to his former nearness and obedience.

Now the Duke of Alancon having to some of his most familiar Confidents
secretly communicated his intention of leaving the Court on the fifteenth day
of September this present year, went into the Faux-bourg of St. Marceau, under
pretense of visiting a certain Lady, which he loved and enjoyed; and entering
the house where she dwelt about the shutting in of the day, while his Gentlemen
expected him on the street-side, he went forth at a private back-gate which led
into the fields; and being come where he was expected by those that were privy
to his purpose, The Duke of Alancon his flight and Declaration.
he presently got on horseback, and with a small Train, but very great speed,
riding all night, arrived at the City of Dreux, a place that was under his
command, and there published a Declaration next day, wherein he showed that the
causes of his departure were the unworthy dealings that had been used toward
Him and other great Lords of the Kingdom, who were kept in prison without any
fault or demerit, and the imminent ruin which he foresaw did hang over the
common safety by reason of the Kings evil Counselors; exhorting all France to
join with him to make a General Assembly of the States, and, by means thereof,
remedy the unjust burdens of many, moderate the heavy taxes laid upon the
people, regulate the abuses of justice, establish the Liberty of Conscience so
often by public solemn decrees promised to those of the Reformed Religion, and
restore peace and happiness to all sorts of men in the Kingdom: for which
things (but without offense to the Kings Majesty) he protested to spend the
last drop of his blood, as he was necessarily obliged to do by his affection to
his Country, and love to all good men. By which Declaration divulged
particularly in those Provinces and places most abounding with the Hugonots, it
was plainly to be seen, that he aspired to the command of that party, which by
the authority of so great a Prince, and the number of his followers, which were
many, was like to be very much augmented in strength and reputation.

But the King hearing of his Brothers departure, that very night dispatched
Lodovico Gonzaga Duke of Nevers with some certain Horse, to try if by any means
possible they could take him; which not succeeding by reason of the great speed
the Duke of Alancon made, and the advantage of so many hours; he being
unresolved in his own thoughts, called his Cabinet-Council together, (on the
sixteenth of September at night) and began to treat of those remedies which
were to be used against so sudden and so unexpected an accident: in which
consultation the Queens opinion concurring with the Kings inclination, and with
the advice of the major part of the Board, the conclusion was, That not
regarding any conditions how hard soever, they should try by all possible
endeavors to withdraw the Duke of Alancon from his new begun design, and
separate him from the commerce of those turbulent people; to which end, though
the King (being a cruel Enemy to Heads of the Factions) bare an ill will to the
Mareshals of Cosse and Momorancy, who were still kept prisoners in the Bastile;
yet to appease and satisfy his Brother, by whose occasion they were fallen
into that rebellion, and to take away the fuel from that fire, The Mareshals of
Momorancy and Cosse set at liberty.
they were both set at liberty in that very conjuncture of time; the Queen
intending to make them instruments of reconciliation with her Son, to whom she
resolved to go in person, not believing that any could be so powerful and
prevalent to persuade him as the authority and flatteries of a Mother,
accompanied with those Arts which she was wont in all occasions to use with
mavelous dexterity.

The Duke of Alancon was come into Poictou, where he was presently met by
Monsieur de la Noue, Gilbert Sieur de Vantadour, a Lord of principal note in
Limosin, and the Viscount of Turenne, both allied to the Mareshal d' Anville,
and all the Hugonot Towns sent to honor and acknowledge him by messages full
of duty and respect.

Nor did the Prince of Conde (who, The Prince of Conde comes with a great Army
out of Germany.
being joined with Prince Casimir upon the confines of Germany, had drawn
together a mighty Army) show himself less ready or desirous to obey him than
the rest; for knowing his ambitious nature, and how much credit and reputation
he gained by the name of the Kings Brother, he thought it was to no purpose to
contend with him for the first place, being confident, that though he carried
the name of the supreme power, yet the real authority of command would
nevertheless still remain in him, as well by reason of the ancient assurance he
had of the Hugonot Faction, as because that foreign Army was paid and raised by
his own industry; so that in his employment he acknowledged no other Superior,
but only His authority under whose conduct and direction he first took up Arms:
Wherefore, preventing the motions, and in a manner the very desires of the Duke
of Alancon, he declared him Captain General of his party, and seemed to content
himself with the Title of his Lieutenant in the command of the foreign Army;
The Prince of Conde declares the Duke of Alancon General of the Hugonots.
which drawing near to enter into France with 14000 Swisse and German Foot,
three thousand French Firelocks, and seven or eight thousand Horse, and fearing
too long a delay by reason of the greatness of his Army, and the tedious
difficulty of the way, he resolved to send Guilliaume de Momorancy Lord of
Thore with two thousand German Horse, two hundred Gentlemen, and two thousand
Foot of several Nations, throw Champagne (which is the nearest way) to join
with the Duke of Alancon, who he thought stood in need of present assistance.
Thore entering the Kingdom near Langres in Burgongne, and thence by the shortest
way crossing over Champagne, hasted by the swiftness of his march to avoid the
opposition of the Catholics, and passing the River Marne, to get as soon as he
could into security: but being overtaken by the Duke of Guise, who with his
Brother Charles Duke of Mayenne, Armand Sieur de Byron, the Count of Retz, and
a fresh powerful Army followed to intercept his passage; either the temerity of
his Soldiers, (as he said afterward) or his own desire to fight, persuaded
him to stay near Dormans, and alter the thoughts of hastening his voyage into a
design of encountering the Enemy. Their Forces wanted much of equality, though
both their courages were ardent and resolute; for the Duke of Guise had above a
thousand Lanciers, two thousand other Horse, and ten thousand good French Foot,
and the Soldiers of Thore weary and tired with the length of their march, were
not near so great a number: yet he that under favor of the woods might have
gotten to the River which was hard by, and have passed it at a foord called du
Vergez, facing courageously about, fell to skirmish with the first Catholics
Troops led by Monsieur Fervaques Mareshal of the Field, the Rhinegrave, and
Monsieur de Byron; but when he found the skirmish succeed prosperously,
ordering his men only in two Divisions, whereof one was led by the Count la
Val, and the other commanded by himself, he began fiercely to give the onset;
and though the place in respect of the open Field, was very advantageous to the
greater number, the issue was uncertain for many hours, till the Duke of
Mayenne with the Van of the Cavalry, and the Duke of Guise with those Gentlemen
that accompanied him in the Battle, charged into the Body of the German Horse,
who having nothing but Pistols against the violence and fury of the Lances,
being routed and trodden under foot, lost their lives desperately in the place.
In this encounter all the Germans were utterly defeated, and by order from the
Commanders cut in pieces without mercy, except only one Cornet of the Reiters,
who being placed in the Rear, and seeing the slaughter of the rest, yielded
himself to their discretion, and was spared rather by the weariness than pity
of the Conquerors. Colonel Stinc the chief Commander of the Germans was slain,
with many Gentlemen of quality, Clervant a famous Leader of the Hugonots taken,
and Thore passing the River with a few Horse saved himself by flight. Nor was
this Victory gotten by the Catholics without blood; for besides the loss of an
hundred and fifty of their best Soldiers, the Duke of Guise, whilst valiantly
following the execution he pursued the fugitives, who fought as they ran away,
The Duke of Guise is shot in the face.
was himself shot in the left cheek, the skar whereof served afterward for a
memorable mark to win him the love of all those who being affectionate to the
Catholic Religion, honored the signs of that Blood which had been spilt, and
of that danger which had been undergone fighting in person for the service of
the Church of God.

Monsieur de Fervaques carried the news of this Victory to the Court, who
departing before the Duke of Guise was wounded, made a lame imperfect narration
of the business, yet much to his own advantage; but Pelicart the Duke of
Guise's Secretary arriving a few hours after, who brought word of his Lords
being hurt, and many other particulars of that Action; Fervaques was not only
slighted by the King, but laughed at by the whole Court, thinking that he with
a false story of the Encounter would have attributed the honor of the day unto
himself, which was due to the worth of those who had purchased it with their
blood: whereupon he conceived himself to be very hardly used, considering the
valor that he really had showed against the Enemy, with whom he had fought
gallantly first of all: and therefore he was excited by his natural inconstancy
to make one in the managing of a new design, which not many days after caused a
great disturbance in the Court.

In the mean time the Queen Mother, attended by the Mareschals of Cosse and
Momorancy, arrived at Campigny in Poictou, to meet with the Duke of Alancon,
who was so puffed up with the present ambition of commanding so many, and with
the near assistance of the Foreign Army already come to the confines of
Burgongne, that she not being able to agree with him concerning Articles of
Peace, at last procured a Cessation of Arms, A Cessation of Arms for six months.
about the end of November, which was to continue for six months, in which time
she not only hoped that the German Army would waste away; but also that the
Duke himself being of a fickle unnconstant humor, might be drawn to a more
reasonable, and more secure Peace: the conditions of the Truce were, That the
King should pay 160000 Ducats to the Prince of Conde and the Germans, provided
they passed not the Rhine, nor entered into the confines of France: That the
Cities of Angoulesme, Saumur, Nyort, Bourges, la Charity and Meziers, should be
assigned unto the Hugonots, and Politics for their security, which should
presently be restored as soon as the Truce was expired, if the Peace were not
concluded in the mean time: That the King should give the Duke of Alancon
wherewithal to maintain an hundred Gentlemen, an hundred G^ns d' Arms, an
hundred firelocks, and fifty Swisses for the guard of his own person: That the
Deputies of the associated Provinces, and of the Politic and Hugonot Princes,
should come to Paris in the midst of the month of January next ensuing, to
treat about conditions of Peace, and in the mean time all acts of Hostility
should be forborne through the whole Kingdom. Which Truce being published about
the twentieth of December, the conditions thereof were not so punctually
observed; for Monsieur de Ruffec Governor of Angoulesme, and Monsieur de
Montigny Governor of Bourges, refused to resign those places to the Duke of
Alancon, pretending in excuse that they thought they could not be secure in any
other places, by reason of the hatred they had drawn upon themselves in the
service of the King, and of their Religion; but the Queen (with whose consent
it was doubted those Governors had made resistance) in lieu of those two
Cities, gave them St. Iean d' Angely, and Cognac, places of much less
importance; and on the other side the Prince of Conde, and the Germans fearing
the same thing which the Kings party hoped, would not consent to forbear
entering into the Kingdom; knowing that if their Army should lie still in
idleness, it would certainly consume, and destroy it self.

Hereupon the Queen Mother leaving the Duke of Montpensier, and the Marshall
of Momorancy with her Son, that they might entertain him with thoughts of
Peace, returned speedily to Paris, to be present at the Treaty with the
Deputies, which was begun in the month of January 1576. with assured hopes of
bringing it to a happy conclusion: 1576.
for the King by his own inclination already affecting Peace, and the
Cabinet-Council to deprive the Rebels of the person of the Duke of Alancon, and
free themselves from the imminent danger of a foreign Army, were content that
very large conditions should be granted; which afterward either by an assembly
of the States, or by some other means they were resolved not to observe; which
Negotiations while they were prolonged by the many pretensions of the
Malcontents, behold a new accident interposed it self, before the
Accommodation was concluded: for the King of Navarre being already two and
twenty years of age, of himself full of sprightly thoughts, and spurred on by
so frequent examples, and by the emulation of other Princes his equals; not
enduring to be ill looked on, and almost despised at the Court, whilst the Duke
of Alancon, a vain indiscreet man, and the Prince of Conde his inferior both
in years and honor, arrogated to themselves the chief command of that party,
which he was wont to rule; and his spirit not suffering him longer to bear the
humors of the Queen his Wife, which whilst he stayed at Court he was forced to
dissemble; either drawn by some supernatural hidden cause, or set forward by
his own inclination to a beginning of eminent success, took a resolution to
leave the Court; and retiring himself to his Government of Guienne, to try if
he could draw that power to himself, which he saw was going to be settled upon
the other discontented Princes.

The difficulty was to put this thought in execution; for he was not only
carefully watched by his guards, who under show of doing him honor were his
diligent keepers, but even the nearest attendents upon his own person, depended
wholly upon the King and Queen Mother, who mixing hopes with fears, led him
gently in hand with continued ambiguous promises, to hold him in an opinion
that they would trust him with the charge of Lieutenant General, which they had
refused to venture upon the unsetledness of the Duke of Alancon; but he being
secretly advertised by Daielle a Provencial Gentlewoman, one of the Queens
maids, whom he privately enjoyed, and by Madam de Carnavelet, with whom he had
a very near familiarity, that those were but arts to keep his hopes fastened to
the Court, he took a resolution to try his fortune, knowing that he should be
assisted and followed by d' Aubigny, and Armagnac, the one Gentleman, the other
Groom of his Bedchamber, the only men that remained with him of his old
Family. But this not being sufficient for the well effecting of his design,
(embracing the opportunity which occasion offered) he communicated his intents
to Guiliaume Sieur de Fervaques, with whom by a certain sympathy of
extraordinary spirit, he had contracted a familiar friendship; who highly
offended at the present affairs, the unquietness of his mind being accompanied
with great subtilty, and no less courage, approved the resolution, and warily
contrived both the time, and manner of their escape: for which purpose being
gone out of the City upon the twenty third of February, with a few Gentlemen
and Servants, under color of hunting the Stagg, which the King of Navarre was
wont much to delight in, and having deceived his guards by many several ways,
they passed the River with all possible speed below Poissy, and thence changing
their Voyage, in stead of continuing toward the West, they turned presently
toward the South, and avoiding the great highways, arrived at Alancon without
the least stop or delay; The King of Navarre displeased for many causes, flees
from the Court, and proceeds against the Catholics.
where staying no longer than was necessary to refresh themselves, they
suddenly passed the River Loyre by the Bridge of Saumur, and preventing fame by
their so speedy journey, came before they were looked for into Guienne, where
the King of Navarre taking the opportunity of his so unexpected arrival,
(because they knew not whether he was come as a Friend, or as an Enemy to the
King) with an incredible diligence, which gave them who were unprepared no time
to arm or certify themselves, still making use of his Authority as Governor
for the King; and with that authority mingling force, he began to make himself
Master of the chiefest places, calling in and reducing all those who for the
memory of his Father, and his own late command, were willing to follow and
depend upon him.

Although this sudden turn did at first disturb the minds of the King and
Queen Mother, who while they labored to remedy disorders, saw daily new
unexpected troubles to arise; yet as soon as their thoughts were quietly
settled, they began to find both advantage and satisfaction by it, hoping that
the multiplicity of Heads would bring forth discord and emulation; whereby the
power of the Malcontents would be weakened, and being divided into many
parts, every one of which would be severally governed by particular interests,
would in the end be unable to maintain it self: With these hopes they showed so
open a joy at the departure of the King of Navarre, either for that
consideration, or because they would not seem dejected at so great an
opposition of Fortune, that many believed the King of Navarre was persuaded to
that resolution by Monsieur de Fervaques, rather by the advice and consent of
the Queen, than out of any faithful care of his advancement; which was the more
credibly believed by many, who know not the truth of the business, when they
saw that Fervaques within a little while after forsaking that party, returned
again unto the Kings obedience. But I have since heard Monsieur de Fervaques
himself affirm, that the occasion of his so sudden change, was because he saw
the King of Navarre (next whom (as one that had run the same fortune) he hoped
for the first place) was fain to let himself be governed by those of most
ancient authority in that Faction, and many were preferred before him, that
were not only less affectionate to his affairs, but of less ability and meaner
condition.

But it is certain that this revolt of the King of Navarre produced an effect
not much unlike that which the King and Queen hoped; for though at first it was
probable, The King of Navarre publishes that he was forced to turn Catholic.
that it would give a great addition of power unto the Hugonot Faction, to
which he had joined himself with open Declarations, alleging that his
Conversion to the Catholic Religion four years before, had been constrained
and forced by the imminent terror of a cruel death; yet it was the occasion
that the Duke of Alancon, being as it were eclipsed by the luster of the Prince
of Conde, and King of Navarre, who by reason of the ancient confidence had of
them, were in greater esteem and reputation, did the more easily condescend to
a conclusion of Peace, knowing that the true essential authority would be in
them, and in him only the title and appearance; for the King of Navarre having
with much ease assumed the command of Guienne, and the protection of the
Rochellers; and on the other side, the Prince of Conde commanding the Foreign
Army, the Duke of Alancon had no power but what they pleased to confer upon
him; who making show to honor him very much for his title of the Kings
Brother, in all other things reserved to themselves as well the privilege of
resolving, as the authority of executing, he having nothing left him but the
weak dependence of some few Malcontents.

About this time the German Army marched toward Burgongne, against which (the
Duke of Guise not being yet cured of the wound he had received on his face)
Charles Duke of Mayenne advanced with the Kings Forces, which being much
inferior to the strength of the Enemy* he still encamped in safe Quarters near
the Suburbs of those Cities where he passed, endeavoring to cut off passages,
and spoil the ways, (which of themselves were much broken by the extremity of
ill weather in the Wintertime) by that means to hinder their progress, as well
in marching, as of being able to take any place that was of importance for the
War: whereby the Prince of Conde always receiving damage, as well in his
Quarters, as in sending out to forage, and very much annoyed by the hail and
snow which fell in great abundance, was forced to move slowly, and in a very
close Body, endeavoring by the pillage of the weakest places to satisfy the
greediness, and supply the wants of his Soldiers; wherein as his discreet
conduct plainly appeared, being able in so tender an age to govern an Army made
up of several Warlike Nations, and keep it within the unusual limits of
obedience to military discipline: so likewise the prudence and industry of the
Duke of Mayenne was very remarkable, who not of much riper years, neither
sparing any pains, nor avoiding any sufferance in so sharp a season, either in
his own person, or his Soldiers, did with admirable diligence keep still close
to the Foreign Army, and oppose their march with so much carefulness, that
except some few open places which were quitted, no City nor walled Town felt
the calamities and miseries of the German incursions; and it happened, that he
having one night when it was late, given order to march away from a place where
his Army was quartered, to prevent the Enemies advancing; some Companies of
Foot, not only terrified by the obscurity of the night, which was exceeding
dark, but also by a thick storm of hail, snow and rain together, refused to go
along with the rest of the Army, that marched in order under their colors with
infinite patience; which being told the Duke of Mayenne, he caused them all to
make a halt, Charles Duke of Mayenne commands his mutinous Sol^diers to be cut
in pieces.
and commanded the Cavalry to cut those mutinous Soldiers in pieces; which
being performed without delay, as he confirmed that discipline in his Army
which Civil Wars (as they are wont) had for a long time corrupted and
destroyed; so did he give a testimony of that severe gravity which ever after
was proper to that Prince in all his other actions in the War.

But neither could the valor of the General, nor the discipline of the Army,
with so great a disadvantage of strength, absolutely hinder the progress of the
Germans; wherefore notwithstanding all rubs and delays, they at last joined
with the Duke of Alancon about the beginning of March in the confines of
Bourbonois, who having mustered his Army which he found amounted to the number
of 35000 fighting men, The Duke of Alancon mustered 35000 fighting men.
went to Moulins, where with the Prince of Conde, Monsieur de la Noue, the
Deputies of the King of Navarre, and the Marshall d' Anville, he began to
advise what was fittest to be done: the Commissioners appointed for the Treaty
of Peace being returned from Court, and the Marshall of Momorancy, the Duke of
Montpensier, and Monsieur de Bellieure being there for the King, both parties
consented, though for diverse respects, and with several intentions to the
conclusion of peace; which though it were opposed by the Marshall d' Anville,
who having already procured his Brothers liberty, and established himself
absolutely in the Government of Languedoc, was not willing by an Accommodation
to return to that obedience from which (as a thing of danger) he had by force
and ^unning withdrawn himself: yet the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde,
who were not pleased to see the Duke of Alancon enjoy that place which they
were wont formerly to possess, and took it ill that he should reap the fruits
of their past and present labors, desired the Agreement might be concluded, by
which means he returning to the Court, and into his Brothers favor, the chief
power of that party would remain in them, believing that as by his continuance
on their side, he did much prejudice their authority, and also greatly hinder
the execution of important designs; The King of Navarre and Prince of Conde
offended at the Duke of Alancons power, think to free themselves of him by a
Peace.
so if on the other side he could obtain from his Brother the command of the
Catholic Army, he by his want of experience would give them many occasions to
advance and establish themselves; wherefore their inclinations, and the nature
of the Duke of Alancon prevailing, it was in the end resolved, That they should
propose the Articles of their demands unto the King, which if they were
accepted, they would conclude a Peace; but if rejected, they would resolutely
continue the War.

Their demands proposed were very high and exorbitant, but the Kings
inclination to Peace, and the desire of the Council to obtain the same, were
great enough to digest them all, both to free themselves of the eminent danger
of a Foreign Army, and take away those vast expenses which (the Treasury being
empty) fell all upon the poor miserable Subjects; as also to ease themselves of
that burden which had so generally tired men's minds and bodies; wherefore the
Queen already ghessing at the Kings designs, having by many conjectures founded
the depth of his intentions, came her self in person (as her custom was) into
the Duke of Alancons Camp about the beginning of May, and there settled the
conditions of Peace, which by a decree of 73 Articles were ratified by the
King, and solemnly published upon the fourteenth of May, he himself being
present in the Parliament.

This was the fifth Peace concluded with the Hugonots; Peace is made with the
Hugonots the fifth time.
by which, after the accustomed clauses belonging to the approbation, and
oblivion of all that was past, full Liberty of Conscience, and the free
exercise of their Religion, without exception of times or places, was granted
to the Hugonots, with a power of erecting Schools or Colleges, or calling
Synods, of celebrating Matrimony, and administering the Sacraments with the same
freedom as was allowed to the Catholics. All men of the Reformed Religion were
permitted to execute any places or offices, and enjoy any dignities of what
quality soever, without that distinction and precedence of the Catholics,
which had formerly been observed; promises were made to settle a Court of
Justice in every Parliament, half whereof should be of the one, and half of the
other Religion, to judge the causes of the Hugonots; eight Towns were granted
to the Princes for their security, till the Articles were fully and perfectly
performed, viz. Beaucaire and Aiguemorte in Languedoc; Perigeux, and la Mas de
Virdun in Guienne; Nyon, and Serres in Daulphine; Isoire in Auvergne, and Seine
la Grand Tour in Provence. The sentences against la Mole, the Count de Coranas,
the Admiral de Coligny, Briquemaut, Cavagnes, Montgomery, and Mombrun were
revoked, and declared null: and further it was declared, that no fault was to
be imputed to the Visdame of Chartres and Beauvais, for having contracted, or
negotiated any agreements with the Queen of England; for the Duke of Alancons
Apennage (so they call the maintenance which is allowed to Kings Sons and
Brothers) they assigned Berry, Touraine, and the Duchy of Anjou, three of the
greatest and most fertile Countries in all France; and 100000 Crowns of annual
pension: To the Prince of Conde they allotted the Government of Picardy, and
for his security the City of Peronne, a very strong place seated near the Sea.
To Prince Casimir the Principality of Chasteau-Thierry, a pension of 14000
Crowns, the maintenance of one hundred Lances, and the entire payment of all
arrears due to the German Army, The Prince of Orange formerly declared Rebel,
is restored to his Estate.
which amounted to 1200000 Ducats. To the Prince of Orange, the restitution of
all those States he was wont to possess in the Kingdom of France, which for
Rebellion had been taken from him by the sentence of Parliament, and added to
the Kings Revenue: finally, an Assembly of the States General was promised
within six months, who were to represent unto the King the grievances of his
Subjects, and consult of their remedies: which condition proposed by the
Princes to set a better gloss upon their cause, and to win the applause of the
people, was willingly received by the King, as a convenient means to dissolve,
and disanul the Articles agreed upon, which (with many others less
considerable, but not less unreasonable and exorbitant) as soon as they were
known to those of the Catholic party, exasperated most of their minds in such
a manner, that they not only murmured freely against the King himself, as one
of a mean spirit, drowned in the effeminate delights of the Court; and the
Queen Mother, as if to recover her Son the Duke of Alancon from the way of
perdition, she had neglected the Majesty of Religion, and precipitated the
general safety of the Kingdom: but many were already disposed to rise, and
would have taken Arms to disturb the unjustness of that Peace, which was
generally esteemed shameful and not fit to be kept, if within a while they had
not manifestly understood, that the King and Queen purposely to recover, and
draw home the Duke of Alancon, had consented to conditions in words, which they
were resolved not to observe in deeds; for the foreign Army being first of all
sent away, by having disbursed part of the arrears to Prince Casimir, and given
him security for the rest, partly by pawning Jewels, partly by engaging the
word of the Duke of Lorain; and having exactly performed all things promised to
the Duke of Alancon, none of the other Articles were observed, either to the
Hugonots in general, or to the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde in
particular: but the King permitting, and tacitly consenting to it, the
Assemblies of the Hugonots were every where violently disturbed; the Government
of Picardy was not given to the Prince of Conde, nor the City of Perronne
assigned to him; the Courts of Justice which were to be formed in the
Parliaments, were deferred with several excuses; and of so many Counselors
which ought to have been elected, the King having named only Arenes, one of the
Deputies which had treated the Peace, to be President of the Parliament of
Paris, they refused to accept of him, the King not being at all displeased at
it: which things clearly discovering the Kings mind, though they quieted those
Catholics, who judged of the state of affairs without interest or passion, and
disposed the most part of peaceful-natured men to expect the issue of the
Assembly of the States, which the King had appointed to be in the City of
Blois, The Assembly of the State is appointed at Blois the 15 of November.
on the fifteenth day of November; yet the Guises, who were not slack in laying
hold of any opportunity, to augment their own greatness, and to secure the
state of that Religion, which was so straightly linked to their interests,
began upon the conjuncture of so great an occasion, secretly to make a League
of the Catholics, in all the Provinces of the Kingdom, under color of
opposing the progress, and establishment of Heresy, which by the Articles of
Peace was so fully authorized, and established; but in effect to reduce the
forces of the Catholic party, into one firm entire united body which they
might dispose of as occasion served, for their own security, and for a
foundation of that party whereof they hold the principality.

Henry Duke of Guise, Charles Duke of Mayenne, and no less than they, Lewis
Cardinal of Guise their third Brother, were left not only Heirs to their
Fathers greatness, and reputation, and Possessors of the Rule and Government of
the Catholic party, but had also by their proper valor and industry, acquired
wonderful renown and love among the people, partly by their liberal popular
nature, partly by their care and zeal showed in preferring before all other
respects, the protection and maintenance of that Religion, whereof they were
the sole Champions and Defenders. These Brothers (to whom were joined the Duke,
and Chavalier d' Aumale, the Duke d' Elboeuf, the Duke de Mercoeur, with his
Brothers, (though allied unto the King, yet all of the same house of Lorain)
when contrary to their expectation they saw the Peace concluded, and ratified
with Articles so unjust, and prejudicial to the Catholic Religion, and to the
credit and power of their party; stirred up with anger and disdain, (which
often use to lay open men's resentments) began to enter into a great suspicion
of the Kings counsels and designs, thinking that a Prince of a noble, Warlike
nature, would never have suffered the temerity of his Subjects, to draw him to
such shameful conditions, but that he concealed some deeper thoughts, and more
weighty undiscovered resolutions: wherefore though the King by means of the
Queen Mother, and many others which they both confided in, gave them to
understand that his intention was to break, or at least to moderate those
conditions, by the Assem^^^ of the States at Blois, and that he had consented
to those dishonorable Articles, ^nly to deprive the Hugonots of so powerful a
prop, as the person of the Duke of Alancon; but that he would settle all by
convenient, proportionable remedies; yet those Princes were not altogether
satisfied, but every day by various conjectures, penetrating more deeply into
those mysteries, as also being highly displeased at the Kings Decree, whereby
taking away the power, in appearance from all, but in effect from them alone,
of procuring gifts, and interceding for favors, for the followers and
dependents of the Catholic party; and falling into a great distrust of his
affection toward them, they resolved, either by that opportunity to establish
the foundation of their own power, or else by so great an obstacle to hinder
those designs which the King had begun and contrived in his mind; to bring
their followers and adherents into one well-united Body, drawing together and
confirming that engine of power, which though vast and mighty, was yet spread
and dispersed as blood in the veins, through all the parts of the Kingdom. And
because the present occasion gave them a wonderfu^ opportunity to allure men's
minds with honorable specious pretenses, to affright the fearful into a
consent to their desires, and to stir up the anger ^f those that were
unsatisfied, and utterly displeased at the conclusion of the Peace, they began
to work upon the Parisians and Picards; Those, as in all times jealous of the
preservation of the Catholic Religion; These, as terrified with the fear of
being commanded by the Prince of Conde, to whom the Go^ernment of their
Province had been promised.

The way of meeting together, and holding intelligence with one another, was
opened to them by the Kings own institution, who either moved by his
inclination to piety, by the admonitions and writings of Father Bernard Castor
a Jesuit, and many other religious men of that and other orders; or else to
cover and palliate those hidden intentions which he had resolved on for the
course of his future Government; had brought in the use of many Fraternities,
who under diverse habits and different names met together upon days of devotion,
to spend their time in processions, prayers, disciplines, and other spiritual
exercises, under the pious pretense of appeasing Gods wrath, of imploring a
remedy for their present divisions and calamities, and of procuring unity,
peace and concord amongst all the people of the Kingdom; by which means the
Catholics did not only meet freely together in all places, By the Duke of
Guise his cunning, politic discourses are brought into those assemblies which
were instituted for devotion.
but also found matter and opportunity to discourse of present affairs, and to
bewail the miserable condition to which the Crown was reduced by division, and
by the increase of heresy: from which lamentations coming to talk of
businesses of the Government, and the affairs of State, it was not hard both
for those Brethren themselves, and perchance for others more crafty, and better
acquainted with the designs of the principal contrivers, to sow the seeds, and
ingraff the beginnings of that league, which had a near connection with that
devout pretense for which the Catholics assembled themselves in so many
several places.

This practice was first begun in Picardy by Jacques Sieur d' Humiers, Governor
of Peronne, Mondidier, and Roye, who being a remarkable man for riches and
followers in those parts, and for some private causes an Enemy to the House of
Momorancy, and by consequence to the Prince of Conde, whose authority he hated,
and whose greatness he apprehended, for fear of being put out of his
Government; began by means of those Assemblies, which were no less frequent
there than in other places, to exhort the inhabitants of Peronne not to suffer
their Town to be made the nest and receptacle of Heresy, nor to let that fire
be kindled in their bosoms, which was like in time to inflame their whole
Country, and consume all the other parts of France: he persuaded them, that the
first day of the Princes admission would be the last of their liberty; for
being made subject to the tyranny of Heretics, Seditious Men, and Foreigners,
there would no longer be any possibility for them to enjoy their Estates,
Houses, Wives, nor their own Children, all which would become a prey to the
covetousness and cruelty of those that governed: he added, that they could
^^pect nothing but mischief which way soever things were carried; for if the
Hugonots prevailed, they would certainly be exposed to the slavery of the
English, with whom it was known the Prince had made an agreement to give them
places and Fortresses in Picardy: and though the Catholics should prevail,
they were to look for no better than long sieges, miseries and calamities of
War and Famine, since he was so earnest to get the possession of that
Government for no other reason, but by the help of its strength to resist the
last assaults of his evil fortune: By which plausible reasons that people being
moved, and the inhabitants of Mondidier, Roye, and Dorlan their neighbors
being persuaded to the same, they consented to make a League among themselves
to hinder the Prince from taking possession of that place, and of the
Government of Picardy, and to maintain and preserve the Catholic Religion in
their Province. Nor was this practice less advanced in the City of Paris, where
the zeal of the common people in matters of Religion, and the open enmity which
they had at all times professed against the Hugonots, afforded them very fit
matter to foment those designs: wherefore there being many of the
Parliament Men and Sheriffs of the City, ( Eschevins, as they call them) and
not a few of Religious Orders, who in those meetings and Fraternities labored
cunningly the promoting of that League, a great number of men of all degrees
and qualities were by a strict Oath already tied and united in the bond of that
Association.

The example of the Picards and Parisians was followed by the Nobility of
Poictou and Tourain, as nearest to those places possessed by the Hugonots, and
more exposed to the imminent danger of their authority; and being led by Louis
de la Tremouille Duke of Touars, (a Lord of great dependents, and of ancient
nobility and reputation, but a man full of turbulent unruly thoughts) were
already united and associated, drawing after them not only the greater part of
the Clergy, but also a great many of the Commonalty. Nor did the other
Provinces want either Heads to introduce, or fit matter to receive the same
Confederacy, which being proposed by men of great subtilty, and no less
authority, under a plausible name and specious appearance, easily gained credit
even among the wisest, and spread wonderfully through all Cities and Provinces.

The Form of that League and Covenant which was to be signed by all those that
consented to it, was this: The form of the League or Covenant.
IN the Name of the most holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, our only
true God, to whom be Glory and Honor.

The Covenant of the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen of the Catholic Religion
ought to be, and is made for the establishment of the Law of God in its first
estate, and to restore and settle his holy service according to the form and
manner of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Church, abjuring and renouncing all
errors contrary unto it.

Secondly, For the preservation of King Henry, the Third of that Name, and his
Successors the most Christian Kings, in the State, Honor, Authority, Duty,
Service and Obedience due unto them from their Subjects, as it is contained in
those Articles that shall be presented to him in the Assembly of the States,
which he swears and promises to observe at the time of his Consecration and
Coronation, with protestation not to do any thing against that which shall be
ordained and settled by the States.

Thirdly, To restore unto the Provinces of this Kingdom, and to those other
States which are under it, those ancient Rights, Pre-eminences, Liberties and
Privileges which were in the time of Clovis the first most Christian King, or
yet better and more profitable (if any such can be found) under the said
protection.

In case there be any impediment, opposition or rebellion against that which is
aforesaid, be it from whom it will, or proceed it from whence soever it may,
those that enter into this Covenant shall be bound and obliged to employ their
Lives and Fortunes to punish, chastise and prosecute those that shall attempt
to disturb or hinder it, and shall never cease their endeavors till the
aforesaid things be really done and perfected.

In case any of the Confederates, their Friends, Vassals or Dependents, be
oppressed, molested or questioned for this cause, be it by whom it will, they
shall be bound to employ their persons, goods and estates to take revenge upon
those that shall have so molested them, either by the way of justice or force,
without any exception of persons whatsoever.

If it shall come to pass, that any man after having united himself by Oath
unto this Confederacy, should desire to depart from it, or separate himself
upon any excuse or pretense, (which God forbid;) such Violaters of their own
Consciences shall be punished both in bodies and goods, by all means that can
be thought of, as Enemies to God, Rebels and Disturbers of the Public Peace;
neither shall such revenge be ever imputed unto the aforesaid Associates, nor
they liable to be questioned for it, either in public or in private.

The said Associates shall likewise swear to yield ready obedience, and
faithful service unto that Head which shall be deputed; to follow and obey him,
and to lend all help, counsel and assistance, as well for the entire
conservation, and maintenance of this League, as for the ruin of all that
shall oppose it, without partiality or exceptions of persons; and those that
shall fail or depart from it, shall be punished by the authority of the Head,
and according to his Orders; to which every Confederate shall be obliged to
submit himself.

All the Catholics of several Cities, Towns and Villages, shall be secretly
advertised and warned by the particular Governors of places, to enter into
this League, and to concur in the providing of men, arms, and other
necessaries, every one according to his condition and ability.

All the Confederates shall be prohibited to stir up any discord, or enter into
any dispute among themselves, without leave of the Head, to whose arbitrament
all dissentions shall be referred, as also the determining all differences, as
well in matters of goods as good name, and all of them shall be obliged to
swear in this manner and form following;



I swear by GOD the Creator, (laying my hand upon the holy Gospel) and under
pain of Excommunication, and Eternal Damnation, that I enter into this holy
Catholic League, according to the form of that Writing, which has now been
read unto me; and that I do faithfully, and sincerely enter into it, with a
will either to command, or to obey, and serve, as I shall be appointed; and I
promise upon my life and honor, to continue in it, unto the last drop of my
blood, and not to depart from it, or transgress it for any command, pretense,
excuse or occasion, which by any means whatsoever can be represented to me.

The Copies of this League framed with so much art by the Guises, (that making
a show to obey, and maintain the King, took from him all his obedience, and
authority, to confer it upon the head of their Union) were very carefully, and
with much cunning dispersed by the hands of discreet wary men, and such as were
deeply engaged to them; so that by little and little it began to spread in
every place, the cause or original not at all appearing; whereby making very
great, but hidden proceedings, because custom had already disposed men's minds
to a desire of novelties; they easily, and in a short time, drew all those into
one body, whom either for zeal of Religion, dependence of interest, desire of
change, or hatred of the Hugonot Princes, they thought fit to bind together in
that League and Confederacy. But it being necessary to provide moneys for the
nourishment and maintenance of that United Body, and to find out some
protection of great power and authority to shelter and defend it from the Kings
forces; the Lords of Guise turning their eyes out of the Kingdom, thought that
both for their Religion and themselves, it was as lawful for them to make use
of the help and favor of foreign Princes, as it had been for the Hugonots to
require the assistance of the Queen of England, and the Princes of Germany: and
therefore they began secretly to treat at Rome for protection, and in Spain for
men and money: nor did they find in any place any averseness to their desires;
for the Pope being displeased at, and afraid of the Peace concluded with the
Hugonots, willingly gave ear to those things which might conveniently oppose
their establishment: and the Catholic King grown jealous that the designs of
the Duke of Alancon would at last break out upon Flanders, and that the King to
quench the fire of his own house, would be content to kindle it in his
Neighbors, willingly concurred to foment those in France who labored to renew
the War, hoping that the discords in that Kingdom, might one day give him an
opportunity of some grand design, and in the mean time preserve the peace and
quietness of all his own.

Nicholas Cardinal de Pelle-ve, bred up in the house of Guise, treated the
interests of this Union at Rome, which by Gregory the Thirteenth, a man of
great candor and goodness, but of a facile nature, was hearkened unto with
much readiness; it pretending nothing but Faith, Religion, Charity, Zeal to the
public good, correction and reformation of abuses; though in effect it
contained private passions, mingled with particular interests: which not being
unknown to the Court of Rome, many discoursing of so new and high a design,
ascribed the cause of it to a desire the Guises had to govern the Kings will;
who excluding their help and counsel, showed that he would rule as it pleased
himself; others drawing the business another way, attributed it to their care
of conserving their own greatness, which they had with so much sweat and labor
been so long a building up. Nor did there want those who passing yet further,
(perchance through the malice they bore to that party) taxed the Heads thereof,
to aim at vaster ends; which whether true or false, were after published to be
the deposing of the King himself, as a dissolute, incapable, mean-spirited man,
and in time to settle the Crown in the house of Guise, which some did openly
maintain to be derived in a right line from Charlemagne. But whether these
designs were indeed plotted from the beginning or whether they took birth from
the emergent occasions which happened after, it is not so evident; for as they
were divulged and amplified by the Hugonots, so were they closely concealed,
and firmly denied by the Guises. Causes that moved the Guises to frame the
Catholic League.
But they themselves could not deny two great and powerful occasions; one a
discontent because they could not sway and govern the present King, as they had
done Charles, and Francis his last Predecessors; the other a desire to rule the
Catholic party, founded long before by their Ancestors, and increased and
confirmed by themselves; and to these was added as a third, the necessity of
opposing the Kings designs, which they now saw tended openly to their ruin,
thereby to free his neck from the yoke of Factions. These interests which could
not be wholly concealed from the Pope, (for that Court, most wise in judging of
all things, did easily penetrate into them) made him so much the more reserved
and wary what to resolve, by how much the apparent respect of preserving the
Catholic Religion spurred him on to consent unto it.

But whilst the approbation of this League is treated on at Rome, the Pope
inclining but ambiguously unto it, The King of Spain becomes Protector of the
Catholic League.
the business was very easily determined on the other side in the Court of
Spain; the propositions being such, that the Catholic King ought rather to
have desired that the League should put it self under his protection, than make
himself be long entreated to comply with those requests, which for that purpose
were effectually made unto him: for indeed it was a gate which did not only
open unto him a passage to the security of his own States, but also to very
great hopes of acquiring more, and at least (if no better) to keep the King of
France his Forces divided and employed, with which the Crown of Spain had so
long and so obstinate contentions.

These practices, especially those which were managed in France, were not
unknown to the King, for they were represented unto him by the Queen Mother,
and other his intimate Confidents; nay, the Count de Retz had particularly
advertised him, that Monsieur de Vins negotiated that Confederacy in Provence;
and the Prince of Conde by the means of the Sieur de Montaut, had made him
acquainted with the Union of those in Poictou; besides, that at the same time
one Nicholas David, an Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, was stayed and
taken in his journey, which he confessed he was employed in by the Guises to
negotiate that business at Rome: The Hugonots dispersed certain Writings, which
under title of a Commission given to him, contained the designs of the
Catholic League, and their end and intention to possess themselves of the
Crown; but for the most part full of exorbitant, fabulous, incredible things;
so that they were generally believed to have been maliciously forged and spread
abroad to discredit the Lords of Guise, and to render them odious and
suspected; who did not only absolutely deny the tenure of those Commissions,
and account David a fool, and no better than a madman if he had any such
Writings about him; but they also caused them to be answered by some of their
party, proving many things in them to be absurd, and without any appearance of
truth. But those divulged Papers generally believed to be false, wrought not so
great a suspicion in the King, as the Letters of Monsieur de St. Goart, his
Lieger Ambassador in the Court of Spain, who gave him notice how he had
discovered that some French Catholic Confederates did earnestly treat of
secret businesses in that Court. But whether so many discords and confusions
springing up daily, they could not all be provided against at the same time,
and therefore they neglected those which at first seemed less material, to
remedy others which were more urgent and weighty; or whether the King taken up
with his secret designs of opening a way to future matters, did slight the
present danger, being confident he should cut off all those plots and
conspiracies at one time: whichsoever of these causes it were, it is most
certain, that though the King knew all these practices, he was so far from
opposing or hindering them, that he seemed not displeased to have one Faction
struggle with the other, thinking that by those jarrs which would arise between
them, he should remain absolute Arbitrator, and enjoy the fruits of that
weakness which they would bring upon themselves by falling upon one another.
Besides, he thought this so high and so general resentment of the Catholics,
gave him a very lucky occasion to break the conditions of peace granted to the
Hugonots, and to make appear to the World, that he did it not of his own
resolution, because he had so intended from the beginning; but because of the
general discontent of his Subjects, of whose good, and of whose desires he was
obliged as a Father to be much more careful, than of complying with the will of
those that were rebellious and disobedient; for which cause he did not only
tolerate the continuation of those practices about the League, but by ambiguous
actions, obscure words, and dark answers, that admitted several
interpretations, he almost made it be believed, that all was managed by his
order and permission.

But if the King resolved to make use of that opportunity to break the Articles
of Agreement, the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde were no less disposed
to do the same; who having thrust the Duke of Alancon out of their faction,
sought to lay hold of any occasion that might kindle the War again, by which
they hoped to establish their own greatness: wherefore the King of Navarre and
the Prince of Conde having often complained to the King and Queen; the King of
Navarre, that his interests were utterly forgotten in the conditions of the
Peace; and the Prince of Conde, that neither the Government of Picardy, nor the
City of Peronne were assigned unto him; and the King having still interposed
delays and impediments, had at last remitted all to be determined by the
States: now upon this new occasion of the League, they redoubled their
complaints the more earnestly, urging that they could not continue in that
uncertainty of their present condition, whilst their adversaries united their
forces in a League to suppress and destroy them: with which importunities the
King being troubled, and having (rather to hold him in hand, than with an
intent to perform it) offered the Prince in stead of Peronne and Picardy, to
give him St. Iean d' Angely and Cognac, in those parts where the strength of
the Hugonots lay; he not staying for the assignment, suddenly made himself
Master of them, and following the success of that beginning, sent for Monsieur
de Mirabeau under color of treating with him concerning other businesses, and
forced him to deliver up Bravage into his hand, a Fort of great importance, as
well for that it lies upon the Coast of the Ocean Sea, as because it abounds
with such store of Salt Pits, which yield a great and constant revenue; he made
the Sieur de Montaut Governor, and put into it a strong Garrison of his
dependents, furnishing it with ammunition, and fortifying it with exceeding
diligence* nor content with that, but vigorously prosecuting that enterprise by
the means of his dependents, in a few weeks he reduced into his own power,
Royan, Pons, Talemont, and Marans, with many other considerable places in
Xaintonge.

But the King of Navarre, who with more deliberate considerations had raised
his thoughts to higher designs, making use of the ready boldness of the Prince
of Conde in those matters where force and violence were needful, with infinite
moderation (to which as well by choice, as nature, he was much inclined) under
title of being Governor of the Province, reduced the principal Cities to
himself, showing both in words and actions, a great deal of gentleness to the
Catholics, a great deal of reverence to the Kings person, singular desire to
help the advancement of every one, and very much trouble for the losses and
outrages which by occasion of the War he was necessitated to bring upon that
Country; by which arts having gained all the people of Perigort, and the Towns
of Loudun, Again, Ganache, and many lesser places, he possessed all that Country
except Bourdeaux, where the Parliament residing, the Citizens had ever refused
to admit him; yet ceased he not after many repulses, sometimes to allure them
with kind messages, sometimes to assure them with large promises, showing
himself to be utterly averse from the animosity of the Factions, and the
cruelties used by others in Civil Wars, since he of his own accord had settled
the use of the Catholic Religion again in those places that were of his own
Patrimony, from whence his Mother had taken it away, and with much modesty,
respect, and favorable Declarations treated with the Churchmen concerning the
interests of Religion; which artifice, or nature, or rather (as it often
happens) artifice derived from nature, won the hearts of all the people, and
took off that hatred, which (as Enemies to the Commonwealth) they were wont to
bear to others who had held the chief command of that Faction; which he
desiring to join and unite into one body, as he saw the Heads of the Catholics
endeavored to do on their side, having obtained leave of the Citizens to enter
Rochel, (the command whereof he knew to be very necessary for him) he was so
skilful in managing the affections of the people, that having tamed and assured
the minds of the Citizens, which were full of suspicions, and unapt to give
credit to any body, by their counsel, and with the consent of all the Cities
which followed their party, the Deputies whereof he had assembled in that
place, he in the end made himself be declared Head and Protector of that party,
The King of Navarre declared General of the Hugonots, and the Prince of Conde
his Lieutenant General.
and the Prince of Conde his Lieutenant General, showing himself every where so
full of sincerity and moderation, that he thereby gained not only their
inclination and good will, but also a very free and absolute authority over
them; which among so many jealousies, and so many pretenders, perchance he
could not have obtained by other arts: for neither the Prince of Conde, not the
Mareshal d' Anville, nor perhaps Monsieur de la Noue, nor Monsieur de Rohan
would so easily have yielded to him, if they had not been forced (besides the
splendor of his Royal name) to give place to his popularity, and his arts of
Governing. Now having obtained the power of that Faction chiefly by the favor
of the Rochellers, and knowing that Monsieur de Fervaques as a subtle man, and
not trusty, was suspected of all, but especially the Citizens of Rochel, who
desired for their security, that Messieurs de Rohan, de Mouy, de la Noue,
Langoiran, and other old Abettors of that party, might have the first place in
their Councils, and in their Civil and Military Offices; or else, persuaded by
d' Aubigny, who affirmed he had discovered that Fervaques at the very last
point had revealed his intended departure to the King, and that they were not
stayed, because the King having a wonderful ill opinion of him, gave no credit
to his words; he cunningly gave him occasion to go his way, (as has been
already related) and making up his Council of men that were famous for
integrity and honest intentions, did not only take away the jealousy of the
Rochellers, and of all the neighboring Provinces, who feared he would change
his Power into a tyrannical Government, but won the hearts of many Catholics;
who, so they might enjoy the liberty of living in the Religion of their
forefathers, were also disposed to serve and follow him. He interposed his
authority that the Rochellers might give way to the exercise of the Catholic
Religion in their City, At the intercession of the King of Navarre, the
Rochellers permit the Catholics to say Mass in their City.
and before he departed procured leave for Mass to be said in a little Church,
many being present at it; which things accompanied with his modest temperate
speeches, as they gained him a great deal of affection from those of his own
party; so did they lessen and extinguish that hatred which the Guises by
imputations of revolt and apostasy, endeavored to fasten upon him among all
degrees of people in the Kingdom.

But the King in so great a combustion of all things, and in so miserable a
condition of his Crown, which was openly assailed by the Politics and
Hugonots, and secretly conspired against by the Catholics of the League,
having conceived great hopes of finding a way to compass his designs by means
of the General Assembly of the States, was intent upon calling them together in
the City of Blois, where he, with his Mother, and the Duke of Alancon his
Brother arrived the tenth day of November; and having by his Letters given
notice to the Deputies of the several Provinces to meet together without delay,
the business was followed with so much diligence, The Assembly of the States at
Bloys.
that the sixth day of December gave a solemn beginning to the Assembly. The
Kings intention was (prosecuting his own designs) by means of the States, to
settle a firm general Peace, which being established by the common consent of
the whole Nation, no man should have cause to find fault withal; but, lasting
in a firm continuance, might quite abolish the interests of the several
parties, cause the present animosities to be forgotten, and give him time and
opportunity to execute his own resolutions of abasing and weakening the
strength and credit of both the Factions. He hoped that a moderate Agreement
would readily be laid hold on by all the three Estates: For the Clergy were
always fain to contribute very largely, as to a War wherein they were more
interessed than any others; the Nobility wearied with the toils of War, and
exhausted with the vast expenses of it; and the Commons, who besides the
continual and intolerable taxes and contributions, being (in the Fields by the
insolences of Soldiers, in the Cities by the interruption of Trade) subject
to all the miseries of War, seemed greedily and impatiently to desire Peace.

With these ends and hopes, King Henry the Third his speech at the beginning of
the Assembly of the States at Bloys.
the several Orders of the States being met together in his presence, he began
with a grave effectual Speech to deplore the miserable calamitous estate into
which the Kingdom of France, formerly so powerful and flourishing, was then
reduced; since every degree and part of so great a Monarchy being fallen from
their former greatness and prosperity, into a labyrinth of discord and
confusion, was manifestly brought to terms of lamentable ruin and desolation:
That the obedience and veneration of the Royal Majesty, which had in all times
been so proper and peculiar to the French, was now utterly lost: That the bond
of that charity which the love of one common Country uses ordinarily to knit
faster among men of right understanding, was broken to pieces by the violence
of inveterate intestine hatreds: That by the license of Civil Wars, which had
lasted so many years, the due respect to justice was taken away, the fear of
Magistrates trodden under foot, and the sincerity of men's manners exceedingly
corrupted: That he knew, whatsoever calamities the people suffer, are always
attributed to the Prince's evil Government; yet he was satisfied with the
clearness of his own Conscience, and doubted not but equal Judges would free
him from all blame, considering the tender age of the King his Brother, and of
himself, when the beginnings of that mischief brake forth: That all the World
knew how much care and pains the Queen his Mother had undergone to remedy those
misfortunes, which from what causes they were derived, was sufficiently
apparent: That the conservation of the Kingdom, and the inheritance of her Sons
yet Children, (conspired against with so much cunning, and openly assailed with
so much violence) was to be ascribed to her prudence, constancy and
magnanimity; but if her virtuous endeavors had not been able to extinguish
those mischiefs, too fierce and powerful in their beginnings, perchance it was
the permission of Divine Providence, to punish the sins of both Prince and
People together: That it was likewise manifest to every one, what he himself
had done for the suppression and extirpation of the present evils; that under
the Reign of the King his Brother, he with those victorious achievements which
were not unknown unto the World, had tried the rigor of the sword; but he had
found by experience, that the letting of blood only weakened the body, but
neither lessened the violence nor malignity of the disease: That by civil
intestine Wars, Religion it self (which receives its nourishment from Peace)
was much impaired and abased, so that in stead of gaining those Souls that were
gone astray, by violent means they did endanger the loss of those that were
most zealous in the truth; for which cause he had both before he went into
Poland, labored to bring in Peace by a Cessation of those calamities; and
since God had called him to the Crown, endeavored by all means possible to
procure the repose and quiet of his Kingdom: That to that end he had called the
Assembly of the States, that by the advice of his good and faithful Subjects
some way might be found to stop the course of those present miseries; wishing,
rather than they should continue, that the thread of his life might be cut off
before he had seen the half of his days: That it was therefore time to think
among themselves of some wholesome remedy, by which putting an end to the
reciprocal enmities, discords, wars and animosities, they might with gentleness
and moderation perfectly restore the candor of Religion, bring men's minds
again to their due veneration and obedience, reduce the integrity of Justice to
its primitive condition, banish the pernicious liberty of Vice, recover the
ancient simple honesty of Manners; and finally, give breath to those dangers of
the Clergy, to those toils of the Nobility, and to those losses and
distractions of the Common people, which by occasion of the War he was (to his
great grief) not only forced to continue, but also to increase and multiply
without end: That he thought for the procuring of those blessings, there was no
more secure nor effectual means, than a good, moderate, and lasting Agreement;
and yet that he was ready to give ear to any reasons that could be objected to
the contrary, and to any other means that could be propounded, that so he might
make choice of those which should be thought the best, most easy, and most
profitable: That therefore he did earnestly exhort every one of them, that
laying apart all passions and interests, they should study sincerely to find
out such propositions as they thought most fit, to ease the troubles of the
State, and quiet the distractions of the Kingdom; for as he was very willing to
consult of all things in common, so was he absolutely resolved, that whatsoever
they concluded and established, should be most exactly and punctually observed.

The High Chancellor Birago spoke then to the like effect, and with a longer
Oration showed the same things, concluded at last, that since the admirable
wisdom of the Queen Mother, and the valor and generosity of the King had till
then preserved France in the midst of so many troubles and dangers, the States
ought now to offer their general opinion and advice, every one striving to
propound such profitable, seasonable remedies, as might relieve the Kingdom
from present, and keep it safe from future miseries. All the three Orders
severally gave the King many thanks for his affectionate care, and praised his
just intention, every one promising for their own parts to assist with faithful
loyalty and sincerity of heart.

But though in these first appearances the Kings intention and that of the
States seemed both to be the same, yet inwardly they were very different; for
the Deputies of the Provinces were for the most part such as had subscribed to
the Catholic League, and were swayed by the counsel and superintendency of the
Duke of Guise, who being absent himself had sent his Brother of Mayenne, Pierre
Espinac Archbishop of Lions, the Baron de Senecey, and many other of his
dependents thither; and therefore the Deputies whom it concerned to propose and
conclude matters in the Assembly, were for the most part resolved, not only to
moderate the last Articles of Peace, which the King would willingly have agreed
to; but also to break them utterly, and again with more force than ever to
begin the War against the Hugonots, who having violated the conditions, had
already taken arms for their own advantage. But the Kings mind was absolutely
averse from that, which being known to the Deputies, who had discovered it by
many signs, especially by his Speech unto them, and foreseeing that by his
power he would delude and frustrate all their designs, as long as he was able
to resolve alone of whatsoever was propounded; they sought cunningly to take
away that Prerogative, and settle it in a certain number, who should have power
to conclude and determine all businesses without contradiction or appeal.
Wherefore the Deputies of the Nobility and Clergy partly consenting, and the
Deputies of the Commons not altogether opposing, they thought it unfit to
dispute openly whether the States were superior to the King or no, It Is an
ancient question, whether the Assembly of the States or the King be Superior.
(a very ancient question, though disproved by the manner of holding the
States, and always deluded and made vain by the Kings authority) but to
petition the King, that for the dispatch of all businesses with speed, and with
the general satisfaction, he would be pleased to elect a number of Judges, not
suspected by the States, who together with twelve of the Deputies, might hear
such motions as from time to time should be proposed by every Order, and
conclude and resolve upon them, with this condition, that whatsoever was
jointly determined by the Judges and Deputies together, should have the form
and vigor of a Law, without being subject to be altered or revoked.

The King was not ignorant of the importance of that demand; and though he was
inwardly much displeased that they went about to deprive him of the power which
was naturally ^his, and from a free King bring him to the slavery of his
Subjects; yet by how much greater the force of that storm was, with so much the
more dexterity endeavoring to overcome it, he answered graciously, that as
often as the States should offer any propositions or demands, he would without
delay hearken to the twelve Deputies, (which he gave them power to nominate)
and that as soon as he had maturely weighed their reasons, they should have a
speedy and resolute answer to determine whatsoever was necessary for their
general contentment; and that for the better satisfaction of them all, he was
willing to deliver unto the States the names of such as were admitted to his
Councils, to the end that they might know the qualities of those persons by
whose advice he meant to govern, which he would consent to do by the example of
any of his Predecessors; but to confirm and ratify whatsoever others should
determine without himself, it was not possible for him ever to yield to in any
manner, it being contrary to all precedents observed by the King his
Predecessors. The States being excluded from that hope, and despairing of being
able to compass their desires, since the cunning of the demand was taken notice
of, tu^ned another way, and began to propose, That matters of Religion might
first of all be decided; for it being once established to admit no other but
the Catholic, (which neither the King himself would dare to oppose, nor any of
the Deputies, though there were many of them who secretly were of another mind)
all hope of Peace would be laid aside, and the War with the Hugonots presently
be resolved on. Wherefore the Archbishop of Lions proposing for the Clergy, the
Baron de Senecey for the Nob^lity, with the consent of Pierre Versoris, one of
the principal Deputies, for the Commons, a man depending upon the House of
Guise, and one of the chiefest sticklers in the League, ^he Clergy concurred in
this Vote, That the King should be moved to prohibit the exercise of any other
than the Roman Catholic Religion; and that all sorts of people subject to the
Crown should be forced to live according to the Rites of that Church: the same
Proposition was followed by many of the Nobility, who suffered their Votes to
be swayed by the will of others, though many of that Order (...) against, not
the integrity of the Roman Catholic Faith, but the taking up of Arms, desiring
the preservation of Religion, and reducing of such as were out of the way, but
by those means which might be used without War. The Commons assented to this
last opinion, because the burden of the War lay chiefly upon the meanest
people, as Merchants, Tradesmen and Husbandmen: nor could any of the Deputies
(who in particular reaped fruit by those troubles, and being engaged with the
Heads of the League, did therefore obstinately follow the Vote of the Prelates)
have power to persuade any of them to change their verdict; for Iean Bodin,
Iean Bodin contradicts the Prelates in the general Asse^bly.
a man famous for learning and experience in State Affairs, one of the Deputies
of the Commons of Vermandois, and who was secretly induced by the King to
contradict the Churchmen in that particular, endeavored by a long discourse
to make appear unto the Assembly how ruinous and fat^l the new taking up of
Arms would be, repeating from the beginning all the dangers and miseries of the
late Wars, which made a very deep impression in the minds of the third Estate,
and would have done the like in both the other Orders, if their Consciences had
been absolutely free and sincere; but meeting with men who were not only
carried by the zeal of Religion, but whose opinions were biased and
pre-ingaged, it was determined by plurality of voices, that request should be
made unto the King to establish only the Catholic Religion in the Kingdom, and
to exclude for ever all communion with the Hugonots. Nevertheless, Bodin
procured certain words to be entered in the Records of the Order of Commons, to
certify their desire of unity in Religion without the noise of Arms, and the
necessity of War.

This motion of the States being propounded to the King, who had already
sounded the secret practices of the Assembly, made him resolve no longer to
oppose, (knowing that the plurality of voices would be clearly against him) but
to delude the propositions of the Deputies; for by opposing, he saw those Arms
of the Catholic League would be turned upon him, which were then prepared
against the Hugonots: wherefore seeking obliquely to hinder that determination,
he proposed to the States and persuaded them, that before it were enacted,
Commissioners ought to be sent to the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and
the Marshall d' Anville, who by true substantial reasons should persuade them
to obey the will of the States, without returning again to the fatal hazard of
Arms, hoping by such delays to find some remedy against that resolution which
he saw the major part of the Deputies was obstinately bent upon. To that
purpose they chose the Archbishop of Vienne, Monsieur de Rubempre, and the
Treasurer Menager, Commissioners to the King of Navarre; the Bishop of Autun,
Monsieur de Momorine, and Pierre de Rate to the Prince of Conde; the Bishop of
Puits, the Sieur de Rochefort, and the Advocate Toley to the Marshall d'
Anville, to know the last resolution of every one of them. But the King of
Navarre having notice which way the States inclined, and seeing so terrible a
storm preparing against him, whilst the time was spent at Bloys in consulting,
and things were drawn out in length by diversity of opinions, and other
obstacles which were interposed; he being resolved to make ready for War,
busied himself in gathering Soldiers with infinite diligence from all parts,
and in seizing upon many places convenient for the defense and maintenance of
party; which succeeding according to his desires, he had possessed himself of
Bazas, Perig^eux, and St. Macaire in Guienne, Chivray in Poictou, Quimperley in
Bretagne, and with a more Warlike than numerous Army laid siege to Marmande, a
great Town seated upon the bank of the Garonne near to Bourdeaux, and therefore
very commodious to strengthen that place, which was the only principal City of
that Province that made resistance.

In the mean time the States Commissioners being come unto him, he gave them
audience at Again, 1577.
in the beginning of the year 1577. with demonstrations of great honor and
respect. There the Bishop of Vienne having eloquently declared the resolution
of the States, to suffer no other but the Catholic Religion in the Kingdom of
France, exhorted him effectually in the name of all the Orders to come unto the
Assembly, to reunite himself in concord with the King his Brother-in-law, to
return into the bosom of the Church, and by so noble and so necessary a
resolution to comfort all the Orders of the Kingdom; by whom, as first Prince
of the Blood, he was greatly esteemed and honored; and afterward enlarging
himself, he represented the several commodities of Peace, and the miserable
desolations of War. The King of Navarre with succinct, but solid words replied
punctually, That if the happiness of Peace, and miseries of War were so great
and many as he alleged, the States ought therefore sincerely to establish that
Peace which was before concluded, and not by new deliberations, and by revoking
Edicts already made, to kindle again the sparks of War which were almost
extinguished: That it was an easy matter to discourse of the rooting out of a
Religion by the Sword, but experience had always showed, it was impossible to
effect it; and therefore it was to be esteemed a more discreet advice to allow
a spiritual Peace, thereby to obtain a temporal one; than by disquieting men's
Consciences to fancy the conservation of an outward Peace: That for his part,
he was born and brought up in the Religion he professed, and he believed still
that it was the right and true Faith; but yet when by sound reasons urged to
him by men of understanding, and not by force and violence, he should find
himself to be in an error, he would readily repent his fault, and changing his
Religion, endeavor the conversion of all others to the belief of that Faith
which should be acknowledged the true one: Therefore he prayed the States not
to force his Conscience, but to be satisfied with that his good will and
intention; and if that answer were not sufficient to content them, he would
expect new and more particular demands, for the better answering whereof he
would presently assemble a full Congregation of his party at Montauban; but in
the mean time, while he saw all things prepared to make War against him, he was
constrained to stand armed upon his own defense, to prevent that ruin which he
plainly saw contrived by his Enemies.

The Prince of Conde will not acknowledge the Assembly of Bloys to be the
States General; nor treat with their Commissioners.
The Prince of Conde's answer was very different; for having received the
Commissioners privately, he would neither open their Letters, nor acknowledge
them for Deputies of the States General, alleging that that Assembly could not
be called the States General, which wanted the Deputies of so many Cities,
Towns and Provinces, and which treated of violating men's Consciences by force,
of shedding the Blood Royal of France, and suppressing the Liberties of the
Crown, to comply with the desires of strangers, who were so hot upon the
prosecution of their own intolerable, pernicious interests of ambition and
private ends, that it was a Conventicle of a few men suborned and corrupted by
the disturbers of the public Peace, and therefore he would neither open their
Letters, nor treat with their Commissioners.

The Marshall d' Anville gave an answer not much unlike, but something more
moderate, the Deputies having found him at Montpellier: For having represented
to them, that his heart was real as any man's to the Catholic Religion, wherein
he had been born, and would continue as long as he lived, he told them, that it
would be both vain and impossible to prohibit the exercise of the Reformed
Religion granted by so many Edicts, and confirmed by so many Conclusions of
Peace, and that by blowing up the flames of War, the destruction and ruin of
all parts of the Kingdom would be continued; but that it ought to be consulted
of in common in a lawful Assembly of the States General of France, and not in a
particular Congregation as that of Blois, where only the Deputies of one party
were met together; and therefore he did protest against the validity of
whatsoever should be there decreed or resolved.

The Commissioners returned to Bloys with these answers in the beginning of
February; and the Duke of Guise being come thither to give a color to the
business on his part, the inclination of the States appeared manifestly ready
to disanul the late Edict of Pacification, and resolve upon a War with the
Hugonots: Wherefore the King not willing to draw the hatred of all the
Catholic party upon himself, nor give them cause to suspect the sincerity of
his Conscience, making the Pope and all Christendom believe he held
intelligence with the Hugonots, which jealousy would have endangered the
Catholic League to take Arms of themselves without his Authority, and disorder
the whole state of things: Besides being advised by the Bishop of Lymoges, and
Monsieur de Morvillier, two of his principal Counselors, he determined (since
he could not by open resistance hinder the designs and progress of the
Catholic League, which already had taken too deep a root) to make himself Head
and Protector of it, and draw that Authority to himself which he saw they
endeavored to settle upon the Head of the League, both within and without the
Kingdom; hoping that he being once made Moderator of that Union, in time
convenient means would not be wanting to dissolve it, as a thing directly
opposite to his intentions: Wherefore showing a great desire to extirpate the
Hugonot Faction, and making all believe that he was highly offended with the
Princes answers, he caused the Catholic League framed by the Lords of the
House of Lorain to be read, published and sworn in the open Assembly, where
they themselves were present, establishing it as an Irrevocable and Fundamental
Law of the Kingdom: Henry the III. declares himself Head of the Catholic
League.
Then he declared himself principal Head and Protector of it, with loud
specious protestations, that he would spend his last breath to reduce all his
people to an unity in Religion, and an entire obedience to the Roman Church:
Thus did he labor to avoid that blow, which he saw he could not break by
making resistance.

But the King having for many days showed a wonderful desire to suppress the
Hugonots, purposed with one mortal blow to try the constancy of the Deputies;
for having sent his Brother the Duke of Alancon, and the Duke of Nevers unto
the Assembly, he caused them to propose, that it being requisite to make War
with powerful Armies, against those that were disobedient to the Catholic
Church, great sums of money were also necessary, and that therefore the Kings
Treasury being exhausted, he desired the States to assist him with two millions
of Ducats to maintain the vast expenses of War; which none ought to refuse,
since they had all solemnly taken the Oath of the League, and thereby obliged
themselves to contribute their Fortunes in common; at which demand, the
Deputies for the City of Paris not being present, (because some were
indisposed, and the rest gone home to elect the Prevost des Merchands the chief
Officer of that City) and therefore Iean Bodin being President of the Order of
Commons, and knowing all that burden was to be laid upon the people, rose up,
and answered, That the Third Estate had always propounded and protested to
desire unity in Religion, and the reducing of those that went astray but
without the noise of Arms and War, and that if they looked into the Records of
the Assembly, they should find those very words formerly expressed in the Vote
of the Commons, which he had caused to be registered, and that since they had
not consented to the War, neither were they bound to contribute to the expenses
of it, to satisfy the fantastical humors of some of the Deputies, and consume
their own Estates to renew the yet bleeding wounds of the Kingdom: to which
speech of his, not only the other Orders, but the Clergy themselves assented,
who having sworn that in words, which they were not so forward to perform in
actions, and desiring no less than the rest to ease themselves of those
contributions wherewith all of them were equally wearied and burdened, the
ardour and constancy of those began to waver, who had so readily resolved upon
a War at the charge and danger of other men: whereupon the King turning his
sail according to the wind, the next day he himself propounded to the Deputies,
That since they thought the charges of War so grievous a burden, they should
patiently expect the Duke of Montpensier and Monsieur de Byron, sent by him to
the King of Navarre, to procure his conversion in a friendly and peaceable
manner; with which motion (notwithstanding the opposition of many) the major
part of the Deputies were contented.

Not many days after the Duke of Montpensier returned; and being brought into
the Assembly by the Kings command, related in order all that had passed in his
Negotiation, and in substance showed them that the King of Navarre being most
desirous of the Peace of the Kingdom, would be contented with such reasonable
conditions, as cutting off all exorbitant, superfluous matters which were
granted in the last Edict, might moderate and compose all differences without
putting themselves upon the necessity of a War, and gave almost assured hopes,
that he himself (though he would not give occasion to have it thought that he
turned Catholic by compulsion) might yet in time condescend to alter his
opinion, and make a happy conclusion of all things: which relation coming from
the Duke, who was of the Blood Royal, Brother-in-law to the Duke of Guise, and
always partial to the Catholics, wrought such an effect in the minds of all,
as encouraged Iean Bodin and others of the Order of Commons, again to try the
way of agreement with express protestation, that unity in Religion ought to be
procured without War: Which Vote being some days stiffly opposed, and as
constantly maintained, was at last carried, and a Writing drawn up in the Name
of the States, beseeching the King to endeavor an unity in Religion by
peaceful means, and without the necessity of War; which being propounded by the
King himself in his Council, the opinions concerning it were diverse; for the
Duke, and Cardinal of Guise, the Duke of Mayenne, the Duke of Nevers, and
others, were against the proposition of the States, alleging that the end they
aimed at could not be obtained without the extirpation of the Hugonots, who
were up in Arms, and moreover had already renewed the War; and affirming, that
last proposition of the Deputies to be artificially contrived and extorted;
whereas the first had been voluntarily and generally agreed on, and the Oath
taken in approbation of the League, which was directly contrary to the present
proceedings. But the Queen Mother, the Duke of Montpensier, the Marshall de
Cosse, Monsieur de Byron, the High Chancellor By^ago, Morvillier, Chiverny,
Bellieure, and Villeclaire, with the major part of the Council being of the
contrary opinion, alleged that there were many other means (though such as
required more time) to bring those that were out of the way, home into the
bosom of the Church; and that to destroy so much people would exceedingly
weaken the Kingdom, and bring it again into the late miseries and dangers.
Wherefore it was concluded that the Duke of Montp^^sier should return to the
King of Navarre, to know his last answer concerning his conversion and
reconciliation to the Church, and the settling of a lasting, reasonable Peace.

In the mean time many other things were debated in the Assembly, about the
rule of justice, the ordering of the Finances, the payments of debts, and the
reformation of manners; among which matters, some of the Prelates moved, that
the Council of Trent might be received and observed: but the Deputies of the
Nobility, and those of the Commons opposed it stoutly; with which the major
part of the Clergy concuring, for the conservation (as they said) of the
privileges of the Gallique Church, and such as had been granted to it by
several Popes, it was at last resolved, that it should pass no further.

The Heads of the Catholic League and their followers omitted not to seek some
way of restraining the Kings power, and propounded that his Council might be
reduced to the number of four and twenty Counselors; which should not be
chosen at the Kings pleasure, but by every Province of the Kingdom, as is the
custom in other States. But this motion being made but coldly, and stiffly
opposed by many as contrary to the an^ient constitutions, and all former
precedents, it was in the end cast ou^, ^est the mention of it should too much
exasperate the King.

With these deliberations, not only ambiguous and uncertain, but also opposite
and disagreeing among themselves, After many disputes the general Assembly is
dismissed without concluding any thing.
the Congregation of the States broke up, which having neither concluded Peace
nor War, the King was left free to do what pleased himself: who having happily,
though not without much pains and industry, overcome the conspiracies of the
League, was in good measure confirmed in the resolution of his first designs;
having not only increased his inward hatred toward the House of Guise, but
found by experience his own weakness, and the too great power of their Faction:
Wherefore being resolved to establish Peace, because both parties were
nourished and fomented by the War, he first of all put the Bishop of Lymoges
away from the Court, and cunningly excluded Mervillier from the
Cabinet-Council, suspecting that they held secret intelligence with the Duke of
Guise, and that they had persuaded him to declare himself Head of the League,
not sincerely, but to assist that party; for though the ^rtifice had succeeded
happily, be thought nevertheless he had discovered that in many occasions they
had dissuaded the War with the Hugonots; which they having done, because they
thought it so became their Order, being of the Clergy, had thereby stirred up
the Kings anger and suspicion, who was jealous beyond measure of seeing the
League favored or not opposed by any of his own Creatures. The Bishop of
Lymoges being retired to his own house, lived very quietly all the rest of his
days; but Morvillier, a man secretly full of great ambition, was possessed with
so deep a melancholy, that within a few months he ended his life with grief.

The King presently dispatched Monsieur de Byron and Secretary Villeroy to the
King of Navarre, that they being joined with the Duke of Montpensier, might
prosecute the Treaty of Agreement: But though the King of Navarre (who with
wise consideration measured the strength of his party, which was not very
powerful at that time, making show to do it through a moderation of mind, and a
desire of the general quiet) did yield to decline the late conditions, and
consent to what was proposed by the Kings Agents; yet the Prince of Conde, of a
fierce haughty nature, and the Hugonot Ministers, with whose advice all things
were necessarily to be governed, were still obstinate against Peace, unless
upon the Capitulations already established, disputing about such things as
necessity disposed another way: wherefore as soon as their stubbornness, and
the difficulty of the Treaty appeared to the King, being resolved to put the
Hugonots in mind of their weak estate, and force them to receive conditions of
Peace, if they persisted in their wilfulness, The King sends two Armies against
the Hugonots. The Duke of Alancon made the Kings Lieutenant General.
he sent out two several Armies against them in the beginning of April; one
into the Countries near the Loyre, and the Provinces on this side the River,
under the command of the Duke of Alancon, who to remove all disgusts, was
declared his Lieutenant General; the other, on that side of the River in
Xaintonge, under the Duke of Mayenne, whom he made use of much more willingly
than of the Duke of Guise, because he found him of a more moderate mind and
inclination; and besides those two Armies, he set forth a Fleet under Monsieur
de Lansac to clear the coasts, and hinder the entry into Rochelle: By this
means he thought presently to make the Catholic party weary of those expenses
which (by the management of the Duke of Alancon) would become intolerable; and
at the same time to break the obstinacy of the Hugonots, letting them see how
little means they had to resist his forces; whereby he might afterward
accommodate the conditions of Peace in such a way as should appear to him just
and reasonable, since the former Capitulations could be neither broken nor
moderated, unless there were first some beginning of a War.

It was not hard for either of the Kings Armies to do great matters in a little
time, for the Hugonots being reduced to an exceeding want of men and money,
were not able to keep the field; and their fortified places, though valiantly
defended, yet having no assistance ready either of their own party, or of
strangers, their only help and refuge in all times of their need, they were
fain either to let themselves be miserably destroyed, or yield to the
discretion of the Conquerors. So no Head of the Hugonots appearing in the
Field, the Duke of Alancon having attacked, and within a few days taken la
Charity, was marched into Auvergne, and had besieged Isoire, a place strongly
situated and well fortified, but which imported most, constantly, or (to say
better) desperately defended by the inhabitants: Yet as the event always proves
it impossible to keep any place that cannot be relieved, it was brought to such
extremity at the beginning of June, that being at last yielded to discretion,
it was not only sacked, and the inhabitants put to the sword, as it pleased the
immoderate will of the Duke of Alancon, but it was also set on fire, and burnt
to the very ground: On the other side, the Duke of Mayenne, having without
difficulty taken Thone-Charente, and Marans, had laid siege to Brouage, a place
for situation, strength, and the profit of the Salt Pits, of very great
importance; where the Prince of Conde having tried all possible means to
relieve the besieged, the Hugonots after some difficulty were brought into such
a condition, that about the end of August they delivered it up, saving only the
lives of the Soldiers and inhabitants, which agreement the Duke punctually
observed. Nor did their affairs prosper better by Sea than Land: for Lausac
with the Kings Fleet having driven away that of the Rochellers commanded by the
Sieur de Clairmont, and taken two of their greatest Ships, landed also in the
Isle of Oleron, took it; and being at last come to the Cape of Blaye, did
exceedingly incommodate the affairs of Rochel. These accidents having qualified
the Prince of Conde's fury, and overcome the obstinacy of the Ministers; there
was not any of the Hugonots, who foreseeing their total ruin, did not desire
and labor for peace, with so great an inclination of all private men, that the
Soldiers forsook their colors, the Gentlemen retired to their own houses, and
the inhabitants of the City, detesting the exercise of Arms, returned to the
business of their shops; besides, the Marshall d' Anville, who in their
prosperity had united his Counsels and Forces with them, now pretending he had
been abused and ill dealt withal by certain Heads of the Faction, did endeavor
to make his peace, and return unto the Kings obedience, and had already taken
Arms against some of the Hugonots, by whom he gave out, that he had been
grievously offended.

Nor were the Catholics more cool and moderate in their desires of peace; for
though the good success of the War redounded to the benefit of the King, and of
the Catholic Religion, yet the charge of contributions, and the losses the
Country sustained by the insolences of the Soldiers, and want of Government
in the Duke of Alaneon's Army, resulted to the detriment and ruin of private
men; wherefor^ seeing that the War, though unactive, and not very dangerous,
was yet like to be ^ong and tedious, a great many of those who at first either
desired it, or did not oppose it, began now to long for peace, to free
themselves from the burdens and incommodities of the War; and, except the
Lords of Guise and their dependents, there was not any who did not think it
requisite to procure an agreement, for the ease of the people who were so
exceedingly oppressed. But the expectation of the Hugonot party was settled upon
the King of Navarre, who (having from the beginning foreseen that mischief, and
desired peace) now treating at Bergerac with the Kings Deputies, knew so well
how to hide and conceal his weakness, that though he stood not upon those
conditions which were last concluded with the Duke of Ala^con, yet he held up
the affairs of his party in being and reputation. But the Kings inclination,
and by consequence the easiness of his Ministers, was not less than the policy
of the King of Navarre: wherefore a Cessation of Arms being agreed upon for a
few days in the beginning of September, the Accommodation was so actively
followed, that in the end the Articles of Peace were concluded with so great
contentment of both parties, that the King being come to Poictiers with the
Court for that purpose, Through weakness of both parties the Peace is concluded
and published by torch light.
showed manifest signs of joy, calling it His peace; and the Prince of Conde
embraced it with so much greediness, that the ratification coming to him in the
evening when it was already dark, he caused it to be publicly proclaimed that
very night by torch-light.

The Edict of this Pacification was very copious, being comprised in Seventy
Four Articles, which did limit and take away many of those exorbitancies that
had been granted in the former Edict in favor of the foreign Forces
establishing a very moderate, political Government, equally just and reasonable
for both parties: it permitted the exercise of the Reformed Religion in the
Houses of Gentlemen Feudataries, or (as they call them) High jurisdiction;
authority to judge and determine all criminal or capital matters (except*
High Treason) within his own precincts, and all civil actions or controversies,
except in Royal cases, and such as concern Gentlemen and the high ways.
de Haute Justice, with the free admission of every body: but in the Houses of
private Gentlemen, not above the number of seven was allowed, and in a prefixed
place in every Jurisdiction and Baily-wick, except in Paris and ten leagues
about, and two leagues compass from the Court wheresoever it should be; it
bridled the license of those who leaving their Religious Orders, had joined
themselves in matrimony, by special favor pardoning what was past, and
severely regulating the future: it r^stored the use of the Catholic Religion
in all places from whence it had been taken during the War: it prescribed the
present restitution of Ecclesiastical Revenues to Priests and Prelates in what
Province soever, and that wit^out any delay: it obliged the Hugonots to the
certainty of Baptism, to keep the appointed holy days, to exclude Consanguinity
in Marriage, and many other things wisely observed in the Catholic Church, and
very proper for a peaceful orderly Government: it took away le^ Chambres Courts
of justice, wherein half were Catholics, half Hugonots
(...)-par^i^s (as they call them) which were already settled in Paris, Rou^n,
Dijon and Bretagne, leaving them still in the other Parliaments, but with a
smaller number of Hugonots: nor was any thing omitted which could hinder
discords, take away scandals, reunite the minds of those that were di^^ident
or divided, and settle the authority of Magistrates and vigor of the Laws in
their first state and condition: Yet were eight places granted to the Hugonot
Lords for their security for the space of four years, after which (the Edict
being entirely observed) they promised faithfully to restore them into the
Kings hands; they serving only in the interim till the Edict of Pacification
was settled in a way, and by time and observance reduced unto the ordinary usual
course. These places were Montpellier and Aiguemorte in Languedoc; Myon and
Serres in Dauphine; Seine in Provence; Perigueux, la Reolle, and le Mas de
Verdun in Guienne; things all prudently ordered, and disposed for the
establishment of a well-setled Peace.

But though the King for the Catholic, and the Princes of Bourbon for the
Hugonot party, had (to the universal joy of the people) concluded this
Agreement, which seemed very likely to take away the late discords, and quiet
the distracted estate of the Kingdom; yet neither were men's minds generally
pacified, differences totally composed, nor the tumults utterly appeased; but
the fire of public War being extinguished, particular quarrels did still boil
in the interests of private persons; for neither did the Marshall d' Anville
(who every day withdrew himself further from the Hugonots) cease to prosecute
those by whom he pretended to be injured in Languedoc, under color of reducing
the places of his Government under his own command; nor did the Sieur des
Diguieres in Dauphine dare to trust the peace, nor hazard himself upon the
Kings word, remembering what had befallen Mombrun, in whose company he had made
War, and therefore still continued armed for his security: and the Catholics
(especially the adherents of the League) when they saw the Hugonots meet at
their Sermons, being inflamed with anger, and transported with passion, could
not suffer them without murmurings and detractions, which occasioned many
contentions, and sometimes dangerous bloody accidents; whereby a great part of
France, though the peace was made, continued still in broils and insurrections.
But the King believing that the benefit of time and moderation of Government
might at last appease and extinguish all those commotions, dissembled those
things which were written and presented unto him from several parts, and had
settled his whole thoughts upon the framing and executing of his designs: yet
after the space of some months, seeing the stirs and dissentions still
continue, he resolved that the Queen his Mother going into Poictou to confer
with the King of Navarre, and then into the other most suspected Provinces,
should with the wonted effect of her presence compose the differences,
artificially taking away those scruples which still disturbed the Edict of
Pacification.

About that time the King created two Mareschals, men of admirable valor in
War, and singular prudence in Government, Armand Sieur de Byron, and Jacques
Sieur de Matignon, who free from the interests of the Duke of Guise, depended
merely and wholly upon the Kings will, acknowledging him their sole Benefactor;
and though Byron for those passages concerning Rochel, and some other
jealousies, had for a long time been little favored by the King, especially
before he came unto the Crown; yet being now resolved to exalt and trust those
who were disaffected to the House of Guise, he came to rise to one of the
highest places: it being generally conceived, that he was chiefly induced to
those other matters by the envy and hatred which he inwardly bore that Family,
by which he knew that not only his advancement was opposed, but that
oftentimes, and particularly at the Massacre at Paris, The High-Chancellour
Bira^o being made Cardinal, Philip Hurault is chosen in his place.
his death was both propounded and persuaded. And because Renato di Birago the
High-Chancellour at the recommendation of the King and Queen was by the Pope
received into the number of Cardinals; that most important Office was conferred
upon Philip Hurault Viscount de Chiverny, one of the Kings most trusty intimate
Counselors.

In the mean time the year 1578 being begun, the Queen Mother, 1578.
after some delays, caused by the sharpness of the Winter, had with a noble
train of principal Lords and Gentlemen, begun her journey toward the King of
Navarre, taking with her the Lady Margaret her Daughter, to restore her to him,
she having by his sudden departure been left behind him at the Court: being
arrived at Bourdeaux, she sent to treat with the Deputies of the Hugonots, who,
as to their Head, were come unto the King of Navarre, who (in this weakness and
slenderness of his party, men's bodies being wearied, their estates consumed,
and the minds of the Protestant Princes alienated by reason of the small
account that had been made of Prince Casimir and the Germans) was forced by
cunning and dissimulation to supply the public necessity, and his own private
maintenance: Wherefore being reduced into a corner of that Province, Governor
of Guienne only in title, deprived of a great part of his own revenues, and
altogether excluded from the Kings favor and liberality, wherewith his
Ancestors had born up their dignity after the loss of the Kingdom of Navarre,
he was on the one side fain to embrace Peace, 1579.
because he had not forces to make War; and on the other he was necessitated
secretly to suffer private discords to break forth into acts of hostility,
thereby to maintain his credit and his followers, who had no other means to
keep themselves; wherefore with politic deliberations, and with a certain
lively promptitude which was natural to him, he made show exceedingly to
reverence the Kings commands, and yet managed his own interests so dexterously,
that in such an exigence of urgent affairs, his vivacity was much esteemed by
men of understanding; though some blamed his resolution to live rather in that
manner like a banished man, than to submit himself unto the Kings obedience,
who by infinite signs was known to be more averse to the House of Lorain than
to him.

But though this variety of interests had prolonged the treaty of matters till
the beginning of February 1579. yet could it not utterly disturb it, 1579.
so that at last it was concluded at Nerac, where both parties were met; for
the Hugonots not having strength sufficient to think of War, were content in
the end (the obscurity of the Edict being taken away, from whence all those
dissentions were thought to arise) that every particular should remain firmly
established, and the Peace (as much as the secret designs of both parties did
allow) perfectly settled.

In the mean time the King, constant to his own intentions, had begun to
confirm the groundwork of his determination; for besides the two Mareshals
which were formerly chosen, he had given the Office of General of the Artillery
(that for a long time had been held by Monsieur de Byron) to Philibert Sieur de
la Guiche, and had declared Laurence Sieur de Maugiron Lieutenant General in
Daulphine, which place was vacant by the death of the Sieur des Gordes: and the
Government of the City of Paris, formerly held by the chief Lords of the
Kingdom, was given to Rene Sieur de Ville-guier, (then one of his two principal
Favorites) and Francis Sieur d' O (the other) was Superintendent of the
Finances, and almost at the same time Iean Sieur d' Aumont, a man of very noble
birth, and not inferior valor, but not favored with the power or union of
any of the Factions, was created Marshall in the place of Francis de
Momorancy, who wasted by the tediousness of adverse fortune, was lately
departed out of this life. The King bred up continually near his person
(besides those who already sat at the Helm of Government) many young Lords and
Gentlemen, of great hopes and expectations, to fill up the vacancy of those
Offices that fell daily; among which the chief were Anne Son to the Viscount de
Ioyeuse, and Iean Louis the Son of Monsieur de la Valett, who by the vivacity
of their wits did equal the nobleness of their extraction: for the Viscount de
Ioyeuse, Father of Anne, being honorably descended, had long been Governor of
Gascogne, and amidst the greatest combustions had faithfully followed the Kings
and Queens party, without meddling with either faction; and Monsieur de la
Valett the Father of Iean Louis, being also a Gentleman of most noble blood,
having commanded the Light Horse in the course of all the Wars, had gained an
extraordinary reputation of valor: Wherefore these young Lords bred up in the
discipline of the Court, (where they had the example of their worthy
Progenitors, and advanced into the Kings Chamber) were as Leaders to the rest,
who were brought up in great number to the principal hopes of the Crown: and
though Monsieur de Quelus, and Francis the Son of Maugiron, two of these young
Favorites (falling into a quarrel with Antraquet and Riberack, Favorites of
the House of Guise) were both slain in Duel, and St. Megrin (a third Companion
of these two) was killed in a few days after by some that were unknown, as he
came out of the Court late at night; yet the King, satisfying both his grief
and anger by doing honors to the dead, (in so much that he caused their
Statues in Marble to be erected in the Church of St. Paul) did still raise up
others into his favor, who for birth and ingenuity were proper for the
greatness of his designs: Henry the III. his manner of life.
which things while they were ripening, the Kings life was very different from
that education in which from his childhood he had been trained up generously in
the midst of Arms; for having at first determined to feign a soft quiet course
of life, very conformable to the inward inclination of his nature, and out of
measure pleasing to him; he gave himself over wholly to his ease, frequented
Sermons and Processions, conversed often with Capuchins and Jesuits, built
Monasteries and Chapels, used to undergo penances and wear hair-shirts, wore
his beads openly at his girdle, and was often present at the Schools of the
Penitents, and at the Canonical hours of the Hieronomites, who were brought by
him to live in his own Palace; by which actions he showed a wonderful affection
to Religion, and a most ardent desire to increase and propagate it. This manner
of living did, in great part, produce the effect he desired; for many of the
Catholics, lulled asleep, and weened from a Military life, by the example of
their Prince, had turned themselves to quiet peaceful thoughts, and to the care
of their domestic affairs, which, in the revolutions of so many Wars, had
been long neglected and forgotten; and among the Hugonots, (part laying aside
their stubbornness, since it was not provoked; and part seeing all gifts and
favors were bestowed upon such as followed the Kings example, in reverencing
Religion, and exercising Catholic duties) many, by little and little, withdrew
themselves from that party, and either really, or in appearance, joined with
the Roman Church; so that a few months of peace were clearly seen to have
converted more then twenty years of continual War had done before.

But, this deliberation of the Kings, which, if it had been prosecuted with the
same severity it was begun, might perchance have happily effected his proposed
end; being at length drawn aside by passion and inclination, began to pass from
devotion to luxury, and from ease to dissoluteness; so that though he continued
in the same spiritual exercises, yet his hours of recreation, and days of
rest, were spent in delightful Pastimes, sumptuous Masks and Balls, Stately
Marriages, and continual conversation with the Ladies of the Court, whereby,
his design of a quiet and peaceful life, corrupted by little and little, was no
longer art and dissimulation, but turned into custom, and abuse; and though on
the one side the advantage of taking off men's minds from their wonted
fierceness, did thereby continue; yet on the other it rendered the King very
odious, and contemptible to a great part of the Kingdom: For the Including the
Gentry, who are always meant by the French Nobless, as well as the Lords.
Nobility, (seeing their Prince's favor was totally engrossed by a few men,
and every one excluded from any advancement at Court* but by the means of those
Favorites (commonly called Minions,) who were not only to be served, and
waited on, above the condition of their birth, but oftentimes also to be
corrupted with great Presents) were kindled with an infinite disdain, and,
shunning and avoiding the very sight of the Court, awakened and stirred up the
state of present affairs. The Common People intollerably burdened with new
Taxations, and innumerable grievances, not only thereby to heap up treasure
sufficient to sustain that fabric of the Kings designs, but much more to
supply his superfluous expenses both spiritual and temporal, and to feed the
greedy covetousness of his Minions; seeing themselves in a much worse condition
in Peace, then they were wont to be in War, hated the very name of the King,
and murmured against his way of Government. The Clergy, no less burdened then
the rest, did continually blame the Counsels of that Administration, which had
made Peace with the Hugonots to follow the Luxuries, and Pleasures of the
Court; and many of the Principal Hugonots themselves, though they peaceably
enjoyed a liberty of Conscience, yet could they not settle their minds, nor
free themselves from jealousies, whilst they saw the King publicly addicted to
the severest exercises of the Catholic Religion, and continually encompassed
by the Capuchins, Jesuits, Bernardines, Hieronomites, and other Religious
Orders; so that in the midst of Peace, nothing but the Persecution of Heresy
was daily threatened. Thus the King's secret designs, framed, and plotted with
so long care and industry, (as is the custom of too subtle Counsels) did, at
length, produce effects very different from the intent and aim of their
contriver.

This occasion of the general hatred against the Kings Person, was not omitted
by the Duke of Guise, nor by his brothers, and confederates, The Guises foment
the Peoples hatred against the King.
for doubting of his intentions in matter of Religion, whereof they had
declared themselves defenders; and having already, by many conjectures, found
out the end to which the action tended; they, being no less politic, and
crafty then himself, did labor, by all means possible, not only to increase
the ill will, which was in a manner generally borne him, and to bring him into
the contempt of all his People, but also to gain themselves credit and
reputation, and to win the love, and applause of every one; grave in their
speech, affable in their conversation, ready to show favor and assistance to
those that needed, boasters of their own virtues, which were many, and (which
among the common People, is always very prevalent) of noble Presence, comely
Person, and graceful behavior. So, though the King diminished their Power, by
bringing such into employment as were averse from them, and only depending
upon himself, yet they grew up another way, cunningly receiving, and assisting
such as were injured, and drawing the Malcontents to join with them; and,
though the King had taken off much of that hatred, which formerly, in the
common sort of Hugonots, was very great against him, by having granted them
both an inward, and an outward Peace, yet did they stir up the hatred of the
Catholics, and particularly of the Parisians, imputing his favors toward the
young Gentlemen that were about him, unto an unfitting irregular desire; his
Devotions and Penances to hypocrisy, and dissimulation; the advancing of his
dependents to offices and honors, to a tyrannical power, and a greedy appetite
to devour all things; which things, they themselves not naming, but speaking of
the Kings actions with ambiguous words and reservations, caused them to be
divulged by active eloquent men, sometimes figuratively in the Pulpit,
sometimes openly in meetings and ordinary conversations, and many times, by
little pamphlets, under diverse Titles, made them be artificially described and
published.

But the King trusting to the secret structure of his designs, which he
thought to be in a very good forwardness, believed he should at last be easily
able to overcome all oppositions; and to level the line of them the more
regularly, by joining the Theorick to the Practick, he retired himself every
day after dinner with Baccio de Been, and Giacopo Corbinelli, both Florentines,
men exceedingly learned in the Greek and Latin Studies, making them read unto
him Polybius and Cornelius Tacitus; but much more often the discourses and
Prince of Machiavel; which readings stirring him up, he was so much the more
transported with his own secret plots; for the advancing whereof, that he might
the better engage and oblige the principal persons more nearly and confidently
to himself, under color that the Order of the Knights of St. Michael was
become mean and common, by having been too easily, and too indifferently
conferred by his Predecessors, he instituted a new Order of Knighthood; which
with strict rules, and an assignment of certain Revenues, he called l' Order du
St. Esprit, solemnizing the Ceremonies of it upon the first day of the year:
Henry the 3d institutes the order of Knighthood of the Holy Ghost.
But, as this Prince was most ingenious in laying his designs, and ardent in
the beginning of them, but remiss in the prosecution, having found many
difficulties at Rome in his purpose of assigning Church Lands to that Order of
Knighthood, under title of Commendams; so the profits of that Order were
frustrated, though the Name and the Order it self being placed in persons of
eminent quality, has continued for many years in high esteem and veneration.

Whilst these things pass at the Court, the Queen Mother (having concluded the
Treaty with the King of Navarre, and endeavored to make him taste the delights
and benefits of Peace) went to visit the Provinces of Gascogne, Languedoc, and
Dauphine, every one receiving her Answers as so many Oracles, since the King,
showing a desire to live quiet and retired, had remitted all the weight of
Affairs unto her care; and having left her Daughter with her Husband, she had
conferred with the Viscount de Turenne in Poiciou, and had composed differences
with the Marshall d' Anville in Languedoc, who, having sued for pardon, (yet,
without stirring from his Government) was returned (though but in appearance)
unto the Kings obedience. Last of all, the Queen went to Montluel, a Town of
the Duke of Savoys, not far from the Confines, to speak with the Marshall de
Bellegarde; who, during the Wars of France, had possessed himself of the
Marquesate of Saluzzo.

Bellegarde had, for many years, held the chief place in the Kings favor, and
in the beginning of his Reign, was, by him, created Marshall; but afterward,
for some jealousies the King conceived of him, and by the instigation of his
competitors Chiverny and Villeguier, he was fallen out of favor; and, under
pretense of sending him into Poland, to negotiate for the Duke of Alancon, he
had cunningly sought to put him from Court: Bellegarde, by intelligence with
the Duke of Savoy, usurps the Marquesate of Saluzzo.
But, being openly favored by the Marshall d' Anville, and secretly by the
Duke of Savoy, he went into the Marquesate of Saluzzo, where, having found a
light occasion of dispute with Carlo de Birago, the Kings Lieutenant, who held
the principal places, he easily drove him away by force; and having, without
much difficulty, made himself Master of that State, he carried himself in
imitation of d' Anville, obeying the King's orders only so far forth as he
himself thought fit. This action of his did not only prove very prejudicial to
the Affairs of France, but likewise wrought great suspicions in the Italian
Princes, who, with reason, doubted, that Bellegarde, set on by the Catholic
King, to deprive the French of the Marquesate of Saluzzo, might give the King
occasion, for the recovery of his own, to bring the War into Italy, and put the
affairs of that Province into confusion; and that so much the rather, because
they saw Bellegarde leavy Soldiers, and fortify places, and yet knew not with
whose money he could do those things: Wherefore the Pope being moved, had
prayed the Venetian Senate, as Friends to the King, to interpose their wisdom,
to take away the occasion of that fire, the preparations whereof were so near
at hand: The Senate undertook the business very carefully, and having caused
their Ambassador Grimano to treat with the King, and Francesco Barbaro Resident
in Savoy, with the Marshall de Bellegarde, was the occasion that the King
committed that affair unto the managing of his Mother. For this cause, the
Queen, not being able to draw Bellegarde unto Gren^ble, whither the Duke of
Savoy, and the Venetian Ambassador, were come to meet her, was content to go to
Montluel, (according to her custom) making small account of Ceremonies (which
use so much to trouble Princes) so she might obtain her ends in the substance
of things. There, having wrought the Marshall to acknowledge the King, and
receive the Patent of his Government from him, she dispatched it for him, with
many demonstrations of honor; but, whatsoever the occasion were, the Marshall
died suddenly as soon as he was returned unto Saluzzo; and before the Queen
departed from those Provinces, the Governors and Guardians of his Son
delivered up that State into the hands of the King of France.

The Queen being gotten out of that trouble, passing thorough Bourgogne* was
returned unto her Son, to assist in the administration of the Government;
whilst he, retired from the management of affairs, seemed only to mind Feasts
and Solemnities, leaving all businesses to her, and to his Council, though
indeed every least particular passed through his own hands; by which arts he
thought himself so secure of present, and certain of future matters, that he
believed he had already fully executed all that he had secretly contrived in
his mind. Only he thought the course of his designs was stopped by the Duke of
Alancon, who, fickle and unconstant in his desires, sometimes retiring himself
from Court, sometimes returning confidently again; now holding intelligence
with the Malcontents, and within a while refusing to meddle with them, kept
him still solicitous with many jealousies and anxieties.

The Queen Mother endeavored principally to remedy that fear, The
Low Countries being withdrawn from the King of Spain's Dominion, first seek
protection from the King of France, and then put themselves under the Duke of
Alancon.
as a thing so material, that the tranquillity or disturbance of the Government
depended on it: Wherefore, the people of the Low Countries being already
withdrawn from the subjection of the Catholic King, having first besought the
King of France to receive them into his protection; and after he refused it,
having offered the Command of themselves to the Duke of Alancon, if with a
powerful Army he would deliver them from fear of the Spanish Tyranny; the
Queen, desirous to free one Son from his suspicions, and to provide a
convenient State for the other, exhorted the King to let the Duke of Alancon
accept of the protection of the States of Flanders, and to raise an Army, upon
fained pretenses, within the limits of France; alleging, that all unquiet
factious spirits would go along with the Duke, and diminish that pestilent
matter which maintained the discords and troubles of the Kingdom: and, the
better to ground and settle that design* she tried to renew the so often
rejected Treaty of Marriage, between the Duke and the Queen of England; which,
though it could not be concluded, yet, at least, this consequence might result
from it; That the Queen, by her Forces and Authority, would incline to favor
the Duke in his new Command; wherefore, omitting nothing that could advance
that end, after many Embassies on both sides, Alancon himself went this year
personally into England, where, being honorably and sumptuously received by
the Queen, he stayed there a great while; and, though she abhor^ed to submit
her self to the yoke of Matrimony, and that the State of England did likewise
abhor the Government of a French King; yet, because the interest of State
required to dissemble, as well to increase the Dukes reputation, and by
consequence the strength of the States of The Italians, under the name of
Flanders, usually comprehend all the Low Countries.
Flanders, as also to cause a jealousy in the Catholic King, who, at that
time, was intent about many other designs, which were much suspected by all the
Princes his Neighbors; the Queen famed to consent unto the match, and, amongst
the pomps and delights of her Court, honored and favored the Duke of Alancon
very familiarly; in whose behalf the King dispatched an honorable Embassy,
the chief whereof was Francis de Montpensier Prince Dauphin, a Lord of winning
carriage, and often employed, being known to be of a sincere mind, an honest
(but not crafty) nature, and very far from meddling or conforting with factious
minded men. At the arrival of this Embassy, which was received with great
tokens of honor, the articles and conditions were treated of, which were to be
observed by both parties; and the business went so far, that the Duke and Queen
gave each other a Ring in token of future Marriage; though she nevertheless
persevered constantly in her resolution of a free, single life, and therefore
would by no means suffer it to go any further: But these things happened in the
course of the year following

In this year the King of Navar, after the departure of the Queen Mother, did
assemble a Congregation of his Party at Mazere in the County of Foix, to
deliberate in what manner they should behave themselves for the time to come;
where (amongst the discourses of Peace, the spirits of many that desired War,
showed their inclinations) in the end it began to be debated, whether the Peace
should be continued, or that they should return to the hazard of Arms. Nor was
the King of Navarre himself much averse from active thoughts, knowing, by
experience, that peace and idleness did ruin by little and little, and
insensibly diminish the strength of his party; for many, weary of innovations,
returned sincerely unto the Catholic Church, many seeing the Hugonots
depressed, and excluded from Offices and Honors, did feign to return to it;
and all of them (old business growing out of date, and the authority of Command
languishing) did equally withdraw themselves from the cares and interests of
the Faction: and he himself being reduced to a very low ebb of Fortune, not
only foresaw his future ruin, but for the present had not wherewithal to
maintain the honor of a King, nor of first Prince of the Blood. To which
necessities, the instigations of the Prince of Conde being added (who was of a
more fierce unquiet nature, unable to digest the affront of being excluded from
the Government of Pi^ardy; and the assent, or rather desire of many young men
that ordered matters of Government concurring in the same) they concluded at
last, that it was better to try the fortune of Arms, than to perish securely in
the idleness of Peace; and they resolved to prepare themselves, and seek some
occasion to begin the War, so much the rather, because the Kings manner of
life, being already thought to proceed from dissoluteness of Customs, and
weakness of spirit, it incited all to carry themselves without respect,
according to their proper interests and inclinations. Wherefore the King of
Navarre calling to him the Deputies of Languedoc and Dauphine, which were come
to the Congregation; after a long discourse, wherein he exhorted them, on their
parts, to lend what assistance they were able unto the Common Cause, he gave
them pieces of a broken French Crown of Gold to carry to Monsieur de
Chastillon, Son to the Admiral de Coligny, who was already gotten into
Languedoc, and to Monsieur des Diguieres, who was in Dauphine, with direction,
that they should give credit, in the matter and order of War, to those that
should bring them the remaining pieces of the Crown, esteeming that a very
secret Token, and not so easily to be counterfeited: with which determination,
each retiring into his own Province, they began secretly to make themselves
ready to take up Arms.

But the King of Navarre seeking to put a gloss upon the business, with some
specious reasonable color, the time drawing on, that the Cautionary Towns were
to be restored, The Hugonots stir up new commotions.
though the King demanded them but coldly, rather out of compliance with the
Catholic party, then a desire to have them; yet He made a mighty noise about
it, and often calling Assemblies of the Hugonots (which they call Synods)
endeavored to show them, that the time of restoring those places was not yet
come, nor the execution of the Edict fully accomplished, since the free
exercise of their Religion was neither permitted in Champagne, Normandy,
Bourgogne, nor the Isle of France; whereupon, the Ministers growing hot, who
were very much pleased with that pretense, their minds began to incline to War;
for the beginning whereof, the King of Navarre was resolved to undertake some
notable enterprise, the fame whereof might quicken the slowness of all the rest
of his party: wherefore he thought of beginning with an attempt upon Cahors,
which Town having been promised by the King to the Lady Margaret his Wife, in
Dowry, was never assigned unto her, it being kept by the Governor in the Kings
Name: by that he obtained a reasonable pretense (so necessary in Civil Wars to
feed the minds of the People, and to palliate the interests of the parties) and
a great benefit resulted to him by the addition of a rich City, and
neighboring Territory, which was both very great, and wonderful commodious for
his present affairs.

The Prince of Conde also, who could not blot the business of Picardy out of
his memory, purposed to go unknown into that Province, and by the help of some
adherents, to make himself Master of a place or two, by which he might get
footing in that Country, and enlarge his State and Fortune beyond the narrow
limits of Xaintonge; thinking, he might fairly cover his own ends, by making
show that he would live under the Kings obedience, and revenge himself of his
enemies, by whose practices he had been excluded from the Government. The
Prince of Conde, as of a more hasty impatient nature, began first; and, being
come unknown to Poictiers, he passed from thence, with very great danger,
through the other Cities and Provinces of France, into the heart of Picardy,
where, after the space of a few months, having, with art, and the intelligence
of his Friends, drawn together, from several parts, the number of 300 men, he
entered la Fere, a strong place, and of great consequence, whence, driving away
the Governor, and the small Garrison that was in it, he became Master of it
the 29th day of November; and, having presently writ unto the King, that he
kept that Fortress in his Name, as being by him elected Governor of the
Province, from which he had been excluded by the malice of his enemies; he
began, notwithstanding, to make preparations to defend himself as well as he
could, not doubting, but the King would use all his force to chase him out of
so convenient an harbor.

But, in the beginning of the year following 1580, the King of Navarre (after
he had sent the remaining pieces of the broken Crown to the Lord of Chastillon,
1580.
and Monsieur des Diguieres, in token that they should begin the War) began to
settle himself in his intended enterprise of Cahors, which was, to surprise
that City upon a sudden, and bring it into his own power.

The City of Cahors is seated upon the River Lot, which, Cahors is taken (...)
sacke^ ^y (...) ^^gonots.
environing it on three sides, leaves only one passage free, called la Port
aux Bars, and the other three sides are entered by three fair Bridges that
cross the River. By one of these, called the New-bridge, the King of Navarre
was resolved to attack the City secretly in the night, not having Forces to
assault or besiege it by day: And, because the first entry of the Bridge was
hindered by a Gate that was kept locked; after which, without any Drawbridge,
at the other end stood the Gate of the City, defended by two Ravelines, one on
either hand: He purposed at each Gate to fasten a Petard (an Engine till then)
little esteemed for the newness of it, but since, by often trials, grown
famous, for sudden enterprises in War) and the obstacles being broken, to come
presently to handy-blowes with the defenders. For this purpose, besides the
company who to fasten the Petard were necessarily to go before, he divided his
Soldiers into four Squadrons; the first led by the Baron de Salignac; the
second by the Sieur de St. Martin, Captain of his Guards; the third, wherein
were the Gentry, and he himself in person, by Antoyne Sieur de Rochelaure; and
the fourth by the Viscount de Gourdon, wherein were 1200 good Firelocks. The
Petard being fastened to the first Gate of the Bridge by Captain Iehan Robert,
wrought its effect according to expectation, and those few Soldiers that were
in the Ravelines were cut in pieces without much difficulty; nor did the second
Petard any less, having broken open the Gate of the City, so that they might
easily have entered if there had been no further opposition; but, they of the
Town, wakned with the noise of the first Petard, and the Sieur de Vesins, who
was Governor, being run to the danger just as he was, not utterly without Arms,
but almost without Clothes; they stoutly opposed the entry of the Enemy, fresh
men still running armed from all parts of the City to make resistance: There
was a very hot service between the first squadrons, not only fighting at a
distance continually with shot, but the boldest of them coming up with short
weapons; and, by little and little, the second and third squadrons being every
where mingled with the first, the encounter became very fierce and bloody,
wherein the Governor of the Town (who, though unarmed, was, of necessity, to be
in the thickes^ of the Fight) was killed on that side; and, on the King of
Navarr's, the Sieur de St. Martin. The business continued for two long hours in
equal balance; but, the Baron de Salignac first, and then the Sieur de
Roche-Laure being dangerously wounded, and carried out of the hurly-burly, the
courage of the rest began to sink, in such manner, that the assailants gave
ground apace; who, though at the first, they had entered as far as the
Marketplace, yet being now driven back almost to the very Gate, would
certainly have been quite repulsed, and beaten out of the City, (for the
Viscount de Gordon, with his Firelocks that were in the Rere, advanced but very
slowly) if the King of Navarre (much troubled for the loss of his Captains,
highly incensed at the affront his men were like to receive, and despairing of
his own affairs, if his first enterprise failed of a happy success, coming up
to the head of his soldiers, in the very face of the Enemy) had not renewed the
assault, by fighting gallantly and undauntedly with his own hand: For the
Lords, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, hasting bravely after him, and striving to go
beyond each other in following the steps of their Leader, who (doing incredible
exploits) did fiercely quell the ardor of the defendants, advanced so far, that
about break of day they had again recovered the chief Marketplace of the City,
the Townsmen having shut up and fortified themselves (as well as the shortness
of the time would permit) in the public Schools; from whence, though they gave
fire on every side, to the great slaughter of the assailants, who fought
without defense in the open streets; yet the King of Navarre never moved from
the head of his men, though they that were next to him were often killed by his
side. In this manner they fought all the day, and all the night following;
except only that now and then they took a little rest, which both sides were
invited to by the darkness of the night. The next day about Sunrising, news
was brought to the King of Navarr^, that Supplies were coming to the City from
the Neighboring Towns; wherefore he sent the Sieur de Chouppes to fight with
them without La Port aux Bars, and courageously redoubled the assault, to
drive the defenders from their places of advantage; but he found so stout and
valiant resistance, that though the supplies were defeated that came to assist
the Town, and that they thereby received no relief, yet could not he in all
that day, and the night following, force them to yield, till three Pieces of
Cannon, which they found in the City Magazin, being fitted and brought forth,
they shattered and broke down all the Barricadoes made up by the defendants;
whence followed a bloody execution, and a wonderful slaughter of the People.
Thus, after three days continual fighting, the City of Cahors was at last
taken, and violently sacked; having not only yielded very rich spoil and booty
to the Soldiers, but wreaked the hatred which many of the Hugonots bore to the
very name of a Catholic. In this enterprise, the fearless courage of the King
of Navarre was much admired by every one; who, having in his other actions
given proofs of a great and lively spirit, in this (to the terror of his
enemies, and admiration of his friends) he showed himself as gallant and as
daring a Soldier, as the effects of his following exploits did completely
witness him to be.

At the very same time, Les Diguieres in Dauphine, not being able to move the
Nobility, which scorned to come under his Command, (who, though a Gentleman by
birth, was yet neither favored with the splendour of an ancient Pedigree, nor
Riches) had stirred up the Country People to take Arms against some of the
chief of them, by whom they complained they had been very much oppressed; but,
the War proceeding with very small success, because Monsieur de Maugiron,
Lieutenant of that Province, and Monsieur de Mandelot, Governor of Lions, often
routed and defeated his peasants; he having attempted many enterprises without
effect, at last retired, and fortified himself in la Muze.

But, in Languedoc, whether it were, that the Lord of Chastillons authority was
not yet very powerful with that People, or that men, being weary of civil
broils, stood in awe of Monsieur d' Anville, who showed himself very ready to
suppress any Insurrection, there was not any stir or taking of Arms, as the
King of Navarre expected, the Marshall laboring very diligently to take away
all occasions of discontent, by a full observation of the King's Edicts.

The King being informed of these new eruptions in so many several places,
whilst he thought himself secure, and free from all troubles and dangers of
War, resolved to show his face once more to those that made Insurrection, to
reduce them to obedience, and to the sincere obedience of the Peace; At the
news of these stirs, the King sends forth three Armies.
to which end, he raised three several Armies with infinite diligence: One for
Picardy, to recover la Fere; another for Guienne, against the King of Navarre;
and the third, to settle the Commotions in Dauphine: From which sudden
resolution, and the readiness of levying and ordering those Forces, wise men
drew more confident assurance that his quiet stilness was only voluntary, and
that under a show of ease and carelessness, he nourished more deep important
thoughts in his mind. To these Armies the King appointed Commanders suitable to
the occasion, and his secret intentions: For, desiring that la Fere should
presently be recovered, because it is so near the heart of the Kingdom, and the
City of Paris, and easy to be relieved by the nearness of the States of
Flanders, he sent thither Jacques Marshall de Matignon, whom he was always
wont to make use of where there was need of doing something to the purpose, on
the other side, desiring, that the King of Navarre should be repressed, but not
utterly suppressed, because he would not cast the Scale so much on that side,
and make the Faction of the Guises Superior, (which had no other counterpoise
so proper as his party) he sent Armand Marshall de Byron, to the end, that by
his old inclinations he might proceed very warily in opposing it. And being
necessitated to employ some one of the Lorain Princes, by reason of the power
of the House of Guise, to which it was requisite to bear a convenient respect;
and because he would not utterly alienate those of the Catholic League, he
made choice of Charles Duke of Mayenne for Dauphine, as well because he
esteemed him to be of a more settled nature then his Brother, as out of a belief
the business of those parts was very easy, and of but small consequence.

Nor did the effect differ from the Kings expectation; La F^re recovered by
Monsieur de Matignon.
for Monsieur d' Matignon having besieged la Fere, from whence the Prince of
Conde was already departed, and gone into England, he, within a small time,
recovered it, though not without some blood. The Duke of Mayenne having taken
la Mure, and put the Hugonots of that Province in a very great terror, did not
only reduce the Gentry and Commons to obedience, but also the Sieur des
Diguieres himself. And, the Marshall de Byron having about Nerac defeated some
Companies of Gens d' arms, and taken many weak places in Guienne, at last his
horse falling under him, and his thigh being hurt in two places, he drew his
Army into Quarters, without any further progress. So that the King of Navarre
not being able to keep the Field, nor undertake any design, by reason of the
opposition of the King's Army; yet, showing much more courage than strength,
maintained himself still in Arms with actions of small importance.

In this interim, the Duke of Alancon being returned out of England, full of
hopes, by the Queens promises, but without any certainty of the future Match,
and preparing for the journey of Flanders, interposed between the King his
Brother, and the King of Navarre his Brother-in-law, to settle businesses in
the former Concord; fearing, that if the War should break forth in good earnest
in France, he should not then be able to draw those helps from thence which he
expected for the accomplishment of his design: wherefore, being gone personally
to Libourne and la Freche, Towns in the County of Foix, whither also came the
King of Navarre, and on the Kings part the Duke of Montpensier, the Marshall
de Cosse, and Pompone Sieur de Bellieure, he wrought so far, that he brought
the business to a good conclusion: for, the King, by nature, was inclined to
it, and the King of Navarre, besides the smallness of his Forces, and the ill
success of his late enterprises, had no hopes at all of any assistance from
abroad; the Prince of Conde who went into England, and thence into the
Low Countries, and after into Germany, found all their minds intent upon the
business of Flanders, weary of the instability of the French Hugonots, and
unsatisfied at the taking up of Arms without any lawful occasion, whilst the
King, living in peace, observed punctually the Conditions of the Agreement;
wherefore, having no hope of aid, and not daring to set up his rest within the
Kingdom, the former Articles were willingly accepted by him, and the Edict of
the late Peace confirmed, as also the Conference held at Nerac with the Queen:
and, in this manner, Arms were laid down again, and all things were composed
in a peaceful way.

The Civil broils being quieted, two different enterprises kept all France in
action; That of the Duke of Alancon, who, with the tacit permission of his
Brother, prepared himself to go into the Low Countries against the Catholic
Kings Forces, under the Command of Alessandro Fernese, Prince of Parma; And
that of the Queen Mother, by occasion of the Kingdom of Portugal. For the King
Sebastian being dead in the War of Africa, and after him King Henry Cardinal,
without sons; among many others who pretended to that Crown, the Queen Mother,
as heir of the House of Bologne, and descended in a right line from Robert the
son of Alfonso the third, and the Countess Matilda his first and lawful Wife,
pretended also to that succession; alleging, that all the Kings who had
reigned since Alfonso (being descended from Beatrice, which could not be the
lawful Wife, but the Concubine of Alfonso, Matilda being yet alive) were
illegitimate; and, because by reason of her being so far distant, and many
other respects, she thought her self not so powerful in Forces as some of the
other Competitors, she pretended, that the business was to be decided by the
way of Justice, without coming to force of Arms. But the King of Spain, out of
a confidence of his power and nearness, having in the mean time usurped that
Kingdom with an Army, and causing himself, by the Governors thereof, to be
proclaimed the lawful Successor; the Queen joining Counsels with Anthonio Prior
of Crato (who pretended to the same Kingdom, but had been put beside it by the
Spaniards) set forth a mighty Navy under the command of Filippo Strozzi,
against King P^ilip, to relieve the Geographers call these Islands, the Acores,
and only one of them the Tercera, as being third in the passage from Spain
toward Virginia, Florida, and those parts.
Tercera's Islands in the Ocean Sea, belonging to that Kingdom, which were yet
held by Anthonio; and, to make new acquisitions, if they could land upon the
Coasts near the City of Lisbon. The death of Strozzi, the dispersing of that
Navy, and other things that happened in that business, I leave to those Authors
that shall write the History of Portugal, it not being necessary to enlarge
this Narration, and make it more prolix, by the addition of foreign matters,
that little or nothing concern the knowledge of the French affairs.

The same silence, and for the same reason, I observe in the business of
Flanders, whither the Duke of Alancon (having, 1581.
with the Kings tacit consent, levied a very great Army) went, the following
year, being 1581, to relieve the City of Cambray, and after he had succored
it, and reduced it into his power, passed on with greater Force into the
Low Countries, to receive the Title and Possession of those States, which
having withdrawn themselves from obedience to the Catholic King, had put
themselves under him, with certain limited conditions. Nor did the King of
Spain and the Pope fail, by means of their Ambassadors, to complain of the King
of France, as well for what concerned the Duke of Alancon, as because Antonio
of Portugal was received into France, and by the Queen-mothers attempts abetted
in his pretensions to that Kingdom. But he answered the Ambassadors, and, by
means of his Agents at Rome and in Spain, excused himself to both; That,
Antonio had been received by his Mother, and assisted as her Vassal, she her
self pretending to the Crown of Portugal; That the Fleet which had been set
forth, was made ready at her own charges, without his knowledge or consent; and
though it should be fought withal and beaten by the Catholic King, he would
not at all think himself injured or ill dealt withal, it being a business
apart, that concerned not his Interests, or the Crown of France: That for the
Duke of Alancon, he had opposed him stiffly more then once; but that he was
more apt to follow the suggestions of others, then to obey his commands: That
he was sorry he had not been able to restrain those French that went with him;
but that the disobedience of his Subjects was known to all the World, and also
the quality of those persons that were gone thither, who, for so many years,
had disturbed the Kingdom in his time, and in the Reigns of his Brothers and
Predecessors: That he had given a sufficient testimony of himself, when the
States of Flanders, desiring to put themselves under his Authority, he had
refused them without any demur at all: So that he having no hand in those
preparations made against Flanders, nor in the others against Portugal, he
believed, that the Peace and Friendship which he held with the Catholic King,
were neither violated nor disturbed; concluding, that to give a clear evidence
of himself, and to conserve the Peace with the Crown of Spain (if the Catholic
King should desire it) he would at any time send men into Flanders, to serve
the Prince of Parma, with express order, not only to fight against the States,
and against the other Commanders, but also against his brother the Duke of
Alancon himself.

This was the substance of what the King said, adorning it with many
particularities and circumstances; but, in effect, he endeavored to make both
businesses continue, being glad, not only that the Duke of Alancon should go
out of his Kingdom, but that with Monsieur de la Noue, the Marshall de Byron,
and many other Commanders, the greatest part of that matter, which did molest
and disquiet his State, should also be removed; which, when he saw effected in
the year 1582, having settled himself in his former repose, 1582.
he continued the prosecution of those designs, which, by long practice, were
grown familiar to him: and, because cunning and dissimulation were already
converted into nature, and he now did that by use and custom, which his humor
inclining to, he was, from the beginning, resolved to bring to pass by art; he
went on, exalting and giving power, only to those, who, bred up by himself,
were, beyond measure, esteemed, and most excessively favored by him: amongst
which, to Anne de Ioyeuse (by him created Duke and Peer of France) he gave in
Marriage his own Sister-in-law, sister to the Queen: and to Iehan Louis de la
Valett (created also Duke of Espernon and Peer of France) he granted the most
important Governments, and the greatest Offices that were daily vacant. Next to
these, in his favor, were the Chancellor Chiverny, Rene Sieur de Villequier,
Francis Sieur d'O, Pompone de Bellieure, Villeroy the Secretary of State, and
the Mareschals of Retz and Matignon, who (no less mature in understanding than
in age) cared not to be the first in the King's favor, lest they should also
be first exposed to the blow and envy of Fortune; but, yielding the highest
place to the vanity of young men ^^ontented themselves with a more settled, and
more moderate condition. The wisdom of the Marescal de Retz was particularly
very remarkable* who, knowing himself to be an Italian, and therefore subject
to the hatred and persecution of the French, though the King did, by the
vastness of his Gifts, seek to exalt him to the highest pitch of greatness, yet
did not only put rubs and hindrances in the way of his own advancement, but
afterward, when he saw that the King was resolved to make him great, he most
discreetly endeavored, that those things which he knew were destined to him,
might be procured by the interc^ssion of some one of the great Princes: A thing
that succeeded so happily for him, that his greatness was established without
envy, every one being either unwilling or ashamed to cross that fortune which
he himself had favored, and that man which he believed, he had made one of his
obliged dependents. But Ioyeuse, Espernon, and the other youths, whose age and
experience had not taught them so much moderation, spreading all their Sails
before the prosperous Wind of Fortune, labored, by all possible means, to
attain to the most eminent Dignities: Wherefore, the death of Philippo Strozzi,
who was General of the French Infantry, happening at the Tercera's, that that
charge was given to the Duke de Espernon, but much more amplified in Command
and Authority. And the Marescal de Byron having left the Office of Lieutenant
of Guien^e, to go into Flanders with the Duke of Alancon, it was conferted upon
the Marshall de Matignon. And the Governments of Orleans, Blois, and Char^res,
void, about that time, by the death of the Marshall de Cosse, were transferred
upon the Chancellor. The same rule being observed in all things, that the most
important Places and Governments, should still be bestowed upon Creatures of
his own breeding.

But the year following 1583, 1583.
the Duke of Alancon having attempted to bring his limited Command in Flanders
to a free absolute Dominion, the success proving very contrary to his hopes;
and therefore he being hated and opposed by those very men who had first called
him thither, The Duke of Alancon rejected by those who had called him into
Fla^ders, is driven thence by the Prince of Parma, returns into France, and a
while after dies there.
was driven from thence by the Forces of Alessandro Farnese, and (to the Kings
great trouble) returned again into France, where it was feared he would
contrive some new mischiefs, according to his rash inconsiderate nature, most
ardent to leap headlong into any dangerous design: Wherefore, he being recalled
into Flanders by his adherents, and by those who more abhorred the Tyranny of
the Spaniard then his fickle instability, the King promised him very great
Supplies of Men and Moneys, that returning to his former design, he might ease
him of the jealousies and fears of new Commotions; and, without doubt, the
effects would have made good his promises, if the Duke of Alancon (afflicted
with the crossness of his late Fortune, and quite worn out with perpetual toil
and trouble, or else (as some said) with those dissolute courses, to which he
had wholly given himself over) had not died at Chasteau-Thierry, a Castle of
his own, in the Month of June, 1584, leaving Flanders at liberty, 1584.
and his Brother free from a most certain revolution of new troubles. After his
death, the Signories of Anjou, Angoulesme, and Berry, which had been assigned
for his Appennage, returned into the Kings power: But the City of Cambray,
taken two years before, and put under the Government of the Sieur de Balagny,
(the King not desiring to transfer it openly to himself, least it should break
the Peace with the Catholic King) fell in appearance, and as by inheritance,
unto the Queen his Mother.

The End of the Sixth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
SEVENTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
IN this Book are set down the causes, why the Duke of Guise and his adherents
endeavor to renew the Catholic League, which before was almost laid aside:
The Reasons they allege for themselves: The quality of those persons that
consented to, and concurred with the League: The design of drawing in the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and his resolution to embrace it: Philip King of Spain
takes the protection of it: The Conditions agreed to with his Agents at
Jainville: The Popes doubtfulness in ratifying and approving the League, and
his determination to delay the time. The King of France consults what is to be
done for the opposing of that Union, and the opinions differ: He sends the Duke
of Espernon to confer with the King of Navarre, to persuade him to embrace the
Catholic Faith, and return to Court. The King of Navarre, at that Proposition,
resolves to stand firm to his Party. The League takes occasion by that Treaty,
and makes grievous complaints. They of the Low Countries, alienated from the
King of Spain, offer to put themselves under the Crown of France: The King is
uncertain what to do in it, but at last remits them to another time. King
Philip entering into suspicion of that business, sollicites the Duke of Guise
and the League to take up Arms: To that end, Forces are raised both within and
without the Kingdom. The King tries to oppose them, but finds himself too weak.
The Cardinal of Bourbon leaves the Court, retires to Peronne, and with the
other Confederates publishes a Declaration. They draw an Army together in
Champagne, seize upon Thoul and Verdun. The City of Marseilles rises in favor
of the League, but the Conspirators are suppressed by the rest of the Citizens;
the same happens at Bourdeaux. Lions, Bourges, and many other places in the
Kingdom, side with the League. The King answers the Declaration of the League;
he endeavors to disunite it, by drawing many particular men from that Party,
as also the City of Lions; but seeing his design succeeds not to his mind, he
resolves to treat an Agreement with the Confederates: The Queen Mother goes
into Champagne to confer about it with the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of
Bourbon: After many Negotiations, the Peace is concluded. The King of Navarre
publishes a Declaration against the League, and challenges the Duke of Guise
to a Duel: He passes it over, and makes the Declaration be answered by others.
The Duke of Bouillon and Monsieur de Chastillon go into Germany, to stir up the
Protestant Princes in favor of the Hugonots. The King consults of the manner
of effecting what he had promised in the Agreement with the League: The
opinions differ, and there arises great discord about it among his
Counselors. He resolves to make War against the Hugonots; and coming to the
Parliament, forbids all other except the Roman Catholic Religion. He sends for
the Heads of the Clergy, and the Magistrates of the City of Paris, and with
words full of resentment, demands money of them for the War. He prepares diverse
Armies against the Hugonots. Pope Gregory the Thirteenth dies: Sixtus Quintus
succeeds him, who at the instigation of the League, declares the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde to be Excommunicate, and incapable to succeed
in the Crown. This Excommunication is diversely spoken of in France: Many write
against it, and many in favor of it.

FRom the ashes of the Duke of Alancon, the half-extinguisht sparks of the
League began again to be kindled and burn afresh: for the King by his policy in
the Assembly at Blois, and after by the delight and benefit every one received
in Peace, and by keeping down the Heads of the Hugonots, and holding them at a
distance, having taken away the opportunities and specious pretenses of the
Lords of Guise, it was of it self grown old, and in very great part decayed and
dissolved. And though those Lords, being stung to the quick by the excessive
greatness of the Kings Minions, and continually stirred up by the jealousy of
his proceedings, had failed of no occasion that might conveniently blemish his
actions, and bring themselves into reputation; yet matters had till then been
rather in unsettled debates than certainly concluded, and had consisted more in
words than in actions. But now by reason of the Duke of Alancons death, and
that the King, after having been ten years married, had no probable hope of
issue, The Guises foreseeing their own ruin, contrive new designs.
affairs began to be very much altered: For as the King of Navarre's being
first Prince of the Blood, and so nearest the Succession of the Crown, did spur
forward the readiness of the Guises, his old corrivals and natural enemies; so
likewise it afforded them a fair occasion to renew the League, that they might
take a course betimes to hinder the Kingdom from falling into the hands of the
Hugonot Prince, to the universal ruin of the Catholics, and the total
overthrow of Religion: Wherefore, the disgusts they received at Court, and the
suspicion which for many years they had conceived, concurring to solicit
them, and this emergent occasion offering a fit opportunity, they began again
not only to repair the old structure, but also to contrive and build up new
designs. The disasters which the Lords of Guise received at Court, were many:
For besides seeing themselves excluded from the Kings favor, and from the
administration of State Affairs, wherein they were wont to hold the first
place, and whereof they now did not at all participate; as likewise being so
little able to do any thing for their dependents and adherents, because the
King reserved unto himself alone the disposing of all Gifts and Honors: they
were also highly offended at the greatness of these new men, who not favored
by the luster of ancient Families, nor raised by the merits of their own
actions, but only by the liberality of their Prince, were advanced so high,
that with a sudden splendor they eclipsed all those Honors which they with
infinite pains and dangers had attained to in the course of so many years. And
though the Duke of Ioyeuse, by his Marriage with the Queens Sister, was allied
unto the House of Lorain, and seemed in many things to be interessed with them,
yet they disdained to lie under the shadow of another protection, where they
were wont to see an infinite number of persons shelter themselves under the
favorable wing of their Power and Authority. To this was added, that the Duke
of Espernon, either through his own natural instinct, or the hopes of raising
himself upon the ruins of the Great Ones, or through the friendship which he
had held from his youth with the King of Navarre, who was most averse from any
familiarly with them, seemed to despise and undervalue the merits and power of
so great a family, and failed not upon all occasions to sting and persecute
them; on the other side obstinately favoring, and in all opportunities
maintaining and assisting the Princes of Bourbon. Whereupon it was commonly
believed, that he to abase the credit and lessen the reputation of the Duke of
Guise, had persuaded the King to determine a matter never clearly decided by
his Predecessors* That in the Ceremonies of the Kings Coronation, and other
occurrences, the Peers should not have precedence according to their Age and
Seniority; but that those Peers which were Princes of the Blood, should
absolutely take place of all the rest, by Prerogative of the Royal Family;
which much incensed the Princes of Lorain: But it touched them a great deal more
nearly to see that the King was wholly intent to deprive them of their Offices
and Governments, to bestow and heap them upon his Minions: For Charles Duke of
Mayenne having been first declared Admiral, (a place held by his Father-in-law
the Marquess de Villars, after the death of the Admiral Chastillon) was after
forced, by the Kings violent persuasions, to take eighty thousand Crowns in
recompense, and to resign his Office, which presently was settled upon the Duke
of Ioyeuse: And because the Duke of Espernon complained that his place was not
so eminent, the King desirous to satisfy him, or at least feigning to be so,
for the compassing of his designs, had often moved the Duke of Guise to give up
his Office of Lord High Steward of the Kings Household, heretofore called Le
Com^^ du P^lais, and le Senesebal de France.
Grand Maistre; and when he saw that, being displeased with the overture, he
resolved not to part with it, by little and little he took away all the
Authority and Privileges which were wont to belong unto that Office, leaving
him only the empty name; and, in stead of it, conferred upon the Duke of
Espernon the charge of Colonel General of the Infantry; which having been
formerly promised to Timoleon de Cosse for his exceeding great deserts, and he
being by death prevented, the enjoyment seemed in reason most due to his Son
Charles Count of Brissac, who was a fast friend to the Lords of Guise, as his
Father and Grandfather had been before him. The Duke of Aumale complained
likewise, that he being elected to the Government of Picardy (for which he had
been in competition with the Prince of Conde) to keep him as it were in an
uncertainty of the possession, the entry of many chief places was denied him;
among which, Bologne, Calais, and la Fere, kept by persons depending upon the
King, in the name of the Duke d' Espernon. And finally, all that bore the
character of dependents of the House of Guise, were either by money or other
means divested of their Offices and Governments, or at least deprived of the
Authority and execution of them, which by oblique ways were reserved for, and
transferred upon the Kings favorites and confidents.

These were then all, or part of the discontents that troubled the Lords of
Guise, wherein (being well versed in affairs of State, and mindful of what had
happened five and twenty years before) they admired the revolutions of this
world, and the effects of Divine Justice, seeing themselves handled in the same
manner by the Dukes of Ioyeuse and Espernon, as they (governing in the Reign of
Henry the Second) had used the Houses of Momorancy and Bourbon; concluding,
that though God for the most part reserves his punishment and vengeance till
the everlasting pains of the world to come, yet is he sometimes pleased, by
those glances of his power, to show us a glimpse of that Justice wherewith he
governs the course of mortal things. But besides the disgusts which these
Princes pretended to receive, they were much more sharply pricked with the
sting of that jealousy which by many conjectures, and by things daily put in
practice, they had conceived: for seeing that the King balanced the Forces very
carefully with those of the Hugonot Lords, and that he would not suppress that
party, which (as they believed) he easily might have done; that under several
pretenses he divested all the dependents of both Factions of their Places and
Honors, to bestow them upon such as should acknowledge them merely from
himself; and that where other pretenses failed, he bought those Offices which
they possessed with great sums of money, to ingross them all into his own
disposing; that he admitted no intercession for any body, thereby to take away
the bait that drew so many followers and dependents to the Princes of both
parties; that he spent great store of money to bring those things about, and
also gathered great store together in Mets, Bologne and Angoulesme, though in
the name of the Duke d' Espernon; they judged that all these things tended to
their ruin and destruction. Nor could it satisfy them to see the King taken
up with religious thoughts, and addicted to a quiet unactive life: for, they
knowing his nature, wherewith they had been conversant from his very childhood,
interpreted that course of life to subtle deep dissimulation. Wherefore the
Duke of Guise, a man of a wonderful quick insight, discerning judgment, and
high thoughts, laying all these things together, determined with himself to
prevent, and not stay to be prevented: in which resolution he was boldly
seconded by his Brother Louys the Cardinal, a man of a high spirit, and an
understanding no less ingenious than his; as also by Henry of Savoy Duke of
Nemours, and Charles Marquess of San-Sorlin, (both Sons of Anna d' Este, and
therefore his Brothers by the Mother) Charles of Lorain Duke of Aumale, and
Claude his Brother a Knight of Jerusalem, Charles of Lorain Duke d' Elbeuf,
Emanuel Duke de Mercure, and his Brothers; who though allied unto the King yet
in respect of the common Family, were nearly united unto him both in opinion
and interests. Only Charles Duke of Mayenne concurred more slowly than the
rest, who with more settled thoughts considering the course of worldly affairs,
thought it as difficult and dangerous for the League to pull down the King,
protected by the Majesty of a Royal Name, and the natural obligations of his
Subjects, as he believed it impossible for the King himself to destroy and
ruin their Family, protected by the favor of the Catholics, and by the merit
and innocence of their persons: Wherefore thinking it superfluous to put
themselves into that fear, and for that cause to hazard their safety by rash
uncertain resolutions, he counseled them to proceed with more patience and
more respect toward the lawful Possessor of the Crown. But the Duke of Guise,
resolute in his thoughts, and by the authority of his Person, the vivacity of
his Courage, the eloquence of his Language, and the excellency of his Wit, able
to persuade and draw all the rest to his opinion, excluding his Brothers
advice, had settled all his thoughts upon the machinations of the League; for
the enlargement and establishment whereof, dissembling his discontents no less
than his jealousies and private interests, he made show of stirring only for
the respects of Religion, and the general good, making an ill interpretation of
all the Kings actions, and with many arts and circumstances aggravating that
danger, which he pretended hung over the Catholic Religion in that Kingdom.

He grounded his fears upon the death of the Duke of Alancon, and the Queens
barrenness, which in the space of ten years had had no Son, whereby, the King
dying without Heirs of the House of Valois, the Crown fell to the Princes of
Bourbon, and in the first place to the King of Navarre, a relapsed Heretic,
and an open Enemy to the Roman Religion. He urged, that his coming to the Crown
would be the universal ruin of Religion, and the total conversion of all
France to the Rites and Opinions of Calvin; and therefore showed how all good
Catholics were obliged to look to it in time, and to prevent the terrible blow
of that imminent subversion; and if they had gathered themselves together ten
years before, to hinder the Prince of Conde from entering upon the Government of
Picardy, much more ought they now to assemble and combine themselves, to keep
the King of Navarre from entering, not into a City or Province alone, but into
the possession of the whole Kingdom. He endeavored to prove that his
Introduction to the Crown would be very easy; for the King, persuaded by the
Duke of Espernon and his other favorites, (by whom he was wholly governed) and
induced by them to favor advance the party of the Princes of Bourbon, would in
his own lifetime bring him in by little and little, without resistance: That
therefore he had granted peace to the Hugonots, while in that low condition and
extraordinary weakness, their extirpation was evident to all the world: That
therefore he deluded the constant and general resolution of the States at
Blois, by his arts unsinewing, and by his delays untwisting the joint will and
consent of all the French Nation: That therefore when sometimes he had been
constrained to make War against the King of Navarre, he employed the Marshall
de Byron, who though a Catholic in outward appearance, was yet by many former
proofs known to be a favourer of the Hugonots, and interessed in their Faction:
That therefore he had lately taken Geneva into his Protection, showing clearly
to all the World how little he esteemed the Catholic Religion, and how much he
was inclined to the Enemies of the holy See, and of the great Bishop of Rome:
That therefore he had excluded all the Catholic Lords from any access to the
Court, or administration in the Government; particularly, those who had spilt
so much blood for the preservation of the Kingdom and Religion, and had brought
in a new people that were privy to his designs, and friends to the House of
Bourbon: That therefore he deprived all the old servants of the Crown of all
their Offices and Honors, of the most principal Governments, and most
suspected Fortresses, to put them into the hands of men that were Catholics in
show, but really partial to Heretics, and inwardly adherents to the King of
Navarre: That therefore without remorse or compassion, he daily oppressed the
poor Subject with new Taxes and intolerable Grievances, lest when occasion
served they should be able to make resistance, and oppose his pleasure and
their own slavery: And though the King made an outward show to do otherwise,
and to be of another mind; yet, that men of understanding ought not to let
themselves be deceived by his dissimulation, who did but feign himself to be
wholly addicted to a spiritual life, and altogether taken up with the zeal of
Religion: For they that had penetrated to the depth of those businesses, knew
certainly that they were but a cloak and mask which which under color of
devotion contained abominable hypocrisy; and that appearing full of
mortification, clothed in a penitent Frock, with a Crucifix in his hand in the
streets, in his private lodgings he gave himself over to the unbridled lusts of
the flesh, and to the perverse satisfying of his loose depraved appetite. From
which things, set forth with many specious reasons, and adorned with many, and
those most particular circumstances, he concluded it was necessary to provide
against that mischief betimes, to underprop the house before it fell upon their
heads, wisely to unite themselves for their own defense, and to pull down and
destroy those designs, before they were brought unto perfection.

These were the reasons of the Lords of Guise; among which, that they mentioned
about the protection of Geneva, was, that the King having been desirous to
renew that Confederacy with the Swisses which they for many years have held
with the Crown of France, the Protestant Cantons had refused to accept it,
unless the King would take Geneva into his protection; who considering (the
affairs of the Marquisate of Saluzzo being then in disorder, and the friendship
of the Duke of Savoy suspected and uncertain, because he was nearly allied unto
the King of Spain, having taken to Wife his Daughter the Infanta Katherine)
that if he should have a passage in his power, whereby without setting foot in
another man's house he might make use of the Swisses assistance, it was
necessary for him to embrace the protection of that City, from the Territories
whereof the passage is free to those places upon the confines of France, Henry
the III. takes upon him the protection of Geneva.
he resolved at last to consent unto it, forced by necessity, but against his
will, and with much suspension of mind, being both by nature and custom most
averse from having to do with the Hugonots. But that which was spoken
concerning the Kings secret dissoluteness, though it were not altogether
without ground, by reason of his amorous inclination to the Ladies of the
Court; yet was it by the reports of his Enemies amplified and enlarged to such
vices and debauches as were very far both from his nature and custom: and among
the common people there went such extravagant tales of his licentiousness, as
caused at the same time both laughter and loathing in those that were
acquainted with his most secret hidden practices.

Now the Duke of Guise, either really moved with a zeal to Religion, or drawn
by the interests of his own greatness, or else persuaded by both respects
jointly united, having framed his design, The Duke of Guise by means of the
Preachers and Friars, in Pulpits and other places of Devotion, labors to
insinuate the Catholic League into the people.
and ordered his reasons with so fair an appearance, made use of popular
eloquent men to divulge them from their Pulpits, and infuse them in private
discourses among the people, thereby to win their affections, and procure the
enlargement and spreading abroad of the League. Among these, the chief were
Guilliaume de la Rose, a man of powerful eloquence, who came afterward to be
Bishop of Senlis; Iehan Prevost chief Priest of St. Severins, a man of rare
learning and copious eloquence; Iehan Boucher, by birth a Parisian, a man in
the same City Curate of St. Bennets Parish; one Poneet, a Friar in the Abbey of
St. Patrick at Melun, Don Christin of Nizza in Provence; and Iehan Vincestre,
all famous Preachers; and finally, most part of the Jesuits, displeased perhaps
that the King having at the first used them very familiarly, was afterward
turned away from them to the Order of the Fueillants and Hieronimites. And as
these prosecuted the business of the League in Paris, the same was done at
Lions by Claude Mattei a Priest of the same Society at Soissons, by Matthiew de
Launoy Canon of that Cathedral; at Rouen, by Father Egide* Blouin of the Order
of Minimes; at Orleans, by Bourlate a very noted Divine; at Thoul, by Francois
de Rosier Archdeacon of that Church; and an infinite number of others dispersed
through the several parts of France, who by their credit and plausible popular
eloquence, sometimes in their Pulpits, sometimes in the Congregations of the
Penitents, sometimes in their secret Conferences at Confessions, did allure the
people, and entice them to enter into that Combination, which it is likely very
many did, out of a respect to Religion, believing that thereby the Calvinists
would be utterly rooted out, and the authority of the Church restored to its
pristine greatness. But many entered into that Covenant invited by other ends,
and drawn to it by different hopes, or else necessitated by their particular
interests, though all shrouded themselves under the same cloak of the
preservation and maintenance of Religion. Thus was the League composed of two
different kinds of persons.

The first sort for the most part of such as were noble eminent persons, The
Catholic League composed of men disaffected to the present Government, and
Zealous in Religion.
who ill satisfied with the power of the Kings Minions, and not enduring to be
banished from all Offices and favors of the Court, went that way partly out of
anger, partly out of hope of change; believing, by the subversion of the
present state of affairs, they should rise to a greater height of fortune, and
in the end compass the height of their designs. The chief of these was Ludovico
Gonzaga Duke of Nevers; who after he had refused the Government of the
Marquisate of Saluzzo, and other places beyond the Alps, when the King resolved
to restore those Towns which had been withheld from the Duke of Savoy, thinking
himself partly hated, and partly despised, could never any more attain to any
other Government, as his great services to the Crown made him hope he should.
In this number was also Guy Sieur de Lansac, and Francois Sieur de S. Luc, who
having seen some beams of the Kings favor, and entertained hopes of being
received amongst his Minions, were afterward thrust out by their Competitors,
and falling from so great expectations, had for anger taken the contrary side;
likewise among these was Monsieur de Vins, a man more fit to be the Head of a
Party, both for his readiness of his wit, and for the nobleness of his Family,
which was the chief in Provence, he having at the siege of Ro^helle saved the
Kings life, The Sieur de Vins at Rochel receives a Musket shot to save Hen. 3.
and interposing his own body to defend him from the Bullets which were aimed
at him, received a Musket Shot in the right side, did afterward neither
obtain his favor, nor those rewards and advancements which the merit of that
service had caused him to expect: with those also was Iehan de Hemery Sieur de
Villers, to whom in recompense of his many services, especially for taking the
Count Montgomery prisoner, the Government of the City and Castle of Caen in
Normandy having been promised, the King without giving him any thing in
exchange, disposed of it presently to Monsieur d' O his favorite. The like was
the condition of Monsieur de la Chastre Governor of Berry; who after many
great services performed in the time of Charles the Ninth, was not only
unrewarded for his valor and fidelity, but also denied the Government of Blois
and that of Chartres, one of which he very much desired, because they lay so
commodiously near Berry. The Sieur de Mandelot Governor of Lions consented
likewise to it, who having received intimation that his Government should be
taken from him, and in favor to Bernard Sieur de la Valet Brother to the Duke
of Espernon, joined to that of Dauphine, and to the Marquesate of Saluzzo; and
Monsieur de la Mante, first, and then the Sieur de Passage, both Creatures of
the Family of la Valet, having been put into the Citadel, which is the bridle
of the City of Lions, took that party to secure his own affairs, Monsieur d'
Entraques Governor of Orleans was another of them, who having formerly been
favored, and gratified by the King, being afterward discontented that he
himself, and his Government should be subject to the High Chancellor, Governor
of that Province, with whom he had no good correspondence, and moved by his
hatred to the Duke d' Espernon, who both in words and actions had abused a Son
of his; joined himself also with the Lords of the House of Guise. The same
resolution was followed by the Count de Saux, whose Father and he himself
having at first (but with ill fortune) held of the Hugonot Party, had left it
by reason of many enmities, wherewith he was sharply persecuted, and for his
own safety retired under the protection and shelter of the League. Guilliaume
Sieur de Fervaques was also joined in that confederacy, who of subtle wit, but
voluble nature, and ready without respect to lay hold of any thing, by which he
could hope for profit and advancement, after he left the King of Navarre, had
followed the fortune of the Duke of Alancon, and now wanting a support, and not
being well looked on by the King, sought new protection, and new matter for his
vivacity to work on. But the Archbishop of Lions, a man of contrary nature, to
whose exttaordinary Learning was joined a wonderful gravity, and great care not
to err from those ends which were suitable to his vocation, beside the
interests of Religion, and his long dependence upon the House of Guise, was
driven into the League by the Duke d' Espernons hatred, who slighting and
despising him as a person not well affected, thrust him out of the Kings
favor, and almost out of the Court, where his worth had held one of the
chiefest places. But amongst them all the most principal was the Count de
Brissac, who took that resolution for anger, that the Office of General of the
Infantry, (promised to his Father, and pretended to by himself in recompense of
the great labors he underwent in the Portugal Fleet, for the service of the
Queen Mother) was disposed from him without so much as making show to reward
him any other way. For these and such like occasions, the Sieurs de la Roche
Breaute, de la Baulme, de Sourdeac, de Couriers, de la Brosse, de Beauvais, de
Forone, and an infinite many more Gentlemen were persuaded to follow that
resolution, either for discontent of things past, or hopes conceived of the
future.

The other kind of persons whereof the League was composed seemed much
inferior in quality to the first, but was not so at all in the advantage and
benefit of the cause; for by means of them whole Towns and Cities were won, and
the common people, and men of many several professions were brought over in all
parts of the Kingdom. These were for the most part honest well-meaning men, of
simple nature, affectionate to the Catholic Religion, and bitter Enemies to
the Hugonots, whereof some really believing (as was pretended) that the total
ruin of the Roman Religion was at hand; and some desiring the destruction of
Heresy, did not only promote the League ardently in their own persons, but
used all their endeavors to lead on the people, and increase the Adherents of
that Faction; to these were joined also certain De Robe Longue.
Gown-men, who under the color of Religion, covered both unquiet thoughts, and
ambitious, covetous desires of working their own greatness. Among these was
Iehan Maistre President in the great Chamber of the Parliament of Paris, a man
of great honesty and sincerity, Estienne de Nully President of the same Court,
Honorat de Laurent, Councellor in the Parliament of Provence, Iehan Quiere
afterward called Sieur de Bussy then Attorney in the Court of Parliament of
Paris, a man wonderfully followed, and of great authority among the people,
Louys d Orleans, a principal Advocate in the same Court, and a man of singular
learning. Charles Hauteman an Agent of the Bishop of Paris, and a man of very
great riches, la Chappelle Martel Son-in-law to the President de Nully,
Estienne Bernard an Advocate in the Parliament of Dyjon, Rolland one of the
Treasurers of the Finances, Druart an Advocate in the Court of the Chastelet,
Cruce a Proctor of the same Court, Compans and Louchart Commissaries in the
Court of Paris, and many other men of the Long Robe, who were in very great
credit and reputation among the common people.

This body so composed of two so different qualities of persons, the Sword
concurring with the Nobility and Gentry, and the Gown with Clergymen and
Lawyers, was strengthened and knit together as with Nerves and Bones, by the
Adherents and Dependents of the House of Guise, who insinuating themselves into
every place, did effectually stir up men's minds to enter into that League; for
besides the Lords of the House of Lorain, there were likewise joined in it the
Cardinal de Pelleve, the Commendatory Dieu a Knight of Jerusalem, Claude Baron
de Senesay, the Sieur de Bassompier, Pierre Iannin President in the Parliament
of Dijon, the Baron de Medauit, the Chevalier Bertone, the Sieur de Antraquet,
de Riberac, de Rony, de Nissy, de la Barge, de Bois Dauphin, de Chamois, de
Beauregard, de Menetille, Monsieur de St. Paul, and Sacromoro, Birago, both
Colonels of Foot, and an infinite number of others, both Prelates, Barons and
Commanders, who acknowledged the rise of their fortunes to proceed from the
favor and power of the House of Lorain.

But because the Duke of Guise having learned by the experience of all former
times, and by the examples of the late actions of the Hugonots, that through
the natural inclination of the French, those commotions could have but a weak
foundation, which had not the protection of a Prince of the Blood, he began to
seek about to pick out and persuade one of them, Charles Cardinal of Bourbon,
Uncle to the King of Navarre, is desired for head of tke Catholics.
who furnishing him with the authority and right of the Royal Family, should be
of such a nature and condition, as to let himself be wholly governed by him.
There was none more proper for his designs, nor more ready to receive that
impression than Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, the third Brother of Anthony King
of Navarre, and Louy^ Prince of Conde deceased; for having been always most
observant of the Catholic Religion, and an open Enemy to the Hugonots, it was
easy to draw him, by the respect of Religion, to consent unto that Union, and
make himself Head of the League; but he was also of so mean a Capacity, and of
so meek, gentle a disposition, that the Duke of Guise might, without
difficulty, turn and wind him at his pleasure; and, that which was more
important than all the rest, being the eldest Prince of the blood, and Uncle to
the King of Navarre, he might bring the inheritance of the Crown in question,
and pretend, that the King dying without Heirs, the succession, of right,
belonged to him, and therefore he was very fit and proper to foment the
pretensions of the League, which principally did profess to exclude the King of
Navarre, and the other Princes that were Favorers, or Followers of Heresy,
from the succession of the Kingdom. Nor did fortune fail to offer the Duke of
Guise his industry a convenient means of obtaining his desires with much
facility. Andre Sieur de Rubempre, a man of swollen thoughts, and of a vain
nature, but one, who by his industry, and politic way of living, and clothing
himself after a fashion, that was conformable to the Cardinals humor, was
become very gracious with him, and reckoned among his chief servants and
favorites. The Duke of Guise, (by means of the Advocate Louys de Orleans, and
of the Abbot of S. Owyn, brother to Pellicart his Secretary) caused those
reasons to be infused into this man, for which his Patron might pretend to the
Crown of France, urging, The Cardinal of Bourbon his pretensions to the
Succession of the Crown.
that the Representation (so the Lawyers call it) is of no validity in
collateral degrees, and that therefore the King of Navarre could not represent
the person of Anthony his Father, the eldest Son, and heir to the Kingdom of
France, but that without doubt it belonged unto the Cardinal yet alive, and not
to his elder Brother, who was dead so many years before. Besides, that the King
of Navarre being a relapsed Heretic, and by the Canon-Laws incapable of
inheriting the most Christian Crown of France; and the other Princes of the
Blood being likewise followers and favorers of Heresy, and therefore incurred
the same incapacity of the Succession, it was not to be endured that the vain,
cautious respect, of not doing injury to the right of his Nephew, should suffer
it to fall into other hands; and therefore his succession was not only just,
because the Laws had so disposed it, but also pious and honest, because
necessity so required, not to exclude the Royal Family, and at the same time to
preserve the Catholic Religion. To this they added, that though the Cardinal
was nearer to decrepidness then old age, and that the King of France was yet in
the flower of his youth, yet, in respect of the short lives of his Brothers,
the weakness of his own constitution, and the continual debauches, by which he
was half wasted and consumed, the Cardinal was likely to outlive him, and come
to the possession of the Crown before his Nephew, and might transfer it upon
the Cardinal de Vendosme, who also was his Nephew, bred up by him in the
Catholic Religion, and that with so much integrity and sincerity of life, that
among so many Heretics, and Favorers of Heretics, he alone showed himself
worthy to attain to the rule of so Christian a Kingdom as that of France. Which
things, alleged by them, not only in words, but in their Writings, folded up
among a number of examples, and amplified with the ornaments of their wonted
eloquence, did easily make impression in Rubempre, desiring rather to be the
Minion of a King, then the Favorite of a Cardinal: Nor found they it more
difficult to instill them into the mind of the Cardinal himself, who, to the
aforesaid reasons, and the near hopes of the Succession, added the honest
intentions of propagating the Catholic Faith, whereof he had ever been a
zealous promoter; whereas his Nephew coming to the Crown, it was to be doubted
he would subvert Religion, and spread the Poison of Heresy through the whole
Kingdom. This seed being cunningly scattered long beforehand, had brought over
the Cardinal to the Duke of Guises party, in such manner, that when it was
needful to make such a resolution, he easily was persuaded to make himself Head
of the League, and became a Cloak and Buckler to them that sought the ruin and
extirpation of his Family; bearing willingly the weight and burden of that
Enterprise upon his own shoulders* for, being overcome by the subtle practices
and skilful flatteries of the Duke of Guise, he gave himself wholly over to the
opinions and government, esteeming and honoring him exceedingly, as a Lord of
invincible courage, and wonderful zeal to the Catholic Religion. Whereupon,
they that then discoursed of present affairs, with the ordinary French liberty,
were wont to compare the Cardinal to a Camel, that kneels down before his
Enemies, to take up a Load, that may endanger the breaking of his own back.

But, the League being established, and confirmed with these Forces, and with
the color of Religion, and of the Blood Royal; that it might also be furnished
with money necessary to maintain it, and those outward helps, that might bring
it either favor or authority, to the end it might not want any of those things
that ordinarily seem requisite for the effecting of so great an Enterprise, the
Duke of Guise began again to quicken the negotiations with Spain and Rome,
which, for some few years past, had, with all those other matters, been coldly
prosecuted, and deferred. Nor did they find the Catholic King very doubtful or
backward in the business* for, desiring to free himself from his suspicion,
that the French might further endamage him in the Low Country Wars; and being
offended at the late attempts and troubles in Flanders and Portugal, could not
but be very well pleased that they should be busied in their own affairs, and
not have leisure to meddle with those of their Neighbors: and it making for
his purpose, that the Hugonots should be suppressed, who bitterly hated his
very Name, and that the King of Navarre should be kept from the Crown of
France, who had still his wonted pretensions of recovering his Kingdom of
Navarre, already united to the Crown of Spain, he earnestly desired an
opportunity, to crush them both together; wherefore, without difficulty, he not
only condescended to concur with his consent, but also to furnish Moneys,
believing, that the greatness of his designs would be effected in all parts of
the World; if France, which could only balance and withhold his Forces, being
divided in its own dissentions, did but afford him convenient means of
attaining to that Greatness, which mighty Princes are wont to aspire to in
their minds. Neither did he think it any violation of the Peace, which was
still reciprocally continued with the King of France: for, if the Duke of
Alancon had been openly assisted by the most Christian King, whilst to obtain
the dominion of that People that had cast off the yoke of his obedience, he
made War against his Armies in Flanders; and, if the Queen Mother, with the
Forces of the Crown, had opposed his succession to the Kingdom of Portugal, he
believed it much more lawful to preserve the Catholics of France from being
oppressed by the Hugonots, and hinder the King of Navarre his known enemy, from
coming to the Crown: And if the King had denied, that he fomented either the
business of Flanders, or that of Portugal, whilst the Wars were manifestly made
with the Men and Moneys of his Kingdom, he thought it not unfit for him,
concealing that assistance which he purposed to lend unto the League, and
conveying it by secret and hidden means, to deny in appearance, that he either
broke or violated the Peace: Wherefore Iuan Baptista Tassi, a Knight of the
order of S. Iago, and Don Iuan Morreo, the Catholic King's Commissioners;
being come to Iainville, a place of the Duke of Guises, in the Confines of
Picardy and Champagne, and being met there by the Duke of Guise, the Duke of
Mayenne his brother, and Francois Sieur de Meneville, the Cardinal of Bourbon's
Attorney for those of the League in France, both Parties agreed to these
Conditions the second day of the year, 1585.

1585.
Conditions agreed upon between the Deputies of the King of Sp^in, and the
Heads of the Catholic League.
That, in case the present King of France should die, without a Son lawfully
begotten, the Cardinal of Bourbon should be declared King, as first Prince of
the Blood, and so true Heir to the Crown, universally excluding from the
succession of the Kingdom all those, who being Heretics, Revolters, or
followers and favorers of Heretics, had made themselves incapable of it: And
that during the life of the present King, to prevent those Heretics, lest by
the means which they were still attempting, they should open and facilitate
their way to the attainment of the Crown, the Confederate Princes should raise
Armies, gather Forces, make War against the Hugonots, and do all other things
which should be thought fit and necessary. That the Cardinal of Bourbon, coming
to the succession, should ratify the Peace already concluded at Cambresis,
between the Crown of France and Spain, and observe it punctually, prohibiting
any other Religion in the Kingdom, except the Roman Catholic, and rooting out
all Heretics by force, till they were utterly destroyed, should settle the
Decrees and Constitutions of the Council of Trent. That he should promise for
himself, his Heirs and Successors, to renounce all friendship and confederacy
with the Turk, and not consent to any thing that he should manage or contrive,
in any place, against the Commonweal of Christians. That he should forbid all
Pyracie, whereby the Subjects of the Crown of France disturbed the Spaniards
Traffic and Navigation to the Indies. That he should restore unto the
Catholic King all that had been taken from him by the Hugonots, and namely the
City and Jurisdiction of Cambray; and that he should assist him with convenient
Forces, for the recovery of that which those that were up in Arms had taken
from him in the Low-Countryes. And, on the other side. That King Philip should
be bound to contribute Fifty thousand Crowns effectively every Month, toward
the maintenance of the League, and of his Forces; and more^^^r, should assist
with what number of men should be thought necessary, in the p^^gress of the
Forces of the League, as well during the life of the present King, as after his
death, for the utter extirpation of Heresy. That he should receive into his
protection the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Lords of the House of Guise, the
Dukes of Mercure and Nevers, and all those other Lords and Gentlemen that
should subscrib^ unto the League, promising to assist them against the Hugonots
and their adherents, so that they should be kept safe and harmless. That no
Treaty or Agreement whatsoever should be made with the King of France, without
the mutual consent of both Parties; and, that the Articles of this Union,
should, for many convenient respects, be kept secret, till a more fitting
opportunity.

This was the substance of the Capitulation made with King Philip, who, besides
the aforesaid things, promised secretly to the Duke of Guise, the assignment of
Two hundred thousand Crowns per annum, for his own particular, to be employed
in the advancement, and for the benefit of the League.

But, the Treaty was not so easy, nor so speedily dispatched at Rome, where
the same interests of State did not persuade: For, though Father Mattei riding
Post with admirable celerity, sometimes to this place, sometimes to that, did
take great pains to contract this Union; and, though Cardinal Pelleue staying
at Rome, did use all possible means to make it be received into the Pope's
protection; yet Gregory, a wonderful good man, and not of too violent a nature,
counseled moreover by Tolomeo Gallo Cardinal of Como, his Secretary, a man of
very great experience in matters of Government, finding, that he could not see
clear into the designs of that League, and thinking it unfit for him to consent
to the taking up of Arms against a King that was manifestly a Catholic, and
an infinite honourer of the Roman Religion, under pretense of hidden secret
things, and such as were only to be left to men's consciences, whereof he
thought he could not easily judge, went still putting off and deferring his
resolutions, that time might bring to light the bottom of those thoughts, which
to him seemed yet very obscure, and much entangled. Wherefore, having made
choice of certain Cardinals, and other wise men, who were to meet, and consult
upon the Propositions of the League, and those Deputies still answering
conditionally with the clause ( If it be so,) whereby they showed their doubt
of those Propositions which were made by Pellue and Mattei* the Pope still
giving the Agents of the Confederates good hopes, and exhorting them to be
watchful for the good of the true Religion, and the extirpation of Heresy: For
the rest, he held them on with continual delays; nor could they ever, with all
the diligence they could use, get any Writing out of his hand, whereby they
might securely affirm, he had approved the League, or taken it into his
Protection.

Whilst the confederate Lords are thus busy in strengthening the Body of their
Union, the King of France particularly advertised of all these things,
consulted with himself, and with his most intimate Confidents, what resolution
he ought to take, to oppose or divert the violence of those proceedings. The
Duke of Espernon, the high Chancellor Chiverny, Monsieur d'O, and Alberto
Gondi, Marshall de Retz, were of opinion, that the King, showing his face
boldly, and uniting himself presently with the Hugonots and the King of
Navarre, should prevent the Guises; and finding them in disorder, and
unprovided (as the motions of Leagues (where the concurrence of many is
requisite) use to be unready and disagreeing) he should endeavor to pull up
the first sprouts of that scandalous seed; alleging, that they being yet
unarmed, and disunited, might be put into confusion, and suppressed, before
they could have time either to draw any Forces together, and to get assistance
and supplies from Spain: That it was not good to stay till that great Fabric,
being brought to perfection, should unite all the members of its Body: and that
it was no sound Counsel to give time, till the great abundance of humors,
which daily grew more malignant and pernicious, had seized upon some vital
parts of the Kingdom; for, as while dispersed, they might easily be purged away
in their beginnings, so it would be very hard and dangerous to provide against
them, when being grown to a mass of corruption, they should stifle and
suffocate the natural vigor: That they knew, neither the Duke of Guise, nor
any of his Faction, had an Army yet united together, but only the consent of
some Churchmen, and the concourse of the common people, with the adherence of
some few of the Nobility of the Kingdom, Forces weak and uncertain of
themselves, the greatest part whereof, as soon as they should see any
considerable strength, would fall asunder of their own accord: That the
Catholic King was so taken up with the Affairs of Flanders, that he could not,
without much difficulty, and many delays, pe^form so much as part of those
things which now he so largely promised, to raise the turbulent spirits of the
French: and that the Pope, a Prince far remote, and not very strong, who seldom
used other then Spiritual Weapons, was not yet well resolved, either to protect
or assist the League: On the contrary, the major part of the Nobility (always
prepared with Arms, and ready for the War) would presently meet together,
wheresoever the King, in case of so great necessity, should call them: That the
Swisses, who had lately renewed their Confederacy with the Crown, would, for
money, supply them with any number of Soldiers their need required: That the
King of Navarre, and the Hugonots, who still continued in Arms for their own
defense, would thank God for so happy an occasion, and readily submit
themselves to the King's obedience, to oppose their natural enemies: That in
the course of so many Civil Wars, experience had taught them, the neglect of
beginnings made the disease mortal and incurable; and that the vivacity and
boldness of noble sprightly revolutions, was always wont to bring forth
fortunate proceedings, and glorious conclusions.

But, the Duke of Ioyeuse, Rene Sieur de Villequier, Pompone Sieur de
Bellieure, and Villeroy the Secretary of State, were of contrary opinions;
urging, that the King, intending to make War against the House of Lorrain, and
against all the other Confederate Lords, he must necessarily either do it of
himself alone, or being united with the Hugonots: That if he stirred alone, his
Forces would be very weak and slender; for, all the Kingdom being divided into
Catholics and Hugonots, he being an Enemy to both, would have no other Party
but some few servants and dependents, against two powerful, ancient, and
inveterate Factions, which possessing all the greatest and most considerable
Provinces of France, viz. the Hugonots, Poic^ou, Guienne, Languedoc, Gascogne,
and great part of Da^phine; and the Guises, Champagne, Bourgogne, Picardy,
Lyonois, Provence, and Bretagne, besides, the City of Paris, very much inclined
to favor them; the King would certainly remain without Revenue, without
fortified places, without Subjects, without Militia, and without Money, by
making a War so ruinous to himself, and so ridiculous to the whole World. But,
to unite himself with the Hugonots, besides the unworthiness of the action, so
contrary to the customs and ancient purposes of His Majesty, and so unbeseeming
the piety of the most Christian King, and the eldest Son of the Holy Church,
would draw on consequences of greatest moment, the alienation of all the
remaining part of the Catholics, and the revolt of the City of Paris, so
constant to the true Religion, and so natural an enemy to the Hugonots; the
addition of greater Forces to the League, which could receive no better news,
nor greater nourishment; the making authentic all those lies and scandals,
which, till then, had been spread abroad against the King's designs, and real
intentions: That it would color and justify the Spaniard's Protection of the
League, necessitate the Pope to declare himself in favor of it, as soon as the
Enemies of the Apostolic Sea should be united with the King: That the most
important, near, and inland Provinces of France would be lost, by staying for
the supplies and assistance of those that were far remote, at the utmost
confines of the Kingdom: Nor was the strength of the Hugonots great, or their
aid secure, who, on the one side, were exhausted, and unable to go forth of
their Native Provinces, where they could hardly subsist of themselves; and, on
the other side, they could not easily in so short a time unite themselves with
the King faithfully and sincerely, who had ever been their bitter enemy, and
their fatal terrible persecutor: That the fresh memory of the bloody Massacre
at Paris, whereof he was esteemed the chief author, and, as it were, the sole
executer, would be more prevalent with them, then the present demonstrations,
which, by many suspicious men, would be interpreted cunning, and dissimulation,
to catch them that were unwary again suddenly in the net: And finally, that the
Proverb was true, Different natures never suit well together. Wherefore they
judged it to be a much better resolution, to give satisfaction to all in
general, and to the Lords of the League in particular, the major part whereof
they knew had, for private disgusts, consented to that public Commotion: for,
the Lords of Guise being quieted, and the other principal men of the Kingdom
satisfied, the color of Religion vanishing and growing stale, the League would
of it self be broken and dissolved: insisting, that the causes being taken
away, the effects would cease of themselves; and showing by many particulars,
that it was in the Kings power to disunite the League, by giving and granting
to the Heads and other Confederates, of his own accord; those things which they
strove for, but were uncertain to obtain by War.

The Queen Mother consented to this advice, as the most secure, of less noise,
and less scandal; and being experienced in the several revolutions of so many
years, thought it no less destructive than opprobrious, to forsake the more
favorable, more certain, more powerful, and more constant Party of the
Catholics, to follow the almost desperate fortune of the Hugonots. And this
was the common vote and general opinion of the ordinary sort of Courtiers, who
are wont every where (but most especially in France) to discourse very freely
of the highest deliberations of their Masters.

But the Authority of the Duke d' Espernon, and of the other Minions, was very
great; and they foresaw their own assured ruin in that satisfaction which was
motioned to be granted unto the Lords of the League, because it could not be
given them without divesting the Favorites of that greatness and authority,
and of those Offices which they enjoyed: so that of them all only the Duke of
Ioyeuse consented to an Agreement with the Catholic League, partly through the
hatred which he bore to the Duke d' Espernon, who was infinitely before him in
the Kings favor; partly because being nearly allied unto the House of Lorain,
he thought at the fall of all the rest, he alone should be able to hold his
place, and keep upon his feet. Besides, this advice was very contrary to the
designs and inclinations of the King himself, being thereby obliged to throw
down, at one instant, all that he had been so many years in building up: for by
consenting to the satisfaction of the Guises and their Confederates, he must be
brought to put that authority, those Fortresses and Offices into their hands,
from whence he had so long been disengaging but a part of them, by little and
little, with infinite cost and industry, and so by consequence must himself
destroy his first resolution of the total ruin and extirpation of both
Factions. Therefore he would more willingly have concurred to oppose the
League, and unite himself to the Hugonots, if the sting of his own conscience,
the unseemliness of the thing, and the resistance of the Queen Mother, had not
made him absolutely abhor it: Wherefore, his mind remaining yet doubtful, and
his determination suspended, he resolved in the mean time to sound the King of
Navarre more perfectly, and find out the strength of the Hugonots, endeavoring
to persuade him to reconcile himself to the Church, with the other Princes of
Bourbon: which if he could compass, he thought he should destroy the foundation
of the League, and reduce the Guises into a very hard and dangerous condition:
For the principal point of the Succession of the Crown failing, which gave
color and credit to the affairs of the League, and he uniting the Forces of
the House of Bourbon sincerely to himself, should remove the obstacle of Rome,
the concourse of the foolish multitude, who believed the business only to
concern the defense of the Catholic Religion, the abetting of Religious
Orders, and so compose all those stirs. He hoped also that many particular men,
and perhaps the very Heads of that Party, would be drawn by respect and shame,
from those practices which then would have no other foundation left, but the
ambition and unjust desires of the Great Ones; and that by taking away the
fuel, the flame which then blazed so high, and spread so far, would in a moment
be extinguished.

To this end he dispatched the Duke of Espernon (under color of going to see
his Mother, who being old, lived in Gascogne) to confer with the King of
Navarre, A meeting between the King of Navarre and the Duke d' Espernon sent
from Henry the Third.
believing that for his own interest he would effectually labor to convert him
to the Catholic Religion; for if he did not, he saw the King inevitably
necessitated to satisfy the Lords of the League, and abase the greatness of
his Favorites, among which he held the chiefest place. But the Duke of
Espernon being come into Gascogne to the King of Navarre, and proposing very
large Conditions in the Kings Name, if he would resolve to turn Catholic, and
come to Court, the doubts and consultations were no less there than they had
been before in the Court of France: for Monsieur de Salignan and Monsieur de
Roche-Laure, Confidents to the King of Navarre, persuaded him earnestly to
trust the King, to reconcile himself to the Catholic Church, and return to
Court, as first Prince of the Blood, alleging that that was the way to conquer
his Enemies without Arms or Dispute, to recover the Place due to him in right
of his Birth, to get possession of the Inheritance of the Crown, to which the
King, seeing himself without Sons, would open and facilitate his passage, and
to settle his own fortune in quietness and tranquillity, as also the whole
Kingdom of France. And though to attain those ends, he must be fain to suffer
much, and to dissemble and bear with many things, yet it was wisdom to bar
himself of his own ease, and deny his own will, for the obtaining of so high,
so eminent a design: That many men endured very much for the getting of a
private Inheritance, though but a mean one; how much more was to be done and
suffered to compass the Succession of the Crown of France? That they clearly
saw the Kings aim, and the express will of his Councillors and Favorites: nor
could he ever desire a more ready way to subvert and dissipate the power of his
old Enemies and Persecutors.

On the other side, Arnauld Sieur de Ferrier his Chancellor, argued the
contrary, a man of subtle wit and excellent learning, (who after his Embassy
to Venice, where he had been Lieger many years, being returned into France, and
little accounted of at Court, had retired himself to the King of Navarre) he
fearing, if his Master came to an agreement, and into the Kings obedience, that
he should remain abject and forsaken, was, though a Catholic, of the same
opinion with Philip de Mornay Sieur de Plessis, with the Sieur d' Aubigny, (a
trusty servant of the King of Navarre's) and with the other Hugonots, who
obstinate in their Faith, labored to show that temporal hopes were not to be
preferred before a good Conscience and the safety of the Soul, which is
eternal. Nor was it fit for the King of Navarre, by so often changing his
Belief, to get the manifest scandalous opinion rather of an Atheist than of a
fickle inconstant man: nor yet were the present hopes that were offered him so
surely grounded; for the King of France in the vigor of his youth, and the
Queen in the flower of her age, might yet possibly have a Son, whereby the old
intentions being renewed, he would remain (as formerly) despised and
undervalued at the Court. That the hope of succeeding a young King of but two
and thirty years old, was very remote and uncertain, the King of Navarre
himself being but little younger; so that according to nature it was hard to
judge which of them would live the longer. That in the mean time, for things so
remote and uncertain, he must put himself into a present certain servitude, lay
down the command and dependence of his followers, deprive himself of the power
and foundation of his Party, and submit himself to the pleasure and discretion
of his Enemies. That all the world knew the Kings nature and inclinations, who
desiring for his own interests to make use of the King of Navarre in the
present conjuncture, would, as soon as that occasion was past, reassume his old
hatred, and his intent (derived from the firm resolution of his Ancestors) to
abase, persecute, and finally destroy the House of Bourbon. And with what
heart, with what courage could he return to imprison himself in the Lo^vre,
where with his own eyes he had seen that bloody slaughter of all his friends,
and the safety of his own life held uncertain for so many hours, that he ought
rather to acknowledge it to the Divine Goodness, and the chance of Fortune,
than to the modesty and clemency of his Enemies? That Gods Justice was not to
be distrusted, for the settling him in the rightful possession of the Crown, in
case the King should die without a Son. That it was much more easy to attain
it, being strengthened by powerful Forces, and the adherence of an armed Party
that had so often resisted the pride of their Persecutors, and the Power of so
many Princes joined together against them, then being left naked, deprived of
assistance, slighted, and put in Prison at the Court. That therefore he ought
not to expose himself to the certainty of those dangers, treacheries, poisons
and murders whereby he had seen his Mother taken away, and so many of his
Friends and Servants; but sustaining himself with the greatness of his courage,
to remit the event of things so far distant and so obscure unto the Divine
Providence.

There was no doubt among the wisest men, but that the first advice of
reconciling himself to the King and Church, and returning to the Court, was the
most secure and expedient: but he could not clear his mind of the suspicion of
being deceived again, and circumvented by the practices of his Enemies; and his
Genius could hardly be reduced to forsake his liberty and authority, for almost
a certain imprisonment, or at least a very private condition in the Court. He
considered that he could not commit an error in that resolution that would not
cost him his life; for if the Kings proceedings were not real and sincere, or
if he should suffer himself again to be ruled by the powerful persuasions and
contrivances of the Guises, he saw he must of necessity, either by sword or
person, incur the infallible danger of being murdered. He was also very much
moved with the consideration of the Lady Margaret his Wife: for having in a
manner repudiated her, by reason of the report of her unchastity; and she being
gone to certain Castles of hers in Auvergne, where she lived with a very
licentious freedom, he saw that necessarily he must either receive her again to
his bed, or else he could never continue in sincere friendship and perfect
confidence with his Mother and Brother-in-law, but that daily new discords and
dissentions would arise, to the total ruin of his Fortune. These
considerations joined to the power of Ferrier, and to the spur and persuasions
of the Ministers, made him at last resolve, neither to turn Catholic, nor
return to Court; but only with a great deal of modesty he offered the
Assistance and Forces of his whole Party to serve the King, whenever he
pleased, to tame those, who, with the Forces of the League, disturbed the State
and quiet of the Kingdom.

In this Conference was treated likewise (as had been many times before) the
restitution of those places granted to the Hugonots by the Edict of
Pacification: for the limited time being expired, the King moved to have them
restored according to the Agreement. But the King of Navarre being determined
not to forsake his Party, made excuses for not delivering them up, showing that
the times to come were like to be such as made him rather desire to have yet
others for his security, than to restore those which he already possessed;
beseeching the King to bear with the urgent necessity, and to ascribe the fault
to the imminent attempts and obstinate persecutions of his Enemies. But this
point being only treated of in formality, there was neither long nor difficult
debate about it; and the answer was easily received and approved, by reason of
that color which the course of present affairs afforded it.

With these Answers the Duke d' Espernon returned to Court; from whose
Conference they of the League taking occasion, divulged every where that it had
been to treat an Union between the King and the Faction of the Hugonots, for
the establishment of Heresy, and the introducing of the King of Navarre (an
Enemy to the Catholic Church) unto the Succession of the Kingdom; for which
purpose the King had also sent him two hundred thousand Ducats. Which things
being thundered out of the Pulpits by their Preachers, filled the people with
vain pretended fears, and with a most bitter hatred against the Person of their
Prince, and against all his Favorites and Councillors. But the curiosity and
itch of the Hugonots, did in great part cut up the roots of these lying
slanders: for the Sieur du Plessis, burning with an ambition to be known the
Author of the King of Navarre's determinations, and to get himself credit and
esteem amongst those of his own Party, published a little Book in print of the
whole Treaty that had passed with the Duke d' Espernon, with the reasons
alleged by the King of Navarre's Counselors, and his last answer and
resolution: whereby it appeared, that the King sought not to unite himself with
the Hugonots, to the prejudice of the Catholic Religion, as was divulged by
those of the League; but by endeavoring to bring home the King of Navarre and
the other Princes of the Blood into the bosom of the Church: As also, that it
was not true that the King voluntarily consented that the Hugonots should keep
the possession of those places, but that they refusing for apparent reasons to
restore them, he made show to bear with their denial, rather than in so
unseasonable a time to put Arms into the hands of that other Faction also.

The Duke d' Espernon at his return found new matter of doubts and
consultations* The Low Countries send Ambassadors to the King of France
entreating him to take the Protection and Dominion of their States.
For the Low-Country-men (the Duke of Alancon being dead) were left without any
foreign assistance, and being as it were abandoned of all, thought to put
themselves under the Crown of France, and by that means to gain the Kings
Protection against the Spaniards: wherefore they sent an honorable Embassy
about that time to the King of France, to entreat him to take the Protection
and Dominion of all their Countries; and making War with the King of Spain, to
deliver them with a powerful Army from that Tyranny from which they had already
for many years withdrawn themselves. This Embassy at first kept secret by the
King, lest it might exasperate King Philip, was afterward publicly received
and admitted, when he saw the Spanish Agents continued to foment the League.

There were many, and those the same that had counseled him to unite himself
with the Hugonots, who exhorted him to accept of that so ample Dominion, and so
noble occasion to raise and increase his own estate; urging, that since the
Spaniards thought it lawful by secret practices and suggestions to disturb the
peace and quiet of his Kingdom, it was much more lawful for him to undertake
the defense of that oppressed people, retorting the injury which he received,
and bringing those to a necessity of looking to their own, who now craftily
sought to put the affairs of others in disorder and confusion; That this was
the way to digest and expel the hurtful humors of his Kingdom, which could
never enjoy Peace at home, but by the help of War abroad, to take up the minds
and employ the active Forces of his Subjects: They said, This was a most
powerful means to abase the League; which being deprived of the money and
assistance of the Spaniard, would fall of its own accord, not having any
strength or ability to maintain it self: That finally it was time to ease
themselves of so many miseries as were every where about them, to give vent to
the French fury, and rather employ their Arms to the destruction of the old
Enemies of the Kingdom, than use them to tear in pieces the body of their
common Mother.

But as these probable apparent reasons were very noble and generous, so were
they likewise difficult, and little less than impossible to be effected: For
with what Armies, with what Forces could the King (his Kingdom being torn and
divided, and he himself suspected by both Factions) undertake and manage a War
of so great importance? He could settle no foundation in the Catholic Party;
for most of them were united by secret intelligence with the Catholic King:
and to join himself with the Hugonots, produced the same difficulties and the
same oppositions that were before considered: Wherefore the King persuaded by
the evidence of Reason, and counseled by the Queen his Mother, answered the
Ambassadors with kind words, expressing his grief for the oppression they
complained of, excusing himself by the present divisions, and intestine
discords of his Kingdom, and showing how ready he should be to succor and
protect them at another time: With which answer, and all demonstrations of
honor, they were at last dismissed: B^rnardino de Mendozza the Spanish
Ambassador, having received a sharp answer from Henry 3. begins openly to set
forward the League.
And yet Don Bernardino Mendozza the Catholic Kings Ambassador grievously
complaining that the Embassy was admitted, and that the Ambassadors of those
that rebelled against his Master had been so much honored; the King either
highly exasperated against the Spaniards, or not willing to show fear and
poorness of spirit, answered boldly, that the common right of Countries and the
neighborhood of so near a people, derived from the French Nation and Empire,
did persuade him to take them into his protection: yet because of his own
interests, he had not consented to do any thing at all in the business; and
that he would not break the peace in public, though he knew it had been
violated by the King of Spain in private; but that in his own time he would
signify his pleasure, not fearing the forces or threatenings of any one; and
knowing himself to be a free King, Master of his own Will, and one that might
make War or Peace wheresoever it pleased himself. By which answer the King
thinking to bridle the Spaniards with a jealousy of the affairs of Flanders,
he on the contrary hastened their practices, and made them labor to kindle the
fire in his Kingdom, that he might not be at leisure to do so to his
neighbors: Wherefore Don Bernardino departing with that answer, began to
solicit the Guises and the Cardinal of Bourbon, that taking Arms, with the
assistance and with the money of Spain, they should begin to execute the
designs of the League; and presently disbursed two hundred thousand Ducats to
the Duke of Guise, for his first years pension, disposing three months pay in
Germany for the raising of Soldiers in that Country: For Lodovick Fifer the
chief Commander of the Swisses, being corrupted with great bribes, had yielded
to receive a stipend from the League; and Christopher Sieur de Bassompier was
gone into Germany to levy German Horse.
Reiters: nor did they omit in those Provinces which were held by the Lords of
the House of Lorain, to raise both Foot and Horse in all diligence, that with
such mighty Forces they might give a beginning to their intended designs.

But the King, who could neither frame his mind to join with the Hugonots, nor
to give satisfaction to the confederate Lords, expecting counsel from the
Benefit of time, went on with slow preparations, rather setting a gloss upon
his cause, and justifying himself, than hindering the progress of the League:
For besides the public Prayers and Processions continually made, to beseech
God to grant him a Son, being advertised from many several places at the same
time, The King Edict forbidding the raising or gathering of Soldiers together.
of their so frequent raising and drawing armed men together, he thought it
sufficient to send forth a Decree (published the 28 of March) to all the
Governors of Provinces; wherein, after having with his wonted preambles
testified that all his actions were led by a desire of the public peace and
tranquillity, and that he had begun to provide for the ease of all his people
by fitting remedies, which some Enemies of quiet labored to oppose and hinder;
He did expressly forbid all raising and gathering together of Soldiers,
commanding that the Leaders of them should be rigorously chastised; and that at
the ringing of the Toquesaint, the Gentry and Commons should rise, to defeat,
prosecute, and cut them in pieces, delivering as many of them as they could
into the hands of Justice, to receive the condign punishment of their insolency
and insurrection: Which Edict only caused those that drew Forces together to be
acknowledged his Enemies, but neither hindered nor stopped the proceedings of
the Confederates. But in the end, it being necessary to make other provisions,
more fit for the quality of the present times, after long doubt and
uncertainty, he resolved to oppose the designs and attempts of the League by
himself alone, without any intelligence with the Hugonots, hoping to have so
much strength as would be sufficient to restrain them; and thinking that the
Hugonots would not only be natural indifferent spectators of the event, without
troubling or molesting him, but that without other union or confederacy, they
would give both heat and life unto his enterprises. But he scarce began to put
this resolution in practice, when the deceit of that expectation appeared in
the weakness of his Forces; for though the Sieur de Fleury, Brother-in-law to
Secretary Villeroy, who was then the Kings Ambassador in Switzerland, had in a
short time raised ten thousand Foot of that Nation for his Majesty's service,
yet they being to match through the Provinces of Burgogne, Champagne, and
Lyonois, which were possessed by the Heads of the League, their passage was
very uncertain and difficult: and Gasper Count of Schombergh, who was sent to
raise some German Cavalry, being forced to pass through the same Provinces, was
by Commission from the Duke of Lorain taken prisoner: for the Duke being
spurred on by the hopes of getting Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, Cities upon the
confines of his State, and long ago taken away by the Kings of France from the
Dukes his Predecessors, had at last changed the determination of standing
Neuter, which he had observed in all the late combustions, and consented to the
League of the Lords of his own Family. Nor were matters any more successful
within than without the Kingdom; for the Nobility divided by the respect of
Religion, and their old sidings not yet forgotten, but revived by these new
Commotions, came in very unwillingly and in small numbers unto the Kings party;
the people ill-affected to his name, did not administer any help unto his
necessity; and the Kings Revenues not only interrupted by the rumor of Armies,
but purposely intercepted by the Heads of the Faction, were in great part
diminished: so that he was every way destitute of the sinews of the War.

The Heads of the League taking courage from these difficulties of the Kings,
began boldly to gather Forces, and to give a beginning to the execution of
their intended purposes. The first breaking forth, was the departure of the
Cardinal of Bourbon from the Court; who under color of keeping Lent at his
Bishopric of Rouen, went to Gallion, a fair house four leagues from the City,
where he was received by a great number of the Gentry of Picardy, and for his
security conducted to Peronne, the womb that gave birth unto the League; where
the Duke of Guise being come to meet him, with the Duke of Mayenne his Brother,
as also the Dukes of Aumale and Elbeuf, they published a Declaration, which
though it spoke in general under the Name of Catholic Peers, Prelates,
Princes, Lords, Cities and Corporations of the Kingdom of France, was yet
subscribed by the name of the Cardinal of Bourbon alone. The Declaration
contained precisely these words. A Declaration published by the Heads of the
Catholic League.


IN the Name of God Almighty, the King of Kings. Be it manifest unto all men,
That the Kingdom of France having for fourteen years last past been tormented
with a pestiferous Sedition, raised to subvert the ancient Religion of our
Fathers, which is the strong bond of the State; such remedies have been
applied, as (Contrary to their Majesty's hopes.)

Note, that this addition, and all the other alterations and additions in the
following Declarations, standing in the margin, are according to the French
Book, inti^uled, Memories de la Ligue.


have proved more fit to nourish than cure the disease; such as have only had
the name of Peace, but have not established it to any, except those that had
molested it, leaving honest men scandalized in their Consciences, and engaged
in their Fortunes. And in stead of a remedy for these mischiefs, which in time
might have been hoped for, God has permitted that the late Kings have died
young, not leaving as yet any Children able to inherit the Crown, and (to the
grief of all good men) has not yet been pleased to give any to the King that
now reigns, although his good Subjects have not, and will not cease their
most earnest Prayers, to beseech God of his mercy to send him some; so that his
Majesty being the only Son remaining of all those which his Divine Goodness
gave unto Henry the Second of famous memory, it is too much to be feared (which
God forbid) that his House, to our great misfortune, will be extinct, without
hope of Issue; and that about the establishing a Successor in the Throne, great
tumults will arise through all Christendom, and perhaps the total subversion of
the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion in this most Christian Kingdom, where
it would never be endured that an Heretic should Reign, for as much as the
Subjects are not bound to acknowledge or submit themselves to the Dominion of a
Prince fallen from the Christian Catholic Faith; the first Oath which our
Kings do take when the Crown is set upon their heads, being to maintain the
Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion* by which Oath, and not otherwise, they
afterward receive that of their Subjects Loyalty: Yet since the death of my
Lord the Duke of Alancon the Kings Brother, the pre^ensions of those who by
public profession have ever showed themselves Persecutors of the Catholic
Church, have been so favored and upheld, that it is exceeding necessary to
make some wise and speedy provision against them, for the avoiding of those
very apparent inconveniences, the calamities whereof are already known unto
all, the remedies to few, and the manner of applying them almost to none: and
so much the rather, because one may easily judge, by the great preparations and
practices every where, the raising of Soldiers as well without as within the
Kingdom, the withholding of Towns and strong places which long ago should have
been delivered up into his Majesty's hand, that we are very near the effects of
their evil intentions; being sufficiently informed, that not long since they
have sent to treat with the Protestant Princes of Germany for the procu^ing of
Forces, to the end that they may more easily oppress all good men, as their
designs aim at no other end, but to secure and possess themselves of necessary
means to destroy the Catholic Religion, which is the common interest of all,
especially of the Great Ones, who have the honor to hold the first and
chiefest Offices and Dignities of this Kingdom, and whom they labor to ruin
in the Kings lifetime, nay more, by his authority; to the end that there being
no body left who for the time to come can be able to oppose their desires, they
may more easily work that change of the Catholic Religion, which they
endeavor; to enrich themselves with the Patrimony of the Church, following the
example of what has been done in England. Moreover, all the world knows very
well, and plainly sees the actions and deportments of some, who having
insinuated themselves into the favor of the King our Sovereign, (whose Majesty
has ever been and shall be to us most holy and sacred) have in a manner
totally possessed themselves of his authority, to maintain that greatness which
they have usurped, favoring and advancing by all means possible the effects of
those aforesaid changes and pretensions, and have had both the boldness and the
power to remove from the private conversation of his Majesty not only the
Princes and Nobility, but all that naturally are most near unto him, not
admitting any but such as are their own dependents: wherein they have advanced
so far, that none of them now have any part in the Government and
Administration of the State, nor the whole power belonging to their places;
some having been deprived of the Titles of their Dignities, and others of the
Authority, though the empty imaginary names be still left unto them. The same
likewise has been done to many Governors of Provinces* Commanders of strong
Holds, and other Officers, who have been forced to leave and resign their
places in consideration of certain sums of money, which they have received
against their wills and desires, because they durst not contradict those that
had the power to constrain them to it. A new example, and never before
practiced in this Kingdom, to get Offices by money from them to whom they had
been given for a reward of their Loyalty and faithful service; and by this
means they have made themselves Masters of all Forces both by Sea and Land. Nor
do they cease to endeavor the like daily to others that are in possession; so
that there is not one of them, who is not in fear, or who can assure himself
that his place shall not be taken from him; notwithstanding that having been
bestowed upon them for their deserts, they cannot nor ought not to be deprived
of them by the Laws of the Kingdom, unless for some just and reasonable
consideration, or that they have failed in something that depends upon them,
and that such their fault be proved by the means of Justice. Moreover, these
men have drawn into their own hands all the Gold and Silver out of the Kings
Coffers, into which they put only the smaller sums of the general receipts, for
their particular profits, keeping all the Great Ones at their own devotion, as
also all those that have the management of them* which are the true ways to
dispose of this Crown, and set it upon whose head they please. And by their
avarice it is come to pass, that abusing the easiness of the Subjects, they
have exceeded all bounds, laying still heavy Taxes upon the poor common people,
not only equal to those the calamities of War had introduced, which have not at
all been lessened since the Peace, but much more grievous ones, by infinite
other Impositions growing daily from the greedy appetite of their unbridled
wills. Indeed some glimpse of hope appeared, when upon the frequent cries and
complaints of the whole Kingdom, the Convention of the States General was
appointed at Blois, which is the ancient remedy of homebred evils, and as it
were a Conference between the Prince and People, meeting together upon the
terms of their due obedience on the one side, and of the due protection on the
other; both sworn, both born at the same time with the Royal Name and
Fundamental Rules of the State of France: but this dea^ and laborious
enterprise produced nothing, saving the authorizing of the evil counsel of
some, who feigning themselves to be good Politicians, were indeed wonderfully
ill^affected to the service of God, and the good of the Kingdom; who not being
contented to turn the King (by nature most inclined to piety) from the holy and
profitable resolution which he had made at the most humble request of all his
States, to unite his Subjects in one only Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion,
to the end they might live in that ancient piety, wherein this Kingdom had been
established, preserved, and afterward increased, to become the most powerful
of all Christendom; which then might have been effected without danger, and
almost without resistance; they persuaded him quite contrary, that it was
necessary for his Majesty's service, to weaken and diminish the autho^ity of
the Catholic Princes and Lords, who with exceeding zeal had infinitely
hazarded their lives, in fighting under his Banners, for the Defense of the
said Catholic Religion; as if the reputation which they had gained by their
virtue and loyalty, had been a means to render them suspected, in stead of
being honored and esteemed. Thus the abuse which began to swell by little and
little, is since fallen like a torrent from so violent a precipice, that the
poor Kingdom is even upon the point of being overwhelmed by it, having but very
slender hopes of safety: for the Order of the Clergy, notwithstanding all the
Assemblies and just Remonstrances which they could make, is now oppressed by
extraordinary Tenths and Impositions, besides the contempt of the sacred things
of the Holy Church of God, wherein now all things are taken away and polluted;
the Nobility brought to nothing, enslaved, and unnobled, and ev^^y day
miserably burdened with infinite payments and unjust exactions, which they
^ust pay to their exceeding damage, if they will sustain their lives; that is
to say, eat, drink, and clothe themselves: the Cities, the Kings Officers, and
the common people so heavily laden with the weight of frequent new Impositions,
which they call Projects.
Inventions, that there is now no other way to be found, save the means of
applying a good remedy against them.

For these just causes and considerations, We Charles of Bourbon, first Prince
of the Blood, Cardinal of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church, as he whom it
most concerns to take into his safeguard and protection the Catholic Religion
in this Kingdom, and the conservation of the good and loyal Servants of his
Majesty and of the State; with the assistance of many Princes of the Blood,
Cardinals, and other Princes, Peers, Prelates and Officers of the Crown,
Governors of Provinces, chief Lords and Gentlemen of many Cities and
Corporations, and of a great number of good and faithful Subjects, which make
the best and soundest part of this Kingdom, after having prudently weighed the
motive of this enterprise, and having taken the advice as well of our good
Friends who are most affectionate to the good and quiet of this Kingdom, as of
discreet understanding persons, and such as fear God (whom we would not offend
in this, for any thing in the world) do declare, That we have all sworn and
holily promised to use strong hand, and take up arms, to the end that the holy
Church of God may be restored unto its dignity, and unto the true and holy
Catholic Religion; and the Nobility (as they ought) may enjoy their perfect
freedom; and that the people may be eased, the new Imposition abolished, and
all additions since the Reign of Charles the Ninth (whom God absolve)
absolutely taken away; that the Parliaments may be left to the freedom of their
Consciences, and in entire liberty of their Judgments; and all the Subjects of
the Kingdom maintained in their Governments, Places, and Offices, so that they
may not be taken from them, save only in the three cases of the ancient
Constitutions, and by the sentence of the ordinary Judges of the Parliaments.
That all moneys that shall be raised upon the people shall be employed in the
defense of the Kingdom, and to the end for which they are appointed; and that
henceforward the General Assembly of the States may be held freely without any
practices every three years at least, with perfect liberty for every one to
complain of those grievances, against which there is no due provision made.
These things and others which shall be more amply and particularly set down,
are the subject and argument of the raising Arms, which are now taken up for
the restoration of France, the maintenance of the good, the punishment of the
bad, and the security of our persons, which some have often, and that not many
days since, labored to oppress, and utterly ruin by secret conspiracies, as
if the security of the State depended upon the destruction of good men, and of
those that so often have hazarded their lives to preserve it: We having no
other means left to save us from that mischief, and to divert the knife that
already is at our very throats, but to have recourse to those remedies which we
have always abhorred; which yet are excusable, and ought to be accounted just,
when they are necessary, and applied by principal authority, and with which we
would not yet help our selves at this present, for the danger of our estates,
if the ruin of the Catholic Religion in this Kingdom, and of the State, were
not inseparably joined unto it: for whose preservation we shall never fear any
danger, believing we cannot choose a more honorable Funeral, than to die in so
holy and just a Quarrel, and to acquit our selves of the debt and obligation
which as good Christians we owe to the service of God; and as good and faithful
Subjects to hinder the subversion of the State, which would certainly follow
the said alterations. Protesting that we do not take up Arms against our
Sovereign Lord the King, but for the guard and just defense of his Person, Life
and State, for which we all swear and promise to expose our fortunes and lives
to the last drop of our blood, with the same fidelity as we have done in times
past, and to lay down our Arms immediately, when it shall please his Majesty to
take away the danger that threatens the ruin of Gods Service, and so many good
men; which we humbly beseech him speedily to do, giving testimony to all men by
good and true effects, that he is indeed a most Christian King, endued with the
fear of God, and has engraven in his heart the zeal of the Catholic Religion,
as we have always known him, and as it befits a good Father, and a King that is
most affectionate to the preservation of his Subjects; which his Majesty
performing, he shall be so much the more obeyed, acknowledged and honored by
us, and by all his other Subjects with most obsequious reverence, which we
desire more than any thing in the world. And though it would not be very far
from reason, that the King should be requested by an open Declaration to
provide a Successor, that during his life, and after his death the people
committed to him may not be divided into sides and factions by the differences
about Succession; yet are we so little moved with any such consideration, that
the calumny of those that upbraid us with it, will prove to have no ground at
all; for besides that the Laws of the Kingdom are known, and clear enough, the
hazard also into which We the Cardinal of BOVRBON do put our self in our old
age and latter days, does give sufficient assurance, that we are not swelled
with such hope and vanity, but only spurred on by true zeal of Religion, which
makes us pretend to a part in a more secure Kingdom, the enjoyment whereof is
more lasting and more desirable. Wherefore our intention being such, we do all
of us together humbly beeseech the Queen, Mother to the King, our most honored
Lady, (without whose wisdom and prudence the Kingdom would long ago have been
lost and destroyed) by the faithful testimony which she can, will, and ought to
give of our great services, but in particular, of Us the Cardinal of BOVRBON,
who have always honored, served and assisted her in her most important
affairs, without sparing our Estate, Life, Friends or Kindred, to strengthen
with her the Kings party, and the Catholic Religion, that she will not forsake
us now at this time; but to employ all that credit with the King her Son, which
her pains and troublesome labors ought justly to deserve, and which her Enemies
disloyally would have robbed her of. We also earnestly entreat all the Princes,
Peers of France, Officers of the Crown, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, and others
of what quality soever they be, who are not yet joined with us, that they would
favor and assist us with all their power, toward the execution of so good and
so holy a work: And we exhort all Towns and Corporations, if they love their
own preservation, to consider briefly of our intentions, and to acknowledge the
ease and quiet which may thereby redound to them, as well in public as
domest^cal affairs; and so doing, to lay hand to this good work, which cannot
but prosper, with the grace of God, to whom we remit all things; or at least,
if their opinions and resolutions cannot so soon be united (their Councels
being composed of many) we admonish them to open their eyes, and look to their
own affairs, and in the mean time not to let themselves be tempted by any body,
nor seduced by them, who, out of some sinister interpretation of our
intentions, would possess themselves of their aforesaid Cities, and putting
Garrisons of Soldiers into them, would reduce them to the same servitude which
those other places feel that are already in their hands. We further declare
unto all, That we will not use any act of hostility, save against those that
shall oppose us with Arms, and by other unfitting means favor our Adversaries,
who seek to ruin the Church, and subvert the State: And we assure every one,
That our just and holy Armies shall not injure nor oppress any body, either in
passing through, or staying in any place; but shall live in good discipline,
and not take any thing but what they pay for. We will also receive unto our
selves all those good men which have zeal to the honor of God, and of the Holy
Church, and of the good and reputation of the French most Christian Religion;
with protestation notwithstanding never to lay down our Arms till the
aforesaid things be fully performed; and rather all willingly to die in that
cause, with a desire to be heaped up together in one Sepulcher, consecrated to
the last Frenchmen who died fighting for the service of God and of their
Country. Finally, since all our help must come from God, we pray all true
Catholics to put themselves with us in a good condition, to reconcile
themselves to his Divine Majesty, by a thorough reformation of their lives, to
appease his wrath, and to call upon him with purity of Conscience, as well in
public Prayers and holy Processions, as private and particular devotions, to
the end that all our actions may tend to the honor and glory of him who is the
Lord of Hosts, from whom we expect all our force, and our mok certain support.

To these words the Heads of the League adding deeds no less ^ffectual* began
to make themselves Masters of many Cities and Fortresses, some by secret
practices, some by open force of Arms; for, being drawn with an Army that
already mustered 12000 fighting men, to Verdun, a City upon the Confines of the
Duke of Lorain, Verdun, the first City taken by the Army of the League.
though the Governor behaving himself gallantly, labored to defend it, yet one
Guittald, a man of great authority with the Citizens, being secretly got into
the Town, made them, the next day after the siege was laid, to take Arms, to
possess themselves of the Gates, and to bring in the Army of the Confederates,
which uprore the Governor courageously opposed; but having very small Forces,
was easily overcome: for the Duke of Guise himself being entered the City, drove
him out with all those that followed him; and having put Guittald in his place,
the City remained absolutely at the devotion of the League. The City of Thoul
followed the example of Verdun* for, rising in Arms, and driving out the Kings
Officers, it gave it self up voluntarily into the hands of the League. The same
would perchance have happened at Metz a Fortress and City of great consequence,
if the Duke of Espernon, who had the Government of it, foreseeing the danger,
had not in time put in Gentlemen and Soldiers from several places, by which
relief the Garrison being confirm d, which of it self was wont to be very
strong, as a place of importance upon the Frontiers, the Duke of Guise thought
not fit to make any attempt, either not having sufficient Forces to besiege it,
or doubting he should spend so much time about it, as would prejudice his main
design.

At the same time happened a Commotion in the City of Marseilles, The
Insurrection at Marseilles.
the chief Port of Provence, and a place infinitely desired by those of the
League, that they might more easily, and by a shorter cut, receive supplies
from Spain: They had drawn to their party Louis Daries Consul of the City, and
Claude Boniface, called Chabanes, one of the City Captains, whereof the first
being a man of a tyrannical nature, desired to attain to the absolute
Government; the other aspiring to the inheritance of his Brother, who was one
of the Kings Treasurers (a rich, but a very covetous man) had wickedly
conspired to kill him, and therefore desired that tumult and insurrection of
the people, that he might the more conveniently execute his design. These
having gained a rabble of followers, made up of all sorts and qualities of
people, went by night to the Treasurers house, and calling him to the door,
under pretense of delivering him certain Letters, slew him treacherously, and
after ran armed through the whole Town, exhorting the People to Liberty, and
the defense of Religion, which they proclaimed to be in very great danger* by
the machinations of foreign Hugonots. The common People being up, they took
and led to prison some that were reported Hugonots; others they slew, and many
hid themselves in private houses, the greatest part of the Citizens being as it
were astonished, by reason of that sudden taking up of Arms, and of the
Consuls and Captains authority, who, with the same fury, made themselves
Masters of the Forts that command the Haven. They presently dispatched an
Express, to give notice of this to Lodovico Gonzago Duke of Nevers, who
thinking, that the revolt of the City was to be effected by other means, and
without those wicked practices, which were caused by private interests; under
pretense of going to Rome, stayed by the way at Avignon, with hope, that the
design of Marseilles succeeding, he should, by the League, be made Governor of
Provence; and they also sent for Monsieur de Vins, and the Count de Saux, that
they, as being nearest, might come to assist them: But they delaying to come,
the day following* when the first fury of the people began to cool, and that
the wickedness of Chabanes against his own brother was come to light, the
multitude of those that were up in Arms began by little and little to fall
asunder, and one of the gravest Citizens for age, and of most authority and
esteem, named Bouquier, having called the people to a parley, exhorted every
one to take Arms against those seditious men, and to endeavor the punishment
of the murder committed by Chabanes; at which, the greater and stronger part
of the Citizens being moved (who, as in a City of great Traffic, jealous of
their own wealth, were very suspicious) took Arms generally, and began to fall
upon those that had raised the Tumult: They sent also in great haste to call
the Grand Prior of France, Bastard Brother to the King, and Governor of that
Province, who was then at Aix, at whose coming, which was speedy, though with
no more then two hundred Horse, the People following his authority with a very
great concourse, the Fort de la Guard was taken, and in it the Consul Daries,
and Captain Chabanes, who the next morning were executed; by which severity,
the City was kept free from those dangers, and under the Kings obedience.

The like success had the designs upon the City of Bourdeaux in Guienne; for
the Confederates attempting to make themselves Masters of it by means of the
Castle, commonly called Chastea de la Trompette, whereof the Governor was the
Sieur d^ Valliac, one of those that had signed to the League, the Marescal de
Matignon (Lieutenant to the King of Navarre in the Government of that Province,
but a Catholic, depending upon the King, and residing in the Town) having had
notice of all that was plotted, made show of holding a general Council in the
Palace, to communicate unto all some Orders received from the Court, and, among
the rest, drew thither also the Sieur de Valliac, who did not yet so much as
dream himself to be at all suspected: There, having made them that were met
together, acquainted with the revolt that was contriving, he imprisoned
Villiac, and at the same instant caused Artillery to be planted against the
Castle, threatening to put the Governor of it to death, if they within should
dare to shoot against the Town; by which threats, and the resolute nature of
Matignon, Villiac being terrified, commanded his men presently to deliver up
the Fortress; which, with new Fortifications, and a strong Garrison, was ever
after kept at the Kings devotion, under the command of Matignon.

But these successes were little considerable, in comparison of the frequent
revolts which followed in other parts of the Kingdom; for those of the League
beginning freely to declare themselves, the Sieur de Mandelott Governor of
Lions had taken and demolished the Citadel there; the Sieur de la Chastre had
put Bourges into the power of the League; the Sieur d' Entraques* having driven
those of the Kings party out of Orleans, had made himself absolutely Master of
it; the Count de Brissac with the City of Angiers, and others of his
Government, had manifestly united himself with the Confederates; the Duke of
Guise, in person, had possessed himself of Mezieres, a City of importance in
the Confines of Champagne; the Duke of Mayenne had taken the Castle and City of
Dijon in Bourgogne; and, at lengrh, with a strong Army they were come to
Chalons in Champagne, the place appointed for their Magazine of Arms, and for
the basis and foundation of the War. There they determined to expect the
Forces, both Horse and Foot, which had been leavied in Germany, with Spanish
money, and which they had intelligence began to move toward Lorrain: and whilst
they advanced, the Duke of Guise leaving the Duke of Mayenne to Command the
Army, with the Dukes of Aumale and Elbeuf; himself, with a select number of
Horse, was gone to Peronne, from whence, with infinite demonstrations of
honor, he conducted the Cardinal of BOVRBON to Chalons, to give reputation
with his Name and Presence, to the proceedings of the League, to show him in
the Army, and to make use of him as of a shield and bulwark in the future War.

Against these so powerful, and so near prepartions of the League, the King
made opposition both by words and actions, as much as he was able; and first of
all he answered their Declaration with another of the following tenure.

ALthough the King has by Letters and Commands already many times admonished
his Subjects, not to let themselves be persuaded, nor counseled, The Kings
answer to the Declaration published by the Catholic League.
by some who endeavor to stir them up, and entice them into their Association,
and, by so doing, to lead them astray from their own repose; and has likewise
offered and promised Pardon to those, who, being already engaged, should
withdraw themselves, as soon as they were informed of his intentions: yet his
Majesty having, to his great discontent, understood, that notwithstanding his
said Commands and favorable advertisements, some of his Subjects do not cease
to enter into the said Associations, induced thereto by diverse interests, but
the most part dazzled and deceived by the fair specious colors, which the
Authors of those Insurrections give to their designs: His Majesty has thought
fit, for the universal good of all his Subjects, and for the discharge of his
own Conscience toward God, and of his reputation toward the World, against
those artifices, to set forth the light of Truth (the true consolation of the
good, and capital enemy of the bad) to the end that his Subjects, being guided
by the cleerness of it, may know, and discern, in time, and without impediment,
the Original and end of such Commotions, and by that means may come to avoid
those miseries and calamities, both public and private, which are like to
arise from them.

The Pretenses which the Authors of these stirs do take, are principally
grounded upon the Restoration of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion in
this Kingdom, upon the disposing of the Dignities and Offices thereof to those
to whom they are justly due, and upon the good, honor, and disburthening of
the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons: All which things are by real, not disguised
effects, known to every one to be so dear and precious to his Majesty, that
none can truly doubt of his intentions therein, so that it does not appear, it
was necessary to stir up his Subjects, to put them in arms, and raise foreign
Forces to make him consent to the Articles which they shall propose, in case
they be just, possible, and profitable for his People. For, as concerning
Religion, His Majesty, before he came to the Crown, has too often exposed his
own life, fighting happily for the propagation of it; and since it pleased God
to call him to the Government of this Kingdom, has too often hazarded his
State unto the same end, and used his best means, with the lives and fortunes
of his good Subjects and Servants, to persuade them at this present, and to
gain their belief, that no man whosoever in this Kingdom or elsewhere, of what
profession soever he be, has more Piety and Religion in his heart, than he
has always had, and by the Grace of God ever will have. And if according to
the example of the King his Brother of famous memory, and of many other Princes
of Christendom (whose Kingdoms and States have been troubled with different
opinions in Religion) his Majesty, with the prudent advice of the Queen his
Mother, of my Lord the Cardinal of Bourbon, and other Princes, Officers of the
Crown, and Lords of his Council, who then were near about him, pacified the
Tumults that were amongst his Subjects about matter of Faith, waiting, till it
should please God to unite them all in the bosom of the Holy Church; it does
not therefore follow, that his fervor and devotion, in what concerns the glory
of God, and the perfect restoration of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church,
should since be changed, or less at this present, than he showed it to be
during the said troubles. But, so far is it from being so, that his Majesty
desires every one may know, that he made the said Peace purposely to try, if by
means of it, he could reunite his Subjects in the Church of God, which the
malice and licentiousness of the times had separated from it; having so long
proved, with the hazard of his Person and State, and with the price of the
blood of a great number of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and others of his
Subjects, who lost their lives in those broils, that the discord raised about
Religion, and that took root in this Kingdom, during the minority of the late
King his brother, and of himself, to the great grief of the Queen their Mother,
could not be settled by the way of Arms, without destroying his said Subjects,
and putting his Kingdom into evident danger. Wherefore his Majesty resolved for
Peace, when once he found that all sorts of Persons were tired and afflicted by
the too long continuance of those said Tumults, and that he wanted the means of
supplying any longer the expenses of so destructive a War. [ Which would not
have come to pass, if in the Assembly of the States General held at Blois, when
the Deputies (induced thereunto by his Majesty's servent affection to the
Catholic Religion) had requested him utterly to prohibit the exercise of the
pretended reformed Religion in this Kingdom, (whereupon followed the
determination which was there taken and sworn, which his Majesty has since
labored to execute) they had at the same time provided a certain stock of
Money to prosecute that War unto the end, as it was necessary to do, and as it
was motioned by His Majesty.]
Which would not have come to pass, if in the Assembly of the States General of
this Kingdom, held at Blois, the Deputies who were there, had made request unto
His Majesty, to prohibit absolutely the exercise of the pretended reformed
Religion in this Kingdom; for then that course would not have been decreed
which was there taken and Sworn to, and which his Majesty labored to put in
execution, with those conditions which are clearly expressed in it. For, if it
had been concluded in good earnest to prosecute the War, care would likewise
have been taken to provide a certain stock of money from time to time, to
maintain it till the end, as it was necessary to do, and as his Majesty
insisted that they would;] And they would now have had no pretense of
complaint, who nevertheless publish, etc. Mem. de la L^gue.
and they should then have had no pretense of complaint, who nevertheless
publish, That every one was quickly deprived of that glympse of good hope which
appeared to them at the resolution taken by the States; though it be neither
decent nor lawful for a Subject to judge of the actions of his King, if for no
other reason, but because he is often ignorant of the secret causes that are
the motives of his commands, which sometimes are more pregnant then those that
are apparent, and known to every one; it not belonging to any one to do so,
save only to God the Searcher and Judge of all hearts, and of the actions of
Princes, who knows the causes that then forced his Majesty to conclude Peace
before any thing else; being certain, that if he had deferred so to do, this
Kingdom would, in a moment, have been filled with Foreign Forces, and with
diverse Factions, and new divisions, which would have been wonderfully
prejudicial to the State. His Majesty therefore, to prevent all the aforesaid
inconveniences, to hinder the effects of them, and to try the best remedies,
condescended to the aforesaid Peace; and not to settle and establish Heresy in
this Kingdom (as is published abroad,) for such a thought never entered into the
mind of so good, and so Christian a Prince, as is his Majesty; who, having
foreseen, felt and proved the difficulties of War, thought fit so much the
sooner to consent unto the aforesaid Peace, to the end, that by means thereof,
he might at least satisfy his good Subjects, with that ease, which they
expected from those other points propounded and required in the Assembly of the
said States General, for the public good of the Kingdom; Peace and concord
being the principal necessary foundation for the establishing of good Laws, and
the reformation of manners; which businesses His Majesty has since continually
prosecuted, as appears by the Edicts and Constitutions made for that purpose,
which he has labored to cause to be observed and put in execution; and if his
intention has not been fulfilled according to his desire, it has been very
much to his grief, and it may be also as well through the negligence of some of
his Officers, and through the cunning of his evil-willers; as by reason of the
advantage and footing, which wickedness, corruption, and disobedience had taken
in this Kingdom, during the said War. By that Peace many Cities full of
Citizens and Catholic inhabitants, were freed from Soldiers that had seized
upon them; and the exercise of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion was
restored to its being, as by the diligence and care of his Majesty, it is
brought to pass in almost all the Towns of this Kingdom, wherein nevertheless
those that make profession of the said pretended reformed Religion, have, since
those Commotions been, and at this present are still the strongest, and by whom
the said exercise had till then been banished, both before and since he came
unto the Crown. Likewise the face of Justice has appeared in them, and if not
so fully and perfectly as might have been desired; yet so, that sometimes it
has had sufficient strength to relieve the good, and terrify the bad. The
Prelates and Clergymen are settled again in their Churches, and in the
possession of those goods that were taken from them. The Nobility has been
able to live securely in their own houses, without being liable to those
expenses they were wont to make during the War, to keep themselves from being
suddenly surprised. The Citizen, deprived of his possession, and wandering about
the Country with his Family, is also entered again into his own house, by means
of the said Peace. The Merchant has likewise wholly betaken himself again unto
his Traffic, which was interrupted by occasion of the said Tumults* And the
poor Peasant, pressed down under the weight of intolerable burden, proceeding
from the unbridled liberty of the Soldier, has had means to breathe, and have
recourse unto his ordinary labor, to sustain the poverty of his life. Briefly,
there is no kind of Estate or Person, that has not effectually shared in the
fruit and benefit of that Peace.

And, as his Majesty has always been most jealous of Gods honor, and as
solicitous of the public good of his Subjects, as a most Christian and truly
good Prince ought to be; knowing, that the evils and calamities of a State do
spring chiefly from the want of true Piety and Justice, he has, since the said
Peace, continually labored to set those two Pillars up again, which the
violence of the said Tumults, had, as it were, overturned, and thrown to the
ground: and that he might so do, had begun to nominate such persons to
Ecclesiastical dignities that have cure of Souls, as were fit and capable, and
such as are ordained by the holy Decrees. He has also invited his Subjects, by
his example, to reform their manners, and to fly unto the Grace and Mercy of
God by Prayer and Austerity of life, which has confirmed the Catholics in the
duty toward the Divine Majesty, and moved some of those, that were separated
from the Church of God, to reunite themselves unto it. He has also graciously
taken time to hear the discourses and complaints of the Clergy (after having
given them leave to meet together for that purpose) and provided amply and
favorably for them, having since rather eased then burdened them with new
extraordinary Tenths, without having any respect to the necessity of his own
affairs, Whatsoever is published to the contrary] Mem. de la Ligue.
being very sorry, that he could not also free them from the payment of the
ordinary ones, having, when he came to the Crown, found them engaged for the
payment of the rent of the Townhouse of Paris. The said Prelates and Clergymen
have likewise had convenience by His Majesty's permission, to call and hold
their Provincial Councels, by means whereof, they have consulted and provided
for the reformation of abuses, introduced into the Church during the said
Tumults; and have made many very good and holy Ordinances for the Government of
it, which have been commended and approved by his Majesty. These are the
fruits, and public general advantages, which the Church of God, and the Roman
Catholic Apostolic Religion have reaped from the aforesaid Peace, besides
infinite other private and particular ones, which it would be too long to
recount.

Then, as concerning Justice; every one knows the pains his Majesty has taken
in drawing it out of the darkness where those troubles had buried it, to set up
the light thereof again in its first force and ancient splendour: having, by
death, disannulled those Offices that were supernumerary, and moreover
prohibited the sale of the said Offices, which the necessity of money had
forced his Predecessors to introduce, without having any regard of his own
wants, though they were no less then those of his Predecessors. Besides that,
his Majesty has excluded all Pardons and Evocation is a transferring of causes
from one Court to another.
evocations which in times past were wont to be dispatched by his own will and
pleasure, knowing, that the hope of the one gives encouragement to wickedness,
and the too much easiness of granting the other, brought a confusion in matters
of Justice. Moreover, His Majesty, since the said Peace, has had opportunity,
to send Courts, composed of the Officers of the Parliament of Paris, into
diverse Provinces of this Kingdom, to do Justice to his Subjects upon the place,
from whence that fruit has been gathered, which every one has tasted, and
which yet would have been greater, to the great contentment of good men, if his
good intentions had been better assisted by those who naturally, and by the
particular obligation of their Offices, were bound to do so. But, as the
misfortune of the times has made some so bold, as to attribute the faults of
others to his Majesty; so the corruption and malignity of them has been filled
with so much impudence and indiscretion, that many have also taken pleasure to
defame his most holy and best actions, and in that manner gain themselves
credit at the cost of his reputation: and have had so high a degree of
boldness, as to interpret too too much rigor and severity, that laudable
resolution he had taken, to make the Sentences and Decrees of the said Courts
be executed against Malefactors. Thus his Majesty, having by these means begun
to provide for the setting up again of these two Pillars, the true and only
foundations (And preservers.) Mem. de la Ligue.
of all Monarchy, had promised himself, that he should settle and restore them
absolutely by the continuation of Peace, if God had been so merciful to him, as
to make his Kingdom and Subjects worthy of it. Which, it appears, having been
as soon feared, as foreseen by those, who at this present would stir up his
Subjects to take Arms, but under color of providing for both their points:
They do also publish, that they have taken Arms to prevent those troubles,
which they say they fear will happen after the death of his Majesty, about the
establishment of a Successor, to the prejudice of the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion: being persuaded (or at least publishing that they are so)
that his Majesty, or they that are near him, do favor the pretensions of
those, who have always showed themselves persecutors of the said Religion; a
thing which his Majesty prays and admonishes his Subjects to believe he never
so much as thought; for being yet (God be thanked) in the force and flower of
his age, and in perfect health, as also the Queen his Wife, he hopes that God
will give him issue, to the universal contentment of his good and loyal
Subjects. And it seems unto his Majesty to be too great a forcing of time and
nature, and too great a distrust of the mercy and goodness of God, of the
health and life of his Majesty, and of the fruitfulness of the Queen his Wife,
to move such a question at this present, and after to go about to decide it by
force of Arms. For, in stead of freeing, and curing this Kingdom of the evil,
which they pretend to fear may one day come to pass; for that cause, they go
directly about to hasten the pains and mortal effects of it, by beginning a
War now upon that occasion: it being certain, that by means thereof, the
Kingdom will be quickly filled with Foreign Forces, with Factions and endless
discords, with blood, slaughter, and infinite murders and robberies. And see
now how the Catholic Religion will be established, how the Clergyman will be
disburthened of Tenths, how the Gentleman will live in quiet and security in
his own house, and how he will enjoy his Rights and Privileges, how Cities,
and the inhabitants in them will be exempt from Garrisons, and how the poor
people will be free from the Taxes and Impositions that lie upon them. His
Majesty exhorts and admonishes his Subjects to open their eyes here, and not to
persuade themselves that this War will end so easily as they give out; but to
comprehend, and maturely consider the inevitable consequences of it, and not to
suffer their reputation to be blemished, and their Arms to serve for
instruments of their Countries ruin, and the greatness of those that are
enemies of it Who only will triumph, and make advantage of the public
miseries and calamities.] M^m de la L^gue.
For, whilst blinded to our own good we shall fight against one another,
succored in appearance, but in effect fomented by their assistance, they will
reign happily, and establish their own power. They complain also of the
distribution of Offices and Honors in this Kingdom; saying, that those are
deprived of them, who have deserved best in his Majesty's service: a weak and
dishonorable foundation to build the ruin and subversion of so flourishing a
Kingdom, whose Kings were never constrained to make use of one more then of
another, for there is no Law obliges them to do so, save that of the good of
their own service. Yet has his Majesty always honored and favored the
Princes of his Blood, as much as any of his Predecessors, and has showed a
desire to advance others in credit, honor, and reputation, by employing them in
his service: for every time his Majesty has raised Armies, or drawn Forces
together, he has committed the charge and conduct unto them, preferring them
before all others; and if it be considered, who those are that even now hold
the greatest and most honorable Offices in the Kingdom, it will be found, that
they, who are said to be the Authors of those complaints, have more cause to
acknowledge the goodness and favor of his Majesty, than to murmur against him,
and depart from him. But they say, they have only the name of them, and that
in effect they are deprived of the privileges which belong unto their said
Offices, which are usurped by others. Now, before we judge of the justness of
such a complaint, it would be necessary to see and touch the ground of the
rights and preeminences attributed to every Office, and to consider how, and by
what persons they have been used in the times of the Kings his Predecessors; a
thing often propounded by His Majesty, desirous to regulate the Offices of
every one, and which long ago would have been cleared and decided, if his good
intention had been seconded and assisted, as it ought to have been, by those
very men, that have interests in them* But, shall it be said at this present,
and left unto posterity, that private interests and discontents were the
occasions of overturning a whole State, and of filling it with blood and
desolation? This is not the way that ought to be taken for the regulating of
those abuses whereof they so much complain, having to deal with a most pious
Prince, who will ever oppose that mischief, and readily embrace those fitting
convenient remedies which shall be proposed unto him to provide against them.

Wherefore, let Arms be laid down, let foreign Forces be sent home to their
own Countries, and let this Kingdom be free from that danger that it incurres
by this Insurrection and taking up of Arms; and, in stead of following that
way, full of difficulties, and both public and private miseries and
calamities, let that of reason and duty be sought out, laid hold on, and
followed; by means whereof the holy Church of God, an Enemy to all violence,
will be more easily restored to its vigor and splendour, and the Nobility
satisfied and contented as it ought to be. For which of the King's, His
Majesty's Predecessors, has showed more love and favor to that Order then his
Majesty has done? not having been contented to prefer it to the ancient and
principal honors and dignities of the Kingdom; but has also purposely erected
and founded new ones, which he has dedicated to the honor of the true
Nobility, having excluded all other kinds of persons from them. His Majesty
will also, at the same time, provide for the ease of his People, as he has
already very well begun to do, and desires to continue to the uttermost of his
power. And although the Heads of this War do promise, that their Forces shall
live in so good discipline, that every one shall commend them for it; and do
also admonish the Inhabitants of Cities not to receive any Garrisons into them;
yet it is already seen, how the Soldiers, which they have gathered together, do
commit infinite outrages and villainies, and that they themselves have put
Forces into those Cities and Places which they have taken, to govern and keep
them at their own devotion. Besides that, it is most certain, that many
Vagabonds, which can do nothing but mischief, will rise up, as the custom is,
who, under the name and protection of either side, will commit infinite
Robberies, Murders and Sacriledges: so that in stead of putting an end to that
danger, which threatens the ruin of Gods Service, and of good men, as they
promise to do by this War, it will fill this Kingdom with all impiety and
Desolation. Mem. de la Ligue.
dissoluteness. They also publish, that their persons and lives are in danger
of Treachery, and that that is one of the causes that moves them to take up
arms. None can believe such an imputation can at all concern his Majesty (As
well by reason of the good and gracious usage which they have ever received
from him, as because His said Majesty is,) etc. Mem. d^ la Ligue.
by nature so far from any kind of Revenge, that the man is yet unborn, who
can, with reason, make any such complaint against him, notwithstanding any
offense whatsoever he has received: There may easily be many found of this
kind, who have proved the gentleness of his nature, and will serve for
memorials of it to posterity. Wherefore his Majesty prays, and exhorts the
Heads of the said Tumults and Commotions, presently to disband their Forces, to
send back strangers, to separate themselves from all Leagues, and laying aside
all enterprises, as his Kinsmen and Servants, to take a perfect assurance of
his friendship and good will; which if they shall so do, he offers to continue
to them, honoring them with his favor, and making them partakers of those
dignities which he was wont to confer upon those of their quality; to reconcile
and reunite themselves with him, to provide duly and effectually for the
restoration of Gods Service, and the public good of his Subjects, by those
means which shall be thought most proper and convenient, which his Majesty has
an infinite desire to put in practice. He does likewise admonish the Clergy and
Gentry, his Subjects, maturely to weigh the consequence of these commotions,
sincerely to embrace his intention, and to believe that his chief aim has ever
been, and ever shall be, to do good to all, but neither harm nor displeasure to
any; commanding them most strictly, as also all his other Subjects, to separate
and withdraw themselves from all Leagues and Associations, and to reunite
themselves with him, as nature, their duty, and their own good and safety does
oblige them; to the end, that if these civil broils must pass further (which he
beseeches Gods divine Goodness not to permit) he may be accompanied and
supplied with their Counsel, Arms, and Assistance, for the preservation of the
Kingdom, to which is joined that of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church; of
their honor and Reputation, as likewise of their Persons, Families and
Estates: offering and promising them, if they shall so do, both the
continuation of his favor, and reward of his service and fidelity.

This was the Kings Declaration, published to answer that of the League;
wherein he thinking it convenient, for the gravity of his Person, to sum up
businesses in a few words, without descending to more particulars, endeavored
afterward to have the reasons of the Guises punctually answered by persons of
great wisdom, and no less eloquence, who having replied largely in writing,
kindled matters in such sort, that it was much more necessary to come at last
to action, then to multiply words any longer. The King endeavored therefore,
not only to draw his Forces together in all parts, to resist the attempts, and
oppose the Army of the League that was so near; but also to disunite, and fetch
over some of those which he thought most fit from the body of that Union: and
because the City of Lions was wonderfully necessary for his designs, that he
might bring his Swisses in that way, who were excluded from Bourgone and
Champagne, Provinces held by the League, he began to tempt the Sieur de
Mandelot, to draw him over to his party, and had nearly engaged Secretary
Villeroy in the business; for Mandelot having a Daughter both noble and very
rich, there was a Treaty of Marriage begun between her and Charles Lord of
Alincourt, Son to Villeroy, the King promising Mandelot the power of putting
his Son-in-law into the Government of the City of Lions after him; by which
alliance he being freed from the suspicion of being put out of his place by the
Duke of Espernon to bring his Brother into it, and the demolishing of the
Citadel already destroyed being authorized and approved by the King, Mandelot
seemed not to have any more occasion to adhere unto the League, being removed
from those jealousies which had made him consent unto it: nor was this Treaty
vain; for Mandelot, a man of a mild nature, and very desirous to have the
alliance of one so powerful, consented to the match, and promised to give free
passage to the Swisses, who were raised by the Sieur de Fleury, Uncle to the
new Bride. The Kings persuasions prevailed also with Lodovico Gonzaga Duke of
Nevers, who failing of his hopes of the Government of Provence by the
unsuccessful event of the business of Marseilles, but (as he said himself)
seeing the Pope did not conclude to approve and protect the League, began to
lend an ear to the persuasions of Francisco Nuvo-loni a Mantuan very conversant
with him, who by Pietro Abbot del Been (one very much trusted by the King)
being moved with reason, and filled by his Patron with plentiful hopes, at last
he resolved to write to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of Bourbon, to renounce
and take his leave of the League, alleging that he never saw the express
consent and approbation of the Pope, and for all the treating that had been at
Rome by means of Father Mattei, he had never been cleared in that scruple, that
it was lawful in this business to take Arms against the King, who was a
Catholic, legitimate and natural: by whose example many others being moved
began to fall away, and particularly the Sieur de Villers, who having consented
to the League chiefly for the veneration, which he had ever born to the
Catholic Religion, was unsatisfied to see that the principal aim of the
Confederates was at the Kings own person; wherefore laying aside his distaste
about the Castle of Caen, and being made amends by the Kings pardon, which he
granted to him for the death of Monsieur de Lizores, slain by him in a single
duel, he returned to the Kings obedience, and served him afterward constantly
as long as he lived: but this was no more than the taking of a drop of water
from the Sea; for the fury of the people was so headlong, and the concourse of
the Clergy so great in favor of the League, that by continual proceedings it
was more strengthened every hour. Nor were the Kings preparations of Arms very
fortunate; for the Catholic Cantons of the Swisses, though at first they had
consented to those Levies which were made there in the Kings Name, yet some of
their Burgo-masters being corrupted with money by the League, and the rest
being persuaded by the authority of Spain, had refused that the Levies should
go forward: nay more, they had given leave to the Duke of Guise to raise six
thousand Foot amongst them: and though the other Cantons had promised the Sieur
de Fleury to make up the number of the ten thousand which were raising for the
King, yet they desired to add this express condition, That they should only
serve in their own defense, and not offend any body, being so persuaded by the
rest that favored the party of the Confederates, whereby the King foresaw,
that with great expense and many difficulties he should receive but small fruit
from the Levies of the Swisses, because they were restrained by those
Commissions, and fought against others of the same Nation, which by so many
proofs of former times he knew was always hazardous, and many times ruinous.
The Forces also of the Kingdom that took his part, were very weak, because he
had not that time that was requisite to effect his designs by leisure and
dissimulation, and had been prevented by the sagacity and quickness of the
Guises, wherefore, except his own dependents, and those of his Minions, all the
rest were joined some to one Faction, some to the other, and those that did
follow the Royal Authority, showed themselves very slow and cold, their minds
being amazed and affrighted by the bold attempt of the Confederates: nay, even
some of those in whom the King confided, and that had been favored and
advanced by him, were (as we have already noted) revolted to the League, as the
Sieur de Entraques, St. Luc, young Lansac, and many others; every one being
displeased at the eminent favor and singular authority of Espernon. But that
which more than any thing held him in suspense and trouble, was the fear of the
City of Paris, the Head indeed of the Kingdom, but so great and so powerful an
one, that which way soever it inclined, it had always pulled down the scale.
This City was not only united with the Confederates, but in it there was also a
particular League practiced by the Sieur de Meneville, President Nully, la
Chapelle Martell, the Sieur de Bussy, Hauteman, and other Heads of the
Citizens, whereby they had secretly armed the people, buying up Arms with great
diligence from all parts; at any price, that the City might be able to revolt
upon any occasion; and moreover, if it were necessary, to take or stay the
Kings own Person till the coming of the Army of the Confederates; toward the
raising and maintaining whereof, particular men of the City contributed three
hundred thousand Crowns to the Duke of Guise. These things being told the King
by Nicholas Poulain, Lieutenant to the Provost of the Isle of France, one of
the Confederates, had put the King in very great perplexity of mind; for
staying in Paris, he was in great danger of receiving some affront by the
inconsiderate rashness of the people, who were possessed with a belief that he
favored and protected the King of Navarre and the Hugonots; and on the other
side, going away from the City, he was certain of the revolt of it, which was
hindered only by his presence, and by the remedies which he applied every hour;
wherefore though he had called all the Soldiers of his Guards unto their
colors, and chosen five and forty trusty Gentlemen, to each of which he
allowed an hundred Crowns by the month, and their diet in the Court, who were
always to be about his Person, yet lived he in very great doubt, fear and
trouble, seeing himself upon such an unbridled horse as could not possibly be
governed.

These so weighty difficulties which on all sides seemed impossible to be
overcome, and the hope of drawing over many to the League in time unto his
party, and of loosening by his wonted arts that bond which then seemed
invincible by strength, made the King resolve to take the counsel of the Queen
his Mother, and of Bellieure, and Villeroy, which was to procure delays as much
as possibly he could; and in the end to give the League such satisfaction as
was necessary to divert the violence and force of the Confederates, and to
endeavor by art and time to disunite their Combination; experience having so
often given certain proofs, that by fighting and resistance, the forces and
dangers both at home and abroad were increased; but that by yielding and
complying those hazards might be deferred, and those imminent calamities and
miseries avoided. To this end the Queen undertook the charge of treating with
the Duke of Guise, and the other Princes of the League; and being attended by
the Marshall de Retz, Monsieur de Brulart Secretary of State, and Monsieur de
Lansac, she went to Espernay in Champagne, ten Leagues from Chalons, to confer
with the Lords of Guise and the Cardinal of Bourbon. Thither also came the
Confederate Lords, and without further delay they began to treat of the means
of an Accommodation. But the intentions of the parties were so different, that
they could hardly come to any conclusion; for the Queen minded only the gaining
of time, as well to give the King leisure to arm and prepare himself, and the
Swisses to draw near to Paris, as to give opportunity to those engines which
were secretly set on work to disunite the League; whereas on the other side,
the Guises taking very good heed to each of those particulars, pressed for
speedy expedition, either of an advantageous Agreement, or of a resolute War:
Wherefore though the Queen labored very much both by her authority and
persuasions, yet could she obtain no more but a truce for four days, in which
space she dispatched Monsieur Myron her chief Physician to the King, to bring
back his resolution touching the Accommodation. The time of truce being
expired, the Queen drew nearer, and advanced as far as Charry, a place
belonging to the Bishop of Chalons, whither the Confederate Lords came also to
meet her: she let them know, that the King by Myron the Physician, had sent her
Order to assure them, that in matters of Religion he was of the same mind with
them, and that he desired the security of the Catholic Faith, the extirpation
of Heresy, and one only Religion and Belief in his Kingdom no less than they;
but that to attain unto that end, he neither had sufficient Forces, nor money
enough to maintain the War in so many places; and that therefore they that
showed themselves so zealous of it, ought to propound the means of gathering
Armies together, and of providing for their pay and maintenance. The King hoped
by this proposition to put the Confederates in as great confusion as he had
done the Deputies at Blois in the same manner; for there was no doubt but the
charges would necessarily fall on the Clergy, and upon the Commons, a thing
contrary to the Proposition of the League, which was to ease the grievances of
the Kingdom; and in these Armies that were to be raised in several parts, it
was necessary to employ all the Nobility, to the burden and obligation as well
of their Estates as Persons: wherefore it was not very easy for the Duke of
Guise and the other Lords to resolve this doubt, and thereupon to the great
contentment of the Queen they took three days time to give their answer. After
many consultations, they determined at last to shun the encounter of those
means and advertisements which the King required, lest they should discover
express falsehood in those promises which they made at the propounding of the
League, and draw upon themselves the hatred of those burdens and grievances
which at that present lay upon the Kings own person; and therefore making use
of both Force and Authority, they answered the Queen resolutely, that it
concerned not them to provide those means; but that the King, who was conscious
to himself of his own Forces, ought to find them, and that without further
delay they would presently have a Declaration and an Edict against the
Hugonots, security for themselves, and a certainty that the War should not be
deferred; toward which they proffered those Forces they had then in readiness;
or else they would make their Army to march whither they thought most
convenient for the end of their enterprise: and indeed they dispatched the Duke
of Mayenne at that very instant with part of their Forces, and with Commission
to meet the Kings Swisses, and if he thought fit, to fight with them presently.
At this resolute determination the Queen demanded eight days time to give the
King notice of it, and to know his pleasure; and the Duke of Guise, who had
need to meet his German Soldiers, which (as he was informed) were near to
Verdun, was easily persuaded to consent unto it. But whilst he goes to meet
them, and to take order for their coming in, the Queen watching all
opportunities, employed Luigi Davila the Authors elder Brother, was favored by
the Queen Mother, and esteemed by the King, who made use of him in the managing
of affairs, and of the War in those times.
Luigi Davila a Cyprian, who was a near attendent of hers, to work with
Francisco Circarssi a Gentleman of the same Country, belonging to the Cardinal
of Bourbon, to try if she could by that means remove and separate him from the
combination of the Lords of Guise, which business being followed and redoubled
many times whilst the Treaty lasted, the old Sieur de Lansac chief of the
Queens Gentlemen was cunningly engaged in it; and on the Cardinals part, the
Sieur de Rubempre himself, who being of a haughty mind, and not having that
authority in the League which he thought he deserved, began to apply his mind
to a reconciliation with the King and his Party; and in the end Monsieur de
Lansac conferred with the Cardinal himself, under color of a complemental
visit. They urged many reasons to him; in substance, that he might take notice
that he was not Head of the League, as befitted the quality of his Person, and
the honor of his Blood, but a Subject and Vassal to the passions and
affections of the Duke of Guise, and the other Lords of his Family: that the
business was not any interest at all of Religion, since the King having offered
to give them all manner of satisfaction in matters of Faith, his offer was not
accepted; but that it was now manifest and public to all the World, that under
color of Religion they prosecuted their private ends and interests: that it
was not fit for a man of so great zeal and integrity, and one that was placed
in the most eminent dignities of the holy Church, to serve for a stale to the
pretensions of the Lords of Lorain, and to give color to a most open
Rebellion, against the Person of a King that was as well a Catholic, as
legitimate and natural: But that it was much more unfit for him, being first
Prince of the Blood, to be the instrument whereby the ancient Enemies of his
House should extinguish the remainder of the Royal Family: That he should
consider that he being old, and of an age not likely to have children, the
House of Bourbon would be quite extinct by the suppression of his Nephews; that
it seemed very strange to every good man, that he who all the rest of his
lifetime had been an Author of peace and concord, how having as it were one
foot in the grave, should make himself the Author of War, Blood, Discord and
Insurrection: That it would be much more acceptable to God, and much more
commendable among men, that he being united with the King to the same holy end,
should endeavor to withdraw his Nephews from the way of perdition, and rather
to reconcile them peaceably to the Church, than to suppress and bury them in
the total ruin and destruction of the Kingdom: That he should not doubt nor
suspect the reality of the Kings intentions, who both openly and privately was
always a Catholic, and affectionate unto Religion; for as concerning the
Hugonots, he would send him a blank to write what he would; so for his own
particular, he would always honor and respect him as a Father, being wont to
say, that amongst all that great multitude of the Confederates, there was not
one honest man but the Cardinal of Bourbon. These Reasons alleged and revolved
in a mind full of right intentions, and uncorrupted ends, were not far from
effecting what they aimed at, nor from bringing him to a thought of re-uniting
and reconciling himself to the King, by means of the Queen, whom he held in the
highest veneration: but while he was in doubt, having as a man of no great
reach nor policy, given some suspicion of it to the Cardinal of Guise, in the
discourses and consultations that passed, the Duke of Guise was presently
recalled, whose spirit did animate the whole body, and move every member of
that Union: and though by his authority he settled the Cardinal of Bourbon's
resolution; yet seeing that the Swisses advanced daily, and that the Duke of
Mayenne had but small Forces to oppose them, Whilst the Cardinal of Bourbon,
Head of the League, stands wavering to reconcile himself to the King, the Duke
of Guise makes a specious Proposition of Agreement.
and considering that to make up the Pay of his German Soldiers great store of
money was necessary, to the furnishing whereof, the Spaniards concurred not
with that readiness that he imagined; for being involved in the War of
Flanders, they could hardly supply so vast an expense; and having found at
last, that the disuniting of the League was attempted by secret practices, the
members whereof were already wavering, he judged that delay was his mortal
Enemy as he had ever thought, and therefore desiring to put a fair gloss upon
his taking up of Arms to justify his ends, and to take away those scruples
which had been sowed in the Cardinal of Bourbon's mind, and which already were
not only divulged, but also had taken deep impression in many others, he took a
resolution to propound a very plausible offer, That he desired nothing but an
Edict against the Hugonots, that no other Religion but the Catholic should be
permitted in the Kingdom, that they should be incapable of all Offices and
Dignities of what kind soever; and that there might be an assurance they should
be persecuted with Arms, renouncing all other security and conditions; and
offering also himself to lay down all Offices and Governments possessed by him
or any of his, to take away all suspicion of cavillous interests. This
Proposition wrought two wonderful effects to his advantage; one that it
confirmed the Cardinal of Bourbon, whose loss would have taken away the
greatest foundation of the League; the other, that it brought the King to a
necessity of accepting the Proposition, lest he should manifestly put himself
on the wrong side, and absolutely alienate also the remaining part of the
Catholics, who were already something mistrustful of him; and as concerning
other securities and advantages of his Family, he knew very well, if the King
made War with the Hugonots, he must of necessity reunite himself with the
Catholics, and with the House of Guise, that had all the Forces in their
hands; and that he must be so far from consenting, that they should lay down
their Offices and Governments, that he should be forced to give them yet
others, and confer the chief Commands of the Armies upon them; and in
conclusion, he saw that the whole perfection of his designs would necessarily
follow upon the War with the Hugonots, and it was so true, that the War with
the Hugonots and his Greatness were firmly linked together, that he was always
able with mavelous opportunities to advance his own Enterprises, in such
manner as no other interest should appear outwardly, save that of Religion. So
this last determination being set down in writing, they presented it to the
Queen the ninth day of June, subscribed by the Cardinal of Bourbon and the Duke
of Guise: the Queen was not much astonished at it* having long ago foreseen
that the Heads of the League could not take a more expedient resolution: but
she dispatched away the aforesaid Myron to the King with the same Declaration*
giving him to understand, that it was necessary for him to consent unto it in
matter of Religion, to avoid the present danger, and to disunite the Forces of
the Confederates, for that in the execution there would afterward be so many
difficulties interposed, that time it self would bring sufficient opposition:
but that by not consenting to it, he should assure himself, besides the
universal hatred and detestation, to be quickly oppressed and forced to harder
conditions, since that the Duke of Mayenne was already gone to hinder the entry
of the Swisses, and while they were retarded, the Duke of Guise making haste to
join with his Germans, would be upon his march toward Paris with thirty
thousand fighting men, where nothing else was to be expected, but the manifest
Rebellion of the City, and the general Revolt of the whole Kingdom, which would
constrain him to flee to those places that were possessed by the Hugonots, of
whose good will and Forces he could not assure himself. Thus the doubt of
retarding the Swisses troubled both Parties; for on the one side the Queen
feared the Duke of Mayenne would be able to stop them; and on the other, the
Duke of Guise feared lest he should not be strong enough to oppose them; which
reciprocal fear persuaded both Parties to consent unto a Peace. The King having
received the Declaration, and the Council of the Queen, sent Secretary Villeroy
presently unto her, and a little while after the Duke d' Espernon, to the end
that the Agreement might be received and established with the best conditions
that could be. Wherefore the Queen being come to Nemours with the Princes of
the League, they concluded upon these Conditions the seventh day of July.

That the King should prohibit any other Religion in his Kingdom, except the
Roman Catholic: That he should banish all the Heretic Preachers out of his
Confines: That he should ordain that Hugonots should be punished with
confiscation of their Estates during life: That he should with all speed
denounce a War against them, wherein such men should be made Commanders as the
League could confide in: That he should abolish those Courts instituted in the
Parliaments, and established in favor of the Hugonots; and should not permit
that any should be capable of any Place or public Office, till he had first
made profession of his Faith, conformable to the Roman Religion: That the Duke
of Guise, Mayenne, Aumale, Mercure, and Elbeuf, besides their ordinary
Government, should keep the Cities of Chalons, Thoul, Verdun, St. Desire,
Reims, Soissons, Dijon, Beaume, Rue in Picardy, Dinan, and Coneg in Bretagne.
That a certain number of These which the Author calls Harquebuziers on
horseback, differed from our Dragoons, in that they did serve both on foot and
on horseback; and it is conceived by men experienced in War, that they were the
same with those which they call Argol^ttiers.
Harquebuzers on horseback should be paid, to be Guards for the Cardinals of
Bourbon and Guise, and for the Dukes of Guise, Mercure, Mayenne, Aumale, and
Elbeuf: That the Duke of Guise should have a hundred thousand Crowns paid unto
him, to build a Citadel in Verdun; and that two Regiments of Infantry should
be paid which belonged to the League, under the commands of Sacramoro Birago
and St. Paul: That two hundred thousand Crowns should be disbursed to pay the
German Forces raised by the League, with which they should presently be sent
away; and that they should be forgiven and remitted one hundred and ten
thousand Ducats which they had taken of the Kings Revenue, and spent for the
advancement of the Union. By which Capitulations it appeared plainly to those
that had any knowledge of the affairs that passed, that not compassion of the
people to ease them of their Grievances had contracted the League, but the care
the Great Ones had of their own security, and their desire to see the party of
their Enemies suppressed and extinguished; though the respect and color of
Religion was always strictly joined with them; for that number of Cities and
strong places obtained for the security of the Guises, showed plainly they had
discovered the Kings secret intentions; and seeing that the Hugonots had their
places of security, which hindered their destruction, they thought to obtain the
like for their Party, to the end that it might be no less difficult to abase
and suppress them, than it proved to be to bring the King of Navarre and the
rest of his party into subjection; and the War which they made to be resolved
on against the Hugonots, though it were chiefly procured to root out the
Divisions in Religion, did nevertheless contain also at the same time the ruin
of the Princes of Bourbon, and of their friends and adherents.

The Agreement being concluded and established, the Duke of Guise, with the
Cardinal his Brother, and with the Cardinal of Bourbon went to the King to S.
More near Paris, and the Conditions being confirmed, the Duke of Guise, after
many demonstrations of confidence, returned to his Governments.

Whilst the Peace was negotiating between the King and the League, the King of
Navarre was brought into a great perplexity, foreseeing the certainty of that
Accommodation, and that all the Forces of the Catholics would be united
together against him, to suppress and destroy his Party: He had from the first
by means of the Sieurs de Clervant and Chassincourt his Agents at the Court,
proffered his Forces to assist the King, exhorting him to join himself
sincerely with him, and to try the fidelity and readiness of the Hugonots; and
in the end had protested, that he could not stand lingering on that manner, to
expect that thunderbolt of ruin which he foresaw was provided against him: But
the King by Letters under his own hand, and by many very effectual persuasions
used to his Agents, had exhorted him to continue quiet, and not to make a
greater disturbance, assuring him, that he would never consent to any thing
that should violate that Peace, or that could cause his ruin: and indeed, such
was the Kings intention at the first; but after necessity had brought him to
seek for Peace with the Confederates, the King of Navarre, who was no unskilful
Judge of businesses, easily perceived that all that storm would fall upon his
Person and upon his Party: wherefore desiring to make his cause plausible, The
King of Navarre's Declaration.
and his reasons known for the furthering hi^ other designs, he published a
Declaration at Bergerac upon the tenth of June, wherein bitterly complaining
that he was called a relapsed Heretic, a Persecutor of the Church, a Disturber
of the State, and a Capital Enemy of the Catholics, to exclude him by those
names from the succession of the Kingdom, he showed he was constrained to
satisfy the world, and particularly the Princes of Christendom, but above all
the King his Sovereign, and the people of France, that these were calumnies
thrown upon him by his Enemies, who out of an ambition to exalt themselves, had
under pretense of taking Arms against him and the rest of the Reformed
Religion, prosecuted the way of bringing the State to miserable confusion,
having in effect taken Arms against the King himself, and against the Crown,
and contrary to the order of nature, and the Laws of the Kingdom of France,
declared one to be first Prince of the Blood, and Successor to the Crown,
arrogating that authority to themselves, which belonged to the States General
of the Kingdom. That he could be no ways accounted a Relapser, having never
changed his opinion; for although out of a just fear, (which may fall into the
breast of the stoutest man) and being forced by manifest violence, he had sent
an Ambassador to the Pope; yet as soon as ever he recovered his liberty, he had
also declared that he had not changed his Religion; neither could he be called
an Heretic, holding (by the example of many others) opinions not yet decided,
and having ever offered, as he did likewise at the present, to submit himself
to the instructions of learned men, and to the determination of a Council
lawfully assembled; that he was falsely slandered to have perscuted the
Catholics, having always cherished many of them; not only keeping them near
his own Person, but making use of them in the principal Offices of his Estate
and Family, and that he had left the Clergymen in his own State, and in every
other place where he commanded, in the peaceable enjoyment of their Revenues,
and exercise of the Roman Religion. That if at several times he had taken Arms,
he had done it without intention to disturb the State, and always in a
defensive way, which Nature teaches every body to do, having seen how
inhumanely they were handled who had embraced the Reformed Religion. That to
oppose the persecutions which were continually made ready against him, and not
to treat a League against the King, he had sent into England, Denmark and
Germany, with no other aim, but to draw from thence some relief for the
preservation of his own liberty. That the resolution not to give up the
Fortresses (as they had lately been denied to the Duke of Espernon) was taken
with the universal consent of all his Party, because not only those suspicions
for which they were granted, were not taken away, but were at that time much
increased, as well by the great preparations for War which were made by those
of the League, as by their particular earnestness wherewith they demanded other
strong places of the King, besides those which they already held; not as they
alleged to secure themselves against those of the contrary Religion, who would
never have offended nor injured them, and could scarce defend themselves from
their evil usage, not having so many places in their hands as those of the
House of Guise had Provinces under their Government, who sharing all the Kings
favors and graces among themselves, had commanded Armies, besieged Cities,
given Battle, distributed Offices at their pleasure, and by that means had
gained followers, revenged their own injuries, and managed their own interest
at the charges of the Crown, and not with a pretext of Religion would attempt
against the Kings Person, and govern the State; That every one might plainly
know how unfitly they demanded new Fortresses for their security; yet to take
away that pretense also from them, he and the Prince of Conde his Cosen,
though they ought rather to endeavor to strengthen, than go about to weaken
themselves, did both offer at that present to leave those that were in their
hands, as likewise the Governments which either of them held; provided the
Lords of Guise would do the like by those that they had taken, and also by
their Governments, whereby he said the opinion of that danger would be taken
away, which his Enemies scattered abroad, that he with those of the Religion
would disturb the State: But every one might easily judge whether it were more
likely that Servants of the Family, or those of the Blood should have ends to
disturb it; and which of them were like to be more affectionate to their
Prince; and whether Strangers could be better affected to the Kingdom of France
than natural Frenchmen; that whosoever would know the difference which had
ever been between his Family and that of Guise, touching the general good of
the people, should call to memory the things which each of them had done, and
he should find those of the House of Bourbon had never been Inventers of new
Gabelles, had never injured the Nobility, nor wrested and violated Justice, as
the Predecessors of the Heads of the League had continually done, and with new
taxes, with the sale of Places, and with the confusion of Offices, many whereof
had been transferred into their own House, others sold in the time of Henry the
Second, and Francis the Second; and with bringing in the alienation of the
Temporal Revenues of Churches, had labored to fulfill their own desires under
color of making War for Religion. That he had never stirred up Wars as his
Enemies had done; but had barely defended himself, and upon all occasions had
accepted such conditions of Peace as the King had been pleased to give him; but
that it was a thing worthy of more consideration, that he had offered himself
to follow the King in his important affairs, and particularly when he had been
called to the Dominion of the States of Flanders; whereas the Heads of the
League quite contrary had opposed the business, and had made an occasion of so
great glory be overslipt, and an acquisition of so great consequence to be
neglected. That though he could not with reason think of the Succession of the
Crown, because of the Kings youth, to whom he wished issue; yet could he not
choose but be much troubled to see himself so unworthily dealt withal by his
Enemies, who having molested him in his Governments, and seized upon Cities and
Fortresses in the midst of them, now turning themselves against his Life and
Honor, ceased not to persecute him with malicious practices, to make an
impression in the minds of those that were unexperienced, that he was unworthy
and incapable to succeed in the Crown; and to draw their designs to a
conclusion, would (without taking any notice of the Kings youth) make
unseasonable provision against those accidents which they imagined might come
to pass after his death. At last he demanded leave of the King with all respect
and submission, to give the Lie (as he did) to all those that had injured and
slandered him in their Declarations, excepting the Cardinal his Uncle, and
offered himself to decide the quarrel with the Duke of Guise, he being the Head
of that Party, by fighting with him single, or two, ten, or twenty of a side,
with more or less number, as the Duke of Guise himself pleased, offering, if
they were to be more than one, that his Cousin the Prince of Conde should be
with him, not desiring in that case to stand upon any disproportion between
their qualities, since they were neither moved to that resolution by ambition
nor hatred, but only for the service of God, to free their Lord the King and
the people of France from those miseries which War does necessarily produce,
and by deciding that difference at once, to leave the Kingdom in peace, and the
Kings mind in quiet, without disturbing it any further. Wherefore he beseeched
the King to name the Field in any part of his Kingdom; and if the Duke of Guise
should think all the Kingdom suspected, he offered to go out of it into any
place that might be secure to both parties, which the Duke himself might make
choice of, and to end that controversy with those Weapons that were commonly
used among Gentlemen of honor.

The King of Navarre endeavored by this Declaration not only to justify his
Cause, and to blemish that of the Confederates; but also finding himself
inferior in strength, though not at all in courage, he sought to reduce the
War to a private Duel; which if it took effect, he was ready to put himself
upon the encounter, thereby reducing his fortune now half desperate, by the
opposition of so mighty Adversaries, unto some equality: and if the offer was
not accepted, he knew it would be but small reputation for the Duke of Guise
and the Forces of the League, and a means to draw the peoples inclination very
much to him, who would praise his Generosity in exposing his own life to
danger, to divert the general distractions of a War. But the Duke of Guise
knowing the art of his Enemies, and aspiring to destroy him by so much
advantage of strength, without being obliged to endanger his own life, would
not answer the Declaration, lest he should be fain to accept or refuse the
Duel, but made some third persons answer in many little Pamphlets, that no Lord
of the Catholic party did profess enmity to the King of Navarre for private
occasions; but that what they did was for the safety of Religion, and their own
Consciences; wherefore it was not fit to reduce the public Cause to a
particular Duel, an effect very contrary to the end they had propounded to
themselves; and with other such like reasons they opposed those alleged by the
King of Navarre; who being advertised of the conclusion of peace between the
King and the Lords of the League, writ Letters to the King, which were
published in print, grievously complaining, that whilst he to obey his
Majesty's command, laid upon him by Letters under his own hand, had forborne to
take Arms, or to undertake any new enterprise, an Agreement was established
with his Enemies, with condition to break the Edicts of Peace already
published, and (contrary to promise already made) again to begin the War
against the Reformed Religion. That he earnestly exhorted and besought the King
to consider, that to comply with the passions of those that rebelled against
him, he took Arms against his good and faithful Subjects and Vassals, and that
he should foresee how the destruction of his whole Kingdom was contained in
that War which was preparing against him: but that if he did persist to
contrive his ruin, he could do no less by the Law of Nature than defend
himself, and he hoped that God for the justness of his Cause would deliver and
preserve him from the persecutions of men, and one day make his innocence
manifest to the whole World. Besides this, he writ other Letters to the
Nobility, others to the People, and others to the Parliaments, excusing
himself, blaming the League, and laboring to make appear, that he having
punctually observed the conditions of Peace, was now contrary to them unjustly
assaulted After which Declarations, having called unto him the Prince of Conde,
and the Mareshal d' Anville, whom he knew to be no less persecuted than the
Hugonots, they established with common consent all that was to be done for
their own defense, and the maintenance of those places which they held of their
party; and because they already knew by so many proofs, that nothing was more
available for their defense, than the supplies of men out of Germany, which
diverted the power and forces of their Enemies into very remote places, they
presently made a dispatch to the Protestant Princes, to treat and conclude a
strong Levy; and that charge was undertaken by the Duke of Bouillon, (who as in
his own inheritance derived from his Ancestors, had settled himself in Sedan, an
exceeding strong place upon the Confines of Champagne and Lorain) and by
Monsieur de Chastillon, Son to the Admiral de Coligny, who was Governor of
Mompellier for the Hugonots, and was now secretly gone out of Languedoc
disguised unto Geneva.

In the mean time the King, in private with his Mother and the Cabinet-Council,
consulted about the manner of executing the Agreement with the League;
Secretary Villeroy, with whom Bellieure and Ville-quier concurred, was of
opinion that the King had no better nor surer way to extinguish the combustions
of his Kingdom, and frustrate the designs of the Guises, than sincerely to
embrace the War with the Hugonots, to manifest to all the World his zeal toward
the Catholic Religion, and the ill will he bore to the Calvinists; to put
Offices into the hands of the most flourishing Nobility of his Kingdom; to
settle the form of Petitions, of granting favors, and of the disposal of
moneys after the old way observed by his Predecessors; and to satisfy their
designs in particular, who were alienated from him out of discontent, because
they were not able to do any thing at Court: they showed, that this was the way
to disfurnish the League of all pretenses, to draw the applause and love of the
people to himself; who because they saw him averse from those ends, did now
adore and follow the Lords of Guise as Defenders of Religion, and Restorers of
an indifferent equality, and of the general quietness; that it was necessary at
last to take away that worst Schism of discords, sowed first and principally by
the Hugonots, and to reunite unto himself all his Subjects and Vassals in the
same charity, in the same Religion, for the same unanimous universal end; and
in conclusion, that he could neither more honorably, nor more easily ruin the
League, than by doing well, carrying himself sincerely, and showing himself
altogether contrary to what the Heads thereof had divulged of him: for by that
upright manner of proceeding he might cross more designs, and take away more
followers from the Guises in one day, than he could do by cunning dissimulation
and politic inventions in the whole course of his life, though it should last
a hundred years. The Queen Mother inclined, though warily, to this advice; for
knowing her self to be already reported a favourer of the Guises, and a
persecuter of the King of Navarre, for her Daughters sake, she would not show
her self partial on the Catholic side; and being angry, though secretly, that
the King, as it were not trusting her absolutely, had sent the Duke of Espernon
to Nemours, for the conclusion of the business negotiated with the League, she
was very reserved in showing her opinion, perhaps doubting she should lose her
authority with her Son, or as some said, desiring to see him entangled in those
troubles, that he might once again acknowledge the helpful hand, wherewith she
assisting in the Government with prudence and moderation, had so often withheld
the imminent ruin of the Crown.

But the King was otherwise inclined, and utterly averse from the opinion of
his Counselors. The reasons that persuaded him to the contrary were two; one,
that being to make War in good earnest against the Hugonots, it could not choose
but be both long and difficult, it was necessary to put Offices into the hands
of the Guises, which would increase their power, and gather them Dependents;
besides the glory of the Victory would be attributed to them, it being evident
that they had constrained him by force to consent unto the War; the other, that
the Hugonot party being destroyed, which bridled their power, and hindered the
excessive strength of the Guises, he should be left a prey unto their Force,
which would then have no restraint; nor would they ever be without pretenses to
take up Arms, though that of Religion were taken away; it not being likely that
such ready wits, and such daring spirits should want other inventions. These
were the reasons alleged by the King; but to them were secretly joined his
most bitter hatred, nourished a long time, and now much more incensed against
the House of Guise, his inclination to his Minions, whose grace and power his
heart would not suffer him to abase; his covetous desire of disposing the
wealth and revenues of the Kingdom his own way, to satisfy the prodigality of
his mind; and the continuation of his old resolution to destroy both Factions
in the end, by keeping them up against one another. Nor, to say the truth, was
he much to be blamed; for having seen the boldness of the Guises, and of so
many others their Abettors and Followers, he could not bring his mind to
increase their Authority, and augment their Power again: and on the other side,
to deprive himself of the use of those he had bred up for his purpose, and of
the assistance of his greatest Confidents, with evident danger to be exposed to
their discretion, since they might easily find out other occasions to prosecute
the course of their designs already begun. Wherefore after some uncertainty, he
leaned to the opinion of the Duke d' Espernon, the Mareshal de Retz, and the
Abbot del Been, (who being a Florentine by extraction, and Son to the Nurse of
Charles the Ninth, was by the quickness of his wit risen to very great trust
and favor) resolved in appearance to satisfy the Capitulations made with the
League, but cunningly to interrupt and hinder the execution of them; for though
he had formerly endeavored to suppress the Hugonots, nor could their
preservation please him; yet now he would not seem to make War against them at
the request of others, and constrained by his own Vassals; nor suffer the
honor and glory thereof to redound wholly to the Lords of Guise.

There arises such a discord between the Duke d' Espernon and Secretary
Villeroy, as in process of time produced many evil effects.
This Counsel had not only an unfortunate event, (as for the most part those
actions use to have, which go in the new deceitful paths of subtle inventions
out of the beaten road) but it had also a difficult and unlucky beginning; for
from it there presently arose a difference and distrust even amongst the Kings
Counselors themselves; the Duke of Espernon jealous of his Masters favors,
and desirous to hold fast his own greatness, beginning to hate and persecute
Monsieur de Villeroy, by whom he had his first beginnings and instructions in
the Court, and with whom he had till then lived in very great friendship;
taxing him to have been corrupted with money and promises by the Duke of Guise,
and that he held secret intelligence with him, and therefore was author of that
advice, which persuaded the King to extirpate the Hugonots, to reduce matters
of Government to their ancient form, and to reunite himself sincerely with the
Catholics of the League; which signified nothing else but the abasing of the
Greatness and Authority of the Favorites. And that distaste indeed took birth
from the time that the Duke had hindered the marriage of Alincourt, Villeroy's
Son, to Mademoiselle de Maure, a very rich Heir of that Family, to match her
with a Kinsman of his own called Monsieur de Bellegarde, Son to Monsieur de
Terms; for which cause Alincourt being offended, sided with the Duke de
Ioyeuse, and by him was made Cornet of his Company of Gens d' Arms; and
afterward that discontent was continued in the Duke of Espernon, by having
seen the King approve of the demolishing of the Citadel at Lions, at the
persuasions of Villeroy, (as he said) though indeed it was to draw the Sieur de
Mandelot to his Party: Yet these reciprocal distastes had been but secret, and
some hope there was they might wear away, till upon occasion of this advice
they began to discover themselves, and it passed so far, that the Duke of
Espernon not only began to hate the High Chancellor Chyverny, and the Sieur de
Ville-quier, the Kings old Favorites, and well-deserving Servants; but he
began also to sow suspicions of the Queen Mother, as though by ancient
inclination she were affectionate to the Lords of the House of Guise, and
sought by fomenting the Commotions of Civil War, to keep the liberty of her Son
in a perpetual Wardship, that being forced by such streights and di^ficulties,
he might make use of her for the Government and maintenance of his Kingdom.
These jealousies and that discord breaking forth in that conjuncture, which
required union and concord, in process of time made the King lose a great part
of his best and wisest Servants, and necessitated a great many others to
incline to favor the Duke of Guise, by reason of their hatred to Espernon, and
their desire to see him abased; and which imported most of all, they were the
cause that the King gave not so much credit as he was wont to the Counsels of
his Mother; and that made her often to hold her peace, and often to comply
against her own opinion, lest she should alienate her Son utterly from her.

But the King spinning on the thread of his design, The Kings Edict against the
Hugonots*
appeared solemnly on the nineteenth of July in the Parliament, and caused a
decree to be published, wherein, revoking all other Edicts, made at several
times, in favor of the Hugonots, he prohibited any other Religion, except the
Roman Catholic, in all Towns and places of his Kingdom; he banished all the
Preachers and Ministers of the pretended reformed Religion out of his confines,
within a month after the publication, and commanded, that all his Vassals
should, within the term of six months, conform themselves to live according to
the Rites of the holy Church, and to make public profession of the Catholic
Faith; or if they would not do so, they should depart the Kingdom, and be
effectually gone out of his Confines within the said term; which six months
being expired, the Hugonots should be proceeded against with capital
punishments, and confiscation of their Estates, as Heretics and Enemies of the
public Peace; and those of the aforesaid Religion should be declared incapable
to attain to, or hold any Degree, Office, or Dignity in the Kingdom; that all
Chambres mi-parties and tri-parties should be taken away, which had been
established by the Edicts of Peace in their favor; and that they should
restore all places, granted to them for their security, and give them up
without dispute or delay into the Kings obedience; that all Princes, Peers,
Officers of the Crown, Parliaments, Governors, and other Ministers, should be
obliged to swear to the performance of this Decree, which should be
irrevocable, and perpetually to be observed. At the Kings coming out from the
Parliament, he was received by the People with joyful cries, to show their
satisfaction and contentment at the Edict which had been published; but he,
with a troubled countenance, seemed to take small delight in those
Acclamations, which were made to flatter him out of season; and it was observed
by many, that contrary to his ordinary affability, he neither daigned to return
any salutation to the Provost des Merchands, nor to the other Heads and
Officers of the People of Paris; which he doing, to show he cared little for
their volubility and inconstancy, and because he would do nothing to comply
with others, gave matter to the Guisards to exclaim, that inwardly he favored
the Hugonots, and that by mere force he was drawn against his own Genius, by
the zeal and industry of the Lords of the House of Lorrain, to denounce War
against them.

The King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, The Hugonots Answer to the Kings
Edict.
and the Marescal d' Anville being met together at St. Paul, answered the
King's Edict with a new protestation; and showed, that this was an unjust
persecution, caused by them who had so often disturbed the Peace; and that it
was neither the sincere will of the King, nor of the Queen his Mother, whose
clemency and upright intentions were known to all; and that the King having
formerly declared all those to be Rebels, who took up Arms without his
Commission; the Lords of Guise were fallen into that offense, having taken
Cities, and done acts of hostility, not only against the Orders, but even
against the Person of the King himself; and that therefore they knowing them to
be, and using them as Rebels, had taken Arms against them, their Adherents, and
Accomplices, for the defense of their l^wful King, and of the Crown, for the
safety of their own lives, and liberty of their Consciences, receiving all
those into their protection who would stay peaceably at their own houses,
without lending any consent to that Conspiracy, although they were of the Roman
Religion.

I remember, that when this Protestation was brought unto the King, and
divulged in Paris, Louis Sieur de Lansac, an old Cavalier, full of experience
of things past, discoursing in the Louvre of those present affairs, with his
wonted eloquence, and the curiosity of his hearers, said openly, without any
respect unto the League, That the Hugonots had at last gained the Victory: for
whereas at first they were cried out upon for disturbers of the Kingdom,
surprizers of Cities, stirrers up of the People, and Enemies of the supreme
Prince; now they, with reason, did object the same things to the Catholics,
and convince them of the same crimes; which were so much the less excusable in
the League, by how much they were wont, more then all others, to exclaim and
make a noise about the Insurrections and Conspiracies of the Hugonots: and, if
they deserved to be blamed, for having contracted a League with the English,
the perpetual Enemies of France; the Catholics did not deserve to be praised
for having made a Confederacy with the Spaniards: That the King of Navarre was
a better Penman then was necessary for a Soldier; but, that if to his present
reasons, he had added the declaring of himself a Catholic, he would have made
the League be utterly condemned as rebellious and seditious.

But neither the King of Navarr's Reasons, nor the opinions of the wisest men,
did cool the universal ardor of the People, and particularly of the Parisians,
who were set upon the ruin of the Hugonots: rather they began to blame the
King, saying, that the term of six months was too long and favorable, desiring
to see the War kindled, and begun without delay; which being known unto the
King, who was desirous to put them out of that fantastical humor, and make
them see they labored for their own disadvantage; The King calling the Heads
of the City of Paris together, demands moneys for the War, which the Catholics
labored for against the Hugonots.
upon the eleventh day of August he sent for the Prevost des Merchands, the two
first Presidents of the Parliament, and the Dean of the Cathedral of Paris unto
the Louvre, and particularly desired the Cardinal of Guise to be there present.
As soon as they were come together, he began openly to express great joy and
satisfaction, that he was so well advised; and that after having had patience
so long time, at last, moved by the counsel of his servants, especially of
those that were there present, he had recalled the Edict of Peace formerly
established with the Hugonots: but if he had been a great while resolving, it
had not been for want of affection toward the Catholic Religion; but because
having so often proved the difficulties of War, he could not, at the very first
imagine, that this last resolution could be more easily executed then the rest;
that that consideration had so long withheld him, and did so still, foreseeing
the great inconveniences this War would bring to the State in general, and to
every one in particular* yet nevertheless seeing himself favored and
accompanied by so many persons, of whose fidelity he was assured, and knowing
they persevered so cheerfully to the execution of that work, he rejoiced at it,
and also gave them thanks, praying them to examine with him the best means of
bringing that advice, which they themselves had given him unto a happy issue;
that therefore he represented unto them, what Forces he did intend to raise,
and with what foundation that War ought to be begun; that he would have three
Armies, one in Guienne, another near his own Person, and the third to hinder
foreign Forces from entering into the Kingdom, which (whatsoever some would
persuade him) he knew certainly were already prepared to march: that it would
not be time to think of the War, when the enemies were upon them, nor to make
peace when they had made themselves the strongest; that he had always had
great difficulties in breaking the Edicts of Peace, but he found greater
difficulties in beginning the War; and therefore, that every one should think
well what they had to do, and that it would be too late to cry out for Peace,
when the Mills of Paris were on fire; that for his own part, though he had
received the counsel of others, against his own opinion, yet was he resolved to
spare nothing that belonged to him, and that he was ready to strip himself to
the very shirt, for the maintenance of that War; that since they were not
content with the Agreement of Peace, it was needful they should assist him in
the expenses of the War; that he would not ruin himself alone, and that it was
fit every private person should bear his part of those incommodities, which
before he had felt alone; and turning toward the first President, he commended
him very much for his great affection toward the Catholic Religion, which he
had well observed in a long eloquent Speech he made when the Edict was revoked,
but that it was reasonable, he and all his Company should consider the
necessity of Affairs, which were such, as being forced to extraordinary
courses, he must be fain to leave the ordinary ones; and therefore entreated
them, there might be no more mention made to him of their pensions, which he
should not be able to pay as long as the War continued: then turning toward
the Prevost des Merchands, he told him, that the people of his City of Paris
had showed him great demonstrations of joy for the breaking of the Edict of
Peace, that therefore it was fit they should assist him in the execution of
that, which they had made him to approve of; and commanded him to call a
Council of the Citizens the next day after, and there to tell the people, that
they were not to expect the This particular is not in the French Original of
the Kings Speech, which is in a Book called Memoires de la Ligue.
Revenues of the Town should be paid any more whilst the War lasted, (that was
a kind of Bank which had been erected by the King in the late occurrences, to
have money at the rate of ten in the Hundred;) and more, that he should lay an
imposition upon the City of Two hundred thousand Crowns, which he said he stood
in need of to begin the first Month; for the maintenance of the War would
amount to Four hundred thousand Crowns a month. In the end, he turned toward
the Cardinal of Guise, saying, with something an angry countenance, that for
the first month he hoped he should be able to do well enough without the help
of the Clergy, searching to the bottom of all particular men's purses; but for
the other months, as long as the War endured, he purposed to raise moneys upon
the Church; and that in so doing he thought he should not do any thing at all
against his Conscience, nor would stand upon any leave or authority from Rome,
for they were the Heads of the Clergy who had put him upon that business;
wherefore it was reasonable they should bear part of the charge; in conclusion,
that he was resolved every one should bear his share, the Nobility and the
Kings Revenues having already been sufficiently burdened. There he held his
peace to hear their answers; and when he found they made some difficulty, he
cried out with an angry voice, It had been better then to have believed me, A
saying of Hen. the third.
and to have enjoyed the benefits of peace and quietness, then standing in a
Shop, or in a Quire, to determine Councels of War: I am very much afraid, that
going about to destroy the The Hugonot Sermons.
Presche, we shall put the Mass in great danger: But howsoever deeds are more
needful here than words. And in that manner he retired into his Chamber,
leaving them all in trouble for fear of their purses, who had been promoters of
that War.

But neither did this take off the edge of the people, stirred up continually
by their Preachers; and the Guises being a far off, murmured that the War would
never be begun, to recover those places which were possessed by the Hugonots:
Wherefore the King, lest he should destroy all that was built up, and be
brought again to those difficulties which he had overcome already, began to
think of drawing an Army together to be sent into Guienne. He was exceedingly
vexed and troubled in his mind, that he must be fain to choose Commanders for
that enterprise at the pleasure of the League; considering, that, besides
putting his own Forces into other hands, all the good success of it would be
publicly attributed to the Lords of the House of Lorrain, who, without doubt,
desired to be Generals of those Armies themselves: but as a Prince, who, by the
sharpness of his wit, would always find an evasion in the hardest and most
difficult businesses, after he had, for many days, turned the matter on every
side, he sent Guy Sieur de Lansac to the Duke of Guise, to know his intention
about those that were to command the Armies; who, after long consultation,
resolved that the Duke of Mayenne his Brother, should command the Army that was
to march into Guienne against the King of Navarre; and he reserved to himself
the charge of keeping the Confines, and hindering the passage of the Protestant
forces of Germany, thinking that to be the more difficult enterprise, and it
concerning him verymuch to be near the Court, to frame his resolutions
according to those occurrences which are often wont to happen unexpectedly.

The King having had this answer, resolved that the Marescal de Matignon, of
whose fidelity he might confidently assure himself, should command in Guienne,
as Lieutenant of that Province, under the Duke of Mayenne; that the Marshall
de Byron should go with Forces to make War in Xaintonge; and that the Duke of
Ioyeuse, with an Army, should march into Gascogne, Provinces so near, that the
Duke of Mayenne would be encompassed on every side by those Armies; and because
about that very time happened the death of Monsieur de Angoulesme Grand Prior
of France, Monsieur Angoulesme Grand Prior France being dead, the King confers
the Government of Provence upon the Duke of Espernon.
the Kings Bastard Brother, who was Governor of Provence, he conferred that
Government upon the Duke of Espernon, and resolved to send an Army thither with
him against the Hugonots; designing, by that means, not only to have many
Armies on foot, commanded by his Confidents and Favorites; but also retarding
the Duke of Mayenne's progress, by making him want Money, Ammunition, and
Victual, that the honor of those actions might fall upon them that were nearest
to him. But not to give occasion of new complaints and murmurings, the Duke of
Mayenne s Army was prepared first of all; and yet to delay the proceedings of
it, he first sent three Ambassadors to the King of Navarre to endeavor his
conversion, which were the Cardinal de Lenon-Court, one anciently bred up in
his Family, the Sieur de Poigny Knight of the St. Esprit, and President
Brulart, who went but a few days before the Duke of Mayenne's Army; whereupon
the Duchess of Vzes, a Lady of an excellent wit, taking occasion to jest, told
the King, that the state of the King of Navarre was now at the very last gasp,
and that he would certainly be converted now for fear of dying without
repentance, since that after the Ghostly Fathers, the Minister of Justice went
to put the Sentence in execution.

The Ambassadors had Commission to excuse the breach of the Edict of Peace,
with many specious reasons, to exhort the King of Navarre to return to the
obedience of the Catholic Church, to move the restoring of those places they
held into the Kings hand, to come and live near his Person, and remove all
occasions of the present War; and all this only to seek occasions to delay the
beginning of the War. The King of Navarre more resolute then ever not to return
to the Prison of the Court (as he called it) whilst the Lords of the House of
Guise had more Forces and Adherents then he had: and seeing himself in so weak
a condition, that it was necessary for his defense to make show of not being
afraid, after having, with great submission, given the King thanks for the care
he had of his Salvation, and after having modestly complained of the breach of
the Edict, in a time, when he, in all reason, should have believed, that Arms
would rather have been employed against the Seditious Abettors of the League,
then against him who was most observant of the Kings commands, and of the
Articles of Peace; he began very gravely, not only to condemn the perverse
Ambition of the Heads of the League, in contending about the Kings Succession
during his life, but also the poorness of the Duke of Guise, in not accepting
his Challenge, which might have ended the differences and enmities between them
hand to hand, without troubling the King, and disturbing the whole Kingdom: and
concluded finally, that as he would ever willingly submit himself unto a lawful
Council, and the instructions which should be sincerely given him by learned
men; so neither did it stand with his Conscience, nor with his honor, to be
brought to Mass by force, hoping that God would protect his innocence, as he
had miraculously done in former times.

At the departure of the Ambassadors, the Army advanced to enter Guienne, the
War beginning to grow hot in every place; for the Heads of the League, desiring
to see the destruction of the Hugonots, especially of the Princes of Bourbon,
made Spiritual Arms be joined with Temporal ones, thinking, by that means, to
hasten their utter suppression. Gregory XIII. dies, in 1585. Sixtus Quint^^^
succeed^^^.
Pope Gregory the XIIIth died this year, who, of a gentle nature, and averse
from violent courses, had never consented either to the open protection of the
League, or to the condemning of the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde: But
being succeeded by Felici Peretti, a Friar of the Order of S. Francis, Cardinal
of Montalto, called afterward Sixtus Quintus, a man of a fierce violent nature;
the Cardinal of Pelleve, Father Mattei, and the other Agents of the League,
ceased not to solicit and persuade him to take the Confederates into open
protection, and to Excommunicate the Princes of Bourbon; to which incitements
he consented easily, through his own inclinations, as one who having been an
Inquisitor a great part of his time, was, by custom, grown a bitter enemy to
those, that were of different opinions from the Church of Rome; wherefore, in a
Consistory held this year on the ninth day of September, he declared the King
of Navarre and the Prince of Conde to be relapsed into Heresy, excommunicated,
and made incapable of any Succession, especially that of the Kingdom of Fr^nce,
and deprived them of the States they possessed, absolving their Vassals from
their Oath, Sixtus Quintus on the ninth of September 1585. Excommunicates the
King o^ Navarre and the Prince of Conde, declaring them incapable of succession.
and Excommunicating those that should obey them for the time to come. As this
Declaration caused great joy in those of the League, persuading themselves,
that it had wholly excluded those Princes from the Crown; so did it pierce the
King very deeply, without whose privity it had been proposed in the Consistory,
subscribed by many Cardinals, posted up and published. But most part of the
French very much troubled at this unexpected Declaration, calling to mind what
had been done by Charles the Ninth, when the Monitory was made to the Queen of
Navarre, and doubting that the privileges of the Gallique Church would be
violated and trod under foot, stood expecting what the King would do; who,
being tied up by the condition of present affairs, lest he should confirm that
suspicion which was conceived of him, that he favored the Hugonots, and gave
new occasions and new pretenses to the Lords of Guise, resolved to dissemble
the business, although all the Parliament together presenting themselves unto
his Majesty, were very earnest to have the Bull torn in pieces, and those
punished who had solicited and procured it; to which request the King
answering, that he would think upon it, the matter was past over in silence,
and the Bull was neither accepted nor published in the Parliament, but only
divulged in many places of the Kingdom, by the Adherents of the League, and the
Catholic Preachers.

The King of Navarre being advertised of the Popes Declaration, did not only
procure his Appeal to be posted up in Rome it self, The King of Nava^r^ makes
the Bull of Sixtus ^uintus to be answered, and the Answer set up in Rome.
as it was upon the sixth of November in the night; but writ to all the States
of the Kingdom of France, complaining to every one of them in particular of the
injury which he reputed to have been done unto him, and exhorted them not to
suffer the rights of the succession of the Crown of France to be decided in the
Consistory of Rome. Many Volumes were written against, and in favor of this
Bu^^* by the chiefest wits of Europe; the ^easons whereof would be too long to
insert into the compendious Narration of this History; and so much the rather,
because the noise that arose faom the thundering of these Spiritual Weapons,
within a few days were drowned by the loud clashings of temporal Arms.

The End of the Seventh BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
EIGHTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
IN the Eighth Book is described the War against the Hugonots in Guienne; the
defeat of the Prince of Conde; the weak proceedings of the Duke of Mayenne
General of the Kings Army; the King of Navar's defense; the Mareschall de
Byron's advancing into Xaintogne with another Army; the siege of Maran. The
King sets forth two other Armies, one under the Duke of Joyeuse in Auvergne,
the other under the Duke of Espernon in Provence; he himself goes to Lions. The
Protestant Princes of Germany raise a mighty Army to relieve the Hugonots; they
send an Embassy unto the King of France, which increases their discontents,
and hastens the taking up of Arms. The King resolves again to try if he can
persuade the King of Navarre to turn Catholic, and come to Court; he sends the
Queen Mother into Poictou to treat with him about it: they of the League are
displeased thereat, and murmur highly, and from that occasion the union of the
Parisians is fomented, who provide and arm themselves secretly; they plot to
surprise Boulogne in Picardy, but the business is discovered, and the Town
saved, they think to seize upon the King himself, but dare not venture to do
it; and he being informed of it looks to himself, they run for assistance to
the Duke of Mayenne at his return to Paris, but he refuses to consent to it,
and departs. In the mean time, the Duke of Guise being up in Arms in
Bourgongne and Champagne, takes Ausonne, and Rocroy, and besieges Sedan. The
Queen Mother meets with the King of Navarre, but without effect; whereupon she
returns to Paris. The King seeing the obstinacy of that Prince, makes a new
Protestation, not to tolerate the Hugonots any longer: He unites himself with
the Catholic League, to oppose the German Army: He sends the Duke of Joyeuse
into Poictou against the King of Navarre, who coming unexpectedly, cuts off two
Regiments of the Hugonot Infantry. The Duke of Guise draws his Army together,
to advance against the Germans in Lorrain; the King levies Swisses, and raises
mighty Forces for the same purpose. The Count of Soissons, and the Prince of
Conty go over to the King of Navarr's party. The Duke of Lorain united with the
Duke of Guise, opposes the Entry of the Germans into his Country; they meet at
Pont S. Vincent, but give not Battle: the Germans pass on into France, the Duke
of Guise follows them; and the King with his Army comes forward, to hinder
them from joining with the King of Navarre, who advancing in the mean time to
meet the Duke of Joueuse, passes the River Drongne; the Armies face one another
at Coutras, and fight with all their Forces; the Duke of Joyeuse loses the
Battle and his life. On the other side, the Duke of Guise fights with the
Germans at Villemory and Auneau, and makes a great slaughter of them; the King
following the Victory comes up close to the Enemies Army; the Swisses yield
themselves unto him, and the remainder of the Germas disband, and betake
themselves to flight; they are followed and defeated in many places. The Duke
of Guise, in revenge, destroys the County of Mombelliart: the Sieur de la
Valette, and Colonel Alfonso Ornano do great execution upon the Hugonots in
Dauphine.

GReat was the hope the Lords of Guise conceived, that the Princes of Bourbon
prosecuted with so many plots, and so straightly beset on every side, would at
last sink under the persecution of the League; and that the Hugonot party being
destroyed, and brought to nothing, the Catholic Religion would be left alone
in the Kingdom, and their old wonted power alone in the Court: but, no less was
the constancy wherewith the King of Navarre, (unanimously followed by the other
Lords of his party) stood upon his defense; and his condition, which before was
wont to be hard and dejected, as it were gathering strength from the assaults
of the Enemies, seemed, in a manner, to rise again, to correspond at last with
the greatness of his courage, and the establishment of his designs. For his
generous resolution of challenging the head of the League to a duel, and of
proffering, with the danger of himself, to end the miseries of the Kingdom, had
won him the general favor, and applause; and the excommunication at Rome,
though in some sort it had confirmed, and approved the League, which had never
been openly received into Protection by Pope Gregory, and though it had
increased the scruples of many minds; yet on the other side, it had wrought a
resentment in the Parliaments; and in many men of the long Robe: De Rob
L^^gue.
and which imported most, had alienated and displeased the minds of many
Prelates; those as jealous of the greatness of the Crown, the succession
whereof they held ought to be decided by the Assembly of the States General of
the Kingdom, and not to depend upon the Arbitrament of the Court of Rome;
these, as defenders of those Privileges, which they pretend do belong unto the
Gallique Church, preserved (as they said) with great constancy, by the care and
diligence of their predecessors; so that the persons of the Princes of Bourbon,
were become more acceptable to many, and their reasons less disfavoured, which,
in former times, were wont bitterly to be hated, and universally abhorred To
these was added the favor of the Kings Minions, who, being sharply persecuted
by the League, and open Enemies to the Guises, were forced, by necessity, to
take part with the King of Navarre, and with their advice, counsel, and
assistance, to withstand his danger as much as they were able, and contrive
many means to strengthen and uphold him; Nor did he fail, either by Writings to
justify his Reasons to all the several Orders, or by actions to prepare for
his defense; but with an unwearied mind, and body, drew Forces from all parts,
fortified his strong places, and stored them plentifully with Victual, provided
Artillery by all possible means, furnished himself with ammunition, gathered
money, solicited the Nobility, armed, and exercised the Infantry, and, without
taking any rest, had his eye still intent upon all those things which were
needful to sustain the encounter of so great a power.

The Duke of Mayenne marched toward the River Loire with his Army, consisting
of 500 Gens d'Arms, 1500 Reiters, 400 light Horse, and 5000 Foot: the Marescal
de Byron moved also toward those parts, (but by several ways) with his
Forces, which were appointed to make War about Rochelle; and Claude Sieur de la
Chastre, with the Soldiers raised in Berry, and Sologne, came along the Banks
of the Loire to join with the Duke of Mayenne; but Emanuel Duke de Mercoeur
Governor of Bretaign was advanced before them all with 800 Horse, and 1500 Foot
of that Province, and entered already into those parts which were held by the
Hugonots in Poictou.

On the other side, the King of Navarre, after he had consulted with the Prince
of Conde, and the Marescal de Anville, at St. Paul de Cade-jous, having drawn
those Forces that followed him into one body, The War is begun again between
the Catholics and Hugonots.
had settled himself to defend Guienne, where the greatest weight of affairs was
like to fall, and had sent the Prince of Conde into Xaintonge, that by means of
his adherents in that Country, and the help of the Rochelers, he might
endeavor to fortify as many places as was possible, and take as many others
as he could, to make the greater resistance, and give the greater hinderance to
the proceedings of the Enemy. With the Prince of Conde were the Duke de la
Tremouille, who, of a voluble nature, was newly turned to the Religion, and
party of the Hugonots, the Sieur de Rohan, a Lord of great note in Bretaigne,
and a near Kinsman to the King of Navarre; the Count de la Roche-fau-cault, the
Sieur de Clermont of Amboise, Monsieur de St. Gelais, who was Camp Master
General; and many other Lords, and Gentlemen of those parts, with whom he was
scarce gone from S. Iehan de Angely, to visit the places in Poictou, when he
received intelligence, that the Duke of Mercoeur was already past Fountenay,
and came on toward him plundering and burning the Country; wherefore, desirous
in the first encounters of the War to show his face to the Enemy, and to give a
bold prosperous beginning to future things, he advanced presently whither he
was guided by the cry and flight of the poor Country people. But, the Duke of
Mercoeur being advertised from many places of the Prince's coming, and knowing
himself too weak to venture further into the Enemies Country, which was all up
in Arms against him, resolved to retire to Fountenay, a place belonging to the
Catholics, and there, as in a secure station, to stay for the Kings Armies,
which were marching that way. But that intent of his was frustrated; for they
that commanded Fountenay, being ill-affected to the League, excusing themselves
that they had no Order from the King to receive him into the Town, shut the
Gates against him at his arrival, and he, with great danger and incommodity,
was forced to quarter in the Suburbs called les Loges, receiving no other
relief from the Townsmen, but a very small quantity of victual. Not many hours
after the Prince came up, resolved to fight, and ready to fall upon the Enemy;
presently they began to skirmish furiously, the Catholics having the advantage
of the place, and the Hugonots of number; but the fight having lasted till
night, successfully redoubled by the Hugonots, and no less constantly sustained
by the Catholics; and the Duke de Mercoeur considering, that not being assured
of those within the Town, he was in great danger of being defeated the next
day, determined to save himself with expedition, and raising his Camp in the
most silent time of the night, without giving any notice of it by Drum or
Trumpet, began to march with all speed toward the Loire, and that with such a
general diligence, that they would not allow themselves time to eat that day,
marching on still in order to recover some secure place: and yet being pursued
by the Prince with his Cavalry, he was fain to leave many of his Soldiers
behind him, and not only to abandon the booty they had taken, but also most
part of their Carriages a prey unto the Enemy.

The Duke of Mercoeur being chased away, as the Prince returned to those places
that were of his party, he had notice, that many Catholic Gentlemen united
together, and not yet advertised of the success, were coming up to join with
the Duke; wherefore, without losing time, or giving them leisure to be informed
of it, he hasted toward them with so great speed, that being suddenly
overtaken, they were not able to make much resistance, but some of them were
killed upon the place, and some being taken prisoners, freed themselves
afterward, with a promise, not to bear Arms against the Princes for a certain
time. The Prince encouraged with this happy success, purposed to assault the
Isles and Castles near Rochel, to reduce all that quarter to his devotion, and
have more Field-room to sustain the War; wherein he had so prosperous a
fortune, that having every where routed those (with great slaughter) that came
to oppose him, seizing upon all the Forts that were near, and taking all the
passes thereabouts, he was so much increased in courage, that he resolved to
besiege Brouage, wherein was the Sieur de St. Luc, one of the League, (with no
contemptible number of Infantry) and some other Gentlemen of the Country. The
Rochellers consented to this Enterprise, both for the profit and reputation
which redounded by it; and having sent a great many Ships thither, besieged the
Fortress by Sea, whilst the Prince having possessed that passage which is the
only way to Brouages by Land, and having shut up the Defendants within the
circuit of their walls, straightened the Siege very closely on that side.

But whilst fixing his mind wholly upon that business, The Castle of Angiers
taken suddenly by the Hugonots*
he neglects no opportunity of blocking and incommodating the Town, a new
accident happened that invited him to a more important deliberation: for the
Sieur de la Roche-morte, Captain du Halot, and Captain le Fresne, secret
Adherents to the King of Navarre, and Enemies to the Count de Brissac Governor
of Angiers, having found means to enter as friends into the Castle of that
City, one of the strongest and chiefest Fortresses in all France; suddenly
killed the Governor of it with those few Soldiers that were there in Garrison,
and seized upon it without much difficulty; but whilst they sought also to make
the Town revolt, they were besieged by the people, who taking Arms, had with
trenches cut off the passage to the Castle; and they beginning to write to all
parts, demanded present relief from the Prince of Conde, who was much nearer
than the King of Navarre. Angiers is a City on this side the Loire, seated in a
sweet, fertile, plentiful Country, very well peopled, famous for the study of
the Law, and commodiously situated to fall into all the Provinces of Gallia
Celtica, which invirons it on every side with a large spacious compass:
wherefore the Prince accounting it a very great and an opportune occasion which
offered it self unto him, not only to take so principal a City, but also to
remove the War beyond the River Loire, (a thing always desired, and thought
very advantageous for the Hugonots) applied his mind to carry such speedy
relief, that he might seize upon the Town by the help and inlet of the Castle,
before it were straightened and shut up by the Catholics. Indeed this was a
very great and hopeful design, but opposed with no less difficulties; for to go
over so broad a River without having any pass in his hands that could be
maintained, to enter into the heart of those Provinces which held (without
division) of the Catholic party, and put himself between two powerful Armies,
which marched into those parts to meet him, considering his Forces, seemed
rather a rash, than a generous attempt; and to quit the Siege of Brouage, which
was reduced to an hard condition, and almost to a certainty of being taken, to
venture upon so doubtful, so hazardous an enterprise, (for in the Castle of
Angiers there were not above sixteen Soldiers, besides the Captains, and it
was doubted whether they could hold out till relief came) seemed an
unprofitable, dangerous resolution. Yet the Prince's mind inclined to hope for
the revolt of Angiers, and it being of so great consequence, that more
uncertain, more perilous hazards were not to be refused for the gaining of it,
he resolved to follow the course of his fortune, the prosperity whereof did
with wonderful beginnings in a manner assure him of a most happy conclusion:
Wherefore leaving Monsieur de St. Mesmes with the Infantry and Artillery at the
Siege of Brouage, and giving order that the Fleet should continue to block it
up by Sea, he departed upon the eighth of October to relieve the Castle of
Angiers with eight hundred Gentlemen, and one thousand four hundred
Harquebuziers on Horseback. Nor was this enterprise (esteemed so rash by
Soldiers of great experience) less prosperous in the beginning than his other
actions; for though he neither had any Pass that held of his party, nor boats
ready to cross the River, he got over nevertheless happily, and without much
difficulty at Rosiers, having found certain boats there, which (laden with
Wines) were rowing along the River, and accidentally came to that side of the
Bank: Having passed the River, they found the Sieur de Clermont with about
seven hundred Horse, who having gone before into the Country of Maine and the
parts adjacent, to draw their friends together, being afterward informed of the
business of Angiers, was come with great expedition to unite himself with the
Prince for the same design; or missing of him there, to pass the River, and
join with him at the Siege which was laid before Brouage. Their Forces being
met with exceeding gladness, and the Sieur de St. Gelais marching before with
two Troops of Horse, to discover the Country, and provide victual for the Army,
upon the twentieth of October they quartered at Beaufort a place not far from
Angiers, where they intended to rest themselves the day following, that they
might come more fresh to the attempt of so great an enterprise.

But the Castle was recovered by the Catholics two days before; for the
Townsmen having at first taken Captain du Halet prisoner, The Castle of Angiers
is recovered by the Catholics before it is relieved.
who was gone out to parley, and to persuade them to turn unto his party, and
having the next day killed Captain le Fresne, whilst he treated at the Bridge
of the Castle with certain Deputies about the present affairs, had generally
set themselves to besiege the place; where on the one side, the Count de
Brissac Governor of the City being arrived; and on the other, Henry de
Ioyeuse, Count de Bou-chag^ Governor of the Province; and not many days after
the Duke of Ioyeuse himself, who came up with some number of Gentlemen to
assist his Brother; and Monsieur de la Roch-morte being at last slain with two
shots, whereof one took off his tongue, and the other went through his throat;
the sixteen Soldiers being left without a Captain to command them, and not
agreeing very well among themselves, some of them being Catholics, and some
Hugonots, had in the end capitulated to yield upon certain Conditions,
wherewith upon the eighteenth of October being Sunday, they delivered up the
Castle into the power of the Governor.

But the Prince of Conde believing that the Castle held still for his party,
having divided his forces into diverse Squadrons, on the 21 in the morning about
break of day, advanced toward Angiers, not by the great road which leads
straight to the gate of the Town* but by that way on the field side, which led
to the Trenches made by the Catholics to besiege the Castle. Those of the City
having notice from all parts of the Princes coming, and finding themselves
already Masters of the Fortress, retired into the Suburbs of the Town, and
there with Trenches and Barricadoes, stood upon their defense, to receive the
assault of the Hugonots with more security. At their first arrival it was
easily known that the Castle held no longer of the Princes party; for in stead
of showing signs of joy for the coming of that relief which they had called
for, they played with their Artillery very fiercely against the first Troops of
the Army, who under the Sieur de St. Gelais were come within Cannon shot, by
which token though the Commanders knew that the Castle was already yielded, yet
in the heat of their first fury they fell most gallantly into the nearest
Suburbs of the Town, and fought stoutly for many hours, not without much blood
on both sides. This was one of the accustomed effects of a first onset; but
their spirits cooling, and the Prince, with the other Lords and Captains,
knowing that to perish obstinately in that skirmish, was but to lose men, time,
and their labor; and that it was necessary to take another resolution, they
sounded a retreat, the Sun not being yet near setting, and marched off to rest
their Soldiers in a Village hard by. There the consideration of their present
condition, changing their late gallantry into a great and reasonable fear, they
began to think what was then to be done for the safety of every one, wherein
those difficulties appearing impossible to be overcome, which the hope and
desire of getting the City of Angiers, had at first made to seem very light and
easy, and not having any time to spare, lest they should give the Catholics
leisure to fall upon them, they drew away without any determinate resolution,
and as it were leaving themselves to fortune, began to march toward the River
Loire, which they were necessitated to pass, if they would save themselves. But
all the Country already beginning to rise at the ringing of the Toques^int, and
being informed that the people had with great diligence taken away the boats
every where from the River side; that Monsieur de la Chastre marched along the
bank to meet them; that the Duke of Mayenne having passed over at Orleans with
all the Army, advanced toward them with all expedition* that on the other side
the Marshall de Byron came up with his Forces, that the Count Bou-chage who
was sallied out of Angiers, drew together the gentry and common people, made
trees to be cut down, spoiling the ways every where, and that the Duke de
Ioyeuse with a great power was at their backs; they were forced to take a
course very contrary to their first intention, and dividing their men into
three squadrons, one commanded by St. Gelais, another by the Prince, and the
third by the Sieur de Rohan, they thought best to deceive the Enemy, by turning
from the River, and marching out of the great highways, to get between the
Armies, into the most woody parts of that Province, and with a long compass
striking speedily into the higher parts of Beausse, to pass the River suddenly
in some place where the favor of fortune* and their unexpected arrival might
open the way for them, and give them opportunity. In this manner (the
Commanders with exceeding care, and the Soldiers with wonderful terror) they
marched all that night, and the day following: but the event showed how hard
that resolution was to be effected; for the whole Province being up round about
them, they had neither leisure to rest, means to feed, The enterprise of
Angiers being vanished, the Hugonot Army encompassed by the Catholics, and
reduced to great streights disbands it self: and part of them with the
Commanders save themselves by flight
nor way to get through those strange difficult passages, and the cry and
concourse of the Country people, and the ringing of the Toquesaint wheresoever
they came, gave the Catholics sufficient notice of the place where they were,
and guided the Armies directly to encompass them, just like the tracing and
hunting of wild beasts through the woods. Wherefore the Sieur de Rohan, who was
nearer his own Country than the rest, the Confines of Bretaigne not being far
off, gave the Prince to understand, that to continue still together would be
the loss of all their men, and therefore advised him to divide his Forces into
many small Troops to delude the Enemy, who would be called sometimes this way,
sometimes that way by the tumult of the people, and by stealing secretly
through the most remote hidden places, to endeavor the saving part of that
whole, which being united could not possibly escape so great a danger. But the
Prince standing in suspense because his courage would not suffer him to come to
that resolution; the Sieur de Rohan saying that he would not perish for
another obstinacy and want of experience, departed from him with his men; and
having divided his Soldiers and Gentlemen into little parties of about ten or
fifteen a piece, hiding themselves, and throwing away their arms, at last
(though after many days) with infinite trouble and danger, through woods, and
diverse several ways, he recovered Bretaigne, and thence by other passages he
got in the end to Rochelle. The Prince after he had marched with his Forces in
one body another day, seeing that he could resist no longer, nor keep them
together, took the same course, and disbanding all his men every one to his own
industry, and the protection of Heaven, he himself with the Sieurs d'
Avantigny, de la Tremouille, and some eight or ten more in company, took that
way by chance which fortune presented to them. This division of the Army into
so many parcels, made the Catholics lose their way, for being called to
several places by the tumults and advertisements of the people, they could not
follow the trace of the Prince and his Commanders; and it so fell out that
having surrounded and took certain small parties of private Soldiers, they
could never light upon any person of note; so that the Prince crossing unknown
as a Traveller through the Country of Maine, and being come to the uttermost
parts of Lower Normandy, went to the Seaside, and there finding by chance
certain Ships laden with Merchandise, he embarked near Auranches, and passed
first into the Isle of Garnsey, and after into England, where being honorably
received by the Queen, he was not many months after conducted to Rochel with
certain men of War. The Sieur de St. Gelais being got into the Forest of
Orleans, and having made an uncertain intricate Voyage, coming at last near to
Gyen, passed the River Loire in little boats belonging to certain Mills,
leaving his Horses to the Enemy, and having hired others, went like a Trav^^^
to those places that were of his party. The Sieur de la Tiffardiere, Aubigny,
and (...) had hid themselves in the houses of their friends and kindred, which
some of them had in one place, some in another; many changing their clothes
saved themselves on foot, many also fell into the hands of the Catholics, and
were by the Country people cruelly cut in pieces. This was the issue of the
Prince of Conde's enterprise, wherein all his Army was dispersed and scattered
without fighting, exceedingly weakening the Forces of the Hugonots in a time of
so great need.

Whilst the Prince and his Soldiers ran so adverse a fortune, the Sieur de St.
Mesmes, who had been left at the Siege of Brouage, was forced about the same
time to retire with very little better success; for the Marshall de Matignon
drawing near with great strength to relieve it, he seeing himself with the
Infantry alone, and they frighted and discoureged with the news of the Prince's
ill-fortune, thought it the best way to retreat, and not obstinately to hazard
the remainder of the Army, which was so necessary for the defense of their own
places; yet the report of the Prince's defeat being spread in the Camp, was so
great a terror to every one, and that no less to the Commanders and Gentlemen,
than to the common Soldiers, that each man purposed to provide for his own
safety; so that St. Luc sallying out of Brouage, and following those that were
scattered several ways, made a great slaughter of them in many places;
whereupon the Commanders despairing to rally the Army any more, got away as
well as they could possibly, to secure their own strong holds. The same did
Henry de la Tour Viscount of Turenne; for being entered very hopefully into
Limoges, and having already struck a terror into the people of those parts,
the news of the Prince's overthrow coming to him, he judged it a safer way to
retire, than alone to oppose the violence of so many Armies, which were
marching into those Quarters to destroy those of his party.

But the Sieur de Lesdiquiers, Head of the Hugonots in Dauphine, having raised
Foot and Horse, and begun a sharp War against Monsieur de Maugiron Lieutenant
of that Province, and against Colonel Alfonso Corso, whereby raising all the
Country, (the sagacity and readiness of the Commander supplying the inequality
of Forces) the affairs of the Hugonots were brought into a very good condition:
having taken many such Towns and Castles, which though not very strong, were
very commodious; and with the hopes of booty drawn together a great number of
old Soldiers, such as were wont to live among the troubles of War.

In the mean time the Heads of the League being augmented in hopes and courage
by the Prince of Conde's ill success, and the defeat of his Army, were
exceeding earnest with the King to shorten the term of six months prefixed by
the late Edict, for the banishment of the Hugonots; urging, that since they had
declared they would resist his will by force, they were no longer to be
suffered, but that their total extirpation was to be endeavored with the
greatest speed that might be; which thing the King knowing to conduce but
little to the end of his designs, resolved yet to satisfy them, and with a new
Edict reduced the term of six months which had been granted to them, to the
space of but fifteen days; after which time, the other Provinces being quiet by
reason of the small number of Hugonots that were in them, they prosecuted the
War as well in Poictou and Guienne, as in the Province of Dauphine. The other
request made to the King by a great many Prelates at the suggestion of the
League, took not the same effect, being to publish and observe the Decrees of
the Council of Trent; for not being willing to oblige or engage himself further
in the League than he had already done, alleging that the demand was
unseasonable, and excusing himself by the troubles that encompassed him on
every side, he referred a business of so great weight to a more quiet season,
wherein he might maturely deliberate and resolve upon it.

With this face of things, all tending to the distractions of an obstinate War,
began the year 1586, full (contrary to the common belief) of exceeding greet
machinations, 1586.
but of very few and weak executions touching the War. The Duke of Mayenne in
the end of the year before was come with his Army to Chasteau-neuf in the
confines of Guienne, whither the Marshall de Matignon Lieutenant of that
Province was also come to consult about the finishing of the War; who being
privy to the Kings intentions and designs wherewith he desired those affairs
should be managed, demonstrated the terrible sharpness of the season, and the
condition of the Country, not only afflicted with a great dearth and (...) of
victual, but also with the violence of the Plague, which had already for ma^^
months been wonderfully spread in diverse places: and considering that the chief
Towns were so diligently manned and fortified by the King of Navarre, that it
was vain to attempt them in that extremity of weather, and scarcity of
provisions, he counseled to assault the lesser places, and the more open parts
of the Province, to reduce those unto obedience, which not being strengthened
with any principal fortification, were yet rich and fertile, and from which the
Hugonots by ordinary contributions drew means sufficient to maintain
themselves. The Duke of Mayenne, though for his own honor, and for the credit
and strengthening of the League he desired to make himself remarkable by some
eminent enterprise, yet not suffering himself to be transported by the violence
of his passion, or the wind of hopes to think of impossibilities, easily
concurred in the same opinion, fearing he should lose much reputation, if
attempting any principal Fortress he should not be able to carry it; whereof he
was the more doubtful, (besides the reasons alleged by Matignon) because he
had but a small train of Artillery, consisting of but four pieces of Cannon,
and two Culverins, with a very small quantity of Ammunition: wherefore passing
by St. Iehan d' Angely, (where nevertheless the Hugonots were in very great
streights and fears, as also all other places of the like condition) they
resolved with a joint consent, though for diverse ends, to divide the Army
between them, and to busy themselves about taking in weaker places whilst the
sharpness of the Winter lasted; and then re-uniting their Forces, to apply
themselves to that enterprise which time and opportunity should present unto
them. So the Marshall being returned to Bourdeaux, the Metropolis of that
Province, with a part of the Army, and having commodiously, or rather
dilatorily refreshed his men, and put them in order, laid siege to Castles, a
place of small consideration, and with various successes consumed all the
Winter in that expedition; in which time the Duke of Mayenne with the greater
part of those Forces attaquing the weakest places, took Montignac, Beaulieu,
Gaignac, and other places of small importance, and which only served to keep
the reputation of his Army alive. But in the budding of the Springtime,
advancing to join their Forces together, he felt such bitter winds and
extraordinary rains for many days, that the sufferings of lying in the field
all the Winter, being increased by those of the dearth of victual, and
contagion of the plague, which grew daily more rife in all those parts, the
Army began to be exceedingly infected, not only all the principal Lords and
Commanders being sick, but a very great number of the Soldiers dying
continually, yet all these difficulties being overcome with infinite patience,
he joined at last with Matignon in the beginning of April. At his coming* first
Castles, and then St. Bazeile yielded themselves, and with some difficulty the
Fort of Montsegur, and they would probably have proceeded further, and
perchance have begun some more important enterprise, if the diseases which
annoyed the Army had not at last assailed the General: for the Duke of Mayenne
being dangerously sick of a Fever, was forced to leave the Camp and retire to
Bourdeaux. So the weight of all business being left to the Marshall, the
expeditions of Arms went on but slowly; for the Kings intention (though secret)
was, that the Clergy being wearied with the length of the War by contributions,
the Nobility by toils and troubles, and the people by the oppressions of
Soldiers and their multiplied grievances, should all return with greater
desire to ask and long for Peace, which by the instigation of the Heads of the
League they had caused to be broken, so that things coming about again to their
former condition, the plots of his Enemies might be deluded, and the way might
lie open to himself for the continuation of his designs.

But the Duke of Mayenne being (though late) recovered of his sickness, and
returned unto the Army, valiantly took Chastillon, a place of some moment held
by the Baron de Salignac, and then Puis Normand another of no less importance,
of which actions knowing that his Army was wonderfully weakened by many
sufferings, and diverse accidents, that he had but small store of ammunition,
and other necessaries for the taking in of places; and (which troubled him
most) that he was not furnished with money from Court to maintain his Army, so
that his Soldiers were many Pays behind, he dispatched the Sieur de Sessaval
to inform the King of the state of his affairs, and to demand new supplies of
men and money, foreseeing that if matters continued as they had begun, his Army
(to his small reputation) would be dissolved of it self, within a few months:
for the King of Navarre knowing he had not strength enough to resist and keep
the field, having discreetly fortified all his places, and stored them with
abundance of all things, reserved only two thousand small shot, and three
hundred light Horse, with a few Gentlemen that followed his name in the
Province, with which forces, expert, ready, quick upon all occasions, and not
troubled with Artillery or Carriages, he ran up and down with great expedition,
now this way, now that, providing all things necessary, relieving places that
were in distress, and never suffering the Enemy to have any opportunity to
fight with him; for by his skilfulness in the ways, and by the unwearied
patience of his Soldiers, he appeared, and vanished like lightning, being far
off in the morning from those parts where he had been seen the night before; by
which conduct and speed that was almost incredible, he made War against a great
Army, though languishing by continual sickness that distressed the Camp; and
having to do with a Commander, who, grave and wary in his resolutions,
proceeded always with very great deliberation, he opportunely furnished and
relieved the chiefest places, surprised many scattering Troops of the Army, cut
off their passages of their victuals, and kept the Army in continual motion,
and very great suspicion; whereby the Duke of Mayenne perceived that his Forces
continually wasting and decaying, and wanting money and ammunition, if he were
not speedily succored with fresh men, and other necessaries, he should come
off with dishonor from that War, wherein never seeing the face of the Enemy,
he should be fain to consume his Army in assaulting, not the weakest places,
for they were all taken already; but strong Towns excellently fortified, and
provided with all things, which though he should take at last, yet would it be
with the lessening and destroying of his own Forces, and that afterward he
should be exposed to the King of Navarre's valor and celerity, wherewith he
(though environed with a thousand difficulties) knew very well how to lay hold
of his opportunities.

While the War is managed in Guienne on this new manner, the Prince of Conde
having got together a good Body of men in the quarters about Rochel, had taken
and sacked the Castle of Dompierre, made himself Master of Soubize and Mornac,
and kept in awe the whole Country; for the quieting whereof the Sieur de St.
Luc being issued out of Brouage with a like number, they met near the Isle of
Oleron, where they fought with various success a whole day, though with some
interruptions, and with almost equal loss on both sides: for though the
Catholics lost the Regiment of Colonel Turcelin with about five hundred
Firelocks; yet on the Hugonots side almost all the Lords and chief Commanders
were killed or wounded, particularly Rieuz and Suilly, (the Sons of Andelot
already deceased) who died both within a while after; nor was it long before
they were followed by Guy de Laval their elder Brother, who in the flower of
his age, wasted by continual toil and action, died of a Burning Fever about
that very time, as also Monsieur de Rohan, who died at Rochel of the same
disease.

Yet did not the heat and troubles of the War take off the Prince of Conde from
other thoughts: for being desirous by a particular bond to tie and engage the
Duke de la Tremouille to himself, who was newly come over to his party; and
besides that, to make some additions to his own fortune, and it may be also
desirous of issue, he about that time took to Wife Cbarlotte Catherine the
Dukes Sister, who with her excellent Beauty had also a considerable Dowry, as
being a sharer in the Inheritance of the ancient and once most flourishing
House of la Tremouille. But neither the pleasures of Marriage, nor the delights
of his new Wife did at all slacken the Princes warlike fierceness, who full of
courage, and a despiser of the most evident dangers, did valiantly embrace all
occasions of fighting, nor would at all yield to the violence of his Enemies,
notwithstanding the tenderness of his own Forces.

In this condition were the affairs of War when the Marshall de Byron arrived
in Xaintonge with another Army, who desiring to do some exploit, not so much to
damnifie the Hugonots, as out of an emulation to the Duke of Mayenne, resolved
to lay siege to Maran, a place very convenient to block up Rochel by Land, and
to cut off the Traffic and Commerce of the Inhabitants, with the Isles and
Cities adjacent, for which the Rochellers and all the Hugonot party were very
much perplexed: wherefore the King of Navarre seeing the Forces of the Duke of
Mayenne's Army weakened, and the sharpness of their first fury abated, left the
Viscount of Turenne in Guienne, to follow the War in the same manner as he had
done, and went suddenly with three hundred Horse to Rochel, doubting that the
Princes too much boldness might run into some great error in those parts; for
being a prudent Judge of his own strength he resolved with himself, and had
given absolute Order to his Commanders, that managing their affairs with wisdom
and celerity, and possessing themselves always of secure advantageous places,
they should spin the War out in length, and not give their Enemies any new
occasion of prosperity; which not suting well with the Princes nature, who
since the death of Monsieur de Rohan, remained sole Head in Xaintonge, the King
of Navarre intended by his presence to establish that resolution, and to order
the Government and managery of the War himself. But being come to Rochel, and
finding the Citizens there in great confusion by reason of the Marshall de
Byron's design of besieging Maran, he stayed no longer than while he was
informed of the present state of things; but knowing his arrival to be very
opportune, because the Rochellers durst not lessen their Garrison to strengthen
that of Maran, he went personally thither, and the same day having considered
the situation of it on every side, he began without delay to make Trenches, and
to raise Redoubts and Batteries for the defense of it; and that with so much
diligence, that assisting in the work unweariedly his own self, not in the
space of many days, but hours, he brought it to perfection.

Maran is a great Town, and of great importance, seated by the Ocean Sea, in a
low fenny place, as it were in a Peninsula, and so encompassed on every side
with Moorish watery grounds, that there is no access to the works thereof but by
very few, and those narrow passages. These the King of Navarre made to be shut
up with Trenches, raising a Fort at the end of every Avenue, which full of
small Artillery, and defended by a competent number of Musketeers, might hinder
the Enemies approaches, having in the rest of the Fenn that was not very deep,
caused many planks to be sunk, which stuck full of great nails, and other
instruments proper to do mischief, might do harm to those that should have the
boldness to enter and pass over to the Dry Land.

On the other side, the Marshall de Byron having drawn his Forces together,
Maran besieged by the Catholics.
and made a review of them at Niort, about the midst of June marched toward
Maran, where having by their Sallies proved the courage of the Defenders, who
trusting to the advantage of their Situation, issued out boldly to skirmish,
and fell so hotly upon his first Squadrons, that he himself was engaged in the
action, whence he came off lightly wounded in the left hand; he took a
resolution to proceed warily in the business, and raising certain Forts against
those of the Defendents, as the quality of the ground required, all his hopes
of gaining that place were reduced only to the length of the Siege.

In the mean time the Court was busied in setting forth new Armies, and making
new warlike preparations; for the King not willing to suffer that the increase
of strength, reputation and adherents, should redound unto the Lords of the
House of Lorain, and the followers of the League, was resolved to put other
Armies into the hands of his trusty Favorites, and to keep up their reputation
with new Expeditions, and new Governments of Provinces, which he knew would
succeed to his own greatness and advantage against the power of the Lords of
Guise. By this advice he obtained also another end, which was to tire out the
Catholic party by the maintenance of so many several Armies, and bring them
all again to intercede for Peace, which was so necessary for the effecting of
his designs. Wherefore besides a million and two hundred thousand Crowns which
he had gotten by Tenths from the Clergy, he urged at Rome for license to
alienate one hundred thousand Crowns per annum of Church Revenues; and the
people oppressed in so many places, and almost in every Province by the
insolence of Soldiers, though they were far from the places possessed by the
Hugonots, felt nevertheless the calamities and miseries of War. Two several
Armies were making ready, one under the Duke of Ioyeuse, to go into Auvergne,
and thence into Languedoc to recover places which the Hugonots held in those
parts; the other under the Duke of Espernon, to go into Provence, and take
possession of that Country, which the King since the death of the Grand Prior
had conferred upon him. The preparations of these Armies to the disadvantage
and open displeasure of the Guises, kept all the Nobility and Martial men of
the Kingdom in employment; for every one desiring to gain the favor and
protection of the Kings Minions, who in the disposing of gifts and honors
carried all things at their own pleasure, ran all voluntarily to to their
Colors, and with great trains and costly preparations of Warlike Ornaments
endeavored to win the affections, some of the one, some of the other of these
Lords, who through the Kings secret instigations, were intent to draw all men
by their liberality and ostentation of rewards, to follow the course of their
fortunes; so that not only such as were Neuters came from all parts to serve
them; but also such as had been resolved to follow the Duke of Mayenne, and the
other Heads in the War of Guienne, leaving their first intentions, determined
to follow the fortune of those that had most power. To this was added, that the
King to moderate by his presence, and with his own counsels the Wars managed by
his Favorites, and to augment their reputation, was resolved to go to Lions,
both Armies being to march the same way, so that by the moving of his own
person he drew after him great numbers of men of eminent quality, and the
expenses were still increased without end. Whereby with new Impositions, with
erecting new Magistrates, with inventions of new Taxes, and with the disposing
of new Offices, the people was every where wonderfully burdened and oppressed;
the King being still constant to his own opinion, that by how much the greater
were the miseries and oppressions of War, by so much the sooner would they
extort an universal consent to the necessity of Peace, and make the authors of
those discords odious and detestable, rendering disfavoured unto all the
formerly so much favored endeavors of the League; wherein his inclination
agreeing with the splendor and subtilty of his design, it was impossible by
any reasons in the World to alter that determination.

But whilst the King is infinite busy, and the Courtiers most ardently
studious in ordering these affairs, a most powerful Army was preparing in
Germany for the relief of the Hugonots; for the King of Navarre having long
foreseen, that the King would easily be brought to an agreement with the League
to his disadvantage, and having learned, by former experience, that all the
hopes of his party, consisting in the aid of the Germans, which the union of
the Protestant Princes was wont to afford unto the Hugonots, had sent the Sieur
de Pardaillan thither (a wise man, and by long travel versed in their several
customs) who treating confidently, and particularly with every Prince, and
every Hans-town, might show them the danger of their common Religion, aggravate
the hatred of the Guises to the Protestant party, and exhort them to continue
the assistance formerly lent unto the Hugonots against the persecutions of
their Enemies; which business being excellently managed by Pardaillan, had not
only stirred up the minds of those Princes in favor of the Hugonots, but had
also much raised the hopes of the King of Navarre, so that having turned his
thoughts that way, at the beginning of the War, he had dispatched the Sieur de
Clervant into Germany, to ripen the fruits of that seed, which had before been
opportunely sown by Pardaillon. And because both the Princes and people of
those parts (very great honourers of that Religion, Great Forces are prepared
in Germany in favor of the Hugonots.
which they hold to be the true one, and also of an easy mind, and flexible
nature to the urgency of entreaties, and efficacy of reasons) might more easily
be moved to consent unto it; Theodore Beza, a most eloquent Preacher of the
Hugonots, went to the same effect from Geneva, into Germany and Swisserland,
who, by his authority and discourses, stirred up every one of the chief men, to
embrace the enterprise in favor of those, who were of the same, or at least a
very little different Religion. The Queen of England endeavored the same, not
only by countenancing it, Mary Qu. of Scots, Cosen to the Guises, imprisoned
by Elizabeth Qu. of England.
and by words, but also by her actions; for, keeping in prison Mary Queen of
Scotland, Cousin to the Guises, who was obstinately linked to their faction,
she desired that the League, and the House of Loraine, should be utterly
suppressed, or at least so busied in France, that she might have free power to
dispose of her life, and of the affairs of Scotland and England: Wherefore she
not only assisted the King of Navarre with her authority, which was very great
in Germany, but had also deposited a good sum of Money, to be laid out in
raising of Soldiers there. To the Negotiation of Clevant, to the exhortation of
Beza, and to the money of England, the Duke of Bouillon added also his
assistance, who, holding Sedan, a very strong place, and other Towns and
Castles about the Confines of France and Germany, that were of the Hugonots
Religion, and in their Counsels united to the King of Navarre, was a fit
instrument for the expedition, and Levyes of the German Soldiers; for the
Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Wittenbergh, and the Protestant Cantons of
the Swisses consenting; and the King of Denmark concurring; but above all, the
Count de Mombelliard, a Lord bordering upon Bourgongne, laboring in the
business, there began to be raised the most powerful Army, that ever had come
out of that Country, to relieve the Hugonots. But, because the Princes knew
they had no occasion at all to offend the King of France, and to enter in a
hostile manner into his Country, they resolved, before the Army (which was
preparing against the next spring) to send this year, for a color, a numerous
Embassy, to complain, in the Names of them all, of the breach of that Peace,
and violation of that Faith, which had been given unto the Hugonots, with whom
they were interessed and united in Religion, and to demand of the King a
cessation of Arms, and a confirmation of those Edicts so often granted to his
Subjects, for the Liberty of Conscience: foreseeing well, that if the King
consented to their demands, the Hugonots would be relieved without further
noise of Arms, and if he should persist, and deny them, they might thereby
make a fair pretense for the War, and take an occasion, not altogether
unreasonable, to raise those Forces they intended.

This determination of the Germans did very much disquiet the King of France,
being not only displeased that others should presume to meddle with the
affairs of his Kingdom, but also terrified with the fear of foreign forces;
who, with perilous commotions, used to destroy Provinces, ruin the People,
disturb all things both Divine and Humane, and to put the state of the Crown
into extreme danger. But, as a Prince accustomed to govern himself by the
subtilty of his wit, to whom (though oftentimes very unsuccessfully) probable
appearances of cunning inventions, did always represent themselves; he began
to think with himself, that from that evil he might draw another good, and
might use the coming of the Germans for the speedy execution of his designs:
for seeing the King of Navarre reduced to such a weakness, that though he made
fearless resistance, he was yet brought to the last extremity of his fortune;
and being himself every day more out of hope to have issue, since by a
continued incurable Gonorrhea, and by infinite other proofs, Hen. the Third
despairing of issue, resolves to further the King of Navars right to the Crown,
and to unite himself with him for the destruction of the Guises.
he knew himself unable to get children, he thought it best to unite himself,
by all means, straightly and sincerely with the King of Navarre, as the lawful
Successor of the Crown, to draw him to the Court near unto his own Person, to
make him partaker in matter of Government, and by his means to make use of that
foreign Army, for the utter suppression of the Guises, and the factions of the
League, which being unexpectedly overwhelmed between his Forces and the
approaching storm of the German Soldiers, could not possibly be able to make
resistance, but would presently be quite extinguished and dissipated. Two
things amongst the rest were principal hindrances of this intention; one, the
King of Navarr's Religion, being resolved (for the satisfaction of his own
Conscience, and to avoid the scandal that would arrive from thence) not to
reconcile himself unto him, unless he would first return into the bosom of the
Church; the other was that of his Sister Queen Margaret, Wife to the King of
Navarre, who having given her self over to a licentious life, for fear of her
Husbands anger, was fled from him; but, being taken by his order, and the
Commission of the King her Brother, she was put as a prisoner into the Castle
of Carlat in Auvergne, and from thence a while after removed to Vsson in the
same Province, under the custody of the Marquess de Canillac, who (as it was
reported) being become captive to his prisoner, had set her at liberty; so she
passing her time in certain houses of her own (yet in Auvergne) and continuing
the same manner of life, was a very great obstacle to those agreements which
might have been concluded between her Husband and her Brother. To overcome
these important difficulties, having imported his design to the Queen his
Mother, who was wont to ripen businesses of greatest consequence, and to find
out remedies for all the hardest impediments, they determined at last, By
reason of the licentious life of Margaret wife to the K. of Navarre, the King
and Q. Mother resolve to break the Match, and to give Christi^nn^ the daughter
of the Duke of Lorain, who after married Ferdinando de Medici Great Duke of
Tuscany.
that the person of the Lady Margaret was no more to be regarded, and that
having made her self unworthy to be acknowledged by them, either for a Sister
or a Daughter, (since the dispensation obtained from the Pope, at the time of
their Marriage, being defective, did afford a color and pretense for the
breaking of it) they would make a Divorce; and give Christienne (Daughter to
the Duke of Loraine, by Claudia the Kings Sister) to Wife to the King of
Navarre, who, of a very pleasing behavior, and of an age already Marriageable,
was brought up in the degree and quality of a Daughter, by the Queen mother:
and as for the King of Navarr's Religion, they resolved to endeavor, by urging
the great good that would result from it, and by so important benefit, as the
assuring himself of the succession of the Crown of France (which was brought in
question) to soften and bend his mind to turn Catholic, giving him such
securities and satisfactions which should be thought most fit to settle and
confirm him. But because all others were either suspected, or unable to manage
a business of so great difficulty and importance, the King entreated the Queen
his Mother that she would take the pains to go into Poictou and Xaintonge, to
confer with the King of Navarre, making her self for the present, as she had
ever been in times past, the Author and Mediatrix of the good and quiet of the
Kingdom.

The Queen takes upon her the charge of this business, though much burdened
with years, and exceedingly tormented with the Gout; An accommodation treated
with the Hugonots by the Queen Mother, and much disliked by those of the League.
and therefore the Abbot Guievan-Baptista Guadagni was dispatched to the
Marshall de Byron, to give order for a cessation of Arms on that side, and to
appoint a meeting between the Queen and the King of Navarre. The Marshall
following the instinct of his old inclination, and being near the King of
Navarre, at the siege which he had newly laid to Maran, obeyed the Kings
command without delay; and they came to this agreement, That Maran should stand
neuter, and that both parts should have free commerce thither; yet, that the
Governor should be put in by the King of Navarre, and that the Garrison should
equally protect the Catholics as well as the Hugonots; that the Marescal
should withdraw his Forces beyond the Charente (a River in those parts) and
that the King of Navarre, after having furnished all things necessary for
Rochel, should go to meet the Queen Mother in Poictou.

This Treaty did much displease the Guises, and all those that adhered
sincerely to the League; so that on the one side, the Popes Nuncio made
grievous complaint thereof unto the King himself; and on the other side, the
Duke of Guise, who was at his Government in Champagne, made it be spoken of to
the Queen Mother by his Agents, and the People of Paris began commonly to
murmur, that the Cause of Religion was betrayed, that the Hugonots were openly
favored, that the course of the War was interrupted, which was like to come
presently to an happy conclusion, that the King showed openly that his mind was
averse to the Catholic party* and that he desired, by all means, to cherish
and maintain Heresy: for, though the Kings design and intention was yet
unknown to every one, the very name of Peace had wrought a jealousy in the
quick apprehension of the Duke of Guise, and given occasion of talk to the
common people. The King answered the Nuncio resentingly, that the backwardness
which the Clergy showed, in submitting themselves to the vast expenses of the
War, and the difficulty which the Pope had made in granting license to alienate
the Hundred thousand Crowns per annum of the Church Revenue, had made him
incline to the Counsels of Peace; and that he thought he neither did any thing
against his conscience, nor against the Office of a Christian Prince, if he
labored to restore peace and tranquillity to the people of his Kingdom, already
wasted and undone by the calamities of War: That it was a fine thing to stand a
far off, and intermeddle in the Government of others with words and
Paper-expeditions; but that a good Father of the Family ought to have more
regard to the evident good of his own house, then to any discourses of
strangers. Yet the Nuncio having replied, that the true way to give his Kingdom
Peace, was to extirpate the very roots of Heresy, that the safety of the Soul
was to be preferred before temporal respects; that the last end and aim of the
War begun with the Hugonots, was quietness and tranquillity, which, by reason of
the weakness of the excommunicate Princes, was not very hard to be compassed by
perseverance; that the Prelates of France had never withdrawn themselves from
the equal burden of expenses, nor would they at all refuse it for the time to
come; and finally, that he had certain hopes from Rome, of the grant of that
License which his Majesty desired: the King, moderating his discourse, began to
show him the great danger, and evil consequences, which the inundation of
Foreigners that was preparing, would bring along with it; for the diverting
whereof, it was necessary to feign and dissemble many things; and that he
should assure the Pope he would never conclude any thing which could prejudice
the Catholic Religion, or the good and honor of the holy Church.

The same things in substance were urged to the Duke of Guise from the
Queen Mother: but he more particularly was moved to consid^^, that this being
done to hinder, and by delay to divert the coming of the Germans, did all
redound to the particular service of the League, and his own private benefit:
for he that was placed in the confines of the Kingdom, on that side by which
they thought to enter, was more liable then any other to the danger of their
incursions: That he knew the weakness of the Kings Forces, the want of Money,
and on the contrary, the great strength of the Army which was raising in
Germany; and therefore it was necessary he should suffer the Counsels that were
begun to be managed with dexterity, which did all result at last unto the same
end.

It was needful, by means of their Confidents, to instill the same things into
the people of Paris, which already began unbridledly to mutiny: and it was
necessary to affirm them with so much efficacy, that being gathered up in
diverse places by those that favored the Hugonots, (which secretly were many)
and told unto the King of Navarre, filled his mind with great jealousy and
suspicion, to the exceeding prejudice of the Treaty undertaken by the Queen,
who being gone to Chinonceaux, a place of pleasure, built by Madame Valentine,
and at that time in her possession, expected till the Abbot Guadagni, and the
Sieur de Rambouillet, who were gone to treat about it, had appointed the place
of interview between her and the King of Navarre, about which there arose many
difficulties, by reason of the deep suspicion he was fallen into, that they
sought to deceive him; whereupon, he refused to go beyond those places which
were held by his party, and without being accompanied by such Forces, as were
needful for the Guard and security of his own person. On the other side, it was
very unfit, and very unsafe for the Queen, to put her self into the power and
forces of the Hugonots; and the business was such, as could not in a few hours
be treated and resolved on in the Field. But the Kings Letters and Messages
were so frequent, and his desire was so great to have that Interview brought
about, that though the King of Navarre, being raised by the near approach of
the German Ambassadors, and by the hope of foreign Forces, either cared little
for that Meeting with the Queen, or would make it with his own perfect security
and entire reputation, and therefore would not consent to go out of the
confines of the Country possessed by him; yet she, at last, resolved to
satisfy him, and to go into the farthest parts of Poictou, bordering upon
Xaintonge; and, having caused the Marshall de Byrons Army to draw backward,
she agreed to come as far as St. Bris, a place very near the King of Navarrs
Garrisons, and encompassed with the Forces of the Hugonots.

In the mean time, the King, to give leisure to this Meeting, and to defer the
Audience of the German Ambassadors, till he knew the issue of that Treaty,
began his journey toward Lions, as he had appointed, leaving order, that the
Ambassadors should be received and entertained with great Honors and Feastings,
till his return to Paris.

The Dukes of Espernon and Ioyeuse began to move with their Forces at the same
time, upon occasion of the Kings departure; yet they marched diverse ways, and
with diverse intentions: For the Duke of Espernon, nearly united to the Kings
designs, distrustful of the League, an enemy to the Guises, and inclined to
favor and uphold the King of Navarre, proceeded in Provence with a desire to
reunite it, and reduce it wholly to his obedience; but neither to foment the
designs of the League, nor to persecute the party of the Hugonots. But, the
Duke of Ioyeuse, transported with hopes, and spurred on by the emulation of
Espernon, had partly forgot the interests of the King, the Author of his
greatness, and only root of his so sudden growth, and being allied unto the
House of Lorain, by his marriage with the Kings sister-in-law, began partly to
second the couns^ls of the Guises; and, desirous of glory, was ready to employ
his Arms vigorously against the Hugonots: for which cause, being departed from
the Baths in Bourbonois (where he had stayed a few days, to cure some
indisposition that troubled him) he drove the Lord of Chastillon from the siege
of Compierre* which he had beleaguered with certain Forces, drawn together in
the quarters about Languedoc, took Malaises, la Pierre, Marvegoes, and
Salvagnac, all places of consideration in that Province; and entering
Languedoc, no less full of pride then warlike boasting, would make the
greatness of his fortune appear distinctly to his own father, and draw his Army
to a Randezvous within sight of the City of Thoulouse, where (his father
commanding as the Kings Lieutenant) he had been bred up in the first years of
his infancy. But the Duke of Espernon with a great Army, and Forces better
ordered, accompanied by the Sieur de la Valette his brother, who was appointed
his Lieutenant in Provence, entered there, to make himself be received Governor
by the Parliament, just at the very time when Lesdiguieres, being come thither
from Dauphine, had, with a great slaughter, routed Monsieur de Vins, the chief
adherent of the League in those parts, and had reduced the Catholic affairs to
a hard condition. This conjuncture was not unfavourable to Espernon, for the
followers of the League did already plot how to exclude him from the
Government; and Monsieur de Vins had labored to make some places refuse to
accept him. But he being arrived in a time when they were yet dismayed, by the
defeat they had newly received, though Lesdiguieres was forced to retire again
into Dauphine, yet Vins had neither strength nor occasion to oppose him openly;
and the Duke having taken Seine, commonly called La Grande-Tour, and many other
lesser places, in a few weeks brought the whole Province under the obedience of
his government; there having left his brother with the charge of the Army, he
returned speedily to Court; his interests of ruling the Kings Genius, and
moderating his deliberations, not suffering him to be far from thence.

At the same time the German Embassy arrived at Paris, wherein, besides a
select number of honorable personages, were the Count de Mombelliard, and the
Count of Isembourg, in person, Lords, for the nobleness of their blood, and the
quality of their power, of very high estimation, and who ardently favored and
managed the German Levies. These being entertained at the Kings charge, and
with all the highest sorts of honors, seemed yet unsatisfied at his so far
distance, and the delay which was interposed of their negotiating with him,
interpreting that to French pride and disdain, which depended upon more secret
and remote occasions: so that the two Counts thinking they should take off from
their own reputation, by staying longer to wait for him, full of hidden anger,
and of so much greater favor to the Hugonots, returned home, leaving the
charge of the business to the other Ambassadors. The King having, by redoubled
messengers, received the news of their departure, and the distaste which the
rest showed openly, began to return, with small days journeys, toward Paris,
expecting still to hear, that the Queen, having overcome all difficulties, had,
at last, conferred with the King of Navarre; But, all delays being already
spent, and the business of that Interview proceeding extraordinary slowly, he
was, in the end, necessitated to stay at St. Germains, and give audience to the
Ambassadors, but, with a countenance no less doubtful and uncertain, then his
mind was perplexed and unresolved; which yet nevertheless became presently free
and resolute: The Ambassador^ of the Protestant Princes of G^^m^ny ^eing come
to ^^is to treat in favor of the Hugonots, having spoken highly to the King,
are sharply answered, and depart unsatisfied from the Court.
for, Prince Casimir's Ambassador having spoken, in the name of all the rest,
with bold terms and high words, no less full of tacit threatenings then open
contempt; the King, as a Prince of a tender sense, offended at that proud
manner of proceeding with him, was kindled with so great indignation, that,
contrary to his wonted c^stom, and first design, he answered the Ambassadors of
himself, with so much sharpness and resentment, that instantly they were
wonderfully dashed, and the next day after, without other audience, with small
honor, and as little satisfaction, they were dismissed. The discourse of the
Ambassadors in substance contained a long complaint, That the King, to satisfy
the unjust desire, and perverse ambition of the Pope, and of certain Princes
and Communalties of his Kingdom, had broken his word with those of the Reformed
Religion, and taken away that Liberty of Conscience, which he had formerly
granted and established by so many Decrees: That therefore the Princes of
Germany, who were interessed and united in the same Religion, entreated him to
put an end to the War and disturbance of Arms, granting both Temporal and
Spiritual peace to all his Subjects, whereby he might escape the just wrath of
God due to such as break their word, and might also give them occasion to
preserve their ancient friendship with the Crown; notwithstanding which, they
were straightly obliged to provide for the safety of those who (without fault
of theirs) being in distress, did implore the aid of those Princes that agreed
with them in the confession of the same Faith. On the other side, the King's
Answer contained, That having been called and chosen by God to the just
profession of his Crown, he had also authority not depending upon any body, to
establish Laws, publish Decrees, grant Licenses, and make fitting Provisions,
according to the qualities of times, and the need of his Subjects, and
therefore might also revoke, change, alter, and retract them at his pleasure,
as he was best directed by his Divine Majesty: wherefore he did give the lie to
whosoever went about to tax him to be a breaker of his word, if for the
interest of his Subjects, and good of his Kingdom, he had revoked a liberty,
granted conditionally, and but for a time; and that as he had formerly done, so
he would reign freely for the future, marvelling that any should presume to
interpose and meddle in the Government of his People, and in the Authority of
his Person: That this was his last resolution, neither was it needful for them
to stay any longer, to hear any other particulars from him. The Ambassadors
urging, to have that Answer given them in writing, he angerly refused to do it;
and giving order, that they should be conducted to lodge at Poissy, went the
next day after (being the ninth of September) to the City of Paris.

There, notwithstanding the resolute answer given to the Protestant Princes,
already divulged every where, and the progress of the War against the Hugonots,
already kindled in so many places, the minds of the common people were more
then ever enflamed against his person and proceedings, which were publicly
inveighed against in Pulpits, and particularly slandered in private meetings;
for it being already spread abroad, by the Preachers and Heads of the League,
and rooted in the minds of the Parisians, that the King favored the King of
Navarre and the Hugonot party, and sought, by underhand means, at the suit of
his Minions, to bring him to the succession of the Crown, and to establish them
in the free profession of their Faith; the hatred conceived upon this occasion,
The Parisians, by the suggestions of th^^ Heads of the League, being set
against the King, frame a Council of 16 principal persons, by whom they were
governed, receiving their Orders and resolutions.
was afterward increased, by the frequency of Taxes and Impositions, and the
continued exalting of the Duke d' Espernon, and the other Favorites, who not
only were highly suspected, but extremely hated by the greatest part of the
Citizens. Wherefore, besides the suggestions of the Duke of Guise, who kept the
Sieur de Meneville perpetually in the City for that purpose, the chief of the
people being (in favor of the League, kindled of themselves, to conspire both
against the Actions and Person of the King, had framed a Counsel of such as
were most interessed, consisting of sixteen persons (because the chief Wards,
or as they call them, the Quarters of the City were so many) which was to rule
and moderate the progress of that business, and the minds of the common
people. La Chapelle Martel, Iehan le Clerc Sieur de Bussy, President Nully, and
Charles Hotman, were from the beginning as Heads and Presidents of this
Council, and all Or Companies.
Trades were brought into it, by means of certain men chosen by them, one of
each profession, who being admitted to this Council, made their relations, and
received their orders, concerning whatsoever was resolved by the Sixteen, as
well for the defense of the City, as the service of the League, and to oppose
themselves against the designs of the King and his Favorites. The meetings of
this Council was at first in the College of Fortet, commonly called the Le
berceau de la Ligne.
Cradle of the League, afterward they assembled themselves in the Covent of the
Dominicans, or Jacobines; and at last, for fear of being suspected and
discovered, they met not any more together in any certain determinate place;
but sometimes in one private house, sometimes in another, with wonderful
secrecy.

But nevertheless all these things were known unto the King, by the relation of
Nicholas Poulain, who, (as we have said before) moved, either by hope of
reward, Nicholas Poulain discovers all the Plots of the League unto the King.
or by the sting of conscience, made the King acquainted with every particular,
by means of Monsieur d' O and the High-Chancellor; for, as a chief instrument
in the Union of the Parisians, he knew the most hidden counsels that were
plotted in that Congregation. But they of the League, not yet finding that
their practices were discovered, and being fomented and swelled with promises
by the Duke of Guise, and Don Bernardino Mendozza the Spanish Lieger at Paris,
their boldness passed so far, that besides having possessed the whole scope of
the City, listed secretly those men that were fit to bear Arms, and made great
provisions to arm them, they had also begun to communicate with other principal
Cities of the Kingdom, to raise and unite them in the same Conspiracy, which
being by inveterate use and custom grown to an unbounded liberty, they began
already to think, not only of seizing upon strong Towns and Fortresses, but
went so far, as to dare conspire against the Kings own Person, that they might
be able afterward to order the affairs of the Kingdom at their pleasure, and
as the League should think fit.

It happened, that this counsel of the League being held one day in the
Jesuits College, a Proposition was made by the Confederates, They of the
League plot to surprise Boulogne by the Spanish Fleet, which is revealed by
P^ulain.
in the name of the Spanish Ambassador, to surprise the Town of Boulogne, a
Fortress in Picardy, seated upon the Shore of the The Author in many places
calls that the Ocean Sea, which we call the British Sea.
Ocean Sea, then under the Government of the Duke of Espennon, and in his name
kept by the Sieur de Bernay, with the Authority of Governor. The Proposers
alleged, that the Catholic King being about to set forth a mighty Fleet to go
for England, was content, that (using his Forces in favor of that League) they
should land in France at their first arrival, provided they might be furnished
with a strong, large, and convenient Harbor, where they might securely enter;
that there was no place more fit then Boulogne, seated in those parts which
were nearest the City of Paris, placed right against England, hard by Flanders,
to receive supplies from thence; the Duke of Parma being there, raising a very
great Army, to join with the Forces of the Fleet: They showed, that the
Enterprise was not difficult; for the Provost Vetus, a faithful instrument of
the League, using every three months to ride his circuit, and visit those
parts, with fifty of his Attendants, or guard; so called, because in old time
they went with Bows and Arrows.
Archers, which were commonly wont to go along with him, might surprise one of
the Gates of the Town at his entry, and keep it till he were releived by the
Duke of Aumale with the Forces of the Province, at whose coming, those few
Soldiers which were there in the Garrison being cut off, it was most easy to
make themselves Masters of the place; which being a very principal one, was
greatly desired also by the Duke of Aumale himself, who never having been able
to attain to the absolute Government of Picardy, tried all ways and plots,
though bold and dangerous, to compass it. This attempt of Boulogne did very
much please the Confederates, hoping that all the Spanish Forces would turn
unexpectedly in favor of their designs; but, it was no less hopeful to the
intents of the Ambassador Mendozza, considering the great benefit the Navy
would receive by so important a place, and so large, so commodious an Harbor,
as well in the prosecution of the Enterprise upon England, as if it should be
employed in the affairs of France: wherefore the common opinion concurring to
the same end, it was resolved in the Council, that the business should be
attempted, and the Provost being informed thereof, who was most ready to
undertake it, the fitting assignation was given to the Duke of Aumale, who, by
reason of his wonderful inclination to the affairs of the League, and his
desire to make himself absolute in the Government of Picardy, did, with as much
readiness, put himself in order for the design. But, Lieutenant Poulain was no
less sollicitous then they, to give the King intelligence of all the business,
by means of the High Chancellor: so that Monsieur de Bernay being advertised,
and carefully prepared, 1585.
received the Provost in so dextrous a manner, that in the entry of the Gate,
between the Drawbridge and the Percullise, he was taken Prisoner with the
greatest part of his men: and the Duke of Aumale appearing a while after under
the Walls, was, by the fury of the Canon shot forced to retire.

Yet, for all the failing of this Enterprise, did not the Confederates find,
that their secret Consultations were laid open to the Kings knowledge; but,
ascribing the succesless event of that attempt to chance, and to the wonted
diligence of the Sieur de Bernay; they continued their accustomed inclinations
with so much ardour, that they consulted of taking the King himself, They of
the League consult about taking the King, as he returned from hunting.
returning with a slender Guard (as he was wont to do) from the Boys de
Vincennes, whither he retiring himself from time to time to the exercise of his
devotions (or as his detracters said, of his debauches) at his return entered by
the Port S. Antoine, the farthest part of all the City from the Louvre, where
his Guards were, and about which the Court was lodged. But they themselves had
not courage to prosecute that attempt, not having any Head of the Confederate
Princes there present, and the King having notice of it by the same means,
began to take better heed to himself, and to go with more caution thorough the
City, and the places about it, causing himself always to be attended by the
Captains of his Guards, and by a good number of his most trusty Gentlemen, not
suffering the five and forty, appointed for that service particularly, to stir
far from his Person. He was oftentimes thinking to chastise their temerity, and
to revenge himself, as well of the contempt which the Preachers showed,
speaking publicly against him, as of the conspiracies of those stirers up of
the people, which had caused the greatest and most important City of his
Kingdom to revolt against him; but many things withheld him from it; the Treaty
begun with the King of Navarre, the end whereof he desired to see before he
gave any new disturbance to the League; the near coming in of the foreign
Army, to oppose the violence whereof, if he should not agree with the King of
Navarre, he was necessitated to make use of the Forces of the League, and keep
united with the Lords of the House of Lorain; much less was that a fit
conjuncture to break out into open War with them, by punishing the Parisians,
the so numerous Forces of such a populous City alone requiring many
preparations to subdue them, and the absence of the Queen his Mother, without
whose advice he was not wont to take any resolutions of such consequence as
concerned the whole sum of his affairs To these weighty respects, and the
unfitness of the time, was added the Office also of Monsieur de Villequier,
who, being Governor of Paris, either out of a certain propension, which men
have to defend and excuse those that are under their command, or out of a
belief that they conspired, not immediately against the King, but only for the
good of the Catholic party, and against the Duke d' Espernon, or else
disdaining, that in his Government, others should know more of the secret
affairs of that People, than he himself, and should, in a manner, tax him of
negligence, labored to make them appear liars, and satisfied the King* by
assuring him, that the people did not bear him ill will, and that they plotted
not any thing at all against him, and finally, endeavored, by several means,
to persuade him to dissemble, and bear with some indiscretions of the People,
who were jealous of their Religion. In which opinion Secretary Villeroy did
often also concur; being intent, by all ways possible, to hinder the further
greatness of Espernon.

Thus the King, by dissembling, increased the popular boldness and temerity* so
that the Duke of Mayenne being about this time returned to Paris (who seeing
his Army destroyed by toil and sickness in Guienne, and not having been able to
obtain from the King, either recruits of men, or supplies of money, was come
personally to Court* after the taking of Chastillon) the Heads of the Parisians
were ready to make their addresses to him, aspiring to bring their designs
about, under the protection and conduct of his authority. The D^sign of taking
the Bastile, Arcenal, Paris, and the Louvre, and to cut in pieces the Minions
and the Kings adherents, and to take the King himself prisoner, revealed, and
not effected.
Hot-man, Bussy, la Chapelle Mortel, President Nully, Prevost the Curate of S.
Severine, and the Preacher Vincestre, went secretly by night unto him, and made
him acquainted with their Forces, the union of the people, the Arms already
gathered, and with the intention they had, not only to reduce the City under
the power of the League, but also to seize upon the Kings person, and put his
Favorites to death, who gave him such wicked Counsel in favor of the
Hugonots. The Duke of Mayenne, who, because he had ever been of a contrary
opinion to his Brothers, was not fully informed of these particular practices,
managed by the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal, and who, by nature, was averse
from too bold precipitate Councels, stood a while in doubt, and took time to
resolve till the night following: which being come, 1586.
and the same Deputies of the Union being come unto him, he desired them to
inform him more distinctly of their intentions, of their Forces, and of the
Plots to which they trusted, being not disposed to undertake any thing which
was not sure to be effected. The Deputies presently did so, and related to him,
That first of all they meant to make themselves masters of all the chief places
of the City, and that they had laid the Design in this manner: That to get the
Bastille, they would go by night to the house of the Chevalier du Captain of
the ordinary VVatch of Paris.
Guet, who dwelt in St. Catherines, a very remote place, and by one of the
Archers which are wont to wait upon him, who was privy to the Plot, cause him
to be told, that the King asked for him; at which, he opening his house to go
out, an hundred armed men should enter, and having taken him, should force him
to open the Gate of the Bastille: That, at the same time, certain Archers and
Sergeants, with whom they had agreed, should cause the A Court of Justice in
Paris as Guildball in London, where also many are imprisoned.
Chastelet to be opened, under pretense of bringing certain prisoners thither,
as it often happened, and rushing in, armed men should make themselves masters
of it: That the gate of the The Magazine of Arms.
Arcenal, where there was no Guard, should be opened unto them by the two
founders of Ordnance, whom they had dealt withal, and who dwelling within
there, had promised to open it when they pleased: Which things being performed,
they would presently run to the houses of the High Chancellor, of the first
President of the Parliament, of La Guesle the Atturney-General.
Procureur-General, and of the Kings Counselors, who, being taken unexpectedly
in their beds, might easily be cut in pieces without resistance. Which things
being done, they would barricado all the streets with barrels full of earth and
dirt, and with Chains, Bars, and other things, to the end that none might be
able to relieve the City, or draw men in Arms together, every Ward standing
upon the defense of their own quarter; and eight thousand armed men chosen
amongst them all, under the command of some expert Leader, or of the Duke of
Mayenne himself, if he pleased to be there, should beset the Louvre, where
there being only the ordinary Guards, and the retinue of Courtiers, it would be
easy to enter it by force, or constrain all those that were there to yield by
Famine, having no provision of victuals within it: which being done, all the
Kings Minions, and other Counselors should be cut in pieces, and the King
himself put in a Monastery, till the Princes of the League had resolved of a
future Form of Government: the Duke of Mayenne being to go presently with new
Forces into Guienne, and the Catholic King sending in a mighty Army over the
Pirenean mountains, to destroy the King of Navarre and the Hugonot party. At
these proposals, the Duke of Mayenne, a stayed man, was in much greater
suspense then before, both for the cruelty of the fact, and because he thought
it not secure to attempt such things upon the only foundation of the common
people, who, for the most part, are deceitful; and therefore answered the
Deputies, That they should think better of the ordering that enterprise, and
that he also would think upon it, and provide Commanders and other necessary
means for the execution, if he resolved to meddle in it: And indeed, either
doubtful in mind, or to have more convenience to think upon a business of so
great consequence, he fained himself not well, and neither stirred abroad, nor
admitted any to visit him.

But, in the mean time, Poulain, who knew all the business, was not slow in
going to the High Chancellor the next morning betimes, to make him acquainted
with the whole design; but he found him going out of his lodging sooner then
ordinary to Counsel, wherefore seeing much company with him, he was resolved to
defer the discovery till the afternoon. It happened, that he being very much in
debt, some Creditors of his having got leave to arrest him, lighted upon him
that morning, and caused him to be led prisoner to the Chastelet, where, seeing
himself shut up, he, by a private note, let the High-Chancellor know of the
disaster that had befallen him, and how necessary it was that he should speak
with him about things of infinite importance: whereupon the Chancellor causing
him to be brought bound before him, took him into his closet, pretending to
examine the occasion why he was imprisoned, and there he was fully informed by
him, of all that had been proposed to the Duke of Mayenne, and of all the
designs and attempts of the Parisians; but, to deceive the standers by, seeming
to be very angry with him, and that he would have him sell his Office to
satisfy his Creditors, he sent him bound to Secretary Villeroy, who set down
his whole relation in writing; and, to cover the business, so that those of the
Union might not have the least suspicion, he, with an angry countenance, and
more angry words, commanded him to be carried back to Prison, from whence, by a
feigned security, which the King himself caused him to give, he was set at
liberty a few days after. But the King being informed of the conspiracy of the
Parisians, (though Monsieur de Ville-quier continued to assure him, and to cry
out they were but lies and inventions, Poulain being often rebuked and
villified by him, as one who brought to despair by his own evil life, tried by
this calumny to make his profit) commanded nevertheless that the Chevalier du
Guet should remove and lodge in the Bastile; caused the Founders of Ordnance to
be put out of the Arcenal, and put in the Provost Papin with his Archers for a
Guard; strengthened the Guards at the entry of the Louvre, and drew some of the
Duke of Espernon's Horse and Foot within a mile of the Town, which in time of
need might be brought in by the Garden of the The Garden of the Louvre.
Tuilleryes, at a back gate opening into the fields.

They of the Union were much astonished, finding all their secrets were
discovered, but they knew not upon whom to lay the fault, nor could they
mistrust Poulain, because the accident of his imprisonment had excellently
disguised his intelligence. But the Duke of Mayenne was much more discontented
at it; who having never consented absolutely to the conspiracy of the
Parisians, saw himself yet included in their error, and as it were engaged
within the Kings power, by whom he might very easily have been taken, had it
not been for those respects which made him proceed warily, and dissemble all
things to attain to the end of his designs: wherefore if he had before feigned
himself sick, that he might have more convenience to ripen his determination;
now he was necessitated to do the same for fear of being taken and put to death
by the King if he should go to the Louvre. But when after the space of many
days it was known that the King made no greater preparations, being satisfied
with having secured himself; the Duke of Mayenne recovering courage, resolved
to leave the City, and retire to his Government of Bourgongne; whereupon going
to the Louvre, he made as if it had been necessary for him to go into the
Country by reason of his want of health, and asked the King leave; who for all
his dissimulation could not forbear to say, How now Duke? will you forsake your
League? whereat the Duke feigning not to understand him, and saying, That he
knew not what his Majesty meant, departed without further delay; the King
rejoicing no less to see him go, and leave the Parisians without a Head, and
without any settled resolution; then he to be out of that danger, and to have
escaped the Kings Forces without hazard of his life or reputation.

The Duke of Guise took it very ill, that the Parisians had revealed their
designs to his Brother, as well because knowing himself to have a freer courage
and a more subtle sprightly wit, he desired in all things to be the man that
should give the first motion and beginning, and that should order the course of
all enterprises; as because he knew the nature and actions of the Duke of
Mayenne were not altogether conformable to the aims of his intents: but the
Parisians excused themselves, that they suspected their counsels were already
discovered; whereupon their fear lest the King should prevent them, had caused
the determination of imparting it to the Duke of Mayenne, that they might
execute the business without delay, having also believed, that the having
recourse to one Brother more than to another was of no great importance, since
one was present, and the other far off, and employed in other affairs:
Wherefore the Duke of Guise, not to be idle in the midst of so many businesses,
and not to let his reputation grow stale and decay, had upon slight occasions
begun a War voluntarily with the Duke of Bouillon, who possessing Sedan and
Iamets, very strong and important Towns, with other less places upon the
Confines of Lorain and Champagne, did by them keep open the passage for the
German Army which came in favor of the Hugonots to enter France; wherefore the
Duke of Guise, who desired to shut up that way by trying to drive the Duke of
Bouillon from thence, having made a great complaint, that the Garrisons placed
in those Towns which were under Sedan, (where great store of Hugonots were
gathered together) did much harm to the villages joining upon Champagne, he
assaulted suddenly and took Donzi, a place in that territory very commodious to
block up the principal City, as he presently would have done, if another
enterprise had not diverted him.

The Governor of Aussone, a very principal Town in the Duchy of Bourgongne,
denied to yield it up to the Duke of Mayenne, to whom it had been particularly
assigned, being encouraged by his so far distance, and his having been employed
so long with the Army in Guienne; and the Master of the Horse.
Grand Esquier Lieutenant of that Province, a man merely depending upon the
King, though he made show of desiring to force that place, did yet cunningly
defer to do so, nor could he find the way to bring him to his due obedience*
Wherefore the Duke of Guise, who would endure no such affronts in the Provinces
held and governed by his Family, and particularly in Bourgongne, closely united
with Champagne, and standing upon the Confines of the Kingdom, and jealous of
his Brothers reputation, and of his own, laying aside the enterprise of Sedan,
came suddenly into Bourgongne with all the Forces of the League, Aussone a
str^ng place in the Duchy of Bourgongne besieged and taken by the Duke of
Guise.
and without other leave from the King, unexpectedly besieged Aussone, which
having a sufficient Garrison, the Defendents showed themselves so courageous,
that in their first sally they defeated Colonel St. Paul's Regiment of Foot,
killing six Captains and three hundred Soldiers, and in the following assaults
which were fiercely given unto the wall, b^at back the Assailants oftentimes
with much loss; but being straightened by the continual battery of three and
twenty Cannon, the greatest part borrowed from the Duke of Lorain, and
distressed with Mines, Escalodoes, and redoubled assaults, and expecting no
relief from any place, because some few Foot and Horse raised in Mombelliard,
(which State borders upon Bourgongne) and in Geneva by Monsieur de Clervant,
were defeated by Monsieur de Rhosne Camp-Master to the Duke of Guise, they
capitulated in the end to yield themselves, and having leave from the Duke to
go to Sedan and Iamets, upon the eighteenth of August they delivered up the
place to the Duke of Guise, who having made the Baron de Senesay Governor,
returned presently to the Government of Champagne, and from thence went to
Soissons, where in a Diet of the principal Heads of the League, it was
resolved, that the War with the Duke of Bouillon should be continued; wherefore
as he was resolute in his determinations, and most quick in the execution,
having in a few days put his Army in order, he attaqued Racroy, a place
fortified after the modern way, and constantly defended by the Sieur de
Monmore. But in that multiplicity of assaults and variety of attempts, wherein
the art of the Duke of Guise was admirable, and his valor no less, the having
no hope of relief constrained the Defendents to yield at last; amongst which,
one called Persevalle, and two other Captains corrupted with money and promises
by the Duke, feigned to retire to Sedan, and Iamets, giving him assurance they
would deliver up a Gate of each of those Cities, when it should be their turn
to have the guard of them; upon which hopes, though with forces inferior to
what was requisite for the besieging a place of so great moment, he quartered
at Moucon, a Town near Sedan, and resolved under color of streightning it, to
expect the performance of those promises.

But while the Duke of Guise does these things in Champagne, the Queen Mother
(the place of interview with the King of Navarre being appointed) was come to
Cognac, attended by Ludovico Gonzaga Duke of Nevers, (who having left the
League, had put himself wholly under her protection), by the Marshall de Retz,
the Sieurs d' Abin, and de Rambouillet, by the Abbot Guadagni, Secretary
Pinart, Monsieur de Lansac, and diverse other personages, who for quality and
wisdom were of great esteem.

On the other side, the King of Navarre was come to Iarnac, with the Viscount
de Turenne, the Sieur de la Force, and Monguidon, the Baron de Salignac, and
many other Lords of his party; but with so great a strength, (having with him
eight hundred Horse, and few less than two thousand Foot) as at the first
notice of them, put the Queen Mother into very great suspicion, there not
wanting those who doubted, and who spread abroad a report, that she was come
with an intention to take her, and carry her away by force to Rochel. But after
it was known that the King of Navarre was come in that manner for his own
security, as one who by reason of his own weakness, and the usage he had
received at other times, was in doubt of being deceived; and that the ingenuity
of his nature, and the absurdity of that business had taken away all
jealousies, they met at last upon the eighteenth of October at St. Bris,
equally distant from the places whence they came, there being on the Queens
part besides her ordinary Court, only the Captain of her Guard with fifty
Horse, The interview between the Queen Mother and the King of Navarre at S.
Bris, wherein nothing was concluded.
and on the King of Navarre's Captain Lomelle with as many. The Gates were
guarded by two Companies of Foot, one of the one party, and the other of the
other, and in the field the Cavalry of both sides, in two several Squadrons;
the King of Navarre's commanded by the Count de la Vall, and Monsieur de la
Noue; and the Queen-Mother's by the Sieur de Malicorne and other Gentlemen of
the Country.

Their public discourses passed in complaints on both sides; the King
lamenting that the King of Navarre's obstinacy not to change his Religion, and
to keep so far from Court, put the King upon a necessity of making War: and on
the other side, the King of Navarre complained, that whilst he stood still
obedient to the Kings commands, and most observant of the Edicts, he to
satisfy the Lords of Guise, and other Enemies to quietness, had broke the
Peace. But being come to secret conference, the Queen laid open the conditions
which the King propounded of the divorce of Queen Margaret, and of the Marriage
with the Princess of Lorain, who was there present, and being of an age already
marriageable, showed tokens of most noble education and discreet modesty. To
this Match the Queen told him, that a Manifest should be added to declare him
first Prince of the Blood, and lawful Successor to the Crown; and alleged,
that from thence would necessarily result the disuniting of the Duke of Lorain,
Father to the Princess, from the League, and from the Lords of Guise, who
losing so principal a foundation, either would become quiet of their own
accord, or if they did not submit themselves freely to the Kings will, they
might with help of the German Army, which was upon the point of entering the
Confines, be easily ruined and suppressed. That to attain so great a good,
nothing else was required from the King of Navarre, but only his conversion to
the Catholic Religion, and his return to Court; for as concerning the
Excommunication of Rome, and the Popes Declaration of his incapacity to succeed
in the Crown, as soon as he should be a real Catholic, the persecution of the
Guises being taken away, and the League destroyed, the revocation of it would
without difficulty be obtained; for the facilitating whereof, the King, who at
first was displeased that Fabio Mirto a Neapolitan Archbishop of Nazaret, had
been declared Nuncio for France in the place of Girolamo Ragazzoni Bishop of
Bergamo a Venetian, and had refused to accept of him, was since persuaded to
receive him; and besides, Monsieur de St. Goart, Marquess of Pisani, his
ordinary Ambassador to the Pope, he had also appointed the Duke of Luxembourg
for extraordinary Ambassador, both men of such worth and prudence as would
easily know how to overcome the greatest difficulties they should find in that
Court.

This indeed was the best resolution and the most powerful to destroy the Lords
of Guise, and the League; to restore the first authority, and Majesty to the
Kings person, and to put the affairs of France into a secure quietness; and the
King of Navarre himself was of opinion that it was so, whereupon he took only
two days time to consider of it. But it was decreed that things should go in
another manner, and that not peace and accommodation, but war and ruin should
make way for the King of Navarre's exaltation; for on the one side his thoughts
represented such a fear of being catched again, and deceived, by the bitter
memory of St. Bartholomew's day; and on the other so weak hopes of his
succession to the Crown, by reason of the youth of the King and Queen, and an
infinite number of accidents which might cross it in length of time, that the
shame of forsaking the Hugonot party, from which he acknowledged his present
condition, and of having (to the scandal of his name) changed his Religion so
often, condemning himself not only of inconstancy, but even of Atheism, if it
should be known that he swayed his Faith to the interest of State, he resolved
not to consent to the Queens Propositions, but to see if by another way there
might be any means to obtain the same ends.

With this determination he returned to the second Conference in the same
place, where after the same complaints, to conceal what was treated of between
them, they came to secret discourses, wherein he showed that the foreign Forces
might altogether as well be united with the Kings, and turn with his to destroy
the League, and easily to suppress the House of Lorain, without his being
obliged to change his Religion, or come to Court: That the King in former times
had plainly known the ingenuity of his Nature, and the desire he had, not only
to obey him, but also to make him to be obeyed by those stiff-necked Rebels,
against whom he would employ not only the German Army, but all his own forces,
friends and adherents, and his very life: That he was ready to give the King
all possible assurance, and hoped that in a short time his actions would of
themselves give testimony of his faith and sincerity: That therefore it was now
superfluous to treat of changing his Religion, a thing of so great moment, and
to be resolved upon with very mature deliberation, and with those circumstances
of counsels, instructions, and other particulars, which might satisfy his
Conscience, and give just pretenses to his resolutions: That it was also out of
season to press his coming to Court, where he could not secure himself he
should stay without danger, till the Guises were utterly suppressed, whose
power would never suffer his mind to rest in quiet till he saw them made unable
to practice their wonted machinations: and with what heart, with what courage
could he return to live in Paris, where the power of the League was so mighty,
and the minds of the people so cruel, unless the Incendiaries and Stirrers up
of tumultuous conspiracies were taken out of the World? that the King therefore
should take what the nature of things would permit in that present condition,
and become certain (with reason) that their common Enemies being the same, and
the same interests pleading for them both, he would labor with that candor
and that efficacy which the exigency of the matter required.

To these reasons the Queen answered, That as his Conversion was easy, so
neither could it want just pretenses; for if the King should make a League with
him while he was disobedient to the Catholic Church, and openly
excommunicated, besides the infamy which his name would incur, (by mingling in
a conjunction not only abhorred, and never so much as in thought consented to
by any other of the most Christian Kings, but also immediately contrary to the
Vow and Oath taken solemnly at his Consecration) he should moreover give color
to the complaints, and justify the practices of the League; and which was of
very great consideration, he should stir up all other Catholic Princes of the
World against him. That upon their agreement would presently ensue the revolt
of the City of Paris, (already in an uproar with but seeing that they treated
with him) and the rebellion of many other chief Cities, as also the alienation
of all the Catholic Nobility, and the greater part of the Kingdom: that this
was the way to facilitate the King of Spain's assistance of the League, who
would presently be forced to turn those preparations into France which were
made against England. That at the first news of it, the Pope, of an angry hasty
nature, would run precipitately to Excommunications and Interdictions, would
presently dispatch great Supplies in favor of the League, and stir up all the
Italian Princes to unite themselves with him for the defense of Religion. That
the Duke of Lorain would not consent the marriage of his Daughter should be
consummate whilst he was an alien from the Church, nor would the States endure
he should be declared the lawful Successor of the Crown whilst he held the
Faith of the Hugonots. In conclusion, that his perseverance was accompanied
with all manner of difficulties and impediments* but his conversion did
wonderfully facilitate and lay open the way to all his hopes, neither doubtful
not uncertain, but well grounded and secure.

The King of Navarre excused himself, sometimes with the indecency of changing,
sometimes with his Conscience, sometimes discovering his fear of being brought
into the net again; but in his excuses the perplexity of his mind* and the
force of the Queens reasons appeared; whereupon new time was taken, and another
Conference appointed within two or three days, wherein to facilitate the
business, the Duke of Nevers was admitted on the Queens side, and the Viscount
de Turenne on the King of of Navarre's; but they (contrary to expectation) did
rather increase the difficulties, than open the way to any resolution: for the
Duke of Nevers desiring to show his Eloquence and Learning as he was wont to
do, wrought greater doubts in the mind of the King of Navarre, to whom the
Italian arts were suspected; and the Viscount, a man no less wise and cunning,
than stout and valiant, though he showed a great inclination to favor the
Queens reasons, yet the common opinion was, that for fear of being abandoned
with the Duke of Momorancy, (so they called the Marshall d' Anville after the
death of his Brother) and of losing those great hopes which he had of power and
command in the Hugonot party, neither desired Peace, nor the King of Navarre's
Conversion; and that therefore he secretly dissuaded him from it: wherefore
neither in this third Conference could they conclude any thing; but at the very
time the King of Navarre had warning given him to take heed of the artifices of
the King and Queen, who at the same instant while they treated with him, did
assure the Popes Nuncio, the Duke of Guise, and the people of Paris, that
whatsoever was done was in favor of the League; and that the end would
justify, that this Treaty included such a design as would at last break forth
for the good of Religion; whereby his jealousy increasing, not thinking it
safe to trust either the Kings inconstancy, or the Queens too much cunning, he
resolved in the end to follow the fortune of the Hugonots, and not to trust the
Court; neither would he come to the Conference any more himself in person, but
continued to send the Viscount of Turenne, who treating very dexterously with
the Queen, would never come to any conclusion at all.

With these Negotiations began the year 1587; upon the first day whereof the
King celebrating the Ceremonies of the Knights of the St. Esprit in Paris, 1587.
The Solemn Oath of Henry the Third.
swore solemnly not to suffer any other Religion than the Roman Catholic. This
Oath of his, as it was sudden and inconsiderate, so both then, and many times
after, it was blamed, as absurd, and contrary to his own designs: for, to treat
of an Agreement with the King of Navarre, and vow the extirpation of the
Hugonots, did immediately contradict one another. But neither they that spoke
of it then, nor they that looking upon things afar off, reprehended it, did so
afterward, when they knew either the Kings intention, or the contents of what
was secretly treated with the King of Navarre: for Monsieur de Rambouillet
being come post from P^ictou, and arrived already at Court upon the 27 of
December* with Letters from the Queen, and with a Relation of all that had
passed with the King of Navarre, whereby the King was certified that it was
impossible to conclude any thing, he standing averse from changing his
Religion, and proposing an Agreement without speaking any thing about matters
of Faith; the King, to take away that hope from the King of Navarre, and to
make him consent to be converted; or if he would not change his mind, being
resolved, or rather necessitated to join with the League to oppose the German
Army, made this Protestation very opportunely, whereby he at once beat down all
the complaints and calumnies of the Heads of the League, and appeased in great
part (at least for a time) the minds of the Parisians, who (as the commotions
of the people are wont) varied their thoughts and inclinations with the breath
of every the slightest accident; whereupon he was afterward able to stir to
gather an Army, and turn against the foreign Forces, without being molested by
the Parisians; though the wonted Incendiaries did not fail to strive to raise
them more than once. The Kings inclination was clearly seen in this, That when
the course of affairs did necessarily force him to treat of any thing in favor
of the Hugonots, he consented to it very slowly, ambiguously, and after long
consideration: But if the business were to favor or unite himself to the
Catholic party, he concurred in that with so much readiness and resolution,
that his motion to the benefit to the benefit of the Catholic Faith plainly
appeared to be natural, but the other produced by necessity, and violently
constrained.

And as for the King of Navarre, the news of the Kings Prote^^ation being
speedily come unto his ear, and he complaining that the proceedings were
contrary to what was treated with him; the Duke of Nevers answered him
opportunely, That if he called to mind all the late Treaties, he should not
find that ever the King had offered to tolerate or embrace the Hugonot
Religion, but that indeed he had tried all possible means to make him forsake
it, and turn to the Catholic, in which the King was so fully resolved to live
and die, that no accident, how averse soever it might be, could ever be able to
draw him from it. However it were, this is certain, that the Queen having by
Monsieur de Rambouillet given the King account of the King of Navarre's last
resolution, received Commission at his return to change her discourse in that
Treaty, and in stead of the propounded League between them, to t^y if she could
procure a Truce for some few months, to gain time to make preparations against
the Army of the Germans. But neither did this take effect: for though the
Viscount of Turenne came often to the Queen, and that the Duke of Nevers and
the Marshall de Byron went often to the King of Navarre; yet they concluded
nothing but a suspension of Arms for so few days, that the King did not care to
ratify it; and the King of Navarre, not willing to retard the coming of the
Germans, broke off the Treaty, and went away to Rochel; as also the Queen, with
the same speed, beyond her age, or the season of the year, returned to Paris;
where all the late Treaties being repeated and discussed, chiefly by the
counsel of Monsieur de Villeroy it was concluded necessary for the King to
unite himself to the Heads of the League betimes, and with their Forces
together to oppose the German Army, so that the King of Navarre might not by
any means possible be able to join with them, since they saw his mind could not
be brought by any composition to an agreement with the King, and that the
firmness of his resolution could not be broken by any largeness of conditions:
wherefore nothing remained, but to follow the old way, trodden by so many other
Kings, till some other occasion should make an overture of new resolutions, and
to resist the violence of the Hugonot Army, that the Kingdom might not be left
a prey to the fury of strangers, that the Royal Majesty might not utterly be
abased and made contemptible, and that he might not be ruined while he was
unarmed, and an Enemy to, or at least distrustful of both the Factions.

Monsieur de Villeroy argued, that ^ase and want of Arms had taken away the
splendor and reputation from the Kings person: That the Taxes and Impositions
excessively increased, had rendered it odious; and that therefore taking Arms
again himself with a mighty Army, showing his wonted valor and greatness of
courage, and putting an end to the calamities of War by an absolute Victory, he
might recover his former Majesty, make the shadows of so many contrived powers
of his Subjects vanish with the Sunshine of his greatness, and strike fear and
terror into those who thought to force him to consent to their own wills: He
showed that this was the true way to dissipate and frustrate the strength of
the League; for that when he should once command his own Armies, the Nobility
and Soldiery would much more willingly follow his Standard than the Ensigns of
the Lords of Guise, and that every one would rather draw water from the
fountain (if they might) than from the brook. He also alleged that by his
Declaration in favor of the Catholics (which his actions would show to be
sincere) he might assure himself of the Popish and Spanish Forces, since
neither of them would ever dare to stir against him, when the pretense of
Religion was taken away: and that it was already known how the Pope, forced by
the truth and evidence of reason, had answered Cardinal Pelle-ve, urging him
for assistance in favor of the League, that he knew not how to take Arms
against a lawful Catholic and religious King, unless first they could make it
plainly appear that he favored the establishment of the Hugonots; and the King
of Spain not having the courage to declare himself openly, had gathered his
Forces together under pretense of making War with England, waiting for an
opportunity to turn against him, but not otherwise than the cloak of Religion
might give him occasion. Moreover, he affirmed that all other counsels were but
politic subtilties and inventions, new ways, difficult knots, impossible
Chimaera's, and deceitful shadows: That this only was the great highway and
beaten road that led to victory and repose; after which, lightning the weight
of their loads and burdens, he might give breath and quiet to the common
people, and get the love and affection of all his Subjects. In sum, he
concluded with his wonted Maxim, That the King could no way more easily destroy
the League, than by carrying himself plainly and sincerely, as the other Kings
his glorious Predecessors had done: for by taking away the foundation of
pretenses and complaints, the fabric of all those plotted designs would fall
to ruin of it self.

These reasons, or rather evident necessity, made the King resolve to unite
himself with the League, and to oppose the Army of the Germans; and therefore
he presently dispatched Myron the Physician to the Duke of Guise, to let him
know that he had endeavored by the Queen his Mothers late Interview, to draw
the business out in length, and to procure a suspension of Arms with the King
of Navarre, thereby to divert the entry of the Germans, and make them fall
asunder by delays, as he had prosperously done so many other times, without
indangering the whole sum of affairs; but having found the King of Navarre's
propositions were very hard, and the time of the coming of the Germans still
drawing on, he was resolved to oppose them by force: That he would dispatch the
Sieur de Sancy to the Cantons of the Swisses, to make strong Levies: That he
was preparing an Army commanded by the Duke of Ioyeuse, to be sent against the
King of Navarre, to the end that being kept in play, he might not be able to
pass the Loyre, and come to join with the Germans: That he would make another
ready to march where need should require, but that the Germans being first to
come into Lorain, and then into Champagne and Bourgongne, Provinces governed by
him and the Duke of Mayenne his Brother, it was also necessary that they should
take Arms, and calling in all their friends and dependents, should make up a
Body of an Army, able to wait upon and distress that of the Hugonots in their
entry. Myron the Physician found the Duke of Guise at Moucon near Sedan* where,
with the Forces he had, by slight inconsiderable enterprises, he endeavored to
streighten that place, expecting that Perseval and the others that went out of
Rocroy being corrupted by money and his promises, should give him some
opportunity to surprise either Iamets or Sedan it self: for one of them was in
one City, and the other two in the other. Myron delivered what the King had
given him in charge, adding the Queen-Mothers Exhortations, accompanied with
kind Letters, expressing a confidence in him; and without difficulty (because
the necessity of opposing the Enemies was reciprocal) carried back word from
the Duke of Guise, that he would obey his Majesty's commands, and that drawing
together the friends and dependents of his house, he would not fail of those
endeavors which he had always been wont to lend in the exigencies of the
Crown; beseeching his Majesty that he would but once free himself of the
stubbornness of the Hugonots, and give way that his Kingdom might be purged
from the deadly poison of Heresy.

But this liberty of framing an Army to oppose the Germans being given to the
Duke of Guise, (which howsoever he would have taken of himself) the King was
still in wonderful great difficulties which way he should carry himself, both
to hold the King of Navarre in play, and make war with so great an Army, as was
ready to invade his Kingdom: for as when the wills of his Subjects were
unanimous, and well united with him to the same end, the French Nation was so
warlike, that it needed little to fear the force of any foreign Enemy; so now
having not only a very great number of Hugonots in every Province, but (which
at the present raised greater difficulties) the Intentions and Forces of the
Catholics being divided by several ends, the event of things was by that
discord made very doubtful and uncertain: Nor did the Victory of the Duke of
Guise represent it self unto the Kings mind with less terror than that of the
King of Navarre and the Germans, not being able which way soever the event
succeeded, to promise himself any thing but infinite dangers, and greater
troubles than he had ever had in times past: which afflicted him so much the
more, because, being a Prince of exceeding providence and quick foresight, he
had all difficulties and future encounters as it were ever present before him;
whereby he was not only taken off from his wonted entertainments, but watching
whole nights in most deep considerations, he went often out of his Chamber in
the most silent hours, and coming into the lodgings of the Queen his Mother,
held long consultations there: to which were called (as more trusted than any
others) sometimes the Marshall de Retz, sometimes the Abbot del Been: for the
Duke of Espernon, though most beloved by the King, and master of his favor,
was yet an open Enemy to the Guises; and Villeroy on the other side, who for
his wisdom and experience in matters of Government was highly in esteem, was
yet suspected in this business, by reason of his enmity with the Duke of
Espernon, and all the men of greatest credit depended nearly upon one of these
two, nor (though he fained the contrary) did the King much like or esteem the
Duke of Nevers, because he thought with his wisdom to rule in all things as an
Oracle. Thus all the secret consultations were reduced only to four persons,
unless the Widow Duchess of Vzes, a Lady of great worth, and excellent wit,
and who, as it is believed, had also in her younger days been very acceptable
to the King, did participate in the counsels of some affairs, though not of the
most secret and intimate ones. To these the Sieur de Rambouillet was often
joined, who, of a subtle nature, powerful eloquence, and profound learning,
began to rise in credit near the King and the Queen Mother; but he was not yet
made a secure Confident, and therefore all secret businesses did not appear
unmasked to him. Thus all the present difficulties and future doubts being
exactly sisted among these, and the opinions of the other Cabinet-Counsellors
being heard upon some particulars, the Kings determination was shut up within
these limits: That the Duke of Ioyeuse with competent Forces should go against
the King of Navarre, but that Iehan Sieur de Lavardin, of whose endeavors the
King was very confident, should go along with him as his Lieutenant and
Moderator, to the end that the King of Navarre might be held in action, but not
suppressed; it being sufficient to keep him so in play, that he might not get
loose to join himself with the German Army. That the care of hindering the
entry, and opposing the first violence of the foreign Army should be left to
the Duke of Guise, and the other Lords of his Family, being certain that the
Duke for the haughtiness of his mind, the defense of his own estate, and the
increasing of his reputation, a thing so necessary for the Heads of popular
Factions, would pass by no occasion which should offer it self of fighting with
the Germans, from which Battle an equal joy and benefit would result which way
soever the event succeeded; for the Conquerours and the Conquered would be
equally routed and destroyed: or rather, it was very probable, that the Duke of
Guise, being much inferior in strength, would either in one or many encounters
be defeated, and by consequence the League broken to pieces; but that to
prevent the Conquerours from having free passage to run on, and do their
pleasure to the ruin of the Kingdom, the King should make up a mighty Army
with Swisse-Infantry, and with the greatest number of Nobility that he could,
to be ready to withstand all dangers, and give the Law as he pleased to both
the Conquered and Conquerors; a thought for the speciousness of it so imprinted
in the Kings mind, that as he walked alone he was often heard to break forth
into these words, A saying of Henry the III.
DE INIMICIS MEIS VINDICABO INIMICOS MEOS.

With this resolution he presently dispatched Monsieur de Sancy to the Swisses
to raise eight thousand Foot of that Nation, and the Army was begun to be
prepared wherewith the Duke of Ioyeuse was to march into Poictou and Xaintonge,
where the King of Navarre, since the Queen-Mothers departure, not losing a
minute of time, had taken Chisay upon composition, and Sassay by assault,
stormed St. Messant, and forced Fontenay to yield, surprised Mouleon, and
having made himself Master of all those Quarters, gathered all possible Forces,
called in his dependents and adherents, raised new Infantry, and set all his
endeavors on work to draw together a competent Army, wherewith he might march
to receive his Germans; to perfect which business, it being necessary to return
to Rochel to gather money, and furnish himself with ammunition, he left two
Regiments of Foot to keep those places he had gotten under the command of de
Bory, and Charboniere, Colonels, or as they are now commonly called, Maistres
de Camp.
Camp-Masters.

But the same of the King of Navarre's Successes, and the complaints of the
Catholics, who exclaimed in a manner publicly, that the Country near unto him
had been left without an Army, purposely to give him opportunity to augment his
Forces, constrained the King to hasten the dispatch of the Duke de Ioyeuse, The
King sends an Army against the King of Navarre, andgives secret order to
Lavardin to oppose, but not suppress him.
who with a great number of the Nobility, (whose favor he had exceedingly won
by his courtesy and liberality) and with between seven and eight thousand Foot
and light Horse, was almost ready to begin his march. Before his departure the
King calling to him in private Monsieur de Lavardin, (chosen Lieutenant General
of that Army, a man by reason of his ancient dependencies not ill-affected to
the King of Navarre's party) informed him of his intentions, and how necessary
it was for him to proceed with such moderation in that War, that the Hugonots
might be kept in action without putting the whole sum of affairs in hazard; it
not being fit in the difficulty of that present conjuncture, to engage the
Catholic Forces, nor venture them in such sort as might prejudice th^se
businesses that were in agitation: then after long instructions, he filled him
with great hopes and promises, if he could order matters according to the
informations he had received. But Lavardin, either not sufficiently informed in
a short discourse or two, or perchance not being able for want of capacity to
discern the Kings intention, which was, that affairs should be kept in equal
balance; or else drawn by some interessed dependents upon the King of Navarre,
was imprudently afterward in a manner the instrument of ruining that Army,
which was not taken notice of by the Duke of Ioyeuse, who (full of high
generous spirits, and puffed up with the great abundance of Nobility that
served under him) having hastily passed the Loire, fell so unexpectedly, into
the Hugonots quarters, that the Regiments of de Bory and Charboniere, which
overran the Country every where, were not able to make their retreat, but
being both surrounded in the Town of St. Eloy, thought they made very gallant
resistance for many hours, yet were they at last taken by force, and cut in
pieces to the very last man. The Sieur de Bory was left prisoner, and
Charboniere saved himself by flight at St. Messant, which Town being besieged,
and terribly battered, in the heat of that Victory was fain to yield within a
few days, and was unfortunately sacked by the violence of the Soldiers; and
with the same fury the Abbey of Maillez^is and Thonne-Carente were also taken.
But the Sieur de Lavardin not being able to resist the will of the Duke of
Ioyeuse, (who desirous of glory, not averse from the designs of the League, and
(as he said himself) desirous that the Preachers of Paris might have occasion
to magnify his actions, and make his name famous, aspired by his enterprises
to confirm that greatness to which fortune had raised him) began to attempt
that by policy, as he thought, which he could not openly bring to pass; and by
slackening the discipline of his men, and by giving the common Soldiers
frequent opportunity of spoil and plunder, was the occasion that many ran away,
(for most of them sought to get home and save what they had gotten) to which
the sicknesses and diseases being added, in part caused by hard duty, but much
more by ill government, the Army was strangely diminished in a short time;
which being known and certified by their musters, the Commanders, and Lavardine
among the first, began to advise the Duke not to proceed further till his
Infantry were recruited, without which it was impossible for him either to take
in any Towns, or to make War in the enclosed Fenny places of Xaintonge; this
counsel, and the news that came daily from Court of the Duke of Espernon's
greatness and authority, which pierced the Duke of Ioyeuse very deeply, made
him resolve to take Post, and go to the Court in person, as well to keep
himself fresh in the Kings memory, as to obtain a new addition to his Forces.
But his coming thither caused him more discontent than his absence had done
before; for he found that the Wife of his Brother Henry Count de Bouchage was
newly dead, who was Sister to the Duke d' Espernon, and had maintained that
friendship (at least in appearance) which by their emulation was wholly blotted
out of their hearts: to which misfortune was added, The Count de Bouchage
Brother to the Duke of Ioyeuse turns Capuchin after the death of his wife, whom
he dearly loved.
that the Count either out of extreme sorrow for his Wives death, whom he most
dearly loved, or out of a satiety of worldly things, or (as it was reported)
because he had so promised his Lady in her life time, took the habit of a
Capuchin, making himself be called Friar Ange de Ioyeuse, to the infinite grief
of his Brother: nor did the adverseness of his affairs end there; but at the
same time he saw the marriage concluded between the Duke of Espernon, and the
Countess of Candale, Heir of that most noble, wealthy Family; which Wedding the
King did not honor so much with the vanity of Pomps and Ceremonies, as he had
done that of the Duke de Ioyeuse, but with presents of infinite value, and with
the additions of inestimable riches, The Duke of Espernon marries the Countess
of Candal^, a rich Heir; the King honors the wedding with great presents.
whereof the Duke of Espernon was a very careful manager. To these serious
businesses the Courtiers added also light youthful discourses; for the Duke of
Espernon loving Mademoiselle Stavay one of the Queens Gentlewomen, and the Duke
of Ioyeuse Mademoiselle de Vitry, another of the same Court, whom they were
wont to present with very rich gifts: they said that the Duke of Ioyeuse at his
return found he had also quite lost the heart of Mademoiselle de Vitry; for
being won by the Duke of Espernon's presents, or the hopes of marrying Monsieur
de S. Goart, who depended upon him; with a womanish inconstancy she was turned
to that side, which either for the love he bore her, or for envy and emulation,
did wonderfully afflict him. These things striking deeply into the mind of
Ioyeuse, but much more the lessening of the Kings favor, which he knew to be
much abated, (having publicly told him that the Court reckoned of him as a
Poltron, and that he was not able to wipe off that blemish) he returned to the
Army with those few forces that were granted him, and (as the custom is)
present passion having more power with him than former benefits, he resolved
with himself to adhere wholly to the League, to wreak the hatred which he bore
to his Corrival, and presently to give battle to the King of Navarre, hoping by
a famous Victory to confirm his own fortune, and make himself equal to the Duke
of Guise, both in the Catholic party, and in the air of the common peoples
applause.

But it was in vain for him to pretend at one flight to reach so high a pitch,
to which the Guises by long patience and many years endeavor, had attained by
little and little; and he by striving precipitately to force the nature of
things, did hastily procure his own ruin; to which, whilst he runs on the one
side with an unbridled fury, the King of Navarre proceeding with more
circumspection, was intent in gathering Forces from all parts to enable himself
to move toward the Loire, and meet the German Army. To him were joined the
Prince of Conde, the Viscount de Turenne, the Duke de la Tremouille, the Count
de Montgomery, and the Marquess de Gallerande, the Baron de Salignac, and a
good number of Horse and Foot under many Gentlemen of note, and old experienced
Commanders; so that his Army was not so numerous as resolute and valiant. About
this time, by the means of his ordinary Confidents, he had solicited Charles
Count of Soissons, and Francis Prince of Conty Brother to the Prince of Conde,
who till then had persevered in the Catholic Faith, and continued near the
Kings person in the Court; urging to them, that the business now in hand did no
longer concern Religion, but the defense of their Family, and the inheritance
and succession of the Crown, to which not only He was called, but successively
the whole House of Bourbon; and that it was therefore fit in that common cause
and reciprocal interest, they should all unite themselves, to make the greater
resistance against those who went about to exclude and ruin them; and that
they should take example by their Enemies, among which the Duke of Mercaeur and
his Brothers, though they were the Kings Brothers-in-law, and had from him
received so much honor and so many benefits, yet because they were of the
House of Lorain kept united with the Duke of Guise and the rest of their
Family, and stood out against their own Sister and Brother in-law: That if it
were lawful for them to do so for the execution of new, unjust designs, much
more was it lawful for them of the House of B^urbon to unite themselves all
together, for the defense of their most just, ancient Prerogatives, which were
due unto them by the legal universal consent of the French Nation* That they
need not fear they should suffer any violence in their Consciences: for he that
labored for the liberty of others, would never take it away from those that
were so near himself, but that they should take example by so many Catholic
Lords and Gentlemen which followed the fortune of his party. By which reasons
these two Princes being moved, as also because they saw themselves kept under,
and little valued at the Court, resolved to go over to his party, and
determined that the Prince of Co^ty should join with the Army of the Reiters as
soon as they were come into France, and that the Count de Soissons should go to
the Hugonot Camp in Xaintonge; which that he might securely do, the King of
Navarre gave order to the Sieurs de Colombiere and Sanc^e Marye du Mont, who
had raised some Forces in Normandy in favor of his party, that they should
conduct him to the passage of the Loyre, whither he had sent the Viscount of
Turenne with eight hundred Horse to meet him; and it fell out so luckily, that
the Count and the Norman Forces went close by the Duke of Ioyeuse his Army
without receiving any damage at all, and united themselves with very great joy
to the Army of the King of Navarre, who highly incensed at the inhumanity used
to his two Regiments which were cut in pieces in Poictou, being wary, yet
resolved to take revenge, advanced still forward, while the Duke of Ioyeuse as
it were assured of the Victory, came on carelessly to meet him.

In the mean time the German Army was upon the point of marching toward
Lorain: for the Protestant Princes-Ambassadors being returned home with the
angry answer of the King of France, the King of Denmark, Christian Duke of
Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenbourgh, Prince Casimir, the Protestant Cantons
of Swisserland, with other Lords of the same Religion, at the importunity of
the King of Navarre's Agents, but much more at the exhortations of Theodore
Beza, gave resolute order for the raising of that Army; toward which, besides
the money gathered publicly in the Protestant Churches, and put into the hands
of Prince Casimir, there were also sixty thousand Ducats added by the Queen of
England. With this money, and the consent and endeavor of all the Protestant
Lords in Germany, it was easy to raise an Army in that populous warlike
Nation; so that in the beginning of July there met in Alsatia, under the
conduct of Prince Casimir, upon whom that charge had been conferred by the
rest, twelve thousand Reiters, four thousand German Foot, and sixteen thousand
Swisses; for the other four thousand went into Dauphine apart. Fabian Baron d'
Onaw, The Protestant Princes of Germany, moved at the King of France his answer
to their Ambassadors, raise an Army under the conduct of Prince Casimir; which
being come into Alsatia, was forty thousand men, led by the Baron d'Onaw,
Lieutenant General to Prince Casimir.
born in Prussia, commanded as Prince Casimir's Lieutenant General; a man of
private condition, but risen to high esteem by the favor of the King of
Denmark and of the Count Palatine, and accounted a man of very great boldness
and courage; but of neither wisdom nor experience proportionable to an
employment of so great weight: and though in the beginning of August,
Guilliaume de la Mark Duke of Bouillon came up with two thousand Foot and
three hundred French Horse, and by Commission from the King of Navarre was to
have been General of that Army; and though at his arrival he displayed the
white Cornet, (a mark due to the Supreme Commander) yet retaining only the
name, he left the command wholly to the Baron d' Onaw, both for his age, and
because he was of the Nation, as also out of respect to Prince Casimir. With
the Duke of Bouillon were Robert Count de la Mark his Brother, the Sieurs de
Guitry, de Monluet, de la Nocle, and many other French Gentlemen; to whom the
Sieurs de Mouy and Cormons, with many other of their Adherents, came from
Geneva with two hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot; and every day the Army
increased with the number of those who ran thither from Dauphine, and the other
Confines of France: so that before it moved out of Alsatia, it amounted to the
number of Forty thousand fighting men.

Before this Army marched, Rodolphus the Second the Emperor commands the Baron
d' Onaw by a public Edict to disband the Army raised without his leave, and to
desist from the business upon pain of the Impe^ial banishment: to which the
Baron answers with excuses that he ought not to desist.
there came an Edict from the Emperor Rodolphus Secundus, sent to the Baron d'
Onaw, which contained, That he having without his License, and without the
Letters Patents of the Empire, caused that Army to be raised to invade the
Kingdom of France should presently disband it, and desist from the Enterprise,
under pain of banishment out of the Empire, both to himself and those that
should follow him. To which threatening the Baron d' Onaw answered in writing,
That the Enterprise being neither his, nor against the Empire, nor against the
Kingdom of France, but for the relief of the oppressed Confederates of the
Protestant Princes: and the German Nation having ever had that liberty to enter
themselves into pay under whom they pleased, so that it were not against the
Emperor nor his Jurisdiction, he neither thought himself obliged to desist,
nor to disband the Army, but that without offense to the Emperor he would
continue the business begun by Commission from his Princes. Thus the Emperor
making no reply, nor proceeding to any other new Prohibition, about the middle
of August the Army was ready to begin to march. And to the end that businesses
might prosper under the conduct of the Duke of Bouillon and the Baron d' Onaw,
the Count de la Marck was appointed to lead the Van: the command of the German
Cavalry was given to the Baron de Bouck an expert Soldier of that Nation; that
of the Swisse Infantry, to Claude Anthony Sieur de Clervant; to Mouy the
command of the French Foot; the Sieur de Guitry a French man, and Lodovick Romf
a German, being Marshals of the Field.

Against all these preparations, the Duke of Lorain (who in all the other Wars
had ever stood Neuter, and now had declared himself in favor of the League,
and of the Lords of his Family) being first at the Frontiers, was in a very
great fear, finding he had not sufficient force to make resistance, and with
Letters and Messages solicited the Duke of Guise, and all his Friends and
Confederates, that since they had drawn him into so much danger, they would
also be ready and speedy to help him out. He had raised two thousand Reiters
out of the Territories of the Catholic Princes of Germany, under the command
of the Baron of Swartzembourgh; eight hundred other Horse, some Or, Cr^ates.
Albanians, some Italians, and four thousand Foot of his own State; to which
Forces the Prince of Parma Governor of the Low Countries, in performance of
the League with the Catholic King, had added eight hundred Bourguignon Horse,
under the Command of the Marquess de Havray, and two thousand Foot, all
Walloons, under the command of the Marquess de Varambone. But it being
necessary to put a Garrison in Nancy the chief City of Lorain, and many other
lesser Towns, he had neither Force enough left to hinder the passage of the
Germans, nor to defend his Country from their Incursions; and therefore the
Duke of Guise, the very Soul and Life of his Party, and upon whom the
Foundation of all the Affairs of the League was settled, drew Friends and Forces
together from all parts to assist and defend the Duke of Lorain.

Nor did the King of France make less preparations than the rest; but being
resolved to show his face, and make himself Arbitratour of Affairs, he drew all
his Forces together: for besides eight thousand Swisse Foot raised under the
public color of the Catholic Cantons, he also levied fourteen thousand
French Foot, summoned all the Soldiery, called all the Nobility to attend him,
having determined to command his Army himself in person; wherein he received no
other hinderance, but the unquietness of the Parisians; for the Preachers and
the Council of Sixteen ceased not to stir up the people, and to make frequent
tumults in the City, insomuch as the Authority of the King and his Magistrates
was despised and trodden under Foot, with very great danger of an open change
desired and procured by them. Nor durst the King in that present condition
punish the authors of those tumults, for fear of causing an absolute revolt,
and in a conjuncture of so great danger, deprive himself of that City, which
had ever been the Basis and Foundation of his Party; this encouraged them with
more boldness to multiply their designs, which would have produced the event
aimed at by the Heads of the League, if first the imminent fear of the German
Army, and then the Kings Oath taken against the Hugonots, and the promise
wherewith he took Arms for the common defense, had not restrained and withheld
the people, who out of fear, and some certain respects of duty, were not very
forward to embrace seditious counsels. But the King having with great dexterity
and patience often quieted those uproars raised without occasions, full of
ill will toward the Heads of Sedition, though cunningly dissembling it, having
left the Queen Mother as Regent in Paris, and Monsieur de Villequier as
Governor, departed from the City about the end of July, and went to Meaux ten
leagues from thence, about which place he had caused Quarters to be taken up
for his Army. Thither the Duke of Guise came unto him, Meaux being a Town under
his command, and they met together with shows of exceeding kindness and
respect, but thoughts very different from the outward appearance. The division
of both Horse and Foot was made in the Duke of Guise's presence, the King
having appointed twenty Cornets of Horse, and four Regiments of Foot for the
Duke, reserving all the rest for the Army which he was to lead himself; but
almost all the Horse were withheld afterward with several excuses, and the Duke
of Guise had only those Foot left him, which were brought by his dependents;
for in their meetings and discourses, suspicions being rather increased, than
former hearts-burning taken away, the King was so much the more firmly settled
in his intention, to beware no less of the Duke of Guise, than of the foreign
Army; and to leave him weak, that he might be the more easily cut off, since
that whether his Forces were many or few, he could do no less than draw near
the Enemy, and fall upon him either in the State of the Duke of Lorain, or in
the Confines of his own Government.

After two days the Duke of Guise departed, and making his Rendezvous at St.
Florentine, a place near Troy, with seven hundred Cuirassiers of Gentlemen
that were his dependents, six hundred Light Horse, part Albanians, part
Italians, and part sent by the Sieur de Balony Governor of Cambray, and with
two thousand French Foot led by the Sieurs de Ioannes, de Clusseau, de Gies,
and de St. Paul, his old Colonels, he marched straight toward Lorain. All the
Lords of that Family were met together at Nancy, where the Duke commonly
resides, and there fell to consult which way they should oppose the German
Army. The opinions were different, or rather oppositely contrary: for the
French Lords, among which the Duke of Guise was the chief, would have made the
seat of the War in the State of the Duke of Lorain, a straight narrow Country,
and by reason of the abundance of Rivers, fit for some great enterprise,
keeping the Germans busied in a place where they could not hope to join with
the King of Navarre, and where being near their own Country, they would easily
disband and run home upon every small occasion or disorder that might arise:
nor did the greatness of the foreign Army at all dismay the Duke of Guise, a
man of a resolute undaunted courage; but despising the number of raw untrained
men newly raised in haste, he thought himself able to accomplish any thing with
his old tried Soldiers. But the Duke of Lorain was of a contrary opinion, who
with the Marquess du Pont his eldest Son, the Count de Saulme his principal
Minister, the Count de Chaligny one of the King of France his Brothers in law,
and with the Sieurs de Ossonville, and Bassompierre, thought not fit to submit
his Country to all the dangers and miseries of the War, and thought he had done
too much, in declaring himself for the French Lords of his Family, and in being
at so great charges, and in undergoing so many dangers to satisfy them:
wherefore he desiring the Germans might not be hindered in their passage, but
that keeping all the principal Towns well provided, and waiting upon them with
a flying Army, to the end they might have less opportunity to hurt the Country,
that impetuous torrent might be suffered to make an inundation in those parts
to which it naturally tended: and by how much the more he saw the Duke of Guise
ready and desirous to put the event of businesses opportunely to the hazard of
a day, so much the more did he fear that danger. Wherefore because the opinions
differed, he concluded freely, that he would not have them to play his State at
that Game; and that if the Duke of Guise and the French Lords had an humor to
fight, they should reserve themselves till the Enemy were entered into France,
it satisfying him to preserve his own with as little loss as possibly he could,
considering the greatness of the Enemies Army. With this resolution all the
guards were recalled from the Confines, to quarter in strong places, Care taken
by the Duke of Lorain that the German Army might not stay in his Country
and the Sieur de Ossonville General of the Duke of Lorains Forces, rode through
all the State, causing the Mills and Ovens to be destroyed, and the victuals to
be carried away from all places, to the end that the German Army finding
scarcity of provisions, might resolve to pass on without delay: and because the
Duke of Guises forwardness made the Duke of Lorain suspect, that against his
will, he would with inferior Forces, and without necessity put it to a Battle,
he himself, though far in years, would command the Army* and to honor the Duke
of Guise, gave him only the charge of the Vanguard.

The same divisions were in the German Army; for the Duke of Bouillon and the
Count de la Mark desired to make the seat of that War in Lorain, not only to
have convenience of victual, and to garrison Sedan and Iamets, their own Towns,
which bordered upon that State, but also to ruin and undo the Duke of Lorain,
whose neighborhood was suspected by them, believing that he aspi^ed to their
possessions, the truth whereof they had seen in the War made upon them by the
Duke of Guise, and knew much more evidently afterward. On the other side,
Monsieur de Monglas the King of Navarre's Agent lately come from him* and the
Sieurs de Muoy, de Clervant, de l' Auguiere, and almost all the French pressed
to have them go forward, and entering into France without delay, to take the
shortest cut that might bring them to join with the King of Navarre, whom they
affirmed to be upon his march, to come as far as he could to meet them. There
wanted not some among the Germans who were much pleased with the nearness of
their own Country, and with a War that was like to be so easy, by reason of
the inequality of Force; but the Baron d' Onaw, intent to execute the
Commissions he had received from Prince Casimir, resolved at last to go into
France, without making any longer stay in the State of Lorain than what was
necessarily requisite, yet purposing to do as much mischief there as the
brevity of the time would permit, without going about to take in any Towns:
with this intention, but with little correspondence among the Commanders, and
as little Government among the Soldiers, (there being no man whose authority
and experience was proportionable to so weighty a business) the German Army
began to move, and upon the 26 of August came in the Confines of Lorain.

Already were the Guards withdrawn, which at first had been placed at the
pri^cipal passes of that State, and the Forces being retreated into their
walled Towns, had left all the ways free; wherefore the Germans began to
plunder all the Country without any resistance; not forbearing murders, firing
of Towns, nor any kind of hostile act whatsoever, though the harm were much the
less, because the people had had convenient time to absent themselves, to drive
away their cattle, and hide their goods in secret places, and what they could
not carry away they had spoiled and burned. But it was not long before the
Germans felt the Forces of the League; for the Duke of Guise desirous to
discover their strength, and to try their valor and discipline, sent forth the
Sieur de Rhosne and the Baron of Swartzembourgh with two hundred Reiters, and
three hundred French Horse, to beat up their nearest quarters. These two
Commanders being come upon the thirtieth of August where the Enemy lay, fell
upon the quarter of the Baron de Bouck, The first assault given by those of the
League to the Germans in Lorain.
and at first put them into great confusion: and though they were driven back
at last by so much a greater number, yet they brought away a Cornet with them,
which the Duke of Lorain sent presently to the King of France, as a token that
to their cost the German Army was come already into his Country. Yet did the
Army continue in the same confusion, in quartering, in keeping their Guards, in
rising, and in marching: for the great abundance of men bred tumult and
disorder of it self, and there was no Commander able to govern a Body composed
of so many several Nations mixed together, and of a different manner of
discipline. The Duke of Bouillon a young Lord, and though of great courage, yet
of little or no experience, was not very much obeyed by the Germans. The Baron
d' Onaw, whom they obeyed, might rather be counted in the number of valiant
Soldiers, than of Commanders who for birth and wisdom were fit for such an
employment; and the other inferior Officers being of several Nations and
different dispositions, did rather increase than lessen that confusion.

These things being known to the Duke of Guise, he desired to meet handsomely
with them, either as their Army was about to quarter, or to rise, before time
or experience should inform the Commanders of their error. But the Duke of
Lorain persisted in the same opinion, nor would upon any terms suffer them to
come to a Battle within his Territories; and the Duke of Guise was necessitated
to comply with him, both because of his age, and because he was in his own
Country, as also by reason of the inequality of the Forces: So the Reiters
passed on without any let or impediment, as far as Pout St. Vincent, a great
Town seated upon the declining of a Hill, at the foot whereof the River Meuse
passes under a spacious Bridge of ancient building. There Monsieur de Rhosne,
and an hundred Harquebuziers on horseback, being quartered with three hundred
Light Horse, the Duke of Guise came up to view the place, having resolved to
lodge the Vanguard there, to make the passage of the River more suspected to
the Enemies, and to make them a little more wary in pillaging the Country: but
at the very time of his arrival, the German Army was espied from the top of the
Hill marching in their divisions directly toward the Bridge, through a little
Plain that spreads it self from the bottom of the Hill: whereupon the Duke of
Guise, desirous to discover the quality and order of the Enemy, having
commanded out the three hundred Light Horse, drawn them up without the Town,
and spread the hundred Harquebuziers along the bank of the River, he himself
unarmed as he was, with the Sieurs de la Chastre, Bassompierre and Dunes, and
two Gentlemen of his Attendents, all six in number, passed over the Bridge,
hoping to get up to some high place, from whence they might conveniently
discern the motions, and distinctly perceive the number and order of the
Germans; but he was hardly come to the other side of the bank, when he was
charged by two Troops of Reiters who marched before the Army to discover the
Country; to avoid whose fury, he was fain to retreat over the Bridge again at a
good round Trot. The Enemies Horse being come to the bank of the River, and
seeing it defended by the Harquebuziers, and that the Duke of Guise with five
and twenty Gentlemen that were come up to him, stood firm at the entry of the
Bridge, they made a halt to stay for the first Troops of the Army, and in the
mean time one of them (which was a very remarkable thing) being come to the
very brink of the River, lighted from his Horse, spanned his Carabine very
leisurely, and taking aim, A bold act of a German Trooper.
gave fire with wonderful security; and though above two hundred shot were made
at him in the mean time, he was not only untouched, but not so much as daunted
at all; so that he got on horseback again with the same gravity, and retreated
safely a foot-pace to his fellows.

In this interim, the Sieur de Guitry Marshall of the Field arrived upon the
bank of the River with fou^ hundred other Horse, who with the two first Troops
of Reiters came directly forward to possess the Bridge: But the Duke of Guise
finding himself much weaker than was requisite to defend the Pass, and that not
only the Duke of Lorain's Army was a great way from him, but also his own
Vanguard which had been left far behind, he caused the Harquebuziers to retire
and put themselves again in the Body of Monsieur de Rhosne's Cavalry; and
having dispatched Bassompierre and la Chastre with order to put the Army in
readiness to receive him, in case he should be straightened and followed by the
Enemies, he began to retreat, skirmishing himself in the last ranks, and very
gallantly sustaining the Charge of the Reiters, who having passed the Bridge
without further resistance, followed him close at the heels, caracolling and
giving fire continually with their Pistols: but being come to the bottom of the
Hill, which had a steep troublesome ascent, the Duke of Guise's Light Horse, and
he himself with his Gentlemen, who were bravely mounted, got up quickly;
whereas on the other side the Reiters with their great Friezeland-Horses, were
much longer about it, and after they were at the top of the Hill, were fain to
make a stand to give their Horses breath; which time he opportunely making use
of, passed over another small River that was before him, and without any show
of flight arrived safely where the Field-Marshals had with excellent order set
the whole Army in Battalia; which being drawn out between three Hills in form
of a Half Moon, with the Cavalry on each Wing, and Foot placed within the banks
and ditches, by the Highways, and among the stakes in the Vineyards defended
by the Cannon planted upon a little Mount, made so gallant a show, that the
German Commanders being come up to face them with the first Troops of their
Forces, judged that in respect of the strength of that situation, the Battle
was not to be hazarded, being they could by no means make the Lorain-Army
dislodge from their post, nor fight with it there, without too evident and
almost insuperable disadvantage.

Wherefore retiring to the main Body, they quartered in the Villages near St.
Vincent, in the Castle whereof the Sieur de la Chastre entered that same night
with six hundred Musketeers, that it might not be left in the Enemies power:
and the Duke of Lorain, who saw that contrary to his desires the Duke of Guise
by his boldness, and to disengage himself from the Reiters, had like to have
put his State in very great hazard, to avoid the same danger, removed a great
many miles from thence, leaving them free passage to continue the voyage, which
with pillaging and burning they had begun; and quartering his Army in the
chiefest places, that the Enemy might not have opportunity to take and sack
them, with very great care and circumspection stood barely upon his defense.

At last, upon the eighteenth of September the Germans arrived upon the
Confines of France, and took up their first quarters at St. Vrbin* which Town
being of the Duke of Guise's patrimony, was by them in a hostile manner burned;
yet to put themselves in order, and by reason of the extraordinary rains that
fell, they stayed there fo^^ days, in which time Francois Sieur de Chastillon
came up with a hundred Cuirassiers, and eight hundred Harquebuziers on
horseback, who with wonderful great difficulty had from the farthest parts of
Languedoc passed by the way of Dauphine, and the Confines of Savoy, as far as
Grizelle, a Town upon the borders of Lorain, to join with the foreign Army; but
being come to Grizelle, he was suddenly charged by the Dukes Forces, and
constrained to retreat into the Castle of that Town, where he had been in
manifest danger by reason of the weakness of the place, if the Count de la Mark
had not advanced with the Van of the Army to disengage him: who no sooner
appeared, but the Lorain Forces retiring, he went on to St. Vrbin to join with
the rest of the Army upon the 22 of September, which day the Duke of Guise
(having left the Duke of Lorain at Bar, who refused to enter into the Confines
of the King of France unless he were called) quartered with twelve hundred
Horse and two thousand Foot at Ioinville, but two Leagues distant from St.
Vrbin.

The German Army entered France with an infinite deal of Baggage, not only by
reason of the great store of carriages which they had with them according to
the custom of their Country, The German Army going out of Lorain rich with
spoil enters France, where not esteeming the Duke of Guises small Forces, they
continue to pillage and destroy the Country.
but also of the abundance of spoil and plunder they had got in the Territories
of Lorain, and which they still increased daily; nor did their disorders and
confusions cease, though they were come into an Enemies Country, suspected on
every side; but rather every one presuming upon the greatness of their
strength, (for they were above forty thousand fighting men) they quartered very
wide and open, minded nothing but pillage, were negligent in their guards and
marches, the fields being every where full of Grapes, of which that Nation
being exceeding greedy, they disordered their Squadrons, and ran confusedly to
satisfy their gluttony; and so much the more, because the Duke of Guise's
handful of men made by him contemptible to their pride, nor did they think they
could meet with any thing that could do harm to so much a greater number, well
armed, well mounted, well provided, (which was true) but wonderfully ill
ordered and disciplined. The number of Commanders made opinions differ about
the way they should march; for some counseled, that following the easiness of
the ways and the abundance of victuals, they should go on through Champagne to
Brye, and to the Isle of France as far as the City of Paris, to strike the very
heart of the Catholic party, and not to linger about matters of small
importance, experience having showed, that the Hugonots had never had hope of
victory, but when they had entered the very bowels of the Kingdom, and brought
terror and damage to the City of Paris: but others knowing that they wanted a
General who was capable to manage the weight of that employment, and that
therefore all their marches were difficult and dangerous, persuaded to move
straight toward the head of the River Loyre, to pass over it above la Charity,
or at some other place thereabout, and to go without delay to join with the
King of Navarre, without whose conduct and command they despaired of effecting
any enterprise. The last opinion prevailed, and with that intention crossing
the Provinces of Champagne and Bourgongne about the end of September, they took
the direct way toward la Charity, to pass the River there, as the Duke of
Deux-ponts had done at the same place; and because the Count de la Mark died
about that time of a natural death, the charge of the Vanguard was given to
Monsieur de Chastillon.

The Duke of Guise followed the track of the Germans; and though his Brother
the Duke of Mayenne were joined with him, with the Forces he brought out of his
Government of Bourgongne; and though the Marquess du Pont had followed him also
with no contemptible number of Gentlemen, whereby in all he had fifteen hundred
Horse, and little more than three thousand Foot, yet because he had no Body of
an Army, he quartered always in advantageous places, keeping near the Germans,
that he might not lose any opportunity (which he watched for with extreme
diligence and impatient desire) to fight; but the Duke of Mayenne following his
old stayed resolutions, and the Marquess du Pont instructed by his Fathers
admonitions, did opportunely allay his forwardness, showing him that the whole
fortune of the House of Lorain was reduced to that small handful of men, and
would run into a manifest ruin, if he should be so rash as to assault the
Enemy with Forces so infinitely inferior: that he could give no greater joy
nor contentment to his Enemies, than to offer up the whole being of their
Family to spoil and havoc by so certain a danger, the event whereof,
whatsoever it could be, would overthrow his Forces for ever: that it was a
business of long, ^mature deliberation, and which could never be sufficiently
pondered and discussed, to hazard all his former labors, all his present
Estate, and all his future hopes upon the cast of a Dye with so much
disadvantage: and with what strength, with what number of Horse and Foot would
he assail an Army of sixteen thousand Horse and twenty thousand German Foot,
flanked with four thousand of the choicest French Firelocks? that it was no
small matter, if they could be able to defend the principal Cities, and the
walled Towns of those Provinces which were under their Government* and that he
alone ought not to assume that charge to himself which principally concerned
the King of France, and which never had been assumed by so many others* who
upon occasion of other German Armies had had the care of the Frontiers, and who
preserving only the places of consequence, had let the storm fly where the
principal Armies were, and where the whole sum of businesses did reside. These
considerations abated, but extinguished not the ardour of the Duke of Guise,
who having vaster thoughts, and higher designs, did within himself alone press
forward the effecting his own resolutions: for having undertaken to be Patron
of the League, assumed the care of the popular cause, and conceiving hopes of
ruining his adversaries, and making himself not only Arbitrator and Moderator
of the Kingdom, but also the glorious Restorer of the Roman Catholic Religion,
he foresaw he should grow less in reputation, and lose his credit within and
without the Kingdom, if the King, and not he, should win the Victory over the
Germans, which would turn the scale, and make him Superior that should obtain
it: besides, suspecting that the King held secret intelligence with the
Hugonots, he feared that the Reiters joining with the King of Navarre, and the
King being on the other side with a strong Army in the field, they might catch
him between them; and therefore he aspired with all the powers of his mind, to
destroy, or at least weaken that Army, before it could come to the consummation
of that design: finally, the desire of glory which in him was most ardent and
unmeasurable, would not let his mind be in quiet, if he did not make his valor
famous in so conspicuous an occasion: Wherefore, sometimes marching before,
sometimes beside, sometimes behind the Enemy, with unwearied diligence both in
himself and in his Soldiers, he used all his uttermost endeavors to incommode
and distress them, by putting them upon a necessity of quartering close
together, by protracting and retarding their march, and finally by striving to
bring them to a scarcity of provisions.

But the abundance of Wine, Grapes, Fruits, and Flesh, The great abundance of
all things causing surfeits, brings great morttality in the German Army.
whereof there was great plenty in those Provinces, did more harm to the
Germans than all the labor and industry of the Duke of Guise; for by excess
and surfeiting, in a Country differing from their natural climate, such
frequent dangerous diseases were gotten into the Army, that their number daily
decreased, and their march was not a little slackened; to which the rains of
Autumn being added, which were wonderfully immoderate in the beginning of
October, did much increase the mortality; and in that deep dirty Country the
ways were so broken, that it was most difficult for so great a multitude to
march, being (as they were wont) exceedingly ill ordered and commanded.

The same rains did also hurt the Duke of Guise's Army, and so much the more,
because being in continual motion, they did perpetually suffer by the ill
weather: But though the Soldiers were without shoes, and almost without
clothes, and their horses tired and almost quite spoiled, yet the great
confidence they had in their Commander, and seeing him the first in all
incommodities and sufferings, made every one undergo them willingly; and
because they were all old Soldiers, hardened to the toils of War, the diseases
did not spread amongst them, which had brought the affairs of the Enemy into a
very ill condition. In this manner, with frequent skirmishes, the Armies came
as far as Chastillon upon the Seine, where the Sieur de la Chastre having put
himself in, for the defense of that Town, not so strong as populous; as the
Germans passed by they skirmished continually for four hours, with some loss on
both sides.

But having passed the Seine at Chastillon, turning on the right hand, they
marched from thence toward la Charity to pass the Loyre, not in those places
that are nearer to the head of it, as the King of Navarre had directed, and as
his Agents put them in mind to do; but to endeavor to get a Bridge over which
they might pass conveniently: and of this resolution not the Commanders, but
the tumultuous cries of the Army were the occasion, who would not hear of being
led through narrow, barren, mountainous Countries, as those parts are from
whence the River springs, but would spread themselves with their wonted
pillagings and licentious manner of living, in the more fertile, spacious parts
of France, as those were through which they were to march toward la Charity, and
the passes near unto it.

H^nry the III. goes in person with an Army to oppose the Germans, and to keep
them from joining with the King of Navarre.
But they were extremely deceived in their hopes; for the King of France being
departed from Meaux, and then from Gien, where he had made the general
Rendezvous of his Army, and being come to Estampes with eight thousand Swisses,
ten thousand French Foot, and four thousand Horse, the Duke of Nevers
commanding as Lieutenant General of the Army, and the Duke of Espernon leading
the Van, by their advice was prudently come unto the Loyre; and having broken
and spoiled all the passes, taken away all the Boats, and well garisoned and
provided all the Towns, encamped along the banks of the River, to hinder the
Enemies from wading over, or passing it in any place.

This difficulty exceedingly puzzled the German Army: for having been made
believe by the French Commanders, both before they were raised, and after they
were entered into France, that the King would tacitly give way to their
passage, and joining with the King of Navarre, and that they were to have no
other Enemy but the Duke of Guise, whose Forces were not to be feared: as soon
as they saw the King in Arms, and resolved to oppose them in a hostile manner,
not only with a very great strength, but with wonderful providence and Military
policy: and after that the Duke d' Espernon, who was generally thought partial
to the Hugonots, did personally assail some Troops of Horse that plundered the
Country; and having slain many of them* took one of their Cornets, there
entered such a confusion into the Army, that the authority of the Commanders
was not able to settle it. The German Army mutinies
The German Cavalry began to cry out aloud for their pay, which had been
promised them at their entry into the Kingdom, nor had money appeared yet from
any place to satisfy them. The Swisses that saw their Countrymen with the
King, with the public Colors of the Cantons, talked of going over to his
Army; and generally all of them murmured, that having been promised to be led
by a Prince of the Blood, they yet saw not any one appear; and every hour
tumultuously threatened the French Commanders, because they had rashly brought
them thither, and falsely persuaded them that they held intelligence with the
King of France. In this Mutiny the Commanders being come to the head of the
Army, it was without much consideration precipitately resolved amidst that
universal cry and tumult, to turn back again, and get into the Country of
Beousse, (the ordinary nourisher of the War) and in the mean time to send men
to the King of Navarre, to demand money and a General, and to know which way
the Army should march to unite themselves most easily with him.

At that time the King of Navarre, being departed from the places that held of
his party with the greatest number he could gather together, and having
mustered them, marched directly toward the Loyre to find some means of joining
with the foreign Army. But the Duke of Ioyeuse, who spurred on by ambition, had
wholly given himself over to the designs of the League, was inconsiderately
gone from Saumur, and came with his whole Army to meet the Hugonots, desiring
with great confidence by all means to give them Battle. Two little Rivers
parted the two Armies from one another, one called the Isle, and the other the
Drougne; the Isle on the Duke of Ioyeuse's side; the Drougne (much the bigger)
on the King of Navarre's; and between both Rivers were la Roche-Chalais, a Town
near the Isle; and near the Drougne Coutras, a brave house built by Lautree, a
famous Commander in the Wars of Italy. Both the Generals thought with reason
that the passage of the River might cause a disadvantage to the Enemy, and
therefore the Duke of Ioyeuse passed the Isle with all speed, upon the
nineteenth of October in the evening, and quartered at la Roche-Chalais, with
an intention to lie the night after at Coutras, and to meet the King of
Navarre, and fight with him as he passed the Drougne. To that purpose he sent
Captain Mercurio Bua before with the Albanians, to possess Coutras, and had
sent away Colonels to take up quarters there. But the King of Navarre, who
commanding an old well-exercised Army, desired to meet in the plain field
without advantage of ground or Rivers, had waded over the Drougne the same day
betimes in the morning, and had also sent the Duke de la Trimouille to make
himself Master of Coutras, and he himself followed the same way with the whole
Army in Battalia. There was no doubt but the Albanian Light Horse were easily
driven back by the greater number: and returning the same night to la
Roche-Chalais, related to the Duke of Ioyeuse, who was sitting at a gallant
Supper with many of the Nobility, that the King of Navarre had passed the
Drougne, and was quartered in the Village at Coutras with all his Army;
presently the Duke turning about to his Officers, said, so loud, that every one
might hear him, So, we have the Enemy shut up between two Rivers, and he cannot
now escape us; let every one be ready for the Battle to morrow by break of day.

The Duke's Army was full of Nobility, and in number 10000 strong; At Coutras
the D. of Ioyeuse with his Army prepares himself to Battle, but with great
confusion.
but the greatest part men rather forward then expert, who accounting the
Victory certain, cared little for that order and discipline, which almost
always uses to cause it in such encounters; there was no Commander, whose
authority and experience could regulate the unbridled rashness of the young
Gentry, which greedily made haste to come to the business, believing firmly,
that they had imprisoned the Enemy between two Rivers; and therefore the next
morning, being the twentieth of October, they began two hours before day to
march, straggling confusedly toward the Field where the Battle was to be. There
they were drawn into Battalia, as well as possible they might, by the Sieur de
Lavardin Lieutenant General, having spread a long Body of Lances in the Plain,
on whose Wings were two Battalions of Infantry, which flanked it on either
side, and he himself with the Light Horse, led by the Sieur de Montigny, and
Mercurio Bua, was ^t the Head of the whole Army, having placed the Artillery at
the point of the left Wing.

But, the Confusion of those untrained Soldiers, who were come thither without
order, and had scatteringly broken their Ranks, and disordered their Squadrons;
and the way also to the place appointed, being (to say the truth) narrow and
Woody, made them lose so much time in embattelling, that the King of Navarre,
finding that the Enemy moved, had convenience to bring up his Artillery, The
King of Navarre takes oppor^unity ^y the Enemies slowness, and puts his Army in
excellent order.
which by reason of their hasty passage, was left the night before on the other
side the River; who otherwise must have been fain to fight without his Canon,
which would have been an extreme disadvantage to him. Now, having received that
benefit by the slowness of the Enemy, he divided his Army, consisting of 2500
Horse, and 4000 Foot, into seven Squadrons, whereof four were Cui^assiers, one
of Light Horse, and two of Foot, and caused the Culverins, and the small
Fieldpieces to be planted in the front of the Army upon the bank of the River,
in a place somewhat higher then the Plain; the two middle Squdrons which made
the bottom of the half moon he commanded himself; the Prince of Conde, and the
Count de Soissons on the right hand; and on the left the Viscount de Turenne;
the Light Horse were commanded by the Duke de la Tremouille, and the Sieur de
Vivans, who was Marshal of the Field; and the two Bodies of Foot on the right
hand were commanded by the Baron de Saligna^, Chastelnew, and Pardbiere, who,
upon their flank had a thick Wood, and a ditch of seven foot-broad; and by
Lorges, Prea^, an Charboniere on the left, all old expert Colonels of that
party, who were defended with the Walls and Buildings of the Park, but more
especially of the Warren. The care of the Artillery was committed to the Sieur
de Clairmont The French Translation says, and to the Ma^quess of Galerande.
Marquess of Gelerande, and the Baggage either purposely, or by chance, was
left in the Village of Coutr^s* without any Guard either of Horse or Foot.

The Armies were very different; for the Duke of Ioyeuse's was clothed all
with rich upper Coats, set forth with gallant Liveries, Plumes, and other
wanton ornaments, but half in disorder and all wavering, a manifest sign of
want of experience; whereas the King of Navarr's had no other show then that of
Iron, nor other ornaments then their Arms rusty with the rain, yet united and
compacted in a firm perfect array, showed their worth most clearly in
Soldier-like actions and behavior. The Canon began to play on all sides (the
Sun being above two hours high) but either with different industry or fortune;
The Armies face one another, and the Battle begins.
for the King of Navarr's making a lane thorough the Catholic Lances, and
passing from thence into the Squadrons of Infantry, made a very great slaughter
of them, and put them all into confusion; but the Duke's Canoneers levelled
their Pieces so low, that all the Bullets struck into the ground, and killed no
body except one Gentleman of the Prince of Conde's; which the Sieur de Lavardin
perceiving, and knowing that to give the Enemies time to charge again, and
redouble their great shot, would cause the total routing of the Army, which was
so broken and disordered by the Artillery, that they hardly kept in Battalia,
having commanded to sound a charge, fell in with his Light Horse so furiously
upon those of the Enemy which stood over against him, to the number of some two
hundred, that the Sieur de Montigny killed the Duke de la Tremouille's horse
under him, and Captain Mercurio ^ua wounded the Sieur de Vivans Marshal of the
Field very dangerously; and having scattered the Light Horse, came up to the
Squadron of Cuirassiers, led by the Viscount of Turenne, whom they charged not
in the Front, but rushed fiercely upon their flank, and making way quite
thorough them (whatsoever the occasion was, The Albanians break through a
Squadron of Cuirassiers, run to Cou^ras, pillage the Hugonots baggage, and
could no more be rallied in the Battle.
for it was afterward diversely spoken of) ran on with full speed to the Village
of Coutras, where the Enemies Baggage was. There the Albanians being out of
breath, with the length of their career, and seeing booty before them, fell to
pillage, and were so long before they rallied again, that they resolved to
retire into some place of security* without doing any further service. But the
King of Navarre having briefly exhorted his men to fight for their common
safety, and having put Thirty Gentlemen before him with short Lances, ran but
ten paces to meet the Catholic Cavalry, who having begun their Charge too
soon, were in such disorder with the length of their career, that their Lances
wrought not their wonted effect, and did no good at all; wherefore being thrown
away, the fight remained equal, wherein, besides the valor of the Soldiers,
their Squadrons being much harder to break thorough, then the long weak
Battalion of the Duke de Ioyeuse, the Cavalry of the Catholics was routed and
defeated in less then half an hour, the Duke himself, among an infinite of
Lords and Gentlemen being left dead; for being overthrown upon the ground, The
D. of Ioyeuse thrown to the ground, offers 100000 Crowns in ransom, yet is
slain.
and offering 100000 Crowns in ransom, he was with three Pistol shots most
violently slain. Nor had the Infantry better fortune then the Cavalry; for
being charged on all sides, and fierce cries resounding every where, that every
one should remember the slaughter of St. Eloy, where two Regiments of the King
of Navarr's were cut in pieces without mercy, the Soldiers were not satisfied
till they had put most of them to the Sword; the Commanders being not able to
restrain their fury, nor the King of Navarre to prevent it, being busied
otherwhere in chasing the Relics of the Cavalry.

The slaughter of the Conquered, and pursuit of the Conquerors, lasted three
hours, after which they were Masters of the field, of the Canon, Colors, and
Baggage, wherein (to the laughter of Soldiers, The Catholics lose the day, are
all killed and taken prisoners, except a very few that save themselves by
flight.
accustomed to the toils of War) they found many of those softer accommodations
of ease and tenderness used in the Court. There were slain three thousand five
hundred of the Catholics, besides the Duke of Ioyeuse, the Count de S. Sauveur
his brother, Br^say, who carried the General's Cornet, the Counts de Suse, d'
Aubijoux, and Gavelo, Colonel Tiercelin, and many others: but the number of
prisoners was much greater; for except Lavardin, Montigny, and Mercurio Bua,
who saved themselves, all the rest remained in the power of the Enemy. On the
King of Navarr's side there were not full Two hundred killed, among which not
any many of great note; and among those that were wounded, only the Sieur de
Vivans, Captain Favas, and the Viscount de Turenne but slightly. In this so
great Victory the King of Navarre showed his clemency no less then he had done
his prudence before in preventing the Enemy, and ranging his Army in order, and
his valor in fighting: for being returned into the place of the battle, he
stayed the slaughter of the Catholic Infantry, received the prisoners
courteously, commending those that had behaved themselves well in that action,
and pitying the death of the rest that had been slain in the fury of the
Battle, caused the dead Body of the Duke de Ioyeuse to be honorably put in a
Leaden Coffin, and granted it to those that came to demand it, who caused it to
be carried to Paris, where, with a solemn Funeral it was magnificently buried.

This Victory of the King of Navarr's, the first cause and original of his
safety, and so much the more glorious, as being the first the Hugonots had
obtained in the revolution of so many Wars, did not much displease the King of
France, as well because he desired not the King of Navarr's total suppression,
lest the Guise's Faction should be so much increased, as to remain arbitrators
alone of the Forces of the Kingdom, as also because the Duke of Ioyeuse, raised
by him with so much favor, to such a height of honor and greatness, had
proved most ungrateful to him; being, out of an emulation to the Duke d'
Espernon, turned to favor the League; and if not openly, at least secretly,
united to the designs of the Lords of Guise. Nor did it trouble him that the
King of Navarre, having got the Victory, and overcome the hinderance of that
Army, was able to march to meet the Germans; The King is not displeased at the
loss, nor at the Duke of Ioyeuse death.
for he with a stronger Army had taken all the Passes of the Loyre, and so
guarded the banks of the River every where, that he was certain neither of the
Enemies Armies could pass over it; and he hoped not only to drive away the
Germans victoriously; but also that they should be instruments to ruin and
suppress the House of Guise, and all the Plots and Machinations of the League.

At this time the German Army was in wonderful discord and confusion, not only
because there neither came Money to pay them, nor that Prince of the Blood that
had been promised them for their General, and because their hopes of being able
to join with the King of Navarre began to diminish; but also because the Duke
of Espernon, who led the Vanguard of the Kings Army, having often beaten up
their quarters, they werecertainly assured, that the King, contrary to what
their Commanders had persuaded them, had taken Arms against them, and followed
them with a mighty Army, since they turned back from the River Loyre. But the
Swisse Infantry were more unruly than all the rest; for seeing other
Foot-soldiers of the same Nation, The Swisses do not willingly fight, when they
see the Ensigns of their Cantons displayed in the Enemies Army.
with the public Ensigns of the Cantons in the Kings Army, though they were of
another Religion, were very unwilling to fight against their Countrymen, and
as unwilling to break their Confederacy and lose their friendship with the
King of France, with whose consent, and for the good of whose Kingdom, they
were told they should fight when they came from home. The death of Colonel
Tileman, who commanded all the Swisses under the Sieur de Clervant, put the
affairs in an absolute confusion: for dying suddenly of a malignant Fever and
a bloody Flux, they had no Commander left that had authority enough to restrain
the unruliness of the Soldiers, so that they tumultuously resolved to send
messengers to the King of France, and to make up an agreement with him: which
being come to the knowledge of the Baron de Onaw, and the French Commanders,
they made so much the more haste in marching away from the Kings Army, to get
into the Country of Beausse, where the abundance of provisions and pillage
might make the Swisses forget the tumultuous resolution they had taken. But
this hasty march brought greater confusion into the Army, troubled with a great
multitude of sick men, some whereof were left behind in their several quarters,
and miserably murdered by the Country people; some carried along upon their
Carriages, and following slowly the speed of those that were in health, were
the cause that they quartered confusedly and in places.

This disorder was very well known to the Duke of Guise, who, at their
returning back from the River Loyre, had most wisely put himself between their
Army and the City of Paris, to keep that City faithful to him, and to increase
both the affection the people bore him, and his reputation, as if he were the
only defense that hindered that mighty Army of the Germans from offending the
City and Territories of Paris; whereas the King following slowly, seemed to
have given over all care of the Parisians. He always lay in secure
advantageous places, not far from the enemies Army, but made the ways be
continually well cleared by Captain Thomaso Fratta an Albanian, and the Sieur
de Vins, who had the charge of the Light Horse, and who sending Scouts abroad,
and bringing in intelligence every minute, gave him notice of the moving and
progress of the Enemy. The Germans were come into the Territories of Montargis,
twenty eight Leagues from Paris; and, upon the twenty sixth of October, were
quartered in this manner. The Baron de Onaw, with the biggest Body of Horse, at
Vilmory, a very great Village: The Swisses under the Walls of Montargis, which
Town was above two great Leagues from thence; and the rest of the Army
scattered in several places about Vilmory; but some a League, some two Leagues
from the Head-quarter.

The manner of their lying being told the Duke of Guise, and the draught and
platform of it being brought unto him by Captain Thomaso, whilst he was at
table at Courtenay with the Marquess du Pont, and the Dukes of Mayenne,
Nemours, Aumale, and Elbeuf, he sat a while musing, and silent, and then
having sent for his own Trumpet, commanded him to sound Bouteselle, and that
every body should be in a readiness to march within an hour. At which order the
Duke of Mayenne asking him, to what purpose he would move, and whither he
intended to go; he replied instantly, The Duke of Guise jested at by the Duke
of Mayenne, for saying, he would assault the Enemy, because they were
indiscreetly quartered.
To fight with the Enemy. The Duke of Mayenne, who knew the inequality of their
Forces, began to smile, and said, he was contended to be jested with: To which
the Duke of Guise answered, with a grave countenance, that he spoke in very
good earnest; and that they who had not the courage to fight might stay in
their quarters; and without more words put on his Arms, and having set all
things in order, took Horse without any further delay. His authority was such,
and his Soldiers had so great a confidence in him, that when it was known they
were presently to go charge the Army of the Reiters, there was no man dismayed
at the great disparity of their numbers, but as if they were going to a certain
Victory, the Foot and Horse, in emulation of one another, strove who should be
first in order and ready to march: only the Duke of Mayenne, and the Marquess
du Pont, considering the greatness and number of the German Army, and that by
fighting, the whole House of Lorain, and the fortune of them all, was set upon
the cast of a Dye, and in a most dangerous precipice, would have dissuaded the
Duke of Guise, showing, that they could not believe, that he, a prudent wary
man, would hazard all his fortunate at so dangerous a game: But he, persisting
in his resolution, told them, That, to the end they might not think him rash,
he would make them partakers of his design, which was, About midnight to fall
into their Headquarter, where he knew they kept not so strict Guards as they
ought, nor were so vigilant as Military Discipline required, being certain,
that in the tumult and uncertainty of the dark, the other quarters, neither
knowing who, nor how strong they were, by reason the King's Army was not far
off, would never stir to assist the Headquarter, but would rather fortify
themselves within their own, till break of day: But it was most probable of
all, that the Swisses would do so, who were so far off, that they could by no
means possible come time enough to help them: Wherefore, that quarter being
suddenly assaulted, where they slept in ease and security, without the least
suspicion of an Enemy, he was most assured to have the Victory, and, in that
manner, to disorder the whole Army; and, though it should succeed contrary to
what reason persuaded, he could not want time and means to retreat with his
Forces, not being troubled with any Carriages: And, because the Duke of Mayenne
answered, That indeed, it was a thing probable, in appearance, to succeed, but
yet to be well thought upon; he (almost angry) replied, That he that could not
think of it in a quarter of an hour, would never think of it in all his life
time: Whereupon, the considerations of all the rest yielding to the authority
of so noble a Man, they began to march about the shutting in of the evening,
with a design to be about midnight at Vilmory, seven Leagues from thence.

The D. of Guise knowing the want of discipline and experience in the German
Army, resolves (though much inferior in number) to fall upon them in their
quarters.
The Duke of Guise marched first of all with thirty Gentlemen, and sixty
Albanian Light Horse; the Infantry followed in two divisions, one of which
consisted of the Regiments of Ponsenat and Chevrieres, commanded by the Sieur
de Cluseau; and the other of the Regiments of Gies and de Bourg, commanded by
Colonel St. Paul. After these went the Cavalry; the Vanguard (being five
hundred Horse) was led by the Duke of Mayenne; the Battle (being four hundred)
by the Marquess du Pont, with whom were the Dukes of Nemours, and Elbeuf; and
the Rere (being four hundred more) by the Duke of Aumale and the Chevalier his
brother. In this order they came into the Plain near Vilmory after midnight,
and having found no obstacle, either of perdu's, or any parties that should
have rid the patrouille, the Duke of Guise putting himself at the head of the
Infantry, led it silently into the Bourg (which thick of Houses spreads it self
about half a Mile in length) and entered so softly, that the street was full of
his Soldiers, before the Germans, who slept soundly, heard any thing at all of
them. The Cavalry was already set in order in the Field, the Duke of Mayenne
having the right hand, the Duke of Aumale the left, and the Marquess du Pont
between them, encompassing the whole Bourg almost on every side, to catch
those, who, scaping from the fury of the Foot, should try to save themselves in
the field.

All things being ordered in this manner, the Duke of Guise gave sign to
Colonel St. Paul, who, with a great volley of Muskets, began to set fire on the
nearest houses, and the same did Colonel du Cluseau on his side; so that in a
very short time the flames gave light to the place of Battle, if it may be
called a Battle; where the Germans, unexpectedly assaulted, were, without
making any resistance, either slain by the Sword, burnt in the Fire, or
destroyed with a thick hail of bullets. Only the Baron d' Onaw, who lay at the
farthest end of all the Town, had time to get on horseback before the storm of
the Infantry fell upon him, and seeing the high street which led into the field
was all on fire, and commanded by the enemies Soldiers, he turned upon the
right hand with an hundred Horse that followed him, and through a narrow Lane
galloped out into the Field, where, having encountered the Vanguard, which was
led up by the Duke of Mayenne to charge him, as he was a most valiant undaunted
soldier, he rushed furiously into the midst of the Enemies, The Baron d^ Onaw
gets out of Vil^ory, and having fought is wounded in the head, and saves
himself by favor of the night.
and meeting with the Duke of Mayenne himself, discharged a Pistol gallantly in
his very face, which hitting something low upon the chin of his helmet, did him
no harm at all; but the Duke of Mayenne having taken notice that the Baron was
without his headpiece, because he had not had time to put on all his Arms,
struck him a slash over the Forehead, notwithstanding which he passed on into
the midst of the Squadron, and with his other Pistol killed him that carried
the Duke's Cornet; but all the Vanguard falling close upon him, he having left
above eighty of his men upon the place, broke through all the Squadron with
fourteen in his company, under favor of the darkness, and being sheltered by
the night, saved himself at Chasteau-Landon, where another part of his Army was
quartered. In the mean time the Infantry had made an end of destroying the rest
of his men, who perished all in the fire of the Town, not being any way able to
save themselves, with so little danger to the Conquerors, that only three men
were wounded; but with so much spoil and rich booty, that never any Soldiers
were more laden with wealth then they; for besides seven Cornets, two Camels
that carried the Generals baggage, and two brazen Kettle-drums, which for Pomp
waited on the Cornet of the Chief Commander, the Soldiers took above 2800
Horses, many gold Chains, no small store of Plate, rich clothes, and other
things of exceeding great value, besides the Money found about those that were
dead; and the benefit of their prey was so much the greater, as the Soldiers
that fought were but few in number The Duke of Guise, who was run to help his
Brother the Duke of Mayenne, whither the cry and tumult of the fight had called
him, found that the Enemies were defeated, and the Baron d' Onaw fled, with the
loss of seventeen Gentlemen of the Duke of Mayenne's own Troop, and only four
more wounded, and when he saw all things in his own power, that he might not
give the other quarters time to fall upon him, nor the Swisses to move that
way, he sounded a retreat before break of day, and with his Infantry all
mounted on Horseback, returned in the same order to his own quarters. The
number of the slain was never so uncertain in any action as in this; for though
one side endeavored to increase, and the other to diminish it, yet it is most
clear there could not be any certain particular knowledge of it, because the
greatest part of them perished in the fire.

This overthrow did much dismay the German Army, who thought the Duke of
Guise's industry most wonderful, and his courage no less admirable, and
therefore stood in exceeding great fear of him: but they were as much terrified
by the carelessness of the Baron d' Onaw, who, to his dishonor, had, by his
want of Military discipline, given opportunity to the vigilance and celerity of
his Enemies: whereupon, if the disorders and confusions were very great among
them before, they were multiplied afterward to such a height, by their fear of
the Catholics, and distrust of their own General, as opened the way to their
utter ruin and destruction; for the Swisses presently sent messengers to the
King of France, who, being brought in by the Duke of Nevers, were received by
him with a sour countenance, and angry words, not that he was not very glad to
make a composition with them, but because he desired to draw the business out
in length, that the German Army might not be dissolved, till the Duke of Guises
boldness and thirst of glory had brought him to some precipice. Likewise the
Reiters, and particularly those that had lost their Baggage in the defeat of
Vilmory, mutined, demanding their pay, and the French Commanders disagreeing
among themselves, could hardly keep their Foot together, that were most
pitifully worn out by the extreme wet weather of Autumn; thus every thing
tended to manifest ruin and destruction.

But it fell out luckily; for Francis of Bourbon Prince of Conty, destined from
the beginning to be their General, arrived then at the Army, who, though he
came without Train, without Money, and was of himself but little able to
command in War; yet being a Prince of the Blood, and Son of the so renowned
glorious Prince of Conde, he filled the whole Army with joy; whereupon the
Commanders taking courage, wrought so much with the Swisses by prayers and
entreaties, that they resolved to follow the Camp, and expect news from the
King of Navarre, before they made an end of their Agreement with the King of
France. But their spirits and hopes were quite raised again by the news of the
Battle of Coutras, and the death of the Duke de Ioyeuse, which having passed
thorough the Enemies Country, was at last come unto them: whereupon they began
to talk, that the King of Navarre being now victorious, would certainly find
some way or other to pass the Loire, and come to join his Forces with them.
But, these shows of prosperity were exceedingly counterpoised by those real
difficulties wherewith the King opposed the deliberation of that Army; for
being turned to march toward Vendosme, the King having left the banks of the
Loire well guarded, was advanced himself to hinder them, causing the Duke of
Espernon with the Vanguard to streighten and incommodate them in their way, and
the Duke of Guise following them in the Rere, with frequent Skirmishes, now as
they were quartering, then as they were rising, sometimes in their march,
ceased not to annoy them very much and keep them in perpetual trouble; yet the
contentment and rejoicing for the Prince, of Conty's arrival, did wholly
possess the Army, and to rest themselves, to refresh their spirits, and recover
their Forces, they had lodged themselves at Auneau, in the Territory of
Chartres, a great Town well furnished with buildings, and abounding in
provisions; and because the Castle, a place indifferently strong by the
situation, was held by a Governor and Garrison of the Kings, they had blocked
up all the ways that led toward it, and stopped them up with Carts chained
together, with barrels, logs, and other such like things, keeping their Corpse
de Guard at the end of the Streets, and setting out their Sentinels on every
side. With these preventions they thought themselves so secure, that they
intended to lie three or four days in that Quarter, as well to ease
themselves, as to consult what they should do, the deliberation of the
Commanders not being yet very well resolved on; and because Auneau, though a
great Bourg, could not contain all their number, many of them quartered
thereabouts, and in the neighboring Villages, making invitations and
merriments every where for the coming of the Prince of Conty, and for the
Victory of the King of Navarre, drinking deeply after the German fashion; and
so much the more, because the Feast of St Martin, and the great plenty of Wines
that year, excited their natural inclinations to dissoluteness.

But the Duke of Guise, who watched for all opportunities and occasions, that
might offer themselves, being informed of the intentions of the Germans, to
stay some few days at Auneau, dispatched the Sieur de Vins secretly to the
Governor of the Castle, filling him with wonderful great Promises, if he would
grant him passage thorough the Castle one night, that he might fall down
unexpectedly to assault the Enemies. The Governor was a little doubtful at
first, because all the wealth of the neighboring Towns was put into that
Castle, and he having taken Money from the Countrey-people to secure them, that
no Soldiers should enter into it who might take them away, showed himself
backward, in giving way to let in the Army. Yet he consented willingly to let
the Duke pass under the Wall, upon a narrow bank that lies along between the
Ravelin of the Castle-gate, and a very broad Lake that spreads it self over a
great part of those fields. But, the Sieur de Vins considering, that it was not
good to put themselves into the power of a mercenary man; and that it was
necessary to be Masters of the Castle, to the end that whatsoever should
happen, the Foot might have a secure retreat, he brought it so to pass, that
the Governor went first to speak with Monsieur de la Chastre Marshal-General of
the Field, and afterward with the Duke of Guise himself, by whom, being
corrupted with Money, and invited with very great hopes, he consented at last
to receive him into the Fortress, having given him his faith, that the
Countrey-peoples Goods should suffer no harm by the Soldiers: so, upon the
eleventh of November, the Duke of Guise departing from his Quarters at Dourdan,
toward the Evening, made so much speed, that he arrived with his Forces, not
much wearied, at the Castle of Auneau, presently after midnight. The back-gate
being opened, he went in to make himself master of the place, and brought in an
hundred Musketeers with very great silence; and the rest of the Infantry, to
the number of Three thousand, commanded by Colonel St Paul, stood ready along
the bank under the Castle-wall, to assault the Bourg, and the Barricadoes which
the Germans had made up: and at the same time the Cavalry had encompassed the
Lake; and, being divided into three squadrons, had possessed the passage toward
the Field, to drive back those that should seek to sa^e themselves that way.
Colonel Ioannes was also come to the same place with Six hundred Musketeers
mounted behind his Horsemen, and had taken the passage to that Gate of the
Bourg, which leads into the Fields, just over against the Castle.

It was already break of day, and the Reiters Trumpets sound the Diana, when
the Infantry assaulted the enemies barricadoes with infinite fury: and though
many of them lay still buried in wine and sleep, yet the Corpse de Guard, which
were vigilant, received the assault most courageously, The Duke of Guise gives
a sudden assault to the Germans at Auneau, and with a great slaughter of them,
obtains another famous Victory.
and the success was doubtful for a time, till the Catholic Infantry, by
setting the Carts and Barrels on fire, cleared the way, and removed those
impediments that stopped it up; whereupon the Germans Corpse de guard not being
able to make resistance of themselves, were, in a very short space, all cut in
pieces, Colonel St. Paul entered with the first squadron into the street that
led on the left hand, and Colonel Ponsenat, with the second, into the street on
the right hand, where they bravely set upon those few Reiters, who not having
had time to get to Horse, came up to them a foot with their Pistols in their
hands: but the fight was very unequal; for the Musketeers shot them at a
distance, and the Pikes overturned all that came in their way; so that the
Reiters having nothing but short Pistols and their Swords, could never come up
to give one blow to the Enemy, and within a very little while all turned their
backs, thinking to save themselves in the field; but finding the way shut up,
and the Gate possessed, being also driven back by Ioannes's Musketeers, who had
made good the passage, they fell into so great terror and confusion, that they
were presently slain by the Foot without resistance. Some few, who thought to
get over the Walls and flee cross the Field, were met withal by the Horse, and
either miserably killed, or taken prisoners: only Baron d' Onaw, much more
fortunate in escaping then in fighting* having, by the help of a Woman, got
over the Wall toward the Moorish side of the Lake, saved his life* and fled
into the quarter of the Swisses, which was little more then a League from
thence. The slaughter of the Germans was exceeding great and terrible, being
enclosed on every side (for Colonel Ioannes was at last come in also at the
Field-gate) and with lamentable cries they were all put to the sword without
distinction: This bloody business continued till Baron d' Onaw being got to the
Swisses, and the French Commanders being come to the same place from the other
quarters, he exhorted, prayed and conjured them to follow him, promising them a
certain Victory over the Catholics, who in confusion, busied in spoil and
execution, and wearied with watching, marching and fighting, could not be able
to resist a much greater number, wherewith they might instantly fall upon them.
But such a Pannick terror had seized them, that it was not possible to persuade
them to it: and the French Commanders considering that the Catholic Infantry
would retire safe into the Castle, and that the Cavalry fresh and unwearied
possessed the passage toward the field, dissuaded the Baron from that attempt;
and having put the rest of the Army in Battalia, purposed only to defend their
post. The Duke of Guise, when his Soldiers were glutted with blood and pillage,
rich in spoil, all gallantly mounted, and from Foot-Soldiers turned Horsemen,
retired with eleven of the Enemies Cornets, and all their Baggage, to Estampes,
where, having given God thanks, he instantly dispatched away the Cornets, and
presented them to the King, giving him account (with proud Soldier-like
boastings) of that notable Victory, which without blood he had so easily
obtained.

But the King seeing the event prove quite contrary to his design, resolved to
prosecute hotly the remainder of the German Army, that he might have part in
that glory which he saw resulted from Victory, and therefore he speedily sent
forth the Duke of Espernon that way, he himself following with all the Army,
with a set purpose to meet the Enemy. The Duke of Espernon, after the example
of the Duke of Guise, attempted often to beat up the Germans quarters, but with
small effect; for the experience of the Commander, the goodness of the
Soldiers, and the success, were all very unequal, circumstances which often
make the events of like occasions and like counsels to be very different:
Wherefore the Duke of Espernon, by the King's direction, The Duke of Espernon
begins again to treat an Ag^eement with the Swisses of the German Army, and
they have leave granted them to return with a safe conduct to their own home.
began again to treat of an Agreement with the Swisses, by means of the Sieur
de Cormons a Hugonot Gentleman, who had been taken a few days before in a
skirmish between the Armies. The Swisses were brought into an ill condition
with perpetual marches, without money, having never had their pay, terrified by
the defeat of the Reiters, and discontented to fight against the Ensigns of
their own Nation, and much more, because they had not a General, who, for
authority and experience was able to command and govern them, whereby they saw,
that the end of so great Forces would be ruinous and miserable; wherefore it
was not very difficult, by an accommodation with the King, to make them submit
themselves unto his obedience: and their Commanders going to acknowledge him,
being kindly received (not to exasperate that Nation) and feasted by the Duke
of Espernon, obtained a safe conduct to return to their own houses, which was
also punctually observed, though toils, sufferings and diseases had let but few
escape of so great a number.

The Reiters, and their Commanders, and the French Soldiers, disheartened by the
two late defeats, and forsaken by the Swisses, resolved to turn back, The
Reiters and the Ge^mans following the example of the Swisses, do the same.
and try to get out of the confines of France by the way of Bourgongne, hoping
to come safe into Germany, and the Territory of Basile, and with that
determination, being united and drawn close together, they began to march that
way. But it was hard for them to get thither: for the Duke of Mayenne being
returned into Bourgongne, had set himself to guard the confines; and the Sieur
de Mandelot and the Count de Tournon being marched out of Lions with the Forces
of that City, were advanced also to hinder them: the King with his whole Army
was but half a days march behind them, and straightened them in the rere; and
the Duke of Guise, with his wonted celerity, sometimes in the flank, sometimes
behind, and sometimes getting before them, ceased not to distress them very
much. The French Infantry was tired and consumed; wherefore the Soldiers
disbanding of themselves, lay close hid in those Cities and Villages thorough
which they passed: and horses spoiled and unshod, could not follow the hasty
march of the Commanders; and the loss of their Baggage, the want of Money, the
dearth of Victuals (because all the people hid what they had in some secure
place) the great rains, and dirty ways, which are wonderful in Burgongue,
their watching, weariness, diseases, and their disorders, had brought them to
the extremity of desperation; wherefore the same Sieur de Cormons interposing,
they resolved to submit themselves to the King's Mercy, who, upon condition
they would deliver him all their Colors furled up, and would promise not to
fight any more against him, proffered to grant them a most ample safe conduct.

The Prince of Conty, the Duke of Bouillon, the Sieurs de Clervant, Chastillon,
and other French Commanders labored to withstand that resolution, promising
them relief from the King of Navarre within a short time, and the arrears of
all their pay, and endeavored to persuade them, All the Army that was
commanded by the Baron d' Onau disbands at last.
not to do so dishonorable a thing, as to acknowledge themselves subdued and
conquered; alleging, that the Forces in Lyonois were not so strong, but that
they might pass that way, and go securely into the Territory of Geneva; but
whilst they treat of these matters, being informed that the Reiters persisting
in their determination of yielding, intended to make them prisoners, thereby to
win the favor of the King, and assure themselves of their pay to which they
pretended, they resolved to steal away secretly, and separate themselves
several ways, to try if they could save themselves by flight, before the
Germans had opportunity to execute their design.

So the Duke of Bouillon with a few Horse making his escape without delay, by
the way of Roane and Lyonois, The Duke of Bouillon flies to G^^^va, and di^s
there.
but traveling out of the ordinary road, after many troubles and dangers got
to Geneva; where, being no less wasted with grief of Mind, then toil of Body,
he died within a few days after, leaving his Estate to his Sister, whom he
recommended to the care of the Duke de Montpensier. The Sieur de Chastillon
with an hundred Cuirassiers, and two hundred Harquebusiers on horseback,
having often fought with the Forces of Bourgongne and Lyonois, with wonderful
success, and no less valor, got at last into Languedoc, and retired himself to
his wonted Government in Vivarez. The Sieur de Clervant, hid among the Swisses
that went with a safe conduct, escaped in their company to Basile. The Prince
of Conty with a few Horse, lurking in remote places, got at last unknown to his
own house; and the other Commanders taking several ways, ran very various
fortunes.

The Reiters having obtained leave of the King to carry home his Cornets, but
not displayed, divided themselves into two parts; one with the Baron de Oneaw
and Colonel Damartin passed thorough Savoy, where being shrunk to the number of
but Five hundred, they were pillaged by the Duke's Forces, the other with the
Baron de Bouck, passing thorough Bourgongne to the confines of the County of
Mombelsiard, was followed by the Marquess du Pont and the Duke of Guise; by
whom being overtaken without the borders of France, they were all cut in pieces
in many several encounters. Nor did this satisfy those Heads of the League;
but with a hostile fury they also sacked and burned the Towns and Castles of
the County, as well to revenge the like outrages committed by the Reiters in
Lorain, as because that Count had been the principal author of raising those
Forces. The slaughter of the Germans was most lamentable, even to the eyes of
their very Enemies; who, sick with Fevers, and weakened with bloody Fluxes,
falling down by the Highways, and in the Towns as they passed, were miserably
slain by the Country people; eighteen of them were seen, who were left sick in
a poor Cottage in Bourgongne, were cruelly butchered, A Woman kills (...) with
a knife.
as the vilest Creatures, by a Woman, who cut all their Throats with a Knife,
in revenge of those losses she had sustained.

Not had those Swisses better fortune, who, to the number of Three thousand
were gone into Dauphine, under the command of the Sieur de Cougy, to join with
Lesdiguiers, who keeping the Hugonot party alive in that Province, could make
no great progress for want of Forces, but busied himself in taking in little
places of small importance, and in actions of small moment, having with him but
a few Foot Soldiers, and only the Hugonot Gentry of that Country. These
Swisses accompanied with four hundred French Musketeers, having passed the
narrow places, marching on to join with him, as they passed the River Isare,
were assaulted by Monsieur de la Valette Brother to the Duke of Espernon, with
the Cavalry of Provence, and by Colonel Alfonso Ornano of the Isle of And
therefore usually called Colonel Alfonso Corso.
Corsica with the Infantry of Dauphine, and so furiously charged there, that
all the rest being slain upon the place, only sixty of them escaped from so
great a slaughter: whereupon also the Sieur Lesdiguiers himself was forced to
seek security among the Mountains.

This end had that mighty Army of the Germans; after the defeat whereof, The
miserable end of the relics of the mighty Army of the Germans
the King returning armed to Paris, entered as in triumph upon the twenty third
of December, being in appearance solemnly received by the people; though with
the incredible applause of every one, but especially of the Parisians, the
whole glory redounded to the Duke of Guise, whose name being become admired and
immortal, was celebrated by the Tongues and Pens of all his Adherents.

The End of the Eighth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The NINTH
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Book relates the determination of the Duke of Guise, and of the League,
to obtain (in the heat of the Victory) their designs of the King, and the ruin
of the Hugonots: The Parisians assent unto it, and are more resolute than the
rest: They prepare themselves to constrain the King by force, and to shut him
up in a Monastery. The King being advertised, takes order to curb their
unruliness; and to that end causes the Swisses to draw near, and makes many
other preparations. The Parisians finding they were discovered, to save
themselves send for the Duke of Guise: At his Arrival they take Arms, make
Barricadoes, drive out the Swisses, and besiege the King in his Palace. He
being not able to resist, flees away secretly, and retires to Chartres, and
thence to Rouen: He resolves to make Peace with the Duke of Guise, causes it
to be treated by the Queen Mother, and it is concluded. The Duke of Espernon
goes from Court, and retires to Angoulesm, where, by a Conspiracy of the
Citizens, his life is in great danger. The Duke of Guise comes to the King to
Chartres, and is favored and exalted to the height of power. The States are
assembled at Blois, according to the appointment made in the Articles of Peace.
The Pope declares Cardinal Moresini his Legate in France. The King dismisses
from Court the High Chancellor, Secretary Villeroy, and the Sieur de
Bellieure: He sends an Army commanded by the Duke of Nevers against the King of
Navarre; who after the taking of many places, lays siege to Ganache. The States
at Blois are begun: Many practices and machinations are contrived on both
sides. The Duke of Guise causes the States to demand that the King of Navarre
may be declared incapable of the Crown, and labors to be created
Lieutenant General with absolute Authority in the Government. News comes that
the Duke of Savoy has seized upon the Marquesate of Saluzzo; businesses are
changed by it: but the Duke of Guise orders matters so, that all redounds to
his advantage and power. The King being very much straightened, resolves to
cause the Duke of Guise to be slain: He finds difficulties and impediments,
1588.
but at last his design is effected, and upon Christmas-Eve the Duke of Guise
and the Cardinal his Brother are slain, and the Cardinal of Bourbon, with many
others, imprisoned: He sends Colonel Alfonso Corso to seize upon the Duke of
Mayenne at Lions; but he is forewarned, and retires to Dijon. The Queen Mother
dies in the seventieth year of her age, and affairs remain in confusion.

THE defeat of the German Army caused the depression of the Hugonots, no less
than the greatness and exaltation of the League: for the King of Navarre having
received the news of so great a loss, though he were victorious beyond the
Loire, yet fearing so black a cloud would suddenly pour a storm upon his head,
he retired, without making other attempt, into his wonted retreat the City of
Rochel; and the other Heads of his party shut themselves up in the strongest
places, expecting the resolutions which they saw would be taken against them.

On the other side, the Duke of Guise, after the destroying of the County of
Mombelliard, being come to Nancy with the other Lords of his Family, began
without further delay to consult of the means of accomplishing speedily the
designs of the League, and of reaping fruits suitable to their present Victory.
In this Consultation debated and reiterated for many days, the greater part of
the Lords of the House of Lorain, forgetting moderation, so necessary in
prosperity, and spreading their fails very boldly, Vast thoughts of the House
of Lorain, too much puffed up by prosperous successes.
could talk of no less than the extirpation of the Hugonots, the deposing of
the King from the Crown, of putting him into a Cloister, as they had learned in
Story, had been in former times done to Chilperick, of destroying the House of
Bourbon, pulling down the Minions and Favorites of the Court, and disposing
the Offices and Dignities of the Crown unto themselves, and in conclusion, of
commanding and ruling the whole Government of France their own way; and were so
puffed up with the presumption of themselves, that their counsels were neither
measured by justice nor possibility, presupposing they had all things in their
own hands which were lawful for their deserts to undertake, and that they could
easily execute any determination, how high, how advantageous soever. These
great designs were partly opposed by the Duke of Lorain, who of a mild nature
and moderate mind, no less remote from danger than far from the pretensions of
the Lords of Guise, tried by the authority he had, as Head of that Family, to
restrain those deliberations which he thought too precipitate, and to keep
matters for the most part within the limits of reason. The Duke of Mayenne
assented to his opinions, and commended them very much, thinking (according to
his old inclination) that every moment they put the whole state of their Family
in danger without much necessity. But the Duke of Aumale, and the Chevalier his
Brother, the Duke of Nemours, the Duke of Elbeuf, the Count de Chaligny, and
above all the rest, the Duke of Guise, who led no less by the boldness of his
own nature, and the acuteness of his wit, than by the prosperous success of his
enterprises, could suffer no delay in following his conceived hopes, argued
(not without reason) that the longer they deferred, the longer time they gave
the King to contrive their ruin, and to perfect the design of their
suppression which he had already begun.

This diversity of opinions was the cause that they concluded as it were in the
middle way: and therefore about the end of January, in the year 1588, they
resolved upon two conclusions: One, that the Duke of Lorain with all his Forces
and the assistance of Flanders, should assail the Towns that belong to the Duke
of Bouillon, to root out the Hugonots from those parts, and to keep the Forces
of the League in action: the other, that the Duke of Guise, and the other
Confederate Lords, should not enter to oppose the King at the very first; but
that being united with the Cardinal of Bourbon, to strengthen their reasons,
and to make appear that the nature of things did of it self carry businesses to
their designed end, they should present a Petition, which should contain many
demands for their advantage, and which should necessitate the King to declare
his last resolution: for if he granted them, their desires would be effected
without noise or trouble; and if he refused them, he should thereby give them
occasion and opportunity to make use of arms, and to acquire that by force,
which he would not consent to of his own accord.

The conjuncture of invading the Duchy of Bouillon was in show very opportune;
for the Duke himself and the Count de la Mark his Brother being both dead, and
having left Charlotte their Sister only Heir, under the tuition of the Duke of
Montpensier, they knew that he being a Catholic, was not acceptable to the
City of Sedan, Iamets, and other places of that Dukedom, and that they would
not trust his Government, and Monsieur de la Noue being Executor of the late
Dukes will, was not only absent, but also to deliver himself from the
imprisonment of the Spaniards, by whom he had been taken in the Wars of
Flanders, had promised not to bear Arms against the King of Spain, nor against
the Duke of Lorain: whereby it appeared that Charlotte wanting a powerful
protection, and being likewise molested by the Count de Montleurier her Uncle,
who pretended right to the inheritance, would hardly be able to resist the
Forces of the Duke of Lorain, who also upon old pretenses laid claim to many
places of that State, and therefore without losing a minute of time, the Duke
having put an Army in readiness, under the command of the Marquess du Pont his
Son, accompanied by the Sieurs de Rhosne and Osonville, after he had overrun
and spoiled the Country, laid siege to Iamets with certain hopes to take it.
But he found it a difficult business; for Monsieur de Schelandre the Governor
of it made very wise and careful provisions for the defense of it; and Monsieur
de la Noue having first by a long Apology in writing excused his stirring in a
defensive War, and for the just right of a forsaken Orphan, came to Sedan, and
began to make strong preparations to maintain the War; so that the Siege of
Iamets cooling of it self, proved so long, that it hardly ended with the year,
wherein those things that happened, directed their Arms to more important
expeditions.

The Duke of Guise causes a Writing to be presented to the King, with many
cunning demands redounding to his own benefit.
But the Duke of Guise being departed from Nancy, and come into his Government
of Champagne, caused a long Writing in the names of himself, the Cardinal of
Bourbon, and the other Heads of the League to be presented to the King, wherein
after many preambles, and many reasons very cunningly laid together, they
demanded in substance, That he would unite himself truly with them, and would
sincerely make himself Head of the League, to the destruction and rooting out
of the Hugonots. That he would put those persons from the Court, from his
Councils, and from their Offices, who should be named by the Catholic Princes,
as suspected and ill-affected to Religion. That he would make the Council of
Trent be received and observed through the whole Kingdom, only excepting those
things which did prejudice the privilege of the Gallique Church. That he would
grant some certain places which should be thought fit, unto the Confederate
Princes for their security, wherein they might keep Garrisons, and make
necessary Fortificati^^s at the expenses of the Crown. That he would maintain
an Army about the (...) of Lorain, under the command of one of the Confederate
Princes, to hinder (...) of Foreigners. That he would cause all the Estates of
the Hugonots to (...) and sold, wherewith the expenses of the late Wars might
be satisfied, and the Confederates might be assisted toward the maintenance of
future matters.

The Writing contained these prin^ipal things, and many others of less
consequence, which being presented to the King in the beginning of February,
was received by him with his wonted dissimulation, and the answer deferred with
his wonted delays: nor did the Duke of Guise press much to know his resolution;
for the end of the demand was only to make the King contemptible, and render
him odious to the people, suspected to favor the Hugonots, and furnish the
League with an occasion and pretense to take up Arms, and presecute their
begun-designs while the prosperity of their fortune lasted. But these artifices
were needless to make the Kings person odious and contemptible. The burdens
which the War, the maintaining of so many Armies, and his own profane manner of
spending, daily increased, had lost the hearts of the people. The noise and
splendor of the Duke of Guise's Victories, had obscured the majesty of his
Name: his obstinate favor to his Minions, had alienated the minds of his most
ancient, most devoted Servants: and the People of Paris, swayed by the ambition
of the Council of Sixteen, could no longer endure Government. The City was full
of infamous Pamphlets, politic Discourses, Satirical Verses, and fabulous
Sories, which for the most part abusing the Name of the Duke d' Espernon,
redounded to the scorn and disgrace of the Royal Majesty. On the other side,
all the Streets, and every corner of Paris, resounded the praises of the Duke
of Guise, celebrated in Verse and Prose by a thousand Writers, with the Title
of the new David, the second Moses, the Deliverer of the Catholic People, the
Prop and Pillar of the Holy Church; and the Preachers in their wonted manner,
but with greater license, openly inveighing against the present affairs, filled
the ears of the people with wonders, or rather miracles (so they called them)
of this new Gideon, come into the World for the desired safety of the Kingdom:
Which things spread from the City of Paris, as from the heart; diffused
themselves through all the Provinces, as into the members, which were possessed
with the same impressions, as well to the Kings disadvantage, as in favor of
the League. This Commotion was fully perfected by the Kings own determination,
who either blinded with the affection he bore the Duke d' Espernon, or because
he would not advance other men whom they had no great cause to trust, declared
him Admiral of the Kingdom and Governor of Normandy, places that were vacant
by the Duke of Ioyeuse his death; which absolutely pierced through the heart of
the Duke of Guise, The King declares ^he D. of Esp^^non Admiral of the Kingdom
and Governor of Normandy, to the great discontent of the Duke of Guise.
seeing that he continued in his wonted customs, and that one man alone being
exalted to the highest degree of greatness, himself, his Brother, and the rest
of his Family, how great soever their merits were, could never obtain nor
compass any thing; so that forgetting the determinations resolved on at Nancy,
and that wary moderation which the Duke of Lorain had advised, he began without
more delay, to think of reducing the authority of the Government into his own
power, making the Parisians his principal instruments, who no less displeased
and incensed than himself, did earnestly solicit him to that resolution:
Wherefore having received particular information of the state of things from
the Council of Sixteen, The Council of Sixteen inform^ the Duke of Guise of
20000 men in readiness for any design.
whereby they assured him that they had twenty thousand armed men in the City
at their devotion, ready to be put upon any enterprise: That they were divided
into sixteen Squadrons, to every one of which they had appointed a Commander;
and that the rest of the people would without question follow the stream of the
chief men, by reason they were ill affected to the person of the King and the
Duke d' Espernon, and on the other side most zealous in the cause of Religion,
he considering that confusion easily arises among the multitude, and that the
division into sixteen several quarters was too many to meet altogether suddenly
in one body when need should require, writ to the Council, that they should
lessen that number, and reduce it into but five quarters, to which they should
appoint a place, where they should meet at the sign that should be given them,
and that they should dispose things in such a manner, as might breed neither
disorder nor confusion: and as well to assure himself absolutely that that
business should proceed according to his own will, as because he had no
confidence in the small experience of those Heads appointed and chosen by the
Parisians, he sent them five Commanders, who were to order the five quarters,
and to rule and moderate the turbulence of popular Arms. These were the Count
of Brissac, the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin, the Sieur de Chamois, the Sieur d'
Esclavoles, and Colonel St. Paul, to whom the Sieur de Meneville was added, who
from the first had been the Mediator and chief Instrument in that business.
These entered openly into Paris, under color of private affairs; and being
lodged in those quarters of the City that were appointed them, frequented the
Court, and followed diverse businesses, leaving the care to Meneville, of
bringing the matter to its conclusion: and to give the greater assistance to
it, the Duke of Guise gave order to the Duke of Aumale, who had Forces in
Picardy, The Duke of Aumale is in a readiness with 500 Horse to assist the
conspiracy of the Parisians.
to make himself be obeyed by many Governors of places, who fomented by the
Duke of Espernon, refused to acknowledge him: That he should keep five hundred
good Horse in a readiness to be there in due time, to put life in the design of
the Parisians, who knowing that such order was given, desired Iehan Conty one
of the Eshevins (or, as we call them in England, Sheriffs of the City) that he
would let them have the Keys of the Port St. Martin, which he kept, as the
custom is, to the end that when occasion should serve, they might bring in that
supply which was to come out of Picardy: but he refusing, they dealt with
Pierre Brigard Eshevin of the next quarter, who promised them the Keys of Port
St. Dennis, by which their assistance might be brought in as well as by that of
St. Martin: And because they doubted that Conty, who had denied to consent unto
it, might reveal the business to the King, they found an invention to make him
be complained of for an Heretic, and many other misdemeanors, putting him by
that means in discredit, to the end that his relation might not be believed.

Things being contrived in this manner, the means of executing them remained to
be resolved on. The Commanders sent by the Duke, and the major part of those
^hosen by the Council of Sixteen, thought that to assault the Louvre where the
King lay encompassed with his Guards, and the Nobility that attended him, would
be a dangerous enterprise, A Conspiracy against the Kings person.
of too loud a violence, and no ways likely to succeed; and they foresaw
besides, that the fact would seem very scandalous to the rest of the Kingdom;
that also if it failed but never so little, or that the effecting of it should
be a work of time, many disorders would arise, and the King might have
opportunity to make himself Superior: wherefore they resolved unanimously to
make use of the occasion which the time of Lent would afford them, to take his
person then when with the Duke of Espernon he should be in procession as he was
wont, in the habit of a Penitent among the whipping Friars, neither accompanied
by his Guards, nor the ordinary retinue of the Court; and as soon as he should
be seized upon, under color of a popular Sedition, caused by the indignation
of the common people, exasperated by the heavy punishments that lay upon them,
aad Enemies to the Authority of the Minions, that he should be shut up in a
Monastery with strong Guards; after which the Duke of Aumale's five hundred
Horse and his other Forces should presently come in, to take absolute
possession of the principal places, and keep them guarded till the Duke of
Guise should arrive; who calling the States General, and showing either the
Kings incapacity, or his evil intentions, and evil Government, might cause the
affairs of the Kingdom to be disposed at the arbitrament and to satisfaction of
the League.

Nicholas Poulain reveals the whole Plot to the High Chancellor, and confirms
it also to the King himself.
But Nicholas Poulain, who was privy to all this Conspiracy, did by means of the
High Chancellor quickly make the resolution that had been taken known to the
King, who though he did not absolutely give credit to the discovery, by reason
of the weight and importance of the thing, grounded upon no other assurance
than the bare affirmation of Poulain, a man of no very good repute, and
suspected by that means to seek for profit and reward; yet thinking fit to look
to himself, he feigned himself not well, and upon that excuse forbore to go to
any spiritual exercises with the Fraternity of the Penitents. And that he might
be the better assured of the truth, he caused Poulain to be brought one night
secretly into his closet, and in the presence of the High Chancellor Monsieur
d' O, and the Abbot del Been, examined him particularly concerning all things
he had revealed, seeming not to believe him, and to doubt that he was set on
and suborned to say so, by those of the Hugonot party. Poulain, with a secure
confidence and distinct narration, confirmed all that he had discovered, added
all the particulars and smallest circumstances, named all the accomplices,
related from the beginning the whole Conspiracy, and at last, with a free
courage and settled countenance, offered to be put in prison and kept there,
till he had justified all that he had said; and in conclusion added, That the
Council of Sixteen was to be held the next day in the house of Monsieur de la
Bruyiere, (one of the Conspirators) and that if the King would send whom he
pleased along with him with a sufficient Guard, he would put them all into his
hands, so that none of them should be able to hide themselves, or deny the
Conspiracy. The King dismissed him with gracious words, and very great
promises, and went presently to the Duke of Espernon's lodgings, where they
conferred together the space of half an hour; and being come from thence about
midnight, went to the Queen-Mothers Chamber, which was in the Palace, and
having wakened her, told her distinctly all that had been revealed unto him,
and began to consult whether he should do well to follow Poulain's advice, and
send the next day to take the Conspirators.

The thing in appearance was easy and secure, but in effect full of great
difficulty and danger: for it was not to be doubted, but upon very little stir
all the quarters of the City would be up in Arms, according to the order
already taken, and under the Commanders already appointed, who would never
suffer their Heads to be laid hold on and carried away prisoners by so small a
number as a Company of the Guards, which was all they were able to send about
that business: nor could they doubt of this effect, since they had often
proved, that when any one of the Heads of the City had been taken by the
Officers of the Court, either upon civil or criminal occasions, the common
people had ever run violently and seditiously armed to deliver him: and if the
people, being raised upon the apparent color, that their Heads and Protectors
were like to be seized upon, should suddenly assault the Louvre, the King and
Court unarmed, unprovided, undefended, except by the ordinary Guards, they
would hardly be able to make resistance against so great a Force, led by so
expert resolute Commanders, and who being come to that pass, would readily
embrace so specious an occasion of making it appear that they stirred not to
offend others, but only in their own defense. They considered that the people
of Paris were so powerful, that they could not be curbed, but by mighty Forces;
and to undertake what they could not compass, would be nothing else but to
overthrow the business, and come off with loss and dishonor. They foresaw that
the Conspirators would presently be relieved by the Dukes of Guise and Aumale,
who were hard by in Arms; whereas the King had no Body of men ready to assist
him in a case of so great danger. They knew that they were not to trust in the
Hugonot party, as well because they had always feared the King, and esteemed
him a bitter Enemy to their Religion, as because the defeat of the Germans had
so terrified them, that they all thought rather of leaving the Kingdom to save
their lives by flight, than of following the conduct of the Princes, to save
themselves by the Sword; and so much the more, Henry Prince of Conde poisoned
at S. Iehan d' Ang^ly by his own servants.
by reason that the Prince of Conde's death (which happened about this time at
St. Iehan d' Angely, by poison given him, as was reported, by his own Servants,
upon some private distaste) had raised the affliction of that party to the
utmost height; wherein there was nothing left unshaken, but only the constancy
of the King of Navarre: Besides that, the far distance, and the other wonted
respects, excluded the making of a foundation upon that party, especially in
the exigence of this imminent danger: so that they could find no Forces any
where sufficient to bridle the Parisians. Whereupon the Queen at last spoke
this conceit in the Italian Tongue, He that will stir up a Waspsnest, had first
need to cover his face well. A saying of the Queen Mother.
Bisogna coprisi been il viso inanzi che stuzzicare il vespaio: adding, that it
was necessary to arm and provide first, and then means would not be wanting to
suppress the Conspirators.

Wherefore, after long consultations, they sent for the Abbot del Been, with
whom pondered the same things again, they concluded that the Duke of Espernon,
under color of taking possession of his Government of Normandy, should go
presently into that Province, (bordering upon, and as it were joining to the
Territory of Paris it self:) That he should assure himself of Rouen and Havre
de Grace, chief places of that Province, and which shut up the passage of the
Ocean, and of the River Seine; Resolutions taken to free themselves of the
Conspiracy of the Parisians.
and that upon that occasion he should draw some Forces together, wherewith he
might be ready to come up in time of need: That on the other side they should
endeavor by all means possible, as they had already begun, to draw Monsieur d'
Entraques unto the Kings devotion, being Governor of Orleans, a City that
stops the passage from Berry and Beausse unto the Territories of Paris: That
the Swisses which were yet under the Kings pay, should be drawn to quarter at
Lagny, and in other places adjoining, to shut up the River of Marne, (commonly
called, The Nurse of the common people of Paris) and to cut off the passage
from Champagne: for having Chartres already, whereof the High Chancellor had
the Government, and Pontoyse, because the Governor of it was Monsieur d'
Alincourt Father to Secretary Villeroy, Paris would be blocked up, encompassed
and bridled on every side; so that bringing in afterward the greatest part of
the Swisses, and reinforcing the Regiment of Guards, by calling all the
Soldiers to their Colors, who are often wont to be absent in time of Peace,
they might then securely take the Heads of the Conspiracy; and if the people
should rise, it would be easy to tame them with the strength of the Swisses,
and the powerful curb of hunger: in the mean time they concluded it was best
for the King to dissemble, and abstain from public Ceremonies, and from
certain suspected places, to give no opportunity to the execution of that plot
which the Conspirators sought to accomplish.

This resolution, grounded as it were upon necessity, was approved the next
morning both by Secretary Villeroy and the High Chancellor, but most of all by
the Sieur de Villequier, who still persisted in his opinion that the
information was not true, but that the Enemies of the Duke of Guise and of the
Parisians, had suborned Poulain to raise this calumny, thereby to stir up some
enterprise against them. Whereupon the King having sent for Conty and Vgoloy,
two Eshevins that consented not to the Conspirators, would needs hear from them
what they knew in that particular. Conty excused himself, that by reason of the
report which was lately raised of him, that he was infected with the Hugonot
Religion, and guilty of other crimes, he had not dared to tell any of those
things he knew, for fear of being thought a malicious slanderer; and then laid
open freely all that had passed about the Keys of the Port St. Martin: and
Pierre Vgoloy relating many particulars that were come to his knowledge,
confirmed the same things: so that the information being partly proved, they
went on to the execution of those resolutions which had been taken.

The Duke of Espernon departed two days after with a very small quantity, that
he might not weaken the Court; and being come to Rouen the Metropolis of
Normandy, took possession of the Government, confirming as well the Parliament
as the Sieur de Carrouges Governor of the City, unto his devotion, and to the
Kings party. But the same succeeded not at Havre de Grace, because Andre
Brancace Sieur de Villars a Provencal, who had the Government thereof given him
by the Duke de Ioyeuse, had already taken part with the League; the Duke of
Guise, who diligently watched all opportunities, having dealt with him, by
reason of the importance of that place, and caused the Parisians to give him
thirty thousand Crowns, under pretense of keeping the mouths of the Ocean shut,
and the passage of the Seine open, to the end that the City might enjoy the
traffic of the Sea, and the convenience of bringing up the provisions which
came from those parts; by which reward, and the protection of the Duke of
Guise, he was won to side absolutely with the League. Wherefore the Duke of
Espernon knowing that he could not draw that place to his devotion, and
unwilling to hazard his reputation at the first, letting alone the Country of
Caux where it is situated, he passed on the other side the Seine, to Ponteau de
Mer, Honfleur, and from thence by the shore of the Ocean to the City of Caen,
where he was received with infinite applause, because the place was full of
Hugonots, and most averse from the designs of the League.

In the mean time the Sieur d' Entraques was treated with about the City of
Orleans, by the means of Secretary Villeroy: in which Negotiation there arose
many difficulties, nor could the King bring it to an end with all his
solicitations. The most part of men were of opinion, that this business was
not effected, because Secretary Villeroy, now an open Enemy to the Duke of
Espernon, desired the Duke of Guise's party should prevail, that he might
thereby be abased; not believing that ever the League would dare to pass on so
far, as to plot against the person of the King himself, but that they only
aimed at pulling down the Minions, and the destruction of the Hugonots, and
that therefore he did artificially interrupt the treaty of Orleans, and
protract the resolution of Monsieur d' Entraques with delays and difficulties;
which was so much the rather believed, because the business was most easily
effected afterward in a time less opportune, and less favorable. But Monsieur
de Villeroy excused himself for it with a long Apology, showing that the
protraction of the business was caused on the one side by the irresoluteness of
Monsieur d' Entraques, and on the other, by that of the King himself; who would
neither consent to dismember the Government of the City of Orleans from that of
the Province as he required, lest he should discontent the High Chancellor,
(who possessed it) nor to make satisfaction be given him by the Duke of
Espernon, by whom he thought himself injured in the person of his Son;
howsoever it were, the business went on so slowly, that they came not to a
conclusion at Orleans time enough to block up the City of Paris; which the King
prosecuting very carefully, caused the Marshall de Byron to bring the Swisses
to quarter at Lagny, a place near the City seated upon the River Marne,
disposing part of them into all the convenient neighbouring-places. The Kings
preparations* to make himself sure of the Conspirators, to block up the
passages about Paris, and keep victuals from thence.
In the mean time the number of the French Guards was increased; for
Commissions had been given out to all the Captains in ordinary, to summon all
Soldiers to their Colors, and not to give leave to any to depart. The Archers
who were wont to wait by the quarter, but three months in the year, had been
all warned to attend in an extraordinary manner; the five and forty Gentlemen
appointed by the King, stirred neither day nor night from his Lodgings and
Person; and many Gentlemen were invited under pretense of other businesses, to
reside at Court: which things being particularly observed by the Council of
Sixteen, (who kept Spies in every place) and seeing the King (contrary to his
custom) live retired from those exercises of devotion and recreation wherein he
was wont to delight, The Council of Sixteen by the Kings preparation^, begin to
suspect that their Plot is discovered, and the Heads being dismayed send for
the Duke of Guise to Paris.
began to grow very suspicious that he had been advertised by Iehan Conty and
Pierre Vgoloy, whereupon they began to fear, and to look to themselves; yet not
desisting from the enterprise, but rather providing for all things with greater
diligence. But when they knew the Swisses were quartered at Lagny, they were
assured that their Plot was discovered, and fell into wonderful confusion,
their hearts all failing, as the custom is in popular designs, there being no
man among them able for his authority and experience to manage so weighty an
enterprise: wherefore finding they stood in need of a principal Head, whose
wit, courage and reputation might give life unto the business, they dispatched
Pierre Brigard in very great haste to entreat the Duke of Guise not to defer
his coming any longer, to which they had often invited him; since by his
presence the design might be happily brought unto an issue; whereas if they
were forsaken by him, they saw they should become a prey unto the King, out of
whose hands (to the total destruction of the City) they could not think of any
possible way to save themselves. The Duke (who had some notice of the Kings
intention, and also on the other side was not willing to suffer the foundation
of the League to perish, nor to abandon those who had principally made their
recourse to him, and thinking that his ruin would immediately follow that of
the Parisians, if time were given for those remedies to work which the King had
begun to put in practice) took a resolution to go to Paris, either perfectly to
finish the design, (as they of the Kings party said) or at least (as he and his
Adherents said) to save the City, and the Council of Sixteen, which he knew to
be in manifest danger, and to free himself of the calumny which his Enemies and
the Favorers of the Hugonots had raised against him. And that he might make no
noise, but proceed with the same arts that were used by the King, he sent his
Gentlemen by several ways, and a great band of old Soldiers, who entered
scatteringly upon several days into the City, and lodged a part in several
quarters; and he himself with but seven Horse in company took the way toward
Soissons, where the Cardinal of Bourbon was, to confer with him, and go from
thence to Paris. Yet Fame published his coming, (which was also spread abroad
by the Sixteen to cheer up the sadness that had possessed all the people by
reason of the preparations that were made) which being known unto the King, The
King commands the Duke of Guise not to come to Paris, but he disobeys.
was the cause that he sent Monsieur de Bellieure as far as Soissons to
dissuade him from coming, and to let him know, that in such a turbulent
suspected time, he should be displeased and offended at it. The Duke, who was
not moved from his resolution by certain vain respects that use to disturb
unsettled minds, but desiring to come unexpectedly, that he might neither be
prevented nor way laid, answered the Kings message doubtfully, saying that his
ambition was to serve his Majesty and Religion; that he knew he had been
slandered by his Enemies, and therefore longed to vindicate himself; that his
journey was exceeding private, and without any train that could make him
suspected; that he was very desirous to satisfy the King in all occasions;
that he would not disobey his Majesty's commands; and added many other words,
but all general and ambiguous; nor did he ever conclude in substance, whether
he would obey the Kings command in that particular, or prosecute his intended
journey to Paris; yet he seemed rather to infer that he would stay at Soissons,
and expect another resolution. But Monsieur de Bellieure was no sooner departed
with his doubtful answer, but he took horse and followed him, making his
journey out of the great highways, lest he should meet other Messengers from
the King; so that Philibert Sieur de la Guiche, and Charles Benoise the Kings
Cabinet-Secretary, who were dispatched one after the other to advise him not to
come to Paris, could not find him any where, till he was at the Gate of St.
Denis, a time when it was too late to forbid his coming. The Duke of Guise
enters Paris upon Monday the ninth of May, when it was almost noon, with no
greater train than seven horses, with his Gentlemen and other Servants
together; but as a little snow-ball rolling down a high hill grows so big, that
at last it becomes almost a mountain; so the people running out of their houses
and shops, with applause and joy to follow him, he had not passed half through
the City, but he had above thirty thousand persons about him, and the crowd was
so great, that he himself could hardly make his way. The shouts of the people
sounded to the Skies; nor they ever cry Vive le Roy, with so great acclamation,
as they now cried Vive Guise: some saluted him, some gave him thanks, some
bowed to him, some kissed the hem of his Garment; those that could not get
near, with actions of their hands and gestures of their whole body showed
infinite signs of rejoicing; and some were seen, who adoring him as a Saint,
touched him with their beads, and either kissed them presently, or else touched
their eyes and foreheads with them; and even the very women, strowing leaves
and flowers from their windows, honored and blessed his coming. He on the
other side, with a popular face, and smiling countenance, showed himself
affable to some in words, to some by courteously returning their salutations,
others he requited with kind looks; and passing through that throng of people
with his hat off, he omitted nothing that was behoveful to win absolutely the
affections and applause of the people.

In this manner, without staying at his own house, he went straight forward to
St. Eustache, and alighted at the Palace of the Queen Mother, who half
astonished at his unexpected arrival, (for Monsieur de Bellieure being returned
three hours before, had made a doubt of his coming) received him with a pale
countenance, and (contrary to the ordinary custom of her nature) trembling and
almost dismayed. The Duke goes to wait upon the Queen Mother, who becomes pale
and affrighted
The Dukes carriage was full of respective humility and profound submission;
the words of the Queen ambiguous, telling him that she was glad to see him, but
would have been much more glad to have seen him at another time: to which he
answered with modest behavior, but high words, that he was a faithful Servant
to the King, and that having understood the calumnies that were cast upon his
innocence, and the things that were in agitation against Religion, and against
the honest well-affected men of that City, he was come thither to divert that
mischief, and clear himself, or else to lay down his life at the service of the
Church and the general safety.

Their discourse being interrupted, while he (as the custom is) saluted the
other Ladies of the Court, the Queen called Luigi Davila her Gentleman Usher,
and commanded him to let the King know the Duke of Guise was come, and that
within a little while she would bring him personally to the Louvre. The King
(who was in his private Closet with Monsieur de Villequier, Bellieure, and the
Abbot del Been) was so wonderfully moved, that he was fain to rest himself upon
his arm, hanging his head down almost to the table; and having examined Davila
of every particular, commanded him to desire the Queen secretly to defer his
coming as long as possibly she could. The Abbot del Been, and Colonel Alfonso
Corso, a most trusty Servant of the Kings, and one that had deserved
wonderfully well of the Crown, coming at that instant into the Closet,
counseled him to receive the Duke of Guise in the same Closet, and cause him
to be killed in that very place, the Abbot saying these words, I will strike
the Sh^pherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.
Percutiam Pastgrem, and dispergentur oves. But Villequier, Bellieure, and the
High Chancellor (who came in) were of another opinion, alleging that the
commotion of the people was so great, that in such a case, contemning the Royal
Majesty, and breaking all bounds of Law and Duty, they would run to a
precipitate revenge; and that things not being yet ready to defend themselves,
and bridle the fury of the City, the Forces of the Parisians were too powerful
to be provoked.

Whilst the King stood doubtful what to resolve, the Queen Mother came and
brought the Duke of Guise: she was brought her self in a Sedan, the Duke going
by her all the way on foot, but with so great a train, and such a confluence of
people, that the whole City seemed to be crowded into the Court of the Louvre
and the Streets thereabouts. They passed through a Lane of Soldiers: Monsieur
de Grillon Colonel of the Guards was there present, who being a free Souldierly
Man, and no very good Friend to the Duke of Guise, whilst he bowed courteously
to every private Soldier, made very small show of respect unto the Duke, who
observed it very well, with some alteration of countenance, which increased to
a great paleness when he saw the Swisses, who (standing to their Arms) made a
Lane at the bottom of the Stairs, the Archers in the Hall, and in the Rooms
above, all the Gentlemen gathered together to expect him. The King being
visited by the Duke of Guise, shows himself angry both in words and looks,
because he was come to Paris contrary to his command.
They entered into the Kings Chamber; who (while the Duke of Guise bowed
himself with a low reverence) said to him with an angry look, I sent you word
that you should not come. To these words the Duke with the same submission he
had used to the Queen, but with more moderate words, answered, That he was come
to put himself into the Arms of his Majesty's Justice, to clear himself of
those calumnies that were cast upon him by his Enemies; and that nevertheless
he would not have come, if he had been plainly told that his Majesty had
commanded him to stay. The King turning to Bellieure, asked him angerly if it
were not true that he had given him Commission to tell the Duke of Guise that
he should not come, unless he would be accounted the Author of the tumults and
insurrections of the Parisians. Monsieur de Bellieure stepped forward, and
would have given an account of his Message; but as he began to speak, the King
interrupted him, The Queen disswades the King from his boughts a^gainst the
Duke of Guise; who perceiving in what danger he was, presently takes his leave
and departs.
saying it was enough; and turning to the Duke of Guise, said, That he knew not
that he was calumniated by any body, but that his innocence would have clearly
appeared if his coming had produced no novelty, nor interrupted the quiet of
the Government, as it was like to do. The Queen well acquainted with the Kings
nature, and seeing in his face that he was inclined to some bold resolution,
drew him aside, and told him in substance what she had seen of the concourse of
people, and that it was no time to think of any precipitate determination. The
Duchess of Vzez, who was close by him, confirmed the same: and the Duke of
Guise attentively observing every little particular, as soon as he saw they
were in an uncertainty, that he might not give the King time to deliberate,
feigned himself weary with his journey, and taking his leave, returned with the
same confluence of people, but not accompanied with any of the Court, unto his
own house in the Rue St. Anthoyne. Many condemned the King, because he did not
then resolve to cut him off at that opportunity; and many knowing the strength
and courage of the Parisians, and that he had many Adherents even in the Court
it self, thought it a prudent and moderate determination to let him go.

But the Duke of Guise having before his eyes the danger he had run, and
condemning himself for his late venture, began presently to draw unto himself
all his friends and dependents, which were spread in the several quarters of
the City, so that he who at noon entered but with seven horses, had in his
house at night above four hundred Gentlemen and Commanders. At the same time he
sent for the Council of Sixteen, and all the Eschevins; and after a long
consultation, (wherein he was fully informed of all particulars) gave order
that Guards should be kept in every Ward; that all men should be warned and
prepared; and that upon any stir they should (according to the order already
given, and under the Officers already appointed) all run to the principal
places of the City, and chiefly to his house. Many Arms, Muskets, Drums, and
other instruments of War, were carried the same night into his house, as well
to arm great store of people, as to defend his own person, about which they
kept Watches and Sentinels, no less than they use to do in Armies when they are
near an Enemy.

The same diligence was used at the Louvre, and at the Queens Palace, whither
she returned when it was very late at night: her Gentlemen kept Guard very
carefully; The King and Queen are strongly guarded for fear of the Duke of
Guise; and he being fearful als^, takes the same care.
and the whole night was spent in great suspicions on every side: and now all
things were become public; nor was any body ignorant that the King meant to
bridle the Parisians, and suppress the Duke of Guise; and that he on the other
side was come to make himself Master of the City, to drive his Enemies from
Court, and to find means of transferring all the Authority of the Government
upon himself. Among these reciprocal suspicions and public scattered reports,
Poulain being admitted the same night into the Kings Closet, told him that he
had heard the Duke of Guise had said publicly, He would clear himself of those
calumnies that had been raised of him; and offered himself again to be put in
prison till he had made what he had revealed appear to be true: for the Heads
of the Conspiracy being taken, he doubted not but the King would have a full
assurance of all. Further, he said that before the Dukes coming, the Kings
preparations had made every one wary and timorous; but that now he was present,
their wonted spirits were revived: whereupon, that very night, in the most
silent hours, the Council was to be held in the house of la Chapelle, where it
would be very easy to take them all, and certify themselves manifestly of the
whole business. Upon this proposition, they continued uncertain what to do, and
consulting the whole night without one wink of sleep, in the mean time day
appeared, it being Tuesday the tenth of May, a day full of terror and
distraction. The City was full of Meetings and Conventicles; the Louvre guarded
with an unwonted number of Soldiers; the Duke of Guise's Palace kept locked
and full of Arms; the King in his Closet at secret counsel with the Queen his
Mother, and his Counselors; yet the Duke of Guise came in the morning to the
Louvre, but with a train of above four hundred Gentlemen and Commanders
privately armed, The Duke of Guise goes (with 400 Gentlemen privately well
armed) to the Louvre, to wait upon the King to Mass.
(with Pistols under their Cloaks) and went to the lodgings of the young Queen
to visit her, and from thence, having waited upon the King till he went to
Mass, retired with the wonted concourse of people to his own house, where he
spent the rest of the morning in consulting with the Archbishop of Lions, who
above all others, was his most interessed Confident, because he was a bitter
Enemy to the Duke of Espernon.

After Dinner he went to the Queen-Mothers house, whither the King came, and
they discoursed together in the Garden a long time. There the Duke of Guise
taking heart, as being in a place out of danger, because it was in the midst of
the City, wherein he was the strongest, discoursed a great while of the causes
of his coming, Discourses that pass between the King, the Queen Mother and the
Duke of Guise.
of the satisfaction which the Confederate Princes desired, and of the War to
be made against the King of Navarre, accusing the Duke of Espernon, and
Monsieur de la Valette his Brother, as authors of the discontents and
divisions, and imputed to their practices that the Hugonots were not rooted
out, and France restored to its ancient splendour, and settled in a perfect
Peace; and finally, he showed that the minds of the sincere Catholics could
not be at quiet, while they saw the King encompassed with suspected persons,
and such as were of doubtful opinions in matter of Religion, while the ancient
manner of Government used by former Kings was perverted, and while in stead of
employing his Forces against the Hugonot Faction, they were turned against the
faithful people of Paris, who desired nothing else but the safety of their
Souls and Consciences; wherefore it was necessary for whosoever would live in
peace and tranquillity to change the course of proceedings and form of
Government, to the end that the Catholic Faith, and the safety of good men
being secured, every one might live quietly within their due obedience.

To these things the King answered with prolixity of words, showing, that his
mind was inclined to the extirpation of the Hugonots; but that it was needful
to stay for a fit opportunity, and wait his pleasure, not going about to
constrain him, by force, that the plots and machinations of those of the League
had interrupted all good; for they had passed on so far, that they had
disturbed the established order of Government; nor had that satisfied, but
slanderous tongues had too much offended his patience both against truth and
reason; that notwithstanding the clemency of his nature was ready to pardon all
those that would see their faults, and serve him faithfully for the time to
come: that no Prince in Christendom had more hated, persecuted, and trodden
down Heretics than he; that never any King had more loved and favored any
Subject, than he had done the House of Lorain, and the very person of the Duke
of Guise; that all Offices and Dignities could not be conferred upon one man;
and that as God bestows his blessings upon many according to the quality of
their callings, so a Prince is bound to divide his gifts and favors among
many, according to their deserts and his own inclination; that he had raised
the Lords of la Valette, Sons of a most Catholic Father, valiant in War, and
who had deserved very well of the Crown, having born Arms more constantly than
any other against the Hugonots; that he found he was well served by them, as
the diligence of Espernon had been seen in the defeat of the Germans, and the
prosperous success of la Valette in making so great a slaughter of the
Protestant Swisses that went into Dauphine: yet for all that he did not go
about to equal them to the House of Guise, being neither alike in birth nor
desert; but that places in Court are different, as there are different stations
in Paradise; that it had ever been in the free power of all Kings to use and
favor whom they pleased, and to choose companions for their hours of recreation
to their own liking and convenience, for else that liberty would be debarred a
Prince which private men freely enjoy, there being no man so mean but has
power to live and converse with whom he pleases, and to dispose of his own
estate according to his own will and genius; that he had never received any
counsel from the Lords of la Valette, nor any impediment that hindered him from
making War with the Hugonots: yet if it could be proved, that they have not
behaved themselves sincerely in any business, he was ready to punish them
according to the quality of their fault; but that he would not banish them from
Court for mere dislike of others: that he would observe what he had so often
sworn concerning the Edict of the Union, and that his thoughts were more than
ever bent upon the War against the King of Navarre, nor did any other respect
withhold him from it, than that of burthening his people, which he must be
forced to do to maintain Armies in so many several places; that it was only
that which troubled; but yet that his Subjects had no reason to complain, since
they themselves had been the Incendiaries of the War, and above all, the
Parisians: that War could not be made without money, and money could not be
raised without oppressing the people, by which means he was brought to bear the
blame of a fault that was not his; for those that cried out against
Impositions, were the very same who seditiously had forced him to make a War;
that the City of Paris (to which he had done more good than ten of his
Predecessors together, which had ever been his Favorite, wherein he had made
his constant habitation, which caused the riches and plenty of the Citizens)
had now declared it self his Enemy, and having derided and defamed his Name,
had also gone on to conspire against his Person: that he knew very well that
those Plots were contrived by strangers, and that the good people who were
originally of the City consented not unto them, and that therefore he had
resolved to turn all strangers out of the City, to take away the fuel from that
pestilent fire which begun to spread; that he would not make use of foreign
Arms to purge the City, whilst he should be faithfully served by the Citizens
themselves; that he required his assistance in that business, and that he would
give him that proof of the fidelity and sincerity he professed, for when he
should once be assured of the obedience of his Subjects, he had nothing more to
desire of him; and when once the strangers were driven out, and the City settled
without tumult, in the condition it ought to be, he would cast away all former
suspicions, and willingly consent to the moderation of future businesses. After
he had ended his discourse, he called the Prevost des Merchands, and the
Eschevins of the City, who were present, and commanded them to search all
houses diligently the day after, with such other persons as he should appoint
for that purpose; and that they should turn out all strangers who had settled
themselves there without urgent necessity: That they should make no distinction
of persons; for he was certified there were fifteen thousand who were set on to
raise scandals, and come to stir up new commotions, to the danger of the lives
and goods of the Citizens. With this Commission the Deputies departed,
promising to serve him faithfully; and after many such discourses, the Duke of
Guise departed also, having promised the same: For he had lulled the King with
his arts, and that his presence had so terrified him, that he should no longer
need much Force: Whereupon he said to some of his familiar Friends, that he
hoped without noise or difficulty to obtain an Assembly of the States General,
wherein he doubted not but matters should go on according to his wish and
design.

The King appointed Monsieur de Villequier and Monsieur d' O to make search for
the strangers, which (the same Guards and jealousies continuing) was begun the
next morning, but with obstinate backwardness, and most apparent dissimulation
of the Parisians, The King commands fi^teen thousand strangers to be driven out
of Paris; but the execution is hindered: whereupon he resolves to suppress the
Insurrection by force.
who knew that those that were lodged in the City were all the Duke of Guise's
dependents, and sent by him; nor were they willing that by expelling them their
own Forces should be dissolved: Whereby the Kings Deputies perceived that they
labored but in vain, and that the intention of disarming and weakening the Duke
of Guise could not succeed by that means, nor produce any effect; and therefore
they let the King know so much; who angry and exasperated, resolved at last to
tame the people by force, and endeavor to suppress the Conspirators without
longer delay. To that end he presently dispatched the Marshall de Byron to
bring the Swisses into Paris, and Monsieur d' O to fetch the Companies of his
Guards which were lodged out of the City in the near adjacent places, and gave
order that neither the Gentlemen, Archers, nor Soldiers of the Guards, should
stir any more out of the Court, but that all should keep close about his Person.

This was not unknown to the Duke of Guise, who, The Duke of Guise makes the
Parisians b^lieve that the King meant to put Sixscore of the chief Catholics
to death.
to set the strength of the People against the Kings Forces, caused a report to
be presently spread about the City, that the King had resolved to put to death
Sixscore of the principal Catholics, and to put Garrisons in the chief places
to suppress the Citizens, and that therefore it was necessary for them to
prepare for their defense. A counterfeit List was framed of the Sixscore names,
the Copies whereof were dispersed abroad; the Duke of Guise being set down
first of all, and President Nully, President Maistre, the Sieurs de Bussy and
la Chapelle, Hautman the Receiver, and after them all the Curates, Preachers,
Deputies, and Eschevins; and finally, all such as were beloved of the people;
the fear of whose danger might stir them up to take Arms; causing this forgery
to be divulged with so much vehemence of words and actions, and with so much
feigned terror, by cunning active persons, who were acquainted with the
peoples humors, that they began to talk of rising that very night; the
Commanders being ordered and chosen in every quarter, and the Dukes Gentlemen
appointed to rule and moderate the rashness of the armed people.

But things were not yet fully ripe; and the night of the eleventh day was
spent in these practices on every side, till in the morning upon Thursday the
twelfth of May, they heard the Swisses Fifes and Drums; which beating their
march, The Kings Soldiers come into Paris, and guard the Lo^vre, with the
streets about it, as also the Bridges and Marketplaces of the City.
entered at the Port St. Honor, the Marshall de Byron on horseback leading
them; and then the French Companies followed under their several Captains, with
all their matches lighted. The King being also got on horseback, went out to
receive them, welcoming the Soldiers at the entry of the gate, and commanded
with a loud voice, repeating it many times, that they should all forbear to
commit the least insolence, or do the least injury to the Citizens, upon pain
of death without mercy: And having given order to Monsieur d' O and the
Marshall de Byron to possess and guard all the chief places of the Town, went
back to the Louvre, where the Soldiers of the Guards were armed and in a
readiness upon all occasions. The Marshall de Byron, perhaps not acquainted
with the Kings design, thought it expedient first to possess those places which
were nearest the Louvre, for the security and defense of the Court; and
therefore first of all he possessed himself of St. Innocents Churchyard, being
at the end of the Rue St. Honor, and there he placed nine hundred Swisses,
setting the rest, to the number of one thousand six hundred, about the
Boucherie, the Marche-neuf, the Chastele^, and Townhouse: Monsieur d' O took
the Pont au Change, and the Pont St. Michel, placing Monsieur du Gast upon the
one, and Monsieur Marivant upon the other; the Companies of Beauvais, Nangy and
Monsieur de l' Archant, being left to guard the Gate of the Louvre toward the
Rue St. Thomas. But the business was very ill ordered in that manner, and it
had been much better to have taken La Place Maubert, la Place St. Antoyne, and
the Streets near the Bastile, which are all in the furthest parts of the City,
and near the Duke of Guise's Palace: for being besieged, so that he could not
stir, and the Rue St. Denis and St. Martin being blocked up, to divide the
people into two parts, that they might not easily draw together, the whole City
would have been blocked up in the Kings power, and the tumult of the people
restrained. But the Soldiers thus disposed of, were more fit to defend the
Louvre, than to hinder the insurrection of the Citizens, which took its birth
and beginning where the person of the Duke of Guise was, and where his spirit
gave life to it.

At the entry of the Kings Forces, which was known to the whole City by the
noise of the Drums, the people full of fear and terror, and now assured that
the report divulged of the Kings intention was most certain, began to gather
together, shutting up their doors and shops, which (according to the custom
used in that City of going to work before day) was already begun to be opened,
and every one began to make ready their Arms, expecting directions what they
should do.

It was already broad day light, when the Queen Mother, desirous to know what
the Duke of Guise did, sent Luigi Davila unto him, under color of a ceremonial
visit, (for she yet continued her wonted dissimulation) giving him charge to
observe very carefully every little circumstance of whatsoever he should see or
hear. He going to the Hostel de Guise (so they call the Houses of the great
Lords) contrary to the ordinary custom, found the Gates shut; and being let in
through the Wicket, he saw two long rows of Gentlemen armed in the Court, and in
the midst of them the Duke of Guise walking up and down alone, to whom he
delivered the complement he was commanded: But the Duke finding the Queens
intention, and desiring to show that he was well prepared, took him kindly by
the hand, and led him talking into the Garden, where a great number of Arms
were laid together, and all the lower rooms full of Soldiers and Reformadoes;
of whom Davila (as being acquainted with them) knew the greatest part. After
two or three short turns in the Garden, the Duke, who notwithstanding was in
great suspense, and as one might easily perceive, full of weighty thoughts,
returning a complement, dismissed him, and he coming back strait to the Louvre,
whither the Queen was already gone, and being brought into the Kings Closet,
related distinctly all that he had observed: and added further, that as he
passed through the City, he had seen them shut up their shops and houses, make
ready their Arms, lay logs and set barrels before their doors, and many of the
Dukes Gentlemen and Officers discoursing together, the chief Citizens very
busy every where, and that especially in the Place Maubert, and the Rue St.
Anthoyne the people gathered very fast together, and made greater preparations
of Arms than in any other place. The King having caused him to make his
relation twice over, presently sent Benoise his Secretary to Monsieur d' O,
commanding him to advance beyond the Bridges, and cause the French Companies to
possess the Place Maubert, and the Rue St. Anthoyne.

Monsieur d' O instantly sent Colonel Grillon to execute the Kings command; but
he came too late: for the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin with the Scholars of the
University, and the Boat-men dwelling about S. Iehan en Greve had already taken
that Post, which had till then been imprudently neglected; and having locked up
the Streets with Chains, and shut up all passages with barricadoes of logs and
barrels filled with dirt and earth, had made that their Rendezvous; wherefore
Monsieur de Grillon was fain to retire, and going about to return to the place
from whence he came, his way was stopped by the Count of Brissac, who with the
People of the Quarter of St. Germain, had shut him up so in the midst, that he
was engaged between the Bridges, nor could he stir any way at all, nor make the
least resistance on any side, though he had with him the greatest strength of
the French Soldiers.

All the rest of the City being already up, followed this beginning, crying
furiously, The Parisians raised at the ringing of the bells, make barricadoes
cross the streets; and blocking up all the Kings Corpse de Guard* come up to the
Louvre, and begin to assaule the Royalists*
Arm, Arm, and ringing the Toquesaint in every Quarter, made Barricadoes in the
same same manner within thirty paces of one another, in so punctual order, and
with so much readiness, that the extent of so vast a City was all blocked up in
a moment, and shut in every way, the Kings Soldiers beset on all sides with
the Barricadoes, even to the very doors of all their Corpse de Guard, and which
was worst of all, Colonel St. Paul with the people of St. Eustache and
Mont-Martre coming down with fury, and blocking up the Streets from place to
place, made their last Barricadoes at the very Gates of the Louvre, right over
against, and in the very face of the Kings Corpse de Guard.

After the Streets were blocked up and fortified on all sides, the word going
every where about with fierce loud cries, that they should cut the Foreign
Soldiers in pieces, the Swisses were presently assaulted in St. Innocent's
Churchyard, where shut up and (as one may say) imprisoned, they could make no
defense in the world, but six and thirty of them being slain in the first
onset, the rest yielded themselves without resistance, and were pillaged by the
people with very great violence and boasting. All the other Guards, of the
Chastelet, the little Bridge, the Butchery, and the Townhouse, were assaulted
at the same time, the Swisses being in the same manner disarmed, and made
prisoners at the peoples discretion. To the French Guards they had a little
more respect; for having made them put out their Matches, and lay down their
Arms, they kept them in that manner till they had further order.

In the mean time the King was persuaded by the Queen Mother and Monsieur de
Villequier to go forth of the Louvre, and show himself unto the Citizens,
thinking that the people would certainly be daunted with the splendor of the
Royal Majesty, that they would acknowledge and obey him, and that laying down
their Arms, and receiving security for their own lives and houses, they would
suffer the Delinquents to be taken and punished: But the King thought it too
dangerous an advice, and such an one as would expose all the remainder of his
Dignity and Authority to the rashness of the people, without much assurance
that the issue would be good; and which was worse, it seemed to him a counsel
of such nature, as in case it should not succeed well, could no way be
remedied, but the event at the same time would be certain ruin, and the loss
of his life: wherefore he resolved to send out the Mareschals of Aumont and
Byron to talk with the people, and endeavor safely to appease them by fair
means. But this determination was as vain as the other; for the Mareschals
words were answered with Musket-Bullets, and Stones, and they were fain to
retire without doing any thing. There was now no other hope left, but of
defending the Louvre, wherein (besides the wonted Guards, most forward to do
their duty) there were above five hundred Gentlemen, who before all others had
undertaken to defend the passage to the Gate.

But the Duke of Guise, either struck with the temerity of so high an
enterprise, or not having prepared his designs from the beginning to go so far,
or astonished in the execution by the greatness of the attempt, or thinking the
business was brought to a head as soon as he saw the City in his power, the
Kings Guards disarmed and taken, and the King with all his Friends shut up, and
as it were imprisoned in the Louvre, and that he should attain to the rest of
his desires, by way of composition, resolved to appease the tumult without
using any more force; and going out of his house on horseback, unarmed, with
only a truncheon in his hand, to show the greater contempt, rode through all the
Quarters, and speaking to the people every where, exhorted them to stand upon
their guard, since God had been so merciful to them as to secure their Lives,
Families, Liberties, Religion, and the honor of the holy Church, but that they
should depend upon him and not doubt, for all things were very safe: and coming
to the place where the French Soldiers were beset and taken, The Duke of Guise
seeing the City in his power, and the King as is were a prisoner, cease to
prosecute the for^eing of the Louvre, and appeaseth the people.
he gave order to Colonel St. Paul to conduct them to the Louvre, and let them
go. Thence he passed by St. Innocents, and made the Swisses Arms be restored to
them; and in the same manner caused the Count of Brissac to bring them to the
entry of the Louvre and let them go. All the Soldiers without Drums, or being
ranked in order went bareheaded, trailing their Arms as prisoners, and being
conducted to the Gate of the Louvre, were there received by the Marshall de
Byron, who caused them to be lodged thereabout: nor could the Duke of Guise's
Victory have a prouder triumph, or a more remarkable spectacle.

Many thought, and particularly Alessandro Farnese Duke of Parma, (a Prince of
incomparable valor and deep understanding) said, that the Duke of Guise had
attempted too much, Ale^^andro Far^^se Duke of Parma his saying of the Duke of
Guise.
and done too little, not remembering the Proverb, that Whosoever draws his
Sword against his Prince, ought presently to throw away the Scabbard: for so
bold an enterprise should either not have been undertaken, or being begun,
should have been executed, whatsoever had come on it: But the Duke of Guise,
either overcome by a sense of justice, whereof he took upon him to be the
Protector; or desiring still to use the cloak of piety and religion to cover
his designs; or else having never had any further aim than his own security,
and the reformation of Government, and now promising himself that by his arts,
and by a treaty he should bring the sum of all things into his own power,
without taking it openly by force, he thought he had reduced the King to such
extremity, that he must of necessity have been forced to yield to his will, and
to grant those conditions he desired, which he doubted not afterward to have
confirmed by the universal consent of the people. There wanted not of those who
suspected that the Duke of Guise's main end was to shut up the King in a
Monastery, under pretense of disability and evil Government, and to assume unto
himself the possession of the Crown: but certainly men generally believed, that
as he aspired (after the Kings death) to exclude the House of Bourbon from the
Crown, and to transfer it upon himself; so he never thought to deprive the King
of it while be lived, and therefore believed it was sufficient, The opinion
that the Duke of Guise made way for his designs to seize upon the Crown of
France, and possess it after the death of Henry the III.
if aiming at the height of Authority and Government, he could make way for the
excluding of his adversaries, and by degrees advance his own designs to such a
point, as he might execute them boldly when occasion should serve; and this as
the more gentle, was also the more probable opinion. However it were, the Duke
supposing he had made himself Master of Paris, and encompassed the Louvre in
such manner, that (as he writ the same day to the Duke of Lorain) he should be
able to give account of all that was in it; he quieted the violence and uproar
of the people, would not suffer them to proceed further toward the assaulting
of the Louvre, made the Guards that had been taken and pillaged to be let go,
but gave order that the barricadoes should be continued, that the people every
where should be in a readiness with their Arms, that the Guards should be kept
with infinite care, expecting some body to come from the King, besieged and
brought into a hard condition, to make an overture of some agreement.

Nor did his expectation fail him in that beginning: for after many
consultations in the Kings Closet, the Queen Mother resolved to go unto him,
and sent to demand passage of the Citizens, who (with intolerable insolence,
but born by her with admirable dissimulation) denied to let her pass in her
Coach, for fear of spoiling the barricadoes, but answered they would give her
leave to go on foot. Whereupon she took her Sedan, The Queen Mother goes to the
Duke of Guise in her Sedan, being denied passage in her Coach, confers with
him; but brings back nothing but complaints and exorbitant demands.
and being attended by Secretary Pynart, Monsieur de Bellieure, and a few of
her Gentlemen, she went with infinite trouble to the Hostel de Guise, and being
fain to stay every minute till the barricadoes were opened, which were still
shut again as soon as she was past, she was above two hours ere she got
thither, by reason of the length of the way, and being stopped at so many several
passages. At her first arrival, the Duke met her with exceeding great
lamentations, complaining openly that the King, by going about to put a Garrison
unseasonably into the City of Paris, that had never had any in times past, had
made the people jealous that he meant to take away the lives of the good
Catholics, which had been cause of that tumult, which all the wit of man could
not remedy: That the King did very much injure him, (who by so many proofs was
his most faithful Servant) and his good and faithful City of Paris, by using
them in that manner: That nevertheless he bearing the affront patiently, had
done what lay in him to take away the peoples fears, and to appease the tumult.
To which arts the Queen answering with the like dissimulation, said, That the
King intended nothing but to drive out strangers, for the security and quiet of
the Citizens: and having been very ill served by some employed in that
business, he had caused his Guards to enter for the safety and defense of the
City, that afterward he himself in person might make the search, and by his
labor and authority prevent the mischief that was ready to fall upon the
inhabitants: That the suspicious people had taken Arms too suddenly; but that
she hoped when the truth was once known, every one would be settled in quietness.

After this discourse in public, they went together into the Garden, where the
Duke of Guise (making his pretense that he knew the Kings designs and
intentions were to destroy the Great Ones, and suppress those that opposed his
Favorites, and that therefore it was necessary for him to look well to
himself, to secure both his own and the common safety) began to make infinite,
high and exorbitant demands, and such as were truly proper for an absolute
Conqueror: That the King should declare him his Lieutenant General in all
Provinces and places under his Dominions, with the same authority his Father
had in the time of Francis the Second: That the States General should be called
at Paris, in which Assembly that power granted to him should be confirmed: That
to secure the people from their fears of a Hugonot Prince, the King of Navarre
and the other Princes of Bourbon his adherents, should be declared to have
forfeited their inheritance to the Crown: That the Taxes and Impositions upon
the people might be limited: That, to take away all hated and suspected
Novelties, all Forms of Government should be reduced to a certain Rule, which
it should not be lawful for the King to alter: That the Duke of Espernon,
Monsieur de la Valette his Brother, the Mareschals of Retz and Byron, Monsieur
d' O, and Colonel Alfonso Corso, (suspected all to hold intelligence with the
Heretics, and every day to find out inventions of new grievances) should be
deprived of all their Offices and Governments, and banished for ever from the
Court: That, to take away all suspicion which every one had with reason, that
the Heretics were not proceeded against really and in good earnest, the
absolute charge of the War should be given to him; which should be prosecuted
with two Armies, one in Poictou, the other in Dauphine: That, to remove
jealousies and fears of tyrannical proceedings, the King should dismiss his
Guard of the five and forty Gentlement, and forbid them to return to Court,
reserving only the Guards which his Predecessors were wont to have: That he
should take away the Regiment of Guards from Monsieur de Grillon, and give it
to such a person as the Catholic Princes might confide in: That all the
Fortresses of Picardy might be delivered up to the Duke of Aumale, as Governor
of that Province: That the Duke of Nemours might have the Government of Lions,
and the Duke of Elbeuf that of Normandy: That the King should put into the
hands of the Lords of the League six such Towns as they should name, in which
they might keep Garrisons, under such Governors as they should like: That a
convenient assignment might be given to the Parisians for the payment of the
Rents of the Townhouse: And that the Government of the City might be given to
the Count de Brissac, upon whom also should be conferred the Office of Colonel
General of the French Infantry, held at that time by the Duke of Espernon: That
the charge of Admiral should be restored to the Duke of Mayenne; and Monsieur
de la Chastre made Marshall in the place of Monsieur de Byron.

Which Demands being carefully examined by the Queen, one by one, and the
injustice and exorbitancy of them being shown, she at last asked the Duke of
Guise what he believed the people of France would say, and what the Princes of
Europe would think, if with the Kings consent a Subject should accept, much
less demand such conditions, and whether he meant not to put shackles upon the
King, and take the Crown from his head? To which words the Duke answered
freely, That he demanded no Place nor Office for any that was not very worthy
of it; and that to drive away Incendiaries, Enemies of the public good,
Favorers of Heretics, and Persecutors of the Catholic Religion, was to purge
the Body of the State of a most dangerous poison, to the end that the King
might afterward enjoy that tranquillity and obedience that belonged to him;
and that the Medicine indeed was bitter at first, but would be fruitful and
healthful in the end. In sum, after many debates, and prolix contentious
arguments, this was the Duke of Guise's conclusion, That since the King himself
had at last laid open his secret intentions, and brought matters to that pass,
he was resolved either to lose his Life, or to secure Religion and the Estate
of his own Family.

The Queen returned at night with this Answer to the Louvre, where they
continued still in Arms; private persons discoursing and consulting no less
than the Kings Counselors in his Closet; among whom the variety of opinions
was very great; private passions, and particular interests, contending no less
than respect of the public and the universal good: For the High Chancellor,
Secretary Villeroy, and Monsieur de Villequier, who desired the abasement of
the Duke of Espernon, and the ruin of the Hugonots, and hoping that they
should not fall from their credit and authority, though the League should
prevail, consented to the greatest part of the Duke of Guise's demands, to the
secret dislike of the King, who could by no means endure them. On the other
side, Monsieur d' O, Monsieur de Rambouillet, the Abbot del Been, and Colonel
Alfonso Corso, argued that the greatest adversities in the world were to be
suffered, rather than to yield unto them: Monsieur d' O nevertheless offering
to lay down his Offices, and the Colonel his charge of Lieutenant in Dauphine,
if that were the only means to appease the tumults. The Queen and Secretary
Pinart kept the middle way, and hoped that the Duke of Guise would fall from a
great part of his demands. The siege pressed very much on the one side, there
being no provision of victuals in the Louvre; and it was feared that the people
going out of the City, would likewise besiege it on the other side, and
shutting up the passage toward the fields, reduce the King and the whole Court
presently into their power; but then again the Propositions were such as the
King could in no wise hearken unto.

The night was spent in this manner, full of terror and uncertainty, the Duke
of Guise being diligent in visiting the Guards of the City every hour, lest
their carelessness and negligence should give the Kings Soldiers opportunity to
recover those places they had lost before, and lest the darkness should give
occasion to some disorder, or stir up some tumult.

In the morning after Mass, the King and Queen Mother being shut up privately
together, resolved that she should return to the Duke of Guise, and making some
show of consenting to the Agreement, should draw the Treaty out in length,
whilst the King should secretly get out of the new Gate on the backside of the
Gardens of the Louvre, which was in his power, and escaping from Paris before
the Enemies had time to block it up, should go to the City of Chartres, the
Governor and people whereof were at his devotion. The Queen with the same
difficulties, went again to the Hostel de Guise; While the Queen returns to the
Duke of Guis^, and trea^s with him, the King with sixteen Gentlemen leaves
Paris, and retires to Chartres.
and by the way one of the City coming close up to her, gave her notice that
fifteen thousand men were preparing to enclose the Louvre on the other side:
Wherefore having begun the Treaty with the Duke, though she found him more
obstinate than at first, yet she continued with infinite patience treating
about matters of Agreement: in the mean time the King feigning to go out to
walk in the Garden of the Tuil^eries, (as he was wont to do) went forth with a
very few, and walked on softly talking, till he came into the Gardens which
were very near his Stables, where (having caused the doors to be shut, and put
on a riding suit) he presently took Horse with sixteen Gentlemen, being
followed only by twelve Footmen; and going out of the New Gate, rode with all
possible speed to Chartres; where the people received him with as much
affection as the Parisians had done the Duke of Guise.

Two long hours after the Kings departure, the Sieur de Meneville came close to
the Duke of Guise's ear, who was yet treating with the Queen, and told him that
the King was gone suddenly from Paris by the New Gate; at which news the Duke
being unexpectedly surprised, turned toward the Queen, and cried out with a
loud voice, Ah Madam, I am quite undone, and while your Majesty holds me here
in delays, the King is gone away to ruin me. The Queen seeming ignorant of
that resolution, answered, she believed it not; and that the King had not told
her of any such intent, but it might be some determination of his Council; and
taking her Chair, she made her self be carried back to the Louvre, where she
found that the Companies of the Guards led by Grillon, together with the
Swisses led by the Sieurs de Dampierre and Tinteville, were already marched
away, to whom she presently dispatched a Gentleman, with command not to lose
any time, but march continually day and night; which being obeyed by them, they
came to the same place not many hours after the Kings arrival. The next day all
the Court came up scattering, and amongst the rest Nicholas Poulain, Iehan
Conty, and Pierre Vgoly fled from Paris, every one rejoicing that they had
miraculously escaped the fury and insurrection of the Parisians; to whom the
Kings departure was so unexpected, that they knew neither what to do, nor had
any preparation to follow him; which is not much to be wondered at in the
common people; but that the Duke of Guise should not have foreseen that blow,
gave great occasion of talk to many at that time; and considering his vivacity
and wariness, may beget wonder in whosever shall apply his mind solidly to
think upon it; this most important oversight being to be attributed to one of
those mavelous works of Providence wherewith God uses often to mock the craft
and subtilty of worldly policy.

The King being departed, the Duke of Guises design (of obtaining from him (as
a prisoner) those conditions he pretended) vanished of it self; and therefore
it was necessary to think upon some other course: Wherefore after he had been a
good while vexed and angry with himself, knowing he had let slip so great an
occasion, he turned his thoughts to secure his absolute power in the City of
Paris; for seeing a War ready to break forth between him and the King, he knew
he could have no surer foundation than the forces and assistance of the
Parisians. His first thought was to make himself Master of the Bastille, which
was kept by Lorenzo Testuto Chevalier du Guet, who commanded there in the Kings
Name; nor was the attaining of it very difficult; for though he might have made
an honorable defense, yet as soon as he knew the Artillery was taken out of
the Arsenal to batter it, he gave it up into the peoples hand, and they
presently delivered it to the Duke of Guise, who not losing any longer time,
having called the people together, upon Sunday the fifteenth, caused Hector
Perose Prevost des Merchands to be put out, as one depending upon the King, and
clapped him up prisoner in the Bastille, making la Chappelle Martel (the
principal instrument of the League, and first Boutefeu of the people) to be
elected in his place: Conty and Vgoly were also put out of their Offices as
fugitives, and in their places were chosen Com-pans and Rolland, both of the
Council of Sixteen, and chief among the Conspirators. Upon Monday the Streets
were cleared, the Barricadoes were taken away, and the Shops and Houses opened,
but the Guards were continued with extraordinary care day and night, many
rumors of danger being spread abroad, which served to keep the people in fears
and jealoushes, and not to let their first motions cool.

The City being secured, the next business was to open the passages of the
River in respect of victual; the Duke of Guise being assured that hunger would
quickly cause repentance among the people: Wherefore Forces being already come
out of Picardy, and two Regiments of Foot listed in the City, slege was laid to
the Bois de Vincennes, which yielded without resistance; and the same did St.
Cloud, Lagny, Charenton, with all the other neighboring Towns; and Pontoyse,
though it feigned to continue under the Kings obedience, yet hindered it not
the passage of the River Seine, for the bringing up of such provisions as were
wont to come from those parts; Corbeil remained to be taken, into which Iehan
de Villiers was entered with good hope to defend it, by reason of the peoples
being well-affected, and of the Kings being so near at hand, who might easily
relieve it from Chartres; nor did he so much value the tumultuous Forces of the
Parisians, but thought though he had no Soldiers in pay, he should be able to
hold out of himself for many days, which begun also to succeed prosperously, he
having at their first arrival skirmished with advantage, and in great part
repressed the boldness of the Parisians. But the King, who had laid his designs
another way, and who (all other passages being already opened) would not in a
matter of no great consequence give beginning to a tedious War, wrote to
Villiers, that leaving the people at liberty to dispose of themselves as they
pleased, he should return to Court; whereupon, as soon as he was gone, the
people opened their gates, and willingly gave themselves up to the Parisians.

All these things were done in the very face of the Queen, who very much
afflicted inwardly, did yet strive to dissemble so great injuries, and not
stirring from Paris, (under pretense that she doubted not of their obedience,
but indeed that she might be present and see how all businesses were managed)
expected to receive directions from the King what she should do.

He being come to Chartres, was not only uncertain in himself, but found also
the same variety of opinions among his Counselors; for Villeroy and his
Adherents, still constant to their first advice, argued that a War with the
Duke of Guise was by no means to be undertaken, lest it should separate and
divide the Catholic Party into open dissension, and give the Hugonots an
evident occasion to overthrow Religion; that many things ought to be dissembled
and born withal to obtain a greater good; and that reason counseled to make an
agreement with the Duke of Guise upon honorable conditions, since the
foundation of the Kings Authority consisted in the Catholics, and therefore it
was not good to destroy, or at least weaken it by division. But Monsieur d' O,
Monsieur de Rambouillet, Alfonso Corso, and the rest, urged on the contrary,
that to assent to the Duke of Guise's demands, was to lay down the Crown, and
give it to the House of Lorain; which having rooted out the House of Bourbon
and the Hugonot Party, born up by the favor of the people, and the greatness
of its forces, would presently think of deposing the King, and shutting him up
in a Monastery, as the report was generally divulged already: that whatsoever
should be done against the Hugonots would be attributed to the Duke of Guise's
industry, and that to consent unto it, was but to authorize and confirm his
ambition so much the more, and even to increase the peoples affection toward
him; for it would be manifest that the King condescended to his demands out of
pure fear, and as being constrained by his force and power; and that therefore
it was better to venture upon any thing how difficult and dangerous soever,
rather than do such an unworthy thing as to deprive the lawful Successors of
the Crown, and put himself into slavery and subjection. They on the other side
replied again, That the King by doing well would recover the love of the people
which he had lost, and that his giving satisfaction to the Heads of the League,
by putting away his Minions, and making them partakers in the honors of the
Government, would quiet all businesses, and dissolve the Union with very great
facility, nor would any body dare to turn against the sacred Majesty of the
King when that so specious pretense should be taken away. That if this were
really a matter of Religion spurred on by Conscience, as soon as the cause
should cease by proceeding against the Hugonots, the effect without doubt would
do the like; and if it were a spirit of ambition, the King by giving a little
convenient satisfaction to the Great Ones, might also settle all commotions:
and finally, that he could not confound his Enemies by any more sure, nor more
ready way, than by doing that of himself, which the League violently
endeavored to make him do by force; for to try the hazard of War was too
disadvantageous, too precipitate a resolution, having neither Forces,
Adherents, nor money to put himself into so weighty, so dangerous a business,
being deprived of the strength of the Catholics, who for the most part
followed the fortune of the Duke of Guise, and being divided from the Hugonots
by ancient hatred, and most open distrust: That it was a thing commended by all
wise men, to wait for the opportunity of times, and to bend rather than be
pulled up by the roots. The Kings mind was in very great doubt and suspense
between these opinions; not only by reason of the variety and weight of their
reasons, but also because he began to suspect that they who counseled him were
moved rather by interests and particular respects, than the regard of his
service, and care of the general good.

The enmity between Monsieur de Villeroy and the Duke of Espernon, was already
commonly known: for the year before, when the King went forth with his Army
against the Germans, being lodged in a Town called St. Aignan, and the means of
finding money to make the Grand Provost march with his Archers, (who for want
of pay had left following the Court, and were very needful in the Camp) being
spoken of in the Kings Cabinet, Monsieur de Villeroy told him, that the Council
thinking how to remedy that want, The cause of distaste between the Duke of
Espernon and Villeroy.
had given him order to put his Majesty in mind, that some certain Treasurers
who were imprisoned, having been fined about the sum of twenty thousand Crowns,
they all or part of them, might serve for the Grand Prevost and his Archers* To
which words the Duke of Espernon answered angrily, That that money had been
promised to Monsieur de la Valette to pay the Soldiers that were with him in
Dauphine; and that it could not be disposed to another use, without doing him
injury, as he saw many took pleasure to do, to offend him; but that he was
resolved one day to resent it in such manner, that those malicious men should
be glad to let him alone. To which Villeroy going about to reply, saying that
it was only a Memorandum of the Council's, and not any intention of his, the
Duke of Espernon gave him the lie in the Kings presence, adding many very
injurious words, as Knave, Rascal, and malicious Fellow. To which Villeroy
beginning to answer, the King rising up, commanded him to hold his peace:
whereupon he went out of the room without any satisfaction, and the next
morning asked the Kings leave to lay down his Office, not willing to serve any
longer, if he must suffer such unworthy wrongs: which the King refused to
grant, and yet on the other side did not much care to make the Duke of Espernon
give him fitting satisfaction, till time of it self afforded him an occasion to
use some courteous words by way of complement, in excuse of the passage at St.
Aignan; which though in show it appeased the outward difference between them,
yet were their minds never after settled in sincere friendship. Wherefore the
King doubted, and not without great reason, that Monsieur de Villeroy favored
the Duke of Guise's designs; and fomented his pretensions, in hope to see the
Duke of Espernon excluded from the Court, deprived of his greatness, and
utterly ruined: and though he dissembled it, yet seeing that Pontoyse, which
was governed by the Sieur d' Alincourt, hindered not provisions from being
carried to Paris, had secretly displeased him, and made him very suspicious of
his counsels. Likewise Monsieur de Bellieure, having been deceived by the Duke
of Guise at Soissons, when the King sent him thither to forbid his coming to
Paris, was not only lessened in his opinion, but had also left some doubt that
he had not proceeded sincerely in the business; the oversight of so wise and so
experienced a man being interpreted infidelity. Nor was the High Chancellor
any better thought of than these: for it being already known that the King
treated about the dismembring of the Duchy of Orleans from his Government, to
give satisfaction to Entraques, he was suspected to desire peace, to the end
that the King might have no more need of working the revolt of that City, which
was still in agitation by the means of Monsieur de Chemerault.

On the other side, Monsieur d' O and Colonel Alfonso Corso were suspected by
the King in this business, as Enemies to the Duke of Guise; who signified
plainly that he would not hear of Peace, if they were not put out of their
places, and banished from the Court: Whereupon he was jealous that they, to
avoid that rock, endeavored to persuade the War. And he was so apt to these
suspicions, (as is the custom of men in adverse fortune) that not only others,
but even the Queen his Mother seemed to him too much inclined to the demands
and pretensions of the League, which thing though far from truth, (for the
Queen had always loved him most tenderly, above all her other Sons, and in the
troubles of so many years had always labored constantly for the conservation
of his Crown) yet it had been obliquely imprinted in his mind by the Duke of
Espernon, insinuating by little and little that the Queen (seeing he had no
Son) desired the House of Bourbon should be excluded from the succession, and
particularly the King of Navarre, who in respect of Queen Margaret was very
much hated by her: and that on the other side she desired (without sticking at
the Salique Law) to have the Kingdom pass to the Duke of Lorain her Son-in-law,
and the Marquess du Pont her Grandchild, both extremely beloved of her; and
that for that purpose she had from the beginning secretly fomented the League;
and at that present favored all those things that tended to the destruction of
the Blood Royal, and to the establishment and greatness of the Family of
Lorain, wherein her Son-in-law and Grandchild held the chiefest place. And it
was true, that the Queen had always loved her Grandchildren of Lorain, who
observed her with all kind of reverence; wherefore she had taken the Princess
Chrestienne to be bred up with her, and never ceased to solicit the King to
call to Court either the Marquess Du Pont, or the Count de Vaudemont, or some
one of the other Brothers, and make use of them in his greatest affairs. It was
also true, that she was not well pleased with the greatness of the Duke d'
Espernon, esteemed by her as a stone of scandal, and an Enemy to her power,
which she doubted would with the weight of old age decline in time, as the
custom is. But there was a great deal of difference between a desire that the
King should advance her Grandchildren, and an endeavor to promote the
greatness of the Duke of Guise, who did eclipse and depress that of the Duke of
Lorain and his Sons; for though he ever seemed to observe and reverence the
Head of the Family, yet he did work and labor for himself; nor would he ever
have suffered the fruits of his arts, pains, and dangers to redound wholly to
the exaltation and benefit of the Duke of Lorain: and likewise to strive to
make the King weary of favoring Espernon, and to put him from Court, thereby
to remove the seeds of discord, was a very different thing from consenting that
the King should be despised, and constrained by force to receive the Law from
the Duke of Guise his will. And yet the force of jealousy was so great in the
Kings melancholy distrustful nature, that after so many proofs, though he
still observed his Mother very much, and never resolved any thing without her
knowledge and advice, yet he was fallen into a doubt, that she was drawn by
interests to favor the Catholic party, and that she desired in great part the
very same things the League demanded.

Being with these thoughts become more sad and austere than he was wont to be,
(as those about him easily observed) his sleeps were broken, and he spent the
nights either studying and contriving by himself, or else hearkening to the
discourses and consultations of others, balancing and pondering them warily;
wherein he began to trust Francois Sieur de Rambouillet, a Gown-man by
profession, endued with much learning, wisdom, and singular vivacity, and Iehan
Marshall of Aumont, a man of an open nature, but a generous spirit, and
exceeding great valor in the profession of Arms; yet not having altogether
left the Marshall de Retz, and the Abbot del Been, though he esteemed the
first to depend too much upon the Queen Mother, and the other to be too
intimate with Espernon. With this diffidence and anxiety having put the whole
sum of businesses upon dissimulation, he feigned outwardly to consent to the
opinion of those that persuaded him to unite himself to the Duke of Guise, and
commended it as the most pious advice, and most agreeing with a specious
appearance; but inwardly he utterly abhorred it, not being able to bend his
mind to yield to the Guises greatness, nor to lay aside the sense of that
affront he had received, which being continually before his eyes, and
concluding within himself, that he could never be secure of his life, nor
absolute Master of his Crown, while the Head of that Faction was alive, and the
Union of the League maintained, at last he resolved to try all possible ways to
ruin him; but because he thought that of War too difficult and dangerous, nor
would his Conscience suffer him to join with the Hugonots, he thought to supply
all wants by cunning; and consenting to the Dukes propositions, to draw him at
last into some place where he might make an end of him by the same means which
he remembered had been used in the reign of his Brother Charles the Ninth,
against the Admiral de Coligny and his Adherents.

With this intention he writ very moderate Letters to the Governors of
Provinces, excusing himself dexterously about the Insurrection of the
Parisians, yet neither laying much fault upon the people, nor upon the Duke of
Guise, but only endeavoring to keep the Towns and Provinces firm under his
obedience. After the dispatch of which Letters, which by every body were
thought necessary, he first sent Myron the Physician to the Queen Mother, and a
few days after Gaspar Count of Schombergh, giving her directions to strive by
all means to make a composition and agreement with the Duke of Guise, being
resolved not to make War with his Catholic Subjects, but to turn his Arms
resolutely to the utter extirpation of the Hugonots; and because he saw the
great inclination of Villeroy to that advice, and knew that he would labor
effectually to conclude a Peace, he sent him also at last to Paris, giving him
most ample Commissions to satisfy the Duke of Guise his desires, so that he
might but thereby pacify discords, and reunite the Catholic party into one
indissoluble body, as Villeroy himself counseled and advised.

The Duke of Guise having in this time made himself Master of Paris, and opened
all the passages that served to furnish the City with provisions, was
diligently busy in getting possession of many other convenient places, and
therefore had caused siege to be laid unto Melun, a Town near Paris; and having
left the Cardinal of Bourbon to govern the City, was gone to Meaux and
Chasteau-Thierry to make himself Master of those places.

His Brother the Cardinal of Guise at the same time, neither wanting wit nor
courage, but boldly following his steps and counsels, had stirred up the
people, and made himself strongest in the City of Troy, which from the
beginning had declared that it would continue under the Kings obedience; and
the Duke of Aumale with the Forces of Picardy had laid siege to Boulogne by the
Sea side, a very principal Fortress of that Province, and the Adherents of the
League labored on every side to surprise Towns and Castles, to gather Horse
and Foot, and to draw the greatest number of followers they possibly could unto
their party; yet the Duke of Guise, after he saw the King had escaped the net,
and that he could not so easily bring his first design to perfection, desirous
to make that seem to have been done purposely, which indeed was only oversight,
with writings cunningly framed, and reasons eloquently set forth, directed to
the King and the whole people of France, he endeavored to persuade that his
actions only tended to the benefit of the Kingdom, the obedience of the King,
and to the general service and benefit: that the Insurrection of Paris had
(without his consent) been stirred up by the peoples fear; and that his
intention was ever to yield such obedience as he ought to do, desiring only
that evil Counselors might be put away, and that sincere thought might be
taken to secure Religion: And though his deeds were for the most part very
contrary to his words, yet the color of Religion was so powerful and
plausible, and he knew so well how to behave himself, that the multitude
thought him a faithful Servant to the King, and believed he was only moved by
zeal to Religion, and most ardent charity toward the good of the whole Kingdom.

While they proceeded in this manner on both sides, the Duke of Espernon, The
Duke of Espernon coming to Court, is not received by the King with his wonted
favor, by his order quits his Government of Normandy, and retires to
Angoulesme.
who was in Normandy, having heard the success of the Sedition at Paris, went
with a good number of Gentlemen to the King, who being already resolved to
dissemble with all, and to trust none but himself, received him neither with
his accustomed intimacy, nor his wonted demonstrations of favor, but made
small show of valuing him, seeming to desire his departure from Court, to put
an end to all those scandals which were said to arise from his extraordinary
greatness. And indeed, having determined to give outward satisfaction to the
Duke of Guise and the League, and knowing that Peace would never be concluded
unless he consented to remove him from the Court, his intention was to do it
before the Agreement, that it might seem a voluntary act, and not constrained
by force: wherefore ^e began by the means of Monsieur de Bellieure and of the
Abbot del Been, to desire him (in respect of the distractions of affairs, and
to remove the occasions of them) that he would lay down his Government of
Normandy, give up the Fortresses of Metz, Loches, Angoulesme, Xaintes, and
Boulogne, and only retain his Government of Provence; wherein, for his greater
security, his Brother la Valette should continue his Lieutenant: That he should
retire thither far from the clamor that was made about his person, and wait
for a more quiet and fitting season to return to Court. The Duke of Espernon (a
man of exceeding great understanding, and bred up by the King himself among the
stratagems of State) perchance ghessing at the Kings secret intentions, by
having been so conversant with him, was contented without contradiction to quit
his Government of Normandy; wherein he saw himself not well settled, by reason
of the resistance many Governors made against him: But for the rest, though in
words he promised to satisfy the King in all his demands, yet was he resolved
not to part with any of the strong Holds, wherein he hoped to defend himself
from the storm of fortune which he saw coming upon him: Whereupon, while he
treats about the manner of delivering them into the Kings hands, and to whom
and which way they should be resigned, (showing still more care of his Masters
security than of his own good) and while the King cannot so readily resolve in
whose power it was fit to trust them, he departs suddenly from Court, feigning
that he would give way to Fortune; and being accompanied with the Abbot del
Been, who was no less persecuted by the League than he, went with all speed to
Angoulesme, where, by reason of the strength of the Castle, and the nearness of
the Hugonots, he thought he might stay more securely, and from whence, through
the Towns of Languedoc held by the Marshall d' Anville, it was easy for him
upon any occasion to retire into Provence.

This retreat clipped the wings of the pretensions of the League, and removed all
impediments that might have hindered Peace; and it was likewise a prudent
determination of his side: for already the Duke of Guise and the people of
Paris turning all their Forces against him, had divulged many Writings, wherein
he was accused to be a sower of discord, and a principal cause of so great
mischiefs: which though he had caused to be answered with many reasons, showing
that the mischief proceeded from the ambition of the House of Lorain, and not
from the modesty and obedience of him and his Brother, who receiving the Kings
favors with a thankful and loyal mind, did use their uttermost endeavors to
serve him so as might be for his advantage and their reputation; yet he saw
that the cloud would undoubtedly break upon him; whereupon he chose rather by
retiring to keep his most important Governments, than by staying be forced by
one means or other to give them up. Many doubted that the King was privy to his
departure, and so much the rather, because the Abbot del Bene's going with him
made it to be suspected: nor was the suspicion without ground; for the Duke of
Guise demanding that he should resign those four principal Fortresses, and the
King not willing to deprive himself and the Duke of Espernon of them at the
same time, to give them into the hands of such persons as he could not
confidently trust, it was necessary the Duke should feign to go away
discontented without the Kings knowledge, and that he should show that he would
not quit them but by force; to the end that the King might be excused
afterward, if he did not presently demand them, and that the Duke of Guise
might not constrain him to take them from him, since he showed they were
withheld against his will. But whether they understood one another by signs, or
whether the King imparted his design unto him by the means of the Abbot del
Been, or whether the Duke took that resolution of himself, it was unknown to
every one at Court, and the Kings most intimate Counselors knew nothing of it:
Yet this I affirm, that the Duke, after his return from Normandy, was no more
so freely admitted to the secret consultations as he was wont to be; but the
night before he went away, the Abbot del Been was a great while in secret
conference with the King in the most silent hours of the night, which was not
known to any but that lay in the Kings Ante-chamber.

The King seemed wonderfully angry and troubled at his departure, and at his
going toward Angoulesme; and caused Secretary Villeroy to write presently to
the Sieur de Tagens, who commanded the Forces in those parts, and to the
Citizens and Deputies of the Town, that they should neither receive nor obey
him: but the dispatch went so slowly, that the Duke had made himself Master of
it before the Kings Letters were come: for he being with very great speed got
thither before he was suspected, presently sent Tagens with his Forces to the
Confines, under color of defending them from the frequent incursions of the
Hugonots; and putting out the old Governor of the Castle, placed a person
there whom he trusted; and taking up his lodging in the strongest part, had
made himself absolute Master of it before his possession could be disturbed, or
taken from him by new orders.

After the Duke of Espernon was gone from the Court, the King gave the
Government of Normandy, one of the greatest and most important Provinces in all
France, unto Francis of Bourbon Duke of Montpensier, lest it should be demanded
by the Duke of Guise for any of his dependents; being minded to grant all
appearances, but not the substance and force of those things that were required
by the Heads of the League. The Duke of Espernon being removed, the conclusion
of the Peace was easy: For on the one side the King granted all that the
League asked for, or pretended to; and the Duke of Guise, the authority of the
Minions being taken away, which had been a sharp spur to stir him up, and the
King showing himself ready to make War against the Hugonots, which was the
foundation of all his pretenses, he could no more lay hold of any excuse, and
had no occasion at all to continue the War; wherefore Secretary Villeroy and
Myron the Physician having gone often from Paris to the King, and from the King
to the Queen Mother, the Treaty of Agreement began to go forward, being managed
by the King himself alone, since neither the Marshall d' Aumont, nor the Sieur
de Rambouillet were perfectly acquainted with his most hidden and admirably
dissembled intentions.

In the mean time the King believing his stay at Chartres was neither safe nor
honorable, thought of going to Rouen. But because he was not very well assured
how that Parliament stood affected, nor which way Monsieur de Carrouges
Governor of the City was inclined, he sent Jacques Auguste de Tou President of
the Parliament of Paris, to certify himself of the minds of the Citizens, and
to reduce them wholly to his devotion. President de Tou performed the Kings
command, yet rather with outward flourishes than substantial foundation; having
spoken in public to the people and those that governed, with great shows of
eloquence, but neither touching the secret interests of the first President,
who was a creature of the Duke of Ioyeuse's, nor of the Governor and the Count
de Tilleres his Son, who had some dependence upon the Duke of Guise and the
League: whereupon the King presently dispatched Iehan d' Emery Seigneur de
Villiers with more absolute orders, he not only being a Gentleman of the same
Province of Normandy, but, which imported more, a particular Friend of the
Governors. He having showed the removal of the Duke d' Espernon, who was not
very acceptable to that City, from the Government of the Province, and the
election of the Duke of Montpensier a Prince of the Blood Royal, did very much
settle the humors of men in the general: and having afterward conferred in
private with the Governor, to whom he promised that his Son should have the
reversion of his Government; and with the first President into whom he infused
great hopes of the Kings favor, and of the principal Offices of the Crown; he
brought matters so to pass, that the Parliament and People sent a very
respective Message to invite the King unto their City; and the Governor sent
his son to Court, as it were for an Hostage. After which demonstrations, the
King resolved to go without delay to Rouen: the report whereof being come to
Paris, the Parliament there being troubled, that the other Courts should
prevent them in readiness and devotion, being persuaded by the Queen Mother,
sent a dutiful Message to assure him of their fidelity; and a while after, by
the Duke of Guise's advice, the Parisians also sent unto him, to excuse the
late passages, with many reasons; but this was when the Peace was in a manner
already concluded; which, while it was in agitation, the Count of Schombergh
finished the agreement with Monsieur d'Entraques, which had so long been
treated of in vain; for he being satisfied with the Duke of Espernon's removal,
turned to the King's party with the City of Orleans, upon promise that the
Government thereof should remain to his heirs; and that the Government of
Chartres and Beausse, then held by the High-Chancellor Chiverny, should be
added to it. But this Treaty could not pass so secretly, but the Duke of Guise
was advertised of it; who, to delude that Agreement, brought to an end after so
many endeavors, began in the treaty of Peace to demand the City of Orleans for
one of the places of security, which he required in hostage of the Kings
Promises. This demand put a rub in the conclusion of the Peace, but it was
presently removed by Secretary Villeroy's earnest desire of it, who either
having received power from the King to conclude the business, or pricked with
envy that others had brought the Treaty of Orleans to perfection, or because he
so thought fit, would not discompose the whole matter by denying that
particular, but when he saw the Duke of Guise obstinately resolved that he
would have it, at last he granted it to him without the Kings knowledge; who
afterward alleged, that the Town of Dourlans in Picardy had been demanded of
him, and not that of Orleans in Beause, made great difficulties and long
delays about the assigning of it.

The Conditions of Peace were almost the same that were contained in the
Writing framed at Nancy, with the privity of the Duke of Lorain, The Conditions
of Peace between the King and the League
which had been presented to the King in the beginning of the year. That the
King should again declare himself Head of the Catholic League, and would swear
to take up Arms, and never to lay them down till the Hugonot Religion were
quite destroyed and totally rooted out: that by a Public Edict he should
oblige all Princes, Peers of France, Lords and Officers of the Crown, Towns,
Colleges, Corporations, and the whole people to swear the same, and bind
themselves with a solemn oath never to suffer any one to Reign that was not of
the Catholic Religion, and far from all suspicion of Heresy: that for the
time to come none should be admitted to Offices, Places and Dignities in any
part of the Kingdom, but such as were Catholics, and made profession of their
Faith according to the Doctrine of Sorbon, and the belief of the Roman
Catholic Church: that all past things, revolts of Cities, insurrections of the
people, taking of Fortresses, levying of Soldiers, withholding of the King's
Revenue, and whatsoever else had been done upon occasion of the late commotion,
should be pardoned and remitted, and that the King should command a total
oblivion of them, as things done for the service of Religion, and the general
good: that two Armies should be raised against the Hugonots; one in Poictou
under the command of the King himself, or whomsoever he should best like; the
other in Dauphine, under the command of Charles of Lorain Duke of Mayenne;
which should never be recalled, but still paid and recruited, till the work
were perfectly finished: that the Council of Trent should be received and
observed through the whole Kingdom, being only dispensed with in those parts
which are contrary to the privileges of the Gallique Church, which within
three Months were to be declared by a Congregation of Prelates, and the King's
Counsel: that the King should permit the Lords of the League to retain yet for
the space of six years the Cities and Fortresses formerly granted for their
security in the year 1585. and that Dourlans, Orleans, Bourges, and Montereau
should be added unto them: that the King should give the Duke of Guise a
Patent* to command the Forces of the whole Kingdom, being to be superior unto
all in Arms and all men subject to his obedience: that the King should take a
course to remove the Sieur de Bernay (enemy to the Duke of Aumale) from the
Government to Boulogne, which should be put into the hands of some such
Gentleman of the Province as was mistrusted by neither party; that Valence in
Dauphine, and the Castle thereof, which had been seized upon by Monsieur de
Valette, upon occasion of the late commotions, should be restored to the Sieur
de Iessan the former Governor: that the Deputies chosen by the Parisians after
the tumult, should be approved and confirmed by the King: and finally, that in
October next ensuing, the States General should be assembled at Blois, to cause
the Edict of the Catholic Union to be Sworn unto, to receive the Council of
Trent, and confirm the authority granted to the Duke of Guise. Concerning
Monsieur d'O, Colonel Alfonso Corso, the Marshall de Byron and the rest, there
was no mention at all made: for the Duke of Espernon, and his Brother la
Valette being removed, these seemed not to have either strength or authority
sufficient to oppose the so formidable power of the Duke of Guise, who thought
already that he ruled and governed all things, nor did he design any longer to
reflect upon any that were not his equals.

The Articles concluded and confirmed, the King, impatient of any delay that
might retard the effects of his secret counsels, presently sent forth his
Letters patents into all Provinces and several Bailages, to appoint the
Assembly of the States in October following at Blois, which place he thought
more fit for his purpose then any other, as well because it was far from Paris,
and near those Towns which were held by the Hugonots, as for the convenience
and greatness of the Castle, but most of all because the people were at his
devotion, far from any commerce or intelligence with the League: and that his
example might invite the Deputies which were to be elected not to delay time,
he departed from Rouen a very few days after, and went toward Chartres, that
from thence he might go afterward to the place appointed. Being come to Mante,
a Town upon the Road from Rouen to Chartres, the Queen Mother and the Queen his
Wife met him, with whom, having stayed there the space of two days, the
Queen Mother returned toward Paris, to bring the Duke of Guise to Court, and
the King continued his journey toward Chartres, to stay there till the rest of
the Court came up to him.

Not many days after the Queen Mother came thither with the Duke of Guise,
attended by a more sumptuous then numerous Train, The Duke of Guise goes with
the Q Mother to C^artres to the King and is received by him with great
dem^nstrations of honor in appearance.
with show of great humility toward the King's Person, but with a presumptuous
heart and countenance, puffed up with spirits of a most assured power; and
which imported most, by those things he had achieved and obtained, become not
only glorious among his own friends, but also admired and terrible to those
that held and followed the King's party: which, as it was not unknown to the
King, by reason of his quick-sightedness, and the suspicion of his nature, so
did it with wonderful impatience increase his desire to see him ruined: but
covering his thoughts with quite different words and gestures, he seemed both
in small and great matters to be sincerely reconciled to him, and that for the
time to come he would proceed according to his Counsels, and lay the whole
foundation of his Government upon his valor and prudence; to which end he
presently caused the Edict of the Union to be published in his Council, and
sworn to by every one, and the War against the Hugonots to be openly
proclaimed: for the prosecution whereof, according to the Articles of Peace,
two several Armies were appointed; one in Dauphine, under the Duke of Mayenne;
the other in Poiciou, whereof the King declared Lodovico Gonzaga Duke of Nevers
his General; and for both, the necessary Commissions were instantly dispatched,
to raise Regiments of Horse, and to draw Foot-forces together. After this first
point, followed the other of greater consequence: for without delay the new
power of the Duke of Guise was established in the Council, published in the
Parliament of Paris, and summed up in his former title of Grand Maistre, which
(except the express name of Lieutenant General) contained all that power which
is wont to be attributed to that dignity, the command of all Armies wheresoever
he should be in person, the authority of High-Constable in mustering and paying
the Militia, the power of limiting and putting the price upon Provisions, the
protection of the common People, the Punishment of outrages committed by
Soldiers, and other circumstances of this nature; which, after the King's own
Person, placed the Duke in the highest authority of command, and settled him in
that Power which the Masters of the Palace were wont anciently to have in the
times of those Kings that were of the Stock of Merouee. Nor did the King fail
to show the same inclination to the Cardinal of Bourbon; for by the consent,
and with the Authority of his Council, he declared him First Prince of the
Blood, granting him the Privilege of creating Masters in all Arts, and that
his servants should enjoy the same exemptions as the King's, which things did
in this manner as it were declare him the lawful Successor to the Crown.

To these great and important matters, others of less consequence were added
also; the King's Familiarity with the Duke of Guise, his veneration of the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and the favors, which by their means, he daily granted to
diverse persons; the alienating of his old favorites, his secret and confident
discourses with the Archbishop of Lions, the Sieur de la Chastre, Bassompiere,
and other intimate friends of the Duke of Guise, and principal followers of the
League, and many other such like things, which, as evident signs of the King's
good inclination, served, in the mean time, to cover the hidden web of his more
real designs; to the continuance whereof he was much excited by the Pope's
demonstrations, who moved with the Duke of Guise's success, in driving the
Germans out of the Kingdom, Pope Sixt^s Quintus writes congratulatory Letters
to the D. of Guis^ full of high praises.
and dissipating their Army with so much facility, had written Letters to him
full of infinite praises, comparing him to those holy Maccbahees, the defenders
of the People of Israel, so highly extolled in the Sacred Scripture, and
exhorting him to continue successfully and gloriously to fight for the
advancement of the Church, and the total extirpation of the Hugonots. Which
Letters, to increase the Duke's fame and reputation, were by his Dependents
caused to be printed and divulged in Paris, with as much applause of the
people, as anger and trouble in the King, who could no way be pleased that
another should have more credit and authority in his Kingdom then he himself;
and therefore the expressions of the Pope, and opinion of the Court of Rome,
kept his mind beyond measure in perplexity, as well in regard of his
Conscience, as for other important respects and consequences. From the
displeasure received by those Letters, he began to proceed to a remedy, not
only to divert the Pope's deliberations, but also to bring to pass, that in
the belief of the World he might not be esteemed to have so little
correspondence with the Apostolic Sea, and to be in so little awe of the holy
Catholic Church.

The Pope desired to have to do in these businesses that passed in France, and
as much as possibly he could, to promote the enterprise of the Catholics
against the Hugonots: for which purpose he was minded to choose a Legate, who
might be present at that famous Convention of the States, The Pope thought he
saw not clearly into the affairs of the League.
and (understanding what concerned the interest of the Apostolic Sea, with the
Duke of Guise and Cardinal of Bourbon) might solicit the King about the
assembling of them, about the declaring of the War against the King of Navarre,
but most of all, that he, and all those of his Family, as being manifestly
guilty of Heresy, might be judged incapable of ever coming to the Crown: yet
because he thought he saw not clearly into the affairs of that Kingdom, and was
not very sure what the ends of the League might be, he was doubtful unto what
person he should commit the charge of that business, desiring neither utterly
to alienate the King's mind, nor to displease the Duke of Guise, and thinking
it a matter of so great importance as required a man of singular prudence and
ability to manage it. But he was not resolved of his choice till the King being
advertised beforehand by the Ambassador Pisani, sounded the bottom of his
design: whereupon, desiring to have such a one as he might trust, and nor one
wholly devoted to the pleasure of the League, he used all possible endeavors,
trying the most powerful means of that Court, to procure that Giovan Francesco
Moresini, a Senator of Venice, Bishop of Brescia, who then resided in the
Kingdom as the Pope's Nuncio, might be chosen Legate; The Pope chooses Giova^
Francesco Moresini Bishop of Bergamo, Legate to the Congregation of the States,
he being much desired by the King, to whom he was Nuncio At the same time he is
made Cardinal.
a man truly of so much worth, as being well informed of the present affairs,
was not a little acceptable to the King, and yet not altogether distrusted by
the Duke of Guise, in regard of the dexterity wherewith he knew how to behave
himself with every body. The Pope disliked not the Nuncio, because he knew him,
and esteemed him a man of singular wisdom, and because having been employed in
the Government of his Republic, he believed him no less experienced in
State Affairs; and besides, that being a Noble Venetian, and by consequence
well-affected to the Crown of France, he thought he would not cast himself
inconsiderately as a prey unto the League, the Pope desiring he should hold the
balance even, and not favor the Duke of Guise's designs more then the service
of the Catholic Religion, and of the Roman Church required. But though the
King was much pleased with the person of the Legate, who at that very time was
created Cardinal; yet was he beyond measure displeased that the Pope gave
account of his Election to the Lords of the League, exhorting them to
communicate and consider of their counsels with him; and that the Letters
concerning it were printed and published by the League, with their usual pride:
and yet this consideration had not so much power over his mind, but that
dissembling his disgust, he sought by all possible ways to gain the Legate, to
the end that that by his means he might be the better able to justify his own
actions to the Pope, and by degrees to take off the favor and assistance which
he seemed to lend unto the enterprise of the League.

These things busied the Court, when news was brought of a Conspiracy against
the Duke of Espernon at Angoulesme, whereby he was very like to have been
suddenly ruined: for the King's Letters being come (though late) wherein he
commanded, that he should not be received nor admitted into the possession of
that Government, The Duke of Espernon is conspired against at Angoulesme,
Secretary Villeroy fomenting, the business upon a secret order from the King.
some of the City, who (as men's affections are different) were not much pleased
to see him there, and who were easily persuaded they should do the King
acceptable service, if they could drive him from that possession, dispatched
one of their confidents straight to Court unto Secretary Villeroy, to know the
King's intention more particularly, and to give notice that they would venture
either to drive him out of the City, or take him prisoner, though he stayed
continually in the Castle, a place very secure, and well fortified. This man's
Proposition was not unpleasing unto Villeroy, who, by reason of his enmity with
the Duke, and because he had received commission to write the aforesaid
Letters, thought that the occasion complied exceedingly with the King's desire,
and therefore spoke of it to the King himself; who beginning to distrust
Villeroy, of whom he was very jealous, would not declare his pleasure openly in
the business; but to the end he might not sound into his most secret thoughts,
wherein he still loved and trusted the Duke of Espernon as much as he was wont,
said that he should not be sorry to see him driven out of Angoulesme, or
brought prisoner into his power, so that his life might not be in danger: which
words being spoken coldly by him, were hotly urged by the Secretary to the
Messenger of the Conspiratours, who being a while after admitted into the
King's Closet, and known by him, had Commission to be referred to such Orders
as he should receive from the Secretary; who, though he would not give him any
thing in writing, yet he commanded that they should endeavor without fail to
get the Duke of Espernon alive into their hands, or drive him from the City,
affirming, that it was his Majesty's effectual desire, and that by so doing
they might very much oblige him. The Conspiratours much quickened, both by the
relation of Villeroy, different enough from the King's coldness, and by the
addition which (as the custom is) the Messenger made both of words and actions;
to show themselves able executors of their promise, talked not only of taking
the Duke alive, but of killing him if they could not get him otherwise; and
having conferred of the business with the Sieurs de Mere, de la Messeliere, the
Viscount of Aubeterre, and some other Gentlemen of the Country, upon the tenth
day of August, being the Feast of St. Laurence, they ran suddenly to the
Castle, and having taken possession of the Gate, the Guards not having the
least suspicion, they went on to the Duke's most private lodgings, and there
fell upon his servants that were in the ante-chamber, while he in the Room
within was talking with the Sieur de Marivant, and the Abbot del Been. Here the
resistance of a few, stopped the violence of many: for Raphaello Gieronimi a
Florentine, defended the entry of the door a great while, with the death of
three of the Conspiratours, till he lost his life, being shot with a Pistol:
when he was dead, Sorlin the Duke's Surgeon, opposing the Enemies most
stoutly, though he were grievously wounded, and with a loud voice calling up
the Family (which was in the lower Room) to join in the defense, stayed the
fury of the assailants, while the Duke, and they that were with him, having
shut the door of the Chamber, and made it up with Trunks and Chests which they
found there, had time to defend their lives against so sudden a violence. In
the mean time, while these fought at the Chamberdoor, the Duke's Gentlemen
(among which Lancillotty di Nores a Cyprian, first of all) having heard the
noise, and taken Arms, recovered the Gate of the Castle; where the Sieurs d'
Ambleville and l' Artigues staying to defend it, the rest ran armed upon the
stairs, and having found the Conspiratours, who strove as much as possibly
they could to get into the Chamber, cut them all in pieces, except one of the
Consuls of the City, whom they laid hands on and took alive. The Duke having
put on his Arms, came forth of the Chamber, and with his servants stood
undauntedly upon his defense; and being come into the Court, where the clamor
increased, he with his own hand slew the Consul's brother, who was got thither,
having scaled the Castle-walls, with some others that had armed themselves to
relieve their Friends. There they took five more of the chief Citizens
prisoners, who were got in by the same means; and in that manner the furious
assault of the Conspirators was repulsed. In the mean time, at the ringing of
the Toquesaint, all the People in the City were raised, the chief whereof ran
to seize upon the Duke's Lady, who, not suspecting any thing, was gone to Mass
in the great Church. The Conspirators received new supplies every minute by the
Gentry, who knowing the business, came in to them; wherefore being increased in
strength and courage, they presently set things in order to assault the Castle.
But the Duke and they that were with him defended it valiantly, and by
threatening to kill the prisoners that were in their hands, who were persons of
note, and principal men among the Citizens, they kept the people in awe till
the Sieur de Tagens came up with his Gens d' Arms, who being quartered hard
by, made haste presently at the noise which was heard a great way off in the
Fields: at his arrival the people were affrighted, and the Heads of the
Conspiracy being dismayed, at last, by means of the Bishop of the City, and of
the Abbot del Been, they agreed that the Prisoners should be set at liberty,
the Duchess likewise restored, the Gentlemen that were of the Conspiracy put
out of the City* and the Duke as before acknowledged Governor for the King,
who showing much courage in defending himself, and much moderation after the
Agreement, did quickly extinguish that fire which had like suddenly to have
consumed him.

The news of this business put Secretary Villeroy absolutely out of the King's
favor, who would not believe, if the Messenger from the Citizens of Angoulesm
had been answered as doubtfully and coldly in that matter as he intended, that
ever they would have dared to go so far as to attempt even against the Duke's
life, he having expressly forbidden them to do any such thing, but thought for
certain that Secretary Villeroy, laying hold of that occasion, had made use of
it to wreak the open enmity and bitter hatred which he bore the Duke of
^spernon; wherefore fretting within himself, believing that he was surrounded
on every side by Ministers, that were swayed with passion and interests, and
condemning their too much wisdom, The King, according to the example of his
Grandfather, dismisse^h many old servants for their too much wisdom.
whereby they searched even into the marrow of his thoughts, he remembered the
example of his Grandfather, who in the later times of his Reign had put away
from him all those old Ministers of State which were become suspected for their
too much wisdom, and had employed men of great integrity, but such as were not
of too high an understanding, from whom he had received betterand more fruitful
service, then from those that were grown old in the prudence and experience of
affairs. With thisthought, as soon as he was gone from Chartres, to continue
his journey toward Blois, where he had determined to accomplish the end of his
designs, he dismissed from Court the Sieurs de Pinart, and Brulart, his old
Secretaries of State, and sent Benois his trusty Cabinet-Secretary, to tell the
High-Chancellor Chiverny Monsieur Bellieure, and the Sieur de Villeroy, who
were gone to their houses to order their affairs, and return, that the King
satisfied with the pains they had already taken, commanded them to return no
more to Court; In the place of the High-Chancellour Chiverny, Francois Sieur de
M^nt^elon is chosen Guard de Seaux.
which order was received and executed by Bellieure with great moderation; the
High Chancellor labored in vain to justify himself, and to get leave to
return; and the Sieur de Villeroy, though he obeyed, showed nevertheless a
great sense of grief, thinking that his long toil^ and services happily
performed, were unjustly despised, and too ungratefully requited. In the place
of the High-Chancellor, the King (as the custom is) chose Francois de
Monthelon, his Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, to be Lord Keeper.
Guard des Seaux, a man of great integrity and honest intentions; but not much
accustomed to matters of Government, wherein, till that time, he had had very
little or nothing to do: Martin Ruzay, Sieur de Beaulieu, and Lowis de Rouel
were made Secretaries of State, both men of unblemished reputation, faithful,
dis-interessed, and bred up in his service from their youth, but not esteemed
to have too great a reach in affairs of Government and matters of State. On
this manner he thought he had taken away from about him (as he said) the prying
Foxes eyes, and that he had assured himself he should receive faithful and
sufficient service, so that his Ministers should not search deeper into his
designs, then he of his own voluntary accord was pleased to impart unto them

By this novelty the whole Court was transformed not only in show, but also in
the form and manner of Government; for the Duke of Guise, whoformerly was wont
to have but small share in the Council, se^med now to moderate all the
resolutions of it; and together with him the Archbishop of Lions, and the
Sieur de la Chastre his near Dependents were held in very great esteem: and, in
the Cabinet-Councel, where the Queen Mother was wont to bear all the sway, now,
by reason of the King's suspicions, her part was not very much; and all the old
Confidents being excluded, only the Marescal d' Aumont, Colonel Alfonso Corso,
and the Sieur de Rambouillet had the King's ear, and were the only partakers
of his most intimate determinations. The Duke of Nevers also, who, in former
times, had been suspected and hated by him, had now great power with the King,
who was now become different from himself. Nor was he so much moved to it by
the fame of his wisdom, and experience, which was generally known, as because
he was an emulator, and a secret enemy of the Duke of Guise's greatness; in so
much, that though they were Brothers-in-law, their Wives being Sisters, yet
could not the one brook the others advancement; and now the Duke of Nevers his
inward animosity was so much the more increased, by seeing that the Duke of
Guise, having obtained the power of Lieutenant General, ruled all, and
commanded every one: which being known unto the King, and he desiring
reciprocally to blow the fire of their hatred, had declared the Duke of Nevers
General of the Army that was to go into Poictou and Guienne, to set them so
much the more against one another, and, to the end that their emulation might
grow from thoughts to deeds; because on the one side, he knew Nevers would
never endure to obey Guise; and on the other, that Guise (to tread down Nevers,
and because he was jealous of him) would not fail to go unto the Army:
Whereupon their secret heart-burnings would break forth into open discord and
dissension. To avoid which, though the Duke of Nevers foreseeing the same,
tried by all excuses, of his age, indisposition, and other occasions, to
decline that charge, yet the King would never consent to confer it upon any
other; thinking also, that was no convenient time to trust the Command of an
Army in the hands of a person whom he suspected. By these Arts the minds of
both parties being more kindled against each other, the King was still secretly
informed by the Duke of Nevers concerning all particulars that might make to
the Duke of Guise's disadvantage, whereby it came to pass, that he who before
was suspected, became now his absolute Confident.

With these practices the Court arrived at Blois the seven and twentieth day of
September, where the Deputies of the Provinces were already met together; in
whose election, though both parties had taken much pains, yet the dependents of
the League did much exceed; for the Order of the Clergy, drawn by the interests
of Religion, did, in a manner, wholly incline to that side, and the Order of
Commons, exasperated by the heaviness of impositions, and whose end it was to
cause them to be removed, did willingly join with the King's Enemies, who
promised, nay professed, they would ease the people of the excessive weight of
Contributions, and among the Nobility were many nearly interessed with the
House of Lorain and the League; whereby the King perceived plainly at the very
first, that in this Congregation the Duke of Guise would captivate all men's
opinions, and obtain all his own desires. But being disposed to go another way,
and desiring to satisfy all humors, having received the Deputies
indifferently, with great signs of apparent good will to all, he composed his
mind to make show, that he had settled all the hope of his own quiet, and of the
safety of the Kingdom in those remedies which were to be applied by the States.
Wherefore, intending to begin a business, which he fained to esteem of so great
consequence, with wonderful great state and preparation, upon Sunday the second
of October he caused a solemn procession to be made, in which he himself being
present, with all the Princes, all the Court, and all the Deputies of every
order in their places, the Sacrament was carried with exceeding pomp through
the Streets, which, for that purpose, were all hung with Tapistry; high Mass
was sung with show of profound and sincere devotion in every one; and the
Sunday after, being the ninth day of the Month, the King himself and the Duke
of Guise, with all the Deputies received the Communion publicly in the Church
of St. Francis, confirming, by that holy pious action, the correspondence, and
reciprocal intelligence which they showed, to perfect the happiness of the
Kingdom, for which end they professed that the States General were come
together.

The Assembly of States General called at Blois, upon the agreement between the
King and the League begins with extraordinary preparations.
The Assembly began upon the third Sunday, being the sixteenth day of the
month; when presently after dinner, all those being met in the Great Hall of
the Castle, who ought to be present at so solemn a Convention, the King sat
down in a Throne raised by many steps from the earth, and covered with a very
rich Cloth of State; the Queens, Princes, Cardinals, Peers, and Officers of the
Crown, sat upon seats fitted for that purpose, in two long rows, on the right
hand, and on the left; and between them, in the inner part of the Theater* sat
the Deputies, according to the ancient preeminence of their degrees; and the
Duke of Guise, as Grand Maistre, with his Staff of Office in his hand, sat
down upon a stool at the foot of the State on the right hand; and on the left
sat the Sieur de Monthelon, who represented the person of the High-Chancellor
of the Kingdom.

When every one was settled in his place and order, The King begins the Assembly
with a fine Speech, which s^ings the Duke of Guise and his adherents.
the King accompanied with a Royal Majesty and singular eloquence, gave
beginning to the assembly of the States with a long elegant Oration; wherein,
attesting his most earnest desires of the good and welfare of his People, and
showing the dangerous troublesome condition wherein intestine discords and
private interests had involved the Crown, he exhorted every one of them
effectually to lay aside their passions, to forget their enmities, to avoid the
animosity of Factions; and, providing by convenient remedies for the public
need, and the quiet of all men in particular, to reunite themselves sincerely
and principally under his obedience; forsaking all Novelties, condemning all
Leagues, Practices, Intelligences, and interessed Communications, which both
within and without the Kingdom, had disturbed both him their lawful and natural
Sovereign, and the mind and tranquillity of all good men: for as he pardoned
and would forget all that was past; so for the time to come he would not endure
it, but account it as an act of absolute Treason: And insisting upon that
Proposition, he enlarged himself a long time; concluding with grave and
effectual words, That as he sincerely labored for the good of his Subjects,
and resolved to persecute and tread down Heresy, to favor those that were
good, to restore the splendor and force of Justice, to advance Religion, to
uphold the Nobility, and to disburden the common people: so he earnestly prayed
and conjured every one of them, to assist him with their good Counsels and
sincere intentions, in that so necessary regulation of all things: for if they
should do otherwise, minding intelligences and particular practices, and
consenting to the interests of factious men, they would stain themselves with
perfidiousness and Treachery, and would be brought to give an account of it
before God's Tribunal, making themselves guilty and blameworthy to humane
justice, with the perpetual infamy of their names unto posterity.

This Speech of the King's stung the Duke of Guise to the quick, and all those
of his party; and so much the more, when they saw him resolved to have it
Printed: wherefore the Archbishop of Lions endeavored to dissuade him from it,
saying, that it was better to lose a few words, though never so elegantly
composed, then to lose the hearts of many of his Subjects, who felt themselves
injured, thinking that he had not forgotten what was past, but would tax them
in the presence of all France, and condemn them of perfidiousness and
Rebellion. Yet notwithstanding that, the King would have it known to all men
what he had said to the Congregation of the States; and caused his Speech to be
Printed, which served wonderfully afterward to excuse those things that
followed. Some have written, that the King, persuaded by the Archbishop of
Lions, had cut off many things from the Press, and taken away many words which
he had spoken in his Oration: But I my self, who was present, and heard every
word very near, can certainly affirm, that as much was Printed as was spoken;
but the expressions being quickened by the efficacy of his action and tone of
his voice, were much more sharp and moving then when they came forth in Print,
wanting that life and spirit with which they were delivered.

After the King's Speech followed the Oration of Monsieur de Monthelon, Guard
des Seaux, who, according to the ordinary custom, praising the King's
intention, Monthelon the Guard des Seaux prosecutes and amplifies the King's
Speech.
repeated at large the same things which he had spoken: To which, with
demonstrations of great humility and obedience, the R^naud de Beaune.
Archbishop of Bourges answered for the Order of the Clergy; the Baron de
Seneschay for the Nobility; and the Michel Mar^ea^.
Prevost de Merchands of Paris for the third Order of Commons: After which
Replies, the Assembly was dismissed, and the second Session adjourned till the
Tuesday following.

That day was famous for the Oath which the States took, to receive for a
Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, that Edict of the Union which the King had
published in the Month of July before, whereby reuniting to himself all his
Catholic Subjects of the Kingdom, he swore to persevere till death in the
Roman Catholic Religion, to promote the increase and preservation of it, to
employ all his Forces for the rooting out of Heresy, never to permit that any
Heretic or favourer of Heresy should Reign; not to elect into Places and
Dignities any but such persons as made constant profession of the Roman
Catholic Religion, and would have all his Subjects to Swear and promise the
same; who being so reunited unto him, he forbade to join themselves in League
or company with any others, under pain of Treason, and being held violaters of
the Oath they had taken; The King and the States swear in solemn manner to
perform the Edict made before, or persev^ring in the Catholic Religion.
with other particulars, wherein, abolishing the memory of all things past, he
made himself Head of the Catholic League and Union, and incorporated all the
Orders in their proper natural obedience. The circumstances of this Oath were
remarkable; for the King himself spoke concerning it with grave and fitting
Speeches, and the Archbishop of Bourges made an Exhortation to the States,
showing the greatness and obligation of the Oath which they were to take;
Beaulieu the new Secretary of State enrolled an Act of that Oath, in memory of
so solemn an action: after it was done, they gave thanks to God publikly in the
Church of St. Savior: all which demonstrations, which many thought were used
to extinguish the memory of things that were past, served after to excuse and
authorize those things that were to come: for notwithstanding all these
obligations, whereby the adherents to the League bound themselves to forsake
all former attempts and machinations, and to tie themselves sincerely in
obedience to the King, and notwithstanding all his Protestations in the public
Assembly of the States, to forget what was past, but severely to revenge the
future, they did not at all slacken their pretensions and contrivances, but
pursued them with effectual practices; and the Duke of Guise aspired to the
express name of Lieutenant General, which he had not been able to obtain from
the King, though he had gotten almost the same power to be joined to his former
title of Grand Maistre; and the rest ceased not to treat with the States, that
the Government might be reformed in such manner, as leaving unto the King only
the name and outside of a Prince, the sum of businesses might be managed by the
Duke and his Dependents of the League: and even the Deputies of the States
mingling themselves in the interests of the Factions, plotted and labored for
the same things, without any regard to so many and so solemn Oaths, and with
manifest scorn and contempt to the King's Name, Person, and Majesty: Wherefore
the event plainly showed the art the King had used in the Assembly of the
States: for knowing the obstinacy of the Confederates, he by the bonds of
public Oaths, Acts and Ceremonies (which, in appearance, redounded all in
favor of the League, but secretly contained a most sharp sting against it)
cunningly spread the net to catch them in those faults and crimes wherewith
they had protested not to stain themselves for the time to come, and which he
had declared that he would severely punish and chastise.

There wanted not many who believed, that if the Duke and the Deputies, with
the other Heads of the League, had, after these Oaths, given over the
enterprise they had begun, and having laid aside their private interests and
old passions, had proceeded sincerely for the future; the King, always of a
good intention and mild nature, would yet at that time have forgotten all that
was passed, and have let alone the House of Guise; But the Duke, either not
discovering, or despising that policy, being transported with the prosperity of
his affairs, and seeing the greater part of the Deputies were inclined and
ready to favor his greatness, strove with all his utmost forces to bring
matters to that point, which from the beginning he had propounded to himself.
The constant report was* that he inwardly aspired to that power, The common
opinion, that the Duke of Guise aspired to the authority which the Masters of
the Palace were wont to have.
which the Les Maires du Palais.
Masters of the Palace in old time were wont to have; while the Kings standing
but for shadows or ciphers, and leading a soft idle course of life, left the
Authority of the Government wholly unto them: whereby it came to pass, in
process of time, that King Chilperi^, a man of an effeminate nature, being
deprived of his Crown, and put into a Monastery to lead a private life, Charles
Martell, and afterward his son Pepin, Masters of the Palace, (in whose hands
the Government and the Forces did reside) at last assumed the name and Majesty
of King, robbing those of it, to whom of right it did belong. Those that were
interessed, C^ip^ric King of France, of an effeminate nature, put into a
Monastery by Charles Martel, and P^pin Masters of the Palace.
openly said, that the example of things past, was very apposite for the
present affairs; for the King seemed to have showed no less tokens of an
effeminate mind, and of a soft idle nature, then Chilperic; and the Duke of
Guise, by his late Victories, and the height of his understanding, was esteemed
not inferior in worth and valor, to what Pepin or Charles Martell were in
those times: and though he was not of the Blood Royal, (as the Masters of the
Palace formerly were wont to be) yet the interests of Religion, to which his
designs were nearly united, gave him a mavelous opportunity to deprive the
House of Bourbon of the Succession of the Crown, and to transfer it upon
himself or his posterity, under color that necessity so required, lest the
most Christian Crown should fall into the hands of Heretics and excommunicated
persons. To this end it was whispered that he aimed to be declared
Lieutenant General, not by the King, but by the States, with supreme Authority,
that he might make use of it no less to bridle the power of the King himself,
who he doubted would return unto his custom of Governing, than to suppress the
House of Bourbon: for causing the King of Navarre to be declared incapable of
the Crown by the States themselves, and by consequence the Cardinal of Bourbon
to be lawful Successor, it came jointly to pass, that he who was decrepid with
old age, dying within a while, the Royal Line would thereby be extinct, and the
rest of that House excluded as suspected of Heresy, and incapable; and then
that the Duke, born up by the applause of the people, and strengthened with
those Forces which would be in his power, could have no obstacle in obtaining
the election of his own person, and his posterity to the Crown, either during
the life of the King himself, or at least after his death, if to show the
greater modesty he would defer it so long: howsoever, the King being a man of a
dissolute life, a profuse nature, a suspicious humor, and not beloved of the
people, they talked among themselves, that by degrees he, as another Chilperic,
might be shut up for ever within the walls of a Monastery.

These things were spoken in a manner publicly. But the Kings nature and
inclination were so different from that of Chilperic, that the Duke of Guise
was deceived by them, whether he really had such thoughts, or that his aim was
only to secure himself and Religion, which he could not do, if he did not
settle himself in a certain permanent greatness: wherefore having directed all
his counsels to that end, that he might perfectly win the love and affections
of the people, he labored before all other things to set the business on foot
of lessening the Taxes and Impositions, making himself the author of that most
important motion. The King opposed it, as did also not a few of the wisest
among the Deputies, alleging that they were contrary things, To settle so
frequent resolutions of making an obstinate War, of raising so many Armies, of
daily entering new Soldiers into pay, with perpetual protestations never to
lay down arms without an absolute Victory; and on the other side, by weakening
and destroying the Kings revenues, to cut the sinews of the War, and after so
many brags, to reduce themselves to a necessity of condescending, for want of
money, to a disadvantageous dishonorable Peace. But the interest of the Order
of the Commons was so great, their inclination so precipitate, and the Duke of
Guise's authority so powerful, that notwithstanding that so evident reason, it
was at last resolved that they should demand of the King a moderation of the
Taxes, an abatement of the new Impost, which amounted to the sum of two
millions of Gold per annum, the reformation of many Offices erected to bring in
money, and the total taking away of many other grievances

But the Duke of Guise having tried his own strength, The Proposition of
receiving the Council of Trent made in the Assembly of the States General, is
rejected with great contradiction.
and found his power with the Deputies, being much augmented in courage, and
grown in favor, by that resolution which he had luckily carried against the
Kings will, propounded to himself for a second attempt, to make the States
receive the Council of Trent, as a most powerful engine not only to destroy and
exclude the Hugonots for ever, but also to cause the King of Navarre and the
rest of the House of Bourbon to be declared incapable of the Succession: but
this was no such plausible matter as the other was, but suspected, not only to
the Nobility by reason of the liberty of their lives, but also to a great many
of the Clergy, who feared to lose the immunities and privileges of the
Gallique Church. Wherefore though the King, by nature an Enemy to Heresy,
consented willingly unto it, hoping also thereby to gain the Popes good will,
which he suspected by reason of those things he intended to put in execution;
and though the Cardinals who were there present stickled much in the business,
and that the Duke of Guise applied all his endeavors to it, yet the
contradiction of the Deputies, and of many of the Clergy, was so great, that it
being impossible to be carried, the resolution was referred till another time.

But the Duke of Guise, not at all discouraged, considering that the reason why
that Proposition had not taken effect, was because every one feared to be
constrained in their Consciences, would needs (without that previous
preparation) venture boldly upon one step higher, and caused to be propounded
in the States, that the King of Navarre and the rest of his Family being guilty
or suspected of Heresy, should by a Declaration be made incapable of ever
coming to the Succession of the Crown. And indeed, contrary to the opinion of
many, who esteemed it an impossible business, by reason of the veneration which
was wont to be showed to the Salique Laws, and to the Line of the Blood Royal*
this determination proved very easy; for though the Archbishop of Bourges, one
of the Presidents of the Ecclesiastical Order, did obliquely oppose it, as an
unseasonable proposition, while the King in the flower of his age might yet
possibly have a Son; The King is r^quested to declare the King of Navarre
incapable of the Crown, and all others suspected of heresy; after much
opposition he consents coldly unto it.
yet the Clergy concluded, that the King of Navarre by name, and all others
suspected of heresy, should be declared incapable of succeeding to the Crown,
and that this was conformable to the meaning and doctrine of the holy Canons,
and expedient for the safety of men's souls, and for the preservation of the
Church of God: this being so resolved, the other two Orders of the Nobility and
Commons (the followers of the League using their utmost power) determined
likewise that in this matter it was good to refer themselves to the Clergy, and
that therefore they should consent to their decision, which as soon as it was
concluded, Guilliaume d' Alancon Archbishop of Ambrun, with six Deputies of
every Order, presented this Vote of the States unto the King, insisting that
his Majesty would make it a public Decree, causing it to be read and confirmed
in the Assembly, which should receive it, and swear to it as a fundamental Law:
But the King utterly averse from that inclination, knowing that this was the
last stroke of the Duke of Guise and the League to establish their designs
absolutely, seemed to praise the zeal of the Clergy, and the piety and modesty
of the other Orders in things that concerned Religion; and in stead of an
Answer, gave unto the Deputies a Protestation which had been presented to him
from the King of Navarre: Who having called a Congregation of those of his
party at Rochel, had caused a Writing to be printed, wherein he demanded the
execution of those Edicts and Grants which had been so often made to those of
his party; the Convocation of a National or Universal Council, wherein he might
lawfully be instructed in those things that were controverted in matter of
Faith; and finally he protested to count null and invalid whatsoever should be
determined against him in that Assembly at Blois; he that having been called to
clear himself of those things whereof he was accused, and that Assembly not
being composed of all the Orders and sorts of people in the Kingdom, since
those of his party were not called and admitted to it: nay, he argued that he
could never be condemned for an Heretic, as he was openly declared by his
Enemies, whilst he offered to submit himself voluntarily to the determination
of a free and lawful Council, either National or Universal. To which
Propositions of the King of Navarre, the most Christian King added, That if
Justice requires no man should ever be sentenced nor condemned without being
summoned, or without hearing his defense, which (by consent of all learned men)
is according to the Law of God, it was not good to decree so heavy a sentence,
without giving him warning to answer for himself, and without hearing his
reasons whatsoever they were; for if the sentence of an hundred Crowns would be
censurable, nay void and of no effect, where the party had not been cited and
warned to answer; much more would a Decree be invalid which concerned so
weighty, and so important a matter as the Succession of a Kingdom. That many of
the King of Navarre's reasons, if they were not altogether true, were at least
apparent and specious, which ought not to be pretermitted in a matter of so
great consequence, without being particularly discussed and pondered: That he
alleged he had ever offered to submit himself to the determination of a
Council, and to the instruction of grave and learned men: That he claimed the
privilege of Liberty of Conscience granted to all Frenchmen, from which he
ought not to be excluded more than others: That he excused the imputation of
being relapsed, by the powerful fear, or rather by the violence of the Massacre
at Paris, wherein to save his life he had condescended to go to Mass; And that
he urged many other things, which were not so much to be slighted, if for no
other reason, at least that the Decree of the States might not appear to have
been precipitate, and interessed, confused, disordered, and void of those
respects which the ordinary course of Justice requires even in the smallest
things, much more in the condemning of a person of so great quality, and in the
inheritance of a whole Kingdom: That there was time enough to warn him, and
appoint him a hearing, and convenience sufficient to proceed legally, since
that (by the mercy of God) he found himself in such a condition of age and
health, that the dangers were not urgent, the business should be so suddenly
determined: Wherefore it befitted so grave an Assembly, composed of the most
eminent men of the Kingdom, to proceed warily, and go forward in such manner as
might not appear to be an indiscreet, disorderly zeal, but piety accompanied
with judgment and constant prudence.

The Deputies returned the Kings answer to their several Orders but in vain;
for the Clergy answered, that the King of Navarre had many times been
admonished, called, and summoned by the Queen Mother, and by messengers from
former States: that new Councils were not necessary, where the universal one of
Trent had condemned the Doctrine which he followed for heretical: that he had
been instructed by the Cardinal of Bourbon his Uncle, so grave a personage, and
so near him in blood, and yet had returned to his first opinions in Religion;
that finally the Pope had declared him a relapsed Heretic; wherefore it was
needless to give him any further warning, or to make new discussions and
examinations; and that the determination in hand was not so much a
determination as an execution; and that therefore neither doubt nor delay was
to be interposed. To this Declaration of the Clergy the other Orders consented;
and therefore the Archbishop of Ambrun with the same Deputies related to the
King, that his Answer having been debated by the States, they persisted in the
same opinion, and therefore beseeched his Majesty to enact it presently.

The King seeing the obstinacy of the States, The King seeing the r^solution of
the States against the King of N^varre, procures an ab^olu^ion at Rome for the
Prince of C^n^y and Count Soissons of the House of Bourb^^, which much troubles
the Duke of Guis^^
and being resolved to another conclusion than what every one believed,
answered, That he agreed to the general Vote, and that he would think of
causing the Decree to be framed: and in the mean time, to weaken in some part
the hopes of that attempt, he wrought with Cardinal Moresini the Popes Legate to
obtain from Rome the absolution of the Prince of Con^y and Count of Soissons,
Brothers to the Prince of Conde deceased; who having lived in the Catholic
Religion ever since the Massacre, had yet gone over to the King of Navarre, and
had born Arms for him, one in the Battle of Coutras, the other in the Conduct
of the German Army; but having since repented their following of that party, by
reason of its weakness, and for other respects, were returned unto the Kings
obedience, by whose persuasions they very submissively asked pardon of the
Apostolic Sea; which humiliation being forwarded by the good assistance of
Cardinal Moresini, who to please the King and favor the Blood Royal took great
pains in the business, and being helped by the earnest solicitations of the
Marquess de Pisani the Kings Ambassador at Rome, it was hearkened unto by the
Pope, and those Princes received absolution; which cast some rubs and
difficulties in the Duke of Guise's hopes, and did partly weaken the specious
reasons of the League.

But while these things were in agitation, the mind of the King of Navarre, of
the Duke of Guise, and of the States, were all much troubled at the news which
was brough^ unto them, that Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Charles Emanuel Duke
of Savoy possesses himself of the Marquesate of Saluzzo
having entered in an hostile manner with an Army into the Marquesate of
Saluzzo, had made himself Master of it, driving out the Kings Garrisons and
Officers. The Duke of Savoy, a Youth of a most high spirit, and much raised in
his thoughts by his new union with the Catholic King, having married the
Infanta Catherine his Daughter, had taken a resolution to possess himself of
the Marquesate of Saluzzo, to which his Ancestors by ancient suecession
pretended to have much right; wherefore seeing the troubles of France, and
particularly the last attempt of the League in the Insurrection of Paris,
wherein the Royal Majesty seemed trodden under foot, and the power of that Name
quite overthrown, would not neglect such an opportunity, but partly by
intelligence, partly by open force, had gotten into his hands Carmagnola, and
the other Strongholds of that State, together with great provisions of
Artillery and Ammunition, which as in a Magazine had been left in many of those
places since the late Wars of Italy. But having boldly executed his design, and
doubting on the one side that the French would resent it, and on the other,
that the Princes of Italy would not be well pleased he presently dispatched a
Messenger to Court to let the King know he had been constrained to take that
resolution, not with a thought to offend the Crown of France, but to provide
against the imminent ruin of his own State, in case the Hugonots should get
footing in the Marquesate, as Les-digueres earnestly endeavored; who having
made himself Master of Castle Delfino in the Alps, had a strong inclination to
seize upon the Marquesate, Causes alleged by the Duke of Savoy in excuse for
his surprisal of the Marquesate of Saluzzo.
from whence would have insued the infesting of Piedmont, and those calamities
unto himself wherein he saw France involved by the poison of Heresy; and
therefore he would keep the Marquesate until such time as that danger were
past; and that Justice had weighed his reasons, being ready to restore it when
the Hugonots of Dauphine being rooted out, he should be free from those just
fears into which that imminent danger had drawn him, and in case his reasons
should be found to be unjust. He caused the same things to be presented to the
Venetian Senate, to whom as Moderator of the Peace, he knew any such novelty in
Italy would be infinitely unpleasing: and the same at large were alleged by
the Pope; adding to appease him the more, that this was the prologue of a War
against the City of Geneva, as he desired; and to work upon him, urged the
confederacy and intelligence which the King of France held with that
Commonwealth.

But it was a wonderful thing how much men's minds were disturbed, and the
affairs of the States of Blois altered by it: for the King and his adherents
said publicly that the Duke of Savoy had been encouraged to that boldness by
secret intelligence with the Duke of Guise, who thought by this means to
deprive Monsieur de la Valette of the Marquesate, who was Governor of it: That
by that price he had bought the friendship of the Duke of Savoy, and satisfied
the Spaniards, who desired to have that Gate shut, thereby to cut off the
passage of the French Forces into Italy: and many among the Nobility believed
it constantly: so that men began to murmur that it was too unjust and too
unworthy a thing to persist obstinately wallowing in the blood of Civil Wars,
and in the mean time to suffer the honor of the Nation to be trodden under
foot, and the possessions of the Crown to be violently taken away by foreign
Enemies: That already too much had been done to satisfy the ambition of the
Great Ones, and to glut the greediness of the Factions: That it was now high
time to reunite their minds, and join their Forces together, to defend
themselves against the insulting of Foreigners; and that this injury was so
great, that they ought by no means to defer the taking of a speedy and
exemplary revenge. From which popular plausible reasons, carried by the favor
of the Nobility, who were moved with exceeding great anger, the other Orders
also resented it very much: so that they seemed inclined to lay aside the
thoughts of Civil War, to turn their Forces against the Duke of Savoy. Many of
the most understanding men thought the Duke of Guise was not privy to that
intent of seizing upon the Marquesate, in that conjuncture of affairs; for the
time was not seasonable; and this accident alone disturbed his designs, which
were already prosperously on their way to the desired end: yet Fame reported
him the Author of that enterprise, and the States were resolved to decree a
Foreign War, and to slacken or defer their homebred quarrel with the Hugonots.

This did much afflict the Duke of Guise, whether he were partaker or no in the
surprisal of the Marquesate: for he perceived that the diverting of those
humors, and employing them in a Foreign War, would settle the intestine
passions of the Kingdom, and that by consequence Liberty of Conscience, Peace,
and the Establishment of the Hugonots would ensue, whereby so many designs
would be frustrated, and so many plots so long beforehand contrived to suppress
the Calvinists, and to establish his greatness upon the ruins of the House of
Bourbon, would come to nothing; but the War being turned against his own
Confederates, which were Spain and Savoy, he saw he should by little and little
fall from his authority, and that the name and credit of the Princes of the
Blood would rise again, since the flourishing age of the King might give time
to infinite (not yet thought of) changes. But if on the other side this thought
tormented him, on the other, the reports spread abroad by the King struck him
very deeply; the universal inclination of the States troubled him; and as the
Head of a popular Faction, he could not oppose nor contradict so just reasons,
and so popular a Cause; thinking that the whole foundation of his affairs would
fall, if he, having always professed to protect the general good and
reputation, should now be seen either to assent unto, or to make small
reckoning of so great an injury done to the Crown. Wherefore being by the
affliction of his mind brought into a deep meditation, he resolved (making use
of the same arts the King did) to feign a consent to the inclination of the
States, to show himself an eager revenger of the offense committed against the
Crown, and by other means to frustrate the effect of the Foreign War, which he
thought not very difficult by his arts to bring to pass: with this design he
began to raise a rumor, that the taking of the Marquesate of Saluzzo had been
procured and plotted by the King himself, to cross the good resolutions of the
States, and to hinder the Decrees against the King of Navarre and the Hugonots;
and that none could more deeply resent the boldness of the Duke of Savoy, nor
was more ardent against him than he and his Family. And in effect, seeming
wonderfully sollicitous for the loss of the Marquesate, he caused some of his
Dependents to propose unto the States, that they should resolve to make a War
with Savoy, and that not being able to go in person upon that enterprise,
because he could not be so far from Court, he desired the Duke of Mayenne his
Brother might, who being appointed to follow the War in Dauphine, was already
come as far as Lions. This proposition gave great satisfaction, and did very
much settle the minds of such as were troubled, so that without much delay it
was by ge^^^al consent resolved, that they should turn their Forces against the
Duke of Savoy, for the recovery of the Marquesate, and that the Duke of Mayenne
should go thither in person.

In the mean time, observing those ceremonies with strangers which they
observed not with the King of Navarre, They send to the Duke of Savoy to demand
the restitution of Saluzzo, and upon his refusal to denounce War.
they determined to send Ieban Sieur de Poigny to the Duke of Savoy, to demand
the restitution of those places he had taken* and if he restored them not, to
denounce War against him: after which absolute Orders were given, both to the
Marquess de Pisani the Kings Ambassador to the Pope, to Monsieur de Men's
Ambassador at Venice, and to the other Ambassadors every where, to make
grievous complaints against the Duke. The ardour of me^^ spirits being by
degrees qualified with these determinations, this so important affair was set
in such a way, as was not likely to do much harm to the principal intentions of
those of the League. At that time many doubted how the business of Saluzzo had
really come to pass; for though the most common report was, that all had been
done with the secret intelligence of the League, because every one knew the
correspondence that was between the Duke of Guise, the Spaniards, and the Duke
of Savoy; and though they of the League on the other side labored to make it
be believed that it had been the Kings invention; yet the wisest opinion held
for certain, that it was merely a motion of the Duke of Savoy himself, who of a
ready courage and high thoughts, would not omit that desirable occasion which
offered it self: which he himself made more credible; for after the taking of
the Marquesate, he caused a coin to be stamped, in which a Centaur trampled a
Crown under foot, which lay overturned upon the ground, with this word,
Opportune; which was interpreted, that he would not pass by the opportunity of
that conjuncture, while the Crown of France was overturned and weakened by
inward divisions. True it is, that men generally believed the Duke of Savoy's
forwardness had been excited by the King of Spain's exhortations, desiring by
the possession of the Alps to cut off the passage into Italy from the French
Army.

At this very time the Duke of Nevers, General of the Kings Army in Guienne,
having begun the War with the King of Navarre, had taken Mauleon, and Montaut,
and though retarded by the rains of Autumn, and many other impediments, had
laid siege to Ganache, a very strong place upon the Confines of Poictou and
Bretagne, defended by a strong and valiant Garrison put into it by the Hugonots;
the Favorers of the League raised a report that he had cunningly besieged
Ganache, (a very strong place, but of no advantage to the main business of the
War) only to protract time; whereas with those Forces fresh and entire he might
presently have destroyed the King of Navarre; who ill provided of men, and
utterly unfurnished of money, had not force enough to make long resistance: nor
was this report altogether vain, or at least improbable. Whereupon the Duke of
Guise intended when the States were broken up, and his power of Lieutenant
General confirmed, to go in person to the Army, and forward the business of the
War. But the determinations of the States proved more long and difficult than
at first it was thought they would have been; for the affairs of Savoy, though
in great part settled again, had yet left men's minds unquiet, and had put many
designs out of frame; and which imported most, the King intent upon the
ripening of his secret thoughts, did in all matters interpose long artificial
delays. It is a strange thing how chance alone was accidentally almost like to
have produced that bloody issue of the States, which the King was secretly
contriving in himself: A fray happens among the Lords Pages; one of the Duke of
Guises is slain^ the uproar rises to that height, that the whole factio^^ are
divided under the names of Royalists and Guisa^ds; the King himself being
armed, goes to the quarrel.
for the Pages and Lackyes of the Princes and Lords no less divided than their
Master into two different factions, and quarrelling openly every day with the
plain names of Royalists and Guisards, it happened upon the thirtieth of
November at night, while about nine of the Clock they were waiting for their
Lords, being all together in the low open Galleries and Courts of the Castle,
that the Pages of the Cardinal of Vendosme and of the Duke of Montpensier
killed one of the Pages of the Duke of Guise; at the noise whereof all the rest
taking arms, every one for his party, the King's, the Cardinal of Vendosm's,
the Duke of Montpensier's, the Prince of Conty's, the Count of Soisson's, the
Marshall de Retz's, and others standing on the one side; and on the other, the
Duke of Guise's, the Prince of Iainville's, the Duke of Nemour's, the Duke of
Elbeuf's, the Count of Brissac's, and many others, they began a most cruel
bloody fray, wherein the other Servants mingling themselves by little and
little, and at last the Soldiers, and some Gentlemen, the business proceeded
so far, that the party of the Guisards prevailing, the fight was reduced into
the great Hall joining to the Kings lodgings, and above those of the
Queen Mother, where all the Lords o^ the Court were together. The noise was
wonderful great, and the enraged voices sounded so loud, that they were heard
into the Town, and wakening those that were asleep, the general opinion was,
that the Princes themselves were fighting, and that they should be all cut in
pieces in the Castle, the Gates whereof were already locked; wherefore the
Cardinal of Guise, who lodged in the Town, having put off his Cardinal habit,
and drawn all his dependents together, was gone armed up thither; and on the
other side, the Marshall d' Aumon^, and the Duke of Longueville, having
assembled the Kings adherents, went the same way, and were not far from meeting
one another, all the Deputies being also in arms, some for one side, some for
the other; and so great was the terror and the assurance that there was a
bloody conflict in the Castle, that many who fled away for fear carried the
news abroad, and the report came to Paris, that all the Court were cutting one
another in pieces among themselves, the event not being yet known. The King
having put on his arms, went out of his private lodgings, (doubtful that the
Duke Guise endeavored by that means to prevent him) and all his followers that
had wherewithal did the same, and so being armed, they expected with more
assurance to turn their assistance whither most need required. On the other
side, the Duke of Guise who sat talking with the Queen Mother, neither moved
his place nor countenance, but thinking it to be what indeed it was, said so
often to the Queen; and perceiving that some of his Gentlemen seeing the
advantage of their party, expected some token from him to proceed further, he
kept his look still firm upon the ground, turning toward the fire, and gave no
sign at all of his intentions, either not assenting to the business, or
desiring they should go on, but without his fault or order. In the mean time
the Sieur de Grillon having commanded the Soldiers of the Guard to stand to
their arms, made the quarrel be parted; the fire being easily extinguished,
because there was no fuel added to it by the Heads of the two parties, and so
in the space of little more than an hour, the whole uproar was appeased, and
settled in the former quietness; an accident that had a terrible beginning, and
a ridiculous end; but showed evident marks of the most ardent hatred, kindled
more than ever between the Factions.

But things were now brought to their full maturity; for the Duke of Guise
having sufficiently tried the Deputies both in general and particular, and
being grown more secure and bold by these late trials, began to get the
business introduced of his being made Lieutenant General, at the request, and
with the authority of the States, which was the last aim of his present hopes;
and the King losing his power and reputation every day more and more, and
seeing that billow which he had so often avoided now coming to break upon him,
his long patience was at length turned into fury, so that the course of so many
contrivances could no longer be withheld from breaking forth to their appointed
end. The King had from the beginning intended to put the Duke of Guise to
death, with all his chief adherents and dependents, being thereunto incited by
the sense of past injuries, and the apprehension of future dangers: he was only
withheld by the respect he bore to the Catholic Religion, and his fear lest
the Pope (who besides his being of a fierce resolute nature, he saw was
infinitely inclined to favor the League) should make use of Spiritual weapons
against him, and stir up all the Princes of Christendom to do him mischief,
whom (by reason of the divisions of his Kingdom) they knew to be in a weak and
dangerous condition. But because he was assured that the Catholic King and the
Duke of Savoy would most certainly be against him, and that the Queen of
England, the Swisses and Protestants of Germany would be for him; and that the
other Princes were so far off that they could do him but little harm, he turned
his mind wholly toward the Princes of Italy, among which the Pope was chief,
by reason of the authority of the Apostolic See, and of the Spiritual Arms
that were in his power; and then the Venetian Senate, as well for the eminent
opinion of their wisdom, as for the supplies of money which he might hope for
from them in time of need: and finally, the Grand Duke of Thuscany, from whom
he remembered King Charles the Ninth had in the heat of War received
considerable assistance both of men and money.

To win the Pope, and make him his Friend, besides a most propense inclination
which he had showed to cause the Council of Trent to be received by the States,
and the great respect which upon all occasions he had shown to the
Ecclesiastical Order, he had also sent Iehan Marquess of Pisani his Ambassador
to Rome; a man ^f long experience, and of a dexterous mature wit, who (his Wife
being a Roman of the Family of Savella) was wonderfully versed in that Court,
and acceptable to the Pope himself, and to the whole Consistory of Cardinals;
by whose means he labored not only to keep Sixtus favorable unto him, by all
the demonstrations of duty and confidence, but also to dive into the affections
of his Nephews and Favorites, by all those ways which his sagacity could
invent. And because he conjectured that the relations of the Cardinal Legate (as
one who was upon the place, and was both by the Pope and the whole world
esteemed a man of singular wisdom) would have great power which way soever they
should incline, he used all his endeavors to make him his Friend and
Confident, which was not very hard to do, as well because the Cardinal being a
Venetian by birth, was naturally inclined to the good and greatness of the
Crown, and because his particular genius abhorred the new turbulent Counsels of
the League. Wherefore the King trusting him with many secrets, and seeming to
depend much upon his advice and authority, he had by his means not only
obtained absolution for the Prince of Conty and Count of Soissons, to the
prejudice of the League, but also having made him acquainted with many hidden
things, which were managed under the name of Religion, had persuaded him to
withdraw his hand from favoring the Duke of Guise: for the prudence of the
Cardinal, being there present, had sounded to the bottom of those things which
always came to Rome covered with the specious title of Religion: whereupon, by
his relations opportunely introduced, the Popes mind was brought into so much
doubt and suspense, that he often told the Spanish Ambassadors, and the Agents
of the League, he could not see clearly into the affairs of France.

It was more easy to gain the Venetian Senate: for besides the many acts of
friendship, showed by that Republic to Charles the Ninth in the greatest
exigencies of his Kingdom, and besides the real welcoms wherewith the present
King had been received in the City of Venice, The King admits Gi^ Mocenigo
Ambassador from Venice, though he were not one of the Sauii d^ T^^ra Firma.
which had produced a reciprocal and confident friendship between them: the
proceedings also of the Senate were very much averse from the Disturbers of
quietness, and from Conspirers of new designs; and their own interests made
them to desire the peace and union of the Kingdom of France under the obedience
of the natural King, to the end that being united in strength, it might
counterpoise the excessive greatness of other Christian Potentates: wherefore,
though the King at first had made some difficulty of admitting Giovanni
Mocenigo, (chosen Ambassador to him from the Senate in the place of Giovanni
Delfino) because he was not of the College of the Magistrates so called at
Venice, because they have the principal admin^stration of affairs by land, and
the care of matters belonging to Peace and War.
Sauii de Terra Firma, (out of which number the Ambassadors to Kings are wonted
to be elected) yet having in the end admitted him, he was so pleased with his
discreet silence and prudent behavior, that he contracted a great intimacy
with him, and with him and the Senate passed business of very great trust and
confidence.

But with Ferdinandi de Medici Grand Duke of Thuscany he proceeded further: for
he having newly succeeded his Brother Francesco in that State, Chrestienne de
Lorain, which should have been given to the King of Navarre, is married to
Ferdinand^ de Medici Grand Duke of Thuscany.
and having renounced the title of Cardinal to take a Wife, it was at that time
concluded to give him Chrestienne the Duke of Lorain's Daughter, and Niece to
the King, who had been bred up with the Queen Mother; and hastening the
Ceremonies of the Marriage, Charles the Bastard Grand Prior of France
contracted her in the name of Ferdinando, and the Bride made her self ready to
take her journey.

Things being ordered in this manner, the next business the King had to think
on, was to contrive which way to catch the Duke of Guise, surrounded with so
many Guards, and with so great a number of adherents: for though he had
cunningly drawn the States to Blois, a City depending upon him, and far from
the assistance of the Parisians, yet was the Duke come thither so strong, and
so many of the Deputies depended upon his will, that it was no easy matter to
set upon him. The Queen Mother was so ill of the Gout, that she kept her bed;
and the King troubled with his wonted suspicions, had not, nor did not intend
to impart that design to her; and therefore having taken occasion upon Sunday
the eighteenth of December, while they were feasting in her lodgings for the
Marriage of the Great Duchess, and the whole Court was busied there, he called
into his own Closet the Marshall d' Aumont, and Nicholas d' Angenay Sieur de
Rambouillet, whom he accounted most trusty, one for the profession of Arms, The
King desiring ^o free himself of the Duke of Gu^se, propose^ his design to four
of his most trusty Confidents, who after long consultation resolve to have him
killed.
the other for the Gown; and discovering his whole design, desired their
counsel in that particular. Their opinions were not very different; and all
agreed that things were brought to that pass, that now necessity forced a
resolution to bridle the attempts of the Duke of Guise; but about the means
which were to be used, they were not so well resolved: for the Marshall d'
Aumont consented to have him resolutely killed; and Rambouillet, alleging the
breach of Faith, and the Law of Nations, counseled to take him prisoner, and
then to proceed against him in a legal way: Whereupon, not knowing how to
resolve among themselves, they called the same night unto them Colonel Alfonso
Corso, and Lewis the Brother of Rambouillet, to have their opinions; they all
thinking it a very hard matter to be effected. After many hours consultation,
it was at last determined that he should be slain, and that the business should
be ordered in this manner following. Upon the top of the stairs in the Kings
Palace, there was a great Hall in which commonly the Council was wont to be
held, and which (except upon such occasions) stood open and free for the
ordinary passage of the Courtiers: at the upper end of the Hall was the door of
the Kings Ante-chamber; upon the right hand whereof was his Bedchamber; and on
the left, the Wardrobe; and just over against the door of the Ante-chamber, was
the door of the Closet; from whence there was a way out into a fair room; and
thence a back-stairs that went down into the Queen-Mothers lodging. When the
Council was held, the Gentlemen and Courtiers were wont to accompany the Lords
that went in, to the Hall-door at the top of the stairs, and there they stayed,
because the door was locked and guarded by the Keepers of the Council Chamger:
then they used to return back into the Court, which being spacious, was
commonly called, Le porche aux Bretons.
The Bretons Porche, because they coming often to Court about their frequent
Lawsuits, were wont for the most part to walk and entertain themselves in that
place. The King and his Counselors resolved that the deed should be done upon
a Council-day: for the Duke being then left alone without his train, with the
other Lords and Counselors in the Hall, he might be called by the King into
his lodgings, which at such times were wont to be shut, and without company;
and being there apart, and deprived of any help, might be dispatched out of the
world: for he being once dead, they feared not those dangers and tumults at
Blois, which they should have done if they had been at Paris. Then treating of
the persons that should execute the business, the King chose to trust Grillon
the Colonel of his Guards; a fierce bold man, and for many occasions an Enemy
to the Duke of Guise. Having therefore sent for him, he unfolded his design
unto him with fitting words, and gave him to understand that he had appointed
him to be the man that should perform the enterprise wherein consisted all his
safety. Grillon answered with short and significant words: The answer of
Grillon Captain of the Guards.
Sir, I am really your Majesty's most faithful and devoted Servant; but I make
profession to be a Soldier and a Cavalier: if you please to command me to
challenge the Duke of Guise, and fight with him hand to hand, I am ready at
this instant to lay down my life for your service; but that I should serve for
an Executioner, while your Majesty's Justice condemns him to die, is a thing
suits not with one of my condition, nor will I ever do it whilst I live. The
King did not much wonder at the liberty of Grillon, whom he and the whole Court
knew to be a plain honest man, and one that spoke his thoughts freely without
fear of any body; and therefore replied, that it was enough, provided he kept
the matter secret, for he had not communicated it to any body else, and if it
should be divulged, he would accuse him for the revealing it. To this Grillon
answered, That he was a Servant of honor and fidelity, and one that would
never discover the secret interests of his Master, and so going away, left the
King very doubtful what he should do; in which perplexity he continued till the
one and twentieth day, when having trusted the business to Lognac, one of the
Gentlemen of his Chamber, who had been brought first into the Court by the Duke
of Ioyeuse, and by his graceful fashion, discreet carriage, and gentle
behavior began to rise into the place of the Minions; he without much
difficulty promised with some of the five and forty who depended nearly upon
him, Logn^c promises the King that the Duke of Guise should be sl^in.
to do the deed most readily. The King having settled his mind, resolved to put
it in execution upon the morning of the three and twentieth day, being
Christmas Eve's Eve; and being come personally into the Council the two and
twentieth day, he told them he desired some business that concerned him might
be dispatched the next morning, that with a quiet mind he might retire himself
to perform his exercises of devotion for the holy Time that was at hand; and
therefore he entreated all of them to come early to the Council.

In the mean time the suspicion of this business, no body knows which way, The
King's resolution against the Duke of Guise comes to the ear of the Duke of
Guise himself.
was crept so far, that a confused knowledge of it came unto the ear of the
Duke of Guise himself; who being in private with the Cardinal his Brother, and
the Archbishop of Lions, consulted whether he should give credit to that
report, and whether believing it he should go from the States to avoid that
danger. The Cardinal said, It was better to fail in believing too much, than in
being too confident, and that it was good to lean to the securer side, and
persuaded his departure so earnestly, that the Duke set his affairs in order to
go away the next morning; but the Archbishop of Lions opposed that resolution
so stiffly, that he caused it almost at the same time to be altered. A
consultation between the Duke of Guise, the Cardinal his Brother, the
Archbishop of Lions, and the Duke d' Elbeuf.
He showed what a lightness it was to believe a rumor of fame not grounded
upon any certain proof; that it might be a plot of the Kings to make him go
away and leave the States, to the end that all hopes, designs and practices
falling at once, he might be left free from that yoke which he saw preparing
for him by the consent of the States; and he being gone that should order and
moderate the affections and promises of the Deputies, who should withstand the
Kings authority and cunning? Who should hinder the State from coming to a
contrary end from what they had designed? For he being absent, the Deputies
seeing themselves forsaken and left alone, would fall under the Kings
authority, and in reverence to the Royal Name, would make their determinations
according to his pleasure, and revoke those already past, disturb matters
already established, and reduce the Government to the former, or perhaps to a
worse condition, to the total ruin and utter destruction of the League; that
all those of his party would with reason complain that they had been betrayed,
and meanly forsaken by him, and every one by his example would think of their
own interests, and to make their peace with the King, so that in the end he
alone would be left forsaken and abandoned; in conclusion, that it was better
(though the danger were certain) to hazard only his life by staying, than
certainly to lose both life and honor at once by going away. His departure
being deferred, the Duke of Elbeuf came in, who being made privy to the
business in debate, confirmed the opinion of the Archbishop of Lions, adding
many things to prove that the Duke of Guise was so well accompanied with
faithful Friends all fast united, that the King would not dare to think of so
rash an enterprise; and that he wondered they should now be in so much fear of
those forces, which till then they had ever undervalued and despised. Whereupon
the Duke of Guise taking courage, resolved not only to stay till the end of the
Assembly, but showed also evident signs of slighting those rumors that ran
about the Court.

The evening of the twenty second being come* the King commanded Monsieur de
Larchant one of the Captains of his Guard to double them the next morning, and
to keep the Hall-door, after the Lords of the Council were gone in; but that he
should do it in such a manner as the Duke of Guise might not suspect any thing:
The order taken by the King, for the killing of the Duke of Guise.
Wherefore having staid with a great number of his Soldiers the same night,
till the Duke came from his own Lodgings to the Kings, he went to him in the
middle of the way, and beseeched him, that he would be pleased to speak a good
word for those poor Soldiers, who had wanted their pay a great many months;
The Captains invention to double the Guards, and not be suspected by the Duke
of Guise.
that they made their address to him as the Head and Protector of all
Soldiers; and that the next day he would wait upon him with the same Company
in the morning, to put him in mind to speak in their behalf to the Council: The
Duke answered courteously, and promised the Captain and the Soldiers to take
great care for their satisfaction. The same night the King gave order to his
Nephew the Grand Prior of France, to make a match at Tennis the next morning
with the Prince of Iainville, Son to the Duke of Guise, and to keep him in play
till he received further order from him. In the morning the King made himself
ready before day, under color of going personally to the Council, and
pretending he should stay there many hours, dismissed all his Servants, and in
his Closet there remained only Revol, the Secretary of State, Colonel Alfonso
Corso, and Monsieur de la Bastide, a Gascon Gentleman of very great courage,
who were all commanded by him to stay there: In his Chamber was St. Pris, one
of his old Gentlemen-Waiters; in the Wardrobe the Count de Terms, The French
Translation says, Grand Mastre de la Guard rob.
Great Chamberlain, who was a Kinsman of the Duke d' Espernon's; and in the
Ante-chamber two Pages, an Usher that waited at the Council-Chamber-door, and
Lognac with Eight of the Five and forty, to whom the King had with very great
promises signified his pleasure, and found them most ready to obey his command.
It was about break of day when the Counselors met, and there went into the
great Hall, Cardinal Gondy, the Cardinal of Vendosm, the Mareschals of Aumont,
and Retz, Monthelon the Guard des Seaux, Francois Sieur d' O, Nicholas Sieur de
Rambouillet, the Cardinal of Guise, the Archbishop of Lions, and at last
appeared the Duke of Guise, to whom Captain Larchant, stepping forward with a
greater number of Soldiers than the night before, presented him a Petition for
their pay, and with that excuse accompanied him, and brought him to the
Hall-door, where being entered, and the door shut, the Soldiers made a long
lane to the bottom of the stairs, seeming to stay there to wait for an answer
of their Petition, and at the same time Monsieur Grillon caused the Gates of
the Castle to be locked, whereupon many suspected what would be the event, and
Pelicart the Dukes Secretary writ a little Note in these words, Pelicart the
Dukes Secretary sends him a Note in a Handkerchief, to bid him save himself,
but it comes not to his hands.
My Lord, save your self, or you are dead: And having put it up into a
Handkerchief, gave it to one of the Dukes Pages, to carry it to the Keeper of
the Council-Chamber-door, pretending, that the Duke had forgot to take it, when
he went forth of his Chamber; but the Soldiers would not suffer the Page to
pass. In the mean time the Duke being come into the Council, and set near the
fire, fell into a little swoon, whether it were that he remembered himself of
the danger in which he was, being separated from all his dependents; or that
Nature (as it often happens) presaging his future misfortune, The Duke of Guise
swoonin theCouncil-Chamber: An ill omen of his approaching death.
did of her self give that show of resentment; or whether (as his ill-willers
said) it was because he had weakened himself too much that night with Madam de
Marmoutier, whom he extremely loved; but being quickly recovered, Secretary
Revol came into the Council out of the Ante-chamber, and told him, that the
King asked for him, and would have him come to him into the Closet: The Duke
arose, and having with his accustomed courtesy saluted all the Counselors,
entered into the Ante-chamber, which presently being locked after him, he saw
not that store of company which was wont to be there, but only those eight
Gentlemen of the Kings Guard, which were well known to him; and as went from
thence into the Closet, The Duke of Guise is slain as he lifts up the hanging
of the Closet-door.
the hanging at the door not being held up for him as it was wont to be, he
stretched forth his hand to lift it up, and at that instant St. Malin, one of
the eight, stabbed him into the neck with a Dagger, and the rest presently fell
upon him on every side; he striving to lay hold of his Sword, was never able to
draw it above half way out: and after many wounds given him in the head, and
all the other parts of his body, being at last struck by Lognac, (upon whom he
had most violently thrown himself) he fell down at the door of the Wardrobe,
and there he breathed forth the last groans of his life, The Cardinal of Guise
and Archbishop of Ly^^s are made prisoners, as also all the Lords and other
chief adherents of the Duke of Guise.
without being able to speak one word. The Cardinal of Guise, as soon as he
heard the noise in the Ante-chamber, was certain that they were about his
Brother; and rising up suddenly with the Archbishop of Lions, they ran both to
the Hall-door, to call for the help of their Servants; but having found the
door shut, they were staid by the Mareschals of Aumont and Retz; who giving
them notice that they were the Kings prisoners, led them up a little pair of
stairs into an upper room, where they were shut up and diligently guarded. At
the same time the Cardinal of Bourbon, by reason of his age and weakness being
yet in bed, was seized on in the Castle; as also Charles Prince of Iainville,
Charles of Lorain, Duke of Elbeuf, Charles of Savoy, Duke of Nemours, and Anne
d' Estre, Duchess of Nemours, and Mother to the Guises. Then having opened the
Castle-Gates, and redoubled their Guards very strongly, Monsieur de Richelieu,
The ordinary Judge of the Kings household, his command extends to all places
within six leagues of the Court.
Grand Provost de l' Hostel, went into the Town, where he took President Nully,
La Chapelle Martel, the Provost of Merchands of Paris, Compan and Cotteblanche,
Deputies for that City, the Lieutenant of the City of Amiens, the Count de
Brissac, the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin; and at last Pelicart the Duke of Guise's
Secretary was likewise taken, with all the Writings which belonged to his Lord;
among which, they found many Letters containing diverse practices within and
without the Kingdom, the accounts of moneys which he had received from Spain,
It was reported, that the Duke of Guise had received from Spain the sum of two
millions of Crowns.
which were reported to amount to the sum of Two millions of Ducats. The rest,
which the King desired to get into his hands, were either favorably hid by
their Landlords in whose houses they lay, or by their Friends in the City, or
saved themselves by several ways and means; so that they escaped the fury of
that present revenge. The body of the dead Duke being laid up in a Green Cloth,
was carried by the Door-keepers into the great Room beyond the Kings Closet,
and there it was laid till further orders. These businesses were performed
without much noise or tumult, every one being amazed and astonished at what was
done; and the most fierce and daring among those of the League, with down-cast
looks and dejected countenances, professed most perfect obedience and profound
submission.

The first thing the King did, was to send Revol the Secretary of State to the
Cardinal Legate, to give him notice of all that had passed, and to entreat him
to meet him at Mass: And at the same time he sent also to give account of it to
the Venetian Ambassador, showing how great a desire he had to be excused to the
Pope, and how much he esteemed the opinion of the Venetian Senate; and then
having walked a turn or two in the Closet, he thought it time to lay off the
Foxes outside, which for so many years he had worn with infinite patience
contrary to his own genius, and to take up again the generosity of the Lion,
which in his younger years he had showed in so many famous actions: And having
caused the doors to be opened, The King admitting every one into his presence,
speaks very resentingly.
and every one to be admitted into his Chamber, he said with a loud voice, That
from thence forward he would have his Subjects learn to know, and to obey him:
For since he had known how to resolve to punish the Heads of Insurrections,
much more resolutely would he proceed against the Members: That every one
therefore should from that time, forget stubbornness and rebellion: For he
would be a King, not only in words, but in deeds also; and it would be neither
a new nor difficult matter to handle his Sword again. So with an angry look,
and a sour countenance, he went down the stairs into his Mothers lodgings.

The Queen lying in her Bed, and very much troubled with her pain, had heard
the bustle that was above in the Kings lodgings, and had often asked what noise
it was; nor had any body courage enough to tell her the news. Now the King
appearing, he first asked her how she did; to which she having answered, that
she felt her self something better, he replied, And I also now find my self
much better; for this morning I have made my self King of France, The King says
to his Mother, Now I am King of France, for I have put to death the King of
Paris.
having put to death the King of Paris. To which words the Queen replied, You
have made the Duke of Guise be slain; but God grant you be not now made King of
nothing: You have cut out work enough; I know not whether or no you will be
able to make it up as well: Have you foreseen the mischiefs that are like to
follow? Look carefully to that: Two things are necessary, Speed and Resolution.
After which words, being exceedingly tormented with the Gout, and much
afflicted in mind, she held her peace; and the King went to meet the Legate,
that they might go to Mass together.

They met before Mass, and walking up and down, conferred a great while
together; in which discourse the King labored to persuade him that he had been
forced by necessity to take that resolution. He told him, that the ends,
practices, designs, leagues and negotiations of the Duke of Guise, were better
known to his wisdom than to others; That by them he had been brought to such
extremities, The King discourses a long while with the Cardinal of Moresini
about the Duke of Guises death.
that he could not save his own life and Crown, without his death; which as by
Gods assistance, it had been happily enough effected, amongst a thousand
unconquerable difficulties; so was it conformable to the Justice of all the
Laws in the World: That the heinous offenses were notorious, and manifest to
every one, which had been committed by him a natural Subject, against the
Majesty of the Royal Name, and against his lawful Prince, without any
reasonable occasion; which he had long born withal and dissembled, out of his
desire of the general quiet, and out of the gentleness of his own disposition:
But that after the last Pacification, in which he had profusely granted more to
the League, than they knew how either to demand or desire; notwithstanding the
Act of Oblivion of all things past, and the Prohibition of all suchlike
practices for the time to come, the Duke of Guise, persisting obstinately in
his first designs, violating so many Oaths, so many Promises, and so many
Sacraments reiterated among the holy Ceremonies, and in the presence of the
Assembly of the States, which represented the majestic face of the whole
French Nation, had both begun again, and continued the same things, leagues,
and intelligences with Foreign Princes, receiving of moneys and pensions from
Spain, agreements with the Duke of Savoy to the prejudice of the Crown,
factions, and practices with the States to tie up the liberty of his Prince, to
exclude the rightful Successors of the Crown, and by seditious wicked acts to
transfer the whole Government upon himself; by which things he made himself
guilty of High Treason, and had often manifestly incurred the crime of
Rebellion; insomuch as Justice neither could nor ought to forbear to punish
him, thereby once to remove the perpetual danger and unquietness in which he
kept the whole Kingdom and all good men: That the ordinary forms of judging and
sentencing could not possibly be observed: For no Prisons were secure, nor
Bonds sufficient to restrain his power; that no Officers would have dared to
examine him, no Judge to sentence him, nor no Power would have been able to
execute the sentence: That the King himself was Justice, and that he had so
many proofs as did more than abundantly condemn and convince him to be guilty:
That he was assured he had satisfied God's Justice, his own Conscience, and the
good and quietness of his Kingdom; and therefore he entreated the Legate to
represent the truth as it was unto the Pope, to the end, that the arts of his
Enemies might not by their false relations, transform the face of so necessary,
so just an action. These things were no news unto the Legate, being fully
informed of the reports already divulged; and the Kings reasons contained
peradventure what he thought himself: And because he firmly believed, that, the
Shepherd being struck, the flock would easily be scattered; the greater part of
the Heads being taken, and the rest much unprovided of strength and force to
resist the Kings power in so sudden an accident, not much valuing the popular
commotion which he foresaw might ensue, because he thought the seditions of the
people were like a fire of straw, which rises with great violence, but
presently cease, and is extinguished; he judged it not fit to alienate the
Kings mind from the Apostolic Sea, but to confirm and establish it to the
protection of Religion, and with a gentle rein, and moderate respect, to
withhold him from agreeing precipitately with the Hugonots: Wherefore, seeming
to believe that the Pope, as disinteressed and as a common Father, would kindly
give ear unto his reasons, he only exhorted him to show that his words and
excuses were true, by a firm and principal argument, which was, To persevere in
the resolution of protecting the Catholic Religion, and extinguishing Heresy;
that by that means he might persuade the Pope, and the whole World, that he had
been constrained by necessity, and not drawn by hatred to the Catholic party:
Whereas, not persisting in that safe, Christian determination, he should
authorize the false reports of the League, and give occasion to have it thought
that his inclination to favor the King of Navarre, and uphold the Hugonots,
had moved him to put to death the Head, and imprison the principal Members of
the Catholic party. This point seemed so important to the Legate, that he
enlarged himself long upon it, till the King gave assurance by an Oath, that if
the Pope would unite himself with him in mind and Forces, he would endeavor
the extirpation of Heresy with more fervor than ever, and that he was firmly
resolved to suffer only the Catholic Religion in his Kingdom: After which
asseveration, accompanied with effectual words and gestures, the Legate made no
scruple of treating with him with the same intimacy and confidence as before,
thinking he had obtained that point which would serve to satisfy the Pope,
since the King, though exasperated with the injuries of the League, did yet
confirm himself in his wonted obedience and veneration of Religion; and that
though the Duke of Guise were removed, he yet continued the Catholic Union,
and the determination of making War against the Hugonots: wherefore he gave the
King no doubtful hope, that the Pope would be satisfied with his reasons: Nor
did he think fit to pass any further at that meeting, but believing he should
have time enough afterward to speak about the enlargement of the Cardinals, he
would not (in a time of so great distraction, and in a conjuncture wherein the
Kings mind might waver) anticipate businesses unseasonably, but proceed with
well-pondered counsels, first settling the public, and then private interest.

But the King having entertained great hopes by the Legates words, and seeing
that he seemed not much troubled at the imprisonment of the Cardinals and other
Prelates, The King seeing that the Legate showed no trouble at the imprisonment
of the Cardinals, commands that Lewis of Lorain, Cardinal of Guise be also put
to death.
resolved to go forward, and to free himself from the Cardinal of Guise, a no
less fierce and terrible Head of the League than his Brother had been: To which
end, having found the Five and forty unwilling to imbrue their hands in the
blood of the Cardinal, he commanded du Gast, one of the Captains of his Guard,
that he should cause him to be put to death the next morning by his Soldiers.
So upon the Four and twentieth day, being Christmas-Eve in the morning, Captain
Gast being come into the Chamber, where he was with the Archbishop of Lions,
and where they had been all night in most terrible fear, confessing one
another, and watching in continual prayer, he bad the Archbishop come along
with him, for the King called for him: At which words, the Cardinal believing
that he was led to death, said to him, My Lord, think upon God: But the
Archbishop ghessing better than he, and not willing to fail in the same Office,
replied, Nay, rather do you think of him, my Lord; and going away, he was
brought into another room. A while after, du Gast returned, and told the
Cardinal that he had Commission to put him to death. To which he only answered,
Du Gast, a Captain of the Kings Guard, causes the Cardinal of Guise to be slain
by four Soldiers.
that he desired time to recommend his Soul to God: And having kneeled down, he
made a short Prayer; and covering his head with the lower part of his Robe, he
undauntedly bad him execute his Commission; when presently four Soldiers armed
with Partezans, slew him with many wounds; and his body was carried to the same
place where the Dukes Brother lay. The King doubted, that if the bodies were
seen, they might occasion some tumult; The bodies of the two Brothers were
burned in quick Lime, and their bones buried in an unknown place.
and therefore having by the counsel of his Physician caused them to be buried
in quick Lime, within a few hours all their flesh was consumed, and afterward
the bones were secretly interred in an unknown place; removing in that manner,
those tragical Objects, which use to work strange and sudden motions in the
common people: neither had he himself the heart to look upon them; nor did any
of the Court see them after their death, except those few who of necessity were
present; the King not desiring that so sad a spectacle should argue him guilty,
either of cruelty, or ambitious pomp of ostentation.

In this manner died Henry of Lorain, Duke of Guise; a Prince very remarkable
for the height of his Extraction, and for the merit and greatness of his
Ancestors; but much more conspicuous for the great eminency of his own worth:
The Duke of Guise's Virtues and Endowments, both in body* and mind
For he abounded with many excellent endowments; vivacity in comprehending,
wisdom in resolving, boldness in executing, courage in fight, magnanimity in
prosperity, constancy in adversity: popular in behavior, affable in
conversation, infinitely industrious in gaining the minds and affections of
every one, liberality worthy the most plentiful fortune, secrecy and policy
equal to the greatness of his designs; a spritely turning wit, readily stored
with determinations and resolves according as occasion required, and just
proper for the times in which he lived. To these qualities of the mind were
joined ornaments of the body no less commendable; patient sufferance of labor,
singular sobriety, a venerable, yet gracious aspect, a strong souldierly
constitution, agility of members so well disposed, that he was often seen to
swim in all his arms against the stream of a swift River; and wonderful
activity, whereby both in Wrestling, Tennis, and Military exercises, he did far
exceed the ability of all other men; and finally, such concording union in the
vigor of his mind and body, that he gained not only an universal admiration,
but extorted praises from the mouths of his very Enemies. Yet were not these
virtues without the defects of humane frailty: For doubleness and dissimulation
were in him turned into nature; and vainglory and ambition were so powerful
over the temperature of his disposition, that from the very beginning they made
him embrace the command of the Catholic Faction, and in process of time, from
the necessity of defending himself from the Kings subtle policies; put him
easily upon the precipitate design of attaining by most difficult hidden ways
to the succession of the Crown: and finally, the boldness of his own nature,
and his usual contempt of all others, brought him unadvisedly to utter ruin.

Lewis the Cardinal, though he came far short, imitated the courage and virtue
of his Brother: for he always showed a ready wit, a lively spirit, a constant
mind, and magnanimity equal to his birth; but the turbulency of his thoughts,
and precipitate boldness of his nature, took off very much from the opinion
which at first was conceived of him: for his too much ardour, his desire of new
things his despising of dangers, and his unquietness of mind, (which have some
kind of luster in a Military profession) seemed not to have the same decency in
a Spiritual life, and an Ecclesiastical habit.

The execution of the two Brothers being past, the others that had been
imprisoned were diversely kept and guarded. The Duke of Nemours either having
corrupted his Keepers with money, or taking opportunity by their negligence, or
by the Kings assent and connivance, (as many thought, because knowing his
nature, he believed him rather more apt to hinder and disturb, than to favor
and compose the affairs of the League) escaped the fourth day from the place,
where he was not very strictly looked to, and by unknown ways, with only one
Servant, went secretly toward Paris. Anne d' Este, Mother to him, and to the
dead Princes of Lorain, was also voluntarily freed by the King, having showed
her many demonstrations of compassion; whether he was moved with the pity of
her age, or that the splendor of her blood, or her being born of one of the
Daughters of King Lewis, made him give her the more respect. La Chapelle,
Compan, Cotteblanche, the Lieutenant of Amiens, the Count de Brissac, and the
Sieur de Bois-Dauphin, because they were in the number of the Deputies, (the
Assembly of the States having made an appeal, complaining that the Law of
Nations was violated, forasmuch as the Deputies were Ambassadors and Messengers
from their several Provinces) were set at liberty. The Archbishops of Lions
being often examined, would never answer; alleging, that as Primate of all
France he had no other Superior but the Catholic Church.
But the same happened not to the Archbishop of Lions, though he was one of the
Deputies, nay President of the Clergy: for the King often desired to have him
examined by the Archbishop of Beauvois, as a Peer of France, sometimes by the
Cardinal of Condy, sometimes by the Judges of the Great Council, he had always
refused to answer, lest he should prejudice the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
wherein, as Primate of all France, he said he had no other Superior but the
Apostolic Sea; though the King and his Ministers alleged that they impeached
him not as Archbishop of Lions, (though so in cases of Rebellion and Treason
the King pretended to have Jurisdiction over him) but as a Counselor of State:
for which cause the King being exasperated, and thinking that his refusal to
answer proceeded from a foul, guilty Conscience, would not consent to his
enlargement, though his Nephew the Baron de Lux took much pains about it, and
though the Deputies were much troubled at the Kings denial. Pelicart the
Secretary of the dead Duke, and some others of his nearest Servants, were often
examined; and having drawn as much from them as they could, by the Kings
command (who scorned to defile himself with mean blood) were set at liberty.
The Cardinal of Bourbon, the Prince of Iainville, now called Duke of Guise, the
Archbishop of Lions, and the Duke d'Elbeuf, are all put into the Castle of
Amboyse.
But the Cardinal of Bourbon, who wept like a Child for the death of the Lords
of Guise, and was much afflicted for his own misfortune; the Duke d' Elbeuf,
who by despair was fallen into an excess of melancholy, so that he would
neither endure to change his clothes, cut his hair, or use wonted decency about
his person; the Prince of Iainville, who by the death of his Father began to be
called Duke of Guise; together with the Archbishop of Lions, were (after not
many days) brought by the King himself to the Castle of Amboyse, and there,
under the command of Captain du Gast, were left in several Lodgings, but with a
good Garrison, and strict order to keep them fast.

Charles Duke of May^nne, third Brother to the Guises, being advertised of his
Brothers death, flees from Lions.
At the very instant of the Cardinals death, Colonel Alfonso Corso went away
post to Lions, where Charles Duke of Mayenne the third Brother of the Guises
stayed, being appointed for the War in Dauphine, with order to take him there
upon the sudden, and make him prisoner: but he was prevented by Camillo
Tolomei, and the Sieur de Chaseron, who being gone secretly from Blois the same
day the Duke was killed, and got unknown to Orleans, took the way toward Lions
with infinite speed; so that upon Christmas Day in the evening, about Sunset,
the Duke left the City to retire to Dijon, a place under his Government, at the
same time the Colonel entered the City by another Gate, to execute the
Commission he had received; and so of the three Brothers he escaped free from
danger, into whose valor and wisdom all the foundations and hopes of the
League were now reduced.

The death of the Queen Mother shut up the last act of the Tragedy of Blois,
who in the 70th year of her age having been long afflicted with the Gout, and
at last oppressed with a slow Fever, and extreme abundance of Catharrs,
departed this life upon the fifth day of January 1589. being the Eve of the
Epiphany of our Lord, a day which was wont to be celebrated with great joy by
the Court, 1589.
Katherine de Medic^s Wife to Henry the Second, died on Twelfth-Eve, in the 70
year of her age, thirty whereof she spent in the Regency, and in the management
of the greatest affairs and troubles of the Kingdom of France^
and the whole Kingdom of France. The qualities of this Lady, conspicuous for
the spacious course of thirty years, and famous through all Europe, may better
be comprehended by the context of things that have been related, than described
by any Pen, or represented in a few words. For her prudence always abounding
with fitting determinations to remedy the sudden chances of Fortune, and to
oppose the machinations of humane wickedness, (wherewith in the minority of her
Sons she managed the weight of so many Civil Wars, contending at once with the
effects of Religion, with the contumacy of her Subjects, with the necessities
of the Treasury, with the dissimulations of the Great Ones, and with the
dreadful engines raised by Ambition) is rather to be admired distinctly in
every particular action, than confusedly dead-coloured in a general draught of
all her virtues. The constancy and greatness of courage wherewith she, a Woman,
and a Stranger, durst against so potent Competitors, aspire to the whole weight
of Government; having aspired, compass it; and having compassed, maintain it
against the blows of art and fortune, was much more like the generosity and
courage of a man versed and hardened in the affairs of the world, than of a
woman accustomed to the delicacies of the Court, and kept so low during the
life of her Husband. But the patience, dexterity, sufferance and moderation,
with which arts in the suspicion which her Son (after so many proofs) had
conceived of her, she knew still how to maintain the authority of Government in
her self, (insomuch, as without her counsel and consent he durst not resolve of
those very things wherein he was jealous of her) was as it were the highest
pitch and most eminent proof of her great worth. To these virtues, which appear
plainly in the course of her actions here related, were added many other
endowments, wherewith banishing the frailties and imperfections of the Female
Sex, she became always Mistress of those passions which use to make the
brightest lights of humane prudence wander from the right path of life; for in
her were a most elegant wit, royal magnificence, popular courtesy, a powerful
manner of speaking, an effectual inclination, liberal and favorable to the
good, a most bitter hatred and perpetual ill will to the bad, and a
temperature, never excessively interessed in favoring and advancing her
dependents. Yet could she never do so much, but that being an Italian, her
virtue was despised by the French pride, and those that had a desire to disturb
the Kingdom hated her mortally as contrary to their designs; wherefore the
Hugonots in particular, both in her lifetime, and after her death, blasted and
tore her Name with poisonous Libels, and with malicious Narrations and
Execrations: and a certain Writer (who deserves rather the name of a Satyrist
than a Historian) has labored to make her actions appear very different from
the truth; attributing often either ignorantly or maliciously the causes of her
determinations to a perversity of nature, and an excessive appetite to govern;
abasing and diminishing the glory of those effects which in the midst of so
certain dangers did more than once securely produce the safety, and divert the
overthrow of the Kingdom. Not but among so many excellent virtues, some weeds
of worldly imperfections did also spring up: for she was esteemed of a most
deceitful Faith, a condition common enough in all times, but very peculiar to
that age; greedy, or rather prodigal of humane blood, much more than became the
tenderness of the Female Sex: and it appeared in many occasions, that to attain
her own ends (though good) she thought no means unfit which seemed conducing to
her designs, though of themselves they were unjust and perfidious. But the
eminence of so many other virtues may certainly, to reasonable Judges, cover
many of those defects which were produced by the urgency and necessity of
affairs.

The King was present with demonstrations of extreme griefs, at the last gasps
of her life, which ended very Christianly, and her death was honored with his
tears, and with exceeding great lamentations by the whole Court, though the
present distractions did in the hasty Funeral of the Mother very much hinder
the wonted Magnificence of the Son. Her Heirs were Chrestienne de Lorain, Wife
to Ferdinando Grand Duke of Thuscany, and Charles Grand Prior of France,
Bastard-Son to Charles the Ninth, who was therefore called the Count of
Auvergne; and to her Servants she left many Legacies, but the unquietness of
the times that followed, and some debts contracted by her liberality* did by
diverse ways swallow up in great part both the Inheritance and the Legacies.

The End of the Ninth BOOK.
1588.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The TENTH
BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
IN the Tenth Book are related the Insurrections caused by the death of the
Cardinal and Duke of Guise; the Union renewed in Paris, and many other Cities
of the Kingdom: The Authority of command, and Title of Lieutenant General of
the Crown given to the Duke of Mayenne. The King commands process to be made
against the actions of the dead Princes; he continues the States, but breaks
them up at last, the Deputies being variously inclined. The King strives to
appease the Pope, who is highly offended at the Cardinal of Guise's death: He
dispatcheth the Bishop of Man's to Rome for that purpose; but the Pope persists,
and makes grievous complaints in the Consistory: The King endeavors to make
peace with the Duke of Mayenne; but neither does that design take effect: The
Duke goes to Paris, and begins several ways to take up Arms; he establishes the
General Council of the League, and the particular one of the Sixteen at Paris:
He dispatches Ministers to Rome to confirm the Popes inclination; who afterward
publishes a Monitory against the King of France, and foments the League
exceedingly. The King being necessitated to make War, agrees with the King of
Navarre, and concludes a Truce with him: The Spanish Ambassador leaves the
Court, and goes to reside in Paris with the Heads of the League; the Popes
Legate departs also, and not having been able to persuade the Duke of Mayenne to
consent to peace, goes out of the Kingdom. The war is begun furiously in every
place. The Duke of Montpensier defeats the Gautiers in Normandy. The Kings of
France and Navarre meet in the City of Tours. The Duke of Mayenne takes the
Duke of Vendosm, and the Count de Brienne prisoner; he assaults the Kings
Infantry in the Fauxbourgs of Tours, and takes and possesses himself of many
Posts. The King of Navarre comes up with his Army, and the Duke going away,
takes many places in his march toward Normandy. The Duke of Aumale besieges
Senlis, fights with the Duke of Longueville and Sieur de la Noue, and loses the
day. The Duke of Mayenne to recover this loss marches toward Paris. The King
with his Army follows the same way, takes Gergeau, Piviers, 1589.
Chartres, Estampes, Montereau, Poissy, and other places: he joins with the
Duke of Montpensier. The Swisses and Germans raised for his assistance, arrive;
He takes the adjacent Towns, and lays siege to Paris; where the Duke of
Mayenne and the People (having but small hopes to defend themselves) resolve to
stand it out to the utmost. Friar Jaques Clement a Dominican goes out of the
City, is brought into the King's Chamber, and stabs him into the belly with a
knife; the King dying, declares the King of Navarre his lawful successor, and
persuades him to turn Catholic. The Army, and particularly the Nobility, waver
in their resolutions, at last they resolve to acknowledge the King of Navarre,
provided Religion might be secured. He makes them a promise in writing to
embrace the Roman-Catholique-Faith. He rises from Paris by reason of the
wasting of his Army, makes show as if he would besiege Rouen, and goes to
Diepe. The Duke of Mayenne much increased in strength follows him; they fight
at Pollet, at Arques, and under the Walls of Diepe. Supplies come to the King
from many parts. The Duke of Mayenne marches off and goes into Picardy; the
King enlarges himself toward the Isle of France: He takes and sacks the
suburbs of Paris, goes directly to Tours, and by the way seizes upon many
places: He enters into that City; is received with great pomp; sits in the
Parliament; excuses to the Nobility his delay of changing his Religion; Marches
into lower Normandy, and reduces all that Province into his power.

AFter the bloody Tragedy which ended the year 1588, followed a dreadful,
terrible alteration of the Scene: for the news of the death of the Lords of
Guise being come the same day to Orleans, the next to Paris, and from hand to
hand into all parts of the Kingdom, it is not possible to believe how much it
troubled and disturbed the minds, not only of the common people (inclined by
nature and custom to embrace all emergent occasions of change) but of all
degrees, and all qualities of persons; and, which seemed very strange, of many
also, who, in times past, had been esteemed prudent, moderate men. This so
great perturbation of men's minds, produced in their first fury rash precipitate
effects: for the City of Orleans, which for a long time before had held the
party of the League, and moreover had been wont, in all the course of the Civil
Wars, to be first up in Arms, having heard of the Duke of Guise's death, and
the imprisonment of all the rest, by them who fleeing hastily from Blois, were
gotten thither at the first stage, and particularly by the Sieur de Rossieuz
one of the Counselors of the League; without any determinate resolution, and
without staying for a Head to order them, they took Arms openly the very same
night; and having driven away or suppressed the King's Magistrates, who
endeavored to hinder the Insurrection, they went all confusedly to assault the
Fortress, in which Monsieur d' Entraques his Lieutenant was for the King, with
a very few Soldiers, and (as in a sudden accident) in want of all those things
which are necessary to make good a place. The Citizens of Chartres did the
same, though in the late Commotions it had been of the King's party; and having
taken Arms, thrust out all that favored the King's name, or that would have
opposed the Insurrection, and began to govern it self without the consent of
the Magistrates. But the news being come to Paris upon Christmas-eve, at the
shutting in of the day, brought first by a Post dispatched from Don Bernardino
Mendozza, and afterward by Captain Hippolito Zanzala of Ferrara, one of the
Captains entertained by the Duke of Guise, the Shops were hastily shut up, and
the multitude in their wonted tumult, ran some to the Hostel de Guise, where
were the Dutchesses of Guise and Montpensier, the Dukes Wife and Sister, The
Insurrection of the Parisians, at the news of the Duke of Guise's death.
and some to the City Gates to look for more certain news, and more distinct
particulars of the business; which when they had learned by the arrival of
those, who, having fled from Blois, came all running without stay to Paris; the
people sometimes with howlings, sometimes with lamentations, sometimes with
exceeding fierce cries, wavered in their resolutions, there not being yet any
one ready to govern the violence, and direct the determinations of the confused
giddy multitude: For the Duchess of Guise, with a Womanish softness, was all
in tears; and the Duchess of Montpensier, a Lady of a haughty mind, and full
of bold manly spirits (who had torn the Kings name and credit more with her
Tongue, than her Brothers had done with their Swords, and all their practices)
being from her birth lame of one foot, and subject to frequent infirmities, was
then lying in her bed, and had already been indisposed for many days:
Wherefore the Council of the League being come together in the midst of the
tumultuous people, resolved to send for Charles of Lorain, Duke of Aumale, who
fleeing from the States at Blois, out of a certain presaging fear, had staid in
Paris, and that very day was retired to his devotions to the Covent of
Carthusians hard by the City; at whose arrival, though late at night, all the
multitude ran to his house, but only spent the time in bewailings and
lamentations.

The next day, the whole City being in grief, they dispatched Divine Service
quickly, without their wonted Music and Singing, and from the Churches being
come to the Townhouse, the same Council met again there; at which were present
the most noted Citizens, and also many of the Magistrates; some drawn by an
anxious curiosity, some driven by the fear of being torn in pieces by the fury
of the multitude, and some came with a desire to find remedy against the
unbridled rashness of the common people. But it was all in vain: For in stead
of Counsels, there being nothing heard but bitter Invectives, and Injurious
Threats against the King's name, they resolved in the first place, that till a
further determination, the Duke of Aumale should be declared Governor of the
City, and that under his obedience they should from new advertisements, expect
new occasion of taking another resolution: Yet he not having power to do or
determine any thing without the Council of Sixteen, and because every one cried
out tumultuously, that the City ought to be kept from the machinations and
violences of the Hugonots and Politics, who upon occasion of the slaughter of
Blois, might plot against the general peace and safety; Charles of Lorain, Duke
of Aumale, being made Governor of Paris by the City, arms the people, and
orders them regularly under Commanders*

The Preachers detracting from the King, celebrate the Duke of Guise his
Martyrdom with exceeding high praises.


the Duke having taken the name and authority of Governor, put the people in
Arms, and under their Commanders distributed them to the keeping of the
principal places, taking care that the goods and houses of the Citizens might
not be pillaged by the Seditious Rabble.

The same evening, and the next day, the Preachers thundered from their Pulpits
the praises of the Duke of Guise's Martyrdom, and detestations of that
slaughter, most cruelly committed by the King; in such manner, that not only
the minds of the baser people, but also of the most noted Citizens, were won
by their persuasions, and kindled with an infinite desire to take revenge:
Which boldness both in the Preachers and People was doubled, when they heard
the news of the Cardinals death also, which brought them to the highest pitch
of rage and madness; so that upon the Eight and twentieth of December, being
Innocents day, the Council of Sixteen caused a Writing to be presented to the
College of Divines called the Sorbonne, in the name of the Provost and
Eschevins of the City, wherein relating how much the Lords of Guise deserved of
the Catholic Church, and their being murdered by the King as Protectors of the
faith, they demanded whether he might not lawfully be said to have forfeited
his Crown; and whether it were not lawful for his Subjects (notwithstanding
their Oath of Allegiance) to withdraw their obedience from him, as an Hypocrite
Prince, an open favourer of Heresy, and a persecutor of the holy Church, who
had bloodied his hands in the sacred Order and eminent Person of a Cardinal.
The College of Sorbonne being assembled, there was no great debate about the
matter: For though Iehan Fabray, Dean of the College, a man of profound
Learning, followed by Robert Vauvarrin and Dennis Sorbin, two of the Senior
Doctors, argued, that though it were true, that the business had passed as the
Writing related (which was doubtful) yet neither for all that could the King be
said to have forfeited the Kingdom, nor was it lawful for his People to
withdraw their obedience from him; so great nevertheless was the ardour of the
younger men, The College of Sorbonne declares Henry the Third to have
forfeited his Right to the Crown, and his Subjects free from their Oath of
Allegiance.
excited by the Preachings of Guilliaume Roze Bishop of Senlis, of the Curats
of St. Paul, and St. Eustache, of Iehan Vincestre, John Hamilton, Father Jacques
Commolet, a Jesuit, Father Bernard, a Fuillant, and of Father Francois de
Feu-ardant, a Franciscan; that they unanimously concurred to determine both the
points, and with concurring votes declared, That the King had forfeited his
right to the Crown, and that his subjects not only might, but ought to cast
off their obedience; and that, providing for the Government, they justly had
power to make confederacies, to impose Subsidies, raise Soldiers, dispose of
the Revenues of the Crown, and to do all other things which were opportune or
convenient for the defense of Religion, and their own security. They added,
with the same universal consent, that the Decree of this Declaration should be
sent to the Pope, that he might confirm it, and make it so authentic, that the
validity of it might not at all be called in question for the time to come;
after which Declaration, the people as it were loosened from the bonds of
obedience, and having broken the rein of Modesty, ran violently to the breaking
down of the King's Arms and Statues, wheresoever they found them, The King's
Arms and Statues are thrown down, the Navarrists and Politics persecuted and
slain.
and began furiously to seek out all those which could be accounted dependents
of his party, by them called Narvarrists and Politics* which insolent
tumultuous search forced many quiet men, and such as were averse from those
turbulent ways, to leave their houses to save their lives; many others were
fain to compound with money; and some (notwithstanding the Duke of Aumale took
great pains to prevent it) lost their lives unfortunately in the business:
while which things were done with infinite disorder, all the streets were full
of Arms, noises, and confusions; and the meanest people raging against the
marks of Royalty, committed scandalous and intolerable insolences: all
Churches echoed with voices of the Preachers, who aggravated the Parricide
committed by Henry of Valois, no longer called King of France, but the
Heretic, Tyrant, and persecutor of the holy Church; and all places were full
of Libels, both in Verse and Prose, which contained and amplified the same
things several ways.

But the Council of Sixteen desiring to reduce the City totally into their
power, and seeing the Parliament divided, part being inclined to follow the
popular commotions, part disposed to persevere in their obedience to the King,
determined, that the Presidents and Counselors which held the King's party,
should, as enemies to the public good, and adherents to the Tyrant, be not
only removed from their Offices, but also shut up close prisoners in the
Bastille; foreseeing well, that if they continued at liberty, and had power to
manage their affairs, it would infinitely cross their designs, and with very
great danger interrupt the union and concord of the other Citizens. Wherefore,
having resolved among themselves what was to be done, and brought all the Heads
of the people to their opinion, upon the Sixteenth of January, they, with a
great number of armed men, beset the Palace-Hall, where, according to the
custom, the Counselors of Parliament were met together, and having made good
all the passages, and set guards at every door, they called forth Achille de
Harlay first President of the Parliament, and all the rest by name, whom they
had determined to lay hold on, who being come readily forth to know what they
would have with them, already presaging very well what would come to pass, the
Sieur de Bussy, All the Counselors of Parliament and Officers who adhered to
the King are imprisoned in the Bastille.
deputed to execute that business, gave them order to follow him; which
command, grounded rather upon force than reason, being by them obeyed without
resistance, they were led thorough the cries and injurious usage of the people,
to the Bastille; only Pierre Segiver, and Jacques Auguste de Thou, by the help
of fortune secretly saved themselves; who depending upon the King's party, had
labored stoutly to keep the Parliament from meddling in the Insurrection. The
favorers of the League being encouraged, and the opposers of it terrified by
this vehement resolution, the remaining Presidents and Counselors chose
Barnabe Brisson first President and Head of the Parliament, a man of deep
learning and singular eloquence, but of a violent various inclination, and
therefore very subject to alter his opinions easily; and afterward the
Parliament being solemnly assembled to the number of 160, they, with a public
Declaration assented to the deposing of the King, and to the freeing of the
City; and substituted new men in the places of those whom they had put out and
imprisoned. Nor did the business end there; but to give form to their
proceedings, the Parliament being assembled again upon the Thirtieth day of
January, they made an ample Decree to unite and combine themselves for the
defense of the Catholic Religion, A Decree is made to combine themselves for
the defense of Religion, and it is called the Holy Union.
the safety of Paris, and those other Cities that should enter into that
League, to oppose the power of those, who having violated the public Faith,
had, in the Congregation of the States, taken away the lives of the Catholic
Princes, and defenders of the holy Church, to take just revenge for their
murder, and do justice to those that were injured, and finally to defend the
Liberty and Dignity of the States of France against all persons whatsoever,
without exception: which Decree was subscribed and sworn to by the Presidents
and Counselors of the Parliament, by the Duke of Aumale Governor, the Prevost
des Marchands, the Eschevins of the City, and afterward by a great number, as
well of the Gentry and Clergy, as of the common people; and this confederacy,
with the wonted name and title of the League, was also called the Holy-Vnion.
After this Decree, Madam de Guise, the late Duke's Wife came to the Parliament;
The Duchess of Guise comes to the Parliament and demands justice; they
determine to do it her, and choose those that should form the Process.
where, having in her wonted form made her complaint, and demanded Justice for
the Murder committed upon her Husband, and the Cardinal her Brother-in-law,
reckoning up all the services which the House of Guise had done to the
Catholic Religion and to the Crown; and exaggerating the cruelty of that
slaughter, under the Public Faith, and in the presence of the States General
of the Kingdom: The Parliament (all the several Chambers being solemnly
assembled) decreed, that Justice should be done her; and chose two Counselors,
who with the public solemnities should form the Process; forbidding all other
to meddle about taking any information in that business, which they added,
because they knew that there was diligent inquiry made by the King's order
concerning those things which had been done by the Princes of Lorain in their
lifetime.

At the Insurrection of the Parliament and City of Paris, as at a Beacon or
signal of War, the greatest Cities, and most warlike people of France took arms
likewise, and rose with a very great and universal commotion; for as the news
of the death of the Princes of Lorain, and of the resolutions of the Parisians
was divulged from hand to hand, so like a dangerous fire spreading all abroad,
did this popular tumult successively dilate it self, in such manner, that not
only Orleans, and Chartres, which had taken Arms from the beginning, Places
and Cities which rise and unite themselves with the Parisians.
but Meaux, Crespy, the Castle of Pierre-font, Corbeil, Melun, St Denis,
Pontoyse, Senlis, Creil, Clairmont, and all the Towns about the Isle of France
joined themselves to the Union of the Parisians; with the same inclination
revolted the City of Rouen, with the greater part of the Parliament of
Normandy, Louviers, Mante, Vernon, Lisieux, Ponteau-de-Mer, Havre de Grace,
Honfleur, Eureux, Fo^geres, Falaise, Argentan, Montivilliers, Dreux, and except
Caen, and the Country of Constantine, all the Cities and strong places of that
rich spacious Province. Picardy followed the same example; where Amiens,
Cambray, Abbeville, Soissons, Laon, and many other places sided with the Union.
Champagne, a Province governed by the Duke of Guise did the like; for Rheims,
Troy, Vitry, Chasteau-Thierry, and all the other Towns except Chalon, took
part with the League without any demur. Nor were men's minds any quieter, or the
people more moderate in Bourgongne; for Dijon with the Parliament of that
Province, Mascon, Lux, and many other Towns betook themselves to the same
party. The like did the Parliament of Aix, the head of Provence, which was
followed by Marseilles, Carcasonne, and Narbonne, as also by the City of
Bourges (where the Law is chiefly studied) Man's, a principal Town in the
Confines of Anjou, and many other lesser Villages. In Rather in Langued^^.
Gascogne, the Parliament and City of Toulouse took Arms violently, to which
many other places joined themselves. In Auvergne the Count de Randan, with
Clairmont, Montferrant, St Porcin, Isoire, and other Towns and Fortresses
followed likewise the party of the Union. In Bretagne the Duke de Mercoeur
Governor thereof, forgetting that he was Brother-in-Law to the King, and by him
enriched, exalted, and put into that Government, being drawn, not only by the
interests of his Family, but his own private pretensions, which by his Wife he
had unto that Province, took part with the League; Nantes, a City of great
consequence, revolting with him, as also Vannes, Quimberlay, and in a manner
all that Province full of Nobility and riches. In Guienne the tumult was
exceeding high, at Bourdeaux, a very great City, where the Governor of the
Province resides, and which is the seat of the Parliament: But the Marshall de
Matignon, who held that Government in the King's name, with his wonted courage,
and prompt resolution, made so brave an opposition, that having driven out the
seditious, and got the upper hand with little blood, he retained it happily at
the King's devotion: Yet, Again, Perigueux, and many other Towns of that
Province went over to the League. The City of Lions was the last that rose, by
reason of Colonel Alfonso Corso his resistance, and the opposition of the
Swisse and Italian Merchants: But the great abundance of common people got the
best at last, so that they generally resolved to turn to the party of the
Union, and to call the Duke of Nemours, who had escaped from prison at Blois,
and had had that Government conferred upon him by the King to gratify the Duke
of Guise a while before his death.

The example of the Cities and common people was followed by no small number of
the Nobility in the several Provinces, drawing with them not only the Train of
their Tenants and Peasants, but also many Castles and strong Holds, in which,
both for their security and decency, the Gentry use to inhabit in all parts of
France: A description of the miserable condition that France fell into by the
means of the Duke of Guise his death
So that the party of the League was not only grown very great, by the
conjunction of the principal Cities, but was also strengthened by the abetting
of the Nobility, in whom, for the most part, the Forces of that Crown consist.
By the commotion of this Universal Insurrection (as it were miraculously
foreseen and foretold by the Queen Mother upon her Deathbed) all the Provinces
of the Kingdom were divided and dismembered, in such fort, that not only Cities
were against Cities, and Castles against Castles; but also Lords, Gentlemen,
and meaner persons against one another, became enemies in such a furious
hostile manner, that treading down the Laws, breaking the bond of common
charity, and driving away the Magistrates from all places, they of themselves,
without expecting order from their superiors, began a most fatal, cruel Civil
War, with fire, slaughter, blood, and rapine: For neither the Commotions of the
Cities, nor the inclinations of this or that particular man being yet know,
every one mingling his private interests and revenges in the public
combustions, did, after their own wills, fortify places that were quitted,
seize upon those already fortified, take rich men prisoners, lay wait for the
lives of their adversaries, pillage the goods of the Country people, rob upon
the highways; and with horrible unheard of wickedness, and without fear of
Justice or Form of Government, filled every thing with terror, mourning and
confusion; so that all commerce being broken of it self, the Ways beset, the
Gentry and Commons armed, and even the very Clergy encompassed with Guards and
Weapons, sometimes under the names of Hugonots and Catholics, The Names which
the Factions gave one another.
sometimes of Royallists and Leaguers, sometimes of the Holy Union and Bands
Blanckes.
White Forces, sometimes of Navarrists and Lorains, they were as with a fatal
general frenzy bent upon the destruction of their common Country.

But the King, to whom the news of these Insurrections were brought every hour
from all parts, was exceeding sollicitous to appease the Deputies, and to show
them the necessity he had to free himself of the Lords of the House of Lorain:
For he thought, that they, returning into their own Countries, with the
impression of his reasons, might help very much to settle those minds that
were violently stirred up, and to restore their Cities unto the wonted
obedience; and therefore did very carefully cause inquisition to be made
concerning the intelligences held by the Lords of Guise, both within and
without the Kingdom, about the pensions which they had received from Spain, and
particularly, that they had consented to the conspiracy of the Duke of Savoy,
whereby he had possessed himself of the Marquesate of Saluzzo (though beyond
the Alps) a most important member of the Crown; and in this they proceeded, by
the Writings, Letters and Accounts, that had been found, and the depositions of
prisoners; Monsieur de Monthelon Guard de Seaux, and two Masters of the
Requests, assisting to form the Process and examine Witnesses.

But the secret opinions of the States were diverse, though they all resulted to
the same end: For those who before held for the King, being confirmed and
encouraged by what had passed, stood more boldly and stoutly for the Royal
Authority, and that all things might be concluded according to his intentions:
But those that were for the League, and that depended upon the House of Guise,
being in fear for themselves, sought all manner of means, to the end, that the
Congregation of the States breaking up of any fashion, they might have leave to
depart freely; having resolved afterward to dispose of themselves according to
their own inclinations, notwithstanding all that should be determined in the
Assembly, as things extorted violently by fear and force: Which though the King
perceived by more signs than one, and knew clearly, that every one, making a
fair show, endeavored to withdraw himself and depart; yet desiring to justify
his actions, he again confirmed the Edict of the Union in the States, hoping to
take away all suspicion from the Legate, who did very much press for that
Declaration, and from his Catholic Subjects, of his adhering to the Hugonots,
or of laboring to procure the King of Navarr's succession, whilst he was
disobedient to the Roman Catholic Church. Afterward the Edicts being
confirmed which had been made for the moderation of Taxes, and lessening the
number of Offices, in all other things he kept on the same way, being diligent
to show, that he had done all of his own accord, and not as having been
constrained by the Duke of Guise. Finally, many Decrees were made about the
form of Judicature, and other matters touching the ease and relief of the
People; and in this manner the States concluded; the most suspected of them,
with deep dissimulation striving (in emulation of one another) to show
themselves the King's dependents, and affectionate to his service: Among which,
were the Count de Bris^ao, the Sieur de Bois Dauphin, Bernard the Advocate, and
others, who, as soon as they were gone from Blois, joined again unto the party
of the League.

The King, besides the frequent news of so many Insurrections, was infinitely
troubled at the loss of Orleans; for he took great thought about it, and had
labored with all possible diligence to keep it, as a City that was near unto
him, seated upon the great road of Paris, and very convenient to make the seat
of the War: And though presently after the death of the Lords of Guise, he had
sent thither first Monsieur de Dunes, Brother to Monsieur d' Entraques, and
then the Marshall d' Aumont, with some of the Soldiers of his own Guard, yet
Claude de Lorain, Knight of Jerusalem, Brother to the Duke of Aumale* being
come to assist the People with supplies sent by the Parisians, the obstinacy of
their sollicitousness in assaulting it, was so great, and so great the want of
Ammunition, and other things necessary to defend it, that in the end of
January, the Marshall d' Aumont marching away with Four hundred men, gave way,
that some few who remained should render it up unto the people; and so that
City was left totally in the power of the League.

But above all things, the means of appeasing the Pope kept the King in
greatest perplexity: for though the Legate, knowing all things that had passed
in France, showed himself from the beginning very favorable to his party, and
ready to represent what had been done advantageously for him at Rome; yet was
he not certain what the Pope would think of it, being far from the place, and
perchance having received an ill impression, both by the relations of the
League, and the ill Offices of the Spaniards: Wherefore presently after the
Cardinal of Guise's death, he dispatched most particular informations to Iehan
de Vivonne, Marquess of Pisani, his Ambassador at Rome, that he might have
wherewithal to answer those things which might be objected, and wherewithal to
make good his reasons; and having before sent Girolamo Gondi, a Florentine to
the Pope, to entreat him to make the Cardinal of Guise his Legate at Avignon,
now changing his Commission* he gave him order to take Post, and make all
possible haste to Rome, to excuse the death of the same Cardinal unto the Pope,
and if need were, to intercede for his absolution for it.

But the Pope having received the news of the Duke's death first, seemed to
make no great reckoning of it; Sixtus 5. being told of the Cardinal of Guise's
death, is highly offended and answers the King', Ambassadors, very sharply, who
came to excuse it to him.
and turning to the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, who was there present, he said, See
what becomes of such men as commit errors, and afterward know not how to look
to themselves. But four days after, the news being arrived of the Cardinals
death, and the imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and Archbishop of
Lions; being a man of a most fierce, precipitate nature, he broke forth into so
great wrath, that thundering on every side, he caused the Ambassadors to be
called before him, to whom with very sharp words he told the news he had
received, complaining beyond measure of the King, That he had had the boldness,
contrary to the Ecclesiastical Immunities, and contrary to the Privileges of
the dignity of Cardinal, and contrary to all laws, Divine and Humane, to put a
Cardinal to death, and imprison closely two most principal Prelates; at the
same time highly threatening the Cardinal-Legat, who being present, had not
withheld the King from so heinous an offense. The Marquess de Pisani, and
Girolamo Gondi (who was then arrived) with modest and obsequious, but yet
constant and grave discourses, laid open all the King's reasons, the crime of
High Treason which the Cardinal of Guise had incurred, and whereof the Cardinal
of Bourbon and Archbishop of Lions were likewise guilty; their forces and
power, whereby the King was so far disabled to punish them with the wonted
forms in a judiciary way, that they a few months before had unworthily driven
him out of his own Palace, and made him fly unknown from the City of Paris to
save his life: the state of affairs brought to such extremities by the
conspiracies managed by the Brothers of Lorain in the States, that unless the
King, as a Ward, would be brought into subjection, or deprived of his Crown, he
was necessitated to cause them to be punished, though without form of judgment,
yet not without most apparent reason, their crimes being most heinous and
manifest, which he as King and Head of Justice had power to judge and punish in
any manner whatsoever: That if nothing else, the very contempt they had shown
of Religion, in making use of so many solemn Oaths, and Sacraments of the holy
Church as means to deceive him, had made them unworthy of the protection of his
Holiness, who might easily inform and certify himself, by many proofs, that it
was not to protect and defend the Catholic Faith (which no man could hold in
greater veneration than the King) but for their own ambition, and to usurp the
Kingdom from the lawful Heirs, they had so often, with the loss of so many men's
lives, disturbed and distracted the whole Kingdom: Finally, they added, that
the King was an obedient Son of the Church, desirous to satisfy the Pope in
all things possible, and that therefore he had sent Girolamo Gondi to entreat
and beseech his Holiness to grant him his blessing, in token that he was
appeased and pacified. The Pope, neither persuaded nor appeased, replied, that
Girolamo Gondi had been dispatched about another business, and that he knew it
very well; that the King was so far from submitting to his obedience, and suing
for absolution, that persevering yet in his sin, he still kept prisoners the
two chief Prelates in all France, who were immediately under the Apostolic
See, and that if the Cardinal of Guise and the rest had offended so much, as
the Ambassadors reported, the King might have demanded Justice from him to whom
it belonged to judge them, and that he should have known very well how to
administer it: And because the Ambassadors answered, that they were
Ambassadors, and public persons, and therefore ought to be believed in
whatsoever they represented touching the King's desire, and the Blessing which
they demanded in his name: The Pope replied, that they were Ambassadors to
treat of matters that concerned the affairs of the Kingdom of France; but that
Contrition and Confession in Foro Conscientiae were to go before absolution;
and that therefore it was needful to send an especial Embassy, and a person
expressly for that purpose; that in token of his Repentance he ought first to
set at liberty the Prelates that were in Prison; that the King and the
Ambassadors sought to deceive him, but they should be assured they had not to
do with a young Novice, but one, who, even with the shedding of his blood, was
ready to uphold the dignity of the Holy-Chair; and having with sharp words, and
sharper looks dismissed them, he caused the Consistory to be called the next
morning, in which, with a vehement Oration, and full of resentment, he accused
the King in presence of the Cardinals* reprehended those who excused and
defended him, Sixtus Quintus chooses a congregation of Cardinals, who were to
consult about the affairs of France.
and threatened severely to punish Cardinal Moresini, who forgetting the person
he represented, had, without any sense of the affront, suffered the Liberty and
Dignity of the Holy-Church to be trampled under foot: then electing a certain
number of Cardinals, who were to consult about those matters that appertained
to the Kingdom of France, the chief whereof were the Cardinals, Serbeloni,
Fachine^to, Lancellotto, Castagna, and Sancta Severina, he set the business in
a high reputation, and filled the whole World, with exceeding great expectation.

In the mean time the affairs of the League gathered strength, and took form in
France; for the Duke of Mayenne being departed secretly from Lions the same
night that he heard the news of his Brother's death, doubting (as it was true)
that the King had taken order, and would send to lay hold on him, came much
perplexed and uncertain of his condition into the Province of Bourgongne, which
was governed by him, and retired to Mascon, from whence he began practices with
the other Towns of that Province, and particularly with the City and Castle of
Dijon, commanded by the Baron de Lux, Nephew to the Archbishop of Lions; and
having found the City, Parliament, and Governor of the Castle ready to receive
him, and to run his fortune, recovering courage he went thither, from whence he
presently sent unto the Pope the The French says Commandeur.

Un Commandeur is one, that having Ecclesiastical Livings may not Marry, and
yet is not compelled to be a Priest; as the Grand Prior of France, and all the
Knights of St John's in I^rusalem. Commines, lib. 7. cap. 9.


Commendatory Francois Diu, Knight of Jerusalem, a man versed in the Court of
Rome, and one of the chief ancient abettors of the League, to the end that he
might complain about the death of his Brothers before the Holy-Chair, and
beseech the Pope, that he would take into his protection the relics of the
Catholic party, extremely trodden down and afflicted. While the Duke stayed
there, not well resolved in his thoughts, Letters came from Madam de
Montpensier his Sister, which gave him notice of the revolt of the Parisians,
and of all the adjacent Towns, and exhorted him to take heart, and putting
himself into the place of his Brothers, to become head of the Union, with
assured hopes, not only to revenge their death, but happily to prosecute the
contrived and begun design of the League. This exhortation, and these letters
added to the news of the revolt of Orleans and Chartres, confirmed the Duke's
courage in such manner, that the Kings letters, written very kindly to him,
which came to his hands a while after, had not power enough to make him yield
to peace, which, at first perhaps he would have greedily embraced. The King
writ, that he had been constrained by necessity to forget his own nature to
free himself of those conspiracies which the Duke and Cardinal his Brothers had
plotted against him, and in a manner brought to a conclusion; that nevertheless
he had not been so severe as any other would have been, The King writes kind
Letters to the Duke of May^nne, promising him very great things.
satisfying himself with taking away the principal Heads, and leaving all the
rest alive, who he hoped might acknowledge and amend their former errors; that
he had not been moved by any hatred or passion, for he had always loved,
favored, and exalted their family, as he desired to do again for the time to
come; and that therefore he prayed him not to let himself be guided and
transported by his affection to his Brothers, but to remember that he had been
forced by those attempts, which he certainly knew had ever been unpleasing to
him, as one averse from the ambition and evil designs of his Brothers; that for
that reason he had ever desired to exalt him, and had always conferred upon
him the commands of his Armies, because he knew him to be far from those wicked
arts which the others had intended to practice; He exhorted him to persevere in
that good and laudable resolution, not to make himself an instrument to divide
the Catholic party, and tear in pieces their common Country, nor to join
himself to the ambition of factious men, from which, even in the fervor of his
youth he had ever been averse: but showing that he made more account of the
general good, and his own duty toward his Prince, than of those private
passions which use to draw and govern mean vulgar spirits, he would sincerely
unite himself to him to preserve the peace of the Catholics, and make War
against the Hugonots; which if he would consent unto, he offered him all manner
of security, and the most reasonable satisfaction he could desire. But the
Duke's mind was already set upon other thoughts, never believing that he could
be secure, much less favored by the King, who gave him those fair words,
because he was escaped out of the net; and seeing the great distractions of the
Kingdom, he hoped for a much higher power and greatness then what his brothers
had possessed: wherefore his inclinations and hope meeting both together in the
same end, The Duke of Mayenne, notwithstanding the Kings promises, being
persuaded by Madam de Montpensier, his sister, makes himself Head of the Holy
Union.
and thinking that it so became his honor, he leaned toward revenge and the
command of that faction; which resolution was absolutely concluded, after that
Madam de Montpensier, not valuing her own health, nor the inconveniency of the
season, came with great speed to Dijon, whose vehement effectual exhortations,
and the Letters of the Duke of Aumale, and many others of the faction exciting
him, he at last determined to consent to the taking up of Arms, and to
prosecute the designs of the League, making himself Head of the Holy-Vnion.

The resolution being taken, he presently gave order to the Sieurs de Rhosne,
de St. Paul, Chamois and d' Eschavoles, to receuit their Regiments of French
Foot; and began to summon the Nobility and Gentry his dependents, and to win
the hearts of the people in every place. And because the foundation consisted
in the City of Paris, the Duke determined to go thither with Madam de
Montpensier, the way being now secure by the taking of the Castle of Orleans,
and by the revolt of Bourges, Troy, and Chartres. The Duke passed through all
these Cities, gathering Forces, and drawing men together; some raised with his
own Money, some brought in by his friends and adherents, and some furnished by
the People; and being already grown to the number of Four thousand soldiers and
Five hundred Gentlemen, he came upon the fifteenth of February into the City of
Paris. There the Duke and Chevalier d' Aumale, putting themselves willingly
under his authority; and the Council of the Union, with most ready consent of
the Citizens, acknowledging him for their Head; the Parliament having assembled
all the O^, s^veral C ur^s.
Chambers, Bernabe Brisson first President of the League, making the
Proposition, declared him Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France,
The Duke of Mayenne being come to Paris, is declared Lieutenant General of the
Crown of France.
giving him (except the name) the very power and authority which uses to be
natural to their Kings; which yet they intended should continue but till the
States General of the Kingdom should determine otherwise, they being appointed
to meet in the City of Paris in the month of July following. Thus the Duke of
Guise's death did with admirable facility, and the universal inclination of
that party, produce that power in his brother, which he with so many toils, and
so long machinations had so eagerly labored for in his lifetime, yet never
could obtain it for himself. Upon the two and twentieth of February, the Duke
took possession in the Parliament of this extraordinary dignity, having taken a
public Oath, to protect and defend the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion
against every one, To preserve entire the State belonging to the Crown of
France, To defend the Privileges of the three Orders, the Clergy, Nobility,
and Commons; and, To cause the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom to be
observed, as also the authority and power of the Parliaments. After which Oath,
many Prayers and Processions having been made, The Council of the Union is
chosen, consisting of forty of the chiefest persons of the League.
he chose and appointed the Council of the Union, consisting of Forty of the
most eminent perspicuous persons of the League, which, with his assistance, was
to treat of, and conclude all the most weighty businesses, the Council of
Sixteen being nevertheless still left, and particularly appointed for the
especial Government of Paris.

Having taken the command of the League upon him, the Duke began to increase
the Body of his Forces to form an Army of them, with which he might march
whither need should require: But in every Province he allotted both Forces and
Commanders to order the affairs of the League, and to make War against those
who were yet of the Kings party. Bretagne was governed by the Duke de Mercoeur,
who, not at all moved with the Kings, and his Sisters Exhortations, to unite
himself unto them, was very strong and powerful, having with his authority made
all that Province to revolt, except the Parliament of Renes, and some few Towns
and little Castles. In Normandy it happened otherwise: for though the greatest
part of the Towns had declared for the League, yet the Nobility held of the
Kings party; so that the Heads were few and divided: The Sieur de la Land at
Rouen, Andre Braneace Sieur de Villars at Havre de Grace, Long-champ at
Lisieux, and the Baron d' Eschaufour in the Country of Perch: Wherefore the
Duke sent the Count of Brissac thither with authority to command them all. The
Duke of Aumale, who was Governor of it, went into Picardy, a divided Province,
yet one of the most favored by the League, because it bordered upon the
Territories of the Catholic King. The Count de Chaligny, and Col. St. Paul, an
old Servant bred up in that Family, went into Champagne, a Province destined
(in succession of his Father) to the young Duke of Guise, who was yet in
prison. The Viscount de Tavannes, an old experienced Soldier, had order to
command in Bourgongne, the particular Government of the Duke of Mayenne. The
care of Lyonois was given to the Duke of Nemours, and in his absence to his
Brother the Marquess of St. Sorlin. The command of Berry continued under the
Sieur de la Chastre, who being Field-Mareschal in the Duke of Nevers his Army,
as soon as he could free himself of that obstacle, followed the party of the
League as he had formerly done. The Count de Randan held the command in
Auvergne; and in Provence, the Marquess de Villars, and the Sieur de Vins, an
old adherent to the House of Guise. The Dukes of Ioyeuse (Father and Brother to
him that was slain in the Battle of Contras, fighting against the King of
Navarre) had the Government of Gascogne; in which Province, except the City and
Parliament of Toulouse, the party of the Confederates was not very strong; and
in Dauphine, Languedoc, and Guienne, the League had but very slender Forces.

But before all these preparations, the Duke dispatched Lazare Coqueille,
Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, to Rome; and with him were gone two
Doctors of the S^rbonne, to confirm the Decree of their College, by which they
had determined, That the King had forfeited his right to the Crown, and that
his Subjects might justly withdraw their obedience from him; the Duke
foreseeing well that the popular Cause, wholly founded upon the pretense of
Religion, was to look for, and take its increase and nourishment from the
Apostolic Sea, and the Popes approbation.

But the King, who, afflicted with his wonted melancholy, though he dissembled
it, had since the death of his Mother been many days troubled with a Bloody
Flux, was no less sollicitous, concerning the affairs at Rome, than the Duke of
Mayenne, as well because being a very great honourer of Religion, he could not
be satisfied to live disobedient to the Apostolic Sea, as because, making the
same judgment as they of the League, he saw that the greatest foundation of the
adverse party consisted in the approbation and encouragement from Rome:
Wherefore, though he had caused absolution to be given him for the death of the
Cardinal, by virtue of a Breve granted to him a few months before by the
present Pope, to make himself be absolved in all reserved cases by his own
Ordinary Confessor; yet seeing that that was not enough, he sent Claude d'
Angennes, of his beloved Family of Rambouillet, Bishop of Man's, The Bishop of
Man's is sent by the King, on purpose to demand absolution for the Cardinal of
Guise his death
a man of profound Learning, and singular Eloquence, to the end, that being
informed of all his Reasons, he might, as his Solicitor, sue for an absolution
from the Pope, and endeavor to reconcile him to the Apostolic Sea; to which
(so he might but secure himself) he was ready to give the most exact
satisfaction. The Bishop of Man's came to Rome, and having conferred with the
other Ambassadors, they went together to receive audience from the Pope; where
after words of compliment, full of most deep submission, they first argued that
the King had not incurred any Censure, not having violated the Ecclesiastical
Liberties and Immunities; for the Cardinal was guilty of the crime of
Rebellion, in which case the Prelates of France, notwithstanding any dignity
whatsoever, are understood to be subject to the Secular Jurisdiction; and so
much the rather, because he having been a Peer of France, his causes naturally
ought to be judged in the Court of Peers, which is no other but the great Court
of Parliament, with the assistance of the Princes and Officers of the Crown: so
that if the King had infringed any Jurisdiction, it was that of the Parliament,
and not the Ecclesiastical one, which has nothing to do with the Peers of
France: But because this reason was not only disapproved by the Pope, but that
also he seemed more displeased and offended at it, alleging, that the eminency
and Privileges of the dignity of Cardinal, were immediately subject to the
Pope, and no other; the Ambassadors began to dispute, that the Kings of France
could not incur Censure for any Sentence they should give; and urged the
Privileges of the most Christian Kings, and the Jurisdiction of the Gallique
Church: But this incensed the Pope so much the more, who bad them take heed how
they proposed things that had a touch of Heresy, as this had; for he would
cause them to be punished. To which, though the Marquess replied, That as
Ambassadors they could not be meddled withal, nor punished, and that no fear
should make them forbear to propose the Kings right; yet, having received
Commission to appease and not to exasperate the Pope, they alleged in the
third place, That the King, by virtue of the Apostolic Breve granted to him by
his Holiness, had caused himself to be absolved; and therefore they insisted
only, that his Holiness, knowing the Pardon he had granted him, would either
confirm it, or not be displeased, if the King, valuing it as he ought, had made
use of it in a seasonable occasion: For not having, in the heat of danger,
considered so particularly, and having never had any intention to offend the
Jurisdiction of the Apostolic See, after he had been made sensible of it, he
being moved with scruple of Conscience, had prostrated himself at the feet of
his Confessor, and had begged and obtained absolution, for as much as need
should require, though he thought he had not transgressed effectively. To this
the Pope answered, That the Breve was granted for things past, but could not
extend to future sins, the absolution whereof cannot be anticipated: That such
a case as this, in which the Apostolic See was directly offended, and all
Christendom scandalized, was not comprehended under that Breve; and that the
Exposition was to be demanded from him who had granted it, which now he
declared, affirming, that it had never been his intention to enable the King to
receive absolution for his future faults, and for so evident a violation of the
Dignity of Cardinal.

This Treaty having been often repeated, and discussed with great allegations
of Right and Authority, in the end, the Ambassadors were contented to petition
in writing for the Popes absolution; who expressed a desire to have it so, and
that it was the means to appease and satisfy him. Wherefore, after good
Offices done by the Venetian and Florentine Ambassadors in favor of the King,
having received order from their Princes to take great pains in his behalf, the
Bishop with a Petition of a very submissive form demanded absolution of the
Pope; who with pleasing words answered, That he would willingly grant it, when
he should be assured of the Kings contrition, whereof he would have this token,
that he should set at liberty the Cardinal of Bourbon and Archbishop of Lions,
it being vain to grant him absolution for one thing whilst he persisted in the
act of another, which did infer the same prejudice to the Apostolic See, which
he could not dissemble. At this the Ambassadors, and those that favored them,
were exceedingly perplexed, conceiving themselves to have been deceived, and
thinking that another kind of moderation ought to be used toward a King of
France; wherefore laying together all those reasons already alleged in the
former Conferences, they concluded, that the King by setting those Prelates at
liberty, should but increase the fire in his Kingdom, with the evident danger
of his own Life and Crown, and that therefore it was not fit to free them: To
which the Pope replied, That they should be sent prisoners to him; for if he
found them guilty, he knew which way to punish them: But the Ambassadors
answered; first, that the judgment of things in his own Kingdom belonged to the
King; and then that the whole State (thanks to their Conspiracies) was so
disturbed. that they could not be sent; for all the Country near the Alps, and
round about the place where they were being up in Arms, it was not possible to
remove them, nor to conduct them securely, and that therefore the King was not
obliged to impossibilities. But the Pope obstinately persisting in his demand,
the Ambassadors agreed at last to write about it into France, and insisted that
in the mean time, the King having humbled himself, and submitted to the
Apostolic See, the Decree of Sorbonne ought to be revoked and nullified, being
not only exorbitant and unjust, but insolent, and prejudicial to the Holy
Chair, whereof those Divines made so little reckoning, that they had dared to
determine a point of so great consequence as the deposing of a King; a thing,
which though it should be granted to appertain to the Ecclesiastical power, yet
would it be simply proper to the highest power, which is in the Vicar of
Christ, and not to that of a petulant College consisting of a few passionate
corrupted persons: but neither could this be obtained; for the Pope confessing
that the Decree was presumptuous, and worthy censure, said that he would
reserve himself to do it when the King had given him full satisfaction.

This seemed very strange to the Ambassadors, and seeing that they had proposed
all those spiritual satisfactions which they (even to the prejudice of the
Crown) could offer, with so great humiliation, that more could not be desired
from a King, they intended to try another way; and the Marquess, whose Wife was
a Roman, began by means of that alliance to treat with Donna Camilla the Popes
Sister, offering (amongst other rewards which the Popes Kindred should have, if
by their means the Absolution was obtained) to give the Marquesate of Saluzzo
in Fee-farm to Don Michele his Nephew, which the King proffered (the peace
being made with the Catholics of his Kingdom) to recover at his own charge
from the Duke of Savoy; but neither could this prevail with the obdurateness of
the Pope; partly, because the Marquesate was now in the power of another, nor
could it be regained without a tedious War; partly, because he saw the Kingdom
involved in so great a distraction, and the Catholic party so strong, that he
doubted whether his Absolution would be able to settle and restore its peace.
Moreover, The Abbot of Orbais sent to Rome by the Duke of Mayenne, treats of
the affairs of the League very effectually.
about this very time the Abbot of Orbais was arrived at Rome, sent by the Duke
of Mayenne, the Duchess of Nemours, Madam de Montpensier, and other Heads of
the League, on the one side to magnify the Forces of the Union, into which
almost all the chief and most noted Cities of France were entered, with an
infinite concourse of the Nobility and Commons, so that now the King was
thereby, not in writing, but in deed deposed and robbed of his Crown; and on
the other, to complain of the inclination which the Pope showed to absolve
Henry of Valois, (so they called him) whereby he, who was Head of the Catholic
Church, and to whom more than to any other it belonged to promote the Holy
Union, contracted for the defense of Religion, and the liberty and dignity of
the Apostolic See, seemed to make but small account of it; that the
imputations of Rebellion and Treason which were cast upon the memory of the
Duke and Cardinal of Guise were false and vain; for they had never taken Arms
against the King, nor conspired any thing against him; but always with due
obedience and veneration of the Royal Name, had sustained and defended the
Catholic Religion, against the powerful plots and forces of the Hugonots: that
it was known how Francis the Duke their Father had lost his life in the service
of the Crown, and of the Church of God, as also the Duke of Aumale their Uncle,
slain fighting under the walls of Rochel for the Catholic Faith: that it was
likewise certain how much the Duke of Guise had labored, suffered, and endured
bearing Arms for the Kings service, and for Religion: that he had all his
lifetime born the scars in his face of the wounds he had received fighting
against the Army of the Reiters, for the defense of the Provinces and Confines
of the Kingdom: that he had defended the City of Poictiers against the long
siege of the Hugonots, led up the first Squadrons of the Army, fighting
victoriously against them at Iarnac and Moncontour; that, last of all, with a
handful of men, he had exposed himself, and the lives of all his Soldiers,
against that formidable Army of the Lutherans of Germany, conquered it, and
dispersed it for the safety of the Kingdom, and of all Christian people; nor in
all those toils and dangers had he ever pretended any other thing but to serve
the King, and defend the Catholics from the imminent oppression of the
Hugonots: that if the King went from Paris upon the Insurrection of the
Parisians, the fault was his own, in having put a Garrison into a City where
there never had been any, and in having gone about to take away the lives of
the chief Citizens; but no conspiracy of the Duke of Guise's, who rather had
appeased the people and quieted the tumult; that since then the King had been
reconciled, and had agreed to the pacification, wherein the Lords of Lorain had
neither demanded, nor obtained other, than that the public exercise of the
Hugonot Religion might be taken away, and that War might be made against them;
and though some little shadow of suspicion should have remained, the King ought
to have forgotten it, after so many Oaths taken, among the sacred Ceremonies;
and not to make two most innocent Princes be murdered under the Public Faith,
for no other cause but to foment the Hugonot Forces, and suppress the Catholic
party, and the Religion of God. But though the Duke and Cardinal had committed
some error, what crime could be objected against the Cardinal of Bourbon, a
most innocent peaceful old man, who was most cruelly kept prisoner? That these
were arts and violent ways to take away that prop also from the Catholic
party, and to reduce the Succession into the relapsed, excommunicate Hugonot
Princes; that the Pope ought to oppose his authority to this so evident design,
to punish what was past, and provide against the future; not being faulty to so
many people, who had unanimously resolved to spend their lives for the defense
of Religion, and to piece up and restore the trodden-down honor of the Holy
Church: that it became him, being the Shepherd, to go before his Flock, and
encourage them all to so holy, so pious a work; but that it was as unseemly,
that while all took Arms boldly, he being so far from danger, should be more
afraid than all the rest. With these reasons the Princes of the League
endeavored to animate the Pope, and he receiving news daily from many places
of the tumultuous insurrections in France, as a man not well versed in
Government, and ignorant how easily popular commotions are extinguished, gave
the King already for absolutely lost, nor would he show himself a favourer of
the weaker side, to the dishonor of himself, and of the Apostolic See, as the
Spanish Ambassador, and those of the League, did perpetually urge unto him.

In the mean time the King, anxious and sollicitous about the determinations at
Rome, kept his resolutions in suspense, and seemed to have laid down the
courage of a Lion, which after the death of the Duke of Guise, he made show to
have taken up again; for the Duke of Nevers, who made War in Poictou against
the Hugonots, having in this interim taken Ganache, could not after the news of
the death of the Lords of Lorain, keep his Army (composed for the most part of
men depending upon the League) from dissolving of it self; and therefore the
Duke being returned to Court, the King straightned for money, and inclined to
an agreement, did not think of setting his Army again on foot, The Legate
propounds a Truce to the Duke of Mayenne; but he refuses it.
but minded only thoughts of peace, having desired the Cardinal Legate to
interpose for the attaining of it, promised to refer all businesses to the
Popes arbitrament; which condition the Legate having made known to the Duke of
Mayenne, and moved him to yield to a Truce, that the accommodation might be
negotiated at Rome, he denied to consent unto it, alleging that he could no
more trust him, who notwithstanding so many Sacraments and Ceremonies, violated
the Public Faith, and the Law of Nations, in the face of the Assembly of all
the States of France; and that this was another trick of the Kings, to gain the
benefit of time, by means of the Truce, being now unarmed and unprovided: That
the Legate ought not to make himself the instrument of that deceitful policy;
for it tended to the prejudice of the Catholic Religion, and of Ecclesiastical
Liberty, perfidiously trampled under foot and violated; but that it was rather
fit to expect the resolutions from Rome, where he had given the Pope
information of all occurrences. But having at the same time received the Duke
of Mayenne's refusal of the Truce, and the Ambassadors Letters from Rome, which
contained the Popes stiffness and obstinacy in desiring to have the prisoners;
and the King not knowing how to release them without fomenting the present
distractions: For it was certain, that they of the Union, having already
declared him to have forfeited his Crown, would have elected the Cardinal of
Bourbon King; the face of affairs was altered; and the King thinking he had
used all possible means, even to his own dishonor, to appease the Pope, began
to change his resolution, lest he should be suppressed without defense, by the
power of his Enemies. This necessity was so apparent, that even the Duke of
Nevers, who had ever persuaded him to satisfy the Pope, lest he should divide
the Catholic party, had not any reason to allege against it; the urgency of
affairs did by force constrain all opinions to take to one side or other:
Wherefore the Count de Soissons, who, a few days before, had defeated some
Troops of the League, being come to Blois with certain Forces, and having begun
to introduce a Treaty of Agreement with the King of Navarre, applied himself
diligently to that business. The King (as he had always been) was averse from
this Agreement; his nature being (as a man may say) incompatible with the
commerce of the Hugonots: But necessity showed, there was no other way; and all
his Counselors said with one accord, That it was needful for him to resolve,
and take some course, if he would not be left alone, between two potent
Enemies; who, one on this side, and the other on that side of the Loyre, had
made themselves Masters of all places: And with what Moneys, with what Friends,
with what Armies, and with what Forces, could he at the same time contend with
both Factions? That it was clear, which way soever he turned himself, he should
have one Enemy before him, and another behind him; and that his Kingdom being
divided, and likewise foreign Princes, between the two Religions, he with a new
example should have them both his Enemies: That in this division, whilst others
usurped the Royal Authority on either side, he remained without Forces, without
Treasury, without Money, and that he was now what he had ever feared to be, dry
between two Rivers: That he had done as much as well he might to appease the
Pope: That he had forgotten his own dignity, to agree with those that were up
in Arms, and to give such satisfaction to Rebels and Despisers of his Name, as
they deserved not: That he had with unheard of patience, born the injuries of
the People, the invectives of the Preachers, the villainous insolences of the
Factions, the presumptuous Decrees of the Sorbonne, and exposed the Royal
Majesty to the pleasure of the remnants of the House of Guise: That he had done
that at Rome, which never any King had yielded to do, not only to ask
absolution in writing for a reasonable, just and necessary action, but also
offered to refer all all differences to the Popes arbitrament: What was there
more to be done? but only (by reason of the appetite of the Spaniards, who
governed all in the Court of Rome, and of the fierce obdurate nature of the
Pope) to expect to be miserably torn in pieces by his Enemies without defense,
and to have those outrages committed upon his own person which had been done
unto his Statues at Paris and Thoulouse? That now indeed was the time to show
the Heart of a Lion, and, making use of the King of Navarre's assistance, De
inimicis suis vindicare inimicos suos: That this was neither a new, nor an
unheard of thing: That King Charles his Brother often, nay, he himself, in less
extremities, had granted Peace to the Hugonots; and that the last breach was
not occasioned by his will and consent, but by the conspiracies and violences
of the League: That he had in vain taken away the lives of the Brothers of
Guise, if he must be in the same fear of them now they were dead; and if, that
obstacle being taken away, he endeavored not to bridle the seditious, to
recover his own power; and finally, to restore peace and tranquillity to his
Kingdom.

And the King of Navarre already knowing, that the occasion required, and
necessity forced the King to that resolution, did by favorable Writings and
Declarations, open the way unto it: For many Towns of Poictou and Xaintonge
having yielded themselves unto him after the departure of the Duke of Nemours,
he had in all of them forbidden any harm to be done unto the Catholics, and
wheresoever he had to do, suffered them to enjoy Liberty of Conscience,
favoring and honoring the Clergy, The King of Navarre grants Liberty of
Conscience in those places he had taken, and publishes a Manif^st, offering to
take Arms against those that rebelled against their natural King.
and giving way every where, that Mass should be publicly celebrated without
any hinderance; and being come to Chastelrault, which together with Niort he
had taken by composition, he published a Manifest, whereby detesting the
Rebellions and Insurrections of the people against their natural King, he
proffered, submitting himself to his due obedience, to take Arms against them;
and exhorted all those of his party to follow him in so good a work; showing to
all the world, what their mind had ever been, and how they had fought simply,
not for any interests, but only for Liberty of Conscience. After which
Protestations and Declarations, because the King had justified his actions in
writing, and set forth the occasion of the death of the Lords of Guise, and
that the Duke of Mayenne had done the like on his side, endeavoring to lay a
fair color upon their taking up of Arms, and upon the proceedings of the
League, a Truce was begun to be treated of with the King of Navarre, The Duke
of Espernon returned into his former Greatness, treats a Truce with the King of
Navarre.
by means of the Duke of Espernon, who after the death of the Guises was
returned to his former greatness with the King; and after having supplied him
with One thousand two hundred Gascon Firelocks, under the command of Colonel
Moncassin, had sent the Abbot del Been to him about the present business. But
because many difficulties arose, and that the King concurred in it, as it were,
perforce, Madam Diane d' Angoulesme, his Bastard-sister, a Lady of great
wisdom, and well versed in matters of Government by the experience of times
past, was employed to treat about this Accommodation; which as soon as it was
known unto the Cardinal-Legat, Cardinal Moresini the Legate makes grievous
complaints unto the King.
he made great complaint of it to the King himself, showing him how contrary it
was to the promises which he had often made to him, that notwithstanding the
death of the Lords of Guise, he would not forbear to make War with the
Hugonots; upon which ground he had endeavored by favorable advantageous
relations, to promote his affairs to the Pope and Court of Rome, which now
would become vain, to the lessening of both their reputations, nay, to their
blame and infamy, if the Agreement with the Hugonots should be so easily
concluded; and that the Arms destined against them, should be turned to the
destruction of the Catholic party; and of those that depended upon the
Apostolic See, and the Popes authority. But the King, concealing the depth of
the business from the Legate, denied that he had concluded any thing with the
Hugonots; but that, if he should do so, the fault was not to be imputed to him,
who was still the same, and always ready to pull down Heresy; but to the
obdurateness of the Pope, who obstinately denied to absolve him, and fomented
the Insurrections of those that rebelled against him; and to the stubbornness
of the Duke of Mayenne, and the rest of the League, who abhorring Peace, had
refused to refer the differences to the Popes arbitrament: That he had desired
no better, nor more certain witness than himself, to whom he had ever imparted
his thoughts sincerely, and upon whom he had imposed the trust of negotiating
that business: That he should consider the great straights into which he was
reduced by the wickedness of others, and not attribute that to Will, which was
forcibly extorted by mere necessity.

The Spanish Ambassador departs from Court without taking leave, and goes to
Paris.
But Don Bernardino Mendozza, the Spanish Ambassador, as soon as it was divulged,
that an Accommodation was treating with the Hugonots, went presently away from
Court without taking leave; and being come to Paris, made his residence there,
as Ambassador with the Lords of the League. The Legate stood doubtful, believing
it not good to forsake the King, and deprive himself utterly of the hopes of
keeping him with the Catholic party; and on the other side, fearing he should
be reproved, if he showed himself less jealous of Religion, than the Spanish
Ambassador had done: And yet thinking that the assistance of the Physician was
there most needful, where the danger of the disease was greatest, Cardinal
Moresini stays with the King; and the Pope falling into suspicion of him,
accounts him guilty.
he resolved to stay till he saw the event of things, not failing in the mean
time to write, and present his opinion at Rome. But his person being suspected,
his counsels were so much more; the Pope accounting him rather a Criminal, than
a Legate or Ambassador. There were often meetings between him and the Cardinal
of Vendosme, who, though the Cardinal of Bourbon his Uncle and Benefactor were
a prisoner; yet in respect of the interests of his Family, had never left the
King, and there was present with them Rene de Beaune Archbishop of Bourges, a
Prelate of deep wisdom and copious eloquence, who being driven away by those of
his Diocese, for having gone about to withstand their insurrections, was
retired to Court; and many times the Duke of Nevers likewise was at the
conferences. All of them could have wished the King would not have made a Peace
with the Hugonots; but the Pope was so obstinate, the Duke of Mayenne so
stubborn, and the insurrections so great through the whole Kingdom, that though
they all abhorred it, yet none of them durst blame that agreement. Wherefore
Madam d' Angoulesme having treated personally with the King of Navarre, and
then being come to Blois, negotiated with the King himself; the differences
were in a manner composed; for the King of Navarre, The peace is concluded
between the King of France and the King of Navarre.
intent upon the great conjuncture of the present occasion, to rise again with
his party, and fight under the Kings Standard and obedience, against those
Enemies which had so many years kept him down, had accepted all conditions
imposed on him by the King, and they only disagreed in this, that a place being
to be assigned unto him upon the Loire, to the end that he might pass and
return with his Forces, as need required; the King would have given him
Gergeau, or Pont de Sey, weak Towns, and hard to be made good, Capt. du Gast
who killed the Cardinal of Guise treats an agreement with those of the League
by the persuasion of the Archbishop of Lions.
and he demanded Saumur, a City seated in a convenient place near Tours, and
which might easily be fortified and defended; yet he insisted upon this
modestly, and rather by way of request, than condition or article of agreement.

Two weighty accidents did absolutely necessitate the King to conclude the
Treaty; one that Captain du Gast, Governor of Amboise, to whom, after he had
killed the Cardinal of Guise, the other prisoners had been delivered into
custody, being dealt withal by those of the League with infinite promises, and
put into doubts and jealousies, began to stagger; for the Archbishop of Lions
had made him believe, that the King, to shift off the fault of the Cardinal of
Guise's death from himself, had alleged at Rome, that Captain du Gast had, of
himself, for some private injuries, caused him to be slain without his order,
and that now likewise for private covetousness he kept the other Prelates in
prison without any order. Wherefore that vain suspicious man having easily
believed this invention, treated an agreement for himself, and to release his
prisoners; so that the King being driven into great anxiety, The prisoners
given in custody to Captain du Gast Governor of Amboise, are sent to several
fortresses, under safer guards.
was fain to give him thirty thousand Crowns of that little money he had by
him, to recover them out of his hands, and to keep him from freeing them, and
from going over to the party of the League, which he could hardly obtain of him
with so great a reward; and it was necessary to distribute the prisoners into
several places, with several guards, and with a much greater charge; for the
Cardinal of Bourbon was sent to Chinon; the Duke of Guise to Tours, the Duke of
Elbeuf to Loches, and the Archbishop ( du Gast, not being to be persuaded
otherwise) remained alone in the Castle of Amboise.

The other accident which did much perplex the King, was the tumult in Tours,
one of the chief Cities of Poictou, seated upon the Loire, and in which he had
designed to establish the foundation of his party: for the people being stirred
up by many favorers of the League, and by certain Friars, with their wonted
suggestions, began to make an uproar, and to rise against the Magistrates, the
common people having been persuaded, that that Town was to be assigned to the
King of Navarre, for his habitation: wherefore the King with the Marshall d'
Aumont, the Count de Soissons, and that small company he had about him, leaving
Blois, was fain to run toward that danger: which being diverted, and the
business of that City settled, he began to see clearly that it was necessary to
take resolution, and that the delays of Rome did too much prejudice the state
of his affairs, reduced to the extreme hazard of an evident suppression.

So cutting off all delays, The Truce is concluded for a year between the most
Christian King and the King of Navarre.
the Truce was concluded for a year between the most Christian King, and the
King of Navarre, with these conditions: That the public exercise of the
Catholic Religion should be restored in all places held by the Hugonots,
without any exception: That the Goods of the Clergy should be restored to them,
wheresoever they were, and that all prisoners which were in their hands should
be set at liberty: That the King of Navarre should be obliged to serve the King
personally, with four thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse, wheresoever he
should be commanded; and that all the Cities, Towns, and places of his party
should observe the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, obey the Parliament,
and the Kings Magistrates, and receive all those Ordinances which the present
King had made, or should make. On the other side, that the King of Navarre
should receive the City of Saumur, and keep it in his power, to have a pass
over the River Loire, that might freely be his own; which nevertheless he
should be obliged to restore at the Kings pleasure without any contradiction.
Which Capitulations after they were agreed upon and ratified, Beaulieu the
Secretary of State delivered up Saumur to the King of Navarre* who gave the
Government thereof to Sieur du Plessis Mornay, his old Confident.

The same Truce was made in Dauphine between Colonel Alfonso Corso on the Kings
part, and Monsieur de Lesdiguiers for the King of Navarre, and they united
their Forces for their common defense. The Hugonots rejoiced exceedingly at
this reconciliation, magnifying their faith and obedience toward the Royal
Majesty, to the confusion of those who, till then, had published and defamed
them as tumultuous and disobedient Rebels

And truly, it was a thing worthy of very great wonder, and one of the secret
mysteries of Gods Divine Wisdom, that the King of Navarre being weak, and
forsaken of all, reduced into a narrow corner of the Kingdom, and for the most
part in want of things necessary for his own maintenance, so that he was fain
to live more like a Soldier of fortune, than a great Prince; his Enemies by
too much eagerness in pursuing him, and by too ardent a desire to see him
utterly ruined, should labor to plot so many ways, to raise so many Wars, to
treat so many Leagues, to make so many Conspiracies, and practice so many arts,
from all which resulting to his advantage, his greatness and exaltation did as
it were miraculously succeed: for there was no man versed in the affairs of
France, and far from the passions of both parties, who saw not clearly, that if
the King had been suffered to live, and rule as peaceably as he ought to have
done, the King of Navarre would by little and little have been destroyed and
brought to nothing; for peace and length of time would absolutely have
dissolved that little Union which was among the Hugonots, and by those
occasions and necessities which length of time would have produced, the
obstinacy of the Rochellers, wherein the sum of affairs consisted, would
finally have been overcome and broken; and the King, a most bitter Enemy to
Heresy, would in a manner insensibly by diverse arts have rooted it out and
destroyed it: whereas* on the contrary, the revolution of the Wars and Factions
did not only foment the stubbornness of the Hugonots, who were so much the more
hardened to resist, by how much they thought they were wrongfully persecuted;
but also in the end made way for the King of Navarre's reconciliation with the
King, and with the French Nobility; furnished him with Arms and Power; and at
last, contrary to his expectation, and the natural course of things, opened him
a passage to attain unto the Crown.

As soon as the Truce was concluded, though but in words only, (for the Writing
was not published till many days after) the King being resolved to change the
course of his proceedings, to show himself, and to reassume indeed the face of
a Lion, dispatched the Sieur de la Clielle to the great Duke of Thuscany, to
entreat him to lend him Two hundred thousand Ducats to make a levy of Swisse
Infantry, and German Cavalry, with which, by reason of the alliance lately
contracted, (for the Lady Chrestienne his new Duchess was but then passing
into Italy to her Marriage) the great Duke was ready to pleasure him, having
sent a hundred thousand to Ausbourg by Cavalier Guicciardini, and promised the
rest as soon as the Leavy was begun; wherefore the King dispatched Monsieur de
Sancy to the Switzers, he having been many years Ambassador in that Country,
with Commission, if he could not have the ten thousand Foot he required from
the Catholic Cantons, by reason of the opposition he doubted he should receive
from the Spaniards, to make his Leavies in the Protestant Cantons; and at the
same time appointed Gaspar Count of Schombergh to raise a Body of German Horse;
who for fear of being taken by the Enemies, took a long, and (in the end) a
fruitless voyage. He sent also Jacques Auguste de Thou to the Emperor, under
color of condoling for the Queen-Mothers death, and upon the same pretense
Pierre Forget Sieur des Fresnes, newly chosen Secretary of State, into Spain;
but the true intent was, that the one might dispose Rodulphus not to meddle in
those Leavies which were to be made in his name in Germany; and that the other
might, if he could in some measure withhold the Catholic King from the open
favor which he was seen to lend unto the Union, to which Mendozza did
manifestly perform the Office of an Ambassador.

Having thus provided in the best manner he could for matters without the
Kingdom, he began to take care of those within it; and having called all the
Presidents and Counselors of the Parliaments of Paris, Rouen and Dijon, who
were fled from the popular fury, he determined, that the Parliament of Paris
should reside in the City of Tours, that of Rouen in the City of Caen, in the
same Province of Normandy, and that of Dijon at Chalons, a City also of the
same Duchy of Bourgongne: and then by a most severe Edict, declared them all
Rebels, who being chosen to the dignity of the Parliaments, should continue to
reside in those Cities and places which had withdrawn themselves from his
obedience, and forbad all men to have any recourse to them to seek for justice,
declaring all sentences to be void, which they should pronounce under the name
and title of Parliament. The same Declaration he made against the Duke of
Mayenne, against the Duke and Chevalier d' Aumale, and others, who having
caused Cities to revolt, took Arms against him; intimating to them, that if
within the term of fifteen days they returned not to their due obedience,
desisted not from disturbing and molesting the Kingdom, and laid not down their
Arms, they should be judged guilty of Rebellion, and should be so declared,
with the Confiscation of their Estates. After these Writings, followed Actions;
and having appointed Governors in all Provinces, he gave Commission to make
Levies, to draw Soldiers together, and that the War should be begun in every
place: The Count de Soissons was made Governor in Bretagne; the Duke of
Montpensier, in Normandy; the Marshall de Martignon, Lieutenant to the King of
Navarre, in Guienne; the Marshall of Momorancy, in Languedoc; Monsieur de la
Valette, Lieutenant to the Duke of Espernon, in Provence; Alfonso Corso, in
Dauphine; the Count de Tavannes, Lieutenant, in Bourgongne; the Duke of
Longeville, Governor of Picardy; the Marshall d' Aumont of Champagne, and
Monsieur de Tinteville his Lieutenant; Filibert Sieur de la Guiche of Lyonois;
Monsieur de Montigny of Berry; Monsieur de Sourdis in Beausse; the Sieur de
Entraques in the Duchy of Orleans; and with himself he kept the Marshall d'
Aumont to command the Army; and gave order, that the Duke d' Espernon, and the
King of Navarre, should come unto him; the agreement with whom, after some
delay, was accepted, and published the 28 of April.

But after the Peace was concluded, and before the publication of it, the
Cardinal-Legat, not thinking it decent for him to stay longer near the Kings
person; and on the other side, not being willing, by his presence and
residence, to authorize the League in the taking up of Arms, resolved, after
many doubts, to go toward Moulins, Cardinal M^resini the Legate, as soon as the
Peace is concluded with the Hugonots, departs from Court, to go out of the
Kingdom.
and thence out of the Kingdom, as soon as he should have received orders from
Rome, where he knew himself to be wonderful ill thought of by the Pope, and his
name blasted by those who, favoring the affairs of the League, endeavored to
make his counsels be excluded. And yet the King, after he had tried all means
to make him stay in his quarters, and excused his agreement with the King of
Navarre by the urgency of necessity; and after he had promised that howsoever
he would presevere in the Catholic Religion, which received rather help, than
any hurt at all from the Accommodation with the Hugonots; at last he prayed the
Legate, that he would once again try the Duke of Mayenne, by meeting personally
with him, and endeavor to bring him to an agreement, since that, neither by
means of the Duke of Lorain, to whom he had written, nor by means of Madam de
Nemours, with whom he had caused the Queen to treat about it, had he been able
to make him vouchsafe to lend an ear to any Treaty of Peace. And that all the
World might see his desire to remove the necessity of agreeing with the
Hugonots, and to take away the credit from the Arms of the League, he gave the
Cardinal a Paper subscribed with his hand, which contained those things he was
contented to grant to the Lords of the Union.

He offered the Duke of Lorain the Cities of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, under the
title of Government, and promised to use his endeavors to get the Heir of
Bouillon in Marriage for the Count de Vaudemont, by which means he might gain
the possession of Iamets and Sedan, places so considerable, and so much desired
by those Lords: He was contented to leave the Duke of Mayenne the Government of
Bourgongne, To confer all the Governments of Cities and Fortresses in that
Province upon such as he should name, To permit that it should pass in the same
manner to his eldest son, To give him an Hundred thousand crowns ready money,
To satisfy those debts he was run into upon the present occasion, and a
pension of Forty thousand Crowns per annum. To the Duke of Guise, the
Government of Champagne, St. Disier, and Rocroy, for the security of his
person, Twenty thousand Crowns of annual pension; and Thirty thousand of
Ecclesiastical revenues for one of his Brothers, whom he would endeavor to get
advanced to the Dignity of Cardinal. To the Duke of Nevers, the Government of
Lions, and Ten thousand Crowns a year. To the Duke of Aumale, St Esprit de Rue
for his security, and likewise Ten thousand Crowns in pension. To the Knight
his Brother, the Generalship of the Infantry, and Two thousand pounds sterling.
Twenty thousand franks a year. To the Duke of Elbeuf, the Government of
Poictiers, and Ten thousand Crowns pension. He referred himself to the Pope for
the Declaration of the Edicts and Agreements made in time past, and was
contented, that as a friendly Mediator he should compose all differences;
leaving it to his own liberty, if he pleased, to join the Venetian Senate with
him, or the Great Duke of Thuscany; being contented, if he took the Venetian
Senate, that the Duke of Ferrara, Uncle to the Lords of Guise, should be added
for the League: And if he chose the Great Duke, that they on the other side
should take the Duke of Lorain, the Head of their Family.

But neither did this Writing produce any effect: For the Duke of Mayenne
having had an Interview with the Legate at Chasteau-dune, refused to give ear
to Peace, The Legate moves the Duke of Mayenne to an accommodation, who refuses
to hearken to it.
excusing himself, that he could not accept of any Condition without assembling
the States of the League, and all the Princes of his Family, to have their
consent unto the business; and added, that he could no more have commerce nor
security with him that had violated his Faith. This he said, because he thought
himself much superior to the King in strength, and because the Catholic King,
and the Duke of Savoy promised him assistance of Men and Money; and at Rome the
affairs inclined already to favor him.

But the news of the Truce with the King of Navarre, and then of the Legates
departure, The Parisians at the news of the Truce between the King and the
Hugonots, besides many public signs of contempt, forbid the King to be prayed
for any longer in the Canon of the Mass.
being come to Paris, it is impossible to believe the hatred that sprung up
from it, against the King, and all those that followed him, and the exorbitant
demonstrations of it which were made, even to the prohibiting by public
Decrees, that in the Canon of Mass they should pray any longer for him, as the
custom is to do for all the Kings of France, and as the Catholic Church does
often very piously, especially in the Solemnity of Good Friday, for Heretics,
Pagans, and Idolaters: And it is impossible to relate the innumerable company
of Libels, Writings, and Declarations printed and divulged against him, which
were neither limited by any reason, nor bridled by any modesty. But the noise
of Arms which were clattering in every place, did quickly drown that of the
Libels and Sermons.

The first encounter of War, was in the Province of Normandy. The Duke of
Montpensier, Governor for the King, was gone to the City of Caen, whither the
Counselors and Presidents were fled from Rouen, and Pierre Seguier, and where
by virtue of the Kings Edict they had placed the seat of the Parliament. At the
Dukes coming, all those Lords and Gentlemen ran thither, who followed the Kings
party, and by his order the Sieurs de Lorges, de Colombieres, de St. Denis, and
the Baron de Ally, had raised four Regiments of Foot; so that he had under his
Colors Three thousand Foot, and Eight hundred Horse. With this Army, which
increased daily, the Duke resolved to besiege Falaise, The Duke of Montpensier
begins the war against those of the League, and besieges the Falaise.
a considerable place, and defended with a Fortress or great Tower called the
Dongeon, being assured, that that Town once taken, Argentan, Vire, and the
other places about Caen would presently yield themselves, whereby that City
which was very populous by reason of the new concourse of Clients, and of the
number that were come thither for refuge, might have the greater means of
subsistence. But the second day after their departure from Caen, there had like
to have happened a tumult among his own men, which if it had fallen out, would have
diverted the whole enterprise. Iehan de Hemery Sieur de Villiers, commanded the
Army in the Office of Camp-Master-General, he who in the first Wars had, by
assaulting Danfront, taken the Count de Montgomery, who afterward by order from
King Charles, was executed at Paris. The Vanguard was led by the Count de
Torigny, Son to the Marshall de Matignon: The Sieur de Baqueville commanded
the Light Horse; and the Rear was led by the Count de Montgomery, Son to the
aforenamed; so that between him and the Camp-Master-General there was very
little correspondence, fomented on the one side by the Catholic party, and on
the other by the Hugonots. It happened, that marching through the Enemies
Country, it was necessary to quarter close, that the Country people who were up
in Arms, might not have opportunity to do mischief to those they should find
straggling, whereupon Villiers was constrained to appoint straighter quarters to
the Count de Montgomery than the Hugonots (little accustomed to the discipline
of War, and used to the liberty of plundering, which they commonly called la
picoree) thought fitting; wherefore having torn the billet which was brought
him by his Quartermaster, the Count enlarged himself above three miles from
the Army, and would needs lodge in certain Villages where he had full
convenience to feed his Horse; which being told to Villiers, he sent to command
him to return to his quarters, the discipline of War so requiring, as also the
order given by the Duke of Montpensier; to which the Count having answered
arrogantly enough, Villiers commanded his Quartermaster to be laid hold of,
made him presently to be hanged up for having had the boldness to assign other
quarters than those appointed by the Camp-Master-General; and having given the
Duke notice of the business, he caused the Count de Torigny with the Vanguard
to draw into order, to force the Count to return to his appointed quarter; and
there would have happened some great mischief ( Villiers being resolved,
whatsoever came on it, that he would be obeyed, and the Hugonots on the other
side being obstinate to defend their action) if the Duke himself getting on
horseback, had not by his presence quieted the business, having with resolute
words commanded the Count de Montgomery to obey; who the next day after, under
color of going into the Confines of the Country of Constantine, where his
Estate lay, to defend certain Castles of his own from the incursions of the
Duke de Mercoeur, left the Army; and the charge of leading the Rear-guard was
given to the Sieur de Hallot, and the Sieur de Grevecoeur his Brother.

After the tumult was appeased, they proceeded with order and military
discipline, the Duke not suffering any injury to be done to the Country people,
nor any thing to be taken away from them, except victual; for it was necessary
(his soldiers not being paid) to take free quarter upon them. The siege was
laid to Falaise, and they began to batter it with a Culverin and two Canons,
with assurance they should take it if it were not quickly relieved: but the
Count de Brissac, who not having been able to get into Angiers his Government,
had been sent by the Duke of Mayenne to command in that Province, being
accompanied with some Gentlemen, and other his dependants, to the number of 300
Horse, went to assist the Gautiers, that he might be able in time to relieve
that place.

The Gautiers were Country people, The Gautiers, (Country people) up in Arms,
to the number of 16000, fight for the League.
who at first had taken Arms against all soldiers that passed thorough their
Territories, to preve^^ the losses and outrages which they might suffer by
them; and after having received an impression, that the King was cause of all
those miseries, and that to the calamities of War he added the burden of
impositions, they had taken part with the League, and having broken the ways,
made up passages with bars and pales, and fortified their Towns and Villages,
were up in Arms, to the number of Sixteen thousand, and called themselves
Gautiers, because they had first begun their insurrections in a Town called la
Chappelle Gautier, to which afterward Vimotier, Bernay, and many other lesser
Towns had united themselves. They had chosen three Commanders, the Barons de
Maillot, and d' Eschaufourd, and the Sieur de Longchamp, Governor of Lisieux,
they had appointed Captain Vaumartell their Sergeant-Major-General, and
exercised themselves with order and military discipline in the profession of
Arms The Count of Brissac obtained that Four thousand of these men, so armed
and disciplined, should go with him to relieve Falaise; and thinking the number
sufficient to accomplish his design, with those Horse he had with him, besides
an hundred Harquebusiers on horseback, under Cap^^in Valage, and two
Fieldpieces, he marches that way, believing that the Duke of Montpensier, lest
he should have those Forces behind him, and Falaise before him, would retire,
and then he might fortify it better, and put in a stronger Garrison. But the
Gautiers being come within four Leagues of Falaise, quartered in a great Bourg,
which they fortified at the entry of the great highway toward the enemy with
their two Pieces, and with a Barricado made with barrels full of earth and
soil, that the^ might not be unexpectedly assaulted without defense; and the
Count de Brissac at a little distance from them, but out of the great highway,
took up his quarters, and sent forth parties of Horse to scour the Country.

Villiers, the King's Field-Mareschal, little valuing the number of those in
expert tag-rag fellows, having been out himself to discover their quarters,
persuaded the D. of Montpensier presently to raise the siege, and without delay
to assault the Enemy; and the Duke desirous to try the encounter, and being
very confident of Villiers his experience, quitting the siege the same night,
and drawing off his Canon from the wall, resolved to assault the Gantiers the
next morning. Villiers ordered the assault on this manner; that the Culverin
and the Canon should play along the great way upon the enemies Barricado and
Fieldpieces, and that then the Infantry should make the assault severally
under their Colonels upon that part; that the D. of Montpensier with his own
Troop should fall on by a way that led into the field on the right side, and
the Count de Torigny, with the Cavalry of the Vanguard, by another on the left
hand; and that the Sieurs de Sure^^, and de Baqueville, with two bodies of
horse should stand ready to oppose the Count de Brissac, if he with his horse
should make any attempt to divert the assault. The Culverin and Canon hit so
luckily, that they beat down all the enemies Barricado, and took off the head
of Captain Vaumartell, who was encouraging and ordering his soldiers: whereupon
the sign was presently given; to assault the enemy on all sides The Duke of
Montpensier, a brave generous Prince, trotted on at the head of his Cavalry to
attaque the Enemy; but wh^^soever the occasion was, leaving the place appointed
him on the right hand, he came to ^^ll on just in the place where (the
barricado being thrown down) the enemies two Pieces were planted, which had not
yet given fire, and he was in great danger to have many of his men slain, and
that the assault would have a bloody issue. The wind was very high, by reason
whereof, together with the noise of the Armies, no man's voice could be heard;
so that the Duke would certainly have been in danger, if Villiers, setting
spurs to his horse, running full speed to overtake him, and hitting him with
his Truncheon upon his Helmet, to make him stay, had not told him his error,
and brought him by a plain free way to charge the Enemy in the Flank; which the
Count de Torigny having done likewise on the other side, and the Infantry in
the Front (where about twenty soldiers were slain by the Faulconets) the Enemy
was defeated in less then an hour, with the loss of about Two thousand men, all
their Baggage, Montpensi^r defeats the Count de Brissac's Forces, who came to
divert the siege of Falaise.
Colors and Cannon. The Count de Brissac, who, during the conflict, appeared
upon a hill hard by, seeing himself without comparison inferior in force,
retired straight to Falaise, without making any further attempt; having, though
with so great a slaughter of his men, made way to relieve that place, and the
Kings Army victorious, quartered that night in the adjacent Villages.

It was debated in the Council of War, whether they should return to the Siege
of Falaise or no; but the opinion of Villiers prevailed, who (the Count de
Brissac being within it, with the rest of his Forces) thought it would be a
difficult, and a tedious business, and advised, that the Army, in the heat of
the Victory, should prosecute the Gautiers, to take their places, and pull up
the root of that Insurrection; for that obstacle being taken away, there would
be no Forces left in the Province, which could hinder them from taking in the
Towns. With this resolution, the Army increased with above Four hundred fresh
Horse, marched toward the Gautiers, who being resolved to make resistance to
the last man, put themselves in three places, Vimotier, Bernay, and la Chapelle
Gautier, into which the Commanders shut not up themselves, but Longchamp
retired to his Government, and the rest gave out, that they went to the Count
de Brissac to prepare assistance.

Vimotier was first assaulted, where with small trouble, it being an open
place, the Bourg was entered, above a Thousand of the Gautiers slain, and those
that fell into the Enemies hands alive, having taken an oath not to bear Arms
any more, but to follow their Tillage, were set at liberty; so that having
found very great gentleness and good order in the Army, by the care which the
Duke and Villiers used, in punishing those who dared to commit any outrage or
insolence, they were quieted, and returned to the managing of their own
affairs. Greater was the difficulty in assaulting Bernay, which was both walled
round, and had the best men within it; but the Cannon having battered from
morning till noon, the Foot made the assault, which having been stoutly
received by the defendants, they renewed the Battery the next morning; and
having made a wider breach, many Gentlemen alighted from their Horses, and put
themselves in the head of the Infantry, The Gautiers being fortified in three
places, after they had fought a long time, some are cut in pieces* and some
yield.
to facilitate the assault: Wherefore it being valiantly redoubled in the
morning, the service lasted hot and bloody for the space of four hours; at last
young l' Archant, and the Sieur de Baqueville entered the Town, and after them
the whole Army, putting the Gautiers to the Sword, whereof a very great number
was slain; and a House being set on fire by a Boy of Colonel St. Denis, who,
for that fault, was condemned by Villiers to suffer death, the greater part of
the Town was burned to the ground. There were killed on the King's side, the
Sieur de la Fountain, one of Villiers his Adju^ants, 14 Gentlemen, and about
100 Soldiers. The prisoners upon the same oath and conditions were set at
liberty. But the remainder of the Gautiers, reduced into la Chappelle, seeing
their companions defeated, and that the Commanders appeared not with relief
from any place, resolved to yield themselves; and having sent two Curates of
their Parishes, they were received to mercy on the same terms: whereupon,
leaving their Arms and Colors, they returned to their houses, and to their
wonted employment of Tilling the Earth.

This was the first prosperous success of the War, and the news thereof was
carried with great joy to the King to Tours, where he was busy in increasing
his Army, and giving order about his Interview with the King of Navarre. To
which purpose the Sieur du Plessis-Mornay was come to the King a great many
days before, and the Abbot del Been was likewise gone to the King of Navarre;
nor were they yet fully agreed concerning the place or manner of their meeting:
For the King would rather have desired the Hugonots should make War apart; and
also the King of Navarre was unwilling to come to Court, being dissuaded by
those about him, who ceased not continually to put him in remembrance of Paris,
and the danger of the Massacre of St. Bartholomews day. But necessity took away
those doubts, by the coming of the Duke of Mayenne; who serving in a popular
Cause, and desiring to put his name in reputation, to confirm and increase his
party, having left Paris, was come to Chasteau-Dune, and there made up his Army
from all parts; which, with two Regiments sent by the Parisians, was Eight
thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse. His first exploit was upon the City of
Vendosm, a great Town, and of the King of Navars Patrimony, and into which, the
Counselors of the Great Council were reduced by the Kings order, as into a
place which he thought secure; but the Governor holding secret intelligence to
go over to the League, Vendosme taken by the League, by agreement with the
Governor.
the Duke of Mayenne sent the Sieur de Rhosne thither unexpectedly with Two
thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse, who being brought in according to the
agreement, made himself Master of the City, and took prisoners all the
Magistrates of the Great Council, and many Clients who followed them, and who
were fain afterward with great sums of money to free themselves.

Vendosme being taken, and it being believed (as it was probable) that the Duke
would proceed further, the King set forward the Duke of Espernon with the
Vanguard of his Army toward Blois, to the end, that lying in the way, he might
hinder the march of the Enemy: But the Duke doubting lest the City might remain
a prey to the Duke of Mayenne, went thither with all the Foot, and left the
Count de Brienne with the Horse, quartered upon the way that leads from Blois
to Amboise near unto St. Ouyn. The Marshall d' Aumont, with the rest of the
Army encamped near the City of Tours, to keep it sufficiently guarded: And the
King dispatched the Abbot del Been the second time, to hasten the King of
Navarre's coming; who, when he had sent the Sieur de Chastillon, General of his
Infantry before, to present his duty to the King, and to receive his commands,
at last waited upon the King himself in the Or, Plessis les Tours.

The Interview between the most Christian King, and the King of Navarre at
Tours.


Parc du Plessis, without the Walls of Tours; where being met by the King, he
not only alighted from his horse a great while before he came near him, but
as soon as ever he was come unto him, kneeling down, he would by all means have
kissed his feet; but the King having raised him up, and embraced him closely,
laying aside all former enmities in a moment, led him talking along into the
City, passing through the Army that was imbattelled, and through the people which
were come out of the Gates, and with infinite applause, and loud acclamations
of the Soldiers, they went unto the Kings Lodgings, every one admiring, on the
one side the Kings courtesy, and on the other, the King of Navarre's
submission and obedience. The next day, after two long hours of secret
conference, the King of Navarre returned to his Forces which were yet quartered
beyond the River: And the King having put the Foot into the Suburb of St.
Syphorien, kept only his Guards in the City, and the Nobility about his person.

But the Duke of Mayenne seeing Blois so strengthened by the Duke of Espernon's
arrival, that there was no hope at all to take it; leaving that City, and the
Duke of Espernon, he passed on with his Army as far as Chasteau Renard, but
seven leagues distant from Tours, and from the Body of the Kings Army: And
having had intelligence that the Count de Brienne staid at St. Ouyn, where he
quartered carelessly with small Guards, his forces (according to the liberty of
the times) being dispersed and divided in those Villages, he marched nine
leagues out of his direct way with infinite speed, and coming unexpectedly,
found the Count so negligently unprovided, that many of his men were cut off
and taken prisoners in a moment, and he in great disorder fled away, and shut
himself up in the Town, without any provision to defend himself; where the Duke
being arrived, and having with equal haste planted his Cannon, though the
Marquess de Canillac (who as General of the Artillery commanded the Works which
were made there) and many of the stoutest Soldiers lost their lives; the Count
de Brienne was yet fain to yield himself, he being kept prisoner: But the
Soldiers, upon promise of not bearing Arms for a certain time, were set at
liberty.

The Count de Brienne being defeated and taken, The Duke of Mayenne defeats the
Count de Brienne, and takes him prisoner.
the Duke of Mayenne resolved to assault the Camp of the King himself, thinking
that not being united to the King of Navarre, and the Foot not well fortified
in the Suburb of St. Syphorien, a vast uneven place, it would not be very
difficult to overcome it, if the assault were unexpected: Wherefore having
raised his Camp upon the Seventh day of May in the evening when it began to
grow dark, bringing two Culverins along with infinite trouble, he arrived near
Tours with all his Forces about Sunrising. The Kings Foot were quartered in
the Suburbs; and because the place, being something low, was commanded (as by a
Cavalier) by a Hill, on the top whereof were certain houses, Colonel Moncasin,
who led the Van, drew a line about the houses, and placed himself there with a
strong Corpse de Guard, to keep the Enemy from possessing it, it being just in
the way that comes from Blois and Chasteau-Renard straight to the Town. The
Duke of Mayenne having caused his Army to make a halt in the Plain beyond the
Hill, to give his Soldiers a little rest, who were tired with the length and
speed of their march, sent two Regiments before, commanded by the Sieurs du
Cluseau and du Bourg, to make themselves Masters of those houses which annoyed
and obstructed all the Highway. These arrived very unexpectedly; yet not so
much, but that they were discovered by the Scouts: Wherefore having put their
Arms in a readiness on both sides, The Duke of Mayenne assaults the Kings Army
at Tours, where they fight a long time. The King himself orders and disposes
his Soldiers, puts himself among those that fight. At last, supplies coming
from the King of Navarre, the Duke of Mayenne gives off the enterprise.
there began a very fierce skirmish, just at the very time when the King being
come to visit that post was there present. His presence did much good: for
besides his being ready to dispose matters in good order for the fight, the
Sieur de Montigny, who was with him, ran at the first noise of the shot into
the forefront of the Battle, and by his words exhorting, and by his example
animating every one to do their duty, did confirm the courage of those Guards;
who remembering that they fought in the Kings own sight, made so gallant
resistance against the greater number of the Enemy, that their fury was bravely
repelled, till relief came up unto them. The King not at all dismayed, but with
a free secure countenance, though he was unarmed, and but slenderly attended,
causing the Regiments of Iarsey and Rubempre, who were upon the right and left
hand of the skirmish, to be supplied with Ammunition, commanded them to charge
the Enemy; and having himself drawn up the Swisses led by Colonel Galati, he
sent them presently to guard the City: for he was no less in fear of an uproar
within the City, than in doubt of the assault without. Above all things, the
King was most troubled to restrain the Gentry, who, stirred up by their courage
and thirst of honor, desired to engage themselves in the action; and falling
on scattered and dispersed, were without doubt likely to receive some great
mischief: But he opposing both his own command and person to the violence of
their forwardness, staid and withheld them; and putting them in order in small
squadrons, kept them near himself, that he might be able to assist in more
places than one, if need should require.

In the mean time, the Duke of Mayenne had planted his Culverins upon the Hill,
and with his furious shot had forced the defendents to quit the post of the
little houses, where the Sieur de Montigny, who fought in the first squadrons,
received a Musket Shot, Colonel Iarsey was slain, and above Two hundred
Soldiers: But though the Enemy had the higher ground, and that the Duke still
brought up fresh Forces where there was most need; yet Moncassin and Rubempre
continued stoutly disputing it, with an infinite thick hail of Musket-bullets,
whereby many fell on either side. But the Duke having commanded on the
Regiments of la Chataigneraye, and Ponsenac, made up of the old Soldiers of
the late Duke of Guise his Brother, and both the Kings Colonels being wounded,
the Foot began to retire, and the Enemy putting courageously forward at last
made made themselves Masters of all the Suburb. The King desiring to have it
recovered, lest with so little provision he should be besieged in the City,
which was all he had left behind him, commanded Monsieur de Grillon, who as
Colonel of his Guards commanded the Infantry, that he should make a charge to
drive out the Enemy. Grillon advanced valiantly with the flower of his men, and
two gallant Squadrons of Gentlemen advanced with him, who having alighted from
their horses by the Kings permission were ready to fall on with Sword and
Pistol. These at their arrival renewed the battle; and having in their first
charge recovered one of the streets of the Suburb, made so fierce a conflict,
that they fought with various fortune, and very great obstinacy, till the
declining of the day, at which time the Dukes Artillery playing hotter than
ever from the higher ground, and Claude Chevalier d' Aumale being come with two
fresh Squadrons to relieve his party, Grillon very much wounded, and his men
spent, with the toil of the whole day, were constrained to quit the Suburb, and
retreated to defend the Bridge, upon which the King himself was, with all the
Nobility that attended him. The fight was fore and sharp; but some small
Fieldpieces being planted at the entry of the Bridge, they kept back the
Enemy, who being already Masters of the whole Suburb, strove most eagerly to
get possession of it.

But whilst they fought with doubtful event, and equal courage on either side,
the King of Navarre having suddenly had intelligence of the business, was moved
with his whole Force to relieve the King; and that delay might not hinder the
effect of his intentions, he had sent Monsieur de Chastillon before, with
fifteen hundred of the best Foot of his Army, who arriving about Sunset,
marched read^ly to the place of Battle. They being come in fresh, and desirous
to make themselves remarkable in the most dangerous service, repelled the
violence of the Enemy in such manner, that night coming upon them, put an end
to the business, as it were with a common consent, expecting the next days
light. The defense of the Bridge was given in charge to Monsieur de Chastillon,
because his men were freshest; and the King, with the Duke of Monbason and the
Marshall d' Aumont, betook himself to guard the City, having with him the
Swisse Infantry, and the Nobility of the Court. There were killed that day
above four hundred soldiers on the King's side, and many Commanders, Chevalier
Berton Nephew to Colonel Grillon, and St. Malin, the same who with his dagger
gave the first wound to the Duke of Guise at Blois. Of the Army of the League
were slain above an hundred, but only two Commanders, and few persons of
quality. The Chevalier d' Aumale, as General of the Infantry to the League, was
left to make good the Suburb they had taken, and the Marquess de Pienne, with
his Regiment, drew up just over against the Sieur de Chastillon at the entry of
the Bridge; both sides laboring all night, with infinite diligence, to
entrench themselves.

Many outrages were committed in the Suburb, both to things sacred and profane;
nor were the Soldiers of the League more modest against Churches and
Monasteries, then the Hugonots would have been if they had entered it, though
the Duke of Mayenne, by nature averse from Military insolences, did strive,
with all possible diligence to hinder them: but the license of a voluntary
Army, which is unpaid, is very difficult to be restrained. They lay in
continual suspicion, and many alarms were given all the night; but upon
Thursday the ninth of May, the Regiments of Charboniere, sent by the King of
Navarre to their relief, appearing about break of day, and it being known that
he himself was hard by, advancing with the rest of his Army; the Duke of
Mayenne having lost all hopes of making any further progress, caused his dead
to be buried, and leaving the Suburb which he had taken, retreated in good
order to his former quarters.

This day (though they lost the Suburbs) seemed very remarkable, and gave
exceeding great hopes to them that followed the King's party, because that
after so many years of ease and rest, they saw in him a fearless Majesty, St.
Malin, who gave the first wound to the Duke of Guise at Blois, slain in the
Fight at Tours; his death is boasted of, as a Miracle, and as a presage of
Victory.
first putting his Army in array himself, though with but a little Company, and
utterly unarmed; and then (having taken his arms at the head of his Nobility)
in overseeing and ordering the Fight, providing against all accidents, and
reassuming that name and authority of a General, which having been practiced by
him with so much glory in his younger years, had, by reason of his hidden
designs, been for a time utterly laid down.

But on the other side, the Duke of Mayenne, and all those of the League,
making use of the outward appearance in having taken the Suburbs, and beaten
out the King's Infantry from their Post, with Writings published in Print fit
for the popular cause, did, by all manner of ways, magnify and augment every
circumstance of that action, amplifying the number and quality of those that
were slain, exalting the valor of their own soldiers, boasting of the death of
St. Malin, as a miracle of public vengeance, and prognosticating within a
while an absolute victory to their party.

But about the same time they received a much greater loss; for the City of
Senlis, ten Leagues distant from Paris, and very opportune for the state of
present affairs, which at first had taken part with the League, having now
declared for the King, and called in Guilliaume de Momorancy, Lord of Thore;
there passed not many days before the Duke of Aumale, knowing there were but
small Forces there, resolved to lay siege unto it, thinking assuredly to take
it before it could be relieved: wherefore having called unto him the Sieur de
Balagny Governor of Cambray, and those Gentlemen which in Picardy and the Isle
of France followed his party, with seven hundred Horse, and nine thousand Foot
(but most of them tumultuously listed in Paris, under the command of the Sieur
de Meneville) and nine pieces of Cannon, sat down before it the seventh day of
May. The besieged defended themselves stoutly from the beginning; and the next
day after the Enemy had entrenched, they made so bold a Sally, that above an
hundred of the Parisians were slain, and among them the Sieur de Chamois, an
old servant of the House of Guise: but after the Artillery was planted, there
being but small store of ammunition in the Town, and none of those things which
were necessary for their defense, they called the Duke of Longueville to their
relief, who, with Monsieur de la Noue was come to Compeigne. But the Forces
were very unequal, and the Gentry of the Province was not met together;
wherefore the besieged were forced to treat of yielding, being destitute of all
hope to hold out longer, and being as it were assured they should not be
relieved; and yet news being come to Compeigne, that the besieged were
capitulating, the Gentlemen began to entreat the Duke of Longueville, that he
would lead them on to fight, thinking it a great affront to them to suffer that
Town to be lost before their very faces, without striking a blow. The Duke of
Longueville was a young Lord, and one, who though full of spirit, did yet refer
all things to the advice of Monsieur de la Noue, and of the Baron de Guiry, who
commanded the Light Horse. These thought the inequality of Forces so great (for
they had not above eight hundred Horse, and less than two thousand Foot) that
they esteemed it extreme folly to adventure themselves, The Duke of Aumale
besieges S^nlis; Monsieur de Longueville goes with small forces to relieve it,
and raises the siege with a great slaughter of the Leaguers.
especially if the Enemy, drawing into Battalia, should plant their Canon
before them. But so obstinate was the forwardness of the young Gentry, who were
grieved to stand idle without doing any thing, that the Commanders resolved to
go within sight of the Enemy, and expect the opportunity of some occasion,
believing it easy to retreat without danger, as they thought it most difficult
by any means to relieve the Town. Being come to the top of a hill which
over-looks the Plain where the City stands, they saw that the Duke of Aumale
having had notice of their coming, began to draw up his Army in the field,
which la Noue being advanced before all the rest, began diligently to observe,
and perceiving (as a soldier of very long experience) the unreadiness of his
men, who went confusedly into their ranks, with their Pikes tottering
unsteadily, (a wonted manifest sign of inexpert soldiers) and above all, that
having left their Artillery, either for want of knowledge in the affairs of
War, or too much confidence, they were deprived of so great an advantage, he
turned back to Giury, and told him, that the Enemies faintness did almost
persuade him to hazard the encounter; which being heard by the Gentry, and the
Duke of Longueville desirous to make his youth renowned by some glorious
exploit, all prayed him to yield unto that motion: and he taking courage from
the boldness and forwardness of them all, having drawn the Cavalry into five
Divisions, commanded out the Musketeers, with three Faulconets, which they had
brought along, to begin the Battle in the Plain. The Faulconets were so hidden
and encompassed by the Foot, that they were hardly seen; and marched so fast,
that keeping pace with the Soldiers, they were not discovered by the Enemy:
Wherefore the Sieur de Balagny that led their Vanguard, being inconsiderately
advanced, his squadron at the first encounter was so torn and disordered by the
Artillery, which gave fire three times very happily, that before they had time
to rally, the Baron de Giury rushing upon them with his Light Horse, and the
Sieurs d' Humieres, and Bonivet following with two valiant Squadrons of
Gentlemen, he was not only forced manifestly to give ground, but to turn his
back without resistance: Which beginning being followed by the Duke of
Longueville, and on the other side by the Sieur de la Noue, they routed the
Cavalry, which made small opposition; and having pursued it not above three
hundred paces, they wheeled about, and fell in upon the Parisian Infantry;
which being charged in the front by La Noue's Musketeers, and there being no
Commander who knew how to order them securely in time of need, their ranks
being broken, they never defended themselves, but having cast away their Pikes
and Muskets, began to flee in disorder; in which flight, being pursued by the
Cavalry, and the besieged at the same time sallying out on their Rear, The Duke
of Aumale loses the day, with his Artillery, Baggage, and thirty Colors.
there was a very great slaughter of them; the Field won, the Trenches entered,
the Artillery taken, which were kept by the Conquerors, with above thirty
Colors. Of the Kings Army, not above twenty men were slain, and no Officer of
note: The Army of the League lost above One thousand and two hundred, and among
those, the Sieur de Meneville, an old servant of the House of Guise, who making
resistance where the Artillery was, received a Musket shot through the side.

The Duke of Aumale retired to St. Denis, not having the heart to carry that
news to Paris; which being related by the Sieur de Belagny, filled the whole
City with infinite terror, insomuch as Madam de Montpensier, and Madam de
Guise, could hardly confirm their fickle minds; as easily lost, as ready and
forward to rebel. But the Council of the Union being come together, they
resolved to call back the Duke of Mayenne as soon as possibly they could, not
being confident of any other bodies sufficiency to deliver them from the danger
of the enemies Army, which, much increased since the Victory, overran all the
Country.

The Duke of Mayenne, after he had left Tours, having no hope by longer stay,
to be able to make any progress against both the Armies joined together, had
marched back with very great speed toward Normandy; and being come to Alancon,
a great important City, had (in a manner unexpectedly) gotten it by
composition; by which he reaped this benefit, That the Duke of Montpensier,
already victorious in that Province, could not turn to unite himself with the
King's Forces, and increase his Camp any more: And therefore having taken
Alancon, he intended to pass on further, with certain hopes, that he should
every day make greater progress: But the sum of all affairs consisting in the
City of Paris, and seeing that people not only straightned for victuals,
because the Duke de Longueville cut off all passages, but also dejected,
discouraged, and without his presence, ready to break out into some tumult, he
resolved to leave all other attempts, and return presently to settle it. So
with his whole Army, making great marches, and without offering at any
enterprise by the way, he came in the beginning of June into the Isle of
France, which invirons the City of Paris.

In the mean time, the King, to whom Poictiers had lately revolted, having put
his men in order at Chastelrault, resolved to pass the Loyre, and, marching
toward Paris, either to straighten that City, or meet the enemy if he advanced
to fight in the open field. The King of Navarre with his Forces led the
Vanguard; and before all, the Sieur de Chastillon with the Avaunt Coureurs. The
King commanded the Battle, with whom were the Duke of Montbason, the Mareschals
of Biron and Aumont, Monsieur d'O, and many other Lords and Commanders. The
Duke of Espernon brought up the Rereguard. At the Kings second quarters, he
received Letters from Monsieur de Sancy by an Express, (who coming disguised
along by-ways, brought them secretly put up in the cover of a Breviary) by
which he gave them to understand, that having obtained from the Swisses of the
Canton of Berne, not only to leavy men; but also a certain sum of Money lent
him, upon promise, that the King should defend them, Monsieur de Sancy having
raised great Forces in Switzerland, and begun the War with Savoy,
marches-towards Paris against the Leaguers.
and those of Geneva from the molestation of the Duke of Savoy; he had raised
Ten thousand Foot of that Nation, Two thousand German Horse, and Three thousand
French Firelocks; and that having begun the War with the Duke in the Confines
of Geneva, and engaged the Canton of Berne to make resistance in those parts,
till the King having disintangled his affairs, could be able to assist them
with powerful Forces; he being come into the Territory of Langres, was marching
thorough the Province of Champagne, the straight way to Paris.

This news did not only rejoice the King, who was sollicitous about that
business, but the whole Army also; there being no man but believed, that with
those Forces they should in a few weeks be able to curb the Insurrections of
the League: And the Kings intent upon that celerity, which he thought necessary
above all things, made made present dispatches several ways; to the Duke of
Longueville, and Monsieur de la Noue, commanding them, that having gathered as
many Forces as possibly they could, they should move without delay, to meet
that Army in Champagne; and gave the Duke of Montpensier direction to follow
the Duke of Mayenne (who from the confines of Normandy was turned toward Paris)
and come to join with him in some convenient place. This order being taken,
they continued their intended voyage, with so general a gladness in the Army,
that they held the Victory in a manner assured.

But this common joy was something troubled by the misfortune of the Count de
Soissons, who having been dispatched by the King with Monsieur de Lavardin to
command in Bretagne, while he was about to unite himself in the City of Renes,
with the Gentry of the Province who expected him, being lodged carelessly, and
with slender Guards at Chasteau-Gyron, was assaulted about midnight by the Duke
de Mercoeur; The Count de Soissons assaulted at Chasteau-Gyron by the Duke de
Mercoeur, is taken prisoner.
who coming from Vitry with his Forces, had marched a great many Leagues
thither; where, after such resistance as the place would permit, and his
strength was able to make, the Count at last was taken prisoner by the Enemy.
By this accident the King was forced (though he was not in a condition to
diminish the Body of his Army) to send some number of men into that Province,
under Henry of Bourbon, Prince of Dombes, son to the Duke of Montpensier, who
being a youth of but tender years, began to give proof of a generous spirit,
and of a very great courage.

The Army marched on its way with very great order; and the Vanguard being come
to Beugency, upon the One and twentieth day of May, the Sieur de Chastillon
with his Troops advanced to get intelligence, and discover the ways of the
Country, The Sieur de Saveuse going with 400 horse to join with the Duke of
Mayenne, is routed by the Sieur de Chastillo^, and taken prisoner.
while at the same time Monsieur de Saveuse marched with Three hundred Lances,
and One hundred Light Horse to join with the Duke of Mayennes Army. He not
being advertised of the Kings arrival, having left Bonneval a very rich
Monastery within the Territories of Chartres, went on his way. But the parties
sent out before on each side, having met, and begun to skirmish without knowing
one another; the Sieur de Chastillon stronger in Forces, and more ready to
fight, fell on and charged Saveuse so on all sides, that having killed an
Hundred and fifty of his men, who fought valiantly, he, with Sixty Gentlemen,
was taken prisoner; and having received two wounds in the encounter, died of
them within a few days after.

Thus matters going on prosperously, upon the Three and twentieth they encamped
at Gergeau, a Town of a convenient bigness, plentiful, and which has in it one
of the principal Bridges of the River Loire. In this place commanded the Sieur
de Ialanges, who being summoned to yield, and not to hazard the battery of a
Royal Army, having refused to do so, the Canon was planted, and after not much
difficulty, the Wall being entered forcibly by assault, he was condemned
presently to be hanged. The Town was sacked by the Army, and the Defendents cut
in pieces; the King, The King takes Gergeau and Piviers.
contrary to his nature, using very great severity, as one who often alleged,
that he made not War against a lawful Enemy, but persecuted the obstinate
stubborness of Rebels. After the taking of Gergeau, followed that of Piviers,
where the same rigor was used against the Magistrates of the place: Chartres
voluntarily sets open the Gates.
Wherefore Chartres not staying so much as for a Summons, set open their Gates,
received the King with all his Army; and having driven out the dependents of
the League, submitted it self to his obedience.

The Pope by a Monitory declares the King liable to Censure, if within 60 days
he releases not the Prelates, and does not Penance for the Cardinal of Guise's
death. The King troubled at it, fasts forty hours.
Thither the news was brought by the Sieur de la Clielle, how the Pope, by a
Monitory, had declared, that the King should incurr censure, if within the term
of Sixty days he released not the Prelates out of Prison; and if within the
same time he made not his due submission for the death of the Cardinal of
Guise; which struck the King so deeply, that he was above Forty hours without
eating or drinking. This last resolution had been obtained by the Dean of
Rheims, who lately dispatched to Rome by the Duke of Mayenne, had, by
amplifying, not only the reasons of the League, but also the Forces of the
Confederates, and the King's weakness, at last induced the Pope unto it, so
much the more easily, after the report was divulged, that the King treated an
agreement with the King of Navarre, and was about to call the Hugonots unto his
party. The Monitory was posted up in Rome upon the Three and twentieth of May,
and within a very few days after published at Meaux, ten Leagues distant from
Paris, the Bishop of which place was made High-Chancellor by the Duke of
Mayenne in the Council of the Union. The King was so grieved for this
determination of the Pope, that it produced an universal sadness, and the
progress of the Army was very much slackened by it. Wherefore the Archbishop of
Bourges began publicly to comfort him, saying, That as the Pope ill-informed,
by the suggestion of the Confederates, believing what they did was out of zeal
to Religion, had pronounced that Sentence: so when he should be better
informed, and assured that they fought for Passion and Ambition, and not for
the Apostolic See, nor for the Faith, he certainly, as a common Father, would
change his opinion. But the King, after a deep sigh, replied, That he thought
it very hard, that he who had ever fought and labored for Religion, Words of
Hen. the Third, upon the Excommunication thundered out against him. The King of
Navarr's Answer.
should be rashly excommunicated, because he would not suffer his own throat to
be cut by the Arms of his Rebel-Subjects; and that those who had sacked Rome,
and kept the Pope himself prisoner, had never been Excommunicated: to which the
King of Navarre, who was present, answered; But they were victorious, Sir: Let
your Majesty endeavor to conquer, and be assured the Censures shall be
revoked; but if we be overcome, we shall all die condemned Heretics. The King
assented, and all the bystanders did the like; and upon that hope, The King
taking Estampes hangs the Magistrates, and gives the pillage of the Town to the
Soldiers.
order was given the Army should march, and having laid siege to Estampes, and
that Town being taken by assault, the King very much exasperated, and moved by
his natural melancholy, now outwardly stirred up by so many provocations,
caused all the Magistrates to be hanged, and gave the pillage of the Town
freely to the soldiers. From Estampes, the King being desirous to shut up all
the passages of those Rivers that were fit to streighten the City of Paris,
marched on with the body of his Army to besiege Poissy, and the Duke of
Espernon enlarging himself with the Rear, took, and with the same violence
sacked Montereau upon the River Yonne. Poissy made very little resistance, and
the Town yielding it self, the King was Master of that brave spacious Bridge,
which there gives passage over the Seine, by the help whereof he was able to
enlarge himself on both sides the River. In this place the D. of Montpensier,
who had followed the track of the D. of Mayenne out of Normandy, without
receiving any opposition, joined with the King's Army, who intended to make
that Town his Magazine, gave the Government of it to the Sieur de Villiers, and
leaving his Baggage, Ammunion, and part of his Artillery there, put in a
Garrison of 2000 Foot.

Poissy being taken and manned, the King of Navarre, with his Vanguard, went
without delay to besiege Pontoise, in which Monsieur d'Alincourt was Governor,
and with him the Sieur de Hautfort, put in also by the Duke of Mayenne, to
supply what should be defective; these having fortified a Church which stood in
a corner of the Town, and reduced it to the form of a Raveline, stood
constantly upon their defense. The first force was employed against the Church,
which battered and assaulted, and no less resolutely defended, maintained it
self for the space of nine days: at the end of which, Hautfort being killed
with a Cannon-shot, the Church was also taken and utterly demolished, and the
defendents retired to make good the Walls. But the Sieur d'Alincourt being
wounded in the shoulder, and the most valiant of the Defendents being slain by
the violence of the Artillery, and in the fury of a bloody assault, the rest
were necessarily forced to yield; who marched out of the Town upon the four and
twentieth of July, with this condition, that they should not bear arms again in
service of the League, till after three months.

The next day after the taking of Pontoise, the foreign Army arrived at
Poissy-bridge; for Monsieur de Sancy, being first met by the Count de Tavannes,
with Five hundred Horse, in the Confines of Bourgongne, and then in Champagne
by the Duke de Longueville; and the Sieur de la Noue with Twelve hundred Horse,
and Two thousand French Musketeers, had advanced with great diligence; nor
durst the Duke of Mayenne, who had made show that he would oppose his passage,
meet him with so much weaker Forces; so that upon Saint James's day they passed
the Bridge at Poissy, being received with great joy, and provided for, with
great plenty, to refresh themselves, by Monsieur de Villiers, who had caused
many carts full of Wine, and provisions, to be brought beyond the Bridge, to
welcome the Swisses and the Germans. The next morning, which was Saint Annes
day, the King desired to see them, and view them in their Divisions, largely
spread over the fields; The Swisses arrive and join with the King at Poissy
and being accompanied by the King of Navarre, and the Duke of Montpensier, he
welcomed and cherished the Commanders with great familiarity, honoring them
with such warlike presents, as the state of things, in the fury of Arms would
permit. There were 10000 Swisses, 2000 German Foot, 2000 Reiters; to which the
Forces of the King, the Duke of Longueville, the Duke of Montpensier, the Baron
de Giury, the King of Navarre being added, the Army amounted to the number of
Two and forty thousand fighting men. The terror of this Army made all the
places thereabout to yield; and the Bridge of St. Cloud, a place within a
League of Paris, having had the boldness to shut their Gates, upon the nine and
twentieth day, was victoriously forced open, and the relief which the Sieurs de
Bourdaisiere, and Tremblecourt had attempted to put into it, with two Regiments
of Foot, and Four hundred Horse, was likewise furiously driven back by the
Cavalry.

The affairs of Paris were already reduced into an exceeding ill condition; for
all the Bridges being lost, all the neighboring Towns surrendered, all the
passages of the River stopped, and the City straightened on all sides, The King
with a victorious and numerous Army lays siege to Paris having taken all those
plac^s that furnished it with victual.
there was no other hope left than what the presence of the Duke of Mayenne and
of the Army afforded, which was all shut up within the circuit of the Suburbs
of Paris. The Army was 8000 French Foot, and 1800 Horse; but so great was the
scarcity of victual, and the terror that had seized every one by reason of the
Kings's prosperous successes and severe resolution, that within two days the
French Foot were reduced to Five thousand, and the Germans demanding meat and
money, began to threaten, that they would go over to the Enemies Camp. Nor were
the inhabitants more resolute, or more unanimous than the soldiers; for the
common people following the ordinary course, as they had been precipitate to
rebel; so hoping by their meanness and obscurity to lie hid, and escape
unpunished, were easily induced to submit themselves to the King; and those who
from the beginning had been inclined to his devotion, but durst not declare
themselves, now by his being so near, and by the danger of the rest, being
become bold and fearless, began to persuade the people through the several
quarters, and to put them into such despair of the present affairs, that the
Duke of Mayenne was no less troubled with the inconstancy of the Parisians,
than with the potent Forces of the King; yet showing courage answerable to the
greatness and urgency of the necessity, he dispatched young Meneville to the
Duke of Lorain (to whom Iamets, having been besieged by him a whole year, was
at last surrendered) desiring him to come personally to his relief, and had
given order that Four thousand Germans, leavied by his Commission, should make
haste to join with him, that they might advance together to raise the siege of
Paris. But these Succors were too late, too far off, and too uncertain; for
the Germans were yet in their own Country, the Duke of Lorain was not well
resolved what he should do, the reputation of the League was suddenly fallen in
every Province, and the people, the first violence of their passion being over,
and they full of infinite fear, thought every where of returning to the Kings
obedience, who having taken St. Cloud, had himself begirt the Fauxbourg of St.
Honor, and all that side of the Lovre to the River; and the King of Navarre on
the other side besieged from the Fauxbourg of St. Marceau, to that of St.
Germain. The Duke of Mayenne was quartered in the Fauxbourg of St. Germain, and
defended both St. Marceau and St. Victoire, having caused his posts to be shut
up every where with trenches: the Sieur de la Castre, with the Germans and a
Regiment of Walloons guarded the Fauxbourg of St. Honor, Montmartre, and St.
Dennis, which was likewise enclosed and fortified with trenches. In the City
the Dutchesses of Nemours, Montpensier, and Guise, with the Preachers (though
much fallen in courage and reputation) were busy in animating the people, who
appeared manifestly sad and dejected. Monsieur de Rhosne executing the Office
of Camp-Master-General, ran up and down to every place; and the Priests and
Friars had taken up Arms, putting themselves generally upon Military duty.

The City of Paris being in so great a straight, and in so much terror, (a
thing very well known to the King, by the frequency of those which ran every
hour from the City to his Camp) upon the last day of July, would needs
personally view the Enemies posts; and by the advice of the Marshall d'
Aumont, and Monsieur de la Noue, who were with him, resolved to refresh his
Army the next day, and upon the second of August to assault their Works on
every side; being not only confident of a happy issue, but as it were certain
that the Germans would mutiny, and that many in the City would take up Arms on
his side; some out of their old constant inclinations, and some by their
present services, to cancel their former faults and insurrections. In his
return toward St. Cloud, stopping his horse upon a Hill, from whence he saw all
the City distinctly, A saying of the Kings, who having been to discover the
Enemies Works, staid at a place from whence he looked upon the whole City of
Paris.
he broke forth into this saying; Paris, Thou art the Head of the Kingdom, but
a Head too great and too capricious; it is necessary, by letting Blood, to cure
thee again, and free the whole Kingdom from thy madness: And I hope, that
within a few days, here shall be neither Walls nor Houses, but only the very
footsteps of Paris. And there was no man who did not already make that
Prognostic: And the Duke of Mayenne being resolved not to outlive his ruin,
had determined to get on horseback with the Sieurs de Rhosne, and de la
Chastre, and to die honorably by fighting, in that space that lies between the
modern Walls of the Town and the Suburbs, which they saw they could not defend.

But as in the revolutions of this War, strange mavelous accidents have still
happened; so an unexpected and unthought-of chance, provided against the exigency
of that danger, which neither the prudence nor valor of the Commanders were
able to prevent. There was in Paris one Jacques Clement, a Friar, (of the Order
of St. Dominick, which commonly are called Iacobins) born of mean parentage in
a Village called Sorbone, The birth, age and condition of Jacques Clement, a
Friar of the Order of St. Dominick.
in the Territory of the City of Sens, a Young Man, about Two and twenty years
of age, and always thought by his Fellow-Fryars, and many others that knew him,
to be a half-witted Fellow, and rather a subject of sport, than to be feared,
or that any serious matter of consequence was to be hoped for from him. I
remember, that (having been often to visit Friar Stephano Lusignano, a Cyprian
Bishop of Limisso, and Brother of the same Order, when the Court was at Paris)
I have seen him, and heard the other Friars make sport with him. This Fellow,
either led by his own fancy, or stirred up by the Sermons which he heard daily
made against Henry of Valois, The King is called Henry of Valois the Tyrant,
and Persecutor of the Faith.
called the Tyrant, and Persecutor of the Faith, took a resolution to hazard
his life in attempting some means to kill him: Nor did he keep this bold
thought of his secret, but cried out among his Fellow-Fryars, That it was
necessary to take Arms, and cut off the Tyrant: Which words, heard by them with
their wonted laughter, he was in derision called Captain Clement by them all.
Many provoked him, by telling the Kings proceedings, and how he was coming
against the City of Paris: To whom (while the Army was far off) he would
answer, That it was not yet time, and that he would not take so much pains. But
when the King began to draw near, he passing from jests to a serious
determination, told one of his Fathers, that he had a bold inspiration to go
and kill Henry of Valois, and desired him to counsel him, if he should execute
it. The Father having imparted this business to the Prior, who was one of the
chief Counselors of the League; they both answered, That he should take good
heed, it were no temptation of the Devil; that he should fast and pray, begging
of God to enlighten his mind what he should do. Within a few days he came
again to the Prior, and the other Father, telling them, He had done as they
advised him, and that he found in himself more spirit than ever to undertake
the enterprise. The Fathers, (as many said) having conferred about the business
with Madam de Montpensier; or (as they of the League will have it) of their own
proper motion, exhorted him to the attempt, affirming to him, That if he lived,
he should be made a Cardinal; and if he died, for freeing the City, and killing
the Persecutor of the Faith, he should without doubt be canonized for a Saint.
The Friar ardently excited by these Exhortations, labored to get a Letter of
Credit from the Count de Brienne, who, having been taken at St. Ouyn, was still
prisoner in the City, assuring him, That he was to speak with the King about a
business of infinite importance, and which should redound to his very great
contentment. The Count not knowing the Friar, but hearing how the City stood
affected, and that many plotted to bring in the King, believing the business to
be true which he professed to deal in, made no difficulty of granting him the
Letter; with which departing upon the last day of July in the Evening, Friar
Jacques Clement having advised with the Prior, and others of his Order, resolves
to kill the King, and to that end goes from Paris.
he went from the City into the King's Camp, where he was presently taken by
the Guards; but he saying, he had business and Letters to communicate to the
King, and having showed the superscription, was brought to Jacques de la Guesle,
the King's Attorney General, who executed the Office of Auditor of the Camp.
The Sieur de la Guesle having heard the Friar, and knowing, that the King had
returned when it was dark, from discovering the Enemies Works, told him, It was
too late for that night, but the next morning he would bring him to him without
fail; and that in the mean time, he might stay, for his security, in his
Lodgings. The Friar accepted the invitation, supped at Table with la Guesle,
cut his meat with a new Knife, with a black Haft, which he had about him; Eat,
drank, and slept without care. And because a Prophecy ran, not only thorough
the Army, but thorough the whole Kingdom, That the King should be killed by a
Friar; A Question made to the Friar, and his Answer.

Upon the first of August the Friar brought in to the King, gives him a Letter;
and then drawing a Knife, thrust it into his Belly.


he was asked by many, if perchance he came for that end: To whom he answered
without disturbance* That those were not things to be jested withal in that
manner. In the morning upon the first day of August, Monsieur de la Guesle went
to the King's Lodgings very early, and having told him the Friars desire to
speak with him, was commanded presently to bring him in, though he was not yet
quite ready, but still without his Buff-coat (which by reason of his Arms he
was wont to wear) and having on only a thin Taffaty Doublet all untrussed. The
Friar being brought in, while they both withdrew to a Window on one side of the
room, he delivered the Letter from the Count de Brienne, which the King read;
and having bid him proceed to tell his business, he feigned to feel for another
Paper to present it; and while the King stood intentively expecting it, he
having drawn his wonted Knife out of his sleeve, struck him on the left side of
the Navel, and left all the blade buried in the wound. The King feeling the
blow, The King strikes the same Knife into the Friars Forehead. Monsieur de la
Guesle runs him thorough; and being cast out of the window, he is torn in
pieces.
drew forth the Knife, and in drawing of it, made the wound wider, and
presently struck it himself up to the Haft in the Friars Forehead, who at the
same time ( la Guesle running him thorough with his Sword) fell instantly dead;
and was no sooner fallen, but Momperat, Lognac, and the Marquess de Mirepoix,
Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber, who were present at the fact, threw him out of
the Window, where, by the common Soldiers he was torn in pieces, burnt, and his
ashes scattered in the River.

The King was carried to his Bed, and the wound was not thought mortal by the
Chirurgions: Wherefore having called his Secretaries, he caused an account of
the business to be given to all parts of the Kingdom, exhorting all the
Governors not to be dismayed, for that he hoped he should be cured within a few
days, and be able to ride: The same he did to the chief Commanders and
Principal Officers of his Army; and having presently sent for the King of
Navarre, committed to him the care of his Army, and the diligent prosecution of
the enterprise. But at night he felt wonderful great pain in his wound, and
fell into a Fever: Wherefore having called his Chirurgions, and search being
made, they found his Intrails were pierced; so that they all agreed his life
could not last many hours. The King, who desired to know the truth, being told
his danger, caused Estienne Boulogne his Chaplain, to be called, and with very
great devotion, made Confession of his sins: But before Absolution, his
Confessor having told him, that he had heard, the Pope had published a Monitory
against him; and therefore he should satisfy his Conscience in the present
extremity: He replied, That it was true; but the Monitory it self contained,
that in case of death he might be absolved; that he would satisfy the Popes
request, and promised faithfully to release the prisoners, though he should
believe it would cost him his Life and Crown: With which satisfaction, the
Confessor absolved him, and gave him the Sacraments the same night. The King
feeling his strength decay, caused his Chamber-doors to be set open, and the
Nobility to be brought in; who with abundance of tears and bitter sighs, showed
public sins of their grief: And turning toward them, the Duke of Espernon, and
the Count d' Auvergne his Nephew standing by his Bedside, he said with an
audible voice, That it troubled him not to die; but he was grieved to leave the
Kingdom in so great disorder, and all good men afflicted and persecuted: That
he desired no revenge for his death; for from his first years, he had learned
in the School of Christ to forgive injuries, as he had done so many in times
past: But turning to the King of Navarre, he told him, That if that custom of
killing Kings should grow in use, neither should he, by consequence be long
secure: He exhorted the Nobility to acknowledge the King of Navarre, to whom
the Kingdom of right belonged; and that they should not stick at the difference
in Religion; for both the King of Navarre, a man of a sincere noble nature,
would, in the end, return into the bosom of the Church, and the Pope, being
better informed, would receive him into his favor, to prevent the ruin of the
whole Kingdom. At last he embraced the King of Navarre, and said, repeating it
twice over: Brother, I assure you, you will never be King of France, The death
of Hen. the third, upon the first of August at night, Anno 1589, he having
lived 36 years, and reigned 1^, and two months: the House of Valois ended in
him, and the Crown devolved upon the House of Bourbon.
if you turn not Catholic, and if you humble not your self unto the Church;
after which words, having called his Chaplain, he, in the presence of them all,
rehearsed the Creed, after the use of the Roman Church, and having Crossed
himself, began the Mis^r^re, but his speech failing him in these words, Read
mihi laetitiam salutis tui, he yielded up the Ghost contentedly, having lived
Thirty six years, and reigned Fifteen, and just two months. In his death ended
the line of Kings of the House of Valois, and the posterity of Philip the
Third, surnamed the Hardy, and by virtue of the Salique Law, the Crown devolved
to the Family of Bourbon, nearest of the Blood, and descended from Robert Count
of Clermont the second son of St. Louis.

The whole Army being wonderfully grieved at so sad, so fatal an accident, and
especially the Nobility, who accompanied the death of their Prince with tears,
which came from the bottom of their hearts: but on the other side, the
Parisians showed profuse signs of joy, and some among the Great Ones, who had
till then worn mourning for the death of the Lords of Guise, did again put on
their Gallantry and their feathers, and leaving off black, clothed themselves
in Green; though the Duke of Mayenne, with the wonted moderation of his
prudence, far from such like demonstrations, minded only how to excuse
himself, and divulge with all diligence, that he had no hand in the business,
and that it was directly and immediately the Hand of Heaven; which nevertheless
was believed by few; for the opinion which was conceived, was not to be rooted
out of men's minds, it being unlikely that the chief men of the Union, and
particularly the Prior, a trusty Counselor of the Grand-Council of it, should
not have conferred about the fact with the Princes, and with their privity
exhorted, and with effectual motives spurred on the simplicity of the Friar:
but as the factious occurrences of Civil Wars are full of Lies and fabulous
inventions, others added many fictions to the truth, which a certain Writer,
perhaps through ignorance, or heedlesness, or else through hatred, has not
shunned to publish in his Writings.

But howsoever it were, it is indeed a thing worthy of very great
consideration, to think how the singular virtues and eminent qualities of so
brave a Prince should come to so cruel, so unfortunate an end; from thence to
learn this excellent Lesson, That the skilfulness of the Pilot avails but
little, if the wind of divine favor, which with eternal Providence governs
mortal affairs, help not to bring our actions into their desired port: For in
Henry the Third were all amiable qualities, which, in the beginning of his
years, were exceedingly reverenced and admired; singular prudence, royal
magnanimity, inexhausted magnificence, most profound piety, most ardent zeal in
Religion, perpetual love to the good, implacable hatred to the bad, infinite
desire of doing good to all, popular eloquence, pleasantness becoming a Prince,
generous courage, valor, and wonderful dexterity in Arms; for which virtues,
during the reign of his Brother, he was more admired and esteemed than the K.
himself. He was a General before he was a Soldier, and a great Statesman
before he came to years of maturity; he made War with power, deluded the
experience of the most famous Commanders, won bloody Battles, took in
Fortresses that were held impregnable, gained the hearts of people far remote,
and was renowned and glorious in the mouths of all men: yet, when being come to
the Crown, he sought out subtle inventions to free himself from the yoke and
servitude of the Factions, both parties conceived such a hatred against him;
that his Religion was counted hypocrisy; his Prudence, a wicked craftiness;
his Policy, meanness of spirit; his Liberality, licentious and unbridled
prodigality; his Affability, was contemned; his Gravity, hated; his Name,
detested; his private Conversations, imputed to enormous vices; and his Death,
being extremely rejoiced at by factious men and the common people, was rashly
judged to be the stroke of Divine Justice.

After the Kings death, the Army remained that day as it were astonished and
stupefied; nor were the Parisians in less wonder and amazement, when by an
unexpected accident they saw themselves left quiet that day, wherein with
terror they looked for nothing but their utter desolation. But the King of
Navarre being gone presently to his lodging at St. Cloud, though he had
determined in his mind to assume the Arms and Title of France, was doubtful,
sollicitous, and very uncertain what might come of it; for the Hugonots that
depended on him, were few and weak, and if he should seem to acknowledge the
Scepter from them, he should without question alienate the stronger, and more
numerous party. In the Catholics he could have but little confidence,
differing from them in Religion, The King of Navarre having many Lords in the
Camp ill-affected to him in respect of Religion, and other private causes, is
in great perplexity.
not having gained them by the merit of former benefits, having ever been far
from them, nay their Enemy, and not so much as known by sight unto most part of
them, until that time. As for the Foreign Forces, he knew not what they would
resolve to do with themselves, being under Commanders of small credit and
authority, without Commissions from their Princes, and for want of money,
rather in a condition to mutiny and disband, than to yield obedience to him,
that had not means to satisfy them: for the King of Navarre, newly come out of
that narrow corner, where he had been shut up so many years, was so far from
being able to pay them, that he had not wherewithal to maintain himself; and in
the dead Kings Treasury was found very small store of money, the gulf of War
having swallowed up both the Revenues which were gotten in, and those sums
which his Friends had lent him in times of great need. To this was added the
disgusts which many chief men had against him: the Duke of Montpensier, though
of the same Family, yet in respect of Religion, whereof he was most observant,
had very little correspondence with him, not being able to endure, and counting
it a shame to the whole Family, to see him encompassed with Hugonot Ministers
and Preachers. The Count d' Auvergne, Bastard of France, a young man, of fierce
nature, for slight occasions, as quartering of Soldiers, and dividing of
spoil, was scarce wont to salute him; Monsieur de Vitry, Monsieur de Villiers,
and many others, who in times past had received benefits from the House of
Guise, and had lately served the deceased King, because their courage would not
suffer them to be called and accounted Rebels, now that respect, and the bond
of obedience being loosened by his death, could in no wise bend their minds to
follow an Enemy to the House of Lorain; and which imported most of all, the
Duke of Espernon, who, as the custom is, hated and persecuted all those who he
thought might remove him from the degree he held, or get before him in his
Masters favor, had broken almost openly with him in the Kings life time:
Causes of hatred between the King of Navarre and the Duke of Espernon.
for the King of Navarre having taken notice that the Duke of Espernon bore him
ill will, and aimed to put him in disgrace with the King, as a man of an open
courage, and free speech, had complained manifestly of him, saying, That if he
thought to use him as he had done the Lords of Guise, he would not endure it:
and Espernon on the other side, had said more than once, That the King of
Navarre was wont to make War not in Royal Camps, and with Military Discipline,
but like a Free-booter, or a Plunderer; and that all outrages and insolences
were committed by the Hugonots; and at the taking Estampes, having found a
Soldier of the King of Navarre's own Troop of Dragoons, who to steal the Pix
out of a Church, had thrown the Sacrament upon the ground, he killed him
presently with his own hand; so that between them there was no very good
intelligence. For all these reasons the King of Navarre was surrounded with
straits and difficulties, not being assured what might succeed upon his
Declaration; and so much the rather, because he knew many were secretly come
from Paris into the Camp, to work upon the minds of such as were discontented,
and that th e Duke of Mayenne would give to all very large conditions.

But if the King was tormented with these doubts, and involved in these cares,
the minds of particular men were no less troubled and perplexed; for the
Hugonots doubted, that the King would make more account of attaining to the
Crown, than of persevering in their Religion, and therefore feared he would
easily reconcile himself to the Church: and the Catholics seeing him environed
by du Plessis Mornay, des Amors a Minister, and the Sieur de la Noue, and many
others who were firm Calvinists, and calling to mind past experiences, believed
he would not forsake that Religion, and those men with whom he had lived long,
and sustained the difficulties of his adverse fortune; and many of each
Religion were drawn and biased by diverse several interests.

The affairs of the Army being so uncertain and distracted, the Catholics, who
were the greater part, gathered themselves together the night before the third
of August, to consult what resolution they should take. Here their opinions
were different; for many thought best to follow and uphold the Crown by all
means in the King of Navarre, that they might not wrong the justness of his
Cause, and violate the Salique Laws, but conserve the Kingdom in the lawful
Succession: They said, that by doing otherwise, it was necessary either to
divide the Kingdom among so many Petty-Kings, The Catholics assemble
themselves to consult about the future King.
as there were armed Princes and Pretenders; or else submit themselves to the
rule and arbitrament of strangers: That this was the true way to foment
discord, and make the Civil Wars perpetual, to the destruction of the public,
and of every particular man, and to expose their common Country to new dangers,
fatal accidents, and most cruel slaughters: That the hand of God was plainly
seen; which favoring the justice of his Cause, had, in an opportune
conjuncture, armed him with Forces, reconciled him with his good Subjects, and
put him miraculously in a condition to be able to attain to, and defend his
Crown: That it was a pious thing to follow the Motives and Disposals of Heaven,
and to leave the care of future matters to Divine Providence: That, by the Laws
of God, Princes were to be born withal, and not to be despoiled of their Rights
and Inheritance for any particular defect: That the King of Navarre was an
ingenuous Prince, full of clemency, modesty, and sincerity: That in him there
was no cause to fear a violent or tyrannical power, but to hope for a good and
lawful Government; and liberty of Life and Conscience, which he till then had
granted to every one: That finally, it was a thing unworthy of the French Name
and Nobility, to adhere to Rebels, who had impiously imbrued their hands in the
bowels of their Prince, and with manifest wrong and violence endeavored to
deprive and despoil the Blood Royal of the lawful Succession of the Crown: But
on the contrary, That it was an action worthy the name of Cavaliers, which they
professed, to vindicate their just blood, unjustly shed by his Subjects, and to
maintain the true and lawful Heirs of the Crown in the possession of the
Kingdom. The Authors of this opinion were the Sieur de Rambouillet, the Baron
de Giury, and especially the Duke of Longueville.

But many others argued on the contrary side, That they ought to observe
Divine, before Humane Laws; and that the health of the Soul was always to
precede transitory worldly things; that the respect of Religion, in the
Succession of Kings, was ancient: For, that depends upon the Law of Nature, and
this upon the Particular Constitutions and Positive Rights of Nations: That the
example of England was very near and remarkable, where the Princes alteration
of Religion, had caused the destruction of the Catholics, and the alienation
of the whole Kingdom from the Apostolic See: That the miseries of Wars, and
the calamities they bring along with them, might be ended in a short time; but
the danger of losing their Faith and Souls, extended it self to their Children,
and Grandchildren, and to their whole posterity for ever, which would receive
an eternal loss, and prejudice, by their present connivence: That it was true,
Princes were to be born withal, though wicked, and of a different Religion; bu^
that was meant by such as were already placed and established in the Throne,
not of such as were to be received and established anew: That the King of
Navarre had, by many means, with a thousand entreaties, and redoubled reasons,
been persuaded by the States General, and by the earnest desire of the late
King, to change his Religion, and yet could never be drawn from Calvinism: And
if he would not leave it in his extreme necessity, it was not to be hoped, that
he would do it in the prosperity of fortune; That what was said of his nature
and qualities, were very true; but that he was so exceedingly affected to his
Religion, that he would think he did well in forcing men's Consciences: And
though he had not a tyrannical mind, yet one of a different nature might
perchance succeed him: That at that present it was fit to foresee the future,
and not to alienate a most Christian Kingdom from its obedience to the Pope,
and from the Fellowship of the Church of God. This Argument was held by
Monsieur d' O, the Sieur de Manuy his Brother, Monsieur d'Entraguos, Dompiere
the Field-Marshal, and the greater number of the Assembly.

Between these two contrary opinions arose a third, as it were in the middle of
the balance, held by the Marshall de Biron, the Duke of Luxembourgh, the Duke
of Espernon, and the wisest among them, That the King of Navarre should be
declared King of France, and that they should serve and uphold him in that
quality; The Catholics resolve to declare the K. of Navarre K. of France, upon
assurance that he would change his Religion.
but upon assurance, that he would change his Religion, and embrace and
maintain the Roman Catholic Faith: And this motion was drawn from the Will and
Prudence of their dead King, who at his death had declared him lawful
Successor; but had also at the same time admonished him, that he should never
be King in peace, if he embraced not the Roman Religion.

This resolution was in a manner generally followed, and charge was given to
those that had proposed it, to let the King understand, with all modesty, what
they had determined. The Duke of Luxembourg, accompanied with the rest, carried
the Message, and told him, That the Princes, Lords, and Officers of the Crown,
The Duke of Luxembourg delivers the resolution of the Catholic Lords, in the
Camp, to the K. of Navarre.
together with the Catholic Nobility that was in the Army, which were the
greatest and best part of the Kingdom, were ready to acknowledge him King of
France, to serve and maintain him against every one, since God and Nature had
called him to the Crown by a lawful Succession: But withal they besought him,
that for the general contentment and reasonable satisfaction of all his
Subjects, for the good, peace and tranquillity of his Kingdom: for the honor of
his own Person, and for that which became the Title of a most Christian King,
he would be pleased to turn to the Catholic Religion, and to come again into
the bosom of the holy Church, to take away the pretenses of his enemies, and
the scruples of conscience of his servants to the end, that he might be served,
obeyed and honored with the universal applause of them all: That His Majesty
would not think this their proposition, and most humble supplication, strange;
for it would appear much more strange to their consciences, and the whole
Christian World, That one should be established King of France, who was no
Catholic, as all his glorious Predecessors had been, from Clouis the first
King that received Baptism.

The King, though he was much troubled and perplexed in mind, yet either
preferring his Religion before the Crown, or knowing, that by pleasing his new
Catholic Subjects, he should displease the Hugonots his old adherents, took
also the middle way, The King thanks the Catholics, and his answer about
changing his Religion.
and answered, That he returned thanks with a most sincere French heart to the
Nobility, for their acknowledgment of his Right: That he knew them to be the
principal Member of the Crown, the foundation of the Kingdom in time of War,
and the establishment of his Scepter: That he embraced them all with tenderness
of heart, being ready to requite their duty and fidelity, both in public and
in particular: But desired, that they would not think it strange, if he did not
so presently satisfy their first requests, because the quality of the thing
demanded, required a convenient time of advice, and the ripeness of a grounded
resolution: That he set a greater value upon his Soul and Conscience, then upon
all earthly greatness: That he had been brought up and instructed in that
Religion, which yet he held to be the true one; but nevertheless, he would not
therefore be stubborn and obstinate: That he was ready to submit himself,
either to a General, or National Council, and to the Instructions, which
without palliating the Truth, should be given him by learned conscientious
persons. But that these were Motives which proceeded from God, effects of the
muturity of time, and which ought to be labored for in peace and tranquillity,
and not amidst the noise of Arms and War, and with a Dagger at a Man's Throat:
That he had a firm resolution to endeavor the satisfaction of his Subjects,
and the contentment of his Kingdom; but that conjuncture was not proper to put
his good desires in effect, lest his action and declaration should seem feigned
and counterfeit, and extorted by force, or else persuaded by worldly interests:
Wherefore he entreated them to stay till a fit opportunity; and if in the mean
time they desired any condition or security for the maintenance of the
Catholic Religion in the same condition it was at that present, he was ready
to give them all the satisfaction they could wish for.

With this Answer the Deputies returned to the rest of the Catholics assembled
in the Hostel de Gondi; and the King with his most intimate friends retired
likewise to consult. The Sieur de la Noue a Hugonot, tells the King, that he
must never think to be King of France if he turn not Catholic.
The Sieur de la Noue, a man of great experience in worldly affairs, though he
were a Hugonot, told the King freely, That he must never think to be King of
France, if he turned not Catholic; but that he should endeavor to do it with
his reputation, and without doing injury to those who had long served and
upheld him. On the other side, du Plessis Mornay, and the Ministers stood for
Liberty of Conscience, and the Cause of God, against earthly greatness; and,
magnifying the Forces of their party, told him, That they who had so many years
defended and preserved him, would also be sufficient to establish him in the
Kingdom. The King knew that these were swayed by their own interests, and
joining in opinion with Monsieur de la Noue, resolved within himself to turn
Catholic; but as a generous and magnanimous Prince, would not seem to do it
out of ambition, or constraint; and he believed the Proposition he had made to
the Catholics to be very reasonable; so that he was determined to continue
that resolution, adding only the prefixed limits and circumstances of time.

God seemed miraculously to inspire the same thought into the Catholic party;
for though many of them, and particularly some Prelates that were in the Camp,
did oppose it; yet the greater part, kindled with a just indignation for their
King's death, could not hear of any agreement or accommodation with the League:
wherefore, it was at last concluded, That the King, taking a prefixed time for
his conversion, should secure the state of the Catholic Religion, and that
upon those terms they would receive and follow him.

The Deputies having carried this resolution, and Treated a long time with the
King and his Counselors, at last a Writing was mutually agreed on between both
parties, whereby the Catholic Princes, Lords, Officers of the Crown, Nobility
and Soldiers on the one side, acknowledged Henry of Bourbon to be their lawful
Prince, and took an Oath of fidelity to him as King of France, The Catholics
of the Camp swear fidelity to the King by a Writing signed and established, and
the King Swears to the maintenance of the Catholic Religion by the same
Writing.
promising him due obedience, and to serve and uphold him against every one:
And on the other side, He swore, and promised, upon the word of a King, to make
himself be instructed within six months, in the Catholic Religion, by an
Assembly of conspicuous persons; and if need were, to call a National Council,
to the Decrees whereof he would humbly submit himself; and in the mean time
promised to maintain the same Roman-Catholick-Apostolick Religion inviolate,
not to innovate or change any thing in it, of what kind soever, but to protect,
defend, and secure it with all his power; to dispose of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Revenues (in the manner observed by the Kings his Predecessors)
to fit, and sufficient persons, of the same Religion; to cause the use of it,
and the ceremonies thereof to be public and principal in all places under his
jurisdiction, as he had established in the Agreement made with the late King,
in the month of April last past; that he would put no Officers, nor Governors,
but such as were Catholics in those Towns which were under his obedience, nor
in those which for the time to come should submit themselves unto him, or
should be taken; except only those places which had been already granted to
the Hugonots; that he would admit none to any Dignities, Offices of the Crown,
or Magistracies whatsoever, but such persons as publicly professed the
Catholic Religion; that he would conserve and maintain the Princes, Peers of
France, Ministers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, Cities and Corporations, and
the three States of France in their wonted Beings, Privileges, Immunities,
Prerogatives, Offices, Places, and Magistracies, without any prejudice or
innovation whatsoever; that he would endeavor to take just and fitting revenge
for that Parricide committed upon the person of King Henry the Third, by severe
exemplary punishment, and the destruction and extirpation of disobedience and
rebellion: finally, that he permitted his Catholic Subjects to send an
Ambassador to the Pope, to inform him of the reasons why they had acknowledged
him, and sworn fidelity unto him, and to sue for, and obtain those things of
the Apostolic See, which they should think convenient for the universal good
of the Kingdom.

Upon the fourth day August this Writing was singed by the King, on the one
part, and on the other by most of those that were present in the Camp; and was
afterward authorized and registered in the Parliament of Tours, according to the
form which was wont to be observed by those Courts in the times of former
Kings. Thus the necessity of present affairs, and the fresh passion for the
Kings death, settled this accommodation, which at another time would certainly
not have been composed.

Yet was not this Agreement able to retain every body; for the Duke of
Espernon, who under color of contending for precedence with the Mareschals of
Biron; and Aumont, had not signed the Writing, because they, as Mareschals,
being in the Camp, pretended to sign first, and he as Duke and Peer of France
pretended the same, The Duke of Espernon standing upon precedence, will not
sign the Writing, but departs from Court.
doubting he should be ill used by the King, and that in his present wants, he
would either by entreaties, or force, wring some money from him, (whereof he
was known to have very great store) alleging that he had obtained leave from
the late King to return to his Governments, departing the next day from the
Army with his Troops, and with many who following the example, took that
occasion to return to their own houses; and having made his journey through
Tourain, he passed by Loches, and came at last to Angoulesme. Iehan Sieur de
Villiers, who had the Government of Poissy, a man very zealous in the Catholic
Religion, and who in his younger years had been exalted by the Lords of Guise,
those obligations ceasing which he had to the late King, gave up his
Government, with the Artillery and Ammunition of the Army, to Filbert Sieur de
la Guiche, who by order from the King received it, and with two hundred Horse,
and many Gentlemen that followed him, retired into his own Country; and the
same did many others severally. Monsieur de Vitry, with a bolder resolution,
(which nevertheless was also followed by many) went over to the League without
any demur, alleging that he saw no certainty at all in the Kings promises,
Many Lords, and a great part of the Soldiers, following the Duke of Espernons
example, leave the Camp; so that by the seventh of August the Army is decreased
to half the number.
and that he would not bear Arms against the Catholic Religion in favor of
the Hugonots: and the common Soldiers, some out of impatiency, some for want
of money, some for fear of future sufferings, began of themselves to disband
scatteringly, in such a manner, that by the seventh of August the Army was
diminished above half in number, and decreased still daily. The same was feared
of the Swisses; but the Marshall de Biron, who now followed his old
inclination more than ever, did by reasons and entreaties induce them to
promise that they would follow the King for the space of two months, till they
should receive new Commissions from their Cantons; toward which, reasons and
entreaties prevailed not so much, as a good sum of money, which the King
borrowed of his Friends, and divided secretly among their Commanders: so that
without demanding further pay, but living upon free quarter, they followed the
Kings Name and Colors very quietly. Nor were the Hugonots more firm, or better
satisfied than the rest; for having conceived hopes that the King, who had been
bred up, nourished, defended and maintained by them, would, now he had attained
the Crown, exalt their Religion, put Offices and Dignities into the hands of
his ancient Confidents, and trust more in those Forces which had made him
victorious among a thousand dangers, than in the doubtful conditional promises
of the Catholics; now they saw the contrary, accused him of ingratitude: and
had it not been that they hoped he did but temporize till he were settled in his
Kingdom, and that then he would do quite contrary to what he had promised,
(which belief was by him cunningly fomented in his conferences with them) they
would without doubt have utterly forsaken him; and yet for all that opinion,
very few followed him, and those unwillingly enough; for many, because they
thought not themselves secure* others out of anger and discontent disbanded,
and returned in great abundance to the Cities of their party.

But the King having accommodated his mind, and fitted it to the present
necessity, having assumed the Name and Arms of King of Fran^e, and not being
able to make new expenses, made use of the late Kings household stuff, the same
Purple serving to mourn for his Predecessor, which he till then had used for
the death of his Mother; and knowing that men's minds were not yet well settled
under his obedience, and that his own weakness was despised of many, he by the
vivacity of his wit, by the readiness of his answers, and by the familiarity of
his conversation, behaving himself rather as a Companion, than as a Prince, and
with large promises making up the wants of his present condition, endeavored
to satisfy all, and to win the love of every one, seeming to acknowledge the
Kingdom, and the reputation of his actions sometimes to this man, sometimes to
that man, severally, and professing to be ready earnestly to embrace those
occasions of requital which should represent themselves: To the Hugonots he
seemed to lay open, and trust his most intimate thoughts, and to acknowledge
the foundation of his hopes to be in them. To the Catholics he did very great
honors, speaking with much reverence of the Pope, and the Apostolic See;
always honoring the Ecclesiastical Order, and showing himself inclined to the
Roman Religion, gave signs of a sudden undoubted conversion. To the
common people, he showed himself compassionate of their burdens, and of the
calamities of War; and to the meanest of them, excused the necessity of taking
free quarter upon them for his Army, laying all the fault upon his Enemies. To
the Gentry with words and gestures full of respect, he gave the glory of true
Frenchmen, of preservers of their Country, and restorers of the Royal Family,
alluring every one by these arts to follow him; eating in public, setting open
his most private lodgings to every one, not concealing the necessity of his
private condition, and proposing those things in a jesting way, which could not
so well be discovered in serious Counsels.

But the Army being already reduced to so small a number, that not only the
siege of Paris could not be continued, but that it was needful to provide
speedily against the imminent danger which was so near (for the League, since
the King's death, increased every moment in strength and reputation:) He being
in private with the Mareschals of Biron and Aumont, the Sieur de la Noue, and
the Duke of Montpensier, (who having quieted his conscience by the King's
promise, had, for the interests of their common Family, firmly resolved to
follow him) consulted a long time what course would be least prejudicial to
take in that present condition. And because he had no means to keep the whole
Army together, which though he had been able to do, would, within a few days,
have been inferior to the Forces of the League; they determined, The King of
Navarre raises the siege from Paris, and divides his Forces into convenient
places
that the King, with the Duke of Montpensier, and the Marshall de Biron,
should retire into the Province of Normandy; that the Marshall d' Aumont
should go into Champagne, and the Duke of Longueville with Monsieur de la Noue,
into Picardy, to keep those Provinces faithful, and to reunite themselves when
time and occasion should require.

But the King knowing the vast structure of the League, and how difficult the
burden of Civil War is to be born, desired to try the hope of an agreement with
the Duke of Mayenne, not being willing in any manner to be faulty to himself,
or to neglect any possible means of settling himself in the Crown; wherefore
many men being come into the Camp for several interests, he made use of the
occasion; and hearing that one Bigot, a near Servant to Monsieur de Villeroy,
was there, he caused him to be brought unto him by the Sieur de Chastillon, and
bad him to let his Master know, that he desired infinitely to speak with him,
and that if he would choose the place of interview, he should have a
Safe Conduct sent him, and all necessary security.

The Sieur de Villeroy had taken part with the League, not only out of anger,
because he was so suddenly dismissed from the Court, but because the Government
of Lions after the death of Monsieur de Mandelot, was, contrary to the promises
the King had made him, given first to the Duke of Nemours, and then to Monsieur
de la Guiche, putting by Alincourt his Son, who upon that hope had married the
Daughter of Mandelot: To which causes of discontent he added, for a more potent
excuse, that all his Land lying within the Territories of Paris, and his
Court-Pension being taken from him, he knew not how to maintain himself, if he
joined not with that party, wherein he might enjoy the Revenue of his Estate.
The King desires to speak with Villeroy, who was gone over to the League: The
Duke of Mayenne will not consent to it: They treat by a third person, but
nothing is concluded.
But however it were, Bigot having delivered the Kings Message, he not being
willing to do any thing without the Duke of Mayenne's leave, told him what
Message he had received from the King: But the Duke would not let Villeroy go
to the meeting, alleging, that it could not be done so secretly, but it would
be generally known, and by consequence those of his party would suspect
something, and fall into a jealousy: That affairs were in a very hopeful
condition, and that it was not good to disturb them inconsiderately, being they
might easily be crossed; and therefore only gave way, that he might receive a
Gentleman in his house at Paris, and treat with him, if the King were pleased
to send one for that purpose. With this Answer Bigot returned to the Camp; and
the King not scorning any kind of means to advance his fortune, and to let the
Catholics know that he desired Peace, sent presently the Sieur de la
Marsilliere his Cabinet-Secretary.

He not having been able to obtain leave to speak personally with the Duke of
Mayenne, told the Sieur de Villeroy, that the King had sent him expressly, to
assure the Duke of his good inclination to consent to peace, and to represent
unto him, how necessary it was for the general good: That he did very much
esteem the Dukes person, and desired to make him his Friend, and to have him
near him in an honorable degree of favor suitable to his condition: That the
Duke ought now to lay aside his vain hopes of seeing him totally abandoned and
forsaken; for all the Princes, Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, and
others, that were both in, and out of the Army, had sworn Allegiance to him,
and promised him their assistance, he having satisfied them in what concerned
Religion, by a reciprocal promise made in writing, the copy whereof he left
with the Sieur de Villeroy, to show unto the Duke: That not only the Hugonots,
but even the Catholics of the Army themselves, were much displeased with the
Duke for the Kings death, and had solemnly sworn to prosecute their revenge,
till they were fully satisfied: That he had promised the same, and was
interessed in it; so that if so universal a good and benefit, as the peace of
the Kingdom, did not make him yield, and also mollify the hearts of those that
were offended, he should not be able to do it afterward, under color of any
other excuse; and that therefore the Duke should think upon it, and embrace
this occasion of regaining the affection of so many Catholics, and so much
Nobility, who, the respect of Peace being taken away, would for ever be his
bitter irreconcilable Enemies: Finally, That he should propound some
Conditions; for the King was extremely disposed to satisfy him in whatsoever
was possible. Which things being told the Duke by Monsieur de Villeroy, he had
commission to answer, That the Duke had no private enmity with the King, and
for his own part honored, and held him in the highest veneration; but that
Religion and Conscience would not suffer him to enter into that Treaty with
him: That if his late Brothers had in the Kings lifetime taken Arms to hinder
the Crown from falling to a Prince of a different Religion, as by the Duke of
Alancon's death they doubted that it might; now, that the necessity was more
urgent, and the danger already present, he could not lay down those Arms that
were taken up, without doing injury to the memory of his Brothers, to his own
Conscience, and to the solemn Oath he had taken: That he had engaged his Faith,
and given his Life to the Public Cause, when he had accepted the Office of
Lieutenant General of the State; and that having declared and acknowledged the
Cardinal of Bourbon King to whom the Kingdom had been judged to belong, he
could not break his Faith to him, nor resolve of any thing till the said
Cardinal were at liberty, and all those of his party assembled together: That
if the Kings death had made him so many Enemies, he hoped God would defend his
innocence; but his contentment was so great to see the death of his Brothers
revenged, that he was very willing to undergo all the hatred he had gotten by
it: That he ought not, nor could not give counsel to that King against whom he
had taken up Arms: But he might easily know, that the liberty of the Cardinal
of Bourbon, and his conversion, were necessary to precede the Treaty. With
these general terms la Masilliere returned to the King, at the time when
because he was able to stay no longer, he raised his Camp from St. Cloud, and
the Towns adjacent.

The resolutions after the Kings death had been no less doubtful and perplexed
in Paris, than they had been in the Kings Camp: Madam de Montpensier, and
others, exhort the Duke of Mayenne to make himself be declared King of France
For the Duke of Mayenne's Friends and Kindred, especially Madam de Montpensier,
exhorted and counseled him, to make himself be elected and declared King of
France, by the party which he commanded; urging to him, that he ought not to
omit that so great, so opportune occasion of transferring the Crown into his
Family, which had formerly been possessed by his Ancestors, he being already
acknowledged the Head, and obeyed by the principal Cities of the Kingdom, by so
great a number of the Nobility, and by the greater part of the Clergy: They
said, the Controversy was between him, already acknowledged and obeyed by
those of his party, and a Prince of a different Religion, whose Inheritance
might with reason be called in question, both because of the distance of
degrees, and of his being an Enemy to the Church; for which considerations he
would never be sincerely loved, nor firmly obeyed, by those very Catholics
that seemed to adhere unto his party: That indeed now at first they had, out of
anger for the Kings death, been persuaded to follow him; but that Catholics
and Hugonots, being incompatible among themselves, it would not be long before
the memory of former hatreds would be renewed, by which their blood being again
set on fire, they would quickly be separated and divided by the interests of
Conscience, and their own natural enmities: That it was necessary to provide a
manly, warlike, and Catholic King, to whom they might securely run, as from
time to time they should grow discontented, finding their error, and leaving
that party: That the Cardinal of Baurbon, decrepid with old age, and kept in
prison, was in neither of those conditions fit for that business: That the Duke
would be accused of want of courage, if he should be faulty to himself in so
fair an occasion: For they are poor-spirited men, that count excess of
Moderation a virtue; whereas men of a noble mind, love and favor bold and
generous designs: That there was both honor and profit in it, nay also
possibility and convenience; and that the Duke could neither be excused to
himself, nor to his posterity, if he neglected that good which God so
miraculously presented to him: They urged, that to declare the Cardinal of
Bourbon King, was the true way to establish the King of Navarre in the
possession of the Crown; for so they confessed the Kingdom to belong to the
House of Bourbon; and the Cardinal dying, who was already in the last minutes
of his life, the lawful Succession could not afterward be denied to his Nephew;
and though the pretense of Religion remained, that was an objection which he
would be able to take away at his pleasure, by turning Catholic, and hearing
one Mass; and though he should persevere in his Religion, yet the other Princes
of that House, who were Catholics, would succeed, and suffer no opposition;
that it was best to oppose the very first point, and assume unto himself that
which he inconsiderately went about to confer upon another: that now the
opportunity was ready and easy, which perchance within a few days would not be
so; for the King of Navarre had promised to turn Catholic within six months,
and in the mean time it was possible his Nephew the Duke of Guise might be set
at liberty, who being Heir of the Family, might perchance oppose his Greatness,
his own interests having more power with him, than the respects which was due
to his Uncles age and many labors: that it was needful to undertake boldly,
and suddenly, before the King of Spain, the Pope, the Duke of Lorain, and Duke
of Savoy had time to think, and lay their plots to turn the course of affairs
their own way; for he being once elected and declared, they would be
necessitated rather to maintain him, than take part with the King of Navarre, a
Heretic, and an enemy to Spain for Navarre, to the Pope for Religion, to the
Duke of Lorain for the Duke of Bouillon's Lands possessed by him, and to the
Duke of Savoy for the protection of Geneva, and for the Marquesat of Saluzzo;
finally, they argued, that since the toyls and dangers were certain, and that
he was to bear the weight of them, it was much better to undergo labor and
hazard for his own interests and greatness, then to promote the exaltation of
another, and to uphold a frail, weak, imprisoned, unknown Prince, from whom he
was not certain to obtain any thing.

This specious counsel favored by self-love, was opposed by Villeroy and
President Iannin, The Duke of Ma^e^ne dissuaded by Villeroy and others, does
not embrace the Council of making himself to be elected King of France.
with whom the Duke consulted about all things; not that they did allege
against it either Right or Justice (things of very small consideration when the
debate is about a Kingdom) but only urging the impossibility: That the
Parisians, the People, and Cities of his party were terrified with the late
businesses, having seen the Duke so few days before brought to the last
extremities, and looking desperately with them for his own destruction: That
they had lost much of the opinion they had, and were not now so ardent as they
were at first in the cause of the Union: That they desired to have a Prince
powerful in men and money, that might be able to defend them, and secure them
from the King of Navarre and his party; and therefore they had turned their
eyes, some upon the Duke of Savoy, some upon the Duke of Lorain, many upon the
King of Spain himself; nor did any thing else withhold them but the right and
justice of the Cardinal of Bourbon, esteemed the lawful Successor (for these
considerations move, and are able to do much more among the common people then
in the minds of the great Ones;) which respect being taken away, there was not
like to be any who would not rather choose to obey a King of Spain, held so
potent a Monarch, and that had so many ways to gratify and reward his
subjects, then a petty Duke of Mayenne, who had no other strength then what the
Union of those Forces afforded, who had elected him their Head; with what
force, with what moneys, with what Armies would he maintain the Crown against
the King of Navarre, and the greatest part of the Nobility united with him?
with those of the King of Spain, of the Pope, of Savoy, or of the Duke of
Lorain? The House of Bourbon being excluded, there was none of them but
pretended better right to the Crown than he; for the Infanta of Spain was
Daughter to a Sister of the deceased King, the Duke of Savoy Son to one of his
Aunts, the Duke of Lorain was head of the Family, and had Sons by another
Daughter of France; and the Pope, if he were moved by zeal to Religion, ought
to be more pleased, by how much a more powerful Prince it had to defend it; and
if he were moved by interests, he might hope for much more from any of those
other Princes, than from the weakness of the Duke of Mayenne; That an
enterprise was not to be undertaken, which was neither generous, favorable,
nor magnanimous; but rash, precipitate, and dishonorable, which, together with
the loss of his fortune, would cost him also his life.

This Counsel prevailed with the Duke of Mayenne, as well for these
considerations, as for two other reasons; one, that Don Bernardino de Mendozza
the Spanish Ambassador did in a manner openly contradict his election;
wherefore, by reason of the Authority and Forces of the Catholic King, he
thought it would be impossible to effect that which he should attempt against
his will: the other, that if it should be discovered that he suffered himself
to be swayed by his own interests, and not by the respects of Religion, and the
general good, he feared he should be forsaken by the Pope, and all the
Confederates, and particularly by the Parisians: For which reasons he chose
rather to expect the maturity of time, and in the interim to cause the Cardinal
of Bourbon to be declared King, toward whom he saw the common inclination
bent* and leaving the Name and Arms of King to him that was old, weak, and
which imported most, a prisoner; to keep the force and authority of Government
in his own hand, being certain, that by how much the more favorably he should
he nominated and elected by the League, by so much the more closely and warily
would he be kept and guarded by the King of Navarre; and by consequence, so
much the longer would the supreme authority remain in him; in which time,
either by his death, or some other occasion, and perhaps by the help of
Victory, more easy and expedite opportunities might offer themselves; hope in
the mean time serving to spur on the other pretenders, whose assistance would
either be quite taken away, or very much cooled, if they should see that place
possessed at the very first, which they were plotting to procure for themselves,

Thus the Duke preventing the peoples desire, and the Council of the Union, was
the first that declared the Cardinal of Bourbon King of France, The Cardinal of
Bourbon, who was prisoner at Chinon, is declared and confirmed K. of France by
the League, and called Charles the Tenth.
with the Name of Charles the Tenth, and so caused him to be declared in the
Parliament, in the Council of the Union, and to be proclaimed in the streets of
Paris, retaining to himself the name and authority of Lieutenant General
through the whole Kingdom. This Declaration was pleasing and plausible to the
people, who were thereby well settled and confirmed to continue the War, as they
said, for the liberty of their King, and to root out the seed of Heresy; it
was well approved of by the Spaniards, who desired to gain time to dispose of
their affairs; but above all, it was a great satisfaction to the Pope, who in
the same point saw both the lawful Succession safe, and the preservation of
Religion.

The Cardinal of Bourbon being declared the lawful King by the Council of the
Union, the Duke of Mayenne by a lofty Edict, full of high words, exhorted every
one to acknowledge that King which God had given unto the Kingdom, to yield him
due obedience, and to endeavor with all their might to free him from that
imprisonment in which he was detained by his Enemies; he commanded that every
one should tie himself by Oath, before the Officers of his Province, to live
and die in the Catholic Religion, and to defend, protect, and confirm it; and
pardoned all those who within the term of fifteen days should separate
themselves from commerce with the Hugonots, and retire into those places where
the Catholic Union commanded: Which Edict, as soon as it was registered and
published in the Parliament, he dispatched the Commendatory de Diu to Rome
again (who had brought the Monitory against the late King) to inform the Pope
of the state of Affairs, giving him notice, that King Charles the Tenth was
declared, and entreating him to assist the cause of Religion, not only by his
approbation, but also by supplies of men and money. Into Spain he only
dispatched a great many several expresses, with particular news of the whole
business, deferring to send any persons of quality, till he had conferred with
Don Iuan de Morrea, who having been sent by King Philip before the King's
death, he had notice was at that time in Lorain: For the Catholic King, though
he had not been willing openly to declare himself Enemy to King Henry the
Third, to whom he in appearance bore respect, for many reasons; yet, as from
the beginning he had laid the foundation of the League, and helped and
strengthened the Duke of Guise, with great sums of money; so after his death, he
had caused Mendozza his Ambassador to stay in Paris, and there under color of
favoring Religion, cunningly to be present at all businesses, who by his arts
and money had so won the hearts of the Parisians, that he had as much power
amongst them, as the Princes of the House of Lorain; and though the Catholic
King did never send any supplies of armed men openly to the League while the
King lived, yet he permitted that Count Iago de Collalto (who had raised a
Tertia of German Infantry for his service, and which was paid by him) should,
under show of friendship to the Duke of Mayenne, go to serve him; and had, by
his authority, and partly with moneys, assisted the leavies of Swisses and
Germans, which the Duke of Brunswick, Count Charles of Mansfelt, and the Sieur
de Bossompierre, had made in favor of the League. But now the Kings death had
taken away that scruple, and that so honorable a pretense of assisting the
Catholics against an Heretic excommunicated King, presented it self, the Duke
of Mayenne hoped he would turn all his Forces to assist the League, and
therefore he staid to hear his mind more particularly from the mouth of Don
Iuan de Morrea, and then he meant to send some person of Authority, to
establish the agreement of common affairs.

But the King having heard of the Declaration which had been made at Paris, and
received in other places of the League, concerning the Cardinal his Uncle, the
first thing that came into his mind, was (just as the Duke of Mayenne had
imagined) to dispatch his Confident du Plessis-Mornay to Chinon, where the
Cardinal was, and give order, Charles the Tenth taken out of Chinon, and
removed to Fontenay a stronger place, where he is kept with stricter guards
That he should be removed to Fontenay, and there kept more carefully with
stricter Guards, thinking that place more secure, because it was near Rochelle,
and environed on all sides with the Hugonot Forces. The second thing was to
solicit the Catholics who had acknowledged him, to send the Embassy already
resolved on to Rome, to begin to enter into a Treaty with the Pope, and to see
if it was possible to satisfy him: Wherefore the Catholic Lords desiring,
that their Embassy might have authority, both by the Birth and Wisdom of the
person employed, chose the Duke of Luxembourg, The Duke of Luxembourg is sent
Ambassador to the Pope by the Catholic Royalists. The King appoints the
Assembly of the States at Tours, which is made the Headquarter of his party.
a man of most noble Blood, of singular parts, and great experience in
businesses of the Court. The Embassy to the Pope being dispatched, the King,
desirous to show that he remembered what he had promised to the Catholics,
caused the Assembly of the States to be appointed in October following at the
City of Tours, which (the Parliament and Court of Exchequer residing there) was
made the Metropolis of his Party. There he made show to the Catholics, That in
the Congregation of the States he would be instructed in the Roman Religion by
learned pious men, whom he had sent for from all parts; and with words and
demonstrations professed, that he would submit himself to what should be
determined in the Assembly: Although the Hugonots affirm, that he told them
otherwise in secret; which was not much to be wondered at in the doubtfulness
of his present condition. These things being dispatched, all necessary and
fundamental to the establishing of his Kingdom, not to stay for the whole Army
of the League, which was to follow him within (...) few days, The Body of Henry
the Third is laid in the great Church at Compeigne*
he marched toward Compeigne, taking with him the King's dead body; and having
by the way taken Meulan, Gisort, and Clermont, arrived there upon the Four and
twentieth of August: And there having laid the Body in the great Church, with
very little pomp, and such as the necessity of the times would permit, he went
toward Normandy with all possible speed.

At his entering into that Province, as it were, for a prosperous beginning of
good fortune, Captain Rolet came to him, a man no less valiant than discreet,
who held Pont de l' Arche, a most important place, three Leagues above Rouen,
and as it were the Key of the River Seine; and taking the Oath of Allegiance,
delivered up the Fortress into his hands. Being come into the Province, the
King in three days march came to Darnetal, a Town less then two leagues distant
from Rouen, and there having encamped his Army, he resolved to make as if he
meant to besiege that City, in which the Duke of Aumale and Count de Brissac
were; not that he thought he had either strength or preparations sufficient to
take it, but to show a resolute mind, and a good courage, and to amuse the
enemy, till he had disposed what he had intended to do: wherefore the Army
being encamped, and the Mills which were without the Works being burnt; whilst
there pass frequent skirmishes with the Garrison, the King having left the care
of the Army to the D. of Montpensier, and the Marshall de Biron, went speedily
with Three hundred Horse as far as Diepe; which City, governed by the
Commendatory de Chattes, had acknowledged him. When the King had carefully
considered the City of Diepe, the Haven of it (very capacious, upon the shore
of the Ocean) and the Country that lay near about it, he resolved to remove
thither with all his Forces, and there to sustain the first violence of the
Army of the League; being persuaded to this resolution, because the Town is
seated upon the Sea, right over against England, with a sufficient Harbor to
receive any Fleet, how numerous soever; by which means he might have supplies
of Men, Money, Cannon, and Ammunition from Queen Elizabeth: And in case he
should be so straightened by the Enemies, as to see himself not able to resist, he
might go away for England, to return afterward, and land at Rochelle, or in
what other place he should think fit. He was the more confirmed in this
determination, by the strength of the City, and the Castle of it; by the
largeness of the Suburbs, fit to quarter his men; by the strong situation of
the passages about it, which was such, as every place might be defended span by
span; so that they could not, without a long time, and much fighting, be
reduced within the circuit of the Castle. For all these reasons, he presently
dispatched Philip Sieur du Fresne unto the Queen of England, (to whom he had
formerly been sent by the late King, and was returned about that very time) to
let Her know his necessities, and to desire Her assistance of Men and Money:
And having made this most important Expedition with most exquisite diligence,
he joined his Horse to the Garrison of Diepe, and took Eu and Neuf-Chastel, but
weak Towns, yet not far off, that he might take away all near impediments: and
having purged the Country very carefully on all sides, he returned to the Army
at Darnetal, to bring it with a commodious march to quarter at Diepe.

He marched from Darnetal the second of September, with One thousand and four
hundred Horse, two Regiments of Swisses, which amounted to the number of Three
thousand, and Three thousand French Musketeers; to so small a number were his
Forces reduced since the Kings death. There were with him the Duke of
Montpensier, The Kings Army is reduced to but 6000 Foot, and 1400 Horse; yet he
marches with good success as far as Diepe.
who led the Van; the Count d' Auvergne Grand Prior, (anger for the Kings
death, and desire of revenge, having made him forget all former disgusts;)
Armand Marshall de Byron, who had the chief authority in the Government; his
Son Charles Baron de Byron; Charles of Montmorancy Seigneur de Meru, or, as
they called him, Lord d' Anville, who commanded the Swisses; Monsieur de
Chastillon, General of the French Infantry; Monsieur de Reux Field-Marshal;
Monsieur de Baqueville, who commanded the Light Horse; the Sieurs de Rembures,
de Larchant, de Mignoville, de Guitry, du Hallot, and de la Force; the other
Lords and Gentlemen, according to the first resolution, being gone into several
parts of the Kingdom. With these Commanders, and with this Army, the King being
come near Diepe, gave order that the Commendatory de Chattes should continue in
the City, and in his wonted Command of the Citadel, with the ordinary Garrison
of Two hundred Soldiers, and two Companies of French Infantry extraordinary,
which made in all the number of Five hundred Foot; and he with the whole Army
resolved to keep possession of the Field.

The City of Diepe (as has been said before) is situated upon the shore of the
Ocean Sea, just over against England; and has a Port on the right side, The
situation of Diepe described.
which extending it self like a Half Moon, is able to contain a great many
Vessels with great security; and on the left hand stands the Citadel, which
being of a four square form, and seated something high, does with four great
Towers scowr the Field on one side, and on the other masters and commands the
Town. The seat of this City is strong and advantageous: For on the side toward
the Sea it is fortified with Flankers, Ravelines, and Platforms, besides the so
powerful defense of the water; and on the side toward the Land, the Country is
so rough, that Armies cannot be brought thither without much difficulty, nor
Cannon without much more; and the manner of the way round about, affords an
infinite number of convenient obstacles for defense: For it lies between two
steep, uneven, woody Hills, which from the bank of the Sea, shoot out many
miles into the Country; and between these two lies a narrow Valley, through
which runs the River Bethune, which dividing the City from a great Bourg called
Pollet, falls into the Haven, and thence consequently straight into the Sea. By
this River the Sea-waters entering, when it is high tide, do spread themselves
for many miles over the valley, making it so fenny, deep, and dirty, that there
is no passing to the City along the Plain, but only upon the two Hills; and by
another way, which, made by art, leads along the foot of the Hill on the left
hand, and with many turnings and windings, comes to the Gate of the Town. So
that only two ways lead to the City: one upon the top, the other at the bottom
of the Hill on the left hand; and the way which is upon the top of the Hill on
the right hand, leads straight to Pollet, which Bourg is divided from the City
by the interposition of the Haven, and the Current of the small River Bethune.
The Country from one Hill to the other, is all moorish and rotten by the
standing of the waters; and there is no passage, but only by a very narrow way,
interrupted by many Bridges, because the River divides it self into many
streams: Upon the Hill on the left side, which is no less steep and craggy than
the other, stands the Castle of Arques, little more than a league from the
Town, a place excellently fortified both by Art and Nature, which commands a
great Bourg of the same name, that lies under it, just upon the way which at
the foot of the mountain leads to Diepe along the bank of the River: The
right hand Hill, which is much more woody than the other, does not run on
equally united in one ridge, as that on the left hand does, but about a league
from Pollet, is parted by a great Valley, which extends it self as far as over
against Arques; and in it upon the right hand is Martinglise, a great
commodious Village; and on the left an Hospital of St. Lazarus, which the
French commonly call a Maladery.

The King lies with his Army and fortifies the quarters about Di^pe, possessing
all places of advantage.
The King having with his Commanders diligently surveyed every one of these
places, resolved to quarter with all his Army at Arques, believing that if the
Duke of Mayenne followed him, he would not pass along the Hill on the right
side, which leads only to Pollet through the Valley and the Wood, but would keep
the straight way that goes to the walls of Diepe: Wherefore the whole Army
working speedily, and likewise those few peasants which could be got together,
he enclosed the Castle and Bourg with a good Trench of about eight foot wide,
and as much in depth, making Works on the inside with all the earth, and
distinguished it with Redoubts and Ravelines, about sixty paces distant from
each other: and then having placed his Cannon to the best advantage, he himself
lodged in the Castle with all the French Foot, and the Marshall de Byron in
the Bourg with the Regiments of the Swisses, shutting up in that manner both
the ways which lead toward the Town, as well that at the top, as the other at
the bottom of the Hill. The Horse, quartered in that space which reaches from
the Trenches as far as Diepe, lay ready behind the Army to move where need
should require, there being left room enough, in fitting places of the Trench,
to sally out conveniently fifty Horse in front, a sufficient Body for any
action they should undertake. Many Ships were appointed at Diepe to fetch
Victual for the Army from England, and the Coasts of Normandy, from Caen, St.
Lo, and Carantan, places which held for the King; which succeeded marvellously
well: for some winds brought in Barks from England, others those that came from
Normandy, supplying with interchangeable assistance the necessities of the
Soldiers, who in that convenient season of the year had also many miles of a
most fertile Country in their power; by the fruits whereof both Horse and Foot
were plentifully furnished.

In the mean time the Duke of Mayenne having received the Marquess du Pon^, who
was come with the Army of Lorain to assist the League, and likewise the Duke of
Nemours, who had brought up the Forces of Lyonoise, Monsieur de Balagny
Governor of Cambray, and finally the German Horse and Foot which had been
levied by his order, with the help of Spain; that he might preserve his
reputation, and fulfill the infinite hopes he had to conquer, and drive the King
out of the Kingdom, was moved from Paris upon the first day of September, and
with six thousand Swisses, four thousand German Foot, twelve thousand
Musketeers between French and Lorainers, and with four thousand and five
hundred Horse, received Poissy, Mante, and Vernon, which yielded to him; and
having in two days taken Gournay, which would have made resistance, marched on
diligently toward Rouen, whence finding the King departed, he took along with
him the Duke of Aumale, and so increasing his Forces, which augmented every
hour, continued on his Voyage with the same speed toward Diepe; but he took a
different way from what the King and his Commanders thought he would; for
leaving that by the hill on the left hand which goes to Diepe by the way of
Arques, and upon which he knew the Army was prepared to make opposition, being
excellently quartered in places of advantage; he marched on by the hill on the
right hand, with a design to come to Pollet, and making himself Master of it,
to block up and command the mouth of the Haven, that the King being deprived of
the use of Shipping, and cut off from his passage to the Sea, might not only
want the assistance he hoped to receive from England, but also be reduced to
extreme necessity of victual, thinking he should this way very easily conquer,
and make an end of the War.

But the King, to whom the Sieur de Baqueville, who had the care of discovering
the motion of the Enemy, had brought word in time, that the Duke of Mayenne had
taken the way toward the hill on the right hand, perceiving his aim, and
desiring to prevent it, left the Marshall de Byron at Arques with the Swisses,
besides a thousand Musketeers, and six hundred Horse; not only that he might
hinder the passage of the Enemy on that side, as had been the first intention;
but also that passing cross the Valley, he might advance to the foot of the
right hand hill, and there draw a line about the Maladerie, and then make
another great trench toward the bottom, to shut up the Duke's passage on that
side also by a double impediment, to the end that he might not be able to get
over to the left hand hill; which if he could do, he might either assault the
Army in their works, or else putting himself between, might streighten it, and
separate it from the Town. Care being thus taken for matters without, the King
with the rest of the Cavalry, and the remainder of the French Musketeers went
presently through the City to Pollet, where, with continual labor day and
night, the Lords and Commanders taking no less pains than the common Soldiers
and inhabitants of the place, he environed the whole Bourg with a deep trench,
which ending in the form of a sput, made a sharp angle, in the point whereof a
great Mill was made into a Fort, filling it up with earth, and setting
pallisadoes round about; so that having planted six pieces of Cannon, though
but small ones, upon the works, he brought all his men to lie within that
Fortification.

The Duke of Mayenne, who by reason of the hinderance of his Artillery, and the
difficulty of the steep rugged ways, had been fain to march slowly, arrived
upon Wednesday the thirteenth of September within sight of Pollet, and having
drawn his Army into Battalia, made a stand for three hours, expecting that the
King would come forth of his trenches to fight; and in the mean time, caused
his light horse to scowr the Country every where, being led on the one side by
the Duke of Nemours, and on the other by the Count de Sagone. But the King
finding himself without comparison inferior in Forces, (for his Soldiers were
few more than seven thousand, counting also those that were at Arques; and the
Dukes Army was between eight and twenty and thirty thousand Horse and Foot, and
was furnished with great store of Ammunition, and an excellent train of
Artillery) keeping within his works, The Duke of Mayenne being come before the
Kings trenches, draws hi^ Army in battalia; but the Kings Soldiers coming only
to skirmish, no battle follows.
consented only that the Light Horse commanded by the Grand-Prior should go
out, and after them the Sieur de Larchant's, and Monsieur de la Force's Troops
of Lancie^s, to make good their retreat if need were. They skirmished all the
time that the Army of the League stood still, and sometimes the service grew so
hot, that the ignorant thought often the Commanders would put it to a Battle;
in which encounters the Kings party prevailing for the most part, there was
very little hurt done on either side. But the Duke of Mayenne knowing the King
would not venture the ha^a^d of a day, unless he were forced, and then with the
advantage of his works and trenches, retiring over the hill, quartered his Army
at Martinglise; and having caused Pollet to be viewed that night, and found
that it was excellently fortified, and in a manner inaccessible on all sides,
by reason it commanded all the Plain, and that it was flanked and fortified by
the Cannon of the Town, resolved not to attempt it, but to pass over to the
hill on the left side, to try either to take the Castle of Arques, and besiege
the Kings Army; or else to draw them to battle in the defense of their post;
for he was so confident of the valor and number of his men, that if he could
not do otherwise, he feared not to assault the King, even within the advantage
of his own trenches.

In the mean time the Marshall de Byron had possessed himself of the Maladery;
and as soon as he had with infinite diligence cast a great trench round about
it, he placed there twelve Companies of Swisses, and three hundred French
Musketeers; and not trusting wholly to that, had made up another high work
within less than five hundred paces below the first, into which he put the
Swisses of the Kings gu^^d with Colonel Galati.

The Duke having given three days rest unto his men, upon the sixteenth day at
night marched with all his Army in battalia without noise of either Drum o^
Trumpet, and turning his back toward Pollet, passed beyond the Kings Trenches,
and appeared about break of day upon the descent of the Hill that goes down
into the Plain, purposing to pass the bridges unawa^es, and to get up without
opposition on the left side; but he found himself prevented by the Kings
vigilance, who being come in the evening silently to Ar^^s, and having
intelligence of his mov^^g (...) before i^ was day, had disposed his Forces in
exceeding good order; some at the entry of the bridges, where the Grand Prior
was with his Light Horse, and the Lanciers of the Sieur Larchant, and Monsieur
de la Force; some in the middle of the Plain, where the French Infantry was
encompassed with the boggs and pools made by the Rivers; some in the lower way
of the hill on the left side, where the Duke of Montpensier was with the
Nobility, and the Companies of Rambures, Hallot, and Mignoville; and some upon
the ascent of the same way where the Marshall de Byron was, with a Squadron of
Swisses flanked with Musketeers. The Artillery of Arques was all levelled to
secure the Plain; and Galati having turned his back to the Maladery, and his
face toward the Enemy, did with his Swisse Musketeers play from the second
Trench, and annoyed that very descent by which the Army of the League was to
come down.

The Duke thought that defense ordered with so good conduct, that not to fight
at the same time with such a disadvantage of place, and with an Army which he
saw standing firm in their ranks most ready for the Battle, took a resolution
to retire, and by experience found it was impossible to pass the Plain, and to
get up the Hill on the left side, unless he first mastered the Kings two
Trenches, which from a high place, commanded all the Descent, and all the
Plain: Wherefore returning to his quarters at Martinglise, he made his men
skirmish sometimes toward Pollet, sometimes toward the Trenches, to keep the
King uncertain on which side he was resolved to fall: And finally, upon the One
and twentieth day in the morning, which was the Feast of St. Matthew the
Apostle, being resolved to try his fortune, he commanded the Count de Belin,
one of the Field-Marshals, to go straight to attack the Maladery, and begin the
Battle there, with Count Iago de Collatto his Regiment of Germans, and the Foot
Regiments of Tremblecourt and Chastaigneraye; he having brought on his men
through a covert woody way, but exceeding troublesome, within shot of the great
Trench; the Germans wearied with their march, and the unevenness of the way,
and knowing the assault, by reason of the height of the Work would be very
difficult, resolved to advantage their design by art, The Germans of the League
make signs of coming over to the Kings party, are received by them at the
Maladery; but being entered, fall hostilely upon them that had brought them in,
and make themselves masters of the place.
(if deceit may be so called:) Wherefore holding up their Hats upon the tops of
their Pikes, and stretching forth their hands, they made signs that their
intention was to come over to the Kings party, and not to storm or assault that
Work: Which being easily believed, because a rumor was spread abroad, that,
being unsatisfied with the Duke, they sought an occasion to revolt, they came
till they were just under the Work, without being either shot at or resisted:
Being arrived there, and confirming that with their words, which they had
signified by their actions, they were by the Soldiers of the same Nation
pulled up by the hand, and helped to get upon the Parapet; where they were no
sooner gotten up, but charging their Pikes, and turning their shorter weapons
against the French and Swisses, they began to fall unexpectedly upon them; who
using neither Muskets nor Firelocks, because they had them not by them; but
seeing themselves suddenly assaulted, or, as they said, betrayed and murdered,
turned their backs without resistance, and with infinite terror and confusion
began to flee toward the descent, thinking to retire in safety to the Plain.
Tremblecourt and Chastaigneraye, who, divided into two fleeing Squadrons,
followed the steps of the Germans, having seen this beginning, rushed suddenly
out of the Wood, and losing no time, advanced as fast as ever they could to the
same Trench, where closing with the Flank of the German Battalion, they ran
together (being filled with courage and fury by their happy success) to give a
violent assault to the second Work* On the other side, the Marshall de Byron
was run thither, to encourage Colonel Galati to defend the Fortifications
undauntedly: But the assault was so hot and unexpected, by reason of the sudden
taking of the Maladery, that the Swisses of the Guard giving back, and the
Marshall de Byron being thrown from his horse, that Work also was with
incredible celerity gained by the Enemy.

The Duke of Mayenne having heard of this fortunate beginning, and following
the conjuncture of so fair an opportunity, gave order to the Duke of Nemours
and the Count de Sagone, to advance with the Light Horse on the right hand of
the Trenches already taken; and to the Duke of Aumale to fall on with One
thousand and two hundred Horse on the left side; The Armies join battle.
and he himself, according as the quality of the situation would permit,
followed with the remainder of the Army divided into several Squadrons. The
King full of grief and anger for the unthough^ of loss of the Trenches, and
seeing it was necessary to fight with his utmost force, encouraged the Duke of
Montpensier with effectual words, to charge the Duke of Aumale; and the Grand
Prior on the other side to encounter the Duke of Nemours, and the Light Horse
of the League. The Grand Prior but young, yet desirous to get honor, and with
his own hand to take some revenge for the Kings death, coming up to the head of
his troop, and presently putting down the Bever of his Helmet, ran full gallop
to meet the Enemy; The Grand Prior challenges the Count de Sagone, and
killshim in the sight of both Armies.
and having seen the Count de Sagone at the head of his Squadron, he called him
by his name, and challenged him to fight hand to hand; which being no less
gallantly accepted, they charged one another so resolutely, that the Grand
Prior receiving a Pistol shot in the forehead of his Helmet, reeled often, and
was like to have fallen; but the Count de Sagone wounded with a brace of Bullets
in the side and left thigh, fell from his horse dead upon the earth. With no
less fury than their Commanders, did the Kings Light Horse rush upon the Enemy:
But their number was so much greater, being followed by two Squadrons of
Reiters, whom the Duke of Mayenne had sent to second them, that they were
forced to retreat; so that still giving ground, yet still obstinately
resisting, they were furiously driven back to the foot of the Hill, whither the
Cannon from Arques reached, both to defend their own men, and repel the
violence of the Enemy: In which Conflict, hot and bloody on both sides, the
Sieur de Baqueville died fighting, who was the Grand Prior's
Lieutenant General. On the other side, the Duke of Montpensier having met with
those who fleeing from the Trenches, ran disorderly toward the Plain, being
half routed by them, had much ado to disengage himself, and keep his ranks; and
being come up to close with the Squadron led by the Duke of Aumale, discouraged
by their number that came up picquering, and discharging their Pistols, he
retired still toward the descent, being fiercely pursued at the heels by the
Cavalry of the League. The King, who was between both the Bodies, and who, to
give fitting orders, had unadvisedly advanced to the steep of the right hand
Hill, was so engaged in the midst of many Squadrons of the Enemy, The King is
in great danger in the midst of the Enemies.
that being abandoned almost by all, and his courage not suffering him to flee,
he thought himself absolutely lost; and with cries, entreaties, and
threatenings, rode stopping and reproving, sometimes one, sometimes another, and
bewailing himself with a loud voice, That in all France there could not be
found fifty Gentlemen who had courage enough to die in company with their King.
Nor did any man doubt, A Speech of the King of France.
but if the Duke of Mayenne had come up time enough with the rest of the Army,
the King and his whole Forces had at that time been utterly suppressed. But
whilst he, leading on the Cavalry by an uneven troublesome way, feared they
would be put in disorder, and therefore marched very softly, and turned back
often to make them keep rank and file, he gave the King convenient time to
recover: For in the interim the Sieur de Chastillon, with two Regiments of
French Infantry, having quitted the Hill on the left side* where he had stood
from the beginning; and seeing the danger in which his party was, marched up
with all speed to the place of battle, and crying out to the King, Courage
Sire, we are here, and will die with you: He charged the Regiments of
Tremblecourt and Chastaigneraye with so much fury, that having taken the Count
de Belin prisoner, and the chief Commander of the Lorainers, with the death of
above three hundred of their men, he beat them out of the Trench: At which
time, the tide of the business turning in a moment, the Marshall de Byron
being happily escaped out of the Enemies hand, had with Colonel Galati made the
Swisses stand, who before were running away; The King being relieved by
Monsieur de Chastillon, recovers the Trenches; and the Duke of Mayenne loses
the opportunity of the Victory.
and facing about with as much gallantry, as before they were fleeing with
haste, they marched up, and joined with Monsieur de Chastillon, who having
already taken the first Trench, was rallying his men to assault the Maladery.
The King himself being valiantly come up thither, caused the Baron de Byron
with an hundred Gentlemen, who were gathered together about him from several
parts, to alight from their horses; and having placed them in the first file of
the Infantry, set them on without losing further time, to give a fierce assault
to the great Trench. The service was hot and bloody for the space of a quarter
of an hour; but Collalto's Landskenets already tired with their march and with
fighting, being charged on all sides, gave back at last; and being beaten, and
driven out with a great slaughter, quitted the Maladery, being repelled with as
much fury by the Swisse Pikemen, and French Musketeers, as they had by cunning
been easily drawn into it at the beginning.

In the mean time the King, whose admirable celerity did in such a time of need
supply all wants in all places, with threescore Horse, which he had rallied
with much ado, ran up to the Duke of Montpensier, and turned vigorously to
charge the Squadron of the Duke of A^male, who being Master of the field, did
already over run all the descent; so that after an obstinate fight, which
lasted about three quarters of an hour, he broke quite through it, and followed
it fighting to the craggy part of the Hill. The Grand Prior on the other side,
who before had been forced to retire, being succored in his danger by the
Lanciers of the Sieurs de Larchant, Montataire, and la Force, who came up last
into the Battle, The Duke of Mayenne, who with so much greater Forces and such
prosperous success began the battle of Arques, retired, because his men were
wearied, and wanted Ammunition.
presently made the Light Horse of the League to turn their backs, and to run
full speed along that way which leads from the place of Battle to Martinglise.
The Duke of Mayenne, who came thither when his Cavalry was already retiring,
and when the Kings Forces had recovered their Works, thinking it too late to do
any more, and that his men were tired with long fighting; and seeing that
because the way was so bad, the Ammunition which was behind came not up,
whereof the Infantry had great need, having spent all theirs with fighting all
the day, caused a Retreat to be sounded, and drew off to his first quarters.
This was the dangerous Battle of Arques, which was fought the whole day with
various fortune, and with an event so different from the beginning, that the
King said openly at night, That the Duke of Mayenne either was not the Soldier
which every one believed, A saying of the Kings.
or else had born him respect, and reserved him for a better occasion.

Men of experience doubted not but the Victory was on the Kings side, who
(though with various success) had defended his posts, and hindered the Enemies
from passing over to the hill of Arques, which was their principal end and
intention; and yet the Duke of Mayenne cried up the advantage of his own party,
confirming it by a Cornet of Light Horse, and three Ensigns of Foot which were
fallen into the hands of his Soldiers at the first taking of the Trenches, and
were therefore carried with infinite boasting to Paris. Of the League there
were slain above six hundred men, among which the Count de Sagone, and the
Baron de St. Andre; and of the Kings men only two hundred: but the loss was
very great, by reason of the death of Baqueville, a resolute, diligent, and a
valiant Soldier, and truly proper to command Light Horse, which requires not
only courage, but also celerity and diligence: Nor was it a small misfortune
that befell the Sieur de Montataire, the Prince of Conde's Lieutenant; who
having received a Musket Shot in the left leg, was absolutely lamed in the cure.

At night the Duke, being resolved to try all possible means to drive away the
King, or to draw him out of his Works, determined to pass on the other side of
Diepe, not by the ordinary road, but a long way about: for having gone round
both the Hills, he got in three days march on the North side of the City near
the walls toward the Citadel; and the same night, being the four and
twentieth of September, did with very great speed cause eight Pieces of Cannon
to be planted, with which the next morning he began to batter the houses of the
Town: but the King, after the Army of the League was seen to march that way,
having left Monsieur d' Anville with the Regiment of the Sieur de la Guard,
four Companies of Switzers, and threescore Horse, to make good Arques, was come
with all his Army to Diepe; and being quartered in the Fauxbourgs, flanked and
defended by the Cannon of the Citadel, he commanded the fight to be smartly
begun on all sides, by that means to hinder the Enemies battery. They of the
League advanced no less fiercely to the skirmish; but a new unwonted invention
broke off the encounter, to their no small loss: for the King having sent forth
the Baron of Byron with a great Squadron of Horse into the middle of the field;
and the Duke of Mayenne incensed by their temerity in coming on so far, or
thinking they had unadvisedly engaged themselves, sent out two great Bodies of
Horse to charge them; at whose arrival the Kings men opening to the right and
left hand, with expert readiness, there appeared two great Culverins in the
midst, which giving fire, and running off at the same time with skill and
admirable quickness, did not only kill many of them, and break their ranks, but
by the wonderful art and spectacle of seeing two such great Engines skirmish
among the Horse, caused the Enemy to wheel about and retire. A device of the
Royalists*
This so new, and so nimble manner of ordering Pieces of great weight, was the
invention of Charles Brise, a Cannoneer born in Normandy, who, after having
been many years at Sea with Pirate Ships in the West Indies, was grown
excellent in managing Ordnance; and in the whole course of the Civil Wars,
performed both this and many other services with very great praise of ingenuity
and experience.

But while they skirmished hotly, and made a great noise about the Town-walls
with their Artillery, the Duke of Mayenne did in an instant cause the Duke of
Aumale with the Rereguard (in which he had for that purpose placed a Regiment
of Walloons, the Regiment of Lorain, and Collalto's Landskenets) to storm the
Works and Castle of Arques, hoping to carry it, and streighten the King within
the bare circuit of the Town: But he found so stout resistance there, that
after having reinforced the assault for the space of two hours, his Foot were
fain to retreat with the loss of two Captains, and above an hundred Soldiers:
Nor did d' Anville's Forces escape without loss; for notwithstanding the
strength and advantage of the place, there were slain above sixty foot, two
Swisse Captains, and Colonel la Guard dangerously hurt in the thigh.

But though the King and his Army had fought very luckily, and beaten back the
Enemies in all places; yet were they not only much spent with weariness, (for
being few in number, they were fain to do continual duty) but also in want of
victual; for being reduced to scarcity in the end of September, and the rains
and storms beginning to be very great, neither could Ships so opportunely bring
in Provisions, nor could the Country, wasted and destroyed, furnish any longer
sufficient food for men, nor forage for horses, which by their toils and
sufferings were brought to extreme weakness. But the Kings hopes depended upon
the relief which he expected from two several places; for he had written to the
Duke of Longueville, and the Marshall d' Aumont, that uniting their Forces,
they should march up to him, thinking that the Duke of Mayenne would not suffer
himself to be enclosed between two Armies, though inferior in strength, but
that at their approach he would raise his Camp; and on the other side he knew
Four thousand English Foot, with great store of Ammunition, were ready to be
embarked, which Queen Elizabeth sent to his relief; by whose arrival, his Army
would be reinforced, and their hard duty partly lessened, not doubting, but
that with the English Fleet would come great store of Provisions, wherewith he
might sustain his Army many days. The Duke of Longueville, and the Marshall d'
Aumont, contrary to expectation, came first, (as Voyages by Sea are very
uncertain;) for having joined themselves together with the Count de Soissons,
who was freed from his imprisonment in Bretagne, and the Sieur de la Noue, they
hastened their march in such manner, that upon the Six and twentieth day they
quartered within six leagues of the Duke of Mayenne's Army: Wherefore the Duke,
The Duke of Mayenne marches from Diepe with his Army.
that he might not be encompassed, and because he was out of hope of doing any
good at Diepe, raised his Camp upon the Eight and twentieth day in the morning,
and drew toward Picardy to meet the Forces which by order from the Catholic
King, were coming out of Flanders with the Sieur de la Motte to his assistance.

The next day the Duke of Longueville and Marshall d' Aumont joined with the
King, who having left the Marshall de Byron at Diepe, went forth with six
hundred Horse and two thousand Foot to meet them, and following the Army of the
League the same way, took Eu, and the Castle of Gamaches before he passed the
River Sum, opportunely making use of the occasion, while the Duke, whose Army
diminished continually by the running away of his men, (being intent upon his
way) marched still close, and in order, and went further from them; so that
without receiving the least harm, the King came to Amiens, the chief City of
Picardy, where he was entertained with very great pomp, being met without the
Gates by all the Citizens, The King in modesty refuses to go under the Canopy
of State at Amiens.
who presented unto him a Canopy of State to be carried over him, as the custom
is to do unto the King; but he refused it, giving great testimony of his
prudence and moderation by an act of so great modesty.

Whilst he stays at Amiens to put the Army again in order, The General of these
forces was that Noble Lord Peregrine Bertue, Lord Willoughby, Father to the
valiant Earl of Lindsey, who was slain in the Battle of Edghill, where he was
General of the Kings Army.
and settle the affairs of that City, four thousand English, and a thousand
Scots, sent by Queen Elizabeth, arrived at Diepe: Wherefore the King (to whom
prosperous fortune began on all sides to show her face) being returned with his
whole Army, received them, to the great contentment of every one: for they had
not only brought an exceeding quantity of victuals, but also a certain sum of
money, which without delay, or showing the least sign of covetousness, was
presently all distributed to his Soldiers; by which readiness (though the sum
was not great) every body was equally pleased and satisfied.

The English having rested themselves, and those that born the toils in the
service at Diepe being refreshed after their sufferings, in the best manner
that possibly might be, the King desirous not to lose time, now that the Duke
of Mayenne and his Army were far off, resolved to assault the Suburbs of Paris,
not so much out of any grounded hope, that by the benefit of some unexpected
accident he should be able to take the City in the terror and tumult of the
people, which by him and all his Commanders was thought impossible; as by the
pillage of those Suburbs, full of the riches of many years, to supply the
evident necessity of his Army, in which the Gentry, no less than the private
Soldiers, were reduced to very great scarcity of money; and not only the
furniture of their horses, but even their arms and wearing clothes spoiled, and
broken with ill weather and perpetual service. The Kings Army marches toward
Paris.
With this design he departed from Diepe upon the Nineteenth of October, having
in his Army Twenty thousand Foot, Three thousand Horse, and Fourteen great
Pieces, and with convenient marches took the direct way to Paris. The Grand
Prior, and the Baron de Guiry, who succeeded in the place of Baqueville,
scoured the way before them with the Light Horse: The Count de Soissons, and
the Marshall d' Aumont led the Vanguard: In the Battle was the King, with the
Marshall de Byron, and Monsieur de la Noue; the Duke of Longueville led the
Rear: With this order, as soon as the Army was come to Pont de l' Arche, the
Duke of Montpensier having passed the Seine with Three hundred Horse, went
toward Normandy, to go to Caen, and look to the affairs of that Province,
where the Forces of the League were very powerful: Upon the last of October,
the King quartered with his Army a league from the Fauxbourgs of Paris; where
the tumult of the people, and the trouble of the Dutchesses was very great,
seeing the Duke of Mayenne far off, and the King come unexpectedly to assault
the City, at a time when they were persuaded he had enough to do to defend
himself, and that he was so weak he must needs be either presently suppressed,
or beaten out of the Kingdom; for the Duke of Mayenne crying up the greatness
of his Forces to the people when he went to the assault of Diepe, had written
to Paris, that within few days he would either bring the King up prisoner, or
force him to flee shamefully into England. Now businesses proving so contrary,
the City unprovided of Soldiers, and seeing they could not hope for any
relief, was full of fear and trouble; especially, there being no Head of
Authority, who might keep the people in order, and provide what should be
needful: For though Don Bernardino Mendozza, the Spanish Ambassador, labored
with all his power to comfort them, with grave Speeches, and with his presence
in every place; yet there was no man in whom the Parisians could much confide,
either for experience in arms, or for alliance to that Family: But at night
Monsieur de Rhosne arrived opportunely, who being at Estampes, (which Town he
had taken a few days before) marched fourteen leagues without any stay, and
came into the City (though with but a few Horse) in the beginning of the night.
At his arrival the Council of the League recovering courage, resolved, That the
Suburbs should be defended; to which end, the people taking arms, and all, both
great and little, and even the very Friars running armed, they were in the best
order that might be, distributed in those Works which had been cast up three
months before, at the time when it was besieged by Henry the Third. The King
before peep of day upon the first of November, The King assaults the Suburbs of
Paris upon All Saints day, takes them, and gives the pillage to the Soldiers.
being All Saints day, divided his Foot into three Tertiaes; one of which was
led by the Marshall de Byron, the Baron his Son, and the Sieur de Guitry to
assault the Fauxbourg of St. Victoire, and St. Marceau; the second, led by the
Marshall d' Aumont, Monsieur d' Anville, and Colonel de Rieux, against the
Fauxbourg of St. Jacques and St. Michael; and the third, commanded by the Sieurs
de Chastillion, and de la Noue, assaulted the Fauxbourg of St. Germain. The
Cavalry being likewise distinguished into three Divisions; one led by the King,
another by Count Soissons, and the third by the Duke of Longueville, stood all
ready in the Field, each Body as a reserve to its Squadron of Foot, in case of
any unexpected accident which might happen. The assault began when it was broad
day light, and lasted very fierce for the space of an hour; but the Works being
beaten down in many places, and there being no equality between the
inexpertness of the people, and the valor of the Kings Soldiers, the
Defendents were at last forced to give back, who with a great slaughter had
much ado to retire time enough to have the Gates of the City shut; Father
Edmond B^^goin, of the order of S Dominick, taken prisoner, is sentenced to be
torn by four horses, for having counseled and praised the Kings murderer.
the assailants pressing on violently on every side, and particularly the Sieur
de la Noue, who having entered the Fauxbourg St. Germain, and coming down
through the street which is called the Rue de Tournon, followed those so
furiously who retreated in at the Port de Nesle, that it could hardly be shut,
the Sleur de Rbosne himself being there. In this assault above Nine hundred
Parisians were slain, and above Four hundred taken prisoners, among which
Father Edmond Bourgoin, Prior of the Covent of Iacobins; who being convicted by
Witness, to have publicly (in the Pulpit) praised the murder of Henry the
Third, and to have counseled and instigated the murderer, comparing him also
in his Sermons, after the Fact, to Judith, and the dead King to Holofernes, and
the City delivered to Bethulia; he was, by Judgment of the Parliament of Tours,
sentenced to be drawn in pieces by four horses, his quarters burned, and his
ashes scattered in the wind: which sentence, some few months after, was
severely executed. The Suburbs being entered on every side, the Officers
withheld their Soldiers with infinite care, from running up and down
confusedly to plunder, till the Cavalry were come in, and placed ready to repel
those that should have the boldness to sally out of the City; and then the
quarters were divided among them, and leave given unto them to sack it; with
charge nevertheless, not to violate either Churches, Monasteries, or other
sacred places; which was observed with so much order by the Officers, and
obedience by the Soldiers, that Masses were said that day in all Churches, as
if there had been no such business; and all the Catholics of the Kings Army
were present at them in great abundance, celebrating that Holiday with very
great joy. The sacking of the Suburbs lasted as long as the Army continued in
them; and the pillage was so rich and plentiful, that the Kings Army was
wonderfully relieved and encouraged by it.

In the mean time the Duke of Mayenne having had notice that the King was
marched toward Paris, omitting to meet with the Ministers of Flanders, for
which reason he was drawn so near to those Confines; without staying for
further intelligence, moved that way with his whole Army, and having passed the
Bridge of St. Maiscant, (contrary to the Kings expectation, who had commanded
Monsieur de Thore, Governor of Senlis, to break it down, which he, being sick
in bed, could not so speedily perform) sent the Duke of Nemours before with the
Light Horse, who arriving upon the second of November, did very much raise the
spirits, and ease the trouble of the Parisians, who were in very great fear,
that the King prosecuting his Victory, would assault the City after the taking
of the Suburbs. The Duke of Mayenne came up also the next day: Wherefore the
King, thinking himself not very secure in the Suburbs, being in danger to be
suddenly assaulted, so that he could not be able to draw up his Cavalry,
marched out upon the Fourth of November, on that side toward the Port St.
Jacques, The King leaves the Suburbs of Paris at the arrival of the Duke of
Mayenne.
and set his Army in Battalia, looking, for many hours, if the Duke of Mayennne
would follow him; but seeing there was not the least stir from the City, he
marched off with a slow pace, and quartered the same night at Montl'hery, and
resolved to pass on to Tours, because he had given his word to the Catholic
Lords, and issued Writs to assemble the States there in the end of October: And
though he knew that by reason the War was kindled in every place, and all ways
unsafe, the Deputies could not be met together at the appointed time; and
though he had not used any diligence to bring them together, that he might not
be so soon put upon the necessity of changing his Religion, and making all the
Hugonots distrustful of him; yet would he be himself in that City, to the end
he might not be accused by the Catholics, and that he might upon that occasion
order the affairs of that Province, and, as soon as they were settled, return
more fresh, and perhaps better furnished with the attendance of the Gentry, and
with strength to maintain the War. The next night his Army lay under the Walls
of Estampes; which Town being yielded without resistance, the King, because it
had been taken thrice in a few months, thinking it could not be kept, caused it
to be dismantled in his presence, leaving the Citizens in liberty to receive
either party. Having staid there a day, he dispatched the Baron de Guiry into
Brie, the Marshall d' Aumont into Champagne, and the Duke of Longueville into
Picardy; The King causes Estampes to be dismantled.
giving to each convenient Forces to defend themselves in those Provinces; and
he himself, with the rest of his Army, making short marches through Beausse,
and the most frequent passes of the Loire, took the direct way into Touraine.

While the principal Armies, and the Heads of the Factions make War thus
sharply, the other parts and Provinces of the Kingdom were no less unquiet; but
to the slaughter of men, and ruin of Towns, there were every where frequent
bloody encounters: For in the County of Beauvais, the Marquess de Piennes, one
of the principal Lords of the Union, defeated and killed the Sieur de Bonivet.
In Picardy the Sieur d' Arcy having called the same Marquess de Piennes to his
assistance, A narration of several successes which happened at the same time
through all France.
taking the opportunity of the waters being let out, that the moat of la Far
might be cleansed, had surprised that Town suddenly by night. In Berrie the
Sieur de Montigny holding the Kings party, defeated and took Monsieur de la
Chastre's Lieutenant in the open field: and on the other side, Monsieur de
Nenny, who held for the League, routed and took prisoner the Sieur de Gamachee.
In Champagne the Count de Grandpre, accompanied with a great many Gentlemen
that were of the Kings party, supprised Vitry, and put all the Defendents to
the sword: but being assaulted a few days after by Colonel St. Paul, who was
chief Commander for the League in that Province, they fought so stoutly that
they of the League got a most bloody Victory; and on the Kings side all the
Gentlemen and Officers were either killed or grievously wounded, and the Count
de Grandpre himself carried half dead to Chaalo^s, being hurt in eighteen
several places. In Normandy, the Baron d' Eschaufour, and Captain Valage routed
and put to flight Colonel St. Denis, who was going with his Regiment to join
with the Duke of Montpensier. At Toulouse, Lymoges, and Tours, there were most
turbulent unruly Seditions. In the Territories of Geneva, the War was very hot
between that City and the Duke of Savoy, The Duke of Savoy besieges Geneva.
who having possessed himself of that Country, did also besiege the City, about
which he raised many Forts, and was in very great hope to carry it. In
Provence, Monsieur de la Valette Governor for the King, had many a skirmish
with the Count de Cars, and the Sieur de Vins, who commanded for the League;
and on both sides many Towns were taken, and many bloody encounters happened
between them. In Dauphine, Colonel Alfonso Corso being joined with the
Lesdiguieres, blocked up Grenoble, and Valence, the only Towns in that Province
that held for the League: And thus with various successes, but still with the
loss of much blood, was the War prosecuted by both Parties.

In the mean time, the King was come with his Army to Chasteau-Dun, where the
Swisse Commanders arrived, being returned from their Cantons, whither they had
been sent by the Soldiers of their Nation who were in the Camp, to give notice
of the death of Henry the Third, and to receive directions from the Republic
what they should do for the future. They brought answer, that the Cantons would
persevere in the same friendship and confederacy with King Henry the Fourth, as
they had done with his Predecessor, and that therefore they should continue to
serve and follow him: Which resolution of the Swisses was much furthered, not
only by the wisdom of the Sieur de Silleroy, who was there Ambassador, but also
by the presence of Jacques Auguste de Thou, who returning out of Italy, (whither
he had been sent by the late King to the Grand Duke of Thuscany) had negotiated
and persuaded that determination. The King and his whole Army was much pleased
at it, as well because they had found, the greatest strength of the Infantry
lay in the Regiments of the Swisses, who were there present, and had always
fought very valiantly, as because they had hope to increase their number by a
new Levy, which should be granted under the public Ensigns of their Cantons.

The K. takes Ve^dosme, and gives the pillage to his Soldiers: condemns the
Governor to death for his infidelity, and Father Robert a Franciscan for
having commended the killing of Henry the III.
At his departure from Chasteau-Dun, the King went to besiege Vendosme, a City
of his Patrimony, and which was thought very convenient, because it was near
the River Loyre. The Suburbs were taken in the first onset; and the King in
person having viewed the walls, and the quality of the place; resolved to
batter that side of the Castle, which, opposite to the Town, stands, but not
very high, over a spacious Plain. There were two pieces planted the next day,
to take away that defense, with intention to plant a Royal Battery against the
Curtine, as soon as two Towers were beaten down, which served to flank it on
each hand: but a great part of the Tower on the left hand being fallen, after
not many shot, some of the Foot fell on to make the assault; but they found the
place without resistance abandoned by the Defendents: wherefore having made
themselves Masters of the Tower, they began with their Muskets to play from
that higher place, upon the inside of the wall, where those of the Town were
retired to make head: and the number of the Foot continually increasing with
hopes of very good success, the Baron de Byron, newly made Field-Marshal by the
King, ran thither, and had scarce brought down the Foot to assault the
Defendents at the wall, when they, full of infinite fear, forsook it, and the
whole circuit of the Castle at the same time, seeking to save themselves by
flight in the City; but being prevented by the Soldiers who followed them
fiercely, the City was also taken with the some fury in less than three hours;
wherein, except Churches, Monasteries, and other sacred places, every thing was
given up to the violence of the Soldiers, who took there great stone of spoil
and rich booty. The Governor who had often dealt perfidiously with the King,
and had always falsified his Faith by double-dealing, was condemned to death,
as also Father Robert a Cordelier, who had there publicly praised the Kings
murderer, and with his Sermons stirred up the common people. After the taking
of Vendosme, Lavardin and Montaut, Castles of that Jurisdiction, yielded
themselves, and the King finding no more resistance in any place, came at last
to Tours upon the one and twentieth of November.

He entered into the City the same night by Torch-light, Henry the IV. is
acknowledged King of France with public solemnity at Tours.
being met at the Gates by the Cardinals of Vendosme and Lenoncour, and all the
Presidents and Counselors of the Parliament, and was surrounded with a great
abundance of people, because all the Neighboring Towns were run thither to see
his entry. The necessity of affairs persuaded not to spend time unprofitably,
and the Kings nature, that was quick and ready, agreed with the present
necessity; wherefore the next morning coming without more delay to the
Parliament, he sat in the Royal Throne, and was acknowledged King of France,
with public Ceremonies, and very great applause. Then hearing the murmurs and
complaints of the Catholics of his Army, and the earnestness of the Lords and
Barons who followed him, that he would observe the promise he had made them to
change his Religion, having caused the Nobility to be publicly called
together, who came greedily to hearken unto him, he told them in a few words,
That to his great discontent, he saw how the danger and heat of War had hindered
the appointed Assembly, which should have been at that present time: That they
themselves had seen how he, laying aside all other enterprises, had in
consideration of them, come to Tours, hoping he might some way give them all
perfect satisfaction: That the nature of affairs, and not the will of men,
opposed it; and that therefore considering how much advantage their common
Enemy received by his being at so great a distance, and by the delay of making
a sharp and diligent War against them, The King desires that the Assembly of
the States (in which his conversion was hoped for) might be deferred, and
obtains it.
he entreated them to allow that to necessity which depended not upon his will,
and that they would be contented the Convocation of the Deputies might be
deferred till the fifteenth of the next March; in which time he hoped the fury
of the Rebels and seditious persons being quelled, he might with more quietness
of mind, and less damage to the common affairs, think of a happy establishment
of life, and future Government: That as a pledge and security of his Faith they
should accept his Person, which was always in their hands: That he would
sincerely observe in deed, more than at that present he promised them in words.
To which the Catholic Lords and Gentlemen assenting, more out of necessity
than of will, a Declaration was made, that the time of the Assembly should be
prorogued till the fifteenth of March next ensuing. The King hoped that the War
continuing, and men's minds being daily more enflamed between both Factions, the
Catholics would still be more confirmed to follow him, and that he might with
excuses which appeared necessary, and with diverse promises and artifices gain
convenient time to turn to the Catholic Religion, and that perchance they
would be content he should continue in his own; and therefore he politickly
avoided their entreaties, and excused himself for not satisfying their desires,
as well lest he should seem to sway his Conscience to a compliance with the
times, as lest he should lose the adherence of the Hugonots, to the great
diminution of his Forces; wherefore, because need so required, and not to give
men time by idleness to think of new disturbances, but to keep them continually
employed in Military exercises, he resolved to go from Tours, and move with his
Army to take in those Towns which the Enemy held in the Country of Maine and
Normandy.

Before his departure, Giovanni Mocenigo the Venetian Ambassador, The Republic
of Venice ^cknowledges Henry the IV. King of France; and Mocenigo, who was
Ambassador to Henry the III* passes a compliment with the King in public.
having received Commission from the Senate, to continue in his Embassy near
the present King, being with public ceremony come unto his audience, presented
Letters to him from the Senate, with the Title of King of France; wherein
congratulating his coming to the Crown, the Ambassador Mocenigo made excuses,
that a particular Ambassador was not sent purposely, according to the custom,
by reason of the difficulty of the ways, broken every where by the incursions
of War. The Senate had been in doubt whether they should confirm their
Ambassador, and whether they should give him the Title of King of France or no;
but finally, foreseeing with a prudent eye, not only that it was necessary for
the interests of Christendom, that the Kingdom should be conserved in the
lawful Heirs, which the League endeavored to tear in many pieces, or to
subject it to foreign Princes; but also, that the King being acknowledged by
the greater part of the Nobility, which are the sinews of the Kingdom, and that
by his virtue and courage he was like to be Conqueror in the end; resolved at
the same time to confirm their Ambassador, to give him the Title of King of
France, and to assist him in all things possible, as they had done all other
Kings of France in their urgent occasions. And though the Popes Nuncio, and the
Spanish Ambassador kept a mighty stir about it, and complained exceedingly,
that an Heretic, and one disobedient to the Apostolic See, should be
acknowledged King of France, contrary to the Declarations made by the Pope in
the Consistory of Cardinals; yet the Senate answered, That it concerned not the
Republic of Venice to decide matters of Faith, which belonged to the Popes
care; but that it acknowledged Henry of Bourbon to be descended from the Stock
of the Blood Royal, and true legitimate Successor of the Crown, which could not
be denied: That they meddled only with Temporal things, and not with the
knowledge of Spiritual Interests; and that they would treat with the King, in
what concerned the Government of those States under his Dominion, without doing
any prejudice to the Popes Declaration. Which answer, though it gave not much
satisfaction at Rome, and that Gieronimo Matteucci, Gieronimo Matteucci the
Popes Nuncio having complained and protested against the Venetian Senate,
departs; which not being well approved ^y the Pope, he returns to his residence.
the Popes Nuncio, Resident in Venice, made many protestations, and in the end,
departed suddenly from the City; yet so great was the dexterity of Alberto
Badoaro, their Lieger Ambassador to the Pope, and so great the efficacy of the
reasons alleged by Leonardo Donato, sent extraordinary Ambassador from the
Republic about that matter, that the Nuncio being not so much as admitted to
the Popes presence, was constrained to return to his residence, and, without
further replies, an end was put to that business. The favorable Declaration of
that Senate, was a very great satisfaction to the King, as well because the
determination of the wisest politic Assembly in Christendom, gave reputation
to his Forces, as because he thought many other Princes, especially of Italy,
would follow the example of Venice; wherefore both by Letters, and by word of
mouth, delivered by Monsieur de Mets, the Ambassador residing in that City, he
strove to express singular gratitude, and infinite respect for the kind
inclination of those Senators.

The King being departed from Tours upon the Six and twentieth of November,
caused siege to be laid to Man's, a place of wonderful importance, in which was
the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin with above two hundred Gentlemen, and seventeen
Colors of Foot. The Defendents made show of holding out courageously, and
therefore burned the Suburbs, and fortified that Gate toward which the King was
to come, casting up a Raveline in the form of a Tenaille. The Count de Brissac
was come at the same time to la Ferte Bernard, with Four hundred Horse and Two
Regiments of Foot, who purposed to relieve that Town opportunely, and cutting
off passages, and molesting the Army, had fallen upon a quarter of the Kings
German Horse, and pillaged above fifty of them. But after that the Baron de
Biron and Monsieur de Chastillon, who were quartered in the Suburbs, had with
redoubled assaults taken the Raveline, which happened the fourth day after the
siege was laid, the Defendents not standing out the utmost violence of the
Battery, began to capitulate, and yielded with very large conditions: For the
King, in whose Army there was great want of Powder and Bullet, was infinitely
pleased not only to have that place upon so easy terms, but that he might also
provide against that want with the Enemies Ammunition that was in the Town. The
example of Man's was followed by Beaumont, la Val, Chasteau Gontier, and all the
places thereabout; and the King passing forward, laid siege to Alancon, which
City being yielded after three days battery, Captain Lago, with the Soldiers
of the Garrison, retired into the Fortress, with an intent to make it good; but
when the Cannons were planted, he staid not to be brought to extremity, but
delivered it into the Kings hands upon the Fourteenth of December: The King
makes himself Master of all the Towns and Fortresses of Normandy.
In which place, the Baron de Hertre was left with Three hundred French Foot.
From this City the King marching on toward Normandy, besieged Falaise, into
which the Count de Brissac was entered with many Gentlemen, and the Chevalier
Piccard's Regiment of Foot; wherefore by reason of the Commanders reputation,
of the strength of the place, but most of all of the unfitness of the season,
it was thought it would prove a long and difficult business; yet the Fauxbourg
de Guibray being taken, and the Army quartered under cover, the King having
personally viewed the situation of the Fortress, commanded the Battery to be
planted against the Castle, judging that if he could take that, he might also
at the same time take the Town. Besides the principal Battery, he caused also
two Culverins to be planted upon a certain Hill, by the shot whereof the
passage was stopped which led into the City from the Tower of the Dongeon, the
principal security of the Castle; and in this manner he did streighten and
incommodate all the resolutions of the Defendents. The Artillery played two
days with very great violence; which having utterly ruined and beaten down the
Tower, which defended the corner of the City and Castle opposite to the
Dongeon, the King made it to be assaulted the same night by two different
Squadrons, one led by the Sieur de Chastillon, that should strive to get into
the Castle from the broken Tower; the other by the Baron de Byron, which was to
endeavor by the same way, to get into the Town, which joined in that place to
the Fortress. Both Squadrons did absolutely effect their design: for one
passing through the ruined Tower, forced the Defendents to shut themselves up in
the Dongeon; and the other at the same time got into the chief street of the
Town, which without more resistance was furiously taken and sacked. The Count
shut up in the Dongeon with a few Defendents, and those already terrified by
the valor the Infantry had showed, and the crosness of the late businesses,
gave themselves up the next morning to the Kings discretion, who kept him and
fifteen more of the chief of them prisoners, and with a Kingly liberality gave
his household stuff, among which was store of furniture of very great value,
unto the Baron de Byron.

Argentan and Bayeux yielded without a blow: and the King prosecuting his
march, came to Lisieux, which at sight of his Artillery yielded upon the
thirtieth of December: Ponteau de Mer, Pont l' Evesque, and all those other
Towns, followed this example; so that the League had no place left in lower
Normandy, except Honfleur, seated at the mouth of the Seine, right over against
Havre de Grace; which (though the Duke of Montpensier was much against it) was
passed by without being molested, by reason of the Kings haste to go into the
higher Province.

The End of the Tenth BOOK.
1590.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
ELEVENTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Eleventh Book contains the Popes inclination touching the affairs of
France: His resolution to send Cardinal Gaetano his Legate thither: The variety
of opinions concerning his Commissions: His arrival in the Kingdom: His
perplexity, and journey to Paris. The different ends of the League are
discoursed of. The Marquess de Belin introduces a Treaty of Agreement: The Duke
of Mayenne deliberates upon that point, and resolves to prosecute the War: He
besieges Pontoyse, which yields it self unto him: He encamps before Meulan,
and batters it with great obstinacy. The King comes to relieve that place. The
Duke raises the siege, and marches to meet the supplies in Picardy. The King
assaults Dreux, but to no purpose. The Duke of Mayenne returns increased in
strength. The King raises his Camp, and chooses a place of Battle in the ^ield
of Yvry. The Duke follows, and comes up to the same place. The Armies fight,
and the King remains victorious. The Preachers deliver the news of this defeat
to the Parisians, who prepare themselves constantly to endure a siege. Diverse
overtures of Peace are made; but nothing at all can be concluded. The Duke of
Mayenne, to procure relief, goes to the Frontiers of Flanders. The King takes
all the Neighboring Towns about Paris. Siege is laid unto that City, to
overcome it with hunger. The calamities of the siege, and the constancy of the
Citizens are related. The Catholic King commands the Duke of Parma to march
with his whole Army into France, to raise the siege of Paris: He enters into
the Kingdom with great Forces, and with exceeding great preparations joins with
the Duke of Mayenne, and advances toward Paris. The King consults what is best
to be done; resolves to raise the siege, and go to meet the Enemy. The Armies
face one another many days. The Duke of Parma takes Lagny, and opens the
passage of Victuals to Paris. The King retires, and in his retreat gives a
scalado to the City, which proves ineffectual. The Duke of Parma takes Corbeil,
and so absolutely frees the City of Paris from want of provisions. He resolves
to return into Flanders; marches in excellent order: The King follows him:
There happen many encounters. The Duke departing, leaves aid of Men, and
promises supplies of Money to the League. The King returning, marches toward
Picardy.

NOw follows the year 1590. full of all those Calamities which use to be the
consequences of Civil Wars; 1590.
but famous also for the greatness of those accidents that happened in it; the
natural revolution of things having so brought to pass, that in it the greatest
force and storm of Arms broke forth with violence. In the year before, Henry
the Third's Ambassadors and Public Ministers were already departed from Rome,
by reason of the Monitory published against him, when the news of his death was
brought thither, which, being come in a time when the Pope was not only very
much exasperated by the conjunction made with the Hugonot party, but also
infinitely sollicitous and anxious because of the prosperous success of his
Arms, was received by him with great demonstrations of joy, thinking, that the
miraculous power of the hand of God, had unexpectedly diverted that ruin which
humane remedies seemed no way able to prevent. His contentment was increased by
the Agents of the League, who to the confirmation of the Kings death, added the
resolution of the Duke of Mayenne and the Council of the Union to acknowledge
the Cardinal of Bourbon the legitimate King of France, with an open Declaration
and strict Oath to use all their might to free him from his imprisonment, and
that this resolution was adhered to, and unanimously followed by almost all the
principal Cities, with the greater part of the Nobility, and the applause of
the Clergy of the whole Kingdom: all which things being conformable to the
Popes wishes, who exceedingly desired the exclusion of the King of Navarre,
esteemed by him an irreconcilable Enemy to the Church; but yet was not willing
that the Kingdom should be divided into many parts, as some had a mind to have
it, and that it should come into the hands of a Foreign Prince, were the cause
that he wrote not only very kind Letters of great commendation to the Duke of
Mayenne, and the Catholics of the League, but that he also determined to
supply them with Men and Money, for the setting at liberty, and perfect
establishment of the Cardinal of Bourbon. Wherefore, without any delay, in a
work which he accounted excellently good, and of wonderful great glory and
advancement to the Apostolic See, The Pope resolves to send assistance to the
League against the King.
he resolved to send a Legate into France, who by his presence might assist
affairs of so great importance, and might endeavor to reduce all the
Catholics, by such means as he should think most reasonable, to unite
themselves in one body under the obedience of the Cardinal of Bourbon already
elected and declared King of France, whose freedom by all possible force was to
be endeavored. For this business of so great concernment, he chose Cardinal
Henrico Gaetano, a man not only by the nobleness of his birth of great
reputation, Cardinal Henrico Gaetano, a man partial to Spain, is declared Legate
to the League in France.
but also for his worth and experience esteemed of sufficient abilities for so
great an enterprise: yet according to what the Kings Friends said then, and his
own actions discovered afterward, too much inclined to favor the attempts and
interests of Spain. He appointed moreover a select number of Prelates to
accompany the Cardinal-Legat, all men conspicuous either for the fame of
excellent Learning, Prelates appointed by the Pope to accompany the Embassy,
and 300000 Crowns to be employed for the liberty of the Cardinal of Bourbon.
or approved experience in matters of Government; among which were Lorenzo
Bianchetti, and Philippo Sega, who after were Cardinals; Marc Antonio Mocenigo
Bishop of Caneda, a man well versed in affairs, and highly esteemed by the
Pope; Francesco Panigarola, Bishop of ^sti, a Preacher of great renown; and
Roberto Bellarmino, a Jesuit of profound and admirable Learning. To the choice
of these men the Pope added Bills of Exchange to the Merchants at Lions for
three hundred thousand Crowns, with Commission to the Legate to dispose of them
according to need and occasion; but particularly to spend them for the
Infranchisement of the Cardinal of Bourbon, upon which he showed his mind was
fixed more than upon any other thought whatsoever.

But this so ardent resolution was cooled in the very beginning; and the Pope
was put in doubt, by Letters that arrived from the Duke of L^^cembourg, wherein
he gave him notice, that by the French Nobility (who in a very great number
followed and acknowledged the King of Navarre to be the legitimate King of
France) he was chosen Ambassador to his Holiness and the Apostolic See, to
inform him of the causes which had moved the minds of all good Frenchmen to
that acknowledgment, and to require from him, as from a common Father, the
proper means and remedies for the Peace and Union of the whole Kingdom. By
which Letters the Pope did not only find, that what the Agents of the League
had represented unto him was vain, viz. That the major part of the Kingdom was
joined to the party of the Union, and that only a few desperate persons
followed the King of Navarre; but he also conceived some hopes, that by the way
of Pacification, an end might be put to the miseries and discords of the
Kingdom, those that were gone astray might be reduced into the bosom of the
Church, and his aim of having a lawful Catholic French King, might be attained
without submitting the afflicted people of France any longer to new dangers and
calamities of an obstinate War: Wherefore, being also excited by the diligent
informations which were given unto him by the Venetian Ambassadors, intent
upon the preservation of the Crown of France, he returned favorable Answers to
the Duke of Luxembourg and the French Nobility which were in the Kings Camp,
assuring him that he should be well respected, and kindly received, and
exhorting them to persist constantly in the Catholic Religion, as in their
Letters which came with the Dukes they asserted they would do, and that they
would continue it even to the effusion of their blood. And yet the Agents of
the League, (especially Frison Dean of Rheims, lately sent thither by the Duke
of Mayenne) urging him not to delay the Legates expedition, for that these were
artifices of the King of Navarre, to take him off, and gain the benefit of
time, he dispatched the Legate toward France, but with Instructions very
different from his first designs: For whereas before, all the endeavors tended
to the confirmation and freeing the Cardinal of Bourbon; now passing over his
name in silence, the design was only to reunite, by any means whatsoever, the
Catholics under the obedience of the Church, and establish a Catholic King,
to the general liking, without naming the person.

Pope Sixtus V his Orders and Commissions to Cardinal G^etano Legate in France.
To these Commissions set down in a Writing dated the Fifteenth of October, were
added particular express Advertisements to the Cardinal Legate, to show himself
no less neutral and dis-interessed in the Secular Pretensions of the Princes,
than most ardent and zealous concerning Religion, and not to value one person
more than another, provided he were a Frenchman obedient to the Church, and
generally liked by the Kingdom: Nay more, at his last coming to receive
Instructions, the Pope added and repeated it effectually, that he should not
show himself an open Enemy to the King of Navarre, so long as there was any
hope, that he might return into the bosom of the Church. But these
Advertisements were very contrary to the principal scope of the Embassy, which
was to uphold the Catholic party of the League as the foundation of Religion
in that Kingdom, a thing often repeated in his Instructions, and which was
always the aim from the beginning, but which the Pope pretended to have altered
in his last directions; so that the substance of the business changed in the
variety of circumstances, as it often happens, did so disturb the execution,
that it was afterward governed more by the diversity of accidents, than by any
firm determinate resolution. The Advertisements of Cardinal Moresini differed
not much from the Popes Instructions; for being met by the Legate Or, Cajetan.
Gaetano in the City of Bolognia, he, as versed in the interests of the
Kingdom, gave the Legate a particular account of the intentions of Spain, of the
pretensions of the Duke of Mayenne, of the weakness of the League, composed of
various different humors, and of the Kings Forces, which had more secure
foundation in the concurrence of the major part of the Nobility, than the party
of the Union had in the conspiracy of the common people. The same was told him
at Florence by Ferdinando Great Duke of Thuscany, who being perfectly informed
of the interests which were on foot in the Kingdom of France, persuaded him to
keep himself Neuter, and not to refuse those overtures of Agreement which might
be with the profit of the Catholic Religion, and the reputation of the Pope.
But both the advice of Cardinal Moresini, and the Great Dukes counsel were
suspected by the Legate, doubting that the one sought to make him fall into the
same faults whereof he was accounted guilty in the Court of Rome; and that the
other did not counsel him sincerely: Wherefore as a man bent with severity to
sustain the greatness and power of the Church, and accustomed to the affairs of
Italy, where the Popes authority, by the piety of the Nation, and the nearness
of the Princes, is held in high veneration, he firmly persuaded himself, that
by the mere terror of Spiritual Arms he should keep all the Catholics at his
devotion, and excluding the King of Navarre, make a King to be declared and
obeyed, wholly depending upon the Apostolic See, and nearly joined and obliged
to the Crown of Spain, to which, both by his ancient breeding, and the new
practices of the Conde de Olivares the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, he was
infinitely inclined. He was the more confirmed afterward in this his thought,
that all ought to depend upon his Authority; when being arrived at Turin, he
saw that the Duke of Savoy did with exquisite terms of submission entreat him
(as one that might dispose of matters at his pleasure) to consider his right to
the Crown of France, as born of Margaret Sister to King Henry the Second, by
whose right (the course of the Salique Law having been formerly interrupted) he
alleged, the Crown ought rather to be confirmed to him than to any other, that
in ancient times had pretended title by the woman's side; and alleging his
deserts to the Apostolic See, since, that still with continual pains, and
exceeding great charge, he endeavored to subdue the City of Geneva, the basis
and foundation of Calvinism; he labored to win the protection of the Legate,
who not being well informed how matters went, did not take notice that the Duke
brought on his pretensions that way, because he had no better prop to uphold
them, and strove to get into favor with the Pope and Legate, to draw supplies
from them of men and money, whereby he might bring those of Geneva under his
yoke, and fortify and establish himself in the possession of the Marquesate of
Saluzzo, against whosoever should at last be elected and acknowledged King of
France, wherein he saw he could not have a more safe Protector, than the Pope.

But the Cardinal Legate being come into France, was not long before he found
effects contrary to his opinion; for having sent to require Colonel Alfonso
Corso, The Cardinal Legates request to Colonel Alphonso Corso; and his answer.
not only to forbear molesting Grenoble and Valence (which Cities alone held
for the League in Dauphine) but also, that as a Catholic and a Stranger, he
should forsake the King's party, and join with the Union, that trial proved
vain; for the answer he received was, That he was indeed a Catholic, and an
obedient Son to the Apostolic See in Spiritual things; but that having made
his fortune, as a Soldier, in the service of the King of France, he could not
desist from following him; and, following him, he was bound to do that to
Grenoble and Valence, which he thought fit for the affairs of the Prince whom
he served, By which answer, the Legate was a little dashed, who was so much the
more troubled, when being come to Lions, he found the business of the League in
such disorder, by the King's prosperous success, that he was so far from
obtaining any thing else, that he could neither have security, nor convoy, to
prosecute his journey; for the Count of Brissac, appointed at first by the Duke
of Mayenne to meet him, and secure his passage, was necessitated to face about,
and employ himself in the affairs of Normandy, and Monsieur de la Bourdai^iere,
to whom that Commission was given afterward, had been defeated by the King's
Forces under the command of the Sieur de Pralin, near Bar upon the Seine; so
that being reduced into very great perplexity, he knew not by what resolution
to steer his course, so various were the things that represented themselves to
his consideration. The Duke of Nevers being retired home, and not interessed on
either side, invited him to come into his State, where, standing neuter, as
befitted one that represented the Apostolic See, he might freely take those
ways that should appear most convenient to him* and this determination seemed
to agree with the Popes intentions and instructions. On the other side, the
Duke of Mayenne ceased not to solicit him to come to Paris; showing him, that
without the authority of his name, and without those helps which were hoped for
from him, the League was in danger to be dissolved, and to be subdued by the
King's Forces; and by consequence, not only the City of Paris, but all the rest
of the Kingdom would remain oppressed by the Hugonot party. The King did not at
all despair, but that, if he could not be wrought to come into the places under
his obedience, he might at least be persuaded to stay in some Neutral Town out
of the way, and perchance to go to the City of Avignion, till he saw the issue
of the Duke of Luxembourgs Embassy at Rome; to forward which hopes, he had
caused to be published, That if the Popes Legate, who was reported to be coming,
should take his journey toward him, every one should receive, honor, and
reverence him, taking care neither to offend him, nor any of his followers, and
should by all means give him safe conduct and security: But if he went toward
the quarters of the League, he did expressly forbid every one to acknowledge him
for a Legate, or to receive him into those places that were under his obedience,
upon pain of Rebellion. But the Legate did not only think it unsafe to go to the
Duke of Nevers, a weak Prince, who had neither Fort nor principal City, wherein
he might shelter himself from the snares of the Hugonots, and unhandsome to
return back: But also he esteemed it much more indecent and prejudicial to
abandon the Catholic party; and by that demonstration, utterly to confound and
deject the minds of those who were for the League, with a manifest increase of
the King's Forces and reputation; from whence a greater mischief would have
followed in Spiritual then in Temporal Matters; because, to the Popes dishonor,
the Catholic party would have been abandoned through his default, and the
King, who at that time, for fear of his enemies, made show both in words and
actions that he would turn Catholic, would be left free with power to do what
he pleased, without respect of any Body; and finally, he thought with himself
that he was come into France, not only to compose the Discords, but
principally to endeavor the suppression of the King of Navarre, an enemy to the
Church, and the election of a new King depending wholly upon the Pope, as a
friend and confident to the Kingdom of Spain. This opinion had so much power
with him, that being grounded upon decency, and not finding any obstacle to the
contrary in his Commission, he resolved at last to satisfy the party of the
League, and to go on without delay to Paris: Wherefore seeing the Duke of
Mayenne extremely taken up with Military employments, The Cardinal Legate having
overcome many doubts and difficulties, arrives at Paris.
he sent Monsignor Bianchetti to the Duke of Lorain, to demand a Convoy of him
for his safe passage; which being obtained without difficulty, passing by Dijon
and Troys, he came upon the Twentieth day of January into the City of Paris,
being received with most solemn pomp, and lodged in the Bishops Palace, richly
and sumptuously furnished with the King's stuff, taken out of the Lodgings of
the Louvre. At his arrival, he caused the Popes Breve of the Fifteenth of
October to be published; wherein, after an honorable commemoration of the
merits of the Kingdom of France toward the Apostolic See, The Publication of
the Popes Breve at Paris, and the content thereof.
and of the reciprocal benefits and kind demonstrations of it toward the most
Christian Kings in all times, and after having compassionately deplored the
present troubles and calamities, he attested, that with the counsel of the
Cardinals he had chosen Cardinal Gaetano Legate to the Kingdom of France, with
power to use (by the Divine assistance) all means which by him should be
thought fit, to protect the Catholic Religion, to recall Heretics into the
bosom of the Church, to restore the peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom; and
finally, to procure, that under one only, good, pious, and truly Catholic
King, the people of the Kingdom might, to the glory of God, live in quietness
and tranquillity, after so many dangers and calamities of War: Wherefore he did
pray and exhort all the Orders and Degrees of France to persevere in the
Catholic Religion, and labor, by the glorious example of their Ancestors, to
extinguish and root up the evil of Heresy, to cut off the occasions and roots
of discord; and that particular enmities and quarrels being finally buried, and
those fatal ruinous Civil Wars being laid down, they should resolve to yield
obedience to a lawful truly Catholic King; and the Divine Worship being
restored under his shadow and protection, to live in charitable union and
concord; being in the mean time obliged to receive the Cardinal Legate with due
reverence, and to put in execution his fatherly admonitions; thereby to reap,
besides temporal earthly fruits, the divine heavenly benediction.

Two different Declarations followed upon the publication of this Breve; one,
of the Parliament of Tours, by which all persons were forbidden to obey or
acknowledge the Legate; The Parliament of Tours forbids to acknowledge the
Legate; and the Parliament of Paris exhorted all to give him due reverence.
the other, of the Parliament of Paris, by which all were exhorted to receive
the fatherly love of the Apostolic See, and to give due reverence to the
Legat's Admonitions. After which contrary Declarations, (learned men desiring
to fight for their Factions in their way, no less ardently then the Soldiers,)
there came forth many Decrees of Parliament, and infinite Writings of
particular persons, decisions of the Sorbonne, Letters of the Legate, Answers of
those Prelates that followed the King's party, and so great a quantity of Books
spread abroad thorough all parts by curious men, All the learned men fight for
their factions with their Pens, as the Soldiers with their Swords.
that it well appeared there was no Brain that labored not, nor Pen that writ
not in the defense and confirmation of the Rights of each party; but with so
much pertinacy of Minds and Reasons, all striking as it were at the mark, of
the coming and power of the Legate, that it was an easy thing to consider, how
Spiritual arms, wrested and interpreted diverse ways, in the heat and
inconsiderateness of War, were rather like to supply new fuel to the fire, then
to extinguish the flame already burning; whereby Cardinal Gaetano within a few
days perceived the falsity of his first opinion, and that it had been better
counsel to have staid neutral, since that by coming to Paris, he made himself
Legate only to one of the Factions; which did not only trouble him, because it
was very different from the mind and designs of the Pope, but because he began
also to know clearly the weakness and disorders of the League.

The affairs of the Union were at this time, very doubtful and uncertain: For
the diversity of pretensions, and the contrariety of the ends of the
Confederates, did (as the custom is) disturb the course of the enterprise, and
did not only hold the deliberations of men's minds in suspense, but also the
effects and operations of common interests, which by reason of the King's
celerity and resolution, had no need of delay. The Duke of Mayenne, Prince of
the Faction, and Head of the Enterprise; who with the Authority of his Person,
the Prudence of his Government, and his experience in War, managed the weight
of all things, esteemed the reward which should result from the blood of his
brothers, and his own industry, justly to belong unto himself; and designed
either to transfer the Crown upon himself, and his own posterity, as had happened
in the times of Pepin and Charles Martel; or if that could not finally be
obtained, to confer it at least upon some Prince who should acknowledge it
totally and absolutely from him: Yet observing his wonted integrity and right
intention, he was resolved never to suffer, that the Kingdom should in any
manner be divided, much less, that it should fall into the hands of a Foreign
Prince. Princes that aspired to the Kingdom of France.
The King of Spain on the other side, who from the beginning had secretly, and
now openly protected and fomented the League, and who in late years had spent
Two millions of Gold in the service of the Confederates, and was fain now,
besides the maintaining of Horse and Foot, to ^ontribute vast sums of money,
both in public and private; and who saw, that without his Supplies, which must
be great and potent, not only the Enterprise could not succeed, but also, that
the League could not so much as subsist, but be speedily dissolved, thought it
more than reasonable, and more than just, that the expenses and losses being
his, the fruits and profits should be so likewise; and therefore, besides a
most secret hidden intention of uniting the two Crowns, or to make that of
France to come to his daughter the Infanta Isabella, born of Queen Elizabeth,
Eldest sister to Henry the Third: He sought also to be publicly declared
Protector of the Crown of France, with Royal pre-eminencies, and authority to
provide for the Offices of the Crown, to choose the Governors and Commanders in
War, to dispose of Prelatical dignities, and to have the power belonging to a
supreme Prince: and this was demanded and openly labored for by his Agents,
who were Don Bernardino Mendozza, the Commendatory Morrea, Iuan Baptista
Tassis, Co^missa^y-General.
Veedor General of his Armies, who was newly come for that purpose from
Flanders. The Parisians, who saw the foundation of the Faction consisted in
them, not only by reason of the abundance of people, and the power of the
City, but also of the continual Contributions from whence they derived the
sinews of the War, thought it belonged to them to dispose of the Crown: And
being ill-satisfied with the Duke of Mayenne, because of his unprosperous
success in the War, both in that the Fauxbourgs seemed to have been lost by his
delay, and that through his want of diligence, the City was in a manner
besieged, and in great scarcity of provisions, they inclined to submit
themselves to the will of the Spaniards, hoping by means of their Forces
utterly to destroy the King, whose very name they hated bitterly; to extirpate
the Religion of the Hugonots, whereof they naturally were enemies; and by the
Moneys of Spain to be eased of the intolerable burden of Contributions, as the
Catholic King's Ministers went cunningly, promising and bragging both in
public and private. On the other side, the Nobility who followed the party of
the League, and in whose hands were the Arms and Fortresses, averse from
submitting themselves to the Spanish dominion, desirous of a French King, and
affectionate to, or interessed with the House of Guise, inclined to favor the
Duke of Mayenne; and following his Name, and obeying his Command, necessitated
all the rest of their party to depend upon him, and to order themselves by the
motions of his will, and the authority of his Government. In the Parliament
many were inclined to ^^vour the King, and desirous that he would turn to the
Catholic Faith, that they might acknowledge and obey him: and universally the
major part of the Counselors were far from suffering either that the Kingdom
should be divided, or that it should come to a foreign Prince. The Duke of
Lorain, from whom the League received no small increase of strength and
reputation, thought that the Kingdom appertained to his Son the Marquess du
Pont, as being born likewise of Claude, the Sister of Henry the Third, and took
it very ill that any other of the House of Lorain should dare to stand in
competition with him, the Head and Chief of the Family. The Duke of Savoy
likewise pretended a right to the Kingdom, because he was born of Margaret, the
Sister of King Henry the Second; and trusted that he should perchance be
favored by the Spaniard, but persuaded himself certainly, that he should have
the protection of the Pope. These two Princes, besides their designs upon the
Crown, had also other particular aims; The Duke of Lorain to get Metz, Thoul,
Verdun, and the Duchy of Sedan, upon which places he had diverse pretentions.
The Duke of Savoy, to conserve the Marquesate of Saluzzo, and by that (as it
began after to be discovered) he hoped to join Provence to his State; a very
commodious Province, and opportune, by reason of the footing he had there
already, possessing in it the City and County of Nizza. The Duke of Nemours and
the Duke of Mercoeur thought also of this division of the Kingdom into many
parts: The first, out of a desire to reduce his Government of Lions into a
proper Signory; the other, to attain Bretagne, which by ancient rights he
pretended did belong unto his Wife: and many others among particular men, who,
out of a design to reduce their Governments into patrimonies, would willingly
have followed that resolution. Of so great diversity of humors and designs,
and of so great variety of Counsels was the League composed, who justling and
thwarting one another, interrupted the course of affairs, and slackned that
fervor wherewith from the beginning they had conspired to establish that bond,
which seemed to have no other end, save that of Religion.

Nor could the variety of counsels, or the uncertainty of the resolutions of
the League be unknown to the King, by reason of the experience he had of them,
and of the intelligence which came daily to him, and therefore endeavoring to
draw advan^^ge from them, and make profit of them, he had, from the time he
departed from Diepe, given liberty, upon his parole, to the Marquess of Belin
(who had been taken prisoner in the business of Arques) with Commission to
proffer peace to the Duke of Mayenne in his name, A Treaty of Agreement between
Henry the Fourth, and the Duke of Mayenne.
and to exhort him, as a Prince of a good moderate nature, not to consent to
the pernicious thoughts of strangers; but that freeing himself from the
vexations of the common people, and from the arts of the Spaniards, he would
hearken to a good wholesome Accommodation, for by that means he might with more
desert and honor obtain whatsoever he himself could desire of him: And at the
same time he had brought to pass underhand, that the Catholics of his party
should pray the same Marquess to beseech the Duke of Mayenne from them, that he
would exhort and persuade the King to turn Catholic; for that was the way to
reduce him into the bosom of the Church; and with his honor and reputation to
restore peace and tranquillity, so necessary, and so desired of all France. But
the Marquess having done his message, and reiterated it again after the King's
departure from the Fauxbourgs of Paris, the thoughts and reasons were
different, not only in the minds of his Counselors, but also of the Duke of
Mayenne himself. They that favored the Propositions of the Catholics of the
King's party, said, There could be no resolution taken, either more to the
purpose, or of more benefit and honor to the Duke, let the event be what it
would; for if the King should accept the invitation, and make himself a
Catholic, Discords would thereby be buried, Religion secured, the Kingdom come
into the hands of the lawful Successor, and an end put to the fatal revolutions
of Civil War: That the name of the Duke would thereby remain glorious to all
the World, as the Author of so great a good; his intentions would be justified,
and the end of his taking up Arms would plainly appear, with the eternal
Benedictions of all the people of France: That as a consequent of so pious a
work, would result the freeing of the Cardinal of Bourbon, who, in so decayed
an age, one ought to believe, desired rather his liberty, and a quiet passage
out of this life, than a vain shadow of dominion accompanied with a most strict
imprisonment: That thereupon likewise would follow the freeing of the Dukes of
Guise and Elboeuf, of whose recovery they had for a long time had but small, or
no hopes: And finally, that the state of the Duke himself, and of his
posterity, would be as great as he h^^self knew how to ask or desire. But if
the King should refuse to satisfy his request, and should persevere in the
Hugonot Religion, then not only the reasons of the League would be justified to
all the World, to the confusion of those who did sinisterly interpret the
actions of the Confederates; but also the Catholics who followed the King,
despairing of his conversion, and having found the falsness of his promises,
would all forsake him; whereby he remaining only with the dependence of a few
Heretics, it would be easy to suppress him, and make an honorable end of the
War by Victory.

On the other side, they that dissuaded from that resolution, said, That the
War being wholly grounded upon the point of Religion, that overture could not
be made without a precedent License from the Pope, whom it concerned to approve
and confirm the Kings Conversion: And that the Duke of Mayenne not being
absolute Prince of the League, but only Head of his own party, ought not to
proceed to so important and so peremptory an act, without the consent of all
those that followed his party, and of all the Princes that adhered to and
favored the League: For if the Pope should not approve of his conversion,
whatsoever he should have treated or resolved on, would remain void and of no
effect; and if the Confederates should not follow his determination, they would
choose another Head, and he would be left deprived of the prop of the Catholic
party, and unhappily exposed to the will of his enemies: That this was a plot
of the King himself, to beget distrust between him and his party, and to sow
discords and suspicions among the Confederates: That it might be, he would fain
himself a Catholic, to the end, he might more securely dispose of Religion at
his own pleasure; in which case, the too hasty, and too simple credulity of the
Duke, would for ever be condemned; and likewise that the King, to break the
Union of the League, would promise mountains of Gold, but without any security;
that being settled King in peace, he would not after observe that, or the least
part of that which he had promised; from whence, to his eternal blame, would
follow the ruin of himself, and all his adherents: That the course of present
affairs required, he should continue united with the rest of the Confederates:
That he should not disgust the Pope, nor alienate the Catholic King, nor the
Duke of Lorain: That he should not be abashed for the ill success of the
beginning, but hope, that as God had revenged the Blood of his Brothers; so he
would give him assistance to establish Religion, and exalt his state to the
greatness he hoped for. The Duke was moved on the one side, by the justness of
the Proposition of those of the Kings party, as also by his anger at the
instability and impertinency of the Parisians: The scarcity of money afflicted
him, for want whereof he knew not how to pay his Foreign Forces, nor how to
satisfy the demands of all the Garrisons, and all the Governors, who addressed
themselves to him for whatsoever they needed; but the cunning and obdurateness
of the Spaniards troubled him more than all the rest, who having caused the
Sieur de la Mothe, The Sieur de la Mothe refuses to advance beyond the
Frontiers, unless the King of Spain be declared Protector of the Crown of
France, with authority to dispose of the chief Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Dignities; which Prerogatives were otherwise called, Marks of Justice.
Governor of Graveline, to come out of Flanders with Supplies, to the very
Frontiers of the Kingdom, denied to make him advance any further, or to pay any
sum of Money for the maintenance of the War, if the Catholic King were not
first declared Protector of the Crown of France, with authority to dispose of
the principal Dignities, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil (which they called Las
Marcas de Iusticia) whereby he would have power and superiority over the
League; which things seemed to him so exorbitant, so prejudicial to the Crown,
and so unfit, that neither he himself could endure to hear of them; nor did he
believe, that any of the Confederates, except the Parisians, would condescend
unto them; knowing, that it was a putting off the Bridle into the hand of the
Catholic King, to give him leave to guide the event of things whithersoever he
pleased, at last, to direct them. But on the other side, the doubt of being
left alone and forsaken, the uncertainty of the Kings Conversion, and of his
Word, the ancient enmity stirred up against him, and much more the hope of
attaining the Crown for himself at last, did not suffer him to consent to the
Marquess de Belin's Propositions: The Duke of Mayenne will not hearken to an
agreement with the King.
Wherefore he sent him back to his imprisonment with general ambiguous words,
and cut off the proposed Treaty of Agreement. And, to remedy (as much as in him
lay) the disorders of present affairs, partly by importunity, partly by
cunning, partly by terror of Arms, he caused the Council of the Union to be
very much moderated, which from the beginning was composed of seditious
persons, The Archbishop of Lions lately prisoner at Amboise, is made
High-Chancellor to the Duke of Mayenne.
and such as did not depend wholly upon him, and would have the Archbishop of
Lions (newly set at liberty by Captain du Gast for a great sum of money, and
come to Paris) to execute the Office of High Chancellor, and in that quality to
be President of the Council; and brought into it the Sieur de Villeroy and
President Ieannin, Men that were his Confidents, and averse from condescending
to the will of the Spaniards; and increasing the number, he put in so many of
the principal Gentlemen, that he did no longer fear the insolency and
instability of the common people in those deliberations which occurred daily;
and yet to satisfy all in appearance, he caused a Decree to be made in the
Council, by which the Princes, Peers, Mareschals of France, Governors of
Provinces, Officers of the Crown, and the Three Orders of the Kingdom were
appointed to meet at Melun in the Month of February following, to hold the
States General there, where all present affairs should be deliberated, and
resolved on wi^h the common consent: Which appointment, though men of
understanding saw, that in respect of the confusion of the War, it was like to
prove vain, it not being possible, either to meet, or stay together in a place
that was in the middle of the combustion, served nevertheless to bait the
common people, who are sooner catched with vain, but specious things, then with
such as are serious and substantial.

With the Spaniards (who importuned him most earnestly for the Declaration) the
Duke held another temper, excusing himself by the coming of the Cardinal Legate,
who already was very near, without whose assent and presence, he said it was
not fit to conclude a business of so great moment; and fed them with hopes, so
artificially, and with so much dissimulation, that, they not distrusting the
inclination and ready consent of the Legate, it was easy to persuade them to
stay his coming: Neither therefore would they make the supplies advance, or
disburse any sum of money, alleging the same reason, that for their parts they
would stay for the approbation of the Cardinal Legate. But because the
Parisians, straightned with scarcity of Victual, murmured exceedingly, (nor did
it appear, that in that, they were much to blame) the Duke drawing together all
the Forces he had in being, laid siege to Pontoise, to open on that side a
passage for the provisions of Normandy.

In the mean time, the Cardinal Legate arrived, with whom the Duke of Mayenne
having had an interview at Paris, many of the principal Lords, who were nearest
at hand, being there present, and among the rest Cardinal Gondi (who since the
King's death, being retired to Noysy, a house of his Brothers the Marshall de
Retz, had kept himself neuter) they began to treat of the progress of the
affairs of the League. The Spaniards above all insisted upon declaring the
Catholic King Protector, and upon the Marks of Justice they demanded for him;
and were fomented by the Council of Sixteen, who affirmed, there was no other
opposition against it, but that of the Duke of Mayenne; and that the whole
party would willingly concur to satisfy the Catholic King, as he from whom
they acknowledged the security of Religion, and their own safety. On the other
side, the Duke resisted, with the major part of the Nobility, and with the
Counselors of Parliament, who were resolved not to consent unto it: And some
inconveniency might have sprung from it, if Cardinal Gaetano had not put the
Spaniards in mind, That it was no time to stand upon those demands, nor to
force the wills of the French unseasonably: That it would make them agree, and
reconcile themselves to the King of Navarre, who not being wanting to himself,
proposed large and advantageous conditions: That the maturity of the business
was to be waited for, and men's minds were not to be put into suspicions
unseasonably* for that without doubt the event would be the dissolution of the
League, with the danger of Religion, and ruin of the whole enterprise: That it
was needful first to withstand the Arms and progress of the King, lest he by
means of those discords should have time to establish himself; andthen that
danger being removed, neither ways nor occasions would be wanting to satisfy
the Catholic King's interests, which he in due time would advance and favor
with all his power; And it fell out very opportunely, that about the same time,
either by chance or cunning, some Articles of Agreement were divulged, between
the King, A false rumor is divulged, of a Treaty of Agreement, which increases
the confusion of the Parisian^.
and the Duke of Mayenne, which were reported to have been concluded by
Monsieur de Villeroy for him, and the Marshall de Byron on the King's part;
and many affirmed, that they were most true, and already subscribed by the
Dutchesses of Nemours and Mayenne; the one Mother, the other Wife to the Duke,
who indeed were against the Spaniards demands; whereby that happening, which
ordinarily is wont that Fear overcomes all other Passions, and removes all
other impediments, the Spanish Ministers agreed at last, that Iuan Baptista
Tassis, one of their number, and the Sieur de Rossieux for the Duke of Mayenne,
should go together into Spain, to know personally the Catholic King's
intentions, which the Duke of Mayenne affirmed to be different from what his
Ministers reported, and to bring back the order that was to be observed in the
administration of common affairs.

The Spaniards consent, that the Supplies of Flanders should advance, and j^yn
with the Duke of Mayenne.
In the mean time they consented, that the Supplies from Flanders should
advance, to unite themselves with the Army of the D. of Mayenne; who, Pontoise
being once taken, purposed to march forward and meet the enemy. The
Cardinal-Legat added the Three hundred thousand Crowns which he had brought
from Rome in Bills of Exchange, which (seeing for the present, they could not
be spent for the enlargement of the Cardinal of Bourbon) he had, upon the
necessity of the enterprise, granted to the Duke, since he absolutely denied
that the Army could move, if it got not at least some part of the arrears of
its pay. Cardinal Gaetan^ grants unto the D. of Mayenne the three hundred
thousand crowns, brought for enlargement of the Cardinal of Bourbon. The Decree
of the College of Sorbon^e.


On the other side, the Duke of Mayenne consented, that the College of
Sorbonne should make a Decree, confirmed by the Cardinal Legate, that no
Agreement should be treated of with the He^eticks, nor particularly with Henry
of Bourbon, who was declared to be relapsed and excommunicated; nor should hold
any commerce or intelligence with him, upon the same pain of Excommunication
and Heresy: To which the Duke more easily gave consent, because at that time
his mind was utterly averse from an Accommodation, and full of hope, remaining
victorious over his enemies, to reduce things to that point which he aimed at
secretly in himself.

The discords being thus composed and quieted, the Duke, desirous to piece up
his reputation lost in the assaults at Diepe, and in the loss of the Fauxbourgs
of Paris, being stirred up and filled with hopes by the Cardinal-Legat, moved
with his whole Army to besiege Meulan, a small place, but seated upon the Pass
of the River Seine, at the entering into Normandy, which therefore next to
Pontoise, hindered the bringing of Victuals to the City of Paris. Meulan is a
little Bourg enclosed with ancient Walls, Meulan stands upon the Sein^ below
Paris.
which spreads it self along the bank of the Seine: from thence there is a
convenient passage over a spacious Bridge into an Island in the midst of the
River, which reduced into the form of a Fortress, is defended and flanked with
four Ravelines after the modern way; and from the Isle there is a passage over
another Bridge to the other Bank of the River, where there is a great Tower of
ancient building, which serves as a defense and fortification to the Bridge. A
description of the situation of Meulan, and of the siege laid to it by the Duke
of Mayenne.
Colonel Berangueville was in Meulan with four Companies of French Foot, fifty
Switzers, and eighty Light Horse; who thinking that after the taking of
Pontoise (which Town had capitulated to surrender) the Duke of Mayenne, to
satisfy the Parisians, would come on to besiege that place, had with exceeding
great diligence caused the Bourg to be encompassed with a good Trench, flanked
with Half-moons; and the same had he done to the great Tower which stands
beyond the River upon the entry of the Bridge, the Isle being already well
enough fortified before: At the same time he likewise dispatched several
messengers to the King, to demand relief: and having ordered his men in a
readiness, and given Arms to those of the Bourg, had taken a resolution to
defend himself to the uttermost. The siege being laid on that side where the
Bourg stands, the Duke of Mayenne caused a Battery to be planted, which began
to play upon the Defendants with eleven pieces of Cannon; but so great was
their diligence in repairing their Works, and so great annoyance did the Army
receive as it were in the flank, from two pieces of Artillery planted in the
point of a Raveline in the Island, that the siege went on with great
difficulty, and exceeding slowly: Wherefore the Duke, angry that so small a
place should make so obstinate a resistance (for he had already been ten days
at work about it) caused the Sieur de Rhosne, one of his Camp-Mareschals, to
pass over to the other side of the Seine, and make a Battery against the Tower
of the Bridge, to straighten the De^endents on all sides.

In the mean time, the King, who was quartered between Lisieux and Ponteau de
Mer, with a design to besiege Honfleur, which was the only Town in the lower
Normandy that held for the League, having had notice of the eager siege at
Meulan, resolved to march presently to relieve it: for the greatest hope of his
Arms consisting in the blocking up and cutting off provisions from the City of
Paris, with confidence that he should break the stubbornness of the Citizens,
and that the impatiency of want and necessity would make their minds incline
to Peace; he saw that the taking of Meulan would open a large passage for
abundant supplies of provisions: wherefore being departed from Lisieux the
fourteenth of February, and having taken Vernueil by the way, he marched
(though orderly) with so great diligence, that having gone forty leagues in
seven days, he appeared upon the one and twentieth with his Army in Battalia
within sight of Meulan, on that side where the Tower was besieged and battered
by the Sieur de Rhosne, who having but a small part of the Army with him, and
therefore unequal Forces to continue the siege on the field-side, drawing off
his Cannon, passed the River in Boats that waited for him, and went into the
Duke's Camp; and the King entering personally into Meulan on that side, and
giving due commendations to the Defendents, left Three hundred Swisses, and two
hundred French Firelocks there; and retiring to his Army, quartered in the
places near adjacent.

The Duke of Mayenne knowing that the King would not attempt with inferior
Forces to pass the River in the face of his Army, continued with confidence to
batter the place; and the Cannon having made way with about Five hundred s^ot,
the assault was given upon the Two and twentieth day; which was so sharp, that
the Defendents would not have endured it long, if the King at the same time,
sending in fresh men on the other side of the River, had not given them new
courage and new strength; and yet nevertheless, having lost the first Trench,
they were reduced to their inner Works, with small hope of defending them, if
the Marshall de Biron had not come in with a great many Foot; who bringing
other Cannon into the Isle, which raked thorough their flank with a very great
slaughter, forced the Assailants at last to retreat toward the evening. Yet
the Duke of Mayenne still persisted in his resolution to force the place,
judging, that his glory would be so much the greater, if he could take Meulan
before the King's face, by how much the more difficult he esteemed the
enterprise, in regard of the hourly relief which the besieged received from the
far side of the River. But the King having changed his quarters, and after
having furnished Meulan with all things necessary, having lodged his Army upon
the great highway that leads to Paris, the Duke of Mayenne was constrained to
send the Duke of Nemours thither with some Light Horse, to prevent the tumults
and precipitate despair of the people: The Duke of Mayenne, after 25 days,
raises the siege of Meulan* and marches toward Rouen to appease new troubles.
after which diminution of his Army, it fortuned, that news came presently, how
the old Castle at Rouen was seized upon by some seditious persons, and that the
whole City was brought into very great danger and confusion: wherefore, upon
the five and twentieth day he resolved to raise his siege, and to march that
way without delay, (so much did accidental chances always assist the King's
proceedings) and yet the danger of Rouen vanished without any trouble: for the
Sieur de la Land, who commanded the Soldiers, having driven out those that
made the tumult the same night, and also the Sieur d' Allegre, who was the Head
of them, restored the City unto its former quietness. But the Duke of Mayenne,
thinking it at last impossible to take Meulan, considering the hourly relief it
had from the King; and not being willing to lose time, and destroy his Army
upon a vain enterprise, resolved to draw off, and with easy marches to meet
the Supplies from Flanders and Lorain, which he had intelligence were advancing
speedily toward him.

On the other side, the King being intent upon cutting off provisions from
Paris on all sides, The King besieges Dre^x
resolved unexpectedly to assault the City of Dreux, his mind giving him that
he should take it before the Duke of Mayenne returned, and so not only totally
shut up the passage of Normandy, but also keeping a strong Garrison there, cut
off and molest the ways of Beausse, and hinder the free passage between
Chartres and Paris. The Sieur de la Falandre and Captain la Viette, were in
Dreux, both valiant Soldiers; who having a sufficient Garrison, received the
siege very constantly, which was begun upon the last of February, showing in
the first skirmishes both firm resolution of mind, and great experience in War:
which opinion conceived of them, they did the more confirm at the Marshall de
Biron's viewing and discovering the place: for they laid him an Ambush of many
Musketeers, secretly placed in the moat, by whom Charles Brise the chief
Cannoneer, who was close by him, Captain la Boulaye, and two others of his own
servants were slain; he himself being shot upon the Target with three bullets,
and beaten to the ground, was not wounded by reason of the goodness of his
Arms; but yet he had much ado to get off, and had certainly been taken prisoner
by the Enemy, if his son the Baron, who followed him very near, had not
opportunely succored and disingaged him. The valor of the Defendents was not
less in other actions: for the Artillery having made a great breach by the
third of March, the King commanded the Foot to assault the Curtine, at which
fighting gallantly from noon to Sunset, the Defendents at the last beat back
the King's Forces with a very great slaughter; and following them victoriously
into their Trenches, slew three Captains there, and two hundred soldiers. About
this time the King received seasonable assistance from many parts: for having
called unto him all the supplies of the Provinces, first of all the Marshall
d' Aumont joined with him, who led the Gentry of Champagne, and One thousand
and two hundred Reiters newly sent out of Germany by the Sieur de San^y; and a
while after, the Grand Prior and the Baron de Giury came up with Two hundred
Gentlemen, and three hundred Light Horse; and at last Captain Raulet Go^ernor
of Pont de l' Arche, the Commendatory de Chattes, the Sieur de l' Archant, and
other Gentlemen, brought in the Forces of Normandy: after whose arrival, the
King, desirous to try the last push for the place he had besieged, caused four
other pieces of Cannon, with great store of Ammunition to be fetched from
Meulan, where they had been left, and began to batter it afresh with very great
violence.

But the news of the besieging of Dreux being come to Paris, At the news of the
siege of Dreux, the people of Paris mutiny.
it is not credible how much men's minds were altered by it, and how much the
people murmured and mutined at it, being exposed more than all others to future
dangers, and to the present distresses of hunger: wherefore the Cardinal-Legat,
and the Spanish Ministers being very much troubled, endeavored not only by
means of the Preachers, to appease and cheer up the Citizens, but solicited
the Duke of Mayenne with frequent Letters, and resenting Messages, spurring him
up with often vehement complaints, and seeming to wonder, that having much a
stronger Army, he should let the principal City, on which the most secure hopes
of the League relied, to be brought into such scarcity, that it was necessary
to prevent those imminent insurrections which were secretly labored for on the
Kings part; that so much money had now been spent, and so much pains taken, and
that nothing had been done save enterprises of small or no account to the sum
of affairs; and that it was evident, nothing else was endeavored, nothing else
pretended, but to consume time unprofitably, and tire out the patience of the
Confederates; and the Three hundred thousand Crowns sent by the Pope being once
spent, with what money would he maintain his Army for the future? with
Contributions of the Parisians, who having been already long blocked up, and
reduced to extreme want of necessaries, were fain to pay ten Crowns for a
Bushel of Wheat, and to live upon Bread alone without any other subsistence?
that every one desired he would at last make trial, whether the Swords of the
Confederates could cut as well, and were as sharp, as those of the Bearnois,
(so they called those of the Kings party) and that the Catholic King had not
emptied his Garrisons of Flanders, to the end, his Soldiers should lose their
time in idleness; that it was manifestly seen how much a man's resolution was to
be valued; for the King without money, without being prop'd up by Confederates,
without Friends, and in a manner without any Towns, had in a few months
traversed all France, taken more places and Forts than there were days in the
year, and now fiercely and resolutely threatened the City of Paris it self, even
in the face of the Army of the League.

The Duke of Mayenne moved by these complaints, earnestly redoubled many times,
though in his own mind he feared the unexpertness of his men, The Duke of
Mayenne joins with the Spanish Supplies from Flanders, and marching toward
Dreux, resolves to fight.
and did much esteem the valor of the Nobility that followed the Kings Camp;
yet was he resolved to put it to a day, because the great advantage he had in
number made him conceal his own opinion; and his being Head of the
Confederates, forced him to manage the War by the directions of others, fearing
many inconveniences if he should have gone about to manage it his own way:
Wherefore being joined with Count Egmont, who brought from Flanders Fifteen
hundred Lanciers, and Four hundred Carabines; and having met Colonel St. Paul
some two days after, who brought Twelve hundred Horse, and Two thousand German
Foot out of Lorain; he began his march without further delay to raise the siege
of Dreux, and come presently to the issue of a Battle. The Flemish Cavalry were
excellently well horsed, and gallantly set forth with Silk and Gold, but
generally undervalued in respect of the French Gentry: On the other side, the
Carabines, armed for the most part with back, breast, and pot, and mounted upon
nimble horses of a middle size, being expert in all encounters, were not only
esteemed by their own, but, which imported more, feared by their Enemies. The
Germans led by St. Paul, had been raised in the name of the Sieur de Sancy, who
sent by the King to the Princes of Germany, and having obtained money from the
Lant-Grave of Hesse, the Count of Mombelliard, and from the Cities of Vlme and
Norembergh, had levied Horse and Foot to join with the Marshall d' Aumont in
Champagne, which the Cavalry prosperously did; The German Infantry raised for
the K. of France, turn for the League, under the command of Col. St. Paul.
who by the way of Langres (though by a various passage) came to the place
appointed; but the Infantry being come near the City of Strasbourg, was
encompassed by the Duke of Lorain, and to free themselves from danger, broke
their Faith; and having received new money in the name of the Confederates, was
come into the Camp of the League, under the command of Colonel St. Paul: With
these Forces, and the old Army, which amounted in all to the number of Four
thousand five hundred Horse, and little less than Twenty thousand Foot: The
Army of the League being 4500 Horse, and 20000 Foot, march to relieve Dreux.
The Duke furnished with victual, and all things necessary, reviewed his Army
diligently upon the Ninth of March, and having given his Soldiers leave to
rest all the day following, upon the Eleventh day in the morning he moved
toward Dreux, which Town was still fiercely battered and assaulted by the King.

The King advertised of their coming raises the siege.
But the King having intelligence, that the Duke of Mayenne increased in
strength, advanced toward him with a resolution to fight; being deceived both
by the constancy of the defendents, from whom he did not think to have met with
such resistance; and by the celerity of the Duke, who he did not believe would
so suddenly have joined with the Supplies of the Confederates, determined to
raise the siege, being not well resolved to fight, by reason of the inequality
of Forces; yet intending (in case he should come to a battle) to find out the
most convenient place, and most advantageous ground that he could for his Army.
The Artillery was drawn off upon Monday, being the Twelfth of March, in the
morning; but because the King would have the Baggage to go before, and that the
Army should march in Battalia, the day was already almost spent when the Camp
moved, nor did they arrive at Nonancourt, their appointed Quarter, till many
hours of the night were past: At which time, a mighty storm of rain falling
from Heaven, among terrible thunder and lightning, put the whole Army into a
very great fright, as well because retreats are always formidable to those that
know not the intimate secrets of command, as by reason of the fame which was
spread abroad of the powerful Forces of the Enemies; and because both Fortune
and the Weather seemed to conspire in prejudice of that Army, which almost half
drowned, marched as if they were flying under favor of the dark, though close
in the ranks and files of their Divisions. A terrible Prodig^ seen by the Kings
Soldiers.
The terror of the rawer men, was increased by a prodigious Apparition, which
as the rain ceased, appeared in the midst of the Sky; for there were seen two
wonderful great Armies, of a red bloody color, which rushed visibly together
in ^he Air, amidst the horrible noise of the thunder; and, within a while
after, the e^^nt not appearing, they both vanished, and were covered again with
exceeding thick and most obscure clouds; which though it were diversely
interpreted by many, seemed most probably to portend mischief and ruin to that
Army, which inferior in strength, and altogether void of other help, than that
of their own Forces, retired, as it were already conquered, while the Enemy
advanced; and so much the more, because those were the very places, where, in
the first Civil Wars, the Kings Predecessors, and his Faction of the Hugonots,
lost the first Battle against the Duke of Guise, wherein the Prince of Conde in
the midst of the terrible slaughter of his men, was both wounded and taken
prisoner. But the Army being come to Nonancourt, (a Town which had been taken
two days before) and refreshed both with great fires kindled in every place,
and with plenty of victual, which the Marshall de Byron caused to be disposed
with very good order through the whole quarters, as well of Horse as Foot, the
Soldiers recovered strength and courage: and the King being come to his
lodging with the Mareschals of Aumont and Byron, began to consult whether he
should venture the hazard of a Battle. One thing dissuaded him from it, which
was the inequality of the number of the two Armies; The Kings Army 3000 Horse,
and 8000 Foot.
for in the Kings, there were not above Eight thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Horse, which were about half as many as that of the League; and if he had a
mind to avoid the encounter, there was also convenience to retreat beyond the
River Eure into places of lower Normandy, all abounding with provisions, and
all reduced to the Kings obedience; where, with variety of opposition and of
effects, the Enemy might be hindered and kept in play. But not only the
promptness of the Kings nature inclined to generous resolutions, but also the
condition of present affairs withstood that determination: For his Forces
consisting in the Union of the Gentry, who served upon their own charge,
without pay or reward, it was necessary to make use of them in the first ardour
of their courage, and not to suffer their first fury to be cooled by their
expenses and sufferings. Reasons moving the King to fight, though his Army was
less by half than that of the the League.
To this was added, the want of money, which was very great and irreparable,
for the payment of the Swisses, and other strangers; so that they could not be
long maintained and kept together: Whereas on the other side, there was no
doubt but the Enemy would never want means, not only to sustain, but also to
increase their Forces to a greater number, whenever it should please the
Pope, and the King of Spain: And finally, the Kings foundation was wholly
grounded upon frankness of courage and resolution, it being necessary to hazard
the lesser to obtain the greater: and because all other hopes were weak,
necessity persuaded to set the sum of affairs upon the edge of the Sword; nor
could it seem other than faintheartedness and cowardice, not to second that
prosperous beginning, which fortune had favorably showed him. To all these
reasons was added, the opinion of the Marshall de Byron (whose counsels, by
reason of his wisdom and experience, were by the King observed as Oracles) who
thought it not only difficult, but in a manner altogether impossible to avoid
the putting of it to a Battle, and to retire without receiving some notable
loss in passing the Rivers, if the Duke of Mayenne should follow them in the
Rear: And he judged it better advice to fight resolutely with the vigor and
forwardness of the Army, than to be destroyed piecemeal, without the least
hope of any good: Wherefore the King, being determined to fight, designed the
form of the Battle; and having asked the counsel of the oldest Soldiers about
it, all of them approved his opinion without contradiction.

The King knew the Enemies Army abounded with a great number of Lanciers, who
being spread at large along the field, there was no doubt but they would break
in, and by consequence endanger the putting of his Cavalry in disorder,
composed all of Gentlemen-Voluntiers, who serving upon their own expense,
without pay or obligation, had in the revolution of the Civil Wars given over
the use of Lances, for their convenience, and as more ready, had taken Pistols
in their steads, in imitation of the Reiters: Wherefore desiring by industry to
remedy this disadvantage, which he, and the most experienced Commanders were
wont to deplore, The King designs his form of Battle, and draws it with his own
hand.
he divided his Cavalry into many Squadrons, to render the encounter of the
Lances less effectual; in whose passage, two or three lesser Bodies might
charge them on all sides, and not receive the shock of their front, with a firm
encounter and continued order. To every Body of Horse he joined Squadrons of
Foot, to the end that the hail of small shot might not only favor his own men
in the encounter, but that falling among the Enemies, and doing execution upon
them, it might make them weaker, and their violence the less united: a remedy
which for the need thereof in the difference of Arms, having often been
consulted and approved of, did that day give proof how considerable it was in
effect. The King having invented the Form wherein the Army was to be drawn up
and imbattelled, gave the design thereof into the hand of the Baron de Byron
Camp-Master-General; and chose Monsieur de Vicy, an old Colonel of the French
Infantry, and a man of great valor and experience, Serjeant-Major-General; an
Office, for the high importance of it, not wont to be conferred but upon such
persons as by their approved knowledge and long practice in remarkable
occasions, had gotten the credit and reputation of Command, and consequently
both knew and were known of all. The remainder of the night was spent in rest,
till the Drums and Trumpets, at the first peep of light, gave notice of the
approaching day; in the beginning whereof Mass was celebrated in all the
quarters of the Catholics, and the Hugonots made their Prayers apart: after
which, the whole Army being come forth into the field, the Carriages of
provision passed without tumult or confusion through all the files, the
Marshall de Byron having care thereof, whose orderly Government, to the
admiration of all, showed his great experience in the discipline of War.

The Army being refreshed and fed, they began with less haste than they had
done the evening before, to march toward the field of Yvry, appointed by the
King for the place of Battle, as well because it was large and spacious on all
sides, as by reason of many places of advantage, which he (preventing the
Enemy) had designed to make himself Master of. This field takes the compass of
many miles in a circular form; it is bounded on the left side (on which the
Kings Army came) by two great commodious Villages, one called Fourcanville, the
other St. Andre; and on the other side, where the Army of the League marched, a
thick Wood shuts up the Plain, commonly called by the Country People, The hedge
or enclosure of the meadow.
Le clos de la prairie: on the West Side, toward which both Armies marched, it
ends in a deep Valley, in which runs the River Eure, of a reasonable breadth,
upon whose banks are two great Bourgs, Anet toward the South, and Yvry
situated on the other side toward the North. The River under Anet is wont to
be easily forded without danger; but a large Bridge of planks, upon great
pieces of timber, leads from the further side into Yvry. The field flat and
open on all sides, not encumbred with hedges, nor uneven with banks and
ditches, has only a little natural hollowness, which extends it self a little
way, almost in the midst of the plain right over against the abovenamed
Village of Fourcanville. The Sieur de Vicy, and the Baron de Byron, together
with the Sieur de Surene, and Captain Favas, The manner of drawing up the Kings
Army for the battle in the field of Yvras.
who that day executed the Office of Adjutants, being all rode before into this
place, drew up the Army as it came, and disposed it in such manner, that the
Village of St. Andre flanked it on the right side, and Fourcanville on the
left; wherein, the ill weather continuing, they might quarter upon all
occasions conveniently under cover: and the hollow of the Plain happened to be
in the Front of the Army, where the Forlorn-hope (which they call Les E^fans
perdus) was to be placed. The Duke of Montpensier led the Van, the King
commanded the Battle, and the Marshall de Byron the Rear. The Cavalry of the
Army was drawn into five Bodies, whereof the first, led by the Marshall d'
Aumont, with two Regiments of Firelocks by it, stood upon the left hand, in the
uttermost part of the field. Next it, was the second, commanded by the Duke of
Montpensier, flanked on the right hand by a Squadron of Swisse Infantry, and on
the left by another of the Germans. The third, bigger than all the rest, in
which was the Kings Person, the Prince of Conty, the Count of St. Paul, and the
choicest number of Lords and Gentlemen, was flanked by the Swisses of the Guard
on the right hand, and by those of Colonel Balthazar on the left. The fourth,
led by Marshall de Byron, followed on the right hand of this, and ^^d near it
two Regiments of French Firelocks. The fifth and last, of German Horse* ^ed by
Count Theodorick of Schombergh, reached down to the houses of the Village of
St. Andre. Two other Squadrons of Horse besides these were in the front of the
Battle, some fifty paces before all the rest; one commanded by the Grand Prior
and the Baron de Giury, wherein were four hundred Light Horse; and the other by
the Baron de Byron, in which were three hundred Cuirasses: And in the midst,
between these two Squadrons, were placed the Artillery, commanded by the
Philibert de la Guiche, with The French Translation says five hundred.
fifty Harquebusiers on horseback, two hundred Pioneers, and the ordinary
company of Cannoneers. The Forlorn-hope, led by three Colonels, St. Denis,
Brignolet, and Parabiere, some fifty paces before the Artillery and the whole
Army, lay close in that hollow that was in the midst of the Plain, so that it
could not be hurt by the Enemies Cannon; and kneeling with one knee on the
ground, could hardly be discovered by those that knew not of their being there.
In this manner the Army, not in a crooked form, or shape of a Half Moon, but
spreading it self in a straight line, had an equal front, except only that the
Grand Prior, and the Baron de Byron with their Squadrons, and the Artillery,
being advanced forwarder than the rest, covered the main Body of the Battle.
They had not yet made an end of ordering and imbattelling the Army, when two
several supplies from several parts came up unto the King: for the Sieurs du
Flessis, de Mouy, and de la Tremouille, came out of Poictou with about two
hundred Horse; and out of Picardy the Sieur de Humieres with about The French
say four hundred.
fourscore Gentlemen, stirred up by the report which was spread abroad that
there was like to be a Battle about that time: which supplies, though small,
yet coming so opportunely, and being increased by fame, gave wonderful courage
and assurance to every one, all being of opinion that it was clearly the mercy
of Heaven in favor of the King, who unexpectedly received those helps, in so
urgent a time of need: and every one more esteeming the happiness of the Omen,
than the considerableness of their Forces, they were welcomed with loud joyful
acclamations: and that they might not disturb the order of the Army, they went
into the Kings Squadron placed just in the middle of the Battle.

The Duke of Mayenne on the other side having intelligence that the King was
risen from the siege of Dreux, and that being neither stayed by any hinderance
of the rain, nor by the darkness of the night, he marched with exceeding great
speed toward Normandy, was of opinion that he, by reason of the inequality of
Forces, would have avoided the hazard of fighting, and therefore hastened the
march of his Army, hoping that the usual confusion of all Retreats might afford
him some opportunity (especially in the passage of so many Rivers) to b^eak, or
at least endamage the Enemy: and being not only the belief of the General, but
the universal opinion of the whole Army, every one of his own accord quickened
his pace, promising themselves an exceeding easy, and very secure Victory
without loss of blood: from which haste it came to pass, that though the Army
marched as close as they could in their ranks, yet were the Squadrons of it
something confused, and almost quite disordered, by the unequalness of the way.
But going on with this diligence toward Yvry, with an intention to take the
Ring in the passage of the River, the Sieurs de Rhosne and Gessan, who led the
first divisions, in the entry of the Plain discovered the Kings Army; which,
drawn up in Battalia, and having the advantage of the Field, expected the
encounter of the day. This news, which passed from Van to Rear, did in great
measure cool the courage of many, who alread^ had inconsiderately promised
themselves the Victory without fighting, and caused the Army to make a hal^ to
draw up and recover their order. The Army of the League was divided into two
Battalions, whereof the right was led by the Duke of Nemours, and the left by
the Chevalier d' Aumale. The manner how the Army of the League was imbattelled.
In the point of the Right Wing was the Count d' Egmont, with the Lanciers he
had brought out of Flanders; next which were a Body of Swisses commanded by
their Colonels, Fifer and Berling, and flanked with the Regiments of Ponsenac,
Disemieux, and Chasteliere. Then the Duke of Nemours his Regiment, wherein were
Four hundred Horse; and between these and the Swisses were placed the
Artillery. In the Left Wing Four hundred Light Horse, Burguignons and
Spaniards, spread themselves in the uttermost parts to the very edge of the
Field, and by the side of them, the Body of German Foot, commanded by the
Colonel St. Paul, and flanked by the French and Lorain Regiments of
Tremblecourt, Tenissay, and Chastaigneraye; and next these, was placed the
Squadron of the Chevalier d' Aumale, wherein were the Troops of the Sieur de
Longchamp, de Perdriel, and de Fountain Martel. The Duke of Mayenne with his
Cornet and Four hundred Gentlemen, which in all made Seven hundred Horse, was
in the midst between the two Wings, flanked by the Flemish Carabines; and
before all were two Squadrons of Reiters led by the Duke of Brunswick, and by
Bassompier, who were to charge, and wheel off after their wonted manner, and so
passing between the two Wings, should fall as a Reserve, and rally themselves
in order, that they might return more fresh into the Battle.

In this order, the Army marching gently toward the Plain, and by degrees
turning their backs to Yvry, and the banks of the River, came up to face the
Kings Army, when the day was already almost spent; for having marched
disorderly, they had been forced to waste a great deal of time to rank
themselves again: Whereupon the near approaching of night, together with the
constant extremity of wet weather, withheld both Genera^ (...) giving way,
that the Battle should be begun; but after they had stood thus some ^wo hours,
faintly skirmishing, The Armies face one another, but being overtaken by the
night, they retire to quarters.
because each was careful not to engage their Forces, the day being already
shut in on every side, the King drew his Army with a great deal of convenience
into Fourcanille, and St. Andre, and the Duke of Mayenne with as much
inconveniency was fain to quarter his men as well as he could, having but very
few houses; which want he supplied by the help of Tents and Pavillions, set up
within the descent of the valley, toward the bank of the River. The night was
full of unquietness, and continual stir on both sides, kindling great fires
very thick in each Camp, and Sentinels being set out all over the field, which
were changed every half hour by the Colonels who went the rounds; though the
Kings Army, by reason of the abundance of victual, of the convenience of
houses, and because the Infantry was enclosed on all sides with barricadoes,
rested more quietly, and by their ease received greater refreshment. The Duke
of Mayenne, a Friend to secure counsels, would willingly have avoided the
encounter of a Battle, spinning out the War in length, to tire out the
forwardness of the Nobility that followed the King, to reduce them into want of
money, and in length of time to make them consume their Ammunition of War,
whereof he knew they had no very great store; thinking by these arts, he should
at last perfect his designs. But on the one side, Count Egmont opposed it with
fierce protestations, that he was not come to consume the Catholic Kings
Soldiers unprofitably, who depriving his Low Countries of their own Forces to
assist Religion in France, desired the War might be ended with one manly blow.
And on the other side, it was opposed (though more modestly) by Monsignor
Girolamo di Portia, who was present in the Camp in the Legates name, and who
alleging the weariness of the Confederates, and the great superiority of
Forces, excited the Duke to a generous resolution: Nor was he himself without
some consideration of the Parisians, whom he knew to be tired with
contributions, pinched with dearth, unsatisfied with him, and ready (if things
should be drawn out in length) to embrace the opportunity of a revolt;
wherefore at last, he resolved he would no longer defer the encounter.
Thereupon the next morning, being Wednesday, the Drums and Trumpets calling at
the first appearance of day, the Armies were imbattelled in the same place and
manner as they had been the night before: But because the Viscount de Tavannes,
who put the Horse in order, while the Sieur de Rhosne did the like unto the
Foot, was extremely short-sighted, he placed the several Divisions so close to
one another, The error of the Viscount de Tava^nes in drawing up the Divisions
of the Hors^.
that he not only left no space through which the Reiters, according to order
given, might wheel about, and rally behind the Army, but even the very
Divisions themselves, not having any intervals, by means whereof, they might
open when they moved, if they did but stir never so little, justled and crowded
one another; a fault, which not being taken notice of by any body, and being
therefore left without remedy, put the Army of the League into great confusion.

On the other side, the Kings Forces, by reason of their lesser number being
easier to put in order, were not only set in Battalia without confusion; but
first the Marshall de Byron, and then the King himself visited every Division
with great diligence, and reviewed every thing very carefully. The King all
armed on horseback, visits and exhorts his Soldiers with great efficacy, and
at the head of his Army, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, prays heartily.
The King was upon a great Bay Courser, armed all over, except his face and
head, and gallopping up and down through all the several Squadrons, did more by
his looks and gestures, than by his words, which could scarcely be heard by the
multitude, recommend his own fortune, and the common safety unto his Army; in
which, his whole strength consisted, and with it the height of their common
hopes: And he with an undaunted countenance, but sometimes with tears in his
eyes, put his Commanders, and all those that heard him, in mind, that not only
the safety of the Crown of France, but the sole way to save each man's
particular life depended upon the point of the Sword, and the valor of their
own Arms; that there were no other Armies to be drawn together, nor other
Nobility to take up Arms, or open any other way of safety, than to fight
stoutly to the death: And at last, standing still at the head of the main
Battalion, joining his hands, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he said so
loud, that he was heard by many, O Lord, thou know the intentions of my
heart, and with the Eye of thy Providence, thou piercest into the secretest of
my thoughts; If it be best for this people, that I should attain the Crown,
which belongs to me by right, do thou favor and protect the justice of my
Arms: But if thy will has determined the contrary, if thou take away my
Kingdom, take away my Life also at the same time, that I may shed my Blood
fighting at the head of these who put themselves in danger for my sake. At the
end of which words there arose in the Front of the Battle, a loud acclamation
from those that heard him ^ith an unanimous cry of Vive le Roy, which being
taken and redoubled from Squadron to Squadron, through the whole Army, gave a
most happy beginning to the Battle. But he having taken his Helmet, covered
with a long gallant plume of white Feathers for a mark, that he might be
followed, and knowing that the wind was against him, which would have covered
and blinded all his Army with the smoke of the Muskets and Cannon, began with
great art to make his Divisions wheel to the left hand, turning to gain the
wind, yet moving but a very few paces; which the Duke of Mayenne seeing, who
likewise stood in the Front of his Battalion, and being desirous to hinder
whatsoever the Kings intention was, The sign of Battle given.
caused presently the sign of Battle to be given by the Generals Trumpet; at
the sound whereof the Cannon fired with a thundering noise, but with so
different art, care, and fortune, that the Dukes shot all too low, and killed
not any body but a Gentleman of the Duke of Montpensiers; and the Kings, by the
diligence and skill of Monsieur de la Guiche, being charged and discharged the
second time, did with a very great slaughter disorder the two Squadrons of
Reiters which were in the Front of the Army, and also did much mischief to
Count Egmont, who with his Lanciers stood on the outside of the Left Wing, and
who being unwilling to stay till they should fire the third time, and utterly
rout his men, was the first that gave the Onset, falling upon the Grand Priors
Light Horse with so much gallantry, that they not being able to resist the
violence of the Lances, and the furious shock of stronger horses, were broken
into, and charged quite through the very midst of their Squadron; so that the
Flemings in contempt ran in, turning their horse tails upon the Kings Cannon,
and killing many of the Cannoniers and Pioniers which were by them; but having
half disordered themselves by this vanity, they were at the same time charged
with very great fury on the Right hand by the Marshall d' Aumont, on the Left
by the Baron de Byron; and the Grand Prior with the Baron de Guiry, having
rallied their horse again, being full of spite and anger, gave them so
desperate a charge in the Front, that being surrounded by all these in Van,
Count Egmont and his Lanciers all c^t in pieces.
Flank and Rear, they were all instantly cut in pieces with the Count that
commanded them. At the same time the Squadrons of the Duke of Montpensier, and
that of the Duke of Nemours in the Vanguard, and the Count Schomberghs, with
that of the Chevalier d' Aumale in the Reer-Guard, charged one another with so
much valor and courage on both sides, that it was hard to know which would
have the advantage at the last: For the Duke of Montpensier, whose horse was
killed under him in the first encounter, and who by the great care and courage
of his men was mounted upon another, being encompassed by the Gentry of
Normandy, fought with admirable valor: and the Duke of Nemours, very young,
but of a generous spirit, raised by the advantage of the greater number of his
Forces, (after the encounter of the Lances) was with short weapons fallen
pell-mell into the midst of the Battle. On the other side, the Count de
Schombergh with the German Horse, not wheeling off, but charging home into the
very Body of the Enemy, with Volleys of Pistols, did great execution upon the
Squadron of the Chevalier d' Aumale, who, no less valiant than fame reported
him, being seconded by a strong party of his men, made the Conflict very sharp
and dangerous. But the Reiters who were placed before the Duke of Mayenne,
having received much damage by the Artillery, advancing nevertheless wheeling
to make their charge: but when they came into the hollow of the field, they
found the Forlorn-hope, who standing up courageously upon their feet, welcomed
them with a terrible storm of Musket-bullets, by which the Duke of Brunswick,
one of their chief Commanders being slain, and many other wounded and beaten to
the ground, as soon as ever they had discharged their Pistols, they fell off
according to the custom of their Discipline, turning to get behind the Body of
the Army, as they had received Orders from their General: but not having found
the passage open, as by directions it should have been, they, by reason of the
narrowness of the Intervals between the Squadrons, rushed upon and disordered
that great Body of Lances wherewith the Duke of Mayenne followed them to charge
the Battle, so that he was constrained to stop, and make his men couch their
Lanches, setting himself to keep off the Reiters, and disingage himself from
them, lest he should have been routed by their inconsiderate violence: which
the King observing, and laying hold of the opportunity that disorder of his
Enemies afforded him, setting spurs to his Horse, and being boldly seconded by
the flower of the Nobility that followed his Cornet, he fell in fiercely to the
Battle before the Duke of Mayenne could recover himself from the encumbrance of
the Reiters, and make his Lances take their career; whereby they becoming
useless, because they do their effect and receive their force and vigor by
running, it was necessary to throw them away, and fight with their Swords
alone, against the Kings Squadrons, in which all were Knights and Gentlemen,
who besides their Tucks, were admirably well armed, and had each man a Case of
Pistols at his Saddle: yet did not this startle the valor of the Duke, nor
make those that followed him lose courage; but after a furious Volley of
Carabines* rushing in boldly with gallant horses, they made the Victory first
doubtful, and then bloody to the Enemy: for in the very beginning, the Sieur de
Rhodes, a youth of great expectation, who carried the Royal white Cornet, A
page being slain who wore a great white Feather like the Kings, it was thought*
the King himself was killed
being slain with a thrust through the fight of his Bever, and a Page falling in
the same place, who wore a great Plume like that of the Kings, it was commonly
believed of all that the King himself was dead: upon which mistake, the
Squadron began to break, some yielding back to the right, some to the left
hand: But the Kings Horse and Plume being known afterward, he himself fighting
desperately with his Sword in his hand in the first rank, and with his voice
exhorting those that were near to follow him, they turned, and shut themselves
close together all in the same place, and taking their second Pistols, fought
with the wonted valor of the French Nobility: so that all impediments being
overcome and broken to pieces, they at length overthrew the Enemy with an
exceeding great slaughter, and made them turn their backs; and being mingled
with them, pursued them, terribly wounding and killing, to the very entry of
the Wood, into which the Reiters also, being disordered, first falling foul
upon their Cannon, and then sometimes upon one Squadron, sometimes upon
another, were retreated, without ever turning their faces, to their own
infinite dishonor, and the no less prejudice of their Army. Almost at the same
instant, the Duke of Montpensier, relieved by the Marshall d' Aumont, who fell
in upon the flank, had routed the Vanguard of the Duke of Nemours; and the
Count of Schombergh, relieved by the Baron de Byron, had likewise beaten the
Reerguard of the Chevalier d' Aumale; and the Grand Prior, having rallied his
Light Horse, The Cavalry of the League being defeated, save themselves by
flight.
had broken and done great execution upon those of the Spaniards and
Bourguignons, who shut up the Reerguard in the very uttermost parts of the
Army: so that all the Cavalry of the League being disordered and put to flight,
had left the field free unto the Enemy; and fleeing with all speed, made
toward Yvry, to save themselves by passing the River.

But the Victory was neither secure nor pleasing in the Kings Camp, because
they did not yet see the Kings Person; and the first news of his death that was
dispersed, was yet believed true by many: nor would there have been any joy in
the Army, if he had not appeared at the head of his Squadron, wherewith he had
routed and pursued the Enemies: But at his appearance, who had put off his
Helmet to be better known, that joyful cry of Vive le Roy was reiterated, which
in the beginning had given an happy Omen of the end of the Battle. The Infantry
of the League remained untouched, but environed on all sides by the Kings
Forces. The Swisses made show as if they would defend themselves; but seeing
that the Cannon were bringing up to rake through and break them, they took a
resolution to yield; which the King seeing, because he would not exasperate
that Nation, The Swisses have quarter given them.
whose friendship was nearly to be valued, as soon as they had laid down their
Colors and Arms upon the ground, they were received, and quarter given them by
the Marshall de Byron. The Germans thought to have done the like; but being
the same who having been raised with the Kings money, had revolted to the Duke
of Lorain, and with a mercenary spirit had born Arms in favor of the League,
The Dutch that had been raised by the King, and had taken Arms for the League
are put to the Sword.
after they had ordered their Pikes, and laid down their Colors, were by the
Kings command all cut in pieces, for a punishment of their perfidiousness. The
French Infantry that yielded, had their lives given them: for the King from the
very beginning of the Victory, having, to gain the general love, cried out
aloud often times, that the strangers should be put to the Sword, but the
French saved alive: the same voice being taken up by the whole Army, through all
parts of the field, and every one, even in the fury of the Battle, enjoying the
benefit of this remarkable clemency, the French that yielded themselves were
received without any difficulty. These things being dispatched with very great
haste, and the Army remaining Master of the whole field, The Kings clemency
toward the French.
the King rallying his men in order, followed toward Yvry, whither the Enemy
was gotten; in which place the tumult was dreadful, and the confusion
miserable: for the Duke of Mayenne having passed the Bridge, had caused it to
be broken down, that the Enemy might not have means to follow him: Whereupon a
great number of Run-a-ways crowding and stopping one another, by reason of the
narrowness of the place, and of the deep dirt that was in the Town, did in that
terrible hurly-burly delay and hinder their own flight; which disorder the
Kings Infantry being come up, who fleshed with the slaughter of the Germans,
pursued fiercely to destroy their Enemies, many precipitated with fear,
resolved to venture the wading over the River, which being deep of it self, and
swelled by the abundance of rain, the greater part of them were miserably
drowned. But the Reiters not having the heart to hazard themselves in the
water, cut off their horses legs, that they might serve them for a Brest-work,
and resolved now to give that proof of their valor and courage, The Reiters of
the League being reduced to necessity, fight till they aie all destroyed*
which they should much more fitly have done in the Battle. This execution,
rather than fight, lasted above an hour: for the Muskets playing upon them on
all sides from the higher grounds and places of advantage, destroyed those
relics in such manner, that very few of them remained alive; but not without
much blood; for many of the Conquerours, by their too hasty desire of getting
to them, were either choked in the mud, and slaughter of dead bodies, or slain
by the Reiters with their Pistols. The Duke of Nemours, the Chevalier d'
Aumale, Bassompierre, Rhosne, the Viscount de Tavannes, and others, took a
different way, and passing by the Wood side, with a longer, but more secure
journey, retired to Chartres without being followed. The Duke, Colonel St.
Paul, Montsignor di Portia, and a great many Gentlemen who escaped from the
Battle, having fled seven leagues with very great speed, came to Mante, into
which Town they were received the same evening, though the people at first
wavered in their resolution. The King omitted not to prosecute them in the
heat; but not being able to pass at the Bridge of Yvry, which was already
broken and beaten down; to avoid the danger of whirlpools, he was forced to go
about, and ford the River near Anet; by which delay having lost above two hours
time, he could not possibly overtake the Enemy, but quartered in a Village
called Rhosny, a league from Mante, where the Marshall d' Aumont, the Grand
Prior, and the Duke of Montpensier arrived also; the Marshall de Byron staying
behind with the Infantry and the remainder of the Army.

There died that day, what by the Sword, what in the passing of the River,
above six thousand of the Army of the League, Six thousand of the League slain.
among which the Count d' Egmont, the Duke of Brunswick, and the Sieur de la
Chastaigneraye. There were taken the Sieur de Cygogu^, who carried the Dukes
white Cornet, the Count of Anfrist, a German, the Marquis de Magnelay, the
Sieurs de Bois-Dauphin, de Medavid, de Long-champ, de Flandre, de Fontaine
Martel, and their Colonels, Tenissay, Disemieux, and Chasteliere. The
Conquerors took twenty Cornets of Horse, the Standard of the Flemish Lances,
the Banner of the Colonel of the Reiters, Four and twenty Ensigns of the
Swisses, Two hundred and four Ensigns and Cornets taken by the King, with all
their Cannon, and Baggage: On hi^ side but Five hundred slain.
Sixty French Colors, Eight pieces of Cannon, with all the Baggage and
Ammunition which followed the Camp. The number of the dead on the Kings side,
were not above Five hundred, among which the Sieur de Clermont, Captain of his
Guards, one of the German Colonels, the Sieur de Crenay, who carried the Duke
of Montpensiers Cornet, the Sieur de Loncaunay, a Norman Gentleman, who being
Threescore and twelve years old, died fighting in the fury of the Battle, and
the Marquess de Nesle, who being left wounded upon the ground, died within a
little while after. Among the wounded, who in all were not full Two hundred,
were the Baron de Byron, the Counts of Ghoysy and Lude, Maximilian de Bethune,
Sieur de Rosny, and the Sieurs de Montluet, d' O, and de Lavargne, of which
hurts, they were cured within a few days without any danger.

This was the Battle fought in the field of Yvry, upon the Fourteenth day of
March; wherein, as the Kings valor appeared eminent, and his prudence
wonderful; so there was no doubt, but that, after him, the first praises
belonged to the Marshall d' Amont, the Baron de Byron, and the Duke of
Montpensier; since that the first two in the beginning of the day, fighting
gallantly, repelled the violence of the Flemish Lances, who were victoriously
come up to their very Cannon; and in the latter end they defeated the
Carabines, who having done much mischief to the King's Squadron, roving
afterward up and down, and wheeling about the Field, did furiously infest, and
hinder all the other Squadrons of the Victory: And the Duke of Montpensier
charging the Enemies Right Wing, wherein was the flower of their youth, though
his Horse were killed under him, he being fain to fight desperately, in very
great danger, to get upon another, and that before his eyes the Sieur de Crenay
was slain, who carried his Cornet, which he was fain to recover with much
hazard; yet fought he with so great courage, that the enemies being routed and
scattered, he was one of the first that followed the King in the pursuit of
those that fled.

But in all the revolutions of the Battle, which was for the most part between
the Cavalry on both sides, the bravery of the French Gentry appeared very
singular, who fighting for no other reward, save only honor, being excellently
well armed, and gallantly mounted, had still the victory in all encounters,
though fighting often with Swords and Pistols against the violence of Lances;
they also did sometimes find the disadvantage of those Weapons, which their own
convenience, not the Direction or Discipline of their Commanders had taught
them to make use of. On the other side, the error of the Viscount de Tavannes
was very remarkable, in placing the Divisions so near and close together, that
they could not turn without falling foul upon one another; so that not only
the Reiters, who were much feared, became useless; but even the Duke of
Mayenne, who with great conduct dis-engaged himself from that so great
disorder, was fain after to lose the effect and vigor of his Lances: Which
notable example teaches, That in matters of War, Prudence, and bravery of
Courage, ought in a Commander to be also accompanied with a strong and perfect
constitution of body, free from all defects. Nor was the vanity of the
Flemmings less considerable; who out of a pride to turn their horse-tails upon
the Cannon, disordered themselves in such manner, that it was very easy to
break into them, and beat them back: For if with the same fury, wherewith they
charged thorough the Grand Priors Squadron, they had rushed upon the Duke of
Montpensier who followed him, and had been backed by the Duke of Nemours, who
should presently have given him a second charge, the Victory might very easily
by that means have inclined in favor of the League. At the same time, the
Kings Justice and Clemency, worthy of eternal glory, appeared likewise; who,
with an example of memorable severity, commanded, that the Germans who had
broken their Faith, should all be put to the sword to the last man: And on the
other side, with exceeding great benignity, he received not only those who
yielded voluntarily, but even those also who fighting constantly were taken
prisoners. His wisdom also and policy in Government was noted by many; for
knowing how much the Gentry love the Gentry, which are like themselves, and how
nearly those very men are linked, either in blood or friendship, who in Civil
Wars charge one another in a hostile manner, he showed a very great and anxious
care, even to the commanding with a hoarse voice, and crying aloud thorough the
field every moment, that the French Gentry should be spared; which act was so
plausible and popular, that it gained him the eternal love of his own soldiers,
and no small praise from his very enemies; every one confessing him to be a
worthy King, and a worthy Father, After the Victory, the King made his
Commanders sup with him at Rosny familiarly, speaking to every one, and
praising even the meanest Soldier.
who, with so much affection, spared the blood of his Subjects and Sons, though
they were disobedient and rebellious. His familiarity likewise gave great
satisfaction; for supping in public at Rosny the same night, he would needs
have his Commanders sit with him at the same Table, adding these memorable
words, That those who had been partakers of the same dangers, ought worthily
also to be partakers of the same conveniences and honors: And, while Supper
lasted, calling all those that were present by their Names, praising,
cherishing, and thanking even the meanest soldier, with demonstrations (in his
present weakness) of a full gratitude of mind in time to come, he filled all
men with wonderful great hope, and infinite desire to follow him: Arts, to say
truth, admirably well suited to the narrowness of his present condition, and to
the urgent need he had of the help of every particular man.

The news of this defeat came the next day to Paris, brought by the Sieur de
Tremblay, who being a prisoner upon his Parole, had not been engaged in the
Battle, and had had opportunity to retire with the first: Which news being told
by him to the Archbishop of Lions, deputed Chancellor, and head of the Council
of the League, was afterward communicated to the Legate, and the Spanish
Ambassadors, every one of which being exceedingly dismayed, feared with reason,
that this news would make the people rise, and very much disturb the City of
Paris, which expecting every hour to be eased of its distresses by the success
of a Victory, being now deprived of all hope to free its self of the
straightness of its present condition by the way of Arms and Force, would think
of doing it by way of composition and agreement; hunger being the quickest and
sharpest spur that can stir up an Insurrection among the common people, who,
not withheld with the Bridle of Decency, is always most prone to follow their
present profit; wherefore, desirous to remedy that inconvenience as much as
possibly they could, after long deliberation they determined, that the
Preachers (in whom the People had a wonderful great Faith) should be the
relaters of the news of this Battle in their Sermons, endeavoring, with the
wonted effects of Eloquence, to confirm their courages, and persuade them
stoutly to resist the crossness of their present fortune. Father Christino of
Nizza tells the Parisians in the Pulpit, of the defeat, an^ makes them resolve
to endure any thing for the Catholic Religion, taking an occasion to discourse
of these words, Those whom I love I r^bucke and chasten.
The first of them that executed this charge, was Don Christino de Nizza, who,
Preaching to the People upon the Sixteenth day of March being Friday, in the
first part of his Discourse, took an occasion to bring in these words, Quos ego
amo, arguo and castigo; upon which he enlarged himself, foretelling, that God
would not fail to prove the Faith and constancy of the Parisians, as by
infinite examples of Scripture he gave clear testimony, that he was wont to try
the courage of his Children; and then in the second part, being come into the
Pulpit, with Letters in his hand, which seemed to be delivered to him at that
instant, he lamented that he had not that day done the office of a Preacher,
but of a Prophet; and that God had been pleased by his mouth to advertise the
People of Paris, of that temptation which was to fall upon them, as now it
troubled him to relate; since that the Catholic Army having fought with the
Enemy two days before, was come off with the worst; to which news, he, with
the force of his Eloquence added so many, and so effectual Prayers and
Exhortations, that the people who hearkened to him, did not only not stir in
the least manner whatsoever, but showed themselves most ready to persevere in
the defense of themselves, and of Religion, without fearing the heavy trials of
a future siege or famine. The same did Guilliaume Rose, Boucher, Prevost, and
all the other Preachers; and last of all Monsignor Francesco Panigarola, who,
though he Preached in the Italian Tongue, was nevertheless continually followed
by abundance of persons, by reason of the fame of his Eloquence.

The Duke of Mayenne came three days after; but not having the heart to appear
in sight of the Parisians; and fearing those Tragical accidents which of late
years had been seen very frequent among the people, he staid at St. Denis,
whither the Cardinal Legate, the Ambassador Mendozza, the Commendatory Morreo,
the Archbishop of Lions, and the Sieur de Villeroy came to him: and, at last,
the principal Deputies of the Parisians, by whom (but much more by his sister
Madam de Montpensier, who by the quickness of her wit upheld the Affairs of the
League exceedingly) having understood the good inclination of the People to
persevere constantly in their defense: first praising so generous a resolution,
he afterward discoursed with them about the state of present matters, showing,
That the loss of the Battle having proceeded rather from the disorders of the
Reiters, and several accidenta chances, than from the great Forces of the
Enemy; and his Army, especially the Cavalry, being rather routed than defeated,
he hoped within a short time to draw together a Body of men more powerful than
the former: That he could not doubt either the Pope or the Catholic would be
wanting to Religion, and to the conservation of the State; and so much the
rather, by how much the need appeared to be more urgent; and that thereby they
should within a few weeks see a greater Army on foot, with which, fresh, and
entire in strength, he doubted not to subdue the wearied and tired Troops of
the Navarrois: That all consisted in opposing the first onset, and in
valiantly supporting the first brunt of the siege which he was confident was
preparing against Paris; for the defense whereof, he would willingly have shut
himself up in the City, and, by his example, have taught them how to endure
hunger, (for as for any other danger, there was nothing to be feared from the
Enemy) but that it was generally much more profitable for all, and particularly
for the relief of the Parisians, that he should march to the confines of
Picardy, to gather an Army with all speed, and receive supplies from Flanders
and Lorain, and thence with sufficient Forces to return and raise the siege;
which he was certain, if they had but patience to suffer a little
inconveniency, would, in the end, prove vain and fruitless: That in his stead
he would leave his brother the D. of Nemours, a youth of wonderful high
courage, and his Cousin the Chevalier d' Aumale, to command the Soldiers, and
have care of the Military part of their defense; and for other things, the
Cardinal-Legat, and the Ministers of the Catholic King being there, and
seconded by the ardent zeal of the Council of Sixteen, he could not doubt, but
all things would be managed with that prudence which need required: That to
show how little he feared the City could fall into the Enemies hands, and for a
pledge of the speedy relief which he meant to make ready for them, he would
leave his Mother, Wife, Sister, and Children in the City, to bear part in that
fortune which the Citizens should run: That finally, there being nothing else
requisite, but to persuade the people, and resist the greediness of the belly,
he could not doubt of a happy issue, with the exaltation of the League, and
total subversion of his enemies. All of them commended his advice, and the
Heads of the people promised to keep united and constant in defending the place
to the last man; beseeching him only to use all the speed he could possibly,
to prevent the extremities of the peoples sufferings, who, for Religion, and in
hope of his promises, disposed themselves boldly to meet all those many weighty
dangers which they saw hang over their heads. The next day the Duke departed
toward Picardy to meet with the D. of Parma, General for the Catholic King in
the Low Countries, knowing that to be the principal point; and that if the
Spaniards lent not their assistance in a considerable manner to him, it would
be a very difficult business to get a sufficient Army to raise the siege, and
relieve Paris: and in the City they began with infinite diligence to repair the
Walls, to scowre the Moats, to cast up Works, to dispose their Artillery, to
arm the People, and principally to provide whatsoever they possibly could
against the imminent necessity of hunger.

In the mean time Man^e and Vernon had yielded themselves to the King since the
Victory, in which places he was constrained to stay longer than he intended:
for the extremity of ill weather, and continual abundance of Rain, had not
only overflowed the fields, and made the ways exceeding deep, but had made it
impossible to lie in the Field, or march with Cannon and Baggage; for men and
horses could hardly save themselves and be secure within the shelter of houses.
In which time notice came to the King of another encounter which had happened
in the Province of Auvergne, near the Wall of Issoire, where the Sieurs de
Florat and Chaseron, who were for him, had routed and slain the Count of
Randan, who commanded for the League; and with the death of about Two hundred
of the Enemy, had made themselves masters of the place. Nor was it long before
other news came from the Country of Main, where Guy de Lansac, who commanded
the party of the League, and the Sieur d' Hertre Governor of Alancon, Head of
the King's Forces, charging one another, had not altered the wonted event of
things; but Lansac, Three hundred of his men being slain, and the rest
dispersed, was fain to save himself by flight, leaving the King's Forces master
of the field in those parts.

These several disasters, the news whereof came to Paris one upon the neck of
another, did much perplex the thoughts of those that governed; but above all,
of the Cardinal-Legat, upon whose shoulders lay the weight of all present
affairs, every one thinking, that he, as one that represented the Pope's
person, should, in a cause wherein Religion was the principal object, give
supplies both of Men and Money for the relief of that adversity which the
League was in at that time: and the Duke of Mayenne complained publicly
concerning it, and wrote freely to the Pope, that his backwardness to help so
necessary a Cause, was the principal occasion of all those evils. The Spanish
Ministers made the same lamentations, being of opinion, that the Legate was the
cause the Catholic King was not satisfied in his demands; and that while he,
neglecting his own businesses, succored the danger of Religion with Men and
Money, the Pope keeping his Purse close, and nourishing ambiguous thoughts in
his mind, did neither send those necessary supplies which he had often
promised, nor consent to the satisfaction of the Catholic King, who, if his
just demands had been yielded to, would have employed his utmost Forces, for
the common benefit. Nor were the Parisians backwarder in complaints than the
rest, who groaning under their present necessities, and the extraordinary
scarcity of provisions, did importunately beg to be assisted by the Legate, and
relieved by the Pope, since they did all, and suffered all for the Catholic
Faith, and for the service of the Holy Church: so that the Legate being
surrounded by these troubles, was in wonderful great anxiety of mind; which was
augmented to the extremity, when he understood, that by the Duke of
Luxembourg's arrival and negotiation, the Pope was almost utterly withdrawn
from the designs of the League; and moreover, that he seemed ill satisfied at
his being gone on to Paris, and that he had not rather stayed in some neutral
place, as a disinteressed Mediator between both parties, and as a labourer for
such a Peace as might be effected without danger or damage to the Catholic
Religion.

The Duke of Luxembourg was gone to Rome with the name of Ambassador from the
Catholics that followed the King, but indeed, to see if he could reconcile the
King himself to the Pope, and to the Church, and to take away those opinions,
which, being spread abroad by those of the League, were generally believed of
him, that he was an obdurate Heretic, a persecutor of the Catholics,
obstinate, and disobedient to the Apostolic See, and a perverse enemy to the
Church: Wherefore, having first made a little stay at Venice, to determine with
that Senate what manner of proceeding was to be held; all things being resolved
on with most prudent advice, he continued on his way boldly to Rome; where,
having in his first audience, by the dexterousness of his carriage, introduced
the Cause of the Catholics into his discourse, he excused them for following
the King, attributing it to be an advantage to the Catholic Religion, not to
abandon the lawful King in the hands of the Hugonots, but to hold him on with
protestations of service, and win him by modest seasonable instances to return
into the bosom of the Church; which would absolutely have been despaired of,
if being forsaken by them, he had been necessitated to have cast himself as a
prey to Heretics; he began afterward to let the Pope know those interests,
which, under a cloak of Piety, and under the name of Religion, did sway and
govern the Lords of the League, how under that pretense, they sought to rob the
lawful Successor of the Crown, to bring it into the power of stranger Princes*
or to divide it into many parts, and so Canton the Kingdom; which, as in it
self it was unjust by all Laws, both divine and Humane, so would it prove
exceeding prejudicial to Religion it self, and to the Sea of Rome, which would
come to lose that Crown that had ever held the protection of the Church, and
bring it into the hands of many weak impotent Princes and Tyrants, or else
unite it with the too great power of the Spaniards, to the general ruin: That
it was much more just, much more easy, and much more profitable for the
benefit of Christendom, to invite and persuade the King to his Conversion;
which he not only showed himself inclined to, with those means that were
suitable and convenient for his honor, and which befitted a King of France; but
to which, he was also brought by the necessity of his affairs, finding daily
how little he could promise himself from the Hugonots, toward the attaining of
the Crown, since that in all his most weighty occurrences, he had for the most
part been attended and followed by the Forces of the Catholic Lords, who would
fall off from him at last, if he should not resolve to return into the Church;
which considerations accompanied with all their circumstances, set forth and
amplified by the Dukes eloquence, made a deep impression in the Pope; to which,
another motive of the Ambassadors being added, that his Holiness should not
think the Catholics that followed the King to be few and weak, but the best,
soundest, and most considerable part of France, and that with the League there
concurred very few of the Gentry, but a rabble of mean, disorderly common
people; and that not only men of better quality, but also in a manner all the
chiefest Prelates of the Kingdom followed the Kings party, upon caution of the
promise he had made to turn Catholic, and forsake the rites of Calvinism,
stirred up in the Popes consideration, besides the fear of losing the Kingdom
of France, and increasing the greatness of the Spaniard, this other weighty
respect also; not to exasperate so much Catholic Nobility united together,
which it was most difficult to overcome by force; but to seek by mild
remedies, and gentle ways, to win the King, and procure the union of the
Kingdom by the means of peace; and the Ambassador having affirmed unto him,
that the Cardinal of Bourbon, Lenon-court, and Gondy, together with the
Archbishop of Bourges, and other Prelates, had offered the same considerations
to the Legate, praying and exhorting him to stand neutral, till matters being
come to the knowledge of his Holiness, he might have been able to have given
him such Commissions as he should have thought most convenient: Pope Sixtus V.
grows jealous, that Cardinal Gaetano is inclined to favor the Spanish designs.
The Pope began to suspect no less than others, that Cardinal Gaetano was too
much inclined to favor the designs of the Spaniards; and therefore did no
longer give that belief, which was requisite unto his Letters, and withheld his
hand from furnishing them with more money; wherefore the Legate being
encompassed with many difficulties, either to take off that suspicion that lay
upon him, of his depending too much upon the King of Spain, or seeking to
recover that name of Neutral, and dis-interessed, which perchance he might more
wisely have maintained from the beginning; or endeavoring to hinder the siege
of Paris (as he affirmed and told the Spanish Ministers) invited the Marshall
de Byron to a meeting with him at Noysy, a Castle of Cardinal Condy's, a days
journey from Paris, to find out some remedy to put an end to the present
miseries, which not displeasing the King, for whom it was, by all means, good
to show an affection to the Apostolic See; and that he was not backward to do
what lay in him, to put an end to the War, the interview was agreed upon, and
performed within a very few days.

There met on the Kings side the Marshall de Byron, the Baron de Giury, The
Cardinal Legate meets with the Marshall de Byron; diverse things are treated of
without any conclusion.
Secretary Revol, the Sieur Liancourt, and de la Verriere: And on the other,
the Cardinal Legate, the Sieur de Villeroy, the Marquess of Belin, and other
Lords of the League. Their reception was very honorable on both sides, but the
event fruitless: For the Legate trying either to persuade the Catholics to
forsake the King, or without any sure foundation of peace, to delay the siege
of Paris, which was already set in a way; and on the other side, the Marshall
laboring to get the Cardinal Legate to come to the King, and exhort him to turn
to the Catholic Religion, with security to bring all his Subjects unto their
obedience, who had alienated themselves for respect of Religion; intentions so
diverse, could not agree, and the wisdom of both parts did not suffer the one
to make it self superior to the other, so they parted again without fruit or
conclusion, the Legate having neither obtained the name of Neutral, nor the
revolt of the Catholics from the King, nor the diverting of the siege, which
perhaps was his principal aim in the procuring of that meeting. Yet neither was
all treating utterly broken off by this parting: for the Sieur de Villeroy,
either with a hope of concluding a good Accommodation, or for the same end of
delaying the Kings coming, did, with the Duke of Mayennes consent, introduce a
Treaty of this business with the Sieur de Plessis Mornay, a great Confident,
and ancient servant of the Kings; but being a Hugonot, very unproper for the
present business.

But the King not losing time, for all the Treaty of Peace, and knowing, that
by how much more the Enemy was straightened, so much more advantageous would be
the conditions of Agreement, was wholly intent upon taking in those places near
the City, and upon making himself master of all those Passes, by which
provisions were brought thither, in shutting up the Passages of the Rivers, and
cutting off the ways into the Country; by this means to obtain that by the
necessity of hunger, which was in a manner impossible for him to imagine could
be done by force of Arms. To which end, marching with his Army from Mante upon
the Twenty ninth of March, he possessed himself without difficulty of Cheureuse,
Montl'hery, Lagny, and Corbeil, all places proper to block up the City; and
upon the fifth of April sat down before Melun. Melun is a little Town, but
well fortified, seven Leagues distant from Paris, Melun stands upon the Sein^
above Paris.
through which run two Currents of the River Seine, and therefore is divided
into three parts by the Stream, and only joined together by Bridges. Monsieur
de Forone was in it with sixty Horse, and Five hundred Foot, but little
provision of things necessary for their defense, and by terror of the Victory
not of too resolute a courage: Yet made they a show as if they would stand out,
and the rather, because Five hundred Townsmen well armed and experienced were
joined with them: But the Raveline of the Gate being battered with seven pieces
of Cannon, and two very great Culverines, the Kings Foot (now accustomed to
master great difficulties) assaulted it with so much fury, The siege and taking
of Melun by the Kings Army.
that though the breach was very narrow, and high from the ground, yet entered
they both the Raveline and the Gate, killing above sixty of the defendents, who
retiring into the further part, beyond the second Bridge, and opposite to the
Town, set fire on the place they quitted, to keep the assailants, who were at
their heels, from being able to follow them; many houses were burned, and the
rest furiously sacked by the violence of the Soldiers. But the other part of
the Town whither the defendents were retired, being altogether deprived of the
means of making resistance, agreed to yield (as it did) if within two days
there came no relief.

The King being lodged there personally in the Suburbs, the Sieur de Villeroy
having a safe conduct, came unto him, and perceiving that the Sieur du Plessis,
for fear the King should change his Religion, did not go on heartily in the
Treaty of Agreement, he had obtained leave, by the means of the Sieur de la
Verriere, to have admittance to the King himself, and to that end was come
thither unto him. The Duke of Mayenne, who was already gotten to Soissons, had
refused at first to give way that Villeroy should enter into this Treaty,
thinking it might be ascribed to want of courage in their present fortune; but
afterward, whether he sought by making the Spaniards jealous of a peace, to
stir them up to the giving of greater and more resolute supplies, or that he
hoped to delay the siege of Paris by the hope of an Accommodation, or that he
sought by this means to penetrate into the Kings designs and intentions, or
that all these ends moved him together, he permitted Villeroy to meet, and to
introduce that negotiation; for which purpose, being come to Melun, and kindly
received by the King, he began (with his wonted efficacy, The Sieur de Villeroy
being come to Melun to treat an Agreement with the King, persuades him by many
reasons to turn Catholic, and propounds a Cessation of Arms.
not accompanied with very deep Learning, but naturally copious and powerful in
speech) to represent unto him, how being anxious for the danger and calamity of
his Country, and desirous to see it out of those ruinous distractions, wherein
it perished miserably, he had obtained leave from the Duke of Mayenne, Head of
the party of the League, to come unto his Majesty, to see if any remedy could
be found, whereby discords being composed and buried, a happy Peace might be
procured; that he hoped (nay, was certain) that His Majesty would have no less
desire to end the Civil Wars, and restore the former quiet and tranquillity to
that Kingdom, which God, Nature, and his Valor had destined to him; that the
only means to attain so great a good, was very easy, and depended wholly upon
his own will; for the sum consisting only in the point of Religion, the Duke
of Mayenne proffered to acknowledge and obey him, as soon as he, at the
Petition of the Catholics (not at all for fear, or for their threatenings)
should resolve to return into the bosom of the Holy Church: Wherefore, upon
his will depended, not only the settling of peace in the Kingdom; but also the
making himself the most flourishing, most powerful, most obeyed, and most
reverenced Prince that France had seen of many years; that the present
conjuncture of time was very seasonable for that resolution; for having
conquered and overcome his enemies with the Sword, it could not be said, that
his conversion was caused by fear, or that he embraced the Catholic Religion
by force, but that good would be attributed to his own will, his own
conscience, and his own election: That this opportune and wholesome effect
would make his Victory twice as fruitful and happy, as his virtue had made it
glorious and magnificent; and he might thereby attain that true end which ought
to be proper to all Victories (especially those in Civil Wars) which is, The
enjoying of Peace: for, that goodness of his would bring more Cities under his
subjection in one day, than he could take by the force of his Arms (though
victorious) in the course of his whole life: That by prosecuting Victory with
the Sword, would ensue an infinite number of mischiefs, and lamentable
calamities; the ruining of Fortresses, sacking of Cities, slaughters of Men,
desolation of Countries; which all redounded to his own loss, who naturally was
the master of them: but, the War ending by this conversion, the Victory would
redound to the general security, tranquillity, safety, and happiness, which
ought to be more dear to him, being a lawful Prince, than all the Victories
that could be imagined in the World: That His Majesty ought to consider, though
his Victory had been great and signal, yet had it neither dismayed the Cities,
nor terrified the adherents of the League in such manner, that any of them had
been moved by it to forsake their party, and yield themselves up to his
devotion; the reason whereof was only the power and command which Religion has
in the hearts of men, which persuaded every one to suffer all the calamities
which could be presented to imagination, rather than put their soul and
conscience in danger: but if the common people of their side, persuaded by this
respect, were so constant, he might think, by consequence, that the Duke of
Mayenne, and the other Heads of that party, the Pope, and the Catholic King,
would be much more constant, being resolved to employ all their Forces for the
securing of Religion: That he knew well, and had often had experience of it in
his Hugonots, that the respect of Religion is so great, that it makes men's
minds invincible, and can neither be tamed by Arms nor Force: That it would be
a prudent consideration, to foresee how much use strangers might make of this
pretense of Religion for their advantage; which, if in former times it had
persuaded the Hugonots to make Agreements with the English, it would be no
wonder if the urgency of present necessity should force the Catholics to
consent unto the demands of the Spaniards: That this danger ought to be
foreseen and prevented by securing men's Consciences, and not reducing them to
utter desperation: That his Majesty should set before his eyes how many Cities
he must of necessity assault, how many Provinces he must subdue, how many other
Armies he must conquer, how many Fortresses he must take in, before he could
settle himself King in peace by means of War: And that he might overcome all
those difficulties in one day, by satisfying his subjects in point of Religion:
That his Victory had been great, but that it was necessary to secure it from
the inconstancy of fortune; which he might do, not by hazarding new
enterprises, but by moderation, and the satisfaction of his subjects: That time
and opportunity invited him to that worthy and holy resolution, and not to stay
till the Duke, and the other Heads of the League, should be so nearly engaged
and interessed with the Catholic King (whose assistance was necessary while
the War continued) that they would no longer have power to dispose of
themselves: in conclusion, That both duty and profit were joined together in
this resolution: for having received so great a blessing from God, it was no
longer time to defer his Conversion, since now by the favor of his Divine
Majesty, he might do it with reputation and glory, and without suspicion of
baseness of mind, or meanness of spirit.

The King answered graciously, The King 's Answer to the Sieur de Villeroy.
That he commended the Sieur de Villeroy's intention to endeavor the peace of
the Kingdom, and was glad to hear that the Duke of Mayenne was well disposed to
it: That he acknowledged the Victory he had obtained, first from the hand of
God, and then from his Nobility: That God, the Protector of Justice and Right,
had protected his Cause; and that those invincible Lords and Gentlemen that
followed him, had been the instruments of his Divine mercy: That the Kingdom
appertained to him of right, by a direct and natural succession, and by a
lawful way known to all* so that foreign Princes were most manifestly to blame
for disturbing him in the possession of it; and much more his Subjects, for
denying him their due obedience: That he had never offended any, nor deserved
so unjust an opposition as was made against him: That he had always moderately
and modestly defended himself, and had done neither violence nor injury to
foreign Princes, nor to the Subjects of the Crown, for which they now had any
reason to revenge themselves; but that when he called to mind the miraculous
power, and merciful favor of God, wherewith he had preserved him in the times
of his weakness and miseries, and had defended him from so many, and so long
persecutions, when the whole World seemed to have conspired against him, he
could not believe his Divine Majesty would leave so great a work unperfect, but
was assured in himself that he would look upon the justice of his Cause, and
those Prayers which he to that end always made unto him from the bottom of his
heart; and therefore he neither feared the Arms of Spain, nor the Forces of
Rebels, but trusted in God, and the faithfulness of his Nobility, that he
should ruin and defeat them: That he knew well, Moderation more profitable in
Victory than at another time.
modesty and moderation were more profitable in Victory, than at another time;
but he neither pretended to oppress nor wrong any body, but only to make
himself be rightfully obeyed by those who by nature were his subjects, and put
under his authority: That his aim was to be King indeed, as he was by right;
and that the end of the D. of Mayenne, and those that followed him, ought to
be, to live in peace, security, and honor, under the obedience of that King
which God and Nature had appointed for them by lawful succession: That in this
he was ready to give them all security, and all satisfaction, and to afford
them a gracious share in his favor, without ever calling to memory what was
past: That he desired to conquer rather by pardon, benignity, and liberality,
than by the Sword, as well because it was the shorter way, as because it was
suitable to his genius and nature, averse from blood and revenge, and inclined
to do good unto his Subjects, and to pacify the troubles of his Kingdom: That
it belonged to him to give the Law unto his Subjects, and not to receive
Conditions from them; yet nevertheless, if, jealous of their Consciences, and
of Religion, they desire to secure it any way, he would give them all
convenient satisfaction; and that the candor and firmness of his Faith was
already known to every one by many proofs; which having never broken for the
time past, he was most fully resolved never to break for the time to come: That
the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen that followed him, which were much more
numerous than those that followed the Duke, had contented themselves with the
promise he had made them, and with the security he had given them, that they
should live peacefully, in their conscience, liberty, and religion, and that
therefore the others ought to be contented with the same; and being secured in
their own particulars, ought to permit him to think of his own salvation, by
those means which it should please the Lord to inspire into him, in a
seasonable time, and a fitting convenient manner. Then he asked the Sieur de
Villeroy, if he had seen his Promise and Declaration made after the death of
the late King: who answered him, That he had; and that the Duke of Mayenne, and
the other Lords of his party had seen it likewise; but that they all believed
they could not in conscience, upon any condition whatsoever, obey a King that
was not a Catholic, but of a different Religion from that which they held by
succession from their ancestors. To which the King replied, That he was neither
Infidel, Pagan, nor Idolater; that he adored and served the same God with the
Catholics; and that he esteemed the Religion in which he had been bred up, not
to be incompatible with the Roman: That in such a case as concerned his
Conscience and Salvation, God was to work, and not men: That it ought to be
done by kind gentle instruction, and not with Sword and Pistol: That if he had
not yielded to turn in the late King's time, when he saw his ruin and
destruction before his face, much less would he do it at the request of those
that rebelled against him, now that by the favor of God he had the upper hand:
That he was not obstinate, but would yield to the truth, and be informed and
instructed in it; yet that he would satisfy his Conscience in it: and if he
left freedom of Belief unto his Subjects, it was not fit that he should be
constrained by them to do that in a rash humor, which ought to be done with
maturity of deliberation, and in the time prefixed by God's Divine will and
pleasure: That he was a man of Conscience, and one that esteemed more the
salvation of his Soul, than all earthly things; and therefore he would go very
circumspectly about that business, with due and convenient cautions. The Sieur
de Villeroy replied, That because he was by all accounted a Conscientious
Prince, affectionate to his Religion, every one doubted so much the more, that,
being settled in his Kingdom, he would not tolerate his Subjects to live in a
Religion different from his, and which he held to be false and damnable: That
he had ever heard say, and even by Theodore Beza himself, in the Conference at
Poissy, that the belief of the one is further from the other, than Heaven is
from Earth; but that those Disputes were not to be made with Arms: That his
Majesty had always said he would cause himself to be instructed, but never
came to the act of that instruction: That there wanted not Prelates and
Doctors, who, in a short time, might certify him of the truth: That it was not
good to foment War any longer, and let Discords run on without end, but, by the
observation of his promises, to comfort all his Subjects, as well those that
had gotten the Victory, as the others, who for the zeal of Religion, stood
alienated from him: Finally, That it could no longer be said, that either
contumacious or seditious persons were cause of the War, things being now
reduced to that point, that it was in his Majesty's power to give Peace by his
Conversion; which if he should not do, after so many promises, all future evils
and calamities would be imputed to him, and to no other body. These last words
pierced the King's mind to the very quick, who answered, That he would take the
Opinion of his good and faithful servants that followed him, and that therefore
he would confer with them about it, and give his resolution the day following:
At which time, he, being already upon the point of his departure from Melun,
sent for the Sieur de Villeroy, and bad him return to the Duke of Mayenne, and
tell him, That he took in good part what had been delivered from him, that he
desired to be reconciled, and to do good to every one, and particularly to the
Duke of Mayenne, and all the rest of his Family, if by them he should be
assisted to settle peace in the Kingdom, as they might easily do, and that in
it he would give them all reasonable satisfaction: That for the point of
Religion, he had already contented those Catholics that followed him, who were
many, of great extraction, of exceeding great strength, and of profound wisdom,
to whose determination he thought all the rest might accommodate themselves:
That if they desired to have more security and caution for the preservation of
their Religion, and safety of their Consciences, he was ready to give it most
fully, having taken into consideration, all that he had represented to him; but
that he could not proceed to treat further with him, having no power nor
authority at all from the Duke of Mayenne, to conclude any thing; but if
Deputies and Commissioners should be sent unto him with sufficient power, he
would willingly admit them, use them well, and endeavor to give the Dukes
party the greatest and most complete satisfaction that might be, out of his
great desire to free his people from the afflictions and calamities of Civil
War. The Sieur de Villeroy answered, That his Majesty's consideration of not
treating, but with such as had power to conclude, was very prudent and
reasonable; but that he should remember, the Duke of Mayenne was not absolute
Master, but Head of his party, which has relation to all the other members,
without whose consent he could not acknowledge his Majesty to be King of
France, nor determine in point of Religion: That it was necessary for him to
confer with them, and that they should resolve together; how his Majesty having
been so many years Head of his party, had by his own experience found, that
that could not be done without delaying time; it being needful to unite those
that were interessed from so many several distant Provinces: That while the War
was so hot, it was impossible to make that Assembly; wherefore a Cessation of
Arms was necessary, or at least a sufficient number of passes, to draw those
together who were to deliberate about the sum of affairs. At the naming a
Cessation of Arms, the King replied suddenly, That that was not to be spoken
of; for he would not by any delay, lose the fruit of his Victory, nor slacken
the progress of his Arms, having had experience of how great importance that
was to the whole business; The Sieur de Villeroy is dismissed without
conclusion, the King being resolved not to grant a Cessation of Arms.
but that for the manner of assembling his party, he left the thought to the
Duke of Mayenne, being resolved not to forbear the prosecution of his Arms, no
not for a moment: With this answer, and such like discourses had with the
Marshall de Byron, Villeroy departed without any conclusion, either of Peace
or Truce, and all the endeavors used to divert the siege of Paris proved
ineffectual.

Wherefore, the King (to whom Cressy and Moret (weak places) had surrendered
themselves, and Provins, a rich Town, but not strong, though chief of the
Province of Brie, and but twenty leagues from the City of Paris) marched to
Nangy; where having reunited his Army, which had been divided to gain these
places, he advanced upon the Fifteenth day of April to take other Towns which
might streighten and block up Paris; Montereau, Bray, Comte-Robert, and Nogent
upon the Seine, yielded without resistance; but Merry, a little place, having
had the boldness to stand out, was by the violence of the Soldiers most
furiously taken and sacked. There remained on that side, the City Sens, a great
Town, and affectionate to the League, seated upon the Confines of Brie and
Bourgogne, wherein were the Sieur de Chanvalon, and the Marquess Fortunato
Malvicino, but they agreed not well together; for Chanvalon sought an
opportunity to go over to the King, and to make his peace by giving up the City
into his hands; but the Marquess on the other side would defend it, as his
honor obliged him, having (as a stranger) no other aim but to show himself a
gallant Soldier, and to do service for the Duke of Nemours, being Lieutenant
of his Troop of Gens d' Arms; wherefore Chanvalon having treated secretly with
the Marshall d' Aumont, and exhorted the King to come before the Town, siege
was laid unto it, the Cannon planted, and they began to batter, with hopes that
some tumult might arise among the Citizens in favor of the King; but having,
to try the constancy of the Defendents, made an assault, which the Marquess and
those of the Town resisted valiantly, the King not willing to lose time about
that place, which was not very necessary, and interrupt his design upon Paris,
wherein consisted the sum of his affairs, raised the siege without delay, and
minded the taking and fortifying of those other places, which might cut off the
passage of provisions to Paris.

In the mean time the Cardinal Legate, anxious and sollicitous, both for his own
danger, and the imminent siege of the Parisians, had caused a new Treaty of
Agreement to be introduced between the Bishop of Ceneda, and the Marshall de
Byron, for which purpose, Marc' Antonio Moc^nigo Bishop of Ceneda treats with
the Marshall de Byron, and propounds a Cessation of Arms; but it is not
accepted.
the Bishop came to Bray, to confer with the Marshall; and as one, who because
he was a Venetian, and so of a Country favorable to the Kings affairs, had
freer access than any other, he treated with a great deal of liberty about his
Conversion; and afterward descended to speak about a Cessation of Arms, by
means whereof they might have leisure to negotiate Peace maturely on either
side; but this attempt was no less vain than the rest, the King being resolved
not to delay the progress of his Arms; and by how much the more the Enemy
labored for it, so much the more unwilling was he to allow them any space to
take breath; and the more he saw the Lords of the League intent upon gaining
time to get Armies and Supplies, the more did he enter into a secure hope,
within a while, to obtain the City of Paris by means of a siege, without
danger, and without blood. Wherefore all things proving contrary to the Bishops
design, he procured to confer personally with the King, but in such manner as
it might seem to have happened by chance, and not to have been sought by him;
which having spoken of to the Abbot del Been, he brought to pass, that the King
should go forth betimes in the morning a hunting, and that the Bishop should
depart a little later to return to Paris, so that they met, as it were,
accidentally upon the way; which encounter began with kind salutations, and
then riding together a good part of the way, the Bishop entered into the
discourse which he had intended to make, exhorting the King to his conversion,
and to return into the bosom of the Church. To which the King having made his
wonted answers, That he was not obstinate, but would be made capable of the
truth by those circumstances of times, persons, and places which were fitting;
nor would he be driven by force, or the threatenings of his Enemies, but be
drawn by the Grace and Inspiration of God. The Bishop of C^neda confers with
the King; prays him to grant a Truce; the King absolutely denies it,
complaining of the Cardinal Legate.
The Bishop replied, The best means for that, would be a Truce, wherein the
commotions of men's minds, kindled by the exercise of Arms, ceasing, he might
have opportunity to receive instruction, and to do with honor and deliberation
whatsoever was needful. But as soon as the King heard him motion a Truce, he
answered with a loud voice, That if he had been a good Venetian, he would not
have given him that counsel; but, that these were the devices of Cardinal
Gaetano, who showed himself a much better Spaniard, than a Churchman. And here
he began to complain very much of him, that, carrying himself differently from
the Popes Commission, he had declared himself his Enemy at his entry into the
Kingdom, and made his residence in that City, which was Head of the contrary
party; whereas it had been fit for him that represented the Apostolic See, to
have stood Neutral, and to have endeavored and procured a Peace by his good
counsel, and by actions conformable to right, and his profession, which then
would have had more credit; but, that now terrified by the present danger, or
else cooperating with the designs of the Spaniards; he sought not to introduce
Peace, but to frustrate the effects of his labors, and the fruits of his
Victories, while the League might gain time to recover strength; and that
therefore he was not disposed to give any ear unto it: With which words they
parted, and the Bishop returned with this final answer to Paris.

But at his return, all hope of Truce failing, they set their minds with so
much the more sollicitousness to make necessary provisions to sustain the
strict siege which the Enemy was preparing. The people was already disposed by
the long exhortations of their Preachers, and the earnest negotiation of those
that governed, to endure the siege, and hazard their lives rather than their
consciences; being wrought upon by the frequent Decrees of the Sorbonne, and by
the Declarations and Protestations of the Cardinal-Legat, that an Agreement
could not be treated with the Heretics without damnation, and that a King of a
different Religion, obstinate in his opinion, a Persecutor of the Church, and
an Enemy to the Apostolic See, was not to be received. By these opinions,
which every hour were thundered out of the Pulpits, and discoursed of in
meetings, men's minds were so effectually moved and confirmed, that they were
not only ready to suffer constantly the danger and toil of bearing Arms, and
that which was much more evident, Some are put to death by the fury of the
people, for saying, it was better to make Peace with the King than starve with
hunger.
and more terrible, the extreme misery of an enraged hunger; but moreover, they
could not so much as endure any one that durst hold or affirm the contrary: so
that many who let slip some words, that it was better to make an Accommodation
than starve for hunger, and that Peace was better than a Siege, were by the
fury of the people either executed in public, or cast headlong into the River,
as damned persons, Enemies of the Catholic Faith, and infected with the poison
of Heresy. This constancy was augmented by the presence of the Cardinal-Legat,
the residence of the Dutchesses of Nemours, Montpensier, and Mayenne, the
forwardness and vigor of the Duke of Nemours, and Chevalier d' Aumale, and
much more by the most certain hopes which the Duke of Mayenne gave them every
hour by effectual Letters, that he would relieve the City powerfully within a
few weeks. The Heads being desirous to increase and confirm this inclination of
the people, by some outward circumstances, a great solemn Procession was made
by order from the Cardinal-Legat, to implore Gods assistance in those present
necessities: in which Procession, the Prelates, A solemn Procession, in which
the Ecclesiastical Orders appear in their religious habits; and not only so,
but armed as Soldiers*
Priests and Monks of the several Religious Orders, walked all in their
accustomed habits; but besides them, armed openly with Corslets, Guns, Swords,
Partezans, and all kind of Arms offensive and defensive, making at once a
double show, both of devotion, and constancy of heart prepared to defend
themselves: which Ceremony, though to many it seemed undecent and ridiculous,
was yet of great use to augment and confirm the courage of the common people,
who saw the same men that exhorted them with words to stand it out, prepared
and armed to hazard the same dangers, and unanimously to undergo the same
sufferings. Thus sometimes even the vainest slightest things, help forward the
most weighty important thoughts and designs.

After this Procession, they made another of all the Magistrates of the City;
and among the Ceremonies of it, the Duke of Nemours their Governor, and other
Commanders of the Soldiers, and the Magistrates of the people, swore publicly
in the great Church, to defend the City to the last man, nor ever to incline to
yield, A solemn Oath taken by the Magistrates.
or make an Agreement with an Heretic Prince, for any calamity, danger,
sufferance or necessity whatsoever that should fall upon them. There were in
the City two hundred chosen Horse, commanded by the Sieur de Vitry, the Duke of
Nemours his Company of Gens d' Arms, and that of Chevalieur d' Aumale; one
hundred Harquebusiers on horseback, and eight hundred French Foot, part whereof
has been in Melun with the Sieur de Forone; five hundred Swisses, and one
thousand and two hundred of those German Foot that were levied by the Count
Collalto, commanded by the Baron of Erbestein: But the foundation of their
defense consisted in the union and constancy of the people, which infinitely
numerous, and now by long use accustomed to Arms, being disposed under their
Magistrates, and divided into several Bands, according to the division of their
Quarters, presented themselves voluntarily, and ready for all encounters; and
by the example of the Priests and Friars, who went armed up to the Works, and
engaged themselves in all things with admirable constancy, failed not in any
duty that was necessary for their defense. Double Chains were drawn cross the
Rivers, where it enters, and where it goes out of the City; the Walls and
Brest-works were repaired in those places where they seemed to be decayed;
Platforms were made in convenient places, and parapets made upon some new
places of the Wall: the Artillery was disposed of orderly to the most dangerous
Posts; and the readiness of the Citizens appeared wonderful in every business.
But this troubled not those that bore the sway in the Government: for every one
was certain that the King would never attempt to take the City by force,
defended, in so great a number of Citizens, rather by the bodies of men, than
by the strength of their Bulwarks; but that he would strive to tame it by
Famine; which seemed to be very easy, by reason there were so many people
accustomed to live in plenty and abundance, who now were in so great necessity,
that being deprived of all other sustenance, they were forced at an
extraordinary rate to feed only upon bread: and there was no doubt but if
relief were delayed, and that the King should straighten the siege closer, the
City would be reduced to the last intolerable calamities of want; which they
foreseeing, The City being blockt up on every side, is in great scarcity for
want of Victual.
most earnestly solicited the Duke of Mayenne to draw forces together for
their relief; and the Cardinal-Legat dispatched his Nephew Pietro Gaetano into
Flanders, to exhort the Duke of Parma, according to the Catholic Kings order,
with all haste to send speedy supplies: and the Commendatory Morreo, Play Master
and Commissary of the King of Spain's Forces in France, was gone thither for
the same purpose. To these provisions abroad, were added also others within:
for the Governors in chief being intent to remedy the necessity of the people
as much as they could, did with very great care cause that Corn that was found
in the City to be divided; the price whereof being infinitely beyond the
ordinary rate, and the common people not having means to help themselves,
Cardinal Gondy Bishop of Paris, not out of any inclination he had to favor the
League, but out of pity to see the poor wretches perish who had not money to
(...) themselves, all Trading being quite left off in the City, gave way that
all the Silver and Plate that had been offered to the several Churches, should
be taken out and turned into money, to feed the poor, with an Obligation to
restore them as soon as the present necessity was over. The Bishop of Paris
gives way that the Church-plate should be turned into mone^ for the relief of
the poor.
The Cardinal-Legat intent upon the same, distributed among the poor fifty
thousand Crowns extorted from the Pope with much ado; and causing his own Plate
to be melted and coined, did, with a great deal of praise, give it among those
that stood in need. The Ambassador Mendozza promised sixscore Crowns a day in
bread: and the Dutchesses and the richest Lords helped to the uttermost of
their abilities, selling their household stuff, jewels and ornaments for the so
miserable necessity of the common people. But these provisions began already to
be very scarce, in respect of the infinite number of mouths, and the continual
wasting of Corn: for the King advancing, by the taking in of the Neighboring
Towns, did straighten the siege every day more and more: nor was there any kind
of Victual at all brought into the City by the Rivers: for Lagny, St. M^ur, and
the Bridge of Charenton, (the care of which places was committed to the Baron
de Guiry) shut up the passage of the River Marne: Montereau, where there was a
strong Garrison under the command of Monsieur de Chanliot, shut up the passage
of the River Yonne: the Garrisons of Moret, Melun, Bray, and Corbeil, stopped up
the Seine from above: and from below, the Marshall d' Aumont quartered at the
Bridge of St. Cloud, a league from the City; and Poissy, and Conflans, well
Garrisoned, did wholly interrupt the passage up the River; as Beaumont, strongly
guarded, hindered all Boats from moving upon the River Oyse. So that the Rivers
which are commonly called the Nurces of the People of Paris, being shut up,
there remained only that little which could be gotten thither secretly by Land:
to cut off which, the King having passed the Seine, and being come into the
Plains near the City, spread his Army from the Port St. Anthoine, which looks
toward the East, to the Port Mont Martre, which stands toward the West; and
making use of the advantage of ground, caused two Pieces of Cannon to be
planted upon the Hill of Mont faulcon, and two others at Mont Martre, enclosing
them with Trenches, and guarding the place with a strong Guard: and the next
day, which was the ninth of May, he caused his Horse to make incursions even to
the very Gates of the Fauxbourgs St. Martin, and St. Denis, which stand between
the two aforesaid Gates, and to burn and destroy the Wind-mills every where:
yet could they not get into the Fauxbourgs, because they were fortified with
trenches, banks, and barrels full of earth: which day, while they were smartly
skirmishing with the Sieur de Vitry's Horse which sallied out of the Port St.
Martin, with some Companies of Foot-Souldiers and Citizens, the Sieur de la
Noue, in whose conduct and courage every one trusted very much, was, according
to his wonted misfortune, wounded with a Musket Shot.

The King had made choice to quarter his Army on that side, for two principal
reasons: one, because the Bois de Vincennes, seated on the East Side near the
River, and the Town of St. Denis on the West Side holding still for the League,
he might not only send out parties of Horse, and cut off the ways conveniently,
so that there might be no passage from those places to the City; but he also
besieged them in such manner, that he hoped to take them within a little time;
the other reason was, that relief being expected out of Champagne and Picardy,
he was quartered just upon the great highway which leads from those Provinces
to the City of Paris, so that he was ready to turn his Army thither where he
should see the Enemy appear. Thus the Army being spread from the banks of the
River Marne, to the lower part of the Seine, the whole field was obstructed
with continual parties, and there were every hour great skirmishes with those
of the City, who being straightened with want, strove to catch either Corn,
Roots, or other Victual, even to the very dead Horses that lay there, which
they could very seldom effect; and at the very same time St. Denis, and the
Bois de Vincennes (a very strong Castle) were closely besieged, and the Count
Montleurier having passed the Seine, had laid siege to Dammartin, a Town
belonging to the Lords of Montmorancy, The Cardinal of Bourbon dies at
Fontenay, which produces no alteration a^ all; only the Duke of Mayenne
invites the Deputies of the Provinces to Meau^ to choose another King.
seven leagues distant from the City, into which, there was gotten a great deal
of provision; so that the Parisians being shut up on all sides, began already
to feel the extremity of hunger, and only sustained the bitterness of their
present fortune, by the constancy of their courage.

While the siege and defense of the City of Paris is thus labored with
infinite contention on each side, the Cardinal of Bourbon, burd'ned with years,
and wasted by the tediousness of his imprisonment, departed this life a^
^ontenay, whose death gave evident proof to all the World, that his person had
only served for a cloak to cover the passions and interests of those that were
most powerful; for it caused no alteration at all in the party of the League,
but both the Parisians continued their constancy with new Decrees of Sorbonne,
That a new King of a different Religion could not be accepted of; and the Duke
of Mayenne setting forth a Manifest to invite the Deputies of the Provinces to
meet at Meaux, for the electing of a King, with the common consent, kept the
same title of Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, and
continued in the same manner to make War, the end whereof at present was wholly
set upon the way of relieving the City of Paris, which being not to be done
without powerful assistance from the Catholic King, the Duke of Mayenne, both
to agree upon the means, and to hasten the execution, went to Conde, a place
upon the confines, to confer with Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma, under
whose Government were all the Spanish Forces.

The intention of King Philip was, that the League should be relieved, and the
people of Paris delivered from the present danger, but with such moderation,
that so many sums of money profusely spent, and so great forces as were
employed in that enterprise, might not prove vain and unprofitable to his
proper Interests: For he foresaw, That if the Duke of Mayenne and the League
should agree to acknowledge the King of Navarre, he should reap no other
benefit from so many labors, but the gaining of a powerful Enemy; and
likewise, if the Crown should fall to the Duke of Mayenne, or any other of the
House of Lorain, The interests and designs of the King of Spain.
he knew he should advantage himself but little more, since the interests of
State would in a short time make him his Enemy, whosoever should be free and
sole Possessor of the Crown; weighty present interests having more power with
men, than the remembrance of past obligations: Wherefore he being to spend vast
sums of money for the bringing a powerful Army into France, and in the mean
time leave the affairs of Flanders in great danger, where the States of the
United Provinces, under the command of Grave Maurice of Nassau, not finding the
wonted obstacles, were like to make very great progress, he desired, that at
least things should be composed in such a manner, that the benefit might in
good measure redound to him, which should succeed from his charges, dangers,
labors, endeavors, and from his Armies; which by reason of the nature of the
French, and the present state of affairs, was most difficult to be brought to
pass: For the Duke of Mayenne, Head of the League, and absolute Master of the
Forces, did not only pretend to obtain the Kingdom for himself, but was also
firmly resolved, not to consent that any Member, Province, or City, that
belonged to the Crown should be alienated from it; and the major part of the
people being naturally Enemies to the Spaniards, and made their adherents now
only by necessity, would never endure to be commanded by them, and thought it
should suffice the King of Spain to be cried up for the Protector and Defender
of the Catholic Religion, and that the King who should be established should
assist him to subdue the Provinces of the Low Countries, without pretending any
other benefit from that principal relief which he lent to the common cause.
Wherefore it was very hard to find a middle way among so many difficulties, and
almost impossible to keep such leight uncertain minds from inclining to
acknowledge and take part with King Henry, a home-born Natural Prince; and
therefore it was necessary to govern that design with huge expenses, great
industry, long delays, and infinite patience, which, among so many suspicions,
and so many difficult businesses, appeared to be of great loss and detriment,
without much hope of proportionable advantage. For this cause the Duke of
Parma, a prudent wary Prince, The Duke of Parma's opinion.
and an Enemy to leight adventuring upon the arbitrament of Fortune, thought it
pernicious counsel to leave his own businesses of Flanders, to employ all his
Forces in so uncertain an enterprise, wholly founded upon the instability of
the French, and had endeavored to divert the Catholic King from such a
thought; but the Council of Spain, either desirous to augment their glory in
the defense of Religion, or perchance too much allured by future hopes, having
judged otherwise, and order being come from the King that he should apply his
mind principally to the affairs of France, he thought that might more easily be
brought to pass which was desired in Spain, if avoiding the necessity of
venturing whole Armies, and hazarding all their reputation at one clap, the
protracting of the War, and the spinning of it out with slow proceedings were
endeavored; by which means, the Party of the LEAGUE no less wearied out than
the KINGS, it would in the end remain in the King of Spain's power, to dispose
of the Affairs of France and Religion his own way; and therefore he was not so
ready to give aid, as the urgent need of the Parisians required, and as the
Duke of Mayenne would have had him; who being come to Conde, and having met him
there, endeavored by most effectual persuasions to move him to march without
delay to the relief of Paris: But he considering that the reputation of the
Catholic King, and the sum of affairs, ought not without convenient Forces to
be put in danger against a valiant and expert Soldier, and against a
victorious Army, showed, That the provisions that were requisite, could not be
got together so suddenly, neither could he so soon give order, as well for the
drawing of the Army into a Body, as for the defense of their own businesses in
Flanders; and concluded finally, that he could not be in France before the
beginning of the Month of August, a time which seemed wonderful long to the
Duke of Mayenne; The Duke of Mayenne having met the Duke of Parma at Conde, and
not being able to persuade him to go into France, obtains some supplies for the
relief of Paris.
and doubting, or rather thinking for certain, that the Parisians could not
hold out so long, he desired him in the mean time to let him have some number
of men, with which, added to his own, he might attempt some way to put victuals
into the City: With that the Duke of Parma was contented, it being a
proposition suitable to his own thought, which was to keep the War alive with
slow proceedings; on the one side, by little and little to consume the Kings
Forces; and on the other, by length of time to tire out and break the constant
resolution of the Duke of Mayenne and his adherents, not to admit a stranger to
the Crown, nor to dismember any part of the Kingdom: And therefore he willingly
granted him Fifteen hundred Spanish Foot, who had been out in a plundering
mutiny, and being now entered again into service, were commanded by Don Antonio
Quiroga, Twelve hundred Italian Foot led by Camillo Capuzichia, a Roman, and
Eight hundred Flemmish and Bourguinon Horse; with which Forces, the Duke not
losing any longer time, marched with all speed toward Picardy.

But at the same time the designs of the Duke of Parma had like to have been
ruined, and the minds of the French to have been stirred up to some commotion
by the counsel of the Ambassador Mendozza, The Spanish Ministers ^eal with some
Governors of places, to deliver them up into the hands of the King of Spain.
and the other Spanish Ministers that were in France, who being more intent
upon present benefit, than the greatness of the future design, and not being
well acquainted with the secret intentions of the Duke, began to deal with some
Governors of places in Picardy, to the end, that being well rewarded for their
pains, they might deliver them up into the hands of the Spaniards; which
practices would not only have expressly shown the Catholic Kings intentions to
be different from the outward appearance, but would also have so moved the
hasty fiery minds of the French, that without any regard they would have agreed
to acknowledge the King, that they might not be deceived by the suspected arts
of the Spaniards, and would have smoothed the way to the revolt of the
Parisians, who with so much art and patience were kept firm in their
resolutions. But the Duke of Parma, as soon as he came to the knowledge of it,
instantly cut off all those Treaties, and labored to make appear that it had
been the inclination of those Governors, but neither the will of the Catholic
King, nor the practice of his Ministers, being most averse from any other
Interest save that of Religion: and yet the Duke of Mayenne, deeply moved at
those Treaties, was fain to lengthen his journey, passing in his return by all
those places that were suspected, and making some stay in each of them, caused
all the Governors to promise, and take a solemn Oath not to fall off from that
party, nor to hold any private Treaty with any Prince: but not trusting wholly
to this, he strove to secure those Fortresses with all possible provisions; and
it being necessary to leave strong Garrisons of his own men in every place, he
was constrained to diminish his Forces in such manner, that they were not
sufficient to give any considerable relief to the siege of Paris: yet because
he would not fail in any thing that was possible, he advanced upon the way that
leads to Paris, with an intent either to raise the King from the siege, or at
least to slacken it in some part; which was not altogether without success: for
the King being advertised of the Dukes advance with his Forces, went from the
siege with one thousand and two hundred Cui^assiers, five hundred Reiters, and
one thousand and two hundred Harquebusiers on horseback; and having marched
eighteen leagues in one day, met him near unto Laon upon the fifth day of June,
and arrived so unexpectedly, that the Duke, not being in a condition to fight,
was constrained to retire apace into the Suburbs of the Town, and there to
quarter his men under favor of the Walls and Cannon, that he might not be
forced to a Battle. The skirmish was hot and furious the next day, Quiroga's
Spaniards coming on very boldly encouraged with the spoil they had gotten while
they were out in mutiny; armed with excellent Arms, and wonderfully gallantly
set forth. But the Baron de Byron having made the Harquebusiers alight from
their horses, and two Troops of Reiters to advance one upon each flank, they
retired without much disputing, le^ving a greate^ opinion of their vain
ostentation, than of their valor and Military discipline, which ill agrees
with the license of plunderings; so that the Italian Tertia, ^ade up of old
well-disciplined Soldiers, was fain to second the skirmish, in which those of
the League, neither suffering themselves to be beaten off from their place of
advantage, nor from the shelter of the Town, it continued till the evening
without coming to a Battle.

But while the Forces skirmish thus at Lao^, The Sieur de St. Paul puts in
relief into Paris.
the Sieur de St. Paul (who from the beginning had separated himself from the
Duke of Mayenne with that intention) being with eight hundred Horse and great
store of Victual advanced by the way of Champagne, came safe to Meaux, and from
thence along the bank of the River Marne, (having avoided the Guards of the
Kings Army, which, because their number was diminished, could not scowre the
ways with their wonted diligence) entered safe into Paris, where having put in
the provisions, he retired without having received any prejudice: which being
come to the Kings knowledge, both because he might not leave open the passage
for other Succors, and because he saw that his staying to face the Duke of
Mayenne (safely entrenched in the Suburbs of Laon, and well furnished with
Victual) was no way advantageous, he returned upon the ninth of June to his old
quarters, where he was more careful in the besieging of St. Denis, and in
cutting off all passages to the City; in which business he himself spending
many hours both of the day and night, and by his example the other Commanders
doing the like, and particularly the Baron de Byron, a young man, in the full
strength of his years, and unwearied in all toil and labor, all attempts
proved vain which were used by the besieged, or by the Provinces bordering upon
them, to get any quantity of Victual (though never so little) into the City:
but how exact soever the diligence of the Kings Commanders was, yet was it no
more than was necessary in the present occasion: for a Bushel of Wheat being
sold in the City at one hundred and twenty Crowns, and all other things at a
suitable rate, not only the Friends and Confederates of the League, but even
their Enemies also, and some of the Kings side, moved by the greatness of the
profit, endeavored to get some small quantity of Corn and Flesh to pass
secretly into the City; which nevertheless, by reason of the multitude of those
that scowred the ways, happened but very seldom, and was in a manner but an
insensible help to the Parisians, who afflicted by extreme miseries, only
sustained themselves by constancy of courage, and the near hope of relief;
which that it might be kept alive, both the Duke of Mayenne, who was without,
and the Lords that were within, used mavelous art and industry, in making
rumors to be spread, sometimes that the Forces were upon their march from
Flanders to raise the siege; sometimes that provision of Victual was making
ready to supply the City; sometimes that some favorable accident had befallen
their party: so that Letters and Messages arriving every day, and mingling true
things with false, both published in the Pulpits, and divulged upon the Guards,
fed the people with hopes for some few days: But the necessity increasing
daily, these arts at last became unwelcom to the ears of men of understanding;
sad doleful voices being heard, and many signs of discontent observed through
the whole City. The month of July was already begun, and the Corn of the City
was quite spent, nor was any thing left for the people to live upon but Oats,
of which some little quantity remained; and that being ground in the Mills that
stood in the streams of the River within the City, sometimes was turned into
bread, sometimes cooked into pottage, which the French call bouillie; The
description of the miseries the people suffered in the siege.
and for dainties, sometimes a little flesh, either of Horses, Dogs, Asses, or
Mules, keeping no other Horses alive, but those which were made use of in the
War; the rest being publicly sold, to keep the Families of the greatest Lords.
But this manner of living was tolerable, and to be wished for, in respect of
the common people, who drawing no profit at all from their Trades, and being
reduced to extremity of misery, without money, and without bread, were fain,
like brute beasts, to feed upon those herbs which they found in the yards, and
streets, and along the ramparts; which yet not being sufficient for so great a
multitude, and either giving little nourishment, because they were dried up
with the heat, or else by their poisonous qualities producing vomits and
fluxes, the miserable people were often seen to fall suddenly dead in the
streets; which was so sad and lamentable a spectacle, as would have caused
horror in any heart, how fierce or cruel soever. Yet, notwithstanding all this,
the Heads of the Faction, and those that governed the people, the Legate, the
Ambassador Mendozza, and the Princes, were so constant and so firm, that they
never so much as entertained a thought of yielding, but with exceeding great
severity caused one Renard the Procureur of the Chastelet, Renard the Procureur
of the Chastelet, with some others, executed for having cried in the face of
the Council, Bread or Peace.
and some other of his accomplices to be executed; who desiring to free
themselves from so great danger, had had the boldness one day when the Council
was assembled, to cry out with a loud voice, Bread or Peace.
Ou Pain, ou Paix: and even the common people, in the midst of so great
straights, and the expectation of present death, rejoiced to suffer and endure
their misery, being fully persuaded that it was a kind of true and glorious
Martyrdom, for the safety of their Consciences, and the maintenance of
Religion. Not, but that some more compassionate of themselves, or of weaker
spirit, or perchance not so constant in matters of Faith, sought and contrived
to make some uproar, either to introduce a Treaty of Agreement, or to open a
way for the King to be received by the people, and went so far stirring men up,
by the apparent terror of unavoidable death, and the most cruel torment of
hunger, that some having made an Agreement among themselves, resolved to meet
one morning and seize upon the Heads of the Government, who assembled
themselves in Council in the Palace of Justice: but the business being secretly
come to the ear of Don Christino de Nizza, one of the chief Preachers that
labored to make the people hold out the siege, he caused the Princes and Legate
to be informed of it, who having put all the Militia in Arms, divided the care
of the City, and ordered, that the Duke of Nemours should ride armed both that
day and night, through all the Wards of the City, An Insurrection appeased with
the death of diverse of those made it.
and that the Chevalier d' Aumale should stay constantly to guard the Palace:
yet nevertheless they of the Plot came in great numbers at the time appointed,
crying, Bread or Peace, and threatening to cut the Council in pieces, if some
course were not taken; when one of the City Captains, whose name was Goix,
inconsiderately going about to oppose them, was shot and killed by one of them,
with a Pistol which he carried privately. But the Chevalier d' Aumale having
caused the Gates of the Palace to be shut, and the Duke of Nemours and the
Ambassador Mendozza coming suddenly with the Militia in Arms, he that had
discharged the Pistol was thrown down from the Galleries of the Palace; and
some other of the chief of them, who could not escape, being taken and executed
the same day, the tumult dissolved of it self, leaving the City free from
danger, but not the Heads from fear, that hunger would cause many of those
commotions: the state of things still growing worse, and no certain hope of
relief appearing. The excessive heats which this year followed the excessive
rains, as they made the sufferings more grievous, so did they hasten the
ripeness of Corn in the Field; which being seen by the besieged, who watched
night and day upon the Walls, was a cause that they went out armed and unarmed
in diverse Companies, sometimes Horse, sometimes Foot, with Sicles and other
reaping Instruments, hoping to catch some part of it: But the diligence of the
Kings Army was great in running to beat back the besieged as often as they came
forth, burning up the Corn, and with shot driving those Women and Children in
again, that came out unarmed to get some by stealth: So that the whole Field
being full of burnings and bloody incursions on all sides, the Parisians could
not furnish themselves with any fruits out of the Field, save those that grew
within shot of their Walls, which was so little as sufficed not to keep them
above five or six days, after which, the famine grew more miserable and deadly
than ever; they being fain from Meal and Oat-pottage, to come to the eating of
noisome things, and even to the grinding of Dead-mens Bones to make Bread; a
food not only loathsome and abominable, The Parisians make Bread of Dead men's
Bones.
but also so unwholsom and pestiferous, that the poor people died wonderfully
fast. They likewise wanted Wood for firing so much, that they eat the flesh
they got almost raw; and the skins and hides tanned for shoes and for men's
clothing, were boiled and devoured by those, who pulling down their own houses,
or other men's, could find wherewithal to kindle fire* nor was there any kind of
nourishment so strange, but it came into men's fancies to make use of, being
become ingenious by necessity, which forced them to invent ways to keep
themselves alive; and that which gave the greatest relief was, that by reason
of the infinite number that were dead and fled away secretly, some streets,
especially those of the Suburbs, being not frequented, brought forth Grass,
which gave mavelous relief to those poor famished Wretches.

But even this small help was likewise quickly taken away: for the Prince of
Conty, the Sieur de Chastillon* the Duke de la Tremouille, the Marquess Pisani,
the Duke of Nevers, and other Lords of Normandy, Anjou, Poictou, Gascogne and
Languedoc being come unto the Army, which was by that means much increased in
number, the King caused the siege to be more nearly straightened, and the
Suburbs to be therefore assaulted and taken; to which end, upon the Four and
twentieth day of July at night, being the Eve of St James the Apostle, Upon
Saint James his day the King assaults and takes the Fauxbourgs of Paris.
the whole Army being disposed in several places under their Commanders, as the
Clock struck three, all the Fauxbourgs were assaulted at one time, clapping a
great number of Scaling-Ladders against the Works. The Baron de Byron assaulted
the Fauxbourg St. Martin, the Sieur de Fervaques that of St. Denis, Monsieur de
St. Luc fell on that of Mont-Martre, the Marshall de Biron at St. Honor, the
Marshall d' Aumont at St. Germain, Monsieur de Lavardin near the Ports de
Bussy and Nesle, Monsieur de Chastillon assaulted St. Michael and St. Jacques,
the Prince of Conty and Duke de la Tremouille did the like at St Marceau and
St. Victoire, in such manner, that being attacqued and stormed all at the same
time, the Defendents strove, but in vain, with their Cannon and Musket Shot
from the Walls of the City; for all the Suburbs were taken by the Army, and the
City and People thereby much more incommodated and straightened.

The Town of St. Denis was taken before this upon the seventh of July; in which
siege the defendents having felt the same calamities, capitulated at last to
yield, if within three days they received not relief from Paris, or some other
place; which not being come to pass, by reason of the weakness of the
Parisians, and the places near adjacent, and because the King had obstructed
all the Avenues, The King at the siege of St. Denis sits on his Horse back
Forty hours together.
sitting on Horseback himself Forty hours together, they in the end gave up the
Town, marching out with their Arms and Baggage: And the same did they, who held
the Castle of Dammartin on the lower part of the River. So the whole Army being
now set to streighten the City, which had before been divided to besiege those
two places, the evil proved now without remedy; there coming no certain news
from any part, that the Forces were upon their march to relieve them.
Wherefore, though formerly they had refused to answer many of the Kings
Letters, in which, A Treaty propounded, the Legate and Cardinal Gondy meet the
Marquess of Pisani in the Fau^bourgs, but return without concluding any thing.
promising them their lives, and security for their consciences, he exhorted
them to desist from so great stubbornness, and yielding up themselves, to
acknowledge and obey him for their Natural King: yet now some Messages having
passed between the Legate and the Marquess of Pisani, who had been Ambassador at
Rome, they were content at last to yield to some treaty of Peace, but more with
an intention to satisfy the people, or to slacken the siege in some measure,
than with a thought of concluding any thing. Wherefore due security being given
and received, the Legate and Cardinal of Gondy went tothe Hostel of Girolamo
Gondy in the Fauxbourg St Germain, whither a while after camethe Marquess of
Pisani, with others from the Camp: but after a long discourse nothing was
concluded; for the Legate insisted to have the whole business remitted to the
Pope's arbitrament, and that there might be a Cessation of Arms till the
Decision came from Rome; and the Marquess demanded to have the Parisians submit
themselves unto the King's obedience, who would afterward give the Pope due
satisfaction in point of Religion; which things being so distant, and so
general, could produce no conclusion at all of agreement. The Legates return
into the City without effect, deluded the Peoples expectation, and every one
being afflicted at it, increased the consideration of their present misery, and
of the certainty that they should lose their lives within a few days: so that
the cries and groans of the people not only filled all the streets, but did
also multiply the number of those, who being overcome by the sharpness of their
sufferings, called out for Bread, or Peace, cries most frequent in the City,
especially in the night. This beginning of insurrection was increased by the
Sieur d' Andelot, brother to Chastillon, and some other Gentlemen of the King's
party, who being taken by the besieged in the skirmishes, which were most
frequent every day under the Walls, and having liberty given them to go abroad
upon their parole, divulged among their friends and acquaintance the King's
Clemency, his readiness to pardon, the liberty and security wherewith the
Catholics lived under his protection, the respect he showed toward the
Catholic Religion, his great strength, which increased more and more every
day, wherewith he was resolved to meet their Succors and fight with them,
having assured hopes to beat them, and to find the same facility he had done in
the Battle of Yvry, wherein the Forces of the League, though entire and united,
were utterly dissipated; by which instigations, many already despairing of
relief, and drawn by their necessity, inclined to try the so much commended
clemency and faith of the Conqueror. Whereupon there was like to be a very
great insurrection of the People, to force the Princes to a resolution of
yielding, and to make themselves masters of some gate, and let in the King's
Army, which, if it should have come to pass, the Forces of the Soldiers and
Citizens were so weakened by famine, that it was thought they would have been
able to make little resistance against the fury of the Enemy: Wherefore the
Parliament and Council being jointly assembled in the Hall of St Lewis, For
fear of an Insurrection, the Council of Paris chooses two Deputies, the
Cardinal Gondy and Archbishop of Lions to treat with the King.
they resolved to appoint two Deputies, that should go to treat with the King,
and if he permitted, should pass on to the Duke of Mayenne, and to take care
not to yield up the City; but if it were possible, to include the particular
agreement of the City, in the union of the general Peace.

For this employment they chose Cardinal Gondy and the Archbishop of Lions,
being assured, that neither of them would treat any thing that should be
prejudicial to Religion; and yet the Duke of Nemours rose up almost angry from
the Council, attesting, he would maintain what he had sworn in the beginning of
the siege, and that he had resolved rather to die, than yield the City into any
other hands than his Brother's, who had trusted him with it. Nor did the
Cardinal-Legat seem altogether there pleased, but said, he permitted that
Counsel by necessity, but that he approved not of it, and that having done and
suffe^^d so much, they ought to have patience for a few days, and expect the
coming and issue of the relief which was ready to appear every hour. But yet
the Deputies went forth with safe conduct to the Abbey of St Anthoine des
Champes, half a mile without that Gate which is so called; where they found the
King with a great many Princes and Lords, The High-Chancellor Chiverny recalled
to the execution of his Office by Henry the Fourth. The Speech of the City-Depu
ies unto the King.
and among the rest the High-Chancellor Chiverny, who having lived retired from
the time that King Henry the Third dismissed him from the Court, had a few
days before been recalled by the King to execute his wonted Office in keeping
the Seals. The Deputies told the King, that the Council and Inhabitants of
Paris, moved to compassionate the miseries of the people of France, which were
the consequences of an obstinate Civil War, had given them commission to come
and treat with him, and from thence to go on to the Duke of Mayenne the Head of
the Catholic party, to see if they could find out some way of accommodation;
and therefore they who had willingly undertaken so honorable an employment for
the general good and safety, exhorted his Majesty to hearken to those
Conditions which were fit for the security of Religion, and the common peace of
the Kingdom; but that he should not think, that for any suffering or danger in
the World, the Parisians would ever accept of any Agreement which should in the
least manner be prejudicial to their Conscience and Religion, being resolved
rather to die a corporal death, than injure or blemish the spiritual life of
the Soul, for which they were ready to suffer any kind of Martyrdom; which yet
they did not fear, being certain to be powerfully relieved within a few days.
Here Cardinal Gondy (though in himself affectionate to the King's party) added
many other things, to make it be believed, that not driven by necessity, but
moved with a charitable zeal of Universal Concord, they were chosen Deputies by
the City and Council of Paris, to find out a way to the quiet of the Kingdom.
Which things being spoken in public, and amidst a great concourse of Soldierly
Nobility, did so disgust every one that heard him, that the respect of the King
could not so restrain the French impatiency, but that it broke forth sometimes
into laughter, sometimes in words of disdain, hearing a Message more proper for
a dis-interessed, or a conquering people, than a City reduced to the last
inevitable calamities of hunger. And the King, either through his own Spirit,
or excited by the general resentment, which had, as it were, prescribed him the
tenor of his Answer, The King's Answer.
replied readily, That he knew very well the common people of Paris had the
knife at their throat; and that howsoever the true meaning of the Embassy were
palliated, yet were the Deputies come indeed to find some remedy for the
extremity of the condition they were brought to; but that the contents of their
message was very different from what it ought to have been: That if the Senate
of Venice, a State not depending upon any body but it self, yet by its ancient
resolution, always a Mediator of Peace among Christian Princes, had interposed
to conclude a Peace between him and the Duke of Mayenne, it would not have
seemed strange to him, and he should have taken it in good part; but that the
common people of one of his own Subject-Cities, who having forgot their natural
duty, had showed themselves contumacious and rebellious against him, should
dare to usurp the name of a Council, and presume to be the Mediators of Peace
and Concord, was a thing so ridiculous on the one side, and so worthy of scorn
and punishment on the other, that it would be no small matter, if from his
clemency they should be able to obtain pardon for themselves, without meddling
any further in the business. And here with many expressions (wherein he was
naturally very happy) desiring also to give satisfaction to the Nobility that
heard him, he said diverse other things, to show that he desired Peace out of
his own goodness and clemency, and for the preservation of the people which God
had committed to his Government; but that he neither feared the War, nor the
powerful succors which the Parisians fancied in their own imaginations: And
finally concluded, that he would be contented to lose one finger from his hand,
upon condition, the War between him and his Enemies and Rebels, might be ended
with the Sword the day following; but that he would gladly give two, that by
the way of Peace every one would acknowledge their own duty.

After which words, the Deputies were led forth into a room prepared for them,
and the King retired to advise with his Council. The opinion of the High
Chancellor Chiverny.
The High Chancellor Chiverny showed, that the Kings answer had been very sharp
and high, and that though that scornful resolute behavior seemed fit in
public, yet now in consulting the matter calmly, that style was to be altered,
not to lose that end which had till then been endeavored with so many labors:
That the Kings aim was to bring the City of Paris under obedience, but not with
the desolation of the Citizens, nor with force of Arms; but that the way of
siege had been chosen, as well by reason of the strength of the people united
for their defense, as not to destroy the greatest and richest City of the whole
Kingdom: Wherefore, now that the Parisians being tamed by hunger, began to
treat of an Agreement, reason persuaded to use them gently, and not to stand
upon any Conditions; but, provided they would but yield the most large and
honorable Capitulation that could be, was to be accepted of; and that if the
desire of saving Paris induced the Duke of Mayenne and others of his party to
embrace an Agreement, it was not a thing to be contemned, but rather to be
wished for: Wherefore he was plainly of opinion, that the Deputies should be
moderately treated with in private touching an Accommodation, and also that
they should be permitted to go on to the Duke of Mayenne, to see if they could
draw him to consent to Peace. The Marshall de Byron approved the first part of
the High Chancellors counsels, which was to give any conditions whatsoever to
the Parisians, provided, they would submit to the Kings obedience; so much the
rather, because by long watchings and continual sufferings, the Forces of the
Army were much tired and lessened, and diseases, in regard of the season, began
already to be very rife in the Camp: But he was not of opinion, that the
Deputies should have leave granted them to go on to the Duke of Mayenne,
showing, that that was a prolonging of the time, till the relief should arrive
out of Flanders: The Marshall de Byrons opinion, to which the Kings
Counselors assent.
That the negotiating of a General Peace was a thing that required long time,
and much maturity, which could not stand with the present business: That it was
good to strike the Iron while it was hot, and to straighten the Parisians till
hunger forced them to think of their own safety: For Paris being subdued, the
foundation of the League was taken away, and it would afterward be most easy
to make an Agreement with the Duke of Mayenne and the rest of his party. All
the rest concurred in this opinion; and therefore the Deputies being called,
after many discourses, this was the conclusion, That if Paris would yield, the
King would give them full satisfaction in the securities, and other matters
they desired of him; but that he would not receive Laws from them, in what
concerned his Conscience and Conversion, which he reserved to his own freedom,
and to the inspirations of God; neither would he give way, that they should go
treat with the Duke of Mayenne, he being resolved not to treat any Agreement,
except concerning the City of Paris: And finally, he caused a Writing to be
given unto them, penned by Secretary Revol, wherein he declared the same things
with very gentle words, and proffers of all possible security and satisfaction.
He added also private kind Letters to the Duke of Nemours, the Duchess his
Mother, and to Madam de Guise, exhorting each of them to Peace, and assuring
them all, That they should receive more from his favor, than they knew how to
desire. With this Answer the Deputies returned: The Deputies return with the
Kings Answer: All thought of Peace is laid aside.
But the Duke of Nemours being averse from Peace, by the counsel of the Legate,
and the Ambassador Mendozza, would not give way that the Writing should be read
unto the people, but that the Deputies should tell them only, that the King
would have no other Agreement, but that the City should put it self into his
power, without the assent of, and without including the Duke of Mayenne, and
the other Lords of the League; which being contrary to the sense of the major
part, especially of those of the Council, (for the City would by no means
separate themselves from the Duke of Mayenne, but run the same fortune with him
to the uttermost) the thought of Peace being laid aside, they returned to the
care of their defense.

In the mean time, the Duke of Parma (notwithstanding that he had made his
opinion fully known in Spain) had received a new absolute order from the
Catholic King to march personally with the whole Army into France to relieve
the Confederates, and to raise the siege of Paris; the Council believing that
enterprise so honorable, so important, and full of so lively hopes, that it
was without doubt to be preferred before the interests of the affairs of
Flanders, which they thought to be reduced into such a condition, that they
could receive but little or no damage by the absence of the Duke and his Army
for a few months; and therefore approving, that part of the Duke of Parma's
opinion which was to nourish and prolong the War, to obtain that from the
weakness and the weariness of the French, which at first seemed impossible to
be effected, The Duke of Parma has express order from Spain to go and relieve
Paris.
they had nevertheless determined, that Paris should be powerfully relieved,
purposely not to suffer the League to be so soon subdued, and the King to
remain Conqueror; to whom, that City being once taken, all other things would
become easy, and quickly be dispatched: Besides, that that Monarchy, even from
the weakness of its beginnings, having been accustomed ever to unite its own
ends with the so favorable and plausible pretense of Religion, it could not
now in this important occasion disunite those interests so nearly joined,
without taking off that glorious reputation which they so much boasted of, that
they never had other Enemies, but the Enemies of the Church it self: Therefore
they had caused a determinate order to be given the Duke, that having
strengthened those Garrisons of Flanders as much as he could, which were
frontiers toward the Confederate States, he should not defer to relieve the
City of Paris with all his force; which being once delivered and freed from the
siege, he should not care to proceed, or do any thing further. But the Duke,
as soon as he had received this last so absolute order, was in much trouble
which way to execute it: For on the one side, he could not leave the Cities of
Flanders so well Garrisoned, but that some great loss was to be feared, which in
Spain (where he saw the opinion in this business was very different from truth)
would be imputed to his carelessness, and not to the necessity of things, and
the Orders he had received: and on the other side, he could not march into
France without the strength of the Army, being to make a War wherein there was
little to be trusted to from his Friends, and much to be feared from a brave,
valiant, unwearied Enemy, bred up in War, and guarded with almost an invincible
Body of French Nobility; and so much the more, because it was necessary to go
and find him at home in the midst of all his Forces. Moreover, the straightness
of time troubled him very much, because he knew Paris was already reduced to
the extremest necessity of hunger, and yet first to furnish Flanders with what
was requisite, and then to go into France with that order, and thos^ provisions
which were fit for the greatness of the enterprise, it was necessary to spend
some time; so that it was infinitely to be doubted, the Parisians could not be
able to hold out so long. But as a Prince of high courage, who to maturity of
resolution joined celerity of execution, judging this (as indeed it was) the
most weighty and difficult enterprise that had ever fallen within his conduct,
he proposed to himself to overcome all difficulties, and to effect it with that
glory which he had gained in his other actions: and therefore having disposed
the order of all things in his mind, he betook himself to the effecting of them
with so much diligence, that he hoped to be able to relieve Paris by the midst
of August; wherefore desiring neither to deceive, nor be deceived, as he had
told the Duke of Mayenne before, so he writ a Letter to the besieged, about the
end of July, At the coming of the Duke of Parma's Letters, which promised
relief within fifteen days, the soldiers and people despairing, strive to fly
away from the City.
wherein giving them an account of his expedition, he assured them that he
would be in France by the midst of the next month, and exhorted them to
overcome all difficulties, and arm themselves with patience to expect that
time, within which he hoped certainly he should be able to free them from all
trouble. This Letter came to Paris upon the first of August, and being read by
the Magistrates, and communicated to the people, filled every one with
wonderful great despair, the time seeming so long to them, that they believed
they should never be able to hold it out with life; wherefore the Soldiers
began by stealth to forsake their Colors, and fly away by night: and the poor
of the City being destitute of sustenance, sought to get out of the siege and
escape some whither else, the Governors in chief not forbidding them, who from
the beginning had given leave to all to depart freely. But the King, as he
willingly suffered the runaway Soldiers to pass, so had he given strict
orders that the Townsmen should be driven back, and forced to return into the
City, knowing that the besieged sought to unburthen themselves; which order
being punctually executed by the Guards, was the cause that very few of them
could escape by stealth. Among the greatest difficulties that the Governors
had, was the restraining of the Germans, who having lived in all kind of
liberty, and without regard destroyed fair houses and gardens to sell the wood
and get money; now that every thing was consumed, had given themselves over to
all manner of villainy, so that they might but get any nourishment by it; and
many have reported, The German Soldiers in Paris having no other food, kill
little children to eat.
that they secretly killed all the children they could get into their hands, to
feed upon their flesh; and notwithstanding all this they began to mutiny, and
desire to disband, though both the Duke of Nemours and the Chevalier d' Aumale
did use all possible means to keep them together. The besieged finding
themselves in this straight, writ to the Duke of Mayenne (for a final
resolution) that if they were not relieved within ten days, it would be
impossible for them to hold out; and having done all that was possible, they
should be excused both before God and man, if they took care of their own
safety: and the Duchess of Mayenne wrote to her Husband to the same purpose,
conjuring him by his affection to their children, that he should not suffer
them to fall into the hands of so bitter an Enemy. Which Letters being reing
received by the Duke, and being in no less perplexity of mind than the
Parisians, The Duke of Mayenne to give hope to the Parisians, advances with his
Army as far as Meaux.
he united all his Forces together and advanced to Meaux, ten leagues distant
from Paris, and dispatched the Marquess Alessandro Malaspina to let the Duke of
Parma know, that if he made not haste with his Army, all their labor would be
lost, the besieged not being able to hold out any longer, and for assurance of
it, sent him the same Letters he had received. There were with the Duke of
Mayenne besides Quiroga's mutineers, Capizucchi's Tertia, and the Walloon Horse
the Duke of Parma had given him, six hundred Lanciers of the Duke of Lorain's,
commanded by the Count de Chaligny, Brother to the Queen Dowager of France, the
French Infantry under Colonel St. Paul, the Duke of Aumale with the Troop of
Picardy, the Marquess de Menelay, Monsieur de Balagny, Governor of Cambray,
and the Sieur de Rhosne, and de la Chastre, with their Regiments and
Attendents, which in all amounted to the number of Ten thousand Foot, and Two
thousand and four hundred Horse. With these Forces, though he advanced as far
as Meaux, to be ready upon any occasion that should be offered, and to put
courage in the besieged by being so near, yet he did not think them sufficient
to be able to relieve or victual Paris, because he knew the King, by the
addition of many supplies, had under his Colors Six and twenty thousand Foot,
and more than Seven thousand Horse, among which, Five thousand were Gentlemen,
who bearing Arms only for Honor, being well attended and gallantly mounted,
were esteemed by him, both for their number and quality, without comparison
superior; and therefore he dispatched Letters and Messengers every hour to the
Vice-Seneschal de Montelimar, who resided for him near the Duke of Parma, to
the end, that he might with all diligence solicit his coming, without which
he thought it impossible to relieve the besieged.

The Duke of Parma having called a Council of War upon the first of August,
told them the Order he had received from the Catholic King, The Duke of Parma
declares, that he had never been of opinion, that the King of Spain should send
his Army into France to serve the League.
to march with the whole Army into France, and said, That that resolution was
contrary to his opinion, alleging the Reasons for which he esteemed the
enterprise to be of great danger, and little advantage: But since it had
pleased the King their Master to command it so, as he was resolved in that
Expedition to employ all those abilities God had given him, so he prayed all
the rest to apply their endeavors, to the end, that the Offices committed to
their care, might be discharged to the praise of God, the Kings satisfaction,
and to their own honor: And there, having given every one his charge, he
commanded, that the Army already drawn down together, should be ready to march
by the fourth of that month. He writ to the Duke of Mayenne the certainty and
time of his coming, and gave the Parisians notice of the same, attesting to
them, That for the only purpose of relieving them, and for the maintenance of
Religion, the Catholic King neglecting his own Affairs, sparing neither blood
nor money, and without those securities of strong Towns for Magazines of Arms,
and places of Retreat upon the Confines, which are wont to be demanded and
granted, to the end, that every one might know his candor in proceeding to be
more lively, and more real, undertook that weighty enterprise; which
nevertheless he hoped, by the help of God, and the justice of the Cause, to
bring to an happy conclusion; The Duke of Parma moves with his Army from
Valenciennes to relieve Paris.
and with this Resolution, his Army moved upon the Fourth of August toward
Valenciennes. The Marquess de Ranti led the Van; in the Battle with the Duke,
were the Princes of Ascoli, Chasteau-bertrand and Chimay, the Count de
Barlemont, the Count of Arambergh, and many other Flemish, Italian, and Spanish
Lords. The Sieur de la Mothe, Governor of Graveling, commanded the Rear, in
which there were twenty pieces of Cannon, two Bridges to be made upon Boats,
and all those other warlike instruments, which are wont to be carried along in
Royal Armies. The Duke of Parma's Armies had ever been very well disciplined,
ready, and accustomed to hardship, punctual in obedience of commands, and no
ways given to pillage or plunder in a Friends Country: And now knowing he was
to enter into a Kingdom, where the name of a Spaniard was generally hated by
the people, and that he was no less to govern suspicious minds, ready to rise
upon every slight occasion, than to make War with a victorious Army, and a wary
complete Soldier, he was more careful than ever, and strove with all possible
diligence to keep his Soldiers from doing any injury, using any violence, or
giving any cause of complaint unto the French. He encamped always, as if the
Enemies Army had been close by him, kept all his men together from straggling,
and orderly in their quarters; he made careful discoveries, and marched without
confusion or tumult; The Duke of Parma's manner of conduct in his marching
through France.
he came into quarters betimes in the evening, and while they were disposed of,
and made defensible, he caused the greater part of the Army to stand to their
Arms; he ordered strong Convoys to attend the Victual, whereof he had made, and
did still make exceeding great provisions; and yielding the honor and
advantage in all things to the French, strove to gain the love of the Nation;
to which end, he having lived in Flanders among the Spaniards with retiredness
and gravity, equal to the humor of those with whom he conversed, now being
come into France, he laid aside the state of Ante-chambers, and the strict
keeping of doors, eat in public, kept a Table for the French Gentlemen, and
both in words and actions showed himself wonderful affable and familiar. And
because in that multitude of Officers of note that were about him, he resolved
only to trust himself, he would personally hear the relations of those parties
that had been abroad to discover and scowr the ways, himself would talk with
Spies, dispose the order of the Guards, and hearken to all things appertaining
to the discipline of his Army: for which purpose watching all the night, he
only gave those few hours to sleep, which past between the beating of the
Keveille, and the marching of his Army. The Duke of Parma's arrival at Meaux,
where he joins with the Duke of Mayenne.
With this diligence marching gently, not to tire out his men, he came to
Meaux, ten leagues from Paris, upon the three and twentieth of August; and
having, as he marched, met the Duke of Mayenne in the field, they joined their
Armies together in that very place.

There the Archbishop of Lions, and President Vetus arrived; who having newly
been with the King to introduce some overture of Agreement, and now with his
Safe Conduct (for at the drawing near of the Spanish Army, he had yielded
something from his former stiffness) were come to negotiate with the Duke of
Mayenne, by whom being brought into the Council, they related in what extremity
the Parisians were, and and that they could not hold out above four days
longer: whereupon they earnestly desired, if within that space they could not
be relieved, that an Agreement might be made, whereby the City might be freed
from the certainty of that danger wherein it was. The Duke of Parma, with
modest and grave expressions, made known that he was come by the Catholic
Kings command, with order only to relieve the City, and to provide against the
danger of Religion, and that he had no Commission to treat of any
Accommodation; nor did his Conscience dictate to him any thought of making an
Agreement with a Prince that was an Heretic, and an Enemy to the Church: but
that the Parisians having with infinite honor, An Accommodation is again
propounded; but the Duke of Parma saying he had only order from the King to
relieve Paris, and not to treat, the Deputies return.
and with an heroic example of Christian fortitude suffered so much, they
should endure yet the delay of a few days; for he hoped, by the help of God,
and the strength of that Army, that they should very easily be delivered; and
that therefore they should return to the City, and persuade them to that short
patience. The Deputies returned to the King, where they had left Cardinal
Gondy, and declared that in the Army there was no intention of lending an ear
to Peace, and that the Duke of Parma had dismissed them with assurance of a
speedy and infallible relief: whereupon, being likewise dismissed by the King,
the thoughts on both sides were turned wholly upon matters of War.

The King was in great perplexity of mind: for beside the diminution of his
Army, caused by diseases, whereof many had died (and among the rest the Abbot
Pietro del Been, The Abbot (...) Been die^.
a man of great ability in State Affairs) many various and different
resolutions represented themselves unto his thoughts. It seemed hard unto him
to rise without fruit from that siege, after so many labors and so many
dangers, and after having reduced the City to the (...) degrees of despair; and
therefore he inclined to a desire of leaving part of the Army to make good the
passes, and to advance with the other to meet the relief. On the other side, he
thought the Duke of Parma's strength to be exceeding great, and that it would
be requisite to use all his Forces to oppose and resist him; and therefore
durst not hazard to go against him with only a part of his Army, which he
believed not able to withstand him. Thus doubtful and uncertain in his mind, he
called a Council of all his Commanders, in which the principal were the Duke of
Montpensier, the Duke of Nevers, the Mareschals of Aumont and Biron, the Baron
his son, Philibert de la Guiche, the Sieurs de Lavardin, Guitry, and de la
Noue, the Viscount of Turenne, the Duke de la Tremouille, and Monsieur de
Chastillon; who not having their minds possessed with passion, concurred all
in the same opinion, that to divide the Army was a pernicious counsel; for that
way the siege would neither be maintained, nor the relief hindered: That this
was not the first siege, which after many experiments had been quitted by
famous soldiers; and that if they could but effect the design, either of
defeating the Duke of Parma, or making him return, the provisions which the
Parisians could get in the mean time from places near adjacent, would be so
inconsiderable, that at their return the City would in a few days be brought
to the same necessity: Which, after it was determined in the Council, the King
having given such Orders as were fitting, Upon the 30 of August the King rises
from the siege of Paris* and marches to Chelles to hinder the relief.
that they might be ready time enough to oppose the Enemy, raised the siege
upon the thirtieth of August, and marched with his whole Army to quarter in
Chelles, a Town three leagues from Paris, and but four from the Army of the
League. Chelles is a spacious Bourg, seated in a Fenny Plain, and overflowed
with the water of a little Rivulet, which stands in pools round about it: It
has on both sides a large Campaign, and before it two hills, on whose ascent
is the great highway that leads straight from Meaux to Paris. Here the Army
(wherein were Seven thousand Horse, The manner how the Kings Army was disposed
at Chelles.
and between eighteen and twenty thousand Foot) was disposed in such manner,
that the Light Horse backed by the Foot of the Vanguard, possessed the bottoms
of the hills, and the passage of the highway: the body of the Main Battle lay
under cover in the houses of the Bourg; and the Cavalry of the Rereguard,
sheltering the back of the Army, lay at the entry of the Plain that leads
toward Paris. On the right hand of the Bourg the Swisses were quartered, and
the Sieur de Chastillon, with four French Regiments; and on the left, the
Germans with five Regiments of Firelocks, and with the Sieur de Lavardin: and
on both sides were placed the Artillery.

The Kings Army was hardly quartered, when upon the steep of the hills the
Italian and Bourguinion Horse of the League appeared, The Dukes of Mayenne and
Parma, while their Horse skirmish, go to discover the situation and strength of
the Army.
who began to skirmish at the front of the Quarters; and in the mean time the
Dukes of Parma and Mayenne, with few in company, riding every where about,
discovered the strength and disposition of the Army distinctly; which seeming
to them admirably well ordered, they retired to their own Quarter, which was in
the bottoms beyond the Hills, and were careful to fortify it with a broad
Trench and a high Brest-work, which flanked round about with Bulwarks and
Half-moons, upon which the Artillery were planted, made their Camp secure from
the fury of any sudden assault whatsoever. While the two Armies lie still
observing one another, the Parisians make some provision of Victual.
The Armies lay still on this manner for the space of four days: for the Duke
of Parma knowing that the Parisians going out of the City, had both from the
places near adjacent, and by those things that had been left by the Army,
furnished themselves with sufficient provisions for some few days, did not
hasten very much, nor would he precipitate his counsels: and the King, though
desirous to fight, and full of hopes of the Victory, thought it an extreme
rashness to assault an enemy stronger than himself in his own Quarters. In the
mean time they skirmished very often, proved the valor of all the several
Nations, and tried all (...) of Arms; the Horse often charging Foot, and the
Cuirassiers sometimes Light-ho^^e and Carabines, sometimes Lanciers, wherewith
the Army of the League abounded very much: in which time the King, anxious of
that delay, and fearful lest the late sufferings, and want of money should make
his men disband, or at least that his Army should decrease, it being full of
dangerous diseases, resolved to try the courage of the enemies, by sending a
Trumpet to let the D. of Mayenne know, That at last the time was come of
settling the differences, and putting an end to the miseries of the War, and
that therefore rising forth of his den, The King sends a Trumpet to the D. of
Mayenne, challenging him to Battle. The Duke of Mayenne sends him to the D. of
Parma, who returns a notable answer to the King.
where he lay rather like a Fox than a Lion, he should bring his Army into the
open field, where the valor and courage of men might presently decide the
future Victory. The Duke of Mayenne sent the Trumpet to the Duke of Parma as
superior: who smiling answered, That he knew very well what was fit for him to
do, for the attaining of his own ends, and was no^ come so far to take Counsel
from his enemy: That he saw clearly enough, that his way of proceeding
displeased the King; but that if he were so great a Soldier as same reported
him, he should show his skill in forcing him to a Battle against his will; for
he would never put that willingly into the arbitrament of Fortune, which he had
already safe in his own hands. But by this time the affairs of Paris began to
press: for that little being consumed which they had been able to catch, the
City returned to its former exigency; and it was necessary to open the passes,
to the end that Victuals might go in: wherefore the Duke of Parma, having in
these days tried the King's Soldiers, discovered the Country exactly, and
maturely deliberated what he should do, gave out, that he would fight in the
open field; and having drawn up his Army in Battalia upon the fifth of
September in the morning, he advanced very early toward the enemy. In the Van
he placed two great Squadrons of Lances, and all the Light Horse of the Army,
and gave the Command of them to the Marquess de Ranty, giving him order, that
as soon as he was out of the woody place, which was upon the ascent of the
Hills, and was come to the top, where the Plain enlarged it self, he should
cover and take up the space of the hills as much as possibly he could, by
spreading his Lanciers out at length, commanded by the Prince of Chimay and
Georgio Basta, and by making two great wings of the Light Horse, and then
marching toward the Enemy, should begin to descend, but very softly, to go into
the open field, making many stands, and staying to expect his Orders. To the
Duke of Mayenne he gave the charge of the Battle, in which he put all the
strength of the Italian and Spanish Foot, together with twenty pieces of
Cannon; and the Rere was led by the Sieur de la Mothe, with the Bourguignon
Lances, and the Walloon Infantry. In the Flank of the Battle, but separated on
the right and left hand, he put the Sieur de la Chastre, and Colonel St Paul
with the French Horse and Foot; and he himself remained free to ride every
where up and down, having with him Count Alessandro Sforza, Nicolo Cesis, and
Appio Conti, with only One hundred Horse.

As soon as the Army of the League was seen to march resolutely toward the
Enemy along the great Highway, it was the general opinion of both sides, that
they should certainly fight that day; and the King full of courage, his eyes
sparkling for very joy, having, with admirable celerity and exact diligence,
drawn up his Army, in the same manner as it lay quartered before, waited with a
longing desire, till the Enemy coming down into the open field, should give him
opportunity to fight with equal advantage. The Kings Squadrons were already all
in order, with the Artillery placed ready to fire, The Duke of Parma draws his
Army into Battalia, marches toward the Enemy, makes show as if he would give
Battle; then running suddenly, goes to Lagny, and deceives the King, who
thinking to fight, had disposed his Army in a readiness.
and the Marquess de Ranty stretching forth his Body of Lances as far as ever
he could, already leaving the Hill, descended but very gently toward the Plain;
when the Duke of Parma, seeing all the Field covered with his Vanguard, and
that the Kings Army stood intently expecting him with a thought to fight, set
spurs to his horse, and galloped up to the head of the Battle, where having
staid the Duke of Mayenne, who was still marching toward the Enemy, he made him
turn suddenly toward Lagny, which stands upon the left hand; and having
changed his order, so that the Battle became the Van, and the Rere the Battle,
he marched speedily to possess the Suburbs of that Town. Lagny is seated upon
the River Marne, in such manner, that the Suburbs, though but of a few houses,
stand upon the Bank on the right side, on which both the Armies were, and the
Town is built upon the left; the passage between is by a large Bridge over the
River, which being the principal that brings Victual to Paris, was also one of
the chief Passes that was to be opened. Monsieur de la Fin was in Lagny with
Fifteen Colors of French Foot, who (contrary to his expectation) seeing the
whole Army of the League turned against him, and not (...) he could defend the
Suburbs, which stood beyond the River, on that side the ^^emy was coming,
having broken and thrown down the Bridge, to the end they might not so easily
pass over, he retired with his men to defend the circuit of the Town, which
before they could assault, it was necessary to pass the River. The Duke of
Parma having taken and possessed the Suburbs without resistance, presently
quartered the French Infantry there, and about half a mile from them he
encamped in the field of Pompone with the rest of the Army, endeavoring, with
infinite diligence, and with Trenches, Brest-works, Redoubts, and Half moons,
to secure the Camp, and to hinder and obstruct the passages of all the Country
round about.

The Marquess de Ranty, after he had with the Vanguard, held the Kings Army for
many hours in suspense, with a hope of fighting, toward the evening began
likewise to march toward Lagny, leaving the King very doubtful what the Enemies
design should be; for he thought it necessary for them to pass the River, if
they would take that Town, which he believed they could not do, without great
danger of losing at least their Rere-guard, if nothing else; and it seemed to
him much more difficult to believe, that the Duke of Parma would assault any
place before his face; but most difficult of all, that he would march toward
Paris on that side, leaving the pass of Lagny behind him, because so he should
have shut himself up in the middle, and depriving himself of the concourse of
provisions, would have besieged his own Army himself; wherefore being doubtful
in his mind, and not knowing what to resolve on, to try what the enemies intent
was, he sent forth the Baron de Biron, the Grand Prior, and Monsieur de la
Noue, to follow the Marquess de Ranty, and to begin as hot a skirmish as they
could, to take some conjecture of the designs and proceedings of the Enemy; but
the Carabines (who were got into the woody places that were there round about)
having received the encounter very valiantly, and Georgio Basta advancing with
Four hundred Lances to second them, the Skirmish was various till night, which
parted them, so that without further action they retired both to their own
Quarters. The Duke still busy in taking and fortifying all the Posts that were
between both the Armies, to defend himself if he should be assaulted in the
Rere, caused the Artillery to be planted against Lagny that very night, though
with the River between, and the next morning by break of day began to batter
the Wall with eleven pieces of Cannon. La Fin at first despised the Dukes
Battery, seeing the River between them, and that though a breach should be
made, they could yet by no means come to assault it, by reason of the River;
but he found himself much deceived, when he saw that the Duke having caused a
Bridge of Boats to be cast over it two Leagues above, had commanded
Capizucchi's Tertia of Italians to pass over, with Berlotte's Tertia of
Walloons, and Georgio Basta's Eight hundred Horse, that they might be ready
when it should be time to storm the Wall; which wealt, and not lined with
Earth, was like, within a few hours, to afford sufficient passage for the
assault.

In the interim, the King at last suspecting what the Enemy was about to do
(but at the time when the Quarter of the League was already well enough
fortified, and all the passage stopped up with Corps-de-Garde, which the Duke of
Parma had placed on every side) sent forth diverse Troops, and several ways to
relieve the In Lagny.
besieged, which all entered without resistance; for the Duke cared not, nor
valued that Relief, so long as the whole Army marched not: But the King could
take no way that was not most difficult and dangerous; for if he moved not,
Lagny was certainly lost, and the passage was open to victual the City on that
side; and if moving to relieve it, he should pass the River, the Duke leaving
Lagny, would march with the victual he had brought, the straight way to Paris;
for which cause, he staying, as it were, unmovable, where he was, not being
able to take any resolution, consulted nevertheless what was best to be done.
The Marshall de Biron was of opinion, that following the same way by which the
Marquess de Ranty was retired, and forcing two Corps-de-Garde that were on that
side, he should assault the Dukes Camp on the left hand toward Meaux, where it
was less fortified than in the other places. Monsieur de la Noue was of
opinion, that it was better to pass the River, and placing themselves behind
Lagny, to reinforce and refresh the Garrison every moment, hoping, that being
so relieved, it might hold out against the violence of the Enemy. To both these
the King answered, That either way the Duke had free passage left him to Paris;
for, by turning toward Meaux, the way by Chelles was left open, and, by
passing the River the same way, would be neither more nor less free to him.

In the mean time, the Duke of Parma being resolved not to lose a minute, and
assured of the solidness of his design, caused a furious assault to be given to
the Walls of Lagny, though the breach was not very wide; where, while they are
fighting stoutly on both sides, the King, drawn by anger, to see all his past
toils and labors lost, could not contain hi mself from advancing that way with
his whole Army in Battalia, but not with any settled resolution what to do. The
Duke of Parma on the other side, not stirring out of the compass of his Works,
put his Army likewise in order within the circuit of his Camp, facing toward
the Enemy, and leaving the appointed Forces without impediment to prosecute the
assault, which having at first been happily repulsed by those within, a
disorder gave the victory to the enemies: For being about to change and relieve
those that had endured the assault, they did it not file by file, as the good
rule of defense directs; but either for haste, or want of experience, would
needs do it all at once, from whence tumult and confusion arising, the
assailants not losing the opportunity, redoubled the assault with so much
readiness, that the defendants being beaten off, who before were half
disordered by themselves, they entered the Castle, and took la Fin prisoner; and
the King, to the greater increase of his affliction, was only a spectator of
the slaughter of his men, who being encompassed by the Walloons and Italians
(who had given the assault with great emulation of each other) were, The Duke
of Parma takes Lagny before the face of the Kings Army, whereby the passage of
the River Marne b^^ng freed upon the sixth of September, great store of victual
enters Paris.
without mercy, put to the Sword. Wherefore, there being no more possibility of
doing any thing about Lagny, neither to defend it, nor recover it, he was
constrained, full of most bitter grief, and without any fruit at all, to return
the same Evening to his old Quarters. Lagny being taken, and the passage of the
River opened, the Victual already gathered together for that purpose, was
carried from the far side o^ the River abundantly into Paris, the City opening
their Gates with joy, and welcome to their deliverers, whereas six days before
they thought they should have been forced with utter ruin and desolation, to
have set them open to the Enemy. But the King seeing Lagny taken before his own
eyes, and the hunger of the Parisians relieved by that means, resolved to
withdraw from the enemy, because it was certain that the Duke of Parma, having
effected his design, would not fight any more of his own accord; and, to force
him in his quarters, strongly entrenched, and abounding with all manner of
provisions, was not a thing to be thought on; whereas, on the other side, his
Army, consumed by the continual toil and duty of the whole Summer, and
therefore full of grievous diseases which increased daily, began also to suffer
for want of Victuals, the whole Country behind him being eaten up; and the
impatiency of the Nobility, the want of money, the nature of the French, who
having lost the hope of taking Paris, and of coming to a Battle with the Enemy,
could no longer endure the sufferings and hardship of Arms, persuaded him to
that willingly, which within a few hours, not days, he would have been
necessitated to do by force: Whereupon, the next day, which was the seventh of
September, having put his Army in Battalia, he stood firm a while defying the
enemy to Battle, The King withdraws his Army from the enemy and marches toward
St. Denis.
and none appearing, no not so much as to skirmish, but the Field remaining
free, he marched away, retiring to the Walls of St. Denis.

But being exceedingly troubled and afflicted for the unprosperous success of
his affairs, and desirous to do something that might recover the spirit and
credit of his Arms, it came in his mind to give an unexpected Scalado that
night to the City of Paris it self, attempting to get that suddenly by force,
which he had not been able to attain by so long a siege, and by so great an
extremity of famine: nor was it without much reason that he fell into this
thought: for the strictness of the siege being over, many of the Citizens, not
well assured of the event, had taken refuge in the Country; and those that
remained in the City surfeiting in their great weakness with excess of meat,
which their hunger made them greedily devour, were so faint and sickly, that
for the most part they lay unfit for service: besides, many of the Soldiers
were gone forth to convoy the Victuals which were brought from Chartres and
other places, and to guard them from the King's Garrisons which were near on
every side: and, which imported most of all, it was credible that the
Neighborhood of so great an Army of Friends, which they knew waited close upon
the King's, would make men already tired out, and spent with hard duty and
suffering, more negligent in their wonted Guards and fitting Watches to keep
and make good so great a circuit of ground. Now the King being resolved to
attempt that enterprise, gave order that all should meet as at a general
Rendezvous in the Plain of Bondy, not far from the City; and having put the
Scaling-ladders together, which for that use were carried with the Army, he
took his way toward Paris The Italian says, Su l^ due ^ore della no^^^; but
their account of hours beginning from Sunset, and so to 24, which end at
Sunset again, it is plain the Author meant 2 hours within night, which,
according to the time of Sunset there in that season of the year, must needs
be before Nine a Clock; for after 2 they could not have had time enough before
daylight to march so far, and to make a several attempts to scale the City.
between eight and nine of the Clock at night. The Marshall d' Aumont led a
fleeing squadron with its Ladders; the Baron de Biron led such another; and a
third, in the same order, was brought up by the Sieur de Lavardin. The King
followed with all the Princes and Commanders, and with the Cavalry drawn up
ready to fight; and having passed the Seine, went toward that part of the City,
which, as being furthest from danger, they thought would be least guarded. The
Scaling-ladders were presented to the gates and walls of St. Germain by the
Marshall d' Aumont; at St. Michel by Biron; and by Lavadin, between St. Jacques
and St. Marceau. But they found the defendants ready and vigilant every where:
for the Duke of Nemours, who caused the ways to be diligently scowred, had had
an inckling of their drawing together at Bondy, and of their marching toward
Paris, and therefore had carefully disposed and visited the Guards in every
place: whereupon, the foundation of the surprise failing, which was negligence,
and the small Guards of the Citizens; the Commanders, The King marches toward
St. Denis; but in the midst of the night gives a scalado to the walls of Paris:
yet the vigilance of the Duke of Nemours makes it ineffectual. The Kings
soldiers return at break of day to scale the walls again, ^ ladders are set up:
but being discovered, they are repulsed, with the death of the first that went
up.
without much obstinacy, brought off their Ladders, and returned to the place
where the King with the Cavalry ^arried for them; who facing about with an
easy pace, drew off the same way he came: but not being able to withhold
himself from trying to effect something, and thinking that the Defendants,
having beaten off his men, would perchance, after that nights watch, be more
negligent and secure in the morning, having caused his Cavalry to make an halt,
he turned about again to lead up the three fleeing Squadrons into the Trenches
of the Gate and Curtine of St. Merceau, being resolved there to make his last
attempt: nor was his opinion altogether deceitful: for the Townsmen already
wearied with long watching, were retired to sleep; by which means two Ladders
were set up with great silence, so that none either heard the noise, or stirred
to hinder them; but a Jesuit who stood sentinel without the Corpse de Guard,
which was kept by those Fathers, and Nicholas Nivelle a Bookseller, who was
likewise upon the Gate, though farther off, hearing the noise, gave the Alarm,
and running presently to that place with the Halberds they had in their hands,
overturned one of the Ladders, which being too long, reached above the Wall,
and made so good resistance at the head of the other, that the Sieur de
Cremonville and Parabiere's Lieutenant being killed, who were near getting upon
the Brest-work, gave time for the coming of help: for at the noise of Arm, arm,
and the cry of the Sentinels, the Guards who were asleep drew forth armed, and
a great number of Citizens running from all parts* before whom the Duke of
Nemours was come, who, with singular diligence had rode round the Walls all
that night: wherefore, the second attempt proving also vain, the King retiring
with all his Forces when it was broad day, marched off to the Walls of S^ Denis.

Many were of opinion, that in this occasion the King failed much in point of
art and Military discipline: for if, Errors imputed to the King and his Army.
leaving the principal post near Paris well guarded with part of his Army, he
had advanced with the rest as far as Claye, a much more fenny, and a much more
defensible place than ^helle^, and had there fo^tified and entrenched himself,
keeping that place diligently, he might perchance have held the Duke of Parma's
Army so long in play, which could pass no other way to Paris, that the City
being reduced to extreme necessity, would have been forced to yield, since the
D. of Parma would not have been able to have forced that passage, kept by such
a strength, if it had been fitly entrenched and fortified* Nor could he have
had passage to have got to Lagny, if the King had been encamped on that way.
Many others considered, that the King being resolved to fight, and being risen
from Paris with that intent, he ought in the first encounter to have fallen
boldly upon the Duke of Parma, before he had time to entrench himself: for
though the time from night to morning was but short, yet the Duke's soldiers,
accustomed to labor, wrought with so much order and industry, that in less
than Twenty four hours they finished their Trenches; wherein the Gommanders and
Gentlemen working no less than the common soldiers, the Duke himself assisted
likewise, making the Engineers draw forth, and divide the work in his presence.
Some others taxed the impatiency of the King's Army, which had seen so great
constancy in the common Tradesmen, and the very women that were shut up in
Paris, that after so many months of desperate hunger, they held out stoutly
nevertheless to the uttermost; and yet that so many Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen, whereof that Army was composed, had not had the courage to endure,
no not so much as the suspicion of hunge^, but after a short stay, and in a
manner no opposition, except only the show of a desire to fight, left the field
free, and the honor of the Victory to the enemy: whereupon on the one side,
the D. of Parma's art and discipline was praised to admiration; and on the
other, the French humors and impatiency was much blamed, having lightly
believed that a Soldier of so great fame, would rashly put that into the hand
of Fortune, which might securely be obtained by solid counsel, and upon this
belief had neglected those things which the commodiousness of their ground
afforded.

Excuses in favor of the King.
Others excused the King, and said (perhaps with as good reason) that the
leaving of weak Guards about Paris, would have been but a giving of them up to
be cut in pieces by the Citizens and Soldiers, who would have sallied
desperately out of the City in great abundance; and that to assault the Duke's
Army, much superior in number, so without consideration at their first coming,
would have been a rash and ruinous advice: for though he were not absolutely
fortified, yet was he already lodged; and that they should not have had to do
with a tumultuary inexpert body of men, gathered together in haste, which might
have been frighted with an assault, or disordered, by being put into a
confusion, but with an old Army, led by Commanders of exceeding great valor
and experience, who would have known how to make use of their own advantage,
and the temerity of the assailants. They likewise excused their retiring so
soon and ascribed it not to the impatiency of the French humor but to a wise
well grounded counsel, since Armies are not to be adventured, nor put to endure
certain hardship, unless a benefit equal to their suffering and danger might
result from them: but the nearness of the King's Army could no ways
incommodate the D. of Parma, who was entrenched in his Quarters, and had the
passage of the River open behind him, nor could it hinder the carriage of
Victuals into Paris; wherefore, that it was prudently done to withdraw the
Nobility from the danger of diseases, which increased very fast, and from other
sufferings, being sure of hunger, and to reserve it for a better use, and a
fitter occasion

The King being come to St. Denis without money or victor^, separates his Army,
which was oppressed with many diseases.
However it was, the King, being come to St. Denis, seeing the diseases
increase, and not having money either in public, or particular to maintain his
Army, resolved to separate his Camp, and providing for the security of the
Provinces, only to keep a flying Army near himself, wherewith he might hinder
the D. of Parma from making any greater progress. He therefore sent the P. of
Conty into Tourain, the D. of Montpensier into Normandy, the D. of Longueville
into Picardy, the D. of Nevers into Champagne, the Marshall d' Aumont into
Bourgongne, he left Monsieur de la Noue in Brie, and he himself with the
Marshall and Baron de Biron (having furnished and strengthened those Garrisons
he held near about Paris) marched with a Body of men more expert then numerous,
into the most rich and fertile places that are along the River Oyse, to refresh
his Soldiers after so many sufferings: And being come to Clermont (a Town
which, The King assaults and batters (...) so violently, that upon the third
day he takes and sacks it.
because it was reasonably well garisoned, had the boldness to shut its Gates
against him) he fell to batter it with so much violence, that the Walls being
beaten down, it was taken the third day, and sacked with a very great
slaughter; and the next day after, the Castle yielded it self to him without
resistance; whereupon, remaining Master of the whole Country round about (for
Senlis and Compeigne were already at his devo^^on) he had convenience to
quarter at large, and refresh the Army he had with him; at which time, the
Sieurs de la Guiche and Sippierre, having left the Camp to return to their own
houses with a good number of Horse, met with the Viscount de Tavannes, and the
Sieur de Falandre, who were conveying victual from Dreux to Paris, and without
having time to discover one another, they charged at the first encounter, with
exceeding great valor on both sides; but after a sharp fight, for two hours,
the Kings party had the better; Tavannes and Falandre leaving their victual and
carriages* saved themselves in the Town by flight.

The City of Troyes about that time was in great danger of being surprised by
Monsieur de Tinteville, C^aude Prince of Iainville defends Troyes, and beats
back Monsieur de Tinteville, who had like to have surprised it by intelligence,
with some of the Citizens.
the Kings Lieutenant in Champagne; for he having held a Treaty with some of
the Citizens, it succeeded so fortunately, that being entered the Town, he was
already come up to the Marketplace, when Claude de Lorain, Prince of Iainville
(Son to the late D. of Guise, a youth, in valor and courage, not unlike his
Father) who was then in the Town, having drawn his men together, charged the
assailants with so much gallantry, that being repulsed with a very great
slaughter, they had much ado to save themselves.

In the mean time the D. of Parma, after the dissolution of the Kings Army,
having taken St. Maur, and the Bridge of Charanton, minded the facilitating of
the passage of victuals to Paris; The Duke of Parma, against his own will, lays
siege to Corbeil.
and being spur^ed on by the frequent entreaties of the D. of Mayenne and the
Parisians, upon the 22 of September, laid siege to Corbeil, to free the passage
of the River Seins on that side also. The Duke had consented unwillingly to put
himself upon that enterprise; for Corbeil was sufficiently manned and
fortified: Wherefore, though the Town was little, and of small account, he saw
it was nevertheless ready to hold out the siege, so that the Duke having but
few Cannon to batter the Walls; and, which imported more, small store of powder
and bullet, doubted that to the lessening of his own reputation, and the credit
of his Army, it would prove very difficult for him to take it. Moreover, he
feared lest the Discipline of his Army (till then constantly observed) should
be broken: For the French of the League, not making those provisions of victual
which he with wonderful order was wont to make, to keep plenty still in his
Camp; but on the contrary, the provisions of the Army often failing through
their negligence, he was forced to suffer his Soldiers to run about the
Country, and his Troopers scattered themselves, plundering far abroad, a thing
which beyond measure troubling his mind, (averse from oppressing or destroying
a Friends Country, and from suffering his men to pill^ge licentiously) now made
him take the greater thought about this siege, wherein he saw (if it should
last many days) those faults, disorders, and necessities, would be multiplied.
Nor did the event deceive his expectation; for having laid siege to Corbeil,
defended by Rigaut the Governor, it resisted so constantly, that for want of
Victuals the Spaniards and Italians, and much more the Walloons, were fain to
spoil all the Country, sacking even those places which the King in the long
siege of Paris had left untouched: The French of the League begin to hate the
Duke of Parma's Soldiers.
Whereupon the French of the League, though the fault proceeded from
themselves, murmured nevertheless against the Dukes Soldiers, and hated them
no less than formerly they hated and murmured against the Hugonots. But the
siege of Corbeil also, through many defects proceeded slowly, not being
furnished with those things that are necessary for the taking of strong places;
and particularly, there being such small store of great shot, that it was
necessary to send for some, though but a few, from Orleans and Pontoyse; The
Duke of Parma takes Corbeil: Rigaut the Governor is slain, with most of the
defendents, and the place sac^ed.
and yet the Duke endeavoring with industry to supply those so important
wants, renewed the Battery in so many several places, and with so many
experiments, that upon the 16 of October, after they had fought four hours
together, with wonderful obstinacy, the Spaniards, Italians, and Walloons,
entered pelmel into the Town; Rigaut with the greater part of the defendents
being slain, la Grange taken prisoner, and the Town sacked with infinite
violence.

In the mean time, the King was moved from Clermont with Eight hundred Horse,
to try if he could put some relief into Corbeil; but having heard it was lost,
in his return back he fell upon a Quarter of two Troops of Light Horse, which
lay apart from the rest, and having defeated them in a moment, and taken the
Captains, he put most of the Soldiers to the Sword.

Corbeil being taken, the disgusts between the Duke of Parma, and the French
Heads of the League, increased; for the Duke thought it convenient to put a
Garrison of Walloons or Italians into it, which might be sufficient to keep what
he had gotten; and the Duke of Mayenne and the Parisians grew jealous that the
Spaniards, under show of helping them, would make themselves Masters of that
place, and many others, and usurp for themselves whatsoever acquisitions they
should make. Wherefore the Duke of Parma having found what the French
suspected, and being again returned to his first designs of spinning the War
out in length, to consume the Forces, and tame the humor of both parties, and
knowing that men's minds were not yet disposed to receive that form which the
Catholic Kings affairs required, he resolved to depart, and go back again into
Flanders, where there was exceeding great need of him and his Army. Many other
circumstances persuaded him to the same resolution; the wasting of his Forces,
which by reason of diseases diminished every moment, want of money, and
scarceness of provisions, which were causes that he could not maintain the
Discipline of his Army; the unfitness of the season, which hindered him from
making any further progress; whereupon he doubted, that by lying still, his
reputation would decrease, and the valor of his Soldiers degenerate; the
necessary redoubled instances which from all parts were insatiably made unto
him for moneys; every one having persuaded himself, that he to satisfy the
covetousness of them all, had brought Mountains of Gold along with him; and
finally, the suspicions of many, who already did rather murmur, than give him
thanks for the relief he had given them in so great necessity, and in so
evident danger. For these causes, having put Corbeil into the hands of the Duke
of Mayenne, and having left Lagny entire, which before he had determined to
dismantle, he gave the Duke and the Parisians to understand, that the necessity
of the affairs of Flanders called him back, and that having obeyed the
Catholic Kings command in raising the siege of Paris, and opening the passages
that were convenient for victuals, he ought not to stay longer in so contrary a
season, and so unfit for action, but return to take order for his own affairs,
which to relieve his Friends, had been left in danger and confusion.

This resolution did much trouble those of the League; who having conceived
hope that the Spanish Army should not forsake them till the enterprise were
fully perfected, and that the Duke of Parma with his Men, and the Catholic
Kings money, should totally assist their party, did now see all those designs
fall in one instant, and their party remain destitute of those necessary
supplies of men and money. Wherefore, both the Duke of Mayenne in person, and
the Deputies of Paris, and Monsignor Sega, Bishop of Piacenza, (whom the
Cardinal-Legat, departing suddenly by reason of the Popes death, The death of
Si^tus Quintus
had substituted Vice-Legat) urged the Duke of Parma with earnest reiterated
entreaties and considerations, to change that resolution: And when they saw
words prevailed not, The Duke of Parma, though earnestly entreated to stay in
France, prepares nevertheless for his departure.
and that the Duke was still setting his Army in order to depart, the Duke of
Mayenne, by the means of Monsieur de Villeroy, began a new Treaty of
Accommodation with the King, to work a jealousy in the Spaniards, and make
them believe, that if their Forces were once gone, the Peace would immediately
be concluded, and by consequence, that all the expenses and pains they had
already undergone would be utterly lost: But neither did this move the Duke of
Parma from his determination, knowing the Duke of Mayenne would not easily
bring his mind to lay aside his present hopes, and to submit himself to the
power of his Enemies; and that though he should do so, the business consisted
not in him alone, but it was necessary that so many others, who were far off,
divided, and drawn by different interests, must consent unto it: That before
they could conclude any thing, he might have leisure to return, and undo
whatsoever should be agreed upon in the mean time. But le^t the affairs of the
League should grow desperate, he promised them, as soon as he came to
Brusselles, to pay down two hundred and thirty thousand Ducats, for the payment
of the Foreign Forces, and to leave a convenient number of Horse and Foot under
the Duke of Mayenne's command, to uphold and continue the War. But that sum of
money seemed very small to those who had fancied to themselves that all the
Treasures of the Indies should be poured down upon them: and the men he left
were indeed sufficient to maintain the War, but not to make an end of it:
Whereupon every one (but especially the Parisians, Urban the VII. created Pope
after Sixtus V. he lives but twelve days, and is succeeded by Gregory XIV. a
Milanese.
who had suffered so much before the coming, and had conceived so great hopes
after the arrival of the Spanish Army) was reduced into wonderful great
perplexity of mind, which was increased by the departure of Cardinal Gaetano,
and because they knew not what might be expected from the new Pope Urban the
Seventh, and after him (who lived but twelve days) from Gregory the Fourteenth,
who succeeded him in the Apostolic Chair.

But the Duke, firm in his resolution, after twenty days time which he had
given the Army to refresh it self, marched toward Champagne, to hold the Enemy
in doubt which way he would bend his course, and by that means to keep his
passage free from Ambus^adoes. The ordering of the Spanish Army in their return
into Flanders.
He divided his Army into four parts, the Vanguard led by the Marquess of
Ranty; the first Battalion by the Sieur de la Mothe, the second Battalion he
commanded himself, and the Reerguard was led by Georgio Basti. All the several
Divisions marched always drawn up in Battalia, and with their Carriages of
Baggage on each side, which shut them up, and enclosed them like a Trench, and
were so near, that they might help one another mutually in a short time.
Provisions of Victual were made; and marching through fertile plentiful
Countries, they were not necessitated to enlarge themselves; except the
Light Horse, who scowred the Neighboring Ways, to discover the Country:
neither did they go far off; for the Army being always ready, and disposed to
fight, feared not to be caught, and assaulted unaware.

But he was scarcely gone, drawing toward Chastean-Thierry in Champagne, when
the Baron de Guiry, who was at Melun, assaulted and took Corbeil, which the
Parisians had negligently and weakly Garrisoned, The Baron de Guiry recovers
Corb^il and Lagny, which had been taken by the Duke of Parma
and with the same fortune returned, and recovered Lagny, which, contrary to
the Duke of Parma's advice, had not been slighted: at which the Parisians, much
moved and troubled, were exceeding earnest with the Vice-Legat S^g^ to procure
the stay of the Spanish Army, until such time as those places, so necessary for
the b^inging in of provisions, were recovered. The Vice-Legat dispatched the
Pronotary Cara^^i^^ to the Duke, to present unto him the earnest desires and
the necessity of the City of Paris: and the Duke of Mayenne, who was in the
Army, labored with all possible efficacy to persuade him to stay: But the Duke
of Parma excusing himself, That his Army was much diminished by sickness, That
the season was so contrary, nothing could be done, and that the Low Countries
solicited his presence, continued on his march, having some hope to obtain
Chasteau-Thierry by a Treaty, which he held with Viscount Pinart Governor of
that Town.

But the King, who was departed from Compeigne, accompanied by the Baron de
Byron and the Duke of Longueville, with a select number of men, followed the
track of the Spanish Army, to hinder it from getting those places that held of
his party, and to watch some opportunity of doing it some mischief: and having
had some suspicion of the Treaty, he caused the Sieur de la Noue, with three
hundred Horses, and six hundred Foot, to enter into Chasteau-Thierry; by which
means, the Duke of Parma, deprived of that hope, bending on the left hand, took
the straight way to return into Flanders. The King followed, and marching
speedily, was sometimes before him, sometimes quartered besides him, sometimes
pressed him in the Rere; and by giving frequent Alarms, and bold skirmishes,
did both day and night molest and surround the Army. The Duke of Parma
proceeded with no less order and circumspection; and keeping all parts of his
Army under the same discipline, was quick and ready to turn which way soever
the enemy should press or show himself. But having marched on this manner from
the thirteenth to the five and twentieth of November, the King, desirous to see
the effect of so much diligence, and of so many labors, having drawn the
Cavalry into five Bodies, advanced upon the same way by which the Army of the
League was to pass, making show that he would charge them as they marched. The
Carabines, who were ready for all assaults, received the skirmish very
fiercely; and coming forth of the Barricadoes of their Carriages, wheeling,
giving fire, and falling in again, did no small harm to the King's Cavalry:
wherefore the Baron de Biron, thinking to rout them, and ease himself of that
trouble, charged up more boldly then considerately, with Fourscore Cuirassiers,
hoping to chase them back and disorder them: but the Carabines giving way,
according to their custom, to retire behind the Squadrons of the Army, the
Baron advanced so far in pursuit of them, and was so deeply engaged between two
Squadrons of Lances of the Vanguard, that his Horse being killed under him, he
was in manifest danger to be taken prisoner; The Spanish Army marching toward
Flanders, and the Kings Army following, they skirmish many days; but upon the
25 of November, the King, making show that he would fight, the Baron de Biron
engages himself so far, that being relieved by his Friends, he had much ado to
escape with help of night.
which being perceived by Count de Tillieres, who was on the right hand with a
body of Cuirassiers, and by the Sieur d' Humieres, who was on the left hand
with Ninety Horse, they advanced no less courageously than he, to disingage
him: but being charged by the whole Cavalry of the Vanguard, and the other
Battalions coming one after another, who knowing, by the rattling of the shot,
that the skirmish was begun, had hastened their march, they were fain (leaving
the field) to retire, fleeing full speed, with evident hazard of being all cut
off, if the King himself, and the Duke of Longueville, with the other two
Squadrons, had not advanced to make the retreat; wherein having disengaged
Biron, and with much ado set him again on horseback, who at the foot of a Bank,
with two companions, had defended himself a great while against the Enemy: they
were followed by them as far as a Village called Longueval, where night coming
on, put an end to the fight, and gave the King convenient opportunity to
retire. He quartered with all his Forces at Pont-Arsy, where they stood all
night in Arms; nor did the enemy rest more quietly: for the Kings celerity and
courage kept all their Quarters in great jealousy; and so much the rather,
because the rout of the two squadrons had been with more terror and danger than
loss, there being not above five men slain, and only twenty wounded. The next
day the D. of Nevers joined with the King with the Forces of Champagne, and
likewise the Sieurs de Giury and Parabiere; who having taken Corbeil, and put a
Garrison into it, were come with all diligence to find him again; by which
means being increased in strength, he began with more boldness than before to
molest the Duke's Army; who, intent upon his journey, not stirring, for any
cause whatsoever, out of his ranks, nor out of the shelter of his Carriages,
marched on commodiously before.

But upon the nine and twentieth day, the Army coming toward Guise, and the
King being resolved to attempt something, with all his Cavalry fell upon their
Rere-guard, which having made a halt, and put their Army in a readiness to
fight, the Carabines failed not with their wonted courage to begin the
Skirmish; but the King's Cavalry, which being for that purpose divided into
little squadrons, and had order to charge home, and not give them time to do
hurt with their shot, enclosed them in such manner, that they all had been cut
off in the place, if Georgio Basti, with one thousand and two hundred Lances,
had not disingaged them. The squadron of Basti rushed upon the small Troops of
the French Cavalry, The King assaults the Spanish Army again; and his Horse
having encompassed the enemies Rereguard, would have cut it in pieces, if
Georgio Basti, a famous Captain of those times, had not disengaged them with
his Lanciers.
so ordered to repress the Carabines; but not being able to receive the shock
of so many Lances, the Baron of Biron was fain to ^etire half in disorder. But
being sustained by the King himself, who with the rest of his Horse, and a
Thousand Foot of Parabiere's old Regiment mounted behind them, advanced to
re-enforce the Battle; Basti not having order to fight, retired under the
shelter of his Squadrons in very good order; yet could he not do it with so
great circumspection, but that the French remained masters of some carriages,
which by chance were separated from the rest. But the King being come near the
Rere-guard, where Pietro Gaetano was making himself ready to oppose him, with
the Foot drawn up in order, encompassed with his Carriages; and the Duke of
Parma, who had faced about, and changed the order of his march, coming up with
the second Battalion, he resolved to retire without attempting any further, by
reason the Enemy was in so Soldier like order, and that their Forces were so
exceedingly unequal. This was the last day that the King molested the Spanish
Army in its march. The Duke of Parma takes leave of the Duke of Mayenne,
leaving him a Tertia of Italians, and another of Spaniards, and 500 Horse.
The Duke of Parma being arrived at the Frontiers, took leave of the Duke of
Mayenne, striving, with apt expressions, to confirm his courage, and to
persuade him that within a little while he should receive powerful assistance
of men and money; and that he might not leave him so weak, that he should be
forced to make an agreement with the Enemy, he commanded the Italian Tertia of
Pietro Gaetano, and the Spanish one of Alfonso Idiaques to stay in France, and
absolutely to obey the Duke, with whom he also left Four hundred Horse, and One
hundred Walloon Carabines; which Supplies added to the German Tertia of
Collalto paid by the King, and to the other French forces, he thought a
sufficient Body to uphold the affairs of the League, especially in a time when
the King having divided his Army for want of Money, and because of the past
misfortunes, was manifestly declining.

The End of the Eleventh BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
TWELFTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THe Twelfth Book relates the various Turbulencies, in several parts of the
Kingdom; the progress of the Duke of Mercoeur in Bretagne, and of the Duke of
Savoy in Provence and Dauphine. The King takes Corby; he is troubled in mind by
reason of the contrary importunities of the Catholics and Hugonots of his own
party. He sends the Viscount de Turenne into England and Germany, who raises a
great Army to bring it into France the Spring following. The Duke of Mayenne
also is no less troubled than the King. The Parisians attempt to surprise St.
Denis, but effect it not, and the Chevalier d' Aumale is killed there. The King
on the other side attempts to surprise Paris, and that design likewise proves
vain. Pope Sixtus Quintus being dead, Gregory the Fourteenth succeeds, who
declares himself favorable to the affairs of the League, and dispatches his
Nephew the Duke of Montemarciano into France with strong Supplies. The King in
the mean time besieges and takes the City of Chartres. The Duke of Mayenne not
having strength to relieve that place, marches toward Champagne, takes
Chasteau-Thierry, and goes to Rheins to confer with the Duke of Lorain.
Marsilio Landriano the Popes Nuncio arrives there, he publishes a Monitory
against those that follow the King, from whence diverse alterations do arise.
The young Cardinal of Bourbon tries to form a third party of Catholics to
bring himself to the Crown; the King advertised of it, applies diverse remedies
to that important accident. The Duke of Mayenne makes an attempt upon Mante,
which takes not effect. The King besieges Noyon, and after many encounters, it
not being relieved, he takes it. The Popish and Spanish Forces pass the
Mountains, they assist the Duke of Savoy; and there happen several encounters.
The Duke of Guise escapes from his imprisonment at Tours. The King and the Duke
of Mayenne advance; the King to receive, the Duke to oppose the Viscount de
Turenne and the Germans in Lorain. The Armies draw near to one another at
Verdun: The King having received the Viscount with the Supplies, retires. The
Council of Sixteen make an Insurrection in the City of Paris, and cause the
first President of the Parliament, and other Counselors, to be executed: The
Duke of Mayenne hastes thither, brings the City into obedience, and punishes
the Delinquents. The King marches into Normandy, lays siege to the City of
Rouen, defended by Monsieur de Villars, and a great number of choice Soldiers
and Commanders; the various accidents of that siege are related. The Duke of
Parma with the Spanish Army marches to relieve that place: The King with part
of his Army goes to meet him; they encounter one another, and fight at Aumale;
the King is wounded, his men routed, and he has much ado to save himself.
Villars sallying out of Rouen, enters the Trenches, and gains the Artillery.
The Duke of Parma advances; but finding the City secured by that sally,
resolves to retire and watch his opportunity. The King returns to Rouen, and
renews the siege: The Duke of Parma also returns to bring relief; and the King
(his Forces being wasted) rises from the siege, and marches to the Banks of the
River Seine.

Men's minds were no less inflamed, nor the revolutions of the War less bloody
in the other parts of the Kingdom, than they were in those places where the
chief Armies lay; for the affections of Religion, mingled in their hearts with
particular interests, and with the already inveterate animosities of the
Factions, every one forward of himself, as in his own cause, and as in a
controversy that concerned him, did with all his power apply thoughts to the
exercise of Arms. Wherefore the War was made both by the Heads and Governors
of the two parties, and by private persons of their own voluntary accord, with
the same contention through every Province, but with various successes and
different fortune on both sides.

The principal and most dangerous commotions were in Bretagne, a great and rich
Province, well peopled, full of Gentry, considerable for the greatness of its
Cities, and convenient for the benefit of the Ocean Sea, along the coasts
whereof it extends it self toward the North. Henry of Bourbon Prince of
Dombes, Son to the Duke of Montpensier, a youth of exceeding high courage, was
for the King, and had the name of Governor for him; but there were so few
Towns under his obedience, that if it had not been for the help of lower
Normandy, (which, confining with that Province, held of the Kings party, and
was governed by the Duke his Father) he would either have been driven out of
the Province, or easily suppressed by the greater forces of the League. On the
other side, Emanuel of Lorain, Duke of Mercoeur governed the party of the
Union, The Duke of Mencoeurs pretensions to the Duchy of Bretagne.
who had not only from the beginning been (as Governor of the Province) in
possession of the best Cities and strongest holds, but also pretending, that
the Duchy of Bretagne it self, belonged to his Wife Mary of Luxembourg,
Countess of Ponthieure, he had a wonderful great dependence of all those, who
rather desired a Prince of their own, than the union with the Crown of France,
which was not very pleasing to them; and longing above measure to establish
himself in that possession with the opportunity of present affairs, he had
negotiated secretly in Spain by the means of Loreno Tarnabuoni, a Gentleman of
his, who was sent by Sea unto that Court, and had obtained that the Catholic
King should send and pay Four thousand Foot for his assistance, upon condition
that Blavet should be consigned to him for his security; a place as then not
considerable, but which with the benefit of a very large Port fortified and
improved by the Spaniards, came by little and little to be of exceeding great
consequence, not only to the affairs of that Province, but also of the whole
Kingdom: Which as soon as it was known to the Prince of Dombes, (though his
Forces were but weak, so that till then he had only exercised himself in
actions of small importance, to keep the Kings name alive in that Province; yet
now, helping with art in so great need) he turned himself to oppose the
entrance of strangers: And having routed Three hundred of the Duke of Mercoeurs
Light Horse, which were going to join themselves with his Army, he assaulted
Annebont suddenly, a place near Blavet; and having easily taken it, began with
infinite celerity to build a Fort by the Sea side, which might command and
hinder the entry of Ships that should come unto that Port, and bestirred
himself in such manner, that he would have brought to perfection the service he
had in design, if (the Duke of Mercoeurs Army still increasing, which was
advanced to Vannes, seven leagues from Blavet) he had not been constrained
(though the Fort were not yet quite finished) to retreat into the places of his
own party. Nevertheless having left a strong Guard in the Fort, with six pieces
of Cannon; and having put Eight hundred Foot into Annebont, he hoped that those
places might be able to hinder the entering and settling of the Enemy. The
Spanish Fleet arrived at Blavet with Six and thirty sail of Ships, and four
Gallions, and with so prosperous a gale, The Prince of Dombes, Governor for the
King in Bretagne, opposes the Duke of Morcoeurs designs, and causes Fort Dombes
to be built, which is demolished b^ the Spaniards.
that notwithstanding the shot from Fort Dombes, redoubled with infinite fury
by the defendents, it entered the Port without receiving much harm, and landed
Four thousand and five hundred Foot commanded by Don Iuan de l' Aquila, who, to
free the Port from all impediments, set himself without delay to take in Fort
Dombes: Which not being brought to perfection, and having no hopes of relief
from any place, yielded it self the fifth day of the siege, and was presently
demolished by the Spaniards: After which enterprise, being joined with the Duke
de Mercoeur, they recovered Annebont, and the other neighboring places, with
the same facility, and at last, under favor of the Fleet, began to fortify
Blavet, securing it no less with two Forts Royal, built at the entry of the
Haven for convenience of bringing in relief by Sea; then they strengthened it
with Moats, Bastions, and all other kinds of Military Fortifications on the
Land-side. But the King, and the Prince of Dombes, knowing that they could not
resist the power of the Duke and the Spaniards, with the Forces they had in
that Province, sought for assistance from England; which lying over against it,
has convenience of giving relief to that coast, no less than Spain: And having
obtained Six thousand Foot from the Queen, they expected their Landing at St.
Lo, the farthest Port of Lower Normandy.

With the like variety, and as great danger, did the War rage on the other side
of the Kingdom: For Dauphine and Provence (Provinces bordering upon the Duke of
Savoy, and spread in length to the very foot of the Alps) wavered with various
fortune in the management of Arms. The Duke of Savoy, from the very beginning
of the War, had applied the greatness of his mind to diverse, and those not
ill-grounded hopes: For the affairs of Piedmont being secured, by his seizing
upon the Marquesate, and lying conveniently for the affairs of Dauphine by the
near adjoining of Savoy, he hoped by fomenting the League, in some sort to
enlarge his confines: On the other side, being interessed in Provence by the
Towns he holds there, he had an eye set upon getting the whole, whereof already
he possessed a part: So that he held intelligence in both Provinces, and with
Money and Arms endeavored to advantage the course of his designs. Nor did his
hopes stay there, but seeing the Kingdom in so great distraction, and ready to
break the Salique Law, and to cut off the Legitimate Succession of the Royal
Family in the King of Navarre, there arose a certain conceit in him, that the
States might perhaps incline to make choice of him, as being born of a Daughter
of France; which he thought would prove so much the more easy to him, by how
much more his name was famous in Arms* and by how much greater merit he should
acquire with the Catholic party, and in the opinion of the Pope, the principal
mover (in respect of Religion) in the determination of the affairs of France.
Nor did he forget (whatsoever event these designs should have) that the
opportunity of present affairs, gave him an occasion of subduing the
inhabitants of Geneva, now that the King of France, being busied by himself,
could not afford them any present relief. With this height of hopes, which
increased his courage, having sent his Agents to treat with the Duke of
Mayenne; and having contracted a reciprocal intelligence with him, he had
raised a great Body of Horse and Foot, and had sent forth Count Francesco
Martinengo, General of his Army, into Provence, The Sieur de Vins and the
Countess de Se^^x conclude to give the super^^^ity of Provence to the Duke of
Savoy; he goes to Ai^, and is by the Parliament declared Head of the Politic
and Military Government.
and his Brother Don Amadeo of Savoy against Geneva; and by means of the
Governors of his Garrisons, he gave help and assistance to the Forces of the
League in Dauphine. Nor was the beginning unlike the greatness of his design:
For the Sieur de Vins, and the Countess de Seaux, (a Lady of more than manly
spirit) who both held for the League in Provence, finding themselves inferior
in strength to Monsieur de la Valette, the Kings Lieutenant, not only willingly
received supplies and assistance from the Duke, but began also to treat of
giving him the Dominion of that Province, and to put themselves under his
protection and superiority: Which being treated and concluded by the Duke, he
went in person to his Army, carrying with him some addition of Horse and Foot,
which by Commission from Spain he had obtained from the Governor of Milan. At
his arrival, the Kings party, inferior in strength, going down the wind,
(though Les Diguieres being come out of Dauphine into that Province, did labor
marvellously with his wonted valor and celerity, which were singular) the
affairs of the League grew up to such a height, that his Arms already gave the
Law to the whole Country. Wherefore the Duke being come into the City of Aix,
where the Parliament of Provence does reside, and being received with those
pomps and solemnities which are wont to be given to Sovereign Princes, (though
he, imitating the Duke of Mayenne, refused to use the Cloth of State) he was in
the Parliament declared Head of the War, and of the Civil Government in that
Province, to preserve it in the Union of the Catholics, and under the
obedience and Royal State of the Crown of France.

The Duke of Mayenne writes resentingly to the Parliament of Aix, and to the
Sieur de Vins, who, repenting himself, begins to dis-favour the Duke of Savoys
designs.
This business displeased the Duke of Mayenne no less than it did the King;
thinking not only that the Duke of Savoy sought after and usurped that
Authority which the general consent had conferred upon him, but also that he
had an aim to dismember Provence, and with the help of Nizza and his other
Towns, by little and little to make himself Master of it; where he wrote sharp
resenting Letters, not only to the Parliament, but also to the Sieur de Vins,
and to the Countess, showing them the fault they committed in separating
themselves from the rest of the Union, and in putting themselves in danger to
alienate so great, and so important a portion of the Crown. These Letters
wrought a very great effect in the Sieur de Vins, an old dependent upon the
House of Lorain; and he began to show himself more backward in complying with
the designs, and forwarding the progress of the Duke of Savoy: By whose example
the City of Marseilles, which (following the footsteps of the Parliament) had
with a readiness in the people called the Duke before, began now to repent
themselves, and to mutiny.

On the other side, the King (grieved to see Foreign Forces brought into that
Province) had given order to Les Diguieres, that leaving the City of Grenoble,
in Dauphine, besieged; as well as he might, he should march with the greatest
number of men he possibly could, to meet Monsieur de la Valette in Provence:
Whereupon, Les Diguieres, accustomed from his youth to fight with the
difficulties and ambiguities of Fortune, having left the posts about Grenoble
well guarded, to continue the siege already begun many months before, went with
Four hundred Horse, and Two thousand Foot in relief of the Provincials, and
kept the Duke of Savoy in trouble and disquiet, who half forsaken by the
Catholics of the Provence, and but slenderly supplied by the Spaniards, who
were not too well pleased with his proceedings, went spinning out the time in
petty encounters, having dispatched Monsieur de Ligny into Spain, to set his
affairs in order with the Catholic King; and the Sieur de la Croix to the Duke
of Mayenne, to excuse what was past, and to confer about the manner of carrying
himself for the time to come.

His affairs were much more prosperous in the Territories of Geneva, where
having to do with the Forces of those Citizens, which were not very powerful,
and with Commanders of small fame and experience, Don Amadeo had often routed
the Enemies in the field, beaten up their Quarters, taken many ^astles, overrun
and sacked the Country, and finally straightned the City on all sides; which
with frequent and effectual importunities solicited for relief, sometimes from
the King of France, sometimes from the Canton of Bearne.

On the contrary, the War in Dauphine went on prosperously for the King; for
though the Duke of Savoy's Counselors and Commanders, united with those of the
League which were in that Province, made great resistance; yet were they not so
strong as Colonel Alfonso Corso, and Monsieur Les Diguieres, who after he had
stopped the precipice of affairs in Provence, Grenoble in Dauphine after a long
siege, returns to the Kings obedience.
being returned to the siege of Grenoble, straightened that City in such manner,
that after having suffered many months, the besieged about the end of the year,
agreed to surrender, upon condition not to be molested in their Consciences,
Goods, or Liberties; that the City should be preserved in the Catholic
Religion, and in the State it then was; and on the other side, that they should
acknowledge King Henry the Fourth for their lawful Prince, by whose appointment
they should receive a Garrison, and a Governor.

At this time the King freed from the Spanish Army, and from the late fear of
the Duke of Parma, was come (in his return) to St. Quentin, where watching with
his wonted diligence for all opportunities, he took a resolution suddenly to
assault Corby, 1591.
a Town seated upon the River Sum, and convenient to bridle the City of
Amiens, the Head of that Province, which held of the party of the League. With
this design he removed his Camp from the Walls of St. Quentin in the dusk of
the evening; but in his march finding all the Country up, and that the Villages
furiously rung their Toquesaints, he could not get to the Walls of Corby, till
within an hour before day. There the hope of effecting his intent appeared no
less uncertain; for they found the whole Town in arms, and the defendents with
Torches and Fires, ready to sustain the assault, whereof they had been
advertised by the cries and tumult of the Country people: And yet Monsieur d'
Humiers coming up with the Regiments of St. Denis and Parabiere about break of
day, caused a Petard to be fastened to the Iron Gate of a Channel that came out
of the Town on the lower side, which falling suddenly by the violence of the
fire, the Foot advanced, some to the Channel which was frozen, some with
Scaling-Ladders to the Wall adjoining, to give the assault; which though it
were constantly received by the defendents, who ran together boldly to hinder
their entry at their Iron Gate, and to make good the Walls; yet the Sieur de
Belle-Fourtiere, Governor of the Town, being slain in the first encounter, and
many of the stoutest Soldiers falling, The King assaults Corby, and takes it.
after a most bloody fight of three hours, the Town remained in the Kings
power, who after his late misfortunes, thought he had concluded the year very
prosperously.

From Corby he marched to Senlis, seated just upon the way which leads from
Picardy toward Paris; and there in the beginning of the year, he began to
dispose his counsels, to set his affairs in order, and find means to dissolve
and subdue the League. 1591.
But he was no less troubled which way to keep his Catholics, than he was to
draw together sufficient Forces to overcome the Enemy; for having promised from
the Autumn of the year Eighty-nine, that in March following he would call an
Assembly, to the end, he might be instructed in the Catholic Faith with that
honor that befitted his person, and not having been able to perform his
promise, because the chief actions of the War happened in that time, the battle
of Yvry, and after that the siege of Paris, and the coming of the Spanish Army
(to his loss) now, That by their departure, and by the diminution of the Enemy,
he seemed to be in a quiet condition, The Catholics make great complaints for
the Kings persevering in Calvinism.
he was called upon by the tacit consent of discreet persons, to observe his
promise; and those that had not so much respect, or that were affectionate to
Religion, murmured publicly, and complained as if they were deluded and
deceived. But more openly the Parliament of Bourdeaux, which with much ado had
been drawn to the Kings obedience by the Marshall de Matignon's diligent care,
and arts of governing, now seeing his Conversion was deferred, began to resent
it, and at this time had sent their first President and two Counselors to
beseech his Majesty to take a final resolution; the Catholics not being able
to quiet their Consciences, unless they saw him reduced to the true Religion,
held for so many Ages by all the most Christian Kings his glorious
Predecessors. Which Commission having been fully and effectually performed by
the Deputies, though the King seemed to take their Petition in good part, and
answered it favorably, yet inwardly being troubled, and stung to the quick, he
saw not what course he might take as a middle way which might give satisfaction
to both parties. He saw the foundation of his affairs was settled in great part
upon the Hugonots; for his command was no where more full, than in the places
under their obedience; and the Catholic Provinces divided between themselves,
were shared between the two Factions, so that neither declared absolutely for
him: He argued within himself from the example of things past, how much
mischief for the most part comes by forsaking old friendships and
confederacies, to give ones self up wholly to the will and discretion of new
ones: He considered, that not having changed his Religion at that time when
being more strong and victorious he might have done it with his reputation; now
that he was declined in strength, it might seem he did it timerously by force;
the need he had at that very present of the assistance of the Protestant
Princes of Germany, and of the Queen of England, represented it self unto him,
so that he was necessitated to think of not making them distrustful of them.
But on the other side, he knew moreover that if he lost the Catholics, he
should no longer have strength to resist; and that, except the Name of King of
France, he should return unto the same condition wherein he found himself so
straightned, before he went from Rochell. In this uncertainty of mind he knew
but two remedies; one, to give full satisfaction to the Great Ones of his Army,
to the end that they not stirring, all the rest might stay likewise; the other,
to keep his men in perpetual exercise, Remedies used by the King to conserve
the affections of those of his party, and keep them in obedience.
that idleness and rest might not suggest those thoughts unto them. For this
cause, knowing how great authority the Duke of Nevers had in the Catholic
party, and how conspicuous his actions were, as a Prince that had always given
testimony of Conscience and Religion, he conferred upon him the Government of
Champagne, a great and principal Province, and which he had long before
desired: And to the Baron de Byron, for the eminent reputation of his Father,
and for his own merit and valor, besides the Office of Field-Mareschal, he
promised the dignity of High-Admiral; and using terms of infinite kindness to
all the rest, showed himself gracious and liberal, always disposing places and
honors to those Catholic Lords, who for birth, desert, or ancient devotion
toward the Church, were proper to keep those loyal who were like to fall away
because of the delay of his promises. And that he might not give way to
idleness, and to those thoughts that take birth from thence, The King recalls
the Duke of Espernon to the Army, and other Catholic Lords, to reconcile them
unto him.
he recalled the Duke of Espernon to his Army, not only with a desire to
reconcile him unto himself, but also to make use of him, and likewise of the
Duke of Nevers, (who at that time besieged Provins) the Duke of Longueville,
the Count de St. Paul his Brother, and many other Catholic Lords; intending
when he had drawn them together, to set himself upon some enterprise, which
with the advancement of his own affairs, might keep every one of them
honorably employed.

After this resolution, succeeded that of gathering Forces, that he might be
able not only to oppose the progress of the Spaniards in Bretagne, and the
attempts of the Duke of Savoy in Provence; but also so to reinforce his Army,
that if the Duke of Parma should return and join with the Duke of Lorain, he
might be equal to resist them in the Field. Nor being to address himself for
supplies of money, and to obtain a numerous leavy of men to any others, than
the Queen of England, and the Protestant Princes of Germany; since he saw both
she and they were slack and cold alike, he determined to send a person of
eminent virtue, quality, and authority unto them, who conferring with every
Prince in particular, and afterward casting up the whole, and treating with
all in general, might be able to procure that fruit which the urgent necessity
of his affairs required. First he thought upon the Marshall de Byron, a man of
renowned fame and prudence, equal to so great an exigent; but then judging him
much more necessary for the conduct of his Army, because the Order, Discipline,
and Foundation of all enterprises rested chiefly upon him, he resolved to send
Henry de la Tour, Viscount de Turenne, a man not only by ancient Conversation,
and by having run the same fortune with him, long known to be most faithful;
but also for his wisdom and singular eloquence sufficient to manage a business
of so great importance, and moreover for Valor and Military Discipline fit to
lead and conduct those Supplies that should be granted; and so much the rather,
because he being a Hugonot, would be so much the more acceptable, and proper to
negotiate with Princes of the same Religion; since Monsieur de Beauvis, who
till the death of the late King had been Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth, being a
Catholic, was not very well received; and the Count de Schombergh, who had
already been a long time in Germany, was likewise in respect of his Religion
grown suspected to the Duke of Saxony, and to Prince Casimir, the Guardian of
his young Nephew the Palatine of the Rhine; but much more to the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, who was jealous that he, under color of negotiating the Kings
affairs, endeavored to discover their intents, and found their designs, to
make them known unto the party of the League.

The Viscount went presently into England, where things were not so well
disposed in favor of the King, but that the Queen thought to make her
advantage of his present exigency, and upon occasion of the necessity he was
in, to induce him to restore Calais unto her, or else to give some other
Fortress of no less importance into her hands; a thing not only desired by all
the Kings that had possessed that Crown, but impatiently longed for by all the
people of England. But because the business was to be cunningly treated of, nor
did the Queen want prudence or dexterity to manage it, she first made known
that the Merchants of her Kingdom demanded to have a secure Port upon the
Coasts of France, where their ships might put in and secure their persons and
goods when they had occasion. Then she urged the reasons she had to desire it
from a King that was her Friend and Confederate, and whom she always called by
the name of Brother, since she had made the same demands to King Charles, and
to King Henry, his last Predecessors, by reason of the Duke of Guise's unjust
Usurpation of the Town of Calais, due unto her Crown by the possession of so
many Ages. But because the Viscount with no less industry, did not openly deny
to satisfy her, but avoided and deferred it with several excuses* sometimes
alleging the hatred that would thereby result unto the King, not yet
established, if he should think to alienate any place: That the revolt of the
Catholics, (who were already more than moderately offended and disgusted)
would follow upon it: sometimes telling the Queen her self, that she ought not
to make that demand at that present, lest she should show a desire to put the
King upon a necessity of consenting unto it, and in the urgency of his
occasions put (as they say) the noose about his neck, she seemed to desist, and
reserving the pressing of that point till the time that the promises were to be
fulfilled, which would be a more proper and a more urging conjuncture. In the
mean time, the Viscount obtained that she should lend the King One hundred
thousand Crowns for the Levies that were to be made: That she should send the
Six thousand Foot we spoke of, into Bretagne, for relief of the Prince of
Dombes: That along with The Vis^ount. The Viscount of Turenne obtains
as^istance from Queen Elizabeth, the Hollanders, and the Protestant Princes of
Germany.
him, she should send Horatio Pallavicino (a Geno^ise, who for Religion was
fled into that Island) to persuade the States of Holland, and the Princes of
Germany to assist the King with men and money on their part: and she promised
likewise, that if the Duke of Parma moved again to return into France, she
would powerfully assist Grave Maurice of Nassau, and the Hollanders, to make a
strong diversion, by entering into Brabant and Flanders.

With this Agreement the Viscount being gone out of England, and come to the
Hague, obtained from the States of Holland, not that which he pretended, which
was Thirty thousand Crowns ready money, but Three thousand Foot paid, which
were to unite themselves with those Forces that were to be raised in Germany;
though afterward, by reason of the urgency of their affairs, that promise also
remained without effect. With the Princes of Germany there was much more to do,
because there were many of them, and their interests different: but the
Viscount carried himself with so much dexterity, being opportunely assisted by
Pallavicino, that in the end, of some he obtained men, of some money, and took
order for the levying of Four thousand Horse and Eight thousand Foot, which
with a convenient Train of Artillery and Ammunition, should be ready at the
beginning of the Summer to march with him under the command of Christian Prince
of Anhalt, for the assistance of the King of France.

The thoughts that troubled the Duke of Mayenne, were not very different from
those that perplexed the King: for there being many Princes of his Family who
pretended no less than he, he could not find means to satisfy them all; and to
the other Lords and Commanders of that party, who continually demanded money to
maintain the Soldiery, it was impossible to give a full satisfaction:
whereupon many being displeased, and many falling off, he feared a division,
and that some would resolve to go over to the Kings party; which was much to be
doubted: for on the one side, the people thought themselves extraordinarily
burdened, and were no longer able to bear the losses and incommodities of the
War: on the other side, The party of the League take a disgust against the D.
of Mayenne, which is fomented by the Spaniards.
the Soldiers were not contented with any kind of licentiousness; nor did they
ever cease crying out for liberty, pay, rewards and satisfactions: but amongst
them all, the Parisians, as they were chief of the party, so were they chief in
their complaints, not only because they saw not that progress which from the
beginning they had fancied to themselves; but because the contributions and
charges inc^eased without end, they accused the Duke of want of conduct, or of
too greedy a desire to engross all to himself, or of extreme profuseness and
prodigality of other men's moneys: nor did they consider what a huge gulf a
Civil War is, and how many interessed particulars were to be provided for in
all parts of the Kingdom. To this were added the practices of the Spanish
Ministers, who, not to suffer the authority of the Duke of Mayenne (whom they
thought little inclined to follow their designs) to grow too excessive, and to
put the Catholic King in greater reputation and favor with the people,
magnifying the expenses, supplies and provisions which had been afforded them,
cried out against the ill management of the Duke, who for want of well
employing them, had reaped so little advantage.

There were some discontents between him and the Duke of Lorain: The Lords o^
the House of Lorain begin to be displeased, and to grow jealous of one another*
for he having taken Villa Franca, the Duke of Mayenne, because it was a place
belonging to the Crown, pretended to nominate the Governor, and to place the
Garrison: and the Duke of Lorain having taken it at his own charge, and with the
industry and blood of his men, contended that he ought to be the disposer and
master of it; and being incensed that he had not obtained his desire, he arose
from the siege of Montealto, which he had begun, alleging that he would not
have the fruits of his pains and dangers converted to the use of others: but
these were but sprouts that grew from a deeper root: for the Duke of Lorain,
who pretended to the pre-eminence as Head of the Family, knew that the Duke of
Mayenne did not only possess the top, and count himself superior now, as
Lieutenant General of the State of France, but had also a design to advance
himself to the Crown; to the pretensions whereof, he thought the right of a Son
born of a Daughter of France to be more valid, and conceived it reasonable that
all the rest of the House should give place to the Head of the Family. But
these secret thoughts, which were yet internally hid, did not let things break
out to a manifest discord.

Greater were the disgusts with the Duke of Nemours, who (of a bold generous
courage, but of a proud disdainful nature, having constantly and valiantly
defended and made good the City of Paris, beyond all men's belief) pretended to
no lesser place than to be his Brothers Lieutenant General, and to have supreme
Authority in the affairs of Paris, as their Preserver and Governor: which
being a thing of great jealousy to the Duke of Mayenne, who would not that any
other should meddle in the Government, and that the affairs of Paris (the
foundation of the League) should not only be managed by him, but that they
should not be so much as touched by another hand; they disagreed in such
manner about the election of the Prevost des Merchands, and the other
Magistrates, that the Duke of Mayenne, without making him or any body else
acquainted with it, chose them to his own liking and satisfaction, without
demurring upon those that were proposed and favored by others; judging it to
be so tender and so important a matter, that the respects which moved him to
it, ought not to be imparted to any body: but the election being divulged, the
Duke of Nemours (making open clamor, that those were refused who had done best
service in the siege; and on the contrary, The Duke of Nemours, for some
discontents received from his brother the Duke of Mayenne refuses the
Government of the City of Paris, which the Duke of Mayenne confers upon his
eldest Son the Duke of Esguillon, appointing the Marquess of Belin his
Lieutenant
men were chosen either of little trust, or no valor) told the Duke of
Mayenne, that with such like Magistrates as those, he had not heart enough to
defend and maintain Paris as he had formerly done, and that therefore he did
surrender up his Government to him: which falling out luckily according to the
Dukes intention, he made no difficulty to take the surrender, and presently
invested in the Government his eldest Son Charles Emanuel Duke of Esguillon,
giving him for his Lieutenant (during his minority) the Marquess de Belin, a
man wholly at his devotion: at which, though the Duke of Nemours showed himself
highly incensed, and no less than he, the Parisians, who, by reason of his late
defense of them, bore a wonderful great affection to him, yet matters were
composed on this manner; That the Marquess of St. Sorlin, Nemours his Brother,
should have the Government of Dauphine; and that he himself should have Forces
and Money assigned him, to make War in his Government of Lions; to which he
went without delay: being neither well satisfied with his Brother, nor openly
disgusted.

The Complai^ts of the Widow Duchess of Guise.
But more grievous were the complaints of Madam de Guise, who with tears and
womanish lamentations made her moan every hour, that among so many enterprises,
there was no attempt thought of to free her son; and that Colonel Alfonso Corso
(one of the Complotters of the death of the late Duke of Guise her Husband)
having been taken in some encounter, was not torn in pieces in revenge, but set
at liberty for a ransom of thirty thousand Crowns; and finally, that the Widow
Duchess of Longueville having been kept prisoner, in stead of treating to
exchange her for her Son, they treated of exchanging her for the Duke d'
Elbeuf. To which, though answer was made, that the Duke her Son was in a place
environed with the Kings Forces, which they could not come at without a great
Army, and without being Masters of the field; and nevertheless that diverse
Treaties had been held to that effect: That Colonel Alfonso being a prisoner of
War, it was not lawful to do him any outrage, nor take away his life; and that
the thirty thousand Crowns had proved of great advantage to the public
affairs: That there never had been a Treaty of giving the Duchess of
Longueville in exchange for the Duke d' Elbeuf, till after the King had
declared he would not free the Duke of Guise upon any exchange; yet she
nevertheless, being a querulous woman, and full of disdain, ceased not to
disturb all businesses, and fill all ears with her lamentation. Nor could the
Duke of Mayenne agree with the Duke of Mercoeur; for, having settled a firm
resolution in his mind, that no part of the Crown should be dismembered under
his Government, he was very much grieved that Mercoeur should attempt to
appropriate Bretagne to himself, 1590.
and should hold secret intelligences and practices with the Spaniards.

To the thought of homebred discords was added the trouble of foreign
supplies, The Duke of Mayenne is troubled at the attempts of those of his
Family, at the designs of the Duke of Savoy, and at the delays of the Spaniards.
which he saw not to answer his expectation; for he found the Duke of Savoy had
designs and pretensions of too much interest, whereby in stead of succouring
and assisting, he seemed rather to divide and dismember the party of the
League, and knew that the Duke of Parma and the other Spanish Ministers had but
little inclination to assist him so powerfully, that under their favor he
might be able to make an end of the War; but he perceived they spun out the
time in length, looking for some opportunity to promote their own designs. The
change of the Pope did much more afflict him; for though Sixtus Quintus in the
later months of his life, (grown suspicious of the dealings of the Spaniards,
and displeased at the sharp proceedings of the Conde de Olivares) showed
himself alienated from the League, and little satisfied with the carriage of
businesses, and perhaps disposed toward a reconciliation with the King, The
Duke of Mayenne is not sati^fied with the new Pope Gregory the 14. doubting his
too great dependency upon Spain, and the unactiveness of his nature.
if he had given occasion for it by his conversion; yet the new election of
Cardinal Sfondrato with the name of Gregory the Fourteenth did not satisfy him
at the first, judging him to depend so much upon, and to be so closely united
unto Spain, that he would not move, but in the Catholic Kings steps; and
besides that, of so slack a nature, (as Fame with a general consent reported
him) that there was little life or quickness to be hoped for in his
resolutions. Amidst this confusion of thoughts, thinking principal aim ought to
be to increase his strength so much, as to be Master of the field, because by
that means the streightning of the City being hindered, the Parisians would be
appeased, and the reputation of Victory would keep all humors in awe; he set
himself with his uttermost endeavors to augment his Forces in the Kingdom, and
dispatched President Ieannin (a man of singular prudence, The Duke of Mayenne
dispatches President Ieannin to the King of Spain; and the Sieur des Ports to
the Pope to solicit aid
and incomparable dexterity in matters of Government) to the King of Spain; and
to the Pope he sent his Secretary Baudoin Sieur des Ports, who for his long
experience in the affairs of the Court, where he had been bred in the times of
the late Kings, and for the vivacity of his understanding was thought fit to
quicken the slowness, and forward the determinations of the Pope; and to these
his Agents he not only gave in charge to make great haste in their journeys;
but also, as their principal end, to procure from both these Princes a firm,
settled, speedy, and powerful supply of men and money.

With these designs and preparations came in the year 1591, 1591.
at the very beginning whereof the Parisians attempted the enterprise of St.
Denis. The City thirsted much after the recovery of that place; for standing
but two leagues from thence, and upon the pass that leads into the most fertile
Plains of the Isle of France, it did much hinder the bringing in of Victual;
and the Garrison that was there overrunning the whole Country, did exceedingly
molest and obstruct the ways. That which gave them hope of an happy issue, was,
that the place was almost empty of inhabitants, and only kept by three hundred
Foot, and one hundred and fifty Horse, which though they roved very boldly
about the fields, yet were they not sufficient to maintain the compass of the
walls, which of themselves were very weak, and in some places broken and fallen
down; and that which ordinarily serves to strengthen and defend a place, (to be
seated in the midst of Fenns that encompass it, and to have a Moat always full
of Water) did in this season serve for the convenience of those that would
assault it, all the Waters being with the infinite cold frozen round about, so
that they made a firm Bridge, and did facilitate the passage and way to come to
the assault.

The Governor of the place was the Sieur de Viq, (lately come in the room of
Lavardin) who though he used all possible endeavors to keep good guards in it,
yet the weakness of the Garrison, and the continual sending parties abroad to
stop the ways, tired out his men, and made them in that extreme cold weather,
not very careful to make good the Wall: Many there were that thought the
enterprise not feisable, by reason of the small number of men that could be
sent from Paris: But the Chevalier d' Aumale, a Friend to bold resolutions, and
well informed of the state of the Town, undertook the managing of it, and with
One thousand Foot, and Two hundred Horse, marched out by night at the Gate
which (because it stands that way) is called by the same name; and having taken
a little compass, drew near to the Town on that side, which joining to the
Abbey, he knew (as most remote) was kept with the least diligence; where having
found the Ice in every place very firm, and particularly in the Moat, he caused
four Ladders to be set up against the Wall with so great silence, that they
were not discovered by the Guards, in that part very thinly set. There went up
two Captains with four and twenty Soldiers fully armed, and having found no
obstacle, made themselves Masters of the Gate adjoining, which being broken
open, The Chevalier d' Aumale goes to surprise St. Denis, and without
resistance enters with all his men; but the Governor with only thirty Horse
charges, and routs the enemy; the Chevalier d' Aumale being run through the
throat and left dead.
the Chevalier d' Aumale himself entered on foot before them all, with his Sword
drawn, and after him the rest of his men marching up in order to possess
themselves of the place. The Governor having heard the noise, and being
informed that the Enemy had already taken the Gate, and were gotten upon the
Wall; grown desperate to see that by the negligence of his Soldiers, he should
lose all the honor he had gotten in so many years of his life spent
fortunately in War, getting on horseback with only thirty of his men that
followed him, and being resolved to die, and not to survive his own ruin, he
caused two Trumpets he had with him to sound furiously, to make the Enemy
believe the number of those that charged was greater, and, with his Beaver down
rushed boldly upon the Front of the Squadron, that was marching in order up the
high street toward the Marketplace. The fury of the horses in the uncertainty
of a very dark night, (the Commanders not having been willing to fire the
houses, lest they should totally destroy the Town) put the foot in disorder; in
which tumult, while the Chevalier d' Aumale turning about, and reproving his
men, endeavored to make them stand, and to set them again in order, being
wounded with a thrust in the throat, fell suddenly dead upon the ground; and
his men having no longer either strength, It was observed, that the Chevalier
d' Aumale fell dead before an Inn whose sign was a Sword embroidered with
Golden Flower-deluces, and that his body being set in the Church, was gnawn by
Moles; The French says, Rats.
courage, order or resolution, flying, fell foul upon the other Squadrons, and,
disordering themselves from one to another, they got out at the same Gate, and
without being pursued by any body, ran with all their might till they came to
Paris, there remaining above a hundred of them, either slain by the defendents,
or trampled under foot in the flight. The Sieur de Viq having recovered the
Town, and redeemed his fortune by his own valor, gave the King an account of
the success, and did not only win great commendations, but also obtained of him
a rich Abbey, which had been possessed by the Chevalier d' Aumale with the title
of the Cross of Jerusalem. Those that were curious observed, that the Chevalier
fell dead before the door of an Inn whose sign was the Espee Royale; and they
esteemed it a much greater prodigy, that being laid upon the Bier in the Church
of the Friars of St. Denis, his Carcas the night following was all gnawed and
mangled by the Moles.

The example of this mischance did not withold the King from attempting
(though upon a better foundation) to surprise the City of Paris in the same
manner. President Brisson, one of the principal adherents to the League, having
changed his mind, plots insurrections in favor of the King.
The first President Brisson, who so voluntarily (not to say precipitately) had
made himself the head and Author in the Parliament of adhering to the League,
perceiving now (as his Friends said) that the ends of the Great Ones were not
so sincere toward the public good, as he at first was persuaded they were; or
(as his ill-willers said) corrupted by the great promises which were made him
from the King, by certain persons who were prisoners in the City; or (as the
general opinion was) drawn by the instability of his own nature, had secretly
begun to favor the Politics, (for so they called those that were affected to
the King) who taking courage from his protection, did already make a
considerable Body, and began to consult which way to make the City revolt, and
submit it to the obedience of the King. The attempts and practices of these men
were assisted by the careless nature of the Prevost des Merchands, who either
did not believe, or did not heed the relations that were made to him; nor did
he use any care or industry to interrupt those new designs, the report whereof
was very common: But that which more favored the Kings party, was the ill
satisfaction of the people, not only tired with scarcity of Victual, and the
hard duty they underwent continually in guarding the Walls, but also stomaching
that the Marquess de Belin, a man of ordinary condition, and of an unactive
nature, should be put upon them for a Governor, whereas they were wont to have
formerly the first Princes of the Blood, and the most eminent Officers of the
Crown. The Duke of Mayenne was absent, the Duke of Nemours far off and
discontented, and the Chevalier d' Aumale lately dead, whose fierceness was
wont to keep life in that party. All these things concurring, invited the King
to make some attempt upon that City: And what persuaded him much rather, was a
desire not to keep his Army idle, but to employ it in some enterprise, which
for the greatness thereof, might keep it in some action full of expectation.
Wherefore the Dukes of Nevers and Espernon, who were sent for before, being now
arrived, and moreover thinking some practices now ripe which he held with his
dependents in the City, he meant to help strength with cunning on this manner:
Eighty, Captains and other Reformadoes disguised, with as many horse^ load of
Corn and Meal, receive order to go up to the Port St Honor about midnight, and
to attempt to surprise Paris.
That Fourscore Commanders and Reformadoes, disguised in the habit of
Country-fellows, with as many horses laden with meal, should go to the Port
St. Honor to be let in after midnight, (because, in respect of the frequent
parties that scoured the ways, provisions were commonly brought and received by
night) and that these secretly armed, should at their entrance strive to
possess themselves of the Gate, being assisted by an hundred men armed Cap-a-pe
that followed them, in which tumult he had privately given order that those of
his party should make some commotion within, but on the opposite side to the
Gate that was assaulted, and should endeavor to seize upon St. Jacques, or St.
Merceau; and that at the same time the Army on the side of St. Honor,
Montmartre, and St. Denis, should come up close to scale the Walls: with which
assaults, which were all to happen at one instant, he firmly hoped either to
enter by force, or to be willingly received into the City; his adherents not
ceasing to use many practices to raise the people in several places* These
things were resolved on for the twentieth day of January; the night whereof,
though it had not been rainy, must nevertheless needs have been dark, the Moon
setting toward midnight. But the Duke of Espernon's passing by Beaumont, and
his being joined with the Kings Army, and the Duke of Nevers having done the
same, leaving the siege he had laid to Provins without any apparent reason; the
Baron de Guiry's having passed the River at Lagny, to unite himself with the
rest, and the seeing the King lie still in a place so near them, had put a
jealousy into the Princesses who resided in Paris: whereupon they did
effectually exhort the Marquess de Belin to take care of the City, some sign
being already discovered of the first Presidents inclinations, and of the
machinations of many others, who went about stirring up the common people. The
Marquess, The Marquis. de Belin, Lieutenant Governor of Paris, advertised of
the Kings design, and of some tokens of President Brissons practices; makes a
severe Proclamation, and orders and disposes the Militia and the Citizens for
the defense of the the City.
excited by the earnest persuasion of those Ladies, began to apply his mind to
the things that were told him; and falling into the same suspicion, upon the
eighteenth day he published a most severe Proclamation, That any commotions or
tumult happening in the City, every one, at the ringing of the Palace-Bell, and
the others of every Parish, should take Arms, and come forth of their houses
into the street, but that no man should stir out of that Quarter wherein he
ordinarily dwelt, upon pain of death without mercy: and he gave order to the
Masters of the several Or, Wards.
Quarters strictly to observe the motion of every one; from whence it came to
pass that the Politics, being fewer, were kept and watched by the much greater
number, and that being dispersed in their several Quarters, they could not meet
together in a Body to molest or to make themselves Masters of any part of the
City, all which also by this command were equally guarded. But the signs and
suspicions still increasing, by the discovery of certain Soldiers belonging to
St. Denis, who were taken by the Sieur de Tremont as they were scowring the
Country, from whom they understood that there were Scaling-ladders and other
instruments proper to assault places withal, providing in that Town. The
Princesses anxious and sollicitous, sent for the Governor unto them in the
house of Madam de Montpensier, and desired him to make the Port St. Honor
presently to be shut up and lined with earth, as being weaker, and more exposed
to danger than the rest; which was diligently performed upon the nineteenth
day; and the Sieur de Tremblecourt was put there to guard it, with his Regiment
of Lorainers. The Marquess de Menelay's Regiment went to keep the Ports of St.
Denis and Montmartre; and Collalto's Germans stayed to guard the Fauxbourgs
beyond the River.

Upon the twentieth day in the afternoon, the King [not being advertised of the
orders given in the City, because extraordinary care had been taken, that none
should stir out of the Gates] took his way toward Paris. Monsieur de Viq
Governor of St. Denis, led the fourscore that were disguised in the habit of
Countrymen; and the other hundred were commanded by the Sieur de Lavardin.
After these, followed the Baron de Byron with one thousand and two hundred
Firelocks, which were to march up to possess themselves of the gate; and
behind them were four Squadrons of four hundred men apiece, who, armed breast
and head, were to advance to the Wall on the side toward Montmartre and St.
Denis, there to set the Scaling-ladders; and these were led by the Sieurs de
Guiry, de Dunes, d' Humiers, and de la Noue: after these marched the Swisses,
with three small pieces of Artillery, two Petards, to be made use of if
occasion were, and all other instruments serviceable for this assault. The King
himself was in the Rereguard, with the Dukes of Espernon and Longueville, and
eight hundred Gentlemen* who, being alighted from their Horses, and very well
armed, had their Swords and Pistols, The order observed by the Kings Soldiers
for the surprising of Paris.
with which they were to fall on where need should require: and last of all,
the Duke of Nevers, with the rest of the Cavalry, stood in Arms to maintain the
field. As Soon as the first were arrived with their loads of Corn and Meal,
demanding to be let in, they spoke with Tremblecourt, who, being made wary by
suspicion, talked a long while with them; and as soon as he knew them, he [to
hold them in hand] gave order they should go down to the entry of the River,
The fourscore disguised Reformadoes are discovered by the Sieur de T^emblecourt.
and that there they should be received by the boats that waited for that
purpose; and presently, by ringing of a Bell, he gave the Alarm to the City,
and the Soldiers in Arms went readily up to the Works. The fourscore retired a
little back; and making show that they would obey, and go down toward the
River, gave the King intelligence of the noise that was in the City, [whereof
he was already advertised by the sound of the Bells] and desired to know what
was to be done. D' Humiers and the Baron de Byron were of opinion that the
Scaling-ladders should be set up, and a Petard fastened to the Gate: but all
the other Commanders thought it was not a thing to be attempted, and that (the
Plot not having succeeded) to use force was too full of danger, and altogether
hopeless: wherefore, after they had made a stand for a while, to see if their
party within did make any Commotion, and this thought not succeeding neither,
they faced about; and leaving the Cavalry to make good their Retreat, returned
in the same order to their former Quarters.

This attempt wrought an effect very different from the Kings intention: for
the Parisians unsatisfied with the Duke of Mayenne, for that upon all occasions
he left them with a weak Garrison, exposed to these dangers, and seeing the King
continually bent to do them mischief, they were contented [being persuaded by
the Catholic Kings Ministers] to receive into the City the Spanish Tertia of
Idiaques, The Parisians, that they might not be lest unprovided, receive a
Te^^ia of Spaniards, and another of Neopolitans into the City.
and another of Neapolitans, which was Pietro Gaetano's, commanded by Don
Alessandro de Monti; which did not only confirm and strengthen the Kings
Enemies, and suppress his Friends and Adherents, but did also put the City in
danger of remaining at last at the devotion of the Spaniards. Yet did there
presently follow another consequent to the advantage of his affairs: for the
Duke of Mayenne (who had consented to the resolution of the Parisians, not to
lose them utterly, though it displeased him much, that, as not confiding in
him, they should fall off to the protection of foreigners) being confirmed in
his suspicion that the Spaniards had particular designs of their own, and that
they fought to disturb his authority, and to make their profit of the
instability of the Parisians, The Duke of Mayenne, jealous of the Spanish
designs, procures a Treaty so far, that for many days the Peace was certainly
thought to be concluded.
quickened the Treaty of Agreement, which, by the means of Monsieur de
Villeroy, had never been intermitted with the High Chancellor and the Marshall
de Byron; and not having been able upon any terms to obtain a Truce and free
Commerce between the two parties, he was contented the King should give so many
Safe-conducts, that the Deputies might meet together from all the Provinces, to
consult in common of the means to conclude a Peace, with the safety of
Religion, and the acknowledgment of the King; which passed so far, that for
many days the Peace was held to be absolutely concluded. But as the opinions of
men are unsettled, and the most important determinations are altered by petty
accidents, the Duke of Mayenne in the mean time while the safe-conducts were
dispatching, (in the grant whereof the King was for some days backward) having
found the firmness of the Parliament in favor of him, and the weakness of the
Garrison that was received into Paris, not being in all both Spaniards and
Neopolitans above One thousand and three hundred Foot; a number fitter to
sasatisfie the people in appearance, than to bridle the City: Nor being yet
able to wean himself from his conceived hopes, as soon as he had received the
safe-conducts, he dispatched them with Letters added to all the Provinces, that
they should meet together in the City of Rheims in Champagne, not to apply
themselves to Peace (as had been agreed) but to make election of a new King;
which as soon as it was known and divulged abroad, the King finding himself
deceived, since now the talk was of assembling the Deputies to his prejudice,
which he had permitted to meet together to treat of a reunion and peace
between the two parties; having made grievous complaints thereof to Villeroy,
he recalled his safe-conducts, and gave command, that all the Deputies that
should fall into the hands of any of his party, should without delay be put to
death; which nevertheless would not have hindered the Duke of Mayenne from
calling the Assembly: But things not being yet ripe, nor disposed fully in the
manner he desired; under pretense of that fear, the Convocation of the States
was suffered to vanish insensibly of it self.

The Dukes hopes were augmented by the Declaration of Gregory the Fourteenth,
who (as the resolutions of Popes, Pope Gregory the XIV. resolves to send me^
and money to assist the League.
are almost ever hot and earnest at their first coming in) despising that
phlegmatic humor which Sixtus (not to foment with the colou^ of Religion the
interests of those who were in greatest power) had in the latter end of his
life expressed in the affairs of France; showed himself wholly inclined to
favor, and promote the progress of the League, accounting it necessary so to
do, for the safety of Religion, and the reputation and greatness of the
Apostolic See; and desirous that Hercole Sfondrato his Nephew, newly by him
invested in the Title of Duke of Montemarciano, should with military actions
and eminent command increase in reputation and riches, he decreed to send him
with numerous Forces in assistance of the League; and had therefore given order
that Horse and Foot should with all speed be raised in the Territories of the
Church; for the payment of which (though he found great contradiction in the
Consistory of Cardinals) he resolved to take those moneys, which, having with
extreme diligence been gathered together by Sixtus, were kept in the Castle of
St. Angelo; and to spend what should be requisite, as in the greatest and most
urgent occasion the Church could have: And at the same time he appointed Legate
to the Kingdom of France, Monsignor Marsilio Landriano, a Prelat of Milan, his
Confident, Marsilio Landriano, a Milanese, is chosen Legate to the Kingdom of
France by Gregory the XIV.
and a man that was wont (as they say) stoutly to assert the liberty of the
Church. Which things, after they were resolved on, and set in order, he sent
several Messengers with speed to the Duke of Mayenne, and to the Bishop of
Piacenza, (whom he had in the mean time confirmed Vice-Legat in France)
promising to them both plentiful supplies of men and money, that they might be
able, not only rooting out heresy, to secure the Kingdom from imminent danger,
but choosing a Catholic, peaceable King, and one obedient to the Church, to
compose discords in peace, and restore tranquillity and repose to the people,
already wearied out, and ruined with the calamities of War; and because the
City of Paris had with infinite merit showed it self by proof to be the true
Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the constant Bulwark of Religion, he professed,
That he would employ his utmost endeavouas to ease it of its grievances, and
settle it again in its first splendour of riches and greatness.

These Letters did not only rejoice the Vice-Legat, Gregory the 14. assigns
15000 Crowns by the month for the service of the League.
and confirm the courage of the Duke of Mayenne, (and so much the more, because
with them the Pope sent an assignment of Fifteen thousand Crowns a month to be
paid by the Merchants of Paris and Lions) but being published in Print to the
whole party, did also fill every one with infinite expectation, seeing that the
new Pope stood not like Sixtus, doubtful and unresolved what he should
determine to do, but declaring himself resolutely, showed he was an open Enemy
to the King, and an effectual Protector of the Union, adding also deeds to
words, while he was scarcely sought unto. That which increased the hopes of the
Duke of Mayenne, no less than the Popes forwardness, was the cunning of the
Duke of Parma; who (persisting in his design of drawing out the French Wars in
length, to make advantage at last of their weariness and weakness, and
therefore not willing that the Duke of Mayenne, remaining inferior in
strength, should lose courage, and resolve to make an Agreement with the King)
seemed not to like well of those things which Mendozza and Don Diego d Ivarra,
who were in Paris, managed particularly without the Duke; and with frequent
Messages assured him, that he was settling the affairs of Flanders, that he
might be able with all speed to march with his Army into France; promising him,
that he would dispose of things in such manner as they with a joint consent
should resolve, without taking notice of the opinions of others, the
Commissions being such which he had from the Catholic King: For confirmation
of which things, to those men the Duke of Mayenne sent to him, he showed
preparations for the gathering of an Army, and the lists of Forty thousand
fighting men to enter into Picardy; for the payment of which, and to supply the
League plentifully with money, according to the desires of the French, he
affirmed, a course was taken in the Court of Spain, and that he expected the
assignment for it every hour. By which, the Duke of Mayenne being encouraged,
and returned to his wonted hopes, had dispatched his Secretary Baudoin Sieur
des Ports, to Rome the second time, with order to solicit the Pope to hasten
away the Duke of Montemarciano, who was to pass through the States of the Duke
of Savoy, and the County of Bourgongne straight into Lorain, to oppose the
Forces which were preparing for the King in Germany by the Viscount de Turenne,
and the Prince of Anhalt; and to the same effect he dispatched an express
Messenger into Spain to President Ieannin, who was already gone to that Court,
to the end that he might obtain from the Catholic King, that the Forces which
that year were to pass from Milan into Flanders, should join in Lorain with
those of the Pope for the same purpose, hoping assuredly, that the Germans
finding a brisk opposition at the Confines, so that they might not be able to
advance and unite themselves with the King, and the Duke of Parma with the
Forces of Flanders entering into Picardy, the League would quickly and very
easily remain victorious. In the mean time he had invited the Duke of Lorain,
and the other Lords of his Family, to meet at Rheims, to the end, that with
their general liking and consent, things might be disposed to their due ends,
and that the difficulties might be removed which hindered the interests of
their House from being brought to perfection.

These things were contrived at that time by the Duke, and negotiated with
great diligence in all places by men of prudence and experience: But the King,
whilst opportunity and the weakness of his Enemies invited him, not to lose
time without advantage, firm in his design to streighten still the City of
Paris, in the fall of which he thought the principal strength of his
adversaries must fall too, resolved to lay siege to Chartres, from the
Territories whereof Paris is wont to receive the greatest part of its ordinary
provisions; and because the City being great, populous, and very well
fortified, represented at first view the difficulty of the enterprise, he
determined to prevent those Supplies which for the well-furnishing of a place
of so great importance might be sent by the Parisians and the Duke of Mayenne,
who with those Forces he had left, lay still at Soissons, to be ready to turn
which way soever need should require. Wherefore having sent the Marshall de
Byron toward Diepe, to receive and conduct the Ammunition and other necessaries
come out of England, he taking a contrary way, went with the Duke of Nevers
once more to besiege Provins, a place of small moment, and for the defense
whereof, they of the League were resolved not to run any hazard; but after that
the Marshall de Byron, having received the provisions which were at Diepe,
began to return back, the King gave him order, that making as if he would
assault the City of Dreux, he should on the sudden clap aside before Chartres,
and surround it in such manner, that the relief which should be dispatched
thither, might have no opportunity of entrance. Byron having passed the Seine
at Vernon with his men and his Artillery, pointing sometime this way, and
sometimes that way, did at once give his Soldiers convenience to refresh
themselves, and hold the Enemy in doubt to what place he would bend at last;
making show sometimes that he also would go to join with the rest of the Army
at Provins; sometimes, as if he would put himself in order to besiege Dreux;
now he placed himself upon the great high Road to Paris, and then at last
having marched twelve leagues without resting, he came upon the sixteenth of
February under the Walls of Chartres.

The description of the si^uation of Chartres, before which the Marshall de
Byron lays siege
The City of Chartres is seated in an uneven place, varied with fertile rising
hills, so that the East Side stands upon the top of an hill, and the West
spreads it self in the bottom of the Plain, through the midst whereof runs the
River Eure, which, as soon as it comes to the Walls of the City on the
South Side, divides it self into three branches; one of which entering into the
Town, drives a great many Mills; the second passing under the Walls, falls into
the Moat, and runs along through it; and the third taking a compass about a
hundred paces from the Wall, invirons the circuit of the Suburbs, till being
all come to the limits of the City turning toward the North, they meet again,
and run together toward Normandy. The East Side, which stands upon the hills,
(by reason of the difficulty of bringing Cannon thither, and because it looked
toward those places from whence there was no expectation of any relief) was not
besieged by the Army: but the other side, which distends it self along the
Plain, and looks toward Paris, was all blocked up at the same instant: for the
Sieur de Vivans, with his Harquebusiers on Horseback, quartered on the
North-side in the Bourg des Espars; Monsieur de Sourdis, with the French
Infantry, lay over against the Port de Dreux; and the Marshall de Byron, with
the remainder of the Cavalry and the Swisses, encamped himself on the
South Side, over against the Gate and Bastion of St. Michel.

The Governor of the City was Monsieur de la Bourdaisiere, a careful diligent
Cavalier. The Foot of the Garrison was commanded by Captain Pesseray, a very
famous Soldier; but the rest of the provisions were not correspondent to the
valor of the Commander: for there were but few Foot in the Town, and much
fewer Horse; and the supplies that were lately come into it, were so weak, that
they had made but a small addition: for the Sieur de la Croix, who departing
from Orleans, was suddenly come with sixty Cuiras^iers, and two hundred
Harquebusiers on horseback to enter into the City, inconsiderately fell for
haste into the Army, which was drawing near the Walls, and being routed and put
to flight, hardly got in with eighty of his men: on the other side Monsieur de
Grammont, who was upon his march to go into Normandy, returned speedily that
way, but brought not with him above forty Gentlemen, and an hundred Soldiers:
and Monsieur de Vitry, who doubting the Enemy would go to Dreux, had shut
himself up in that Town, had not had means nor time to get thither; so that the
number of the Garrison was much inferior to what need required. To this defect
was added the want of Ammunition: for though when at first the Governor
visited those stores, there were found three hundred Barrels of Powder, yet the
cozenage of the Officers had so diminished it, (at a time when it was exceeding
dear in all places) that the first day of the siege (to la Bourdaisiere's great
grief of heart) there were not left above eighty; and there likewise appeared a
great want of those other things that are necessary for defense. These
important wants were in part supplied by the forwardness of the Citizens, who
with a free courage exposed themselves to all services; and the same did a
great many Country People, who were got into the City, and labored with the
spade to make up the Works. For the first days, the Marshall thought it
sufficient to shut up the Avenues to the City, to exclude all relief, till the
King should come to the Camp with the rest of the Army; and therefore he
advanced at the first dash, to quarter in the Suburbs. The Governor
endeavored to deprive him of that convenience, (very necessary in respect of
the season) and set fire on the houses to burn them down; but the remedy was so
late, by reason of the Enemies sudden coming, that they had means to quench the
fire before it could destroy many of the buildings; and so the Assailants had
free possession of the Suburbs, in which, after that the Marshall de Byron was
commodiously quartered, the King arrived upon the nineteenth day: yet did they
not presently begin to raise Batteries, as well because the Commanders were not
well agreed among themselves on which side they should assault it, as also
because the want of Ammunition was perchance no less in the Army, than that of
the Defendents within the Town; the provisions that came from England being far
short of the Kings demands, and of the promises made to the Viscount de
Turenne: But the High Chancellor Chiverny, Governor of the Province, who was
exceeding rich, and had very great authority in the Country, having at his own
expense sent for many necessary things from the Towns and Castles thereabouts,
it was resolved to batter on the side toward the Fauxbourg des Espars, as a
place less fortified than the rest, there being no other defense but great
Towers of the old fashion, and a Wall not very strong, nor formerly fully lined
with earth; but the Defendents having foreseen where they were like to be
assaulted by the besiegers, though they had no Engineers skilful in
Fortifications, yet they did draw a Line, as well as they could, on the inside
behind the Wall, flanking it with Ravelins, and raising it exceeding high with
earth, in such sort, that the Artillery having battered down a good part of the
Wall, their Works behind it appeared so strong, that the King, not willing to
expose his men to manifest danger, but knowing the small number of the
besieged, and meaning to tire them out with hard duty and working, resolved to
remove his Battery to another place, thereby to render their past labors vain
and useless: so in the beginning of March two Batteries were raised over
against the Port de Dreux, and they began to play on that side with eleven
Pieces of Cannon. The Defendents presently turned to make Works there, and with
so much the greater heart, because that part was already flanked with two
convenient Ravelines, which had been made ever since the year 1569, when the
Prince of Conde besieged that place; and adding new Fortifications to the
first, they reduced it to such a pass, that redoubled assaults were given in
vain, and with the loss of many men. All the month of March they labored in
that place, without being able to do any good, battering without, working
within, and skirmishing almost every day at the points of the Ravelines, and at
the entry of the Courtine: but upon the fifth of April, the King, with the same
intention of frustrating the pains of the Defendents, The Sieur de Chastillon's
stratagem to cast up his Trench by night without error.
removing his Battery yet again from thence, with eleven Redoubts, went
something lower toward the Port St. Michel. The business was undertaken on
that side by the Sieur de Chastillon; who doubting lest the darkness of the
night might make him mistake the place where he had resolved to open his
trench, found this way, which was, to make a Truce for two hours with those of
the Town, under pretense of fetching off the dead; and that being concluded, he
himself was busy in making the bodies be pulled out of the Moat, and for
quicker dispatch, to be brought along the Line, to the place where the Battery
was prepared; which not only gave him a wonderful great convenience to discover
and measure the situation, but also he feigned that one of the dead bodies
could not be fetched off time enough, and caused it to be left for a mark upon
the edge of the Moat, in that very place where he had designed by night to
entrench himself. So the effect followed proportionably without error: for the
Battery being raised, and his Trench cast up in the appointed place, he began
to batter with twelve Pieces of Cannon, and at the same time took care for the
building of a Gallery covered with timber, that he might securely pass the
Moat, and come to the foot of the Wall. The endeavors used on that side were
thought to be very hopeful: for the Defendents, already tired, had not had time
to cast up many Works there: But the Batteries went on slowly, For want of
Ammunition, the Battery goes on so slowly at Chartres, that the King thinks to
raise the siege.
and with intermission; for there wanted Ammunition in the Camp; so great a
defect, and so hard to be remedied, that the King was oftentimes minded to give
over the enterprise, if the Duke of Nevers, and much more the High Chancellor,
had not stayed him with earnest entreaties and persuasions, and if some that
ran over to him from the City, had not reported the want of Powder to be much
greater within than it was without; which was so true, that it being all spent,
there was hardly the quantity of two Barrels left, and that brought in by
particular men, to be delivered to the Soldiers. The besiegers had already
finished their Gallery, which was a thing built like a bridge, covered with
boards overspread with earth and turfs, and then on the top of all, other
boards and pieces of wood were fastened to make it stand the more firmly: the
sides were made of thick beams joined so near together, that they defended
those that were in the hollow of the Bridge; and the bottom was raised so high
with planks, as might bear up the Assailants level with the breach. But the
besieged having yet some Fireworks, and having also got together all the pitch
which could be found in the several Shops, set fire on the Gallery, at the time
when being ready to give the assault, many were already advanced into it; in
such manner, that the Engineer himself (who was called la Guard) and some
others with him having lost their lives, Colonel Parabere was forced with his
men to come out of the Gallery, and to go a good way without any shelter, to
get before the appointed time unto the assault, which caused the death of
manyof his most valiant Soldiers; and yet the fight being stoutly maintained
on both sides, lasted four hours together, with much blood, there being slain
two Colonels, eight Captains, and above two hundred Soldiers: and Parabere
himself, and the Sieur de Montet, a valiant Gentleman of Languedoc,
Chastillon's Adjutant, were very dangerously wounded. But the want of Powder
was already become irreparable to those within; wherefore Monsieur de Vitry
first, and then the Viscount de Tavennes having attempted to put Men and
Ammunition into the City, and not having been able to effect it by reason of
the diligence of the Cavalry, which with continual care scoured all the ways;
and after it was known that the Duke of Mayenne being come to the Bois de
Vincennes, not having strength enough to make opposition in the field, had set
himself upon the enterprise of Chasteau-Thierry, in a Country far remote, the
besieged (being reduced to defend themselves with their Swords and Pikes,
because they had not wherewithal to charge their Muskets and Cannon, and being
decreased with toil, hard duty, and the loss of men slain in the late assaults)
in the end, upon the Twelfth of April they agreed to surrender, The Defendents
of Chartres not being relieved, surrender the Town.
if within three days they were not relieved with the number of, at least, Four
hundred men, and some limited quantity of Ammunition; which days being being
expired without received any assistance, at last upon the Nineteenth day,
Monsieur de la Bourdaisiere, and the Sieur de Grammont (for Captain Pesseray
was already slain in an assault) marching out in order with their Baggage, and
Colors flying, gave up the place into the hands of the Baron de Byron, who
entered into it with 800 Foot, and 200 Horse; and the King put Monsieur de
Sourdis in the Government, to gratify the High Chancellor, upon whom he, or
(as his Detractors said) his Wife depended.

At the same time, while the King was busied at the siege of Chartres, the Duke
of Mayenne being departed from Soissons with all his Forces, and come to the
Bois de Vincennes, stood doubtful a good while, whether he should venture the
Army he had to relieve that place; but those Forces that were sent for from
many places not arriving time enough, and knowing himself so much weaker, that
his advancing would have endangered the Army, without hope of giving any relief
to the besieged, turned toward the way of Champagne, where he had appointed the
meeting of the Princes of Lorain; and to keep up his reputation, sat down
before Chasteau-Thierry, a great place, well peopled, and pleasantly seated;
but whereof no long defense was to be hoped for, either in regard of the Walls
of the Town, or of the strength of the Castle. The Governor was the Viscount de
Comblesy, Son to Secretary Pinart, who, besides his Wife and Children, had also
his Father and Mother, The Duke of Mayenne besieges Chasteau-Thierry, a place
more pleasant than strong, the Governor whereof was the Secretary Pinart.
and a great many Women shut up with him in the Castle, who being all
affrighted, made a great stir and confusion, though the defendants were
sufficient to make it good for some days. To this was added, that the Father
and the Son had brought into the Castle all their Plate, Money, and
Housholdstuff, which amounted to a great value, and were above measure
sollicitous, for fear if the place should be sacked, they might fall into the
Enemies hands. On the other side, the Dukes Army had a desire, not only to
pillage the Town, which was full of inhabitants, but much more to plunder the
Castle, wherein, the report was, that there were inestimable riches; by which
hopes the Soldiers being encouraged, and especially the strangers, at their
first arrival they bravely possessed themselves of the Suburbs, frighting and
confounding the heartless defendants with their resolution. As soon as the
Suburbs were taken, the Cannons were planted without delay, which having beaten
down a good piece of the Wall, the assault was given; and though it was happily
sustained till the evening, yet it left the besieged without hopes of being
longer able to defend the Town; wherefore presently quitting it, they retired
the same night into the Castle. At that the tumult increased, and louder grew
the cries of the Women, who with their Prayers and importunities, were the
cause that Pinart sent a Trumpet for his old Colleague the Sieur de Villeroy,
who was in the Duke of Mayennes Camp, to treat with him about some composition;
and yet having conferred together for two long hours, they came not to any
conclusion: Wherefore, no sooner was Villeroy gone out of the Castle, but
instantly the Cannon began to play; the noise of which troubling not only the
Ladies, but even Pinart himself, and also many others not accustomed to the
trade of Arms, the Sieur de Villeroy was sent for again the next morning, who
was met by Madam de Pinart, with the other Ladies that were of her company,
kneeling upon the ground, and beseeching him with tears, Secretary Pinart
having brought all his goods into the Castle, for fear of losing them, treats a
Composition with the Sieur de Villeroy.

The Duke of Mayenne receives the place and Castle, with the composition of
Twenty thousand Crowns.


to free them by a composition from falling into the power of the Soldiers, and
especially of strangers. This sight moved even Villeroy himself, who returning
to the Duke of Mayenne, labored to persuade him, that it was much better to
receive the Castle upon a Capitulation, and to get a good sum of money from it
for the maintenance of the War, than to enrich strangers, and shed French blood
to satisfy their greediness: To which, the Duke of Mayenne (averse from
cruelty and plunder) easily consenting, though the Army grumbled very much at
it, yet the agreement was concluded, the Castle compounding for Twenty thousand
Crowns, great store of Victual which the Town was to provide, the place, with
the Artillery and Ammunition remaining freely at the Dukes disposing. But
Pinart thinking himself free from the calamities of the siege, fell presently
into other troubles: For, being accused of treachery, and that not out of
cowardice, but perfidiousness, he had delivered up that place without any
necessity, he was therefore censured guilty by the Parliament of Chalons, and
being absent, condemned as a Rebel; and afterward bought out the Kings pardon,
and the confiscation of his Estate with Thirty thousand Ducats. The taking of
Chasteau-Thierry, though not equal to that of Chartres, either for the quality
of the place, or for the consequences that it drew along with it, did yet give
some reputation to the Arms of the League; whereupon the Duke of Mayenne,
augmented in hopes and courage, went to the meeting at Rheims, where a common
consultation was to be held, of the way that should be taken to advance the
common interests, and to oppose the progress of the King; who, after the taking
of Chartres, had, by policy and force gotten Louviers also, a place in Normandy
near Rouen, which, for its situation and fortification, was esteemed of very
great importance.

But though the War proceeded fortunately for the King, other things were not
so prosperous, but new troublesome accidents arose within his own party; for
the Catholic Lords and Gentlemen (seeing that the time of his conversion was
deferred without end, and that all the promises, and all the appointments of
assembling the States, and calling the Prelates together, to give him those
instructions propounded by himself, and talked of every hour, proved vain, and
without any effect at all) began already to stagger in their resolutions, to
think of retiring, to murmur among themselves, and to show their discontent,
which was increased beyond measure by a Declaration of the Kings; who, after
the taking of Chartres, being come to Mante, had called his Council, with many
of the most conspicuous persons that followed him, and had given them to
understand, The King in Council with the most conspicuous men of ^is party,
declares the necessity of giving some satisfaction to the Hugonots. He proposes
the confirmation of the Edict of Pacification made last by Henry the Third,
which grants them Liberty of Conscience, with some circumstances and
limitations; and it is consented to.
how the Queen of England and the Princes of Germany his Confederates (of whose
Arms and assistance he had such urgent need, that without them he had no hope
of being able to sustain his Crown) did press him daily, that (giving peace to
men's Consciences) he would permit Liberty of Religion, and a peaceable
indifferent way of living to his Subjects, to unite them with perfect charity
in the same body; and that the German Army being now upon the point of coming,
he thought it good to prevent those requests, which would then be made unto him
with arms in their hands, in a time of extreme necessity, and to grant
something now to those of the Reformed Religion, that he might not be forced
then to yield much more unto them: That he did not intend to grant them more
than what King Henry, his glorious and most Catholic Predecessor had done, but
simply to renew the last Edict of Pacification which had after been broken and
revoked, not by the Kings will, but by the violences of the League; and that he
thought fit to tell his Reasons there in Council, to the end, that none might
make a sinister interpretation of that resolution, but should know, that all
was done for the advantage of the Catholic Religion, not to suffer himself to
be reduced to a necessity of giving them greater liberty, than what had been
granted and established in the times of his Predecessors: That every one should
weigh the state of present Affairs, the Forces which the Pope and the Catholic
King sent against him, necessitating him to make use of the Supplies of the
Protestants, to whom he could not, with reason, deny some just satisfaction, if
he would be upheld by their blood, by their moneys, by their endeavors, and by
their assistance; That this should not retard his Promises, nor in the least
manner prejudice the Catholic Religion, which he would constantly favor,
protect, and maintain. The major part of voices assented to the Kings proposal,
some others were scandalized at it, and particularly Charles, Cardinal of
Vendos^e, (who, his Uncle being dead, made himself be called Cardinal of
Bourbon) who (saying that he could not with a safe conscience be present at
that determination) made show as if he would have gone away; but being not
followed by the other Prelates, and sharply recalled by the King, he came back
(though not much to his reputation) and sat down again. The Archbishop of
Bourges, and the Bishop of Nantes, President de Thou, the High-Chancellor, and
many other Catholics, demanded that the Edict for liberty of Conscience might
not be absolute, but that a clause might be added to it, to show, it was
intended to be in force until such time as Peace being obtained, the
differences of Religion might be accommodated, to reunite all the Subjects in
one and the same belief: which being willingly consented to by the King, the
Edict was made, and some days after published, and Registered in the
Parliaments of his Party. Those of the Council did not much resist this
Declaration, as well because they saw the urgent need the King had to make use
of the Protestants, as because they perceived the opposing of it would have
produced no good; besides, the Hugonots already enjoyed that indeed, which was
now granted to them in writing; But, those Soldiers that were affected to the
Catholic Religion, and that had not heard the reasons of it, took mavelous
great offense at it, and began almost openly to be disgusted; and so much the
more, because the Cardinal of Bourbon, and other great ones, fomented that
discontent, and with words, not only in private, but publicly oftentimes
stirred up men's minds to a resentment.

The Cardinal of Bourbon had already long before entertained a thought of
framing a Party of Catholics, The Cardinal of Vendosme begins to raise a third
party of Catholics, to make himself Head of them, and thereby to bring himself
to the Crown.
different both from the League, and from those that followed the King. This
thought was sprung up in him, from the consideration that the Kings obstinacy,
in not turning his Religion, did not only make his own possession of the Crown
more difficult, but also deprived the whole Royal Family of the just
pretensions it had to the inheritance of the Crown, since that all of them, as
followers of an Heretic, were excluded from it together; and they of the
League began already to discourse of breaking the Salique Law, and of calling
other Princes to the Crown, who had nothing to do with the Royal Consanguinity:
and this thought perplexed and troubled him much more than the rest, because his
Cosen the Prince of Conde, being then, as it were yet in swadling-clothes, and
of the Hugonot Religion; and his elder brother the Prince of Conty, both by
reason of a great imperfection in his speech, being not very fit to govern, and
because he had been cut for the Stone in his childhood, accounted unable to get
children, he thought the nearest hopes of the Crown belonged to himself,
because the Count de Soissons, the third brother, was younger than he; and the
Duke of Montpensier was much farther from the Succession than they. From this
meditation, and the disdain it wrought in him, he began by little and little to
nourish a desire of withstanding that prejudice, and to make himself a Faction
that might bring him to the election of the Kingdom, since neither the Pope
could oppose the person of a Cardinal, nor the Catholic King refuse him as an
Heretic; nor could they of the League in the end deny him due obedience. He
had imparted this thought to Iehan Touchard Abbot of Bellozanne, who from his
Infancy had been his Tutour, a man not at all of Pedantique breeding, nor of a
mean dull understanding, but full of lively, active spirits, and well versed in
the discipline of the Court. This man looking after the advancement of his own
greatness in being his Masters instrument, fomented the Cardinal's designs, and
regulated his pretensions with good instructions, counseled him to proceed
secretly and very dexterously till he had gotten followers and adherents, and
teaching him to make use of the conjunctures of times, which would offer him
fit and profitable opportunities. And that he might have assistance in the
raising of so eminent a design, having discovered the business to Jacques Davy
Sieur du Perron (a young man, of mean birth, but of most profound learning, and
therefore from the first received, and well looked upon in the Cardinals
Family) and Scipio Balbani a Lucchese (one who having spent many years
unfortunately in Traffic, was, of a Merchant, become a manager of affairs in
Court) they applied themselves, with all their utmost endeavors to the framing
of that third party. To this end Perron, under show of complement, went to the
Duke of Longueville and the Count de St Paul, brothers; who being descended
from the Royal Family, but by Progenitors that were not legitimate, calling
themselves of the House of Orleans, were zealous Catholics, and kept
themselves united with the Princes of the blood for the maintenance of the
Crown; and having represented unto them the considerations of that prejudice,
which from the obstinacy of the present King did fall upon their common
interests, drew them cunningly to the same opinion, and to hold secret
intelligence and correspondence with the Cardinal. On the other side, Balbani,
under color of his own private affairs, went to Rome, to make excuses to the
Pope for the Cardinals abode in those places that were of the King's party,
which was to no other end, Scipio Balbani is sent to Rome by the Cardinal of
Vend^sm^, to treat with the Pope, and to communicate his design unto him.
but only to exhort and persuade him to his conversion; which being now
protracted contrary to the common expectations, and to so many promises he had
made, the Cardinal, not willing to offend his own Conscience, sent him to
excuse it to his Holiness, and to pray him to protect the Royal Family, which
ought not to forfeit its rights for the obstinacy of one man; and that when the
Cardinal should once be made certain of his hope, that the Apostolic See would
suffer no other to be King but a Catholic of the legitimate stock of St.
Lewis, he would declare himself with the Catholic Nobility and Commons, and
deprive the King of the greatest strength of those who followed him at that
present, to uphold the Rights of the Royal Family. Now whilst Perron and
Balbani, the one within, the other without the Kingdom, did labor to plant the
root of this third party, the Cardinal staying at Tours, as Head and President
of the King's Council that resided there, did, by himself, and by the means of
Touchard, try to work upon the minds of many, and particularly of Gilles de
Souvray Governor of that City, a man of exceeding great Piety, and no less
Prudence, and who in the Court had always been wonderfully famed for goodness
and knowledge. But these designs, which, being communicated to many, could not
be kept secret, were come to the ear of Philip Cardinal o^ Lenon-court, an old
dependant upon the House of Navar, who likewise following the Kings party,
resided in Tours, and was one of the Council: and there being no very good
correspondence between him and the Cardinal of Bourbon, The Cardinal of
Lenon-court gives the King notice of the designs of the Cardinal of Vendosme.
he was the first that gave the King notice of it, representing confusedly unto
him what he had been able to find out concerning those designs that were
contriving. The King knowing the emulation that was between the Cardinals, did
not absolutely credit Lenon-court's relation; and yet he remained a little
perplexed in mind, and began to stand at watch, that he might come to more
certainty of the business, which Fortune brought him, as it were, of her self,
in such a way, as a man's own imagination could not have thought: for Balbani,
who was already come into Italy, having in his journey met with Des Ports, the
Duke of Mayenne's Secretary, who was likewise going to Rome about the present
affairs, made friendship with him, as they use to do that are interessed in the
same Nation: after which, either inconsiderately, or that he might begin to
scatter some seeds of it in the League, he imparted the business to him, for
which the Cardinal sent him to the Pope, and showed him the Commissions, which
for his information he had given him, distinctly comprised in writing. Des
Ports, a subtle man, and a wary manager of things, knew how to behave himself,
and to flatter Balbani in such manner, that he not only sounded the depth of
the business, and what adherents the Cardinal had, but withal got a copy of his
Instructions out of his hands; whereof he sending several duplicates in his
Letters to the D. of Mayenne, it so fell out, The Sieur des Ports Secretary to
the Duke of Mayenne, informs him of the practices of the said Cardinal: but a
Letter being intercepted, falls into the Kings hands.
that one of them was intercepted by the Garrison of Auxerre, and came to the
Kings hands, with full information of the whole Plot. For the clearing and
confirmation of this intelligence gotten by the Letters of Des Ports, it
happened that Jacques du Quesnay, a Norman Gentleman, who was bred Page to the
Duke of Longueville, as he was one night on the far side of his Lord's bed,
where he was unseen by reason of the Curtains, (the custom of France being to
entertain great persons while they are undressing) by chance heard a long
discourse of du Perron to the same purpose, which he, thinking nothing, related
to Iehan d' Espinay, his Kinsman; but, he being a Hugonot, and of a discreet
understanding, delayed not long to discover all to Monsieur de Chaseron, under
whom he served in the War, by whom afterward the King was distinctly informed
in every particular.

When the King knew what was plotting against him, he was extremely afflicted
and troubled in mind; and having told the business to the High-Chancellor, and
Monsieur de la Noue, The High Chancellor being told by the King, of the
Cardinal of Vendosmes designs, persuades him to turn Catholic.
desired to have their advice in it. The High-Chancellor intent upon the King's
Conversion, or because he so thought it best, said, it was in the Kings own
power to remove those obstacles, and dispel those Clouds: for, by turning
Catholic, he might at once take away the foundation of all those contrivers,
and open a most secure way to Peace and Union: That to think of any other
remedy, was not only vain, but destructive: for by alienating the Cardinal of
Bourbon and other Princes of the Blood who sided with him, he should cut off
one of his own Arms, and weaken his party in such manner, that he would no
longer be in a condition to resist his Enemies: and on the other side, by
dissembling the knowledge of their machinations, they would have convenience to
perfect the design, drawing with them a great part of the Catholics,
discontented at the so long delay of his conversion: Whereupon, to shun those
two inevitable dangers, it was necessary at last to give satisfaction to all
his servants, while the state of Affairs permitted him to do it with his honor;
for when the Catholic party should fall from him, it would be no longer time
to convert, nor to give them satisfaction, thinking to lure them again, as they
do Hawks, when they are loose from the fist; that therefore he should rouse up
his courage, and with a Royal resolution, cut off the Roots of those evils that
were creeping about so dangerously. Monsieur de la Noue said, That he would
speak the more freely, because his Majesty and all the World knew, Monsieur de
la Noues Answer to the High-Chancellor.
he had said from the very beginning, That if the King did not turn Catholic,
he should never be King of France; but that now it was neither time nor
conjuncture, to make that determination; That the King knew how great a power
of his Enemies was like shortly to come upon him, the Pope and the Catholic
King having made wonderful great preparations to assist the League; that to
oppose those Forces, he had no other prop but the Supplies of the Queen of
England, and of the Princes of Germany, who were drawing a great Army together
under the Viscount of Turenne, to uphold them in so great need; which
Provisions and Supplies would all vanish in a moment, if he at that present
should change his Religion; for not only they being offended, would forsake
him, but all the Hugonots of the Kingdom that followed him would fall away,
whereby at the arrival of the Enemies Forces he would be found alone,
unprovided, abandoned, without any means to resist, and left to the discretion
of his Enemies: That the exigency of Affairs would not give way to the counsel
of preventing the future, with a present ruin: That the Forces of Italy were
already set forward, the Duke of Parma already was gathering an Army; nor did
the straitness of time permit the thought of things that were far off, but
persuade the use of present remedies: That the Cardinal of Bourbons design had
no very firm foundation, and though it should succeed, yet it required a great
length of time: That at the present, not very resolute and powerful remedies
were to be applied, but such as might mitigate and defer the disease, till
means might be had to purge it away: That it was needful to separate those
Lords into several places, to have an eye upon their actions, to seek to
pacify them, and keep them in till the event were seen of the coming of the
foreign Forces of each party: That afterward time and occasions would of
themselves minister remedies proportionable to the disease, and the means of
getting one day out of those Labyrinths. The King best liked this advice, which
was also confirmed by the Marshall de Biron, to whose opinion all serious
matters were at last referred. Whereupon he presently dispatched Letters to the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and the other Lords of the Council, that they should come
to him to the Camp, he having need of their help and assistance; and removing
the Count de Soissons from the Government of those parts, he sent to Govern
Poictou and Tourain the Prince of Conty; a man not engaged in the plot, The
Count d^ Soissons, brother to the Cardinal Ve^d^sme, is removed from the
Government of Poictou upon suspicion.
and already excluded by his own Brothers: For the Count de Soissons also
(angry, because the King having often promised him his own Sister, the Lady
Catherine, to Wife, did now refuse to give her him) assented to the Cardinals
designs, with hopes also, that though he were the younger Brother, yet being a
Layman, the Election which the Catholic Princes of the Blood should make,
might fall upon him: Whereupon, the Cardinal being come to the Camp before
Chartres, and continuing to come to the Council, happened to be present at the
Edict which was made in favor of the Hugonots, which he opposed both by his
gestures and words, and after it was passed, ceased not to talk sinisterly of
it, to persuade the Catholics to comply with him. Nor could the King so easily
have dis-entangled himself from that tumult, if an engine framed by the League
to do him hurt, had not proved of admirable advantage to him.

Landriano the Nuncio was come to Rhems, being sent by the Pope, with Monitory
Letters directed to the Prelates that followed the Kings party, and to the
Nobility, Landriano the Popes Nuncio arrives at Rheims with Monitory Letters to
the Prelates and Catholics of the Kings pa^ty.
Cities, and people of the same party; wherein, after the wonted Prefaces, and
having copiously exaggerated and detested the Error which the Catholics,
especially the Clergy, committed in following and fomenting a King that was a
relapsed and excommunicated Heretic, and in voluntarily putting upon their own
necks, the miserable yoke of the servitude of Heresy, he did at last with
pregnant words ordain, and expressly command the Clergy (under pain of
Excommunication, of being deprived of their Dignities and Benefices, and of
being used as Sectaries and Heretics) that within a certain time, they should
withdraw themselves from those places that yielded obedience to Henry of
Bourbon, and from the union and fellowship of his Faction; and admonished and
exhorted, but in the end, also commanded the Nobility and People, that
forsaking all, and leaving those places that acknowledged the Heretics, they
should retire among the Catholics, and such as obeyed the Apostolic See in
the true unity of the Faith. The whole Monitory was full of grave and exquisit
words, high and threatening expressions, sharp and rigorous commands, and in
sum, such as seemed not to suit much with the present time, wherein the Kings
Forces went on prosperously, and the affairs of the League were diminished both
in strength and reputation: wherefore being taken into consideration by the D.
of Mayenne and the principal heads of his party, many were of opinion, and
particularly Monsieur de Villeroy, that it was good to defer the publication
thereof till another time, when (the Arms of the Confederates being in greater
credit and reputation) they might hope to reap some fruit by it: But the Nuncio
(little versed in the affairs of France, and accustomed to measure things by
the opinions of the Court of Rome) the Bish. of Piacenza also (though he was
better experienced in the present businesses, yet wholly intent to please the
Pope, and win his favor) and the Spanish Ministers (being persuaded by hatred,
and enticed with a desire to see things every day more disturbed) were
resolved, that the Monitory should be published. The French Lords considered,
that it was not only a thing very difficult, but also not by any means to be
hoped for; that the Prelates and the Nobility, who had their wealth, dignities,
and Prelacies in the Kings hands, should resolve to forsake them to satisfy
the Pope, their number being but small now adays, who for their souls sake are
content to f^rgo their estates; that moreover they had already from the
beginning expected these commands and menaces from the Pope, and had prepared
their minds to bear them: That the more they were forced, the more obdurate
they would be, and losing all hope of ever being received into the Popes favor,
would become more obstinate in following their party, and laboring to get the
Victory: That it was needful to allure them, and draw them cunningly, not to
terrify them and drive them into utter despair: Tha^ suchlike threats would
be proper after a Victory, to give them color and occasion upon that pretense
to fall from the King when his affairs were languishing, but not now, when
being powerful and flourishing, it was not to be believed that any body would
forsake him: That prudent resolutions were not to be grounded upon
probabilities, but truths; nor ought things to be regulated according to the
opinion of those that judged afar off, but by the judgment of men, who, besides
their long experience in affairs, were present upon the place it self. The
Popish and Spanish Ministers thought these things were spoken out of a common
charity to the Nation, not because they were true: and the Duke of Mayenne, who
had set all his hopes upon the coming of the Forces out of Italy and Flanders,
After long opposition by the French Lords, the Monitory is published to the
satisfaction of the Spanish and Popish party.
and would not distaste those Princes, referred himself to them; and therefore,
without delaying, the Monitory was presently published, which produced the same
effect the French Lords had foretold; for the King having called his Council
(wherein he would have all the Prelates that were in Mante, and the most
conspicuous persons of his Army to be present) complained grievously of the
course which the Pope took with him at that present, praised and commended the
moderation of Sixtus, who being made sensible, that the discords grew from the
ambition and covetousness of dividing the Kingdom, and not from zeal and
affection toward Religion, had forborne to give assistance to the League, and
tacitly granted him time to think of turning opportunely to the Catholic
Faith; cherishing, and graciously harkening to those who followed him for a
good end, and for the service of God, of Justice, and of their Country, as the
Duke of Luxembourg could give full testimony. He declared his intention to
observe what he had sincerely promised to the Catholic Nobility in the
beginning of his Reign; he excused himself, that he had been hindered by the
heat of War, from using those means which he thought fitting, both for the
importance of the business, and the quality of his Person; and at last exhorted
all the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons to use all their uttermost endeavors to
conserve the immunities and privileges of the Gallique Church, not to suffer
that Kingdom to be divided and dismembered, which they had received so
flourishing from their Ancestors; and not to permit the people to remain
without their Prelates and Pastors to the danger of error, schism, and
damnation; things which though they were neither seen nor considered at Rome,
were yet nevertheless too obvious to the eye of whosoever should look upon them
with Christian piety. Hereupon he caused a very grave Decree to be made,
declaring, That he would inviolably observe his promise, and exhorting the
Parliaments to take care for the dignity of the Crown, and the Prelates to look
to the people under their Charge, and to preserve the liberty of the Gallique
Church.

The Decree being made with a most free consent (because every one was offended
at the severeness of the Monitory, and at the coming of the Nuncio Landriano)
he dispatched President de Thou to Tours, The Parliaments of C^alons and Tou^s
decree, That the Pope's Monitory should be publicly burnt.
and President Favre to Chalons, in which Parliaments the person of Landriano
was with very great liberty spoken and decreed against, and there it was
determined, That the Monitory should be publicly burnt, and at the same time
most severe Decrees were made against those that should forsake the party, and
follow the intimation of Landriano, depriving the Clergy of their Dignities and
Benefices, and confiscating the Estates and Goods of whatsoever Lords,
Gentlemen, or others should do so, and making them all subject to the pain of
High Treason and Rebellion; which, added to that disdain the French liberty had
conceived at the severeness of the Monitory, did so bridle men's minds, that
there was not now any one that stirred: but on the contrary, those that were
turned after the new designs attempted by the Cardinal of Bourbon, did now
alienate their minds from all other thoughts, save the Conservation and
maintaining of the King, whose Arms they saw in a fair way to Victory; the
Clergy saying publicly, that the Canons did not command them to abandon their
Flocks in such distracted dangerous times, nor did duty enjoin them to forsake
their Countries, their own houses and estates given by the liberality of former
Kings, as a reward for their labors, to go like miserable vagabonds to beg a
hundred Crowns in pension from the charity of the Popes Nephews: That in the
end, the King, remaining victorious, would compose matters with the Pope* and
then, whosoever had been obstinate and rebellious against him, would be utterly
undone: and that they could not in conscience forsake a Prince, who implored
their ^id and instruction to come to the obedience of the Church. Thus always
those engines that were framed to oppugn the King, did wonderfully succeed to
his advantage; and poisons were converted into medicines. To these Decrees of
the Parliament of Tours and Chalons, the Parliament of Paris opposed contrary
Decrees, receiving the Monitory, and admitting the Nuncio's Commissions,
exhorting and commanding that all should be accepted, published, and obeyed;
The Parliament of Paris makes Decrees contrary to those of the Parliaments of
Tours and Chalons.
imposing most severe punishments upon those that should transgress. But
neither for this did the Prelates or Nobility that followed the King's Party
stir one jot from their first proposal: and all those discourses and complaints
which before were made for the liberty granted to the Hugonots in the exercise
of their Religion, were now turned against the Pope's severe, and (as they
called it) precipitate resolution.

In the mean time, the Lords of the House of Lorain, the Nuncio Landriano, the
Spanish and Savoyard Ambassadors, and Cardinal Pelleve Archbishop of Rheims (an
old protector and favourer of the League) were all come into that City to the
appointed Meeting; and there their common interests were with long discourses
exactly treated of: wherein, though every one did, under various colors and
pretenses palliate the interests of his own designs, yet was it very clearly
seen they could not all agree in the same end. The Spaniards trusted upon their
power, and the necessity that others had of their assistance; the Nuncio, upon
the Majesty of the Apostolic See, and upon the foundation of Religion;
asserting, that the authority of disposing those matters was proper and
peculiar to the Pope: The Duke of Lorain grounded himself upon fitness and
decency, as Head of the Family, and pretended, that the rest ought in reverence
to yield to his pretensions; the Duke of Savoy aspired to the acquisition of
Provence; the Duke of Mercoeur to that of Bretagne; the Duke of Nemours
designed to Canton himself in his Governments; and finally, the Duke of
Mayenne, General of the Armies, and leader of his party, trusted upon the union
of the People, and the concurrence of the Nobility that bore an affection to
his name. But things were not yet ripe; and every one proceeding with great
wariness and secrecy, concealed his own thoughts, and made show to be moved
only by the consideration of the general good; which being observed by the
Duke of Mayenne, and being confident that with time, opportunity, and his
prudent managery, he should bring the rest to consent to his opinion, having
only concluded, with their common Forces to oppose the coming of the Kings
foreign Supplies, all other things were remitted till a more seasonable time,
the Duke having demonstrated, that it was more necessary to employ the present
in action, and not in consultation; the King's Germans being already upon their
March, and he himself continuing prosperous in the progress of the War.

Wherefore the Meeting at Rheims broke up without any other determination, and
only the Duke of Mayenne lost a little of that confidence he had conceived of
the Pope's adherence, The Meeting at Rheims dissolves without any determination.
having found the Nuncio in all things inseparable from the interests of Spain;
whereupon, designing to make use of the Ecclesiastical Forces, only to hinder
the entry of forraigners, in other matters he was resolved not to trust to any
but his Frenchmen. To this end he presently dispatched a Gentleman in all
haste to President Ieannin, who already was arrived in Spain, to give him
directions, not so much to labor for supplies of Spanish or Italian Forces, as
to procure Pay for a set number of French Foot and Horse, under pretense that
the Officers of those two Nations were unwilling to obey his commands, and that
with French Forces, which scorned not to acknowledge him, and were acquainted
with their own Country, he might sooner, more easily, and with fewer rubs,
effect their common interests. To the same purpose, he, by redoubled
Messengers, gave commission to Des Ports to solicit the Pope for an express
order, that his Army under the D. of Monte-Marciano should stay in Lorain, and
there, united with that Dukes Forces and the supplies from Flanders, The Pope
sends 1200 horse and 6000 foot into France, under the command of the Duke of
Monte-Marciano.
should oppose the coming of the Viscount de Turenne, alleging, that that was
the principal means to hinder the King from assistance, and very easily to
become Conquerors in the War: which having already agreed upon with the Nuncio,
whom he had easily made believe, that the Sum of affairs consisted in that, he
with his own Forces took his way toward Paris and Normandy, to withstand the
King's daily progress.

The D. of Monte-Marciano's Forces were considerable; which being drawn
together at Lodi, chosen by the Catholic King's permission for a place of
Rendezvous, they amounted to the number of One thousand and two hundred Horse,
and Two thousand Foot, all under noble and experienced Commanders: to these,
Four thousand Swisses were to join, being raised in the Catholic Cantons by
the Popes money taken out of the Castle. The Catholic Kings Forces destined
for Flanders, consisting of two Tertia's of Foot, and Four hundred Horse,
commanded by Marco Pio, and the Governor of Alexandria, marched with the Pope's
Army, making the same Voyage. To this Body, which (passing from the Confines of
Savoy thorough the Country of Bourgongne) was to come into Lorain, the Army of
that Duke intended to join it self, being already Four thousand effective Foot,
and Eight hundred Horse; so that the confederate Princes made account, that the
King's Germans (though he with all his Forces should advance to receive them)
would not be able to resist; and at their entry into the Kingdom, must either
dissolve of themselves, or be defeated.

But the Duke of Mayenne being departed from the Assembly, had posted with
infinite speed to Rouen, in which City, the people, ill satisfied with the
Government of Monsieur de Tavannes, were furiously risen up in Arms to drive
him out; and Andre Brancace Sieur de Villars, The people of Rouen disliking the
Viscount de Tavannes their Governor, make an Insurrection.
Governor of Havre de Grace, being come thither with some number of men, for
fear the City should revolt, and put it self into the Kings power, there was
afterward such emulation and enmity sprung up between those two Heads, that
they were in danger to assault each other, which could not come to pass without
much blood, nor without exceeding great hazard of the Cities falling into the
enemies hands. The Duke arrived so opportunely, that if he had stayed but one
day longer, matters could not have been composed without a great deal of
mischief: but his coming bridled both those Heads; and being unwilling that
discord should endanger a place of so great moment, he satisfied the desires of
the people and Parliament, by choosing his son Henry de Lorain Governor of the
City; and because he was very young, he made the same Sieur de Villars his
Lieutenant, who was a man of exceeding high spirit, and singular valor, and
sent the Viscount de Tavannes, his old servant, to command as
Camp-Master-General, under the Government of the Duke of Aumale in the Province
of Picardy.

About that very time, la Fere, a place of wonderful importance upon the
confines of Picardy, was like to have revolted: for the Marquess de Menelay,
who had that Government (though from the beginning he had been most obstinately
for the League, yet at this time) having changed his mind, whatsoever the
reason was, he had secretly agreed to deliver up the place, and to go over to
the King's party. For this purpose, the King himself lingered with his Army in
those parts: But the Duke having had notice of the business, or (as some said)
only suspecting it, dispatched the Vice-Seneschal de Montelimar (of whom, for
his sagacity, he was wont to make use in the most urgent occurrences) and the
Sieur de Magny, Lieutenant of his Guards, unto la Fere, with order, that if
they could not get the Marquess out of the place by other means, they should
endeavor to take away his life as speedily as possibly they could; nor did
they fail to effect what was given them in charge: For being come into the
Town, and having delivered Letters from the Duke, to the Captains of the
Garrison; while the Governor was at Mass, without staying till he should
resolve upon any thing, The Marquess de Menelay is killed by order from the
Duke of Mayenne, because he would have delivered up la Fere to the King, and
have gone over to his party.
they set upon him suddenly as he came out of the Church; and having found him
unprovided, and half astonished, killed him with two Stoccadoes; and without
any opposition, made themselves Masters of the place. This action, more proper
for an absolute Prince, than for the Head of a Confederacy, displeased many,
though the Duke labored to show, that extreme necessity had produced it
against his will; and much more did it displease, that the Government was given
to Montelimar, one of the Murderers: Whereupon it was publicly said, That the
Arms of the League were always blunt, but when they were used against their
Friends.

Great was the commotion of men's minds, by reason of the Marquisses blood and
dependencies; and because it displeased all, that the Duke should arrogate so
absolute a power unto himself: Whereupon he, who knew he had lost much of his
credit, and that it was necessary to revive it again by some notable enterprise
(for ordinarily late^ actions doin great part cancel, and take away, the
memory of former ones) resolved to give a scalado to Mante, The Duke of Mayenne
gives a scalado to Mante, where the Prelates, Lords, and Officers of the Kings
party were weakly guarded; but being discovered, is beaten off.
where the Kings Council was, and many Lords, Prelates* and most of the
Officers of the Crown that adhered to him; but without that guard which the
quality of their persons and the weakness of the place required; and thinking
this attempt so great, if he could bring it to perfection, that it must needs
increase the glory of his name, and exceedingly weaken the Kings party, and the
prosperity of his affairs: He commanded out the men that were in Paris, and the
Garrisons of Meaux, Dreux, and Pon^oy^e, and having chosen a very dark rainy
night, he drew near on two sides with Scaling-Ladders to the Walls of the Town
(the situation whereof, was by long practice perfectly known to him) with
assured hopes, by reason of the small number of Soldiers that were within, to
enter it without much trouble; but it so pleased fortune, that in both places
he found the Sentinels watchful, at whose cries, the Guards betaking themselves
to their Arms, ran up to make good the Wall; and yet this would have been but a
weak supply, and not able long to have resisted the assailants, if the Lords of
the Council themselves (not failing in what concerned their own safety) armed
with more courage than could be expected from Gown-men, had not run with their
servants to reinforce the Guards; so that the Dukes soldiers, wet, tired, and
by rain in great part deprived of the use of their Muskets, not being able to
get up to the top of the Walls, which they thought they should have found
slenderly guarded; but on the contrary, many of their Ladders falling, and
being broken, they were beaten off by the Defendants, and retired without
fruit, the assault proving in the end much fuller of noise than blood. He goes
to assault the Swisses at Hudan, and having found them well fortified, is fain
to return.
Yet did not the Duke lose courage for this; but knowing, that part of the
Kings Swisses were quartered at Hudan, he hasted with the same celerity the day
after to fall upon them, but without effect; for having found them excellently
fortified and entrenched, he was forced likewise to march from thence without
having obtained any thing; much praise being due, either unto the vigilance or
good fortune of the Kings soldiers, that had frustrated the Dukes prudence and
celerity.

But the danger of Mante had been so great in the opinion of discreet men, By
the Council of Mocenigo the Venetian Ambassador, the King removes his Officers
and Prelates from Mante to Chartres.
that Giovanni Mocenigo, the Venetian Ambassador, showed, it was a great
temerity to stay for another of the Dukes attempts, in that weak place so
poorly manned; and persuaded the Council, and the other Lords that were there,
to retire to Chartres, where, besides the greatness and commodiousness of the
City, they might stay with more decency, and also be much more secure, in
regard of the strength of the place, and quality of the Garrison that kept it.
The King approved of this determination, which (as all things are not remembered
by all men) he had not thought of before; and being come to Compeigne, began to
make ready his Army, that he might advance to receive his foreign Forces: But
because he had not yet had intelligence of their setting forward, he resolved
in the mean time (that he might not spend it unprofitably) to lay siege to
Noyon, a Town upon the Confines of Champagne and Picardy, which, because it was
much better provided of Horse than Foot, molested all the ways round about,
and did incommodate those places that held for him in those parts. The reason
that persuaded him to ease himself of it, did also render it less difficult to
be taken, being full of Horse, whereby the siege became more easy, and
ill-provided of Foot, and those other things that were requisite for the defense
of it, and particularly of Ammunition: Wherefore having drawn all his Army
together, upon the Five and twentieth of July he caused the Marshall de Biron
to take up his quarter within a mile o^ the Fauxbourgs of the Town; and the
same day the Sieur de Rieux perceiving the Kings intention, departed from
Pierrefont with Threescore Horse, and as many Foot mounted behind them, each
having a bag of Powder at his Saddle-bow, and passing secretly thorough the
Woods, got into the City, and gave great relief to the Defendants.

Noyon is seated between a Mountain and a Fenn, having on the South Side, The
situation of Noyon, besieged by the King.
the Fen caused by the overflows of the River Oyse in that place; and on the
North the Mountain, steep, and not very accessible; behind it thick spacious
Woods distend themselves for many miles; and no other way lies open save only
before, through a little Plain that comes to the Gate of St. Eloy, and to the
rich Abbey, situate near the Fauxbourg. The Town was encompassed with old Walls,
and great Towers from place to place; but both the Towers and the Curtine were
well lined with Earth. The Marshall de Biron having viewed the situation,
encamped before the City at a little distance from the River, with a thought to
assault the Fauxbourg and Abbey that were in the Plain, and out of the Fen, and
by that means to make himself a way to the Moat, which of a great breadth
encompasseth the Town on that side. Monsieur de Ville, Governor of the Town, on
the other side, knowing the weakness of the Garrison, and the want of many
things, had not ceased some few days before the siege, nor did yet cease,
after the Army appeared, to solicit relief, redoubling Letters and Messages
both to the Viscount de Tavannes, and the Duke of Aumale, Governor of the
Province, who no less sollicitous than he, dispatched first the Sieur de
Griboval with an hundred Foot, and about twenty Horse, and then the Sieur de
Tremblecourt with his Regiment, though reduced to a small number of men, to try
if through the Woods they could get by stealth into the Town; but both of
themcharged by the Garrisons of Chauny, Corby, and Catelet, were defeated by
the way; so that Griboval scarce entered with sixteen of his Foot, and
Tremblecourt could not come, no not within many miles of Noyon. The loss of
these necessitated the Viscount de Tavannes to put himself in hazard by
attempting to get in; and therefore being departed from Roye, upon the first of
August, in the evening, with Five hundred Firelocks, and Three hundred Horse to
convoy them, under favor of the night, he drew near the Guards of the Army an
hour before day, with great hope to pass between Guard and Guard, before the
Camp should have put themselves in order to oppose them; but the Sieur d'
Arges, who by order from Biron had been out the same night with a party of
Sixty Light Horse scouring the ways, chanced suddenly to meet him, and not
losing courage, though he had so few men with him, but valiantly making ready
their arms, and beginning the skirmish with hot vollies of shot, was the cause
that all the other parties which were abroad made haste to the same place:
Wherefore they of the League seeing themselves discovered, and not knowing well
in the dark by what number of enemies they were so bravely charged (as the
errors of the night are commonly pernicious without blood) they both routed
themselves without opposition, and in a very great fear took flight several
ways; only the Viscount de Tavannes, The Viscount de Tavannes going to put
relief into Noyon, is defeated and taken prisoner*
whilst with his Sword in his hand he endeavored to stop his Soldiers, being
wounded in the Arm, and in the thigh, was at last taken prisoner by the Sieur
d' Arges himself.

The Duke of Aumale, upon whose Government the affairs of that Province did
depend, was much troubled at the ill fortune of his Officers, and resolved to
attempt the relief himself, being most certain, that if Foot and Ammunition
were not put into the Town, it must of necessity be lost within a few days:
wherefore, marching from Han upon the seventh of August in the evening, with
Six hundred Horse and Nine hundred Foot, to the end that his men might be
ready, and not lose courage in the dark, as the others had done, he determined
to beat up one of the King's Quarters by break a day, and (whilst they sounded
the Alarm there, and were fighting) endeavor to put in relief openly by day,
rather than put himself in danger of being disordered by night. With this
intention, coming up to the Plain along the great highway which leads directly
to the gate, he suddenly fell upon one of the quarters of the King's
Light Horse that lay without the Trenches, under cover of some scattered houses
upon the same way. The assault was fierce, and the defense no less, with which
the same Sieur d' Arges (a young Gentleman of high courage) and his other
companions sustained it: But the Duke of Aumale still redoubling his fury with
fresh Horse, and Colonel Beranglise being come up with the Foot that followed,
the Light Horse, though they fought valiantly, would have lost their quarter,
and left the way free to the relief, if Biron had not come in to help them with
Three hundred Cuirassiers, and Two hundred Reiters; at whose arrival the Duke
being furiously charged in the flank, and even the Light Horse recovering
vigor, who before gave back, the enemies advance was stopped, until such time
as new supplies coming up one after another, and the Infantry of the Camp
already all in Arms, The Duke of Aumale going to relieve Noyon, after a sharp
sight retires.
being fallen into their ranks to defend their posts, the Duke of Aumale was
constrained (though still fighting) to retire; in which Retreat, with the loss
of sixty of his men, and the death of Sieur de Longchamp, a Soldier of great
experience, and of Francisco Guevarra, a Captain of Spanish Light Horse, he was
followed to the very Walls of Han, not having been able to give any relief at
all to the besieged.

But the Duke of Mayenne being advertised of the siege of Noyon, had diligently
sent for the Sieur de Rosne with the Forces that were in Champagne, The Duke of
Mayenne having heard of the siege of Noyon, marches with his Army to Han, to
give courage to the besieged.
and for the Prince of Ascoli, sent by the Duke of Parma, with Eight hundred
Horse and Three thousand Foot; and being joined with them at la Fere, came up
to Han upon the tenth of August; and having quartered his Army upon the way
toward Noyon, but with the River between, he thought his presence would give
sufficient courage to the defendents. But the King having settled his quarters
in the most convenient places, and having made his approaches so far, had begun
already to batter the Abbey that stood without the Fauxbourg; which was
obstinately defended by the besieged, to keep the Enemy as far as possible they
could from the wall. The King having caused five Pieces of Cannon to be planted
against this Abbey, had so beaten it down, that being assaulted by the Foot,
upon the eighth day they took it, killing thirty of the Defendents, and taking
above fifty others of them; which did so much the more weaken the Garrison,
that of it self was too weak to defend the circuit of the Town. But it was
necessary to susp^nd the progress of the siege, by reason of the Duke of
Mayennes coming: for his strength being 10000 Foot and 2000 Horse, lit was
thought, that not being able to relieve the place any other way, rather than
lose it, he would join battle with the King.

Yet the opinions in his Camp were very different: for the Prince of Ascoli
thought not the loss of that place of so great concernment, that, to divert it,
it was fit to incurr the uncertainty of a Battle, with the hazard of those
only Forces that were in being to resist the Enemy; and considered, that the
Popes and Catholic King's supplies, which had already passed the Mountains,
being expected, it would be a very strange rashness to put that now in the
power of Fortune, which within a few days might be made more certain, and more
secure. The Duke of Aumale on the other side, thoroughly vexed at his late
misfortune, and longing to piece it up again, argued, that the loss of that
place was of great moment to the affairs of the Province, for that in those
quarters there remained no other important* Town of their party; but that their
reputation was of much greater importance, which would be much diminished, if
being come up to the very face of the Enemy with Forces in number not inferior
to theirs, they should let that place be taken from them without stirring, or
disputing it with the Sword. The Duke of Mayenn^ resolves not to hazard a
Battle with the King.
The Duke of Mayenne assented to the more secure advice, partly because he was
of a nature not much inclined to dangerous resolutions, partly because with the
Prince of Ascoli and the Spaniards he did more by entreaty than command; and he
saw them very resolute in not consenting by any means to the hazard of a Battle.

But the King, desirous to find out what the enemy intended, having no quicker
way to make himself certain of it, caused the Marshall de Biron to pass the
River with the greater part of his Horse, to see if the Duke would move to
fight, or keep fast in his quarters. But as soon as the Marshall was advanced
within sight of Han, and of the Army of the League, which was encamped in the
midst of the great high way, he found the Country clear and free; nor did any
stir out of their quarters to skirmish in the plain field: which having come to
pass not one day alone, but three together successively, the King apprehending,
that the Duke thought to defend Noyon with nothing but the reputation of his
being near it, took heart, and caused the Courtine of St Eloy to be battered
upon the fifteenth day; and having beaten down the Works on each side, on the
sixteenth day in the morning, being resolved to give the assault, he made his
Cavalry pass over the River, as he was wont to do* that they might be in
readiness if the enemy should stir; and having drawn his Foot into their
divisions, gave the Baron de Biron order to advance and assault the Town.
Monsieur de Ville having, as long as possibly he could, expected relief in
vain; and seeing himself now in such a condition, The Sieur de Ville Governor
of Noyon seeing the King's Forces ready to give the assault, parleys, and
concludes to surrender the place, if it were not relieved within two days;
which is performed.
that he was not able to resist that fierce assault which was preparing against
him, caused a sign to be given that he would parley, and in a few hours
concluded to surrender, if within two days the Duke of Mayenne did not either
fight, or put at least Five hundred men into the Town: which being agreed upon,
and Hostages given on both sides, he dispatched a Gentleman to the D. of
Mayenne, to let him know the Agreement; who having consulted again with his
Commanders, and concluded as they before had determined, drew off to the Walls
of Han the same evening* and the Sieur de Ville sincerely performing the
Agreement, delivered up Noyon upon the Eighteenth day into the hands of
Monsieur d' Es^ree for the King.

After the taking of Noyon, men's minds on both sides were taken up with the
expectation of the Foreign Forces, which with equal fortune delayed to appear:
for the Germans, who, to the number of 8000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, had been
raised by the Viscount de Turenne, by the help of the Protestant Princes, moved
with great difficulty for want of money, and expected that for the drawing
together and maintenance of them, a great sum should be furnished from England*
which the Queen being to raise upon her people, who had promised to pay it upon
certain conditions, matters were not so soon ordered, nor did the conditions
prove of mutual satisfaction: for the English, continuing desirous to recover
footing in France, and particularly in Normandy, a Province in former times
long possessed by them, had promised the Queen Three hundred thousand Ducats to
be spent in the affairs of France, provided she got some convenient Seaport to
be given her, not only for security of their Money, but also for a
landing-place of Commerce, and that they might have more commodiously traffic
in the Kingdom of France: which being at first demanded, and now again, under
pretense of the earnest importunity of her Subjects, effectually urged by the
Queen, no less than liberty of Conscience for the Hugonots, kept the King in a
great deal of trouble, not being willing to deprive himself of Diepe, the place
where he had tried and sustained the first encounters of his fortune; much less
of Calais, upon which the English had too strong pretensions; and the other
places were in possession of the League: wherefore he at last propounded, and
(by sending the Sieur de Salettes a Hugonot Gentleman) gave firm promise to the
Queen, that he would lay siege to the City of Rouen; toward the taking
whereof, if the English would help with Men and Money, he would give them some
reasonable jurisdiction in it, to the end that they might freely and securely
traffic; and then if he could take Caudebec and Harfleur, Towns near that
City, he would consigne unto them one of those Ports, which might serve for a
free open retreat for their shipping. To which Conditions, while the English
unwillingly consented, and while they were treated of on both sides with usual
caution, the coming of the Germans was protracted; nor could they ever be got
to move, till the first One hundred thousand Ducats were paid down, and
assignments given for the other Two hundred thousand.

The Duke of Savoy obtains, that the Popes Forces marching toward France,
should stay some time in his State, to strengthen his designs against the Sieur
Les Diguieres.
On the other side, the Duke of Monte-Marciano, and the Forces which from Milan
marched toward Flanders, at the Duke of Savoy's urgent importunities* had
received orders to stay for some days within his State, to the end that with
their countenance and assistance he might recover some places which had been
taken from him, and repress the Forces of Monsieur Les Diguieres, who fiercely
bestirred himself, sometimes in Dauphine, sometimes in Provence. The Duke was
troubled that the Kings party had taken some places, though of no great
importance; but he was much more troubled at a Fort which Les Diguieres had
begun to raise over against Montmeillan: Wherefore having obtained that the
Italian Army, and likewise Four thousand Swisses raised by the Pope, should
stay some time with him, he spurred up Don Amadeo for the recovery of that
Fort, called Morestello, from the place where it was built, and he with other
Forces entered into Dauphine another way, while Count Franc^sco Martinengo with
the greatest strength of his Army, The Duke of Savoy besieges the Fort of
Morestel^o.
besieged and straightened the Town of Bar in Provence. Monsieur Les
Diguieres, who was forced sometimes to assist in the affairs of Dauphine,
sometimes to help Monsieur de la Valette in Provence, was now set forward to
raise the siege of Bar, while la Valette besieged and battered Gravion; but
being arrived so late, that the Defendants had already articled to surrender
it, after some slight encounters, he was returned with exceeding great celerity
to relieve Fort Morestello, and with Four hundred Horse and Three thousand
Foot, was advanced as far as Ponte Chiarra, a place near and proper for his
intetention; which being known to the Savoyards, who were strengthened with part
of the Popes Forces, they rose silently from the siege, which they had
continued already many days, and leaving the Fort behind them, encamped
themselves upon the same way, by which they saw the French Army would advance.
But Les Diguieres having himself viewed and discovered the Camp, and number of
the Enemy, and making no great account of the raw men that were in that Army,
in comparison of his old Soldiers, resolved to sight, thinking with a fierce
boldness easily to strike a terror in them. Wherefore, both the Armies being
between the Mountain and the River Isare, in a narrow place, which favored the
small number of his Forces, he parted his Infantry into two Bodies, one of
which he sent up by the steep of the Hill, and the other along the bank of the
River; and he, keeping the Plain with his Cavalry, divided into four Squadrons,
with some Musketeers mixed and placed among the Horse, advanced resolutely to
attack the Enemy. The Savoyards having drawn up the Army in very good order,
advanced likewise, and received the encounter in the Front very courageously;
but while they fought, and in fighting, had their eyes and minds wholly taken
up with the Enemy that was before them, they were suddenly charged in the
Flank, by the Foot that were come about by the way of the Hill, which they had
not taken care to make good: Wherefore being staggered at that unexpected
accident, they broke their ranks, and without making much resistance easily
took flight. But being come into the Plain that was behind them, recovering
courage, they fell to rally again, and once more to face about; and so much the
rather, because their being stronger in Horse, and having a very spacious open
field, gave them very great advantage in renewing the Battle; yet nevertheless,
the Conquerors following up with wonderful speed and fury, they were terrified
in such manner, that being dispersed, they were pursued to the very Walls of
Monmeillan, with the loss of Fifteen hundred men, two Cornets, Eighteen
Foot-colours, and great store of spoi^ and baggage. The Savoyard^ are routed
and defeated by the French.
But this unhappy accident, which cut off all hopes of making any further
progress at that time, and the importunities of the Dukes of Mayenne and
Lorain, to have the Popish and Spanish Forces to march to hinder the passage of
the Germans, were the causes that Savoy being left, they advanced through the
Country of Bourgongne directly toward Lorain.

The Duke of Mayenne, since the taking of Noyon, to put in order and increase
his Army, had staid still at Han (whilst the King, victoriously advancing,
overran the whole Country) in which place President Ieannin, being returned
from the Court of Spain, found him, but brought back no pleasing answer to any
of those things he had negotiated with the Catholic King. President Ieannin
returns from Spain; but brings no resolution to the Duke of Mayenne.
The Duke of Mayenne had been of opinion, that the artificial reserved
proceedings of the Spaniards had sprung from the nature and will of the
Ministers ill-affected to his person, or desirous to do more than what was
given them in charge by the Royal Council; he thought that the D. of Parma, a
very wary prudent Soldier, would unwillingly hazard his reputation against the
King, followed by almost an invincible Nobility, and in his actions prompt,
fearless and resolute; he believed that Diego d' Ivarr, and Mendozza (who, for
many particular accidents were ill-disposed toward him) either to make him
lose his credit, or out of covetousness, did convert those Moneys that were
sent to other uses, and often disposed of them without his privacy at their own
pleasures, and did assuredly think, that as soon as the Catholic King was once
fully informed of the affairs of France, of the interests of every one, and of
his pains, endeavors, and authority, he would soon resolve in favor of him,
give him sufficient assistance to make an end of the War, and permit him to
negotiate the getting of the Crown for himself: For this cause he had deprived
himself of the help and counsel of President Ieannin, sending him to the Court,
as one privy to all his most secret thoughts, well informed of all particulars,
full of wary prudence, and for experience and eloquence, able to undergo the
weight of so difficult a business. But both he and the President found
themselves much deceived in their opinion; for (whether that had been the aim
of the Spaniards from the beginning, or that the Counsel given and imprinted by
the Ministers that resided in France had caused that resolution) they in Spain
desired the War should be drawn out in length with a slow progress; that the
Duke of Mayenne should not rise so high in credit and authority with his party,
as to be able to dispose of things by himself, and that by degrees the way
might be facilitated, either to the union of the Crowns, or to the election of
the Infanta Isabella, which could not without long time, and much patience, be
obtained; and at least (if nothing else could be done) they would make
themselves sure, that so many expenses and troubles should redound to the
profit and augmentation of their Monarchy: Wherefore, when Ieannin was come
thither, he, in his first audience found, that King Philip was fully informed
in all things, and very far from that inclination, which the Duke of Mayenne,
at so great a distance, had fancied to himself; yet did he, with all possible
arts, labor in his following audiences to take away those impressions, which
he thought contrary to the Dukes interests, and to persuade the King to concur
with him in his own ends; but all was in vain, nor could he see, that he
advanced or profited any thing; for, The King of Spains answers to President
Iannin.
treating about Money, he not only found the King indisposed to allow a greater
sum than he was wont; but even those very Moneys which were before given to the
D. of Mayenne, he had now determined should pass through the hands of his
Ministers (though with the Dukes participation) alleging, that he had seen but
very small fruits of so many expenses, that he would not have his supplies to
be secret, but that every one should see and know from whence they came, and
should be obliged for them to the principal Author. Then concerning the Armies,
he said, his will was they should advance into France to help against the
danger of Religion, and to establish a Catholic King that might be generally
liked of; but that the Duke of Parma could not so soon leave Flanders, the
States of Holland having taken Zutphen in Friesland, and other places in
Brabant, and that it was needful not to proceed longer by chance, without
knowing what was to be done; and that therefore it was necessary to assemble
the States to resolve upon the election of a King, to the end, that they might
go on with order and deliberation to a certain determinate end. Finally, as for
the paying of the Duke of Mayennes French Forces, raised and commanded by him,
he said he was ready to do it, when the principal resolution was once taken;
wherefore he concluded, that he would send a new Ambassador into France to
declare his intention to the States, and to cause that to be determined of
which was necessary for the perfecting of the enterprise; and that in the mean
time, he would give order to the Duke of Parma to return into France as soon as
the affairs of Flanders would permit* but that time was not to be lost, and
that the Assembly of States ought to be appointed and called; till the end of
which, he was not disposed to make any more powerful expedition of men or
moneys. This was the last conclusion; nor could Ieannin, by urging the state of
Affairs, the diffidences of the French, the interests of that party, the merits
of the house of Lorain, the pains and authority of the Duke of Mayenne, obtain
any thing more: And with this resolution he was returned to give the Duke an
account thereof, who more perplexed than ever he had been, and having lost the
confidence that his arts should overcome those of the Spaniards, was also
overtaken with new trouble, at the liberty of his Nephew Charles, Duke of Guise.

That Prince, since the death of his Father, had always been kept prisoner;
nor, though his freedom had been much treated of, had any attempt ever
succeeded, and the King had always stiffly denied to change him for any body,
alleging, That he was not a prisoner of War, but of Justice: Nor (though his
Mother made great complaints and exclamations) had the D. of Mayenne ever cared
much to get his liberty; foreseeing that his freedom would endanger the
division of his party, by reason of the dependence that many would have upon
him, in respect of the memory of his Father, and of benefits received from him;
and that the common people would willingly concur to exalt him: so that if he
would not acknowledge his superiority, but should attempt to put himself in the
place long held by his Father and Grandfather, the League was without doubt
like to be divided and disunited: wherefore he designed not to apply himself in
good earnest to procure his freedom, till things were reduced to such a
condition, that it should not be in his power to disturb them if he were at
liberty. But now, whether the King (as some believed) foreseeing the same, had
underhand given way to his enlargement, or that the Sieur de la Chastre, an old
servant and dependent of his father's, who had the near Government of Berry,
had prosperously procured it; certain it is, that having plotted, and agreed
that a Lackey and a Valet de Chamber with a very swift Horse, sent by la
Chastre, should stay for him in the fields under the Castle of Tours, in which
he was kept prisoner, he upon the fifteenth day of August, being risen from
Table about noon, and having afterward shut himself up in his Chamber to take
his rest, while the Guards that kept him, and his other servants, entertained
themselves merrily eating and drinking, he having locked them all dexterously
into the room where they were at dinner, went up to the top of a Tower that
stood toward the field, and with a ladder of silk, which had been secretly sent
him in a Pie, let himself down the wall, with exceeding great danger; and being
come safe to the ground, ran along the Riverside of the Loire toward the
fields, where he found the horse and those that expected him; Charles Duke of
Guise having been long kept prisoner at Tours, ^scapes at (...), and flees to
Bourges.
and with infinite speed galloped to find the Baron de la Maison, son to the
Sieur de la Chastre, who stayed for him some few miles off beyond the River
Cher, with Three hundred Horse; wherewith being conveyed into Berry, he was
received with infinite signs of joy in the City of Bourges. Monsieur de Souvray
Governor of Tours, and Monsieur de Grillon (who, since the wound received in
his left Arm in those Fa^xbourgs, had ever stayed in that Town) having heard
news, tha^ la Chastre's Horse were roving about those parts, and doubting some
intelligence (...) the City, had, for some days* kept the Gates shut, and
looked more strictly to their Guards than they were wont: but being suddenly
adve^tised by Captain Rouvray Governor of the Castle of the Duke's ^light, they
entered, or feigned to enter into ^ much greater suspicion, and caused the
Gates to be opened with so much caution (because they would first draw all the
Soldiers into Arms, and make a diligent discovery without) that the Duke having
had the advantage of above an hour and half, could not afterward ^e overtaken
by those that followed him; which confirmed the jealousy some had, that the
King had secretly commanded he should be permitted to escape, since that all
those days, Letters and Messages were without restraint suffered to come to
him, and Presents to be sent, among which was the Pie with the Silk Ladder in
it, without which his escape could not have been effected.

This news being brought to the Heads of the two parties, as it did not
displease the King, who hoped some good would grow out of that evil; so did it
pierce the Duke of Mayenne to the quick, especially in that present conjuncture
of time, wherein he was diffident of the Spaniards, and of many French of the
party, who were ill-satisfied with him: yet dissembling this affliction, and
not losing courage, The Duke of Mayenne inwardly afflicted for the D. of Guises
escape, strives to show signs of joy, and treats underhand with the Cardinal of
Bou^bon and the other Lords that endeavor to set a third party on foot.
having expressed fitting joy for the freedom of his Nephew, he exhorting him
as soon as he could to come unto him, thinking, that not being well informed of
matters, nor known to many, as soon as he should be with him, he would yield to
his age, prudence, and the possession wherein he was of governing all things:
and having recourse to art, to bridle the arts of the other Confederates, he
presently by the means of Monsieur de Villeroy, caused a Treaty of Intelligence
to be begun with the Cardinal of Bourbon and the other Princes of the blood,
whom he knew (by the relation of the Sieur des Ports) to be discontented with
the King, and to try to set on foot a third and different party; judging, that
he should by that means beget a jealousy in the Spaniards, and necessitate
them to consent, if not to all, at least to many of his demands. Nor was
Villeroy (being always desirous that the War should end in an Accommodation)
slack, by the means of his brother the Abbot de Chesy, to promote that Treaty,
which, with hopes, and imaginary Conditions, was artificially kept alive.

But the King (who had got an inkling of the business) standing between the
machinations of these, which did necessitate him to his conversion, and the
earnest desires of the English, and of the Princes of Germany (who urged him to
give them places in his Kingdom, and securities (...) the liberty of Religion,
wherein they pretended that he must still persevere, if he would have their
assistance) was no less afflicted than the Duke of Mayenne: which affliction
increased much, after he was arrived at Sedan: for the Moneys of England were
not yet disbursed, and the Germans had therefore delayed their coming so long,
that it was thought the Popish and Spanish Forces would get into Lorain before
them: and to his other troubles was added, that Charlotte de la Mark Heiress of
that Duchy, being kept in that City, of an age ripe and marriageable, he was
forced to take a revolution of matching her, lest the Duke of Lorain preventing
him (as he had a most earnest desire) should give her to Wife to one of his
sons. As the importance of that Duchy, and particularly of the City of Sedan,
did necessitate the King to provide, that it might not fall to the Duke of
Lorain; so did it keep him in great doubt, to whom he should give that Lady in
Marriage, who carried with her the possession of a State of so great
consequence. Carlo Gonzaga son to the D. of Nevers, aspired to this Match,
confining with her Lands by the Duchy of Retelois, whereof he bore the title;
but her being of the Hugonot Religion, as likewise the People and Gentry of
those places, was the cause the King would not resolve to satisfy him, lest he
should alienate that party from him, and discontent those whom he labored to
keep with so much pains and industry. On the other side, he doubted lest the D.
of Nevers (of a nature apt to take disgusts) should be offended, if he should
propose any other Match of inferior quality to his son: Which contrary
considerations, after they had held him some days in suspense, it being
necessary to resolve, at last he concluded to marry her to the Viscount de
Turenne, Charlotte de la Mark Heir to the Duchy of Bouillon, is given in
Marriage to Henry de la Tour, Viscount de Turenne; at which the D. of Nevers i^
disgusted.
as well because of the confidence he had in him, as because he was of the same
Religion; and much more to reward him for his excellent service done in raising
and bringing in the foreign Army: but it presently produced that effect which
the King had before apprehended: for the D. of Nevers was incensed to such a
height, that he began to incline to those that pressed his conversion, and to
hold secret intelligence with the Cardinal of Bourbon, the D. of Longueville
his son in Law, and with the rest of the new party, who made show to move
principally for Religion, which they said was trampled under foot, and
themselves deceived, while notwithstanding all promises, those were advanced in
strength and power, who openly professed to live and die Hugonots. Nor was
there any other remedy for this mischief, save to be incessantly in action, and
not to suffer idleness to give nourishment to those thoughts, but to let
victorious enterprises put to silence and quiet those spirits which were yet
kept hidden in the breasts of men: for which cause, he labored so much in
soliciting the march of the German Army, and in sending them those sums by
little and little, which with infinite diligence he had been able to get
together from several parts, that in the end he joined with them, before the
Popish and Spanish Armies were come up to cross that union, as the D. of
Mayenne had ever striven and endeavored to do: so great an error, that it
rendered vain all those so vast expenses made, and so many labors undergone,
for the gathering together and bringing in of those Forces: for they having
inconsiderately spent their time in Savoy, to attend businesses that did no
ways advance the sum of the War, arrived not soon enough to hinder the King's
joining with the Germans, upon which depended the principal point of the War of
this year.

Now the King united, without opposition, with the Viscount de Turenne, and
having taken many Castles about Metz and Sedan, The King being joined with the
German Army, takes Attigny, whither all the wealth of the neighboring people
had been broughtin, and grants the pillage of it to the Germans.
at last assaulted Attigny a great Town, into which all the riches, goods and
Cattle of the neighboring places were reduced; and having very prosperously
taken it, he gave all the pillage (which was very great) unto the Germans, who
being ill provided of Money, were refreshed and quieted for some time: after
which booty, the King (always ready to embrace valiant counsels) thought good
to try whether the Commanders of the League had a heart to come to a Battle:
wherefore, having known that the Forces of the Pope, the Duke of Lorain, and
the Duke of Mayenne, were also at last joined together at Verdun, he would
needs draw up to them, and provoke them by his presence, and all other possible
means to put it to a day, judging the Italian Forces to be yet raw, and the
Duke of Lorain's not well assured, and therefore no way be compared to his.

Wherefore being departed from Attigny upon the first of October, he quartered
that night with his Vanguard at Grandpre, upon which day Monsieur d' Amblise,
who commanded part of the Lorain Forces, having marched from Montfaulcon,
joined with the Army of the League. The next day a^^ut noon the King arrived
with his Army within sight of Verdun, spreading his ^^uadrons largely
imbattelled along the Plain. On the other side, they of the League who were
encamped without the City, drew themselves up in Battalia under the Walls; the
Italians having the right Wing, the Duke of Lorain the Battle, and the Duke of
Mayenne's French the l^ft; yet the Duke himself commanding and ordering the
whole Camp as he pleased. The King reinforced by the German supplies brought by
the Viscount de Turenne, offers battle to the Duke of Mayenne in the Plain of
Verdun.
At the first arrival, there began so great and so hot a skirmish between the
two Armies, that many of the Commanders themselves thought it would be a
Battle; for the Sieurs de Praslin, de la Curee, d' Arges, and the Baron d'
Giury with the Kings Light Horse, in sour Divisions, advanced to the very face
of the Enemy to skirmish, being seconded on the right hand, and on the left, by
the Count de Brienne, and the Sieur de Marivaut, with Two hundred Cuirassiers;
and on the other side, Cavalier Avolio, Ottavio Cesis, and Ascanio della Cornia
were likewise advanced with the Popes Light Horse, and the Sieur d' Amblise
seconded them with a Body of Lorain Lances. But though the skirmish was very
fierce in the beginning, the Sieur de Praslins Horse being killed under him,
and the Sieur de la Curee thrown to the ground with the shock of a Lance, the
Italians behaving themselves very gallantly every where; yet were the Dukes of
Lorain and Mayenne resolved not to fight, because the Catholic Kings Forces
that were come out of Italy (following their wonted Counsels) had denied to
follow them, and were marched straight to join with the Duke of Parma, and the
Popes Swisses were not above Three thousand: Wherefore, not thinking themselves
strong enough to deal with the Kings Army in so open a place, as is the Plain
that lies before Verdun, the skirmish, by their order, cooled by little and
little, and they drawing back their men under the Walls (yet without show of
fear) the King took up his Quarters, and entrenched himself within sight of the
Town, and of their Army.

All sorts of provisions came in plentifully to the Camp of the League, and the
City furnished them with many conveniences, not only for victual, but for
lodging under cover; whereas the King, in the midst of an enemies Country, and
the weather being very rainy, suffered both for want of victual, and
convenience, nor could his Soldiers (accustomed to another kind of Discipline)
endure the hardship and incommodities of lying in the field in so contrary a
season. To other things was added a most cruel storm that night, with thunders,
whirlwinds, and infinite rain, which spoiling all the Soldiers Huts, and
overflowing all the Plain, put the whole Army in wonderful confusion: Wherefore
next day, the King, after he had stood firm in Battalia for many hours, and
none of the enemies appearing in the field, faced about with his Army, and
marched back to quarter again at Grandpre. There the Germans were like to have
mutinied, not being paid the money that had been promised them: Wherefore the
King, who could now do no less than perform his promises to the Queen of
England, that he might receive the other Two hundred thousand Ducats, having
made provision at Sedan (with the Jewels and credit of the Princess Charlotte)
of a certain sum of money to quiet his Germans, took, without delay, the way
toward Normandy, to besiege at last the City of Rouen.

The Duke of Mayenne, contrary to whose expectation the Popes forces had so
long delaid their coming, and who had also seen the King of Spain's march
straight toward Lorain, without making any stay, presently dispatched the
Count de Br^ssac to the Duke of Parma, to protest unto him, that if he entered
not into the Kingdom, or sent not such Supplies as should be sufficient to
oppose the King, the affairs of the League, and the state of Religion would be
very much endangered, and that he should not be able to hinder many from making
their peace, as (seeing the slowness and ill counsels of the Confederates) they
daily threatened. The Duke made this protestation more at large to Diego d'
Ivarra, who was there present, showing him the wonderful ill effect which the
delays and secret practices of the Spaniards did produce; for if all the
Catholic Kings expenses and forces which he had granted severally, to this
man, and to that, in Bretagne, Provence, Savoy and Languedoc, ha^ been put into
one Body, and all employed to the root of the business, and to the Springhead
of affairs, the victory over the King would thence have ensued, and also the
suppression of their Enemies in all places; but whilst the division of the
League was endeavored, whilst his counsels were not believed, and whilst the
Duke of Parma would not advance, the King had found opportunity to receive his
Foreign Forces; and now being grown powerful, he overran all France at his
pleasure, to the admiration and grief of all good men. But these Protestations
and Reasons not availing with Diego d' Ivarra, who had received another
impression, and was otherwise inclined; and the cause from whence this hardness
proceeded, being clearly seen by the relation of President Ieannin, the Dukes
of Lorain and Mayenne not being able any other way to hinder it, The Dukes of
Lorain and M^^enne agree secretly not to condescend to the election of any to
be King of France, not only that was a stranger, but also that was not of their
Family, or at least a Prince of the Blood of the Catholic Religion.
agreed together (though secretly) in this general, to keep close and united
together, and not to suffer that any should be admitted to the Crown, not only
who was a stranger, but who was not of their own Family; and, that if they were
constrained to yield to any other persons, a Prince of the Blood of the
Catholic Religion should be chosen, and never to consent, either to the
alienation or division of the Kingdom. With this firm resolution, confirmed
also by a Writing which they signed, the Duke of Mayenne set himself in order
to prosecute the War, and being departed from Verdun, with the Popes Army and
his own, and with the Supplies he had obtained from the Duke of Lorain, (who
gave way that the Count de Vaudemont, the Count de Chaligny, and the Sieur de
Bassompierre should follow him) he took the way toward Champagne, that he might
not go too far from the Confines, till he heard the determinations of Flanders.

When the Duke was arrived at Retel in Champagne, The Duke of Mayenne being at
Retel, the Duke of Guise comes to him well accompanied, and is received with
outward shows of love, but i^ their secret conferences, their confidence is not
correspondent*
the Duke of Guise came up to him, accompanied with Six hundred Horse, all
Gentlemen, who upon the same of his being at liberty, were come in to him, and
though at his arrival, their greetings and outward actions showed kindness and
confidence in one another; yet did not their secret discourses correspond,
either to that kindness or confidence: For just as the Duke of Mayenne had
suspected, all those that were unsatisfied with him, turned their eyes upon
this young Prince, full of high spirits, of an handsome presence, courteous and
affable in h^^ behavior, and which imported more than all, heir to his Fathers
Name, and to that love which all the people of France had profusely born him.
The Parisians, and particularly the Council of Sixteen, who could not endure to
be kept under by the Duke of Mayenne, and that he should dispose of the Offices
of the City as he pleased, without confiding in any of their number, did openly
call upon the name, and desire the exaltation of this Prince; and even the
Spaniards applying themselves to do him all possible honors, set him as a
counterpoise against the Duke of Mayenne, with whom they had no good
intelligence, because they saw him little inclined to favor their designs. The
Sieur de la Chastre, the Sieur de Vins, and Colonel St. Paul followed him
particularly, as in the general all those that had been obliged by, or had
depended upon his Father; and he, though new come into play, and little
informed of affairs, was not in any way failing unto himself: Wherefore being
by the Duke of Mayenne and the Sieur de Bassompierre, made acquainted what they
had agreed upon with the Duke of Lorain, viz Not to suffer any to rise to the
Crown that was not of their Family; and in case they were forced otherwise, to
name a Prince of the Blood; he at first excused himself, that he had not yet
any information of businesses, and afterward demanded time to confer with the
Duchess his Mother; and finally concluded, that he would not alienate himself
from the Spaniards, but would first hear the Duke of Parma's opinions, and
after dispatch men expressly to that Court, to treat of his affairs with the
Catholic King: Nevertheless, the Duke of Mayenne, full of moderation, and
accustomed to overcome all encounters with patience, commending his Nephews
resolution, and making show that he would favor his advancement, labored to
keep him near himself, not to give him means or convenience to think or treat
of new designs.

At the news of the death of Pope Gregory the XIV, the Duke of Montem^rciano
interposes delays, and declares that he will depend upon the will of the Duke
of Parma.
Whilst they passed the time here in these businesses, expecting the Count of
Brissa^'s return, and the answer from Flanders, the news of the Popes death
arrived, which bred new difficulties in all things; for the Duke of
Montemarciano, not knowing what the Cardinals would determine, during the
vacancy, nor what the Pope that should be chosen would do, began to interpose
delays, and to say he would not stir from what the Duke of Parma should
resolve: and Monsignore Matteucci, Archbishop of Rag^sa, Commissary of the
Camp, having but little money, proposed the dismissing of the Swisses, till new
orders (which were to be expected from Rome) should come; which things, while
they detain the Duke of Mayenne in the same place, a new troublesome accident
had like to have turned all the affairs of the League upside down.

The Parisian Council of Sixteen, most nearly united with the Preachers, and
with the College of Sorbo^ne, having from the very beginning been the Basis
and Foundation of the League, had always pretended to rule matters their own
way; wherein carrying themselves with those passions and affections that are
proper to factious persons, without any regard to the conservation of the
members of the Crown, or to the decency and reputation of the French Nation,
they only labored for those things that might suppress the King, (whom they
perfectly hated) extinguish the name and party of the Hugonots, and put the
reins of Government into the hands of persons that might rule according to
their desire and appetite. But the Duke of Mayenne, though he owed to these the
beginning of his exaltation, the maintenance of the League, the support of the
War, and the late defense of Paris, was not yet inclined to follow their ways,
but rather (wholly intent upon keeping the Kingdom entire) strove to bridle and
moderate their turbulent spirit; wherefore he had from the beginning instituted
the Council of State, contradistinct from this, wherein were many prudent
moderate men, who did counterbalance and restrain the course of things: among
these, the Archbishop of Lions, the Sieur de Villeroy, President Ieannin, the
Bishop of Meanx, and the Sieur de Videville, who were all averse from the
Spanish attempts, and from the inconsiderate Zeal of the Preachers. The Duke
had also ever endeavored to maintain the authority of the Parliament in credit
and vigor, referring many important businesses unto it, and bearing great
respect to the Decrees which in diverse matters were made by those Counselors:
and though the fidelity of the first President Brisson, and many others had
been suspected, as if they would have labored to make the City revolt unto the
Kings party; yet he dissembling the matter, was not sorry that one Council
should counterpoise the other, and was always displeased when the Sixteen
accused him and many others of the Council, of treachery: for though he saw
that some of them were inclined to the King, and managed businesses, in favor
of him, he did not believe they could do much hurt, but rather help exceedingly
to restrain the impetuous determinations of the Sixteen, by which he feared to
be turned about, if the Parliament should sink in credit and authority. This
secret emulation between the Parliament, The Council of Sixteen falls into an
emulation with the Parliament of Pa^is, and with the Council of State chosen by
the Duke of Mayenne.
and the Council of State on the one side, and the Council of Sixteen on the
other, discovered it self by little and little, and proceeded so far, that as
these were partial to the greatness and authority of the Duke of Mayenne, so
the others made themselves Favorers of the Spanish demands, and in many things
contrary to the Duke. These were those who in the siege precipitately made many
of the Citizens to be executed, that were suspected to be for the King: these,
fomented by the Duke of Nemours, contradicted the election which the Duke had
made of the Officers of the City; and these were the very same that were
Authors and Introducers of the Spanish Garrison: and they did often labor that
the Catholic King might have the Marks of Justice, and be acknowledged as
Patron of the League, and Protector of the Crown of France. But now, the
passion of these men still increasing, being unsatisfied with the Duke of
Mayenne, whom they taxed of fear and meanness of spirit; and being mad against
the Parliament, whose gravity they saw withstood their power, they were grown
bold and presumptuous since the Duke of Guise was at liberty, and since the
Spaniards (having discovered the agreement between the Dukes of Mayenne and
Lorain) began openly to try to pull it down, and to draw unto themselves the
Forces of the party, the strength whereof consisted in the City of Paris. These
had the common people at their devotion, not only by reason of their natural
dependence as fellow-Citizens, but also because they were weary of
Contributions, which the greedy nature of the Duke of Mayenne did often
multiply beyond what was fit; the disbursing of them afterward not excusing
the weight of those burdens with his honor and equity. Wherefore some of the
chief of the Sixteen, that were most affectionate to the party, (whom they
called Zealots) began to contrive the way to abase the authority of the
Parliament, that they might be able more easily to dispose of the affairs of
the City, and put it either under the Duke of Guise, or the immediate
protection of King Philip. The Spanish Ministers assented to, or rather
concurred in this attempt; and no less than they, the Bishop of Piacenza, who
since the Popes death was wholly turned to favor Spain* and the principal men
were the Sieur de Bussy Governor of the Bastille, the Sieur de Cromay
Counselor of the Great Council, Commissary Louchart, Ameline an Advocate,
Olivier a Treasurer, Boucher a Divine, Father Commolet a Jesuit, and diverse
others of the same condition. After many consultations and debates among them,
by advice of the Bishop of Piacenza, they chose four of the Sixteen, who should
go to the Duke of Mayenne to carry their complaints, and to demand that the
Council of State might be replenished with sufficient faithful men, and such as
the City might confide in: That that Council might always reside in Paris: That
the Treasurers Accounts might be over-looked, and especially of one Ribes, that
kept the Duke of Mayenne's particular Coffers: That this might be done by
select persons approved of by the Council of the Union: That the Gabelles might
be taken away, which were newly imposed by the Governor Belin, and the Prevost
des Merchands: That the City-Garison might be paid and increased for their
security: and finally, That President Brisson (against whom they carried a
whole heap of complaints) and some other principal men of the Parliament, might
be put out of their Offices, and severely and exemplarily punished and rooted
out, as Traitors and Rebels.

These four Deputies came to Rheims at the time when the Duke of Mayenne was
gone into Lorain; and having waited for him many days, they at last found him
at Retel; where having been heard by him, they were at first sharply
reprehended as men that demanded too much, and aspired unto an absolute power:
but afterward, not to exasperate them utterly, he used them more favorably in
their other audiences, showing them, that whilst he was busied with the Enemy,
he had not leisure to attend those matters: that in due time and place, he
would come personally to Paris, to give them all possible satisfaction; and
that in the interim they should abstain from meddling with new designs, which
put all things in confusion, and doing themselves harm, did wonderfully
advantage the Enemy. But these men being returned to Paris, not much edified by
the Dukes Answer, and particularly offended at his first reprehension of them,
in stead of moderating, increased the boldness of the rest, exclaiming afresh
against the Duke, and saying it was necessary to take some resolution, for that
they found him wholly averse from their intentions: wherefore all of them
boiling with anger, thinking themselves undervalued by the Duke, and at last
being resolved either to abase, or absolutely to change the Parliament, that
they might govern the City their own way, they began to stir up the people,
persuading them that Religion was betrayed, and that the Parliament endeavored
to put the City into the hands of the Navarrois.

It happened that Brigard, one of the first Fomenters of the League at Paris,
having been accused, as if (having changed his mind) he held intelligence, and
plotted secretly in favor of the King, was by the instigation of the Sixteen
violently cast in prison: but in the mean time, while they proceeded slowly
against him with due proofs, he found means, either by money, or his own
industry, to escape out of the place where he was kept, and also to get
secretly out of the City, and out of the hands of his Enemies: which thing
seemed very foul to the Council of Sixteen, and thinking he had been
maliciously let go, by the Judges themselves who made his Process, being raised
to the height of their fury, and with this incentive fomented by the Spanish
Ministers, and by the Garrison which depended on them, they put the people in
Arms upon the fifteenth of November in the morning, and, without further
consideration, being led by the Sieur de Bussy and Commissary Louchart, having
taken and blocked up all the ways that led to the Palace of Justice, they took
prisoners the first President Brisson, Claude l' Archer, and Iehan Tardif, one
Councellor of the Chastelet, and the other of the Court, who were the same men
that had made the Process of Brigard, these being brought fast bound to the
Chastelet, Brigard, who had been impris^ned upon suspicion of Plots against the
League, being ^scaped, the Judges that made his process are by the people in
Arm^ tumultuously put in prison, and by the Council of Sixteen are caused to be
strangled, as accomplices in his flight.
the same day, without any lawful form of Process, but some precipitate
informations taken by the Sieur de Cromay, were strangled in prison, and the
next morning ignominiously hanged up in public upon the Gallows. Then, as if
they had obtained some signal Victory, running up and down the City with the
common people armed and furious, they set their Guards in many places, and
threatened to take the same course against many others. The Governor desiring
to put some stop to these proceedings, being also advised to it by the
Dutchesses of Nemours and Montpensier, began to try whether the strangers of
the Garrison would obey him: but having found them all disposed to favor the
Council of Sixteen, and their present actions; and Alessandro de Monti having
freely said, that he would not stir against those who sincerely managed the
Cause of God and of all good men; he thought it a better way to go out unarmed
to parley with them, and to endeavor to appease the people, and in part remedy
those mischiefs that were like to follow: But neither did this succeed: for
they valued him but little, and the Prevost des Merchands much less, desiring
ardently to put them both out. The Council of Si^te^n resolves to put it self
under the protection of the Catholic King.
All the sixteenth day was spent in this tumult; and on the seventeenth in the
morning, their Council being met in the house of a Divine, named Pellettier,
Curate of St. Jacques de la Boucherie, they resolved to put themselves freely
under the King of Spain's protection, and in the mean time to present some
Articles to the Council of State, for the Government of the City; which by all
means they would have accepted and put in execution. The Articles contained,
That a Court of Justice should be formed of men of their party, The Contents of
certain Articles made by the Council of Sixteen.
which should proceed against Heretics and Favorers of the Navarrois;
thinking with the Judgments and Executions of this, to destroy and annihilate
the Parliament: That all Commerce with those of St. Denis should be broken;
which the Duke of Mayenne had established, to facilitate the concourse of
victuals: That the Imposts upon Wine should be taken away; and that the Account
of all those should be over-looked, who had managed the moneys raised by the
Contributions and Gabelles of the City: That the moneys that came in by the
ordinary Imposts, should not be spent but in the payment of the Garrison, which
should be increased with Foreigners, either Walloons, Italians, or Spaniards:
That the Council of State should be filled up to a certain number; and the men
that should be chosen of it, were named by them: That likewise a Council of War
might be framed, whereof some Colonels of the City were to be, and the chief
Commanders of the Foreign Militia; without the consent of which Council, the
Governor should not be able to resolve any thing: And finally, That the Seals
of the Crown, which the Duke of Mayenne carried about wheresoever he was
himself, should remain constantly in the City, and not be removed to any other
place. This being resolved on, they presently dispatched Father Claudio Mattei
with Letters to King Philip, in which they prayed him to take upon him their
Protection and Government: And having with cries and clamours made the Council
of State to be assembled, they propounded the Articles, to the end they might
be confirmed and executed. The Governor and Prevost des Merchands, with some
of the gravest Eschevins, endeavored to get the benefit of time, alleging,
that the day was too far spent, and hoping that by delay, the ardour of the
people would be cooled: But the Council, according to their advice, having
determined to stay till the next day, the Sixteen with the people in arms stopped
Madam de Nemours as she was going out from the Council, and would by all means
have the Articles confirmed; which the Council having chosen to do, as the
lesser evil, the Duchess her self carrying forth the Decree that was made
about it, prayed them with gentle words to forbear the execution of it till her
Son, the Duke of Mayenne, had given his consent, without whose knowledge it was
not fit things of so great importance should be done; that the delay was but
for a few days, that the Council, and she her self would dispatch the Sieur de
Bourg to the Duke to carry him the Decree, and bring back his confirmation of
it, and she assured them they should remain fully contented and satisfied. The
fury of the people being in part appeased with this grant, they began to lay
down their arms, and to be quiet again, expecting the resolution of the Duke;
who from Retel, being gone to Laon, to meet with the Duchess, Mother to the
Duke of Guise, upon the twentieth day in the evening, received the news of what
had happened in Paris.

He was wonderfully moved at so dangerous an accident, which was about to
strike directly at his authority, but yet would not show any trouble of mind,
lest the Duke of Guise who was present, should take notice of his anger against
his dependents, but only said, that he would expect the Sieur du Bourg (who the
Governor wrote him word, was immediately to depart) to be better informed of
the business, and that it was good to remedy popular commotions with
gentleness, and not to be incensed against them, to avoid greater scandals and
more pernicious errors: for the people drawn by a good zeal, do ordinarily
move without consideration. These words settled the mind of the Duke of Guise,
who was afraid lest he should prove cruel against his dependents, and the
discourses of the next day quieted him much more; so that though the Duke of
Mayenne said he would go to Paris to prevent those mischiefs that might happen
by the divisions of men's minds; yet he let himself be persuaded to stay,
because he had the command of the Army, and was to meet with the Duke of Parma;
who being come to Valenciennes, was in the end of the month to be at Guise,
that they might resolve together of the time and manner of his coming. The
Sieur du Bourg arrived the day following, from whom the Duke had the whole
Narration of the business, and of the Decree that had been made in the Council
of State to appease the people; whereupon being resolved to depart, and
determining with himself to establish his own power and authority by this
occasion, he dispatched Monsieur de Rosne to the Duke of Parma, to excuse him
if he could not be at the place appointed upon the prefixed day, and left the
charge of the Army, and of meeting with the Duke of Parma, to the Duke of
Guise; but with such caution, that to the end he might not be able to do any
thing in arms, he gave secret orders to Rosne and Tavannes, who were Mareschals
of the field, that they should neither draw forth Artillery nor Ammunition,
which were all at la Fere; and he gave the Duke of Guise no Information at all
of the particulars that were to be treated of with the Duke of Parma, to the
end he might not be able to conclude any thing of moment* and having obtained
of the Duke of Montemarciano, and of Commissary Matteucci, that the Switzers
might not be dismissed at that time; and that all the Forces should stay till
his return, showing haste and want of time, he took with him the Counts of
Vaudemont, Chaligny and Brissac, the Sieurs de Bassompierre and Villeroy, with
Seven hundred of his best Horse, part French, part Lorainers, and departed upon
the Five and twentieth in the morning toward Paris; leaving President Ieannin
with the Duke of Guise, to moderate his Counsels, and to observe his carriage.

The same night Don Diego d'Ivarra went the same journey, (though the Duke had
desired him to stay) not being willing to let himself be deceived as the Duke
of Guise had been, but being by all means resolved with his help and counsel to
assist against the danger of the Spanish adherents. The Duke making speed in
his journey, would yet nevertheless take with him two Regiments of Foot that
were at Soissous, and having received the Sieur de Vitry with Two hundred other
Horse at Meaux, he arrived near the City of Paris upon the Twenty eighth day in
the evening. The Sixteen, with the Preachers, and the College of Sorbonne,
seeing the Duke come armed, and knowing, that the Governor, and the Prevost
des Merchands, with the dependents of the Council of State and Parliament would
be powerful in the City, (though Bussy kept the Bastille for them) being much
affrighted, propounded to appease him with words and demonstrations, and sent
four of the chief of them, with many of the Citizens to meet him, to the end,
they might endeavor to divert the anger which they imagined he came withal.
These met him at the Abbey of St. Anthoyne without the Walls, and, with a
discourse full of submission, strove to persuade him, that all had been done to
an extreme good end, for the safety of the City, the conservation of Religion,
the maintenan^e of his own Authority, and to satisfy the people that were
desperate, because there was no show at all made against those Rebels and
disturbers of the public peace: That this had been chosen as the least evil,
to the end, that the people enraged might not make some bloody tumult: That
those who had been executed were manifestly guilty, as he might see by the
proofs, which though they were not accompanied with the wonted Forms of
Justice, were at least true, real and manifest: That the Articles propounded to
the Counselors of State, were by them accounted reasonable; yet that
nevertheless they submitted them to his censure: And finally, they put him in
mind how much they had done and suffered for the greatness of his House, and
for his own exaltation, and besought him to make himself be known for an
indulgent loving Father, and not for a punctual severe Prince. The Duke, who
desired not to receive an obstacle at his entering into Paris, but to be let in
with his Forces without resistance, excellently dissembling the injury he had
received, and the anger that was kindled in him, welcomed them all severally,
and answered them in general, that he came to the City for no other end, and
with no other intention but to secure it, as he that knew well, the
sustentation of Religion, and his own hopes were all founded and placed in that
people, and in the Council of Sixteen, the first authors and framers of his
party: With which words and outward shows, having in great part assured their
minds, he entered that night into the City when it was late, and being conducted
to his Hostel, he held the same discourse with many, knowing, that by
proceeding so, if he should find opposition, he might attribute the pardon to
his own will; and if he could execute his intentions, those outward
demonstrations could not hurt or prejudice him in any manner. A while after him
arrived Diego d' Ivarra, who being come to him with the other Spanish
Ministers, they strove together to persuade him not to show any resentment of
what was past, but to give satisfaction to the people for the time to come;
since the things that had happened, though they were done without due orders
and forms of Justice, were yet good in themselves, and profitable for the
conservation of Religion; and that in the distractions of Civil Wars, the
ordinary rules of good Government cannot be so well observed, but many things
are done to a good end in the heat of dangers, which in quiet peaceful times
would in no wise be suffered; That he himself had proceeded in that manner at
la Fere, without forming any Process against the Marquess de Menelay, whom he
had caused to be killed; for otherwise that place could not have been kept;
That therefore it was better to quiet all things by approving what was fallen
out, than by going about to punish any one, to kindle new discords, and more
dangerous tumults. The Duke answered with the same moderation, and so parted
with the Spaniards: but having taken information of the Forces that were in the
City, and having been told by the Governor, and the Prevost des Merchands,
that the greater and better part of the people would be at his devotion, he
caused the Colonels of the City to guard their several Quarters that night; and
in the morning, having put in Arms the Foot and Horse he brought with him, he
went up to the rue St. Anthoyne, and sent to command the Sieur de Bussy at that
very instant to deliver up the Bastille into his hands: he excusing himself,
interposing delays, and demanding security that he should be harmless; the Duke
caused the Artillery to be taken out of the Arcenal, and began to make them be
drawn that way: whereat the Governor of the Bastille affrighted, (being a man
more accustomed to any thing than the exercise of Arms) and not seeing that any
in the City stirred in favor of him; for the Governor and Prevost had
possessed and blocked up all the ways; he at last, after many Treaties, agreed
to leave the Bastille, receiving a promise not only from the Duke, but from
many others, that his life should be given him; and yet being come home to his
house, he was assaulted the same evening, and was necessitated to save himself,
by getting over the tops of houses, with much ado, and with very great danger;
and after some few days (the Duke winking at it) he fled secretly from the
City, and went to live in another place. Bussy being out of the Bastille, the
Duke chose the Sieur du Bourg (a man valiant and trusty) Governor of it, and
put such a Garrison into it, as secured it from all danger that might happen:
which done, he the next morning sent the Sieur de Vitry with his Horse, (the
streets being still blocked up, The Duke of Mayenne being come to Paris to
appease the Insurrection, takes the Bastill^, kept by the Sieur de Bussy: and
having set strong guards in the several quarters of the City, causes four of
the chief of the Council of Sixteen which were most guilty to be strangled.
and the Militia in Arms) and caused to be taken prisoners at their own Houses,
Commissary Louchart, Captain Emmonot, Barthelemy Auroux Colonel of the Quarter
of the Carmelites, and Ameline the Advocate, Cromay the Counselor being
stolen away, and secretly fled: for being hid by the Spaniards, he continued
many days in the habit of a Soldier, among those of the Garrison, and went
afterward into Flanders, where he lived in great necessity. These four, judged
to be the most faulty of the Sixteen, were the next day strangled by the
Hangman in a Chamber of the Louvre, and after publicly hanged upon the
Gallows; the example sufficing the Duke to recover his authority and
reputation, without showing cruelty in the blood of so many others that were
guilty of the same crime. This severity did wonderfully terrify the Preachers,
and the College of Sorbonne: but the Duke, not willing to lose them, nor to
put himself upon an enterprise that might be sinisterly interpreted, nor yet to
make so great a confusion as might cause some division in his party, went
personally to the Church of the Sorbonne, and there with grave and moderate
words assured them of his favor and protection: and said, That in
consideration of their former virtue and constancy, he pardoned the present
disobedience and conspiracy; and, making show to do it for their sake, he
caused an Edict to be published, wherein declaring that he had satisfied
Justice by the punishment of four seditious persons, he granted pardon to all
the rest, imposing silence and oblivion to what was past. Out of this Pardon he
excepted the Counselor Cromay, Adrian Cocher, and the Or, Notary.
Gre^^ier that wrote the Sentence against Brisson; who afterward perished
diversely by diverse ways. At the same time he also decreed, that experience
having shown how pernicious those Meetings and Conventicles were which were
made secretly without the presence of the public Magistrate, none should upon
pain of death any more assemble any other Councils within the City or without,
save the ordinary Council of the Union, with the assistance or presence of the
lawful Magistrates. These Decrees, registered with full consent of the
Parliament, put an end to the power of the Sixteen, and did something slacken
and retard the designs and machinations of the Spanish Ministers.

But as soon as the Duke of Parma knew distinctly the things that had passed in
Paris, The Duke of Parma declares that he had not been privy to the commotion
of the Parisians, praises the D. of Mayenne for having punished the
delinquents; and having met with the Duke of Guise at Valenciennes, refuses to
treat with him without the presence of the D. of Mayenne.
he showed himself infinitely ill satisfied at all that had been done,
publicly blamed the little consideration of the other Ministers, who, to get a
vain dependence of the basest dregs of the people, disgusted and alienated the
Duke of Mayenne, in whose hand the Arms and strength of the party were, and
without whom, it was not to be thought that any good could be brought to a
conclusion: he testified to the Sieur de Rhosue, that those things were done
without his privity; praised the Duke of Mayenne for punishming the
delinquents, and for his prudent moderation: and when the Duke of Guise came to
him to Valenciennes, though he honored him with all possible demonstrations,
yet he refused to treat with him about any thing without his Uncle's presence
and consent. He saw that all the rest of the party were ill grounded; that
there was no sure foundation to be made upon the people; that the Nobility
depended upon the Duke, and the strong places were held by men that he confided
in; that he alone, with his prudence and valor, was fit to manage all the
rest: wherefore he assented not to the counsel of exasperating him, and putting
him in despair, from whence he knew the resolution taken with the Duke of
Lorain had proceeded; being certain, that when he should once see himself
unable to keep up his dignity, and the Place which he held, he would presently
make an Agreement with the King: nor did he doubt but all other Frenchmen,
except some few, would follow his counsel and authority. Wherefore he saw
clearly, that having a desire to prosecute the design that was begun, it was
necessary to proceed slowly and cunningly, and not to put all things in
confusion, and the minds of the French in terror and suspicion, by a precipice
of furious resolutions.

To this effect he wrote into Spain, and gave the same advertisement to the
Ministers of State that were in France; though in both places they were of
another mind, The Spaniards grant small supplies to diverse French Heads of the
League, to alienate them from the Duke of Mayenne, and divide them from the
body of the League.
and particularly, in the Council of Spain they thought that by sending small
supplies into several Provinces, they should gain themselves many dependents,
alienating them from the Duke of Mayenne, and that so the War would be
nourished and prolonged, with less expense and more advantage: to this purpose
they had granted assistance of men to the Duke of Ioyeuse in Guascogne, to the
end that he might sustain the War on that side near the Pirenean mountains: for
this purpose they had sent the Duke of Savoy three thousand Foot, and three
hundred thousand Ducats, that he might maintain the War in Provence and
Dauphine; and for the same effect they had sent Aquila's Tertia into Bretagne,
to gain the Duke of Mercoeur; The Duke of Mercoeur with the Spaniards, and the
Prince of Dombes with the English, face one another in Br^tagne.
who with that assistance advancing his own affairs, this year in the beginning
of the Spring had almost driven the Prince of Dombes out of the confines of
that Province: but the English being come, who landed at Breast without any
hindrances, businesses were equally balanced; so that after many petty
encounters, which imported not much to the sum of affairs, the Armies at last
came to face one another.

The Duke of Mercoeur was strong in Light Horse led by the Marquess de
Belle-Isle, Son to the Marshall de Retz, and powerful in Foot by virtue of the
Spanish Tertia, who were no less expert in Manufactures than in the matters of
the War. On the other side, the Prince was accompanied with great store of
Gentry, and therefore had a good Body of Horse, though in Foot, by reason the
English were raw men, and the French all Musketeers, he was not to be compared
to the Army of the League: For this cause, though they were within half a mile
of one another, the Duke kept himself entrenched and encamped in mountainous
woody places, advantageous for Foot* and the Prince was drawn out into the
field, where the Squadrons of C^valry might spread and enlarge themselves as
they pleased: and neither of them being willing to stir from their advantage,
(after three days of obstinate continuance in that manner, in which time there
happened many encounters) they both took a resolution to retire, and went to
besiege several places.

But the King having about this time sent the Sieur de la Noue with eight
hundred Germans to assist the Prince as his Lieutenant in the managing of the
War, they resolved, being thus strengthened in Foot, to turn again toward the
Enemy, and try some opportunity to get the better of him: but it was hard for
them to meet; for the Duke of Mercoeur, a discreet wary Soldier, would not put
all he possessed in the Province (which was a great deal) into the power of
Fortune; but having the assistance and money of Spain, endeavored to tire out
the Enemy; and on the other side, la Noue moderating the Princes forwardness
with wise provident counsel, would not suffer him to incur the danger of a
battle without manifest advantage. Wherefore, after diverse encounters and
various attempts on both sides, to bring the Enemy under, the Duke at last went
to assault St. Maximin, and the Prince marched to besiege Lambale, which having
battered, and with his Artillery made a convenient breach in the Wall, while
the Sieur de la Noue went personally to view it, The Sieur de la Noue going to
view the breach and the works at Lambale, is killed with a Musket Shot in the
head.
and the works of the Town, he received a Musket Shot in the head, of which he
died within a few days after, having in an inconsiderable action (as it often
happens) unexpectedly met death, which he had not feared in so many difficult
and glorious enterprises. He being dead, the King commanded the Sieur de
Lavardin to go into Bretagne to supply his place, who proceeding with the same
counsels, though military encounters were most frequent through the whole
Province with variety of fortune, yet did they never come to the hazard of
fighting with all their Forces; but it satisfied the Prince in so vast a
Province, where his Forces were inferior to the Enemies, to keep his name
alive, and the affairs of his party in being.

The Kings affairs in Dauphine were much more prosperous, though the Duke of
Savoy, of an unwearied mind and body, used his endeavors in those parts, with
many of his own Forces, and with strong supplies from Spain; but the greatest
strength of the Province being on the Kings side, under a vigilant, resolute,
diligent, and valiant Commander, who often obtained by policy what could not so
easily be compassed with force, was the cause that after the defeat of
Ponte-Chiarra the League was almost excluded out of Dauphine, and the seat of
the War began to be in the Duke of Savoy's own Country.

On the other side, the fortune of the Savoyards was more successful in
Provence; for having Marseilles (if not wholly subject to the Duke, yet at
least most partial to the League) the Cities of Aix, Arles, and many other of
the chiefest at their devotion: Berre being taken, they made themselves
terrible to the Province, in which Monsieur de la Valette with a small force,
could not equal their power; so that Count Francesco Martinengo, after the
taking of many Towns and Castles, did without much opposition, overrun that
part that extends it self along the Seashore. But having at last laid siege to
Vinon, whilst he battered it with exceeding great fury, Monsieur de la Valette
being resolved to show more courage than he had strength, and rather to trust
the affairs of the Province to the arbitrament of fortune, than to waste
himself with retreating continually in all places, advanced that way with Seven
hundred Horse, and not more than One thousand and two hundred Foot, and having
divided his men into four Battalions, whereof one was put in the Rear for a
reserve and re-inforcement to the rest, commanded by the Viscount de Governet,
he marched straight without other advantage to assault the Enemy, who being
risen from the siege, and having past a Rivulet that was between them, came
resolutely to meet him. Nor was the conflict unlike the valor of the
Commanders; for it was obstinately fought on both sides with equel courage for
the space of many hours, till the Viscount entering fresh into the Battle with
the last Squadron of Horse, Count Francesco Martinengo is defeated by Monsieur
de la Valette, and the siege of Vinon i^ raised
reserved for their utmost hope in so great need, the Savoyards already wearied
with long fighting, began to give ground to the Enemy, who was fresh and eager;
whereupon la Valette's other Squadrons also recovering vigor, charged them so
home, that they made them return full speed over the water, and had pursued
them with a great execution, if the mutual losses they received had not
persuaded them to end the business; which while it was in the greatest heat,
the Soldiers that were in Vinon, sallying gallantly out of their works,
assaulted them that guarded the Savoyards Artillery, and having routed them,
nailed some great Pieces, fired a great deal of Ammunition, and did them many
other mischiefs. This defeat curbed the Dukes proceedings, and did for some
time secure the King's affairs in Provence.

Nor was the War less hot in the Territories of Geneva; for the Sieur de Sancy,
The Sieur de Sancy who was at Basil to raise men in that Canton, having heard
of One hundred thousand Ducats that were carrying from Milan toward German, to
levyforces the^ places himself in ambush in a Wood, assaults the Convoy, and
with much ease takes the Money.
who being retired to Basil, to obtain some number of Swisses in that Canton,
having had intelligence that a hundred thousand Ducats were on the way from
Milan to make Levies in Germany, and that they were conducted by a few men,
without any considerable Convoy, he laid an ambush for them in the Forest of
Basil with so good success, that he took the Money, and being come with it to
Geneva, had in a few days hired a Regiment of Swisses of the Canton of Berne,
where there being also arrived three hundred Horse raised in the State of
Venice by Monsieur de Metz the Kings Ambassador to that Republic, and
commanded by Count Mutio Porto, and Pausania Brazzoduro Vicentines, and Captain
Nicolo Nasi a Florentine, he had in a short time recovered the territory of
Geneva, and was advanced to assault the places that were held by the Savoyards;
during the siege of one of which, named Boringes, some Companies of Neapolitans
and Milaneses belonging to the Catholic King, and that were there to assist
the Duke of Savoy, marched up to disturb them; but being fiercely charged by
the Italian Cavalry, desirous to make themselves remarkable in gallant actions,
they were routed and dispersed, and Boringes surrendered it self to the
discretion of the Enemy.

In this interim Don Amadeo having rallied his Forces, advanced to stop the
Enemies incursions, and being come near unto their Army, they sent back their
great Cannon to Geneva, and encamped themselves in an advantageous place,
keeping the top of an Hill with the Body of their Army, and with their
Vanguard a Wood that was at the bottom of it. There Don Amadeo having
discovered how the enemy was quartered, commanded forth his Vanguard to make
themselves Masters of the Wood, where they of the Kings party making small
resistance, retired little less than routed to the rest of the Army, which
stood in Battal^a upon the ways of the Hill: But the Italian Cavalry going
down into the plain field* violently charged* and repulsed the enemies Van
guard with the death of many; so that they also retired in like manner half
defeated to their main Body. But the Duke of Savoy knowing that in the strength
of narrow places, which ^ill the whole Territories of Geneva, his men could
make but small progress, with the hazard of receiving much damage; while these
Forces employed themselves with those of Geneva, commanded Don Amadeo to
retire, and only to defend his own, till the Supplies should either be
dissolved, or be sent for away to other places. Nor was he deceived in his
hopes; for the Sieur de The French says Vitry.
Giutry who commanded the French forces; and the Italian Cavalry seeing the
Savoyards retreated to defend their own, resolved to go and assist the
Marshall d' A^mont in Bourbonois, where he had much ado to resist the Duke of
Nemours, a Prince, that with his fierceness and courage kept all those places
which confined upon his Forces in very great terror. But the progress of the
War was also weak on that side; for the Marshall having attempted to besiege
Autun, a Town, which, because it was strong, and well manned, molested all the
Country round about; after many assaults and diverse attempts, he was by the
Duke of Nemours forced to retire with no ordinary loss.

About the same time that the Duke of Mayenne was troubled in the business of
the Parisians, there was a Battle in the Quercy.
Country of Cahors, where the Marquess de Villars, who governed the party of
the League, and the Duke of Vantadour who held for the King, encountered one
another, with much Gentry on both sides, and with a very great number of Foot;
in which action, after a valiant fight of two long hours, at last they of the
Kings party had the better, and having slain six hundred of the Enemy, among
which were many Gentlemen of great renown, remained Masters of the Field, and
of the carriages; and afterward took Gadenet, an exceeding strong place, and
many other lesser Towns; in which businesses the courage of the Sieur de
Temines, and Captain Vivans appeared most clearly, the greatest merit of the
victory, and the progress of so fair achievements being attributed to their
valor.

While they labor thus with various success, in the other parts of the Kingdom,
the King marched with his whole Army toward Normandy, being resolved to besiege
Rouen, as well because of the promises wherewith he had engaged himself to the
Queen of England, either to give her some jurisdiction in that City, or to
assign her some other place upon the Sea side; as out of a design to reduce all
that large and exceeding rich Province to his party; for except Rouen and
Havre-de-Grace* there was no place of moment that held not for him; and by
reducing it to his devotion, besides the very considerable profit which he
should gain by the Imposts and Revenues thereof, He absolutely made himself
Master of a large Country, full of great Towns, and a great many Castles,
abounding in Gentry, numerous in people, plentiful in victual, and so situate,
that on the one side it was open to the Ocean, convenient for the near Supplies
of England; and on the other, it extended it self near the City of Paris,
cutting off from it the passage of the River Seine, which was most important
for its present conservation; wherefore, being intent with his utmost
endeavors upon this enterprise, he had given charge to the Marshall de Biron
(who, when he went into Lorain, stayed behind with part of the Army in those
parts) to seek to possess himself of all the places about it, and to make the
greatest provisions he could of victual, ammunition, and other things necessary
for that siege. Biron, after the taking of Louviers, where he had found
wonderful great store of corn, which he caused to be carefully kept, had
assaulted and taken Gournay; and then passing further into the Country of Caux,
had likewise taken Caudebec, seated upon the River Seine, between Havre de
Grace and Rouen, and possessed himself of the Castle of Eu, which stands upon
the great highway of Picardy; after which successes, being already absolute
Master of the field, he set himself diligently to make provisions, storing up
corn, some at Eureux, some at Ponteau de Mer, and most of all at Pont de l'
Arche, because it was the nearest place to Rouen. At Caen he caused great store
of Tents to be made, and other clothes for the Soldiers use. At Diep he
gathered together plenty of Ammunition, and of those Iron-instruments that were
fit for the intended siege; and in all places businesses went on with infinite
diligence and order, but without any noise or apparent stir.

And yet there was not any of the contrary party, who perceived not that things
were setting in order to besiege Rouen; and the Duke of Mayenne being confident
that that was the King's intention, did, with no less diligence busy himself
in making those provisions that were fit for the defense of it; and to give it
reputation, he had sent his son Henry thither, to give such orders as were
needful, to confirm the people, and to give them assurance that they should not
remain without relief. The course taken by the Sieur de Villars in ordering*
disposing, and preparing things to receive the siege, which was going to be
laid to Rouen by the Kings Army.
The Military affairs, and the weight of the defense, he laid wholly upon the
Sieur de Villars, a Cavalier not only of high spirit and courage, but
absolutely depending upon his name and authority; who going first to Havre de
Grace, a Fortress abundantly furnished by former Kings, and leaving the
Government of it to the Sieur de Guijon, who likewise was a Provencal by birth,
returned to Rouen with two and thirty pieces of Cannon of several sizes, and
with every thing necessary to make use of them; all which he caused to be
carried in great Boats up the River; and brought thither Six hundred Horse of
that Country, and One thousand and two hundred of those Provencal Foot, which
had long followed the War under his Command in those parts: and as a man to
whom learning (which he was adorned withal) suggested generous spirits, and the
experience of many years, supplied with wary prudent Counsels, knowing how much
good, order is wont to produce in Military affairs, and desiring therefore that
all things might proceed with a due disposal, under their proper Heads, and
that every one might know and execute his own Charge; he called all the Heads
of the Clergy, the principal men of the Parliament, the chief of the People,
and the Officers of the Soldiery, and distributed to every one his part of
those labors that were to be undergon in their future defense. He destined the
Sieur de la Land (an old Soldier, well known in the City, by having lived
there many years) to the Office of Sergeant Major: to the defense of St.
Catherines Mount, wherein the sum of the business consisted, he chose the
Chevalier Piccard with his Regiment, and two hundred other Musketeers commanded
by the Sieur de Iessan. The old Palace standing between the Port de Chaux, and
the River Seine on the North-side, he gave to the Sieur de Banquemare, first
President of the Parliament, with One hundred Swissers and Three hundred
French: the old Castle, with the part adjoining toward The French says
toward the East.
Maistre, he assigned to his brother the Chevalier d' Oyse, to whom he gave the
Regiments of Colonel Boniface, and of Commendatory Grillon; and the West Side
toward the Fauxbourg de St. Severe beyond the River, he gave to Captain Giacopo
Argenti of Ferrara, with his Regiment: Carlo Siginolfi a Neapolitan Engineer of
great experience, commanded the Artillery; Captain Basin the Fireworks, which
were made in very great abundance: and at every Gate, one of the ancientest
Presidents, and one of the Counselors of the Parliament assisted, as well for
security as reputation. The Citizens were divided into Ten Companies, under ten
Commanders, chosen by them; whereof eight were to guard eight Bulwarks or great
Towers lined with earth, which were in the Circuit of the City; and the other
two had the Main-guard in the great Marketplace; and in the Palace of Justice
were lodged two hundred Swissers, and as many French Firelocks, to be ready to
help where need should require. The Governor also caused some little Barks to
be furnished with small Pieces of Artillery, and manned with twenty Soldiers to
each of them, as well on the upper as on the lower part of the Seine; which
under the command of their Admiral the Sieur d' Anquetil, were to run up and
down the River, to make Prize of such Vessels as should stir, and to take
Cattle and other provisions along the banks of it, to keep the City in more
plenty of Victual. Two Counselors of the Parliament, and two Deputies of the
City, were employed in the distributing of bread; and the old Sieur de Coursey
had the care of delivering out the Ammunition. With this order, very well
contrived, and exceeding well executed, by the diligence of the Governor, and
the experience of those to whom it was entrusted, things went on so quietly and
so happily, that during all the time of the siege, there neither happened any
disorder, nor did any body suffer for want of Victual, the price of provisions
not much differing from the ordinary rate.

Against these provisions, the Marshall de Biron, after he had received Three
thousand English Foot that had landed at Boulogne, and were led by the Earl of
Essex, had under his Colors between Nine and ten thousand Foot, and One
thousand and eight hundred Horse: and to give a beginning to the Siege, he came
and lay within sight of the City, at a place called Darnetal, upon the Eleventh
of November; which day the Cavalry of the Camp overran all the Plain, to the
very Walls of the City, The Marshall de Byron lays siege to Rouen Nov. 11.
1591. In the first Skirmish before Rouen, the Earl of Essex his Nephew is slain
by Berosey.
and of St Catherine: Captain Borosey a soldier of great valor, with Two
hundred Horse, and Colonel Boniface with Five hundred Foot sallyed out at the
Port Cau-choise, and charging first the Cavalry, and then the Regiment of
English, skirmished fiercely for many hours, though at last, being weary on
both sides, they retired willingly without advantage; yet the besieged vaunted
of a happy beginning, by reason of the death of a The Author is a little
mistaken in this parti^ular; for it was the Earl of Essex his Brother Sir
Wa^ter d' Eureux.
Nephew of the Earl of Essex, who, his courage having drawn him into the most
dangerous place of the fight, was slain by Borosey with a Pistol-shot in the
throat. On the other side, Captain Perdriel with Two hundred other Horse, and
Captain Basin with Four hundred Foot sallied at the Port de Martinville, and
having skirmished long with the French Light Horse, led by Francesco Orsino
Sieur de la Chappelle, they were forced to retire, though they received not
much harm, because they were defended in their retreat by the Artillery of the
nearest Bulwark.

But the Marshall, as soon as he had entrenched Darnetal, to the end his Army
might lie secure from the sprightly forwardness which he saw in those of the
Town, set himself for some days following (without advancing toward the City)
to divert the course of the Robec, which little Rivulet running through the
Field, and entering into the Town, drove eleven Mills near the Port St.
Hillaire, to the great convenience of those within; nor was it very difficult
to turn it another way; which would have much incommodated the Town, and made
them suffer exceedingly, if Villars, foreseeing the diversion of the water, had
not provided against it before, by having caused a great many hand-mills to be
made, which were continually kept going by the Countrymen, who, to fly the
Enemy, were in great numbers gotten within the Walls. While they wrought to
divert the water, the Marshall no less intent upon art, than he was upon force
of arms, held a Treaty with Captain Graveron, who was in the City, to get into
his hands the Port de Beauvais, which he was appointed to guard; A double
practice is discovered, which vanishes without effect.
and this was managed by a kinsman of his, who was one of the Mareschals
servants, and who before the siege had often gone disguised into the City for
that purpose. But Graveron having revealed the Treaty to the Governor, and
received Orders to draw the Enemy by night into an Ambush, he could not fain so
well, but that the art was discovered; whereupon this treaty vanished with
little damage on either side. But the next day the Chevalie^ Piccard sallying
out from St. Catherine's to skirmish and the Earl of Essex with the English
coming out of the Wood of Turinge, they contended with words no less than
deeds: for Piccard upbraided the English, that not having courage enough to
revenge the death of the Earl's Nephew, they ^ought to advance their designs by
treachery, they came to ill language, and to give the Lie, for which, as soon
as the skirmish was ended, there came an English Trumpet from the Earl of
Essex, The Earl of Essex challenges the Sieur de Villars to a Duel, who refuses
it not; but refers it to another time, and so nothing is done.
to challenge the Governor; which the Chevalier Piccard (who had spoke the
words) having answered, it came not to a duel; for the Earl refused to fight
with any other than the Governor; and the Governor, though he refused him not,
yet he referred the Duel till another time, when he should be free of the
charge of that present defense, to which, as a public cause, he was both first
and more deeply engaged.

All the Month of November was spent in continual Skirmishes, and hourly
encounters, the Marshall in the mean time being employed in fortifying his
quarters, drawing Artillery and Ammunition, and causing provisions to be
brought in; expecting the Kings coming up to the siege with the rest of the
Army; who being come into the Camp upon the third of December, sent an Herald
to summon the City; but being very stoutly answered by those within, The King
with the rest of the Army comes up to the siege of Rouen, he sends a Herald to
summon the Town but is refused.
the next day they broke ground to make their approaches to the Wall. The King
lay at Darnetal with the Marshall de Biron, and the greatest part of the
Nobility that followed him, having the Swissers flanked with the Regiment of
his Guards, for the defense of his own quarters. The Viscount de Turenne (whom,
in the right of his Wife, we will begin to call the Duke of Bouillon) was
quartered on the right hand, with the Cavalry, and the German Infantry,
spreading themselves a great way in the Neighboring Villages, upon the way
that leads toward Diepe. The French Infantry (having lost the Sieur de
Chastillon, who was wont to command it, he being dead a while before of a
natural death) was led by diverse Colonels of renowned fame, and lay close by
the Germans; but on the right hand of the King's Quarters, toward the Port
Cau-choise, and the Port de Beauvais. The English Foot lay on the left hand of
the King, and the Swissers entrenched under the Wood of Turinge, against the
Port St. Hillaire, and the Mount of St. Catherine: The Baron de Giury, and the
Sieur de la Chappelle with the Light Horse, spread themselves on the left hand
of these, upon the way that leads to Pont de l' Arche, and thence toward
Paris. And the Count de Soissons with Captain Raulet, beyond the Rive^ Seine
(over which there was a passage made by a Bridge upon Boats) were quartered
right over against the Fauxbourg of St. Severe.

When the whole Town was thus girt round, there being neither the hinderance,
nor the convenience of Suburbs (for the Governor, at the arrival of the Army,
had caused them to be burnt) the King commanded Colonel St. Denis to take up
his Post in the Church of St. Andre, which was the only building that (because
it was built of stone) remained yet standing, though they had endeavored to
demolish it: but he soon perceived that Villars had foreseen the mischief which
he might receive from thence, and provided a very convenient remedy: For two
exceeding great Culverins were discovered upon a A Mount raised on purpose to
plant Cannon on Some call it a Ca^.
Cavalier raised within, which did so batter that place, that the French had
scarcely possessed themselves of it, when they were forced to quit it. This
attempt having proved ineffectual, the King began to cause two Trenches to be
cast up, one to approach St Catherines Mount, which (being drawn from the Wood
of Turinge) was wrought at by the English; and the other to end just against
the Port St Hilaire, at which the French Infantry wrought by turns. But the
Sieur de Villars (besides the other works which were thrown up day and night,
and by a great abundance of Laborers, who within a short space had dammed up
the Port de St. Hilaire with Earth) having raised a very high Caval^er close
by it, filled the Moat with Casamats, and fortified the Counterscarp with
little Ravelines, had also before the Forts of St. Catherine (where the utmost
force of the siege was applied) drawn a Brestwork of eighteen or twenty foot
thick, flanked with two Ravelines only for the use of Musketeers, having
neither Shoulders, Orillons are the round shoulders at the ends of the faces of
Bastions next the Flanks, which cover the covered Flanks; little used in
Holland, but much in Italy and France.
Orillons, nor Retreats; and before this a Moat of thirty foot wide, and ten
foot deep; which was a very fit obstacle to hinder, and keep in play the first
fury of the assailants: But besides these Fortifications, finding the City
strongly and fully manned, (for besides the Townsmen most ready upon service,
there were in it Five thousand Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse) he resolved with
frequent Sallies to trouble the enemy, so that their Works should go on but
slowly; that manner of defense seeming to him very profitable, by reason of the
hinderance it gave to the enemies approaches; and very generous, by reason of
the fame and honor which (if they succeeded prosperously) he should gain
thereby: Wherefore the two trenches were scarcely begun, when five Companies of
Foot, seconded by Boresey with 120 Horse, sallied out at the Port Cauchoise;
and on the other side Three hundred Provencials armed with Corslets and
Halberds, or Partisans, flanked with a hundred French Firelocks, came down from
St. Catherines, and with infinite violence assaulted those that were at work
making the Redouts. On the one side the English ran to oppose this Sally; and
on the other, Colonel St. Denis, la Luserne, and Parabere; and the fight grew
so hot on both sides, that it lasted above three hours with great execution,
till the Baron de Biron being come up with a Body of Four thousand Germans, and
two great Troops of Horse, sent back those of the Town, whereof (with the Sieur
de St. Sulpice) there were slain above forty; but on the Kings party above Two
hundred.

The Pioneers were terrified with this assault, to which the crossness of the
weather being added (which first with excessive Rains, then with very deep Snow
and hard Frosts, hindered all manner of working) the approaches went on but
slowly; and yet the besieged, who with ease and convenience lay under cover,
did not for the same difficulties slacken the works they had begun; but every
day, Casamats, Trenches, Ravelines, and Cavaliers, were seen to rise, and their
sallies were so fierce, and made to so good a purpose, that they kept all the
besiegers almost continually in Arms. Herein appeared most clearly the prudence
and valor of the Sieur de Villars, who, though he could not stir up and down
without difficulty, being lame of one foot, would yet himself in person
(sometimes upon a pad-nag, sometimes upon a gallant horse) be in all
encounters, surveying himself, and ordering and governing the actions of his
men by his own presence: One Goville ^ Priest, one of the stoutest Defendants,
noted both by the Kings party and his own, a^ often as he fights single, still
gets the victory.
And amongst the most courageous Salliers (at last known also to all the Kings
Army) were Captain Boresey, Captain Basin, and one Goville a Priest; who much
fitter for the exercise of Arms, then his Ecclesiastical Function, being bold
beyond measure, and a despiser of the greatest dangers, was ever the first in
all sallies, and as often as he chanced to encounter any one, man to man, he
always got the victory, with infinite applause of his own party.

At last the approaches that were making at St. Catherines, were brought to
perfection, though they proved very straight, and had only three Redouts; but
they were favored on the right hand by a long battery of fourteen pieces of
Cannon, and on the left with seven more; but planted so far off, that the
Commissaries that had them in charge, did not care to fill their Gabions; yet
under favor of their shot, the works were advanced so forward, that they were
brought to the Counterscarp of the Fortification that was newly made, which
being something high, and the Trench of the besiegers very straight at that end
(all defects of the English Engineer) a great number of men were slain by the
incessant storm of Musket Shot, which was poured from those that were behind
the Parapet of the same Counterscarp: Wherefore it being necessary to beat them
away, and that not being to be done by day, in regard of the defense which they
received from the Curtine, from whence the Musketeers of the Fort with very
good order shot perpetually, the King coming personally into the Trench with
three hundred Gentlemen, accompanied by four hundred gallant Firelocks, gave a
fierce assault to that place in the greatest darkness of the night, which it
not being possible for the defendants to sustain, they quitted the
Counterscarp, and (as Soldiers say) filing off to the right and left hand,
under favor of their Fortifications, they retired into the Moat. Sir Roger
Williams, a valiant Colonel, entered presently with Eight hundred English, and
Gabions being brought with wonderful speed, he covered himself, working all
night upon the edge of the very Moat; but the night following, the Sieur de
Villars (having placed a Thousand Musketeers upon the Curtine, who, without
intermission, shot even in the dark against the angle of the Counterscarp) sent
forth the Chevalier Pi^card, and Captain Basin, with Four hundred Provencals,
and at the head of them completely armed sixty Gentlemen defended with Targets,
who falling on the same way by which they had retired the night before,
valiantly regained that Post, beating the English from thence, who being hailed
upon with a thick shower of Musket-bullets, durst not stand up to handle their
Pikes; but being terribly vexed at the affront they had received, prepared
themselves the two days following, and on the third at night assaulted the
Counterscarp so precipitately in the King's presence, that the Defendants being
driven out, they lodged themselves there, and with infinite speed and diligence
fortified and covered themselves more than sufficiently.

The end of the Trench was thrown open into the Moat upon the 29th of December,
and upon New Years Eve two Batteries were raised; one of Fourteen Cannon, which
battered the old Fort, and the other of seven, planted against the new. These,
though they thundered all the day, and continued all the night following, not
to give the Enemies leisure to repair their Works; yet did they make but little
progress, the Forts being all of good Earth, and newly turfed, and the
Artillery being lower than the Forts, battered more strongly weakly, and made
much less impression. Wherefore, upon the second day of the year 1592. they
began to make a platform in the midst between the two Batteries, that they
might play more strongly against the Forts. The besieged would not pass that
night in idleness, but coming down between the Hill and the City, assaulted the
Trenches that were at the Counterscarp of the old Fort; and having put the
Guards in confusion, killed above Sixty of them, carried away many of their Or
digging tools.
materials, and would have thrown down all their Work, if Sir Roger Williams
making opposition himself, with a few to second him at the Gorge of the first
Redout, had not long sustained the violence of the Enemy; for laying hold of a
Pike, and with him two Captains, an Ensign, and a Sergeant doing the same, he
so bravely stood the fury of the Assailants, that a few other Soldiers working
a little behind, made a gap in the Redout, and fresh men still coming up, who
at the noise of the fight ran to assist their fellows, the heat of the assault
was first sustained, and then other Squadrons of the Army coming one after
another, they of the City were at last forced to give over the enterprise, and
retreat, though with much gallantry and reputation: Nor did the fight end
because they were retired; for with their Artillery, Harquebuzes a Croc,
throwing Fireworks, and a thousand other ways, they ceased not to molest and
hinder the progress of the Battery.

At the other Trench, which was cast up against the Port de St. Hilaire, and
finished the third day of January, there was a battery raised of four pieces of
Cannon and two Culverins, which having found the Gate damm'd up with earth, and
making no progress that was considerable, it was propounded to leave that
place, and go to work against the Port de Beauvais that stood lower; which
proposition was favored by the French Colonels, because the place was more
convenient for them, and near the quarters where they were lodged. But in the
mean time, while the Commanders are deliberating, and that the consultation, by
reason of the contrary opinions, proves long, the Chevalier d' Oyse sallying at
the Port Cauchoise, assaults that very Trench, and in the mouth of it makes a
great slaughter of the Soldiers of St. Denis, not being upheld by his wonted
conduct and courage, because it being then in debate, whether or no the Post
should be quitted, he was gone to the Consultation, and to receive the
Marshall de Biron's Orders. The next day the Work was removed from thence
something lower, and the French (out of emulation to the English Foot, whom
they saw upon the Counterscarp of St. Catherines) with infinite diligence in a
few days brought the Trench to perfection; which after it was ended, and the
Gate battered with seven pieces of Cannon, Colonel St. Denis, without staying
till the breach were made very large, presented himself valiantly to assault
it; and at the same time Colonel Piles with his Regiment falling out of the
same Trench, set up many scaling ladders against the Curtain which joined to
the same Gate. The assault was fierce, and no less fierce the defense: But the
breach in the Wall being high and narrow, and a thick cloud of fire works,
stones, and scalding water pouring from the Curtain, the assailants were
constrained to retire, leaving above seventy of their Soldiers dead upon the
place. This business happened upon the fourteenth of January.

Lieutenant Landon being taken prisoner by the Kings party, promises to let
them in at a Gate of the City: but being set at liberty, he discovers the
business to the Governor, who on the night appointed takes Captain Raulet and
others that came for that purpose.
Whilst their Arms are courageously employed on this side, they that were on the
other side of the River, at the Fauxbourg St Severe, having no other Commission
but to hinder the entrance of Men or Victual into the Town, made weaker and
less bloody skirmishes; in which the besiegers having taken one Landon, a
Lieutenant of Commendatory Grillon's Regiment, they labored to corrupt him,
and bring him to give them a promise, that as soon as he should have the Guard,
he would let them into the Fort of the Bridge which was upon the Seine; Landon
dissembling a consent unto it, because he had formerly served under Captain
Raulet, and had received some courtesies from him, was set at liberty; and
faining to keep his promise, upon the Eighteenth of January at night, he having
the Guard, gave the sign that was agreed upon, which being understood by those
without, Captain Raulet on foot completely armed with twenty Gentlemen, and
thirty fire^locks, drew near to the Fort to be received in, the Count de
Soissons standing in Arms with the rest of his Forces, intent to follow him
upon all occasions: But Landon having discovered all to the Governor, at the
first appearance of the Kings Soldiers, sallied out of the Fort with sixty good
men, and fell so fiercely on the Enemy, that the rest running away, frighted at
that unexpected encounter, Captain Raulet who stood to it, was taken prisoner
by him; Another practice, but not a fained one, is discovered, and those that
are guilty condemned to the Gallows.
and the Count de Soissens advancing to disingage him, could not come time
enough to effect it. But about this time there was another intelligence, which
was not fained, held with the Sieur la Fountain; which being discovered and
revealed by one Mauclere an Advocate, who was conversant in the same place, all
the accomplices were taken and condemned to the Gallows.

They wrought now more diligently in many places than they were wont; for the
soldiers had already (for their own honor) taken an affection to the
enterprise, and the emulation between the Nations made the Work go forward with
greater speed: To increase the which, the King having taken a new Post between
St. Catherines and Martinville, quartered 3000 German Foot there, who labored
no less than the rest to make their approach with the Trench to the
Counterscarp of the Moat. On the other side, the besieged, encouraged by the
prosperous success of their Sallies, agreeing among themselves in all things
belonging to the defense, moved by the Governors example, who putting his hand
to all employments, was present at all things; and solicited by la Land, who
with unwearied vigilance went about; and provided against all wants in all
places; labored continually, sometimes to make up their Works which the
Artillery had beaten down, sometimes in raising new Forts, and making new
Casamats, sometimes to put in order warlick instruments and fireworks; but
above all things, they were diligent and forward upon Sallies, to which not
only the Soldiers ran with infinite readiness, but many times even the
Companies of the Townsmen also: So that upon the one and twentieth day,
sallying out of the Port Cauchoise on the one side, and out at the Port de
Martinville on the other, they made an hot and furious conflict: But the King
having caused some Fieldpieces to be secretly planted on the flank of his
Post, they were driven back by the violence of them with great loss, leaving
slain the Lieutenant of the Governors Guards, two of the City Captains, and
above 30 soldiers. There sally out of Rouen 1000 Foot, and 300 Horse.
Much more dangerous was the encounter that happened on the three and twentieth
day, when 300 Horse and 1000 Foot sallying out at the same Gate, divided
themselves into several places; for the Cavalry went toward the field which
leads straight to Darnetal, to attacque the Regiments of Guards in their
Quarter, and the Foot to march more covertly, entered into the dry channel of
the Robec, and came to the Wood of Turinge to the English. The fight began
about noon, weak at the first, because Grillon Colonel of the Guards was scarce
able to get an hundred of his men together, and the English shooting coldly at
a distance, did not close up resolutely with the Enemy; but afterward by the
coming up of the Commanders, the action rose to such a height, that at last it
proved to be like a Battle: For the Baron de Biron and Francois de Montmorancy
Sieur du Hallot, with two Squadrons of valiant Gentlemen assisted in both
places, and the Baron de Giury, and la Chappelle with the Light Horse ran to
reinforce their party: And on the other side, Villars seeing the danger of his
men, who were advanced very far, came forth himself to fetch them off, with
Boresey's and Perdriel's Horse, and the Sieur de la Land followed him with the
Regiment of Giocopo Argent, and three Companies of the Townsmen; wherefore
fighting in every place as in a pitched Field, the service grew very dangerous
and bloody, The Baron de Biron wounded.

The Skirmish increased almost to a Battle; many Commanders are either killed
or wounded, and the Sieur de Villars also being hurt, has much ado to retire
to the Walls under the protection of his own Cannon.


fresh numerous supplies coming up on all sides to those that fought. But the
King who being at that side toward the Battery of Martinville, was advanced
with a few Horse, passing with great danger over a little bank that was wont to
stop the course of the Robec, to the place where the fight was, having heard
that the Sieur du Hallot, wounded with a Musket Shot in the thigh, was carried
to the next Quarter, and that the Baron de Biron hurt (though but slightly) in
the face, was in great danger of being slain, he presently sent forth the Duke
of Bouillon with a Squadron of Reiters to relieve his Forces, by whose fury
Villars his Horse being killed under him, he himself hurt slightly in one of
his hands, and many of those that were about him knocked down, he had wonderful
much ado to retire under the Artillery of the Walls. In this action were killed
Captain Laurier, the Sieur de Plumetant a Gentleman of the Country of Caux,
Bois-Pulein a Captain of Horse, the Governors Captain of his Guard, the Sieur
de Molart, and Brebion, with above an Hundred Soldiers: And, on the King's side
were slain above an Hundred and fifty, and many more wounded; among which
Grillon the Colonel of the Guards having received a dangerous shot with a brace
of Bullets under the elbow, remained a long time disabled for service.

The same night the Chevalier de Varneville, of the Order of Jerusalem, died in
the City of his wounds formerly received; and the Chevalier Piccard, being shot
with a Cannon-bullet in the thigh, departed this life within a few days after.
This loss was increased by the death of Captain Basin, that with much honor had
engaged himself in all occasions, who looking out at a A Skyt-gate is that gap
in the Parap^s where the mouth of the Cannon lies out, called in French
l'Embraseure, or Cannoniere. Goville the valiant Priest is killed with a Musket
shot.
Skyt-gate to discover the Enemies works, was hit with a Musket-bullet on the
forehead, and lay dead a good while before any body took notice of it. Goville
the Priest was likewise slain in a skirmish the next day; for having strained
his foot in getting up a Work, and being thereby necessitated to retire softly,
he was overtaken by many, and after having long defended himself, lost his life
by a Musket Shot in the throat. The number of the Defendants being very much
decreased by the death of these, they slackned their sallies, and therefore the
approaches of the Army still advancing, the assailants were in many places
fortified upon the Counterscarps, and at the old Fort of St. Catherine, and
under the Curtine of Ma^^in^ille, having also passed the Moats, they were
working Mines under the Walls; and at the Port d^ Beauvais they had already
sprung a Mine, though with but little effect: Which Works being diligently
hastened by the Marshall de Biron, the Soldiers labored with so much ardor,
that by the sap they brought themselves under the Bulwark of the old Fort; and
having reduced it all upon props, the Commanders believed that without Powder
it would all fall of it self, as soon as the props should fail; wherefore,
having drawn up two Squadrons in a readiness to go on to the assault, the props
were set on fire; but the Earth, which was admirably good, and well beaten,
sunk down so gently, that without opening it self, or falling in pieces, it
only sunk down upon the ground, the Bulwark remaining lower, but not broken,
nor discomposed on any side, which was the cause, that without any further
attempt the Foot returned all into their Trenches. They then began to make a
Mine in the same place, to do that effect which could not be done with the
Props, and in the mean time the Germans also wrought under the Curtine of
Martinville; in which place la Fountaine-Martel, and Agueville, a young
Gentleman of that Country, drawn by the emulation that was between them,
sallied out at one of the Skyt-gates of the next Bulwark, each with ten
Firelocks, and twenty Corslets, and gallantly assaulted the principal Avenue of
the Trench; but being exceeded by so much a greater number, and there being no
means to help them from the Walls, because the Works were beaten down, after a
long and gallant fight, wherein almost all their men were slain, they had much
ado to get themselves drawn up at the same Skyt-gate. The Mine at the old Fort
was already perfected, and was to be sprung the next morning, when Colonel
Boniface going the Round to visit his Guards in the still silence of midnight,
heard the noise of the working in that place, and having caused many Fireworks
to be cast into the Moat, to discover what the Enemy did; those fires running
up and down, and scattering themselves into many places, by chance found the
mouth of the Mine, and gave fire to it before the time, in such manner, that
the blast striking backward; and carrying part of the Bulwark with it, burned
and overwhelmed with Earth all the out-guard, and hurt many of those that were
preparing themselves against morning, to give the assault; yet the ruin was so
large, and the Earth so overturned at the point of the Bulwark, that it might
easily have been assaulted, if that sudden accident, and the death of the
chiefest of them, had not terrified the assailants; so that the Baron de Biron,
who was to give the sign for the assault, not being in the Trench, and the Foot
that were to make it not being drawn up in readiness, the ^arl of Essex and Sir
Roger Williams standing firm upon their Guards, sent away in haste to receive
Orders what to do, and in the mean time* the Defendants with sacks full of
Earth, and brush Faggots, repaired the breach in a short space.

But the siege of Rouen, by reason of the importance of it, had from the
beginning bred great anxiety in the Duke of Mayenne, who being departed from
Paris, and returned to the Army, had dispatched the Sieur de Rosne to Landrecy,
where the Duke of Parma then was, to solicit his coming, or at least to know
his resolution. The Duke of Montemarciano and Commissary Matteucci, had also
dispatched Antoni^ Maria Pallavitino to him, to let him know, that if he by the
midst of December were not entered with his Army upon the Confines of France,
they had a Commission from Rome ^o the band their forces; and likewise Diego d'
Ivarra was gone thither, as well to inform him of the business that had fallen
out in Paris, as to represent unto him the importance and danger of the siege,
already laid before Rouen. The Duke governing himself according to his
Commissions, and his own design, never to let the Kings party have so much the
better, that the League should be suppressed by it; and seeing that he could no
longer delay to assist the Duke of Mayenne, he resolved to do it, but still
persevering in his determination, not to show any interessed end, The Duke of
Parma is of opinion to succor the League, without showing any other end save
that of Religion, and Diego d' Ivarra thinks it better (the League being in a
strait) to force them to call an Assembly of the States, and to declare the
Infanta Isabella, Queen of France.
but simply a desire to succor and sustain Religion, that he might not put
things in disorder, and beg^t an unseasonable jealousy in the French. Diego d'
Ivarra was of another mind; who by his own opinion, and that of the other
Ministers who were in France, persuaded that upon occasion of the present
necessity, which was most urgent, the Duke of Mayenne, and the other French
Lords should be constrained to assemble the States, and cause the Infanta
Isabella to be declared Queen, who should afterward, with the consent of the
Confederate Princes, take such an Husband as should be resolved on* which
coming to pass, he thought best to spend with a free hand, and with all their
Forces to assault the King, and never to draw off their Army from him till he
was absolutely suppressed and overcome. But the Duke, though he knew this to be
the last intention of the Catholic King, and of the Spanish Council, did not
judge the present time seasonable for that business, as well because the French
Lords (holding themselves deceived, and that upon occasion of their present
exigency, they meant to bring their necks into a noose) would, in despair, cast
themselves into the Kings mercy, who, with many inticements sought to make them
his friends; as also, because there was not time to manage that design, with
that patience and dexterity it required, while Rouen was already besieged, and
the necessity of relieving it admitted no delay. The Spaniards, and
particularly Diego d' Ivarra (a man of a most fiery wit, and naturally of a
stinging tongue) added, that the Duke of Parma being an Italian, (for his own
interest, and that of the other Italian Princes) did not desire the so great
growth of the Spanish Monarchy, and that therefore he went interposing doubts
and delays, no less than the French Lords did: But the effects of aftertimes
have clearly shown, how prudent and profitable the Duke of Parma's opinion was;
who being resolved to help in the so great need of the Confederates, was come
to Guise, where he met with the Dukes of Mayenne and Montemarciano, and having
left Count Mansfelt in the Government of the Low Countries, gave order to his
Son, Prince Raunuccio, and the other Commanders, to draw together, and lead the
Army toward the Confines.

The Duke could do no less, than give the Duke of Mayenne and the rest, a touch
of what King Philip had with his own mouth, spoken to President Ieannin: That
it was thenceforth necessary not to do things by chance; and without a
determinate end, but to assemble the States; who (having understood the
Catholic Kings intentions, which he would cause to be made known unto them by
new Ambassadors) should resolve upon future things, which could not always go
on in the present uncertainty: And when he saw that the Duke of Mayenne
answered him very coldly to that particular, he caused it afterward to be
spoken of to him by President Riceardotto, one of his Counselors* but the Duke
not refusing the Convocation of the States, said, it was necessary to refer it
till another time, and that first it should be treated on with the Dukes of
Lorain, Nemours, and Mercoeur, and that the ends to which they should
unanimously tend should be agreed upon, lest they should proceed indeed by
chance, and cause some division among the Confederates: Which reasons being
very conformable to the sense and opinion of the Duke of Parma, and having
observed, that at this proposition, all the French Lords were put in suspense,
and no less than they, Madam de Guise, who was then present, he seemed to
remain satisfied, and imposed silence to th^^ point; but fell only to demand
la Fere for his retreat, whither he might bring all the Artillery, Ammunition,
and Baggage of his Army, it not being fit that they should remain open to the
Enemies incursions; and that he, advancing into the bowe^ of an enemies
Country, should not have one place whither he might retire at his pleasure.
There was enough to do to obtain this point; for the Duke of Mayenne refused to
alienate any place from the Crown: But having discovered, that the
Vice-Se^^scha^ de Montelimar, Governor of that Fortress, held intelligence with
the Spaniard doubting, that they howsoever would get it against his will, he
was at last contented that the Duke should bring in his Arms and Artillery
thither, and that he should leave ^ Garrison there of Five hundred Walloons,
paid by the Catholic King; but still under the same protection of the Crown,
the same French Magistrates residing to administer Justice; and not satisfied
with that, he would also have a bill of the Duke of Parma's hand, to leave it
free to him again whenever he should draw forth his Artillery.

The D. of Parma about that time gave great satisfaction to the Confederates by
a very prudent and generous action; for certain Deputies being come to him from
the City of Orleans, to let him know, That their Citizens (not having
wherewithal to pay the soldiers of the Garrison, who were many months behind,
and seeing that the D. of Mayenne had no great care of their interests) were
desirous to put themselves under the Catholic King's protection, being ready
to receive what Garrison he should think fit: he reprehending them for seeking
to swerve from the obedience of the Lieutenant of the Crown, refused to accept
of them, though Iuan Baptista Tassis, and Diego d' Ivarra were of a contrary
opinion; to whom he answered, that if they thought to get possession of the
Crown of France, by reducing the Cities one by one, the World would be at an
end before they had absolutely gained it, and that it was necessary to strike
at the root, and not busy themselves in pruning off the boughs.

Matters being set right with the French Lords, it was necessary to set them
right also with the Ministers of Rome; Pope Gregory the 14th dies: Giovanni
Antonio Fachinetto Cardinal of Santi Quattro, succeeds with the name of
Innocent the 9th. His inclinations concerning the affairs of France.
for after the death of Gregory the XIVth, Giovanni, Antonio Fachinetto
Cardinal of Santi Quattro being chosen Pope, who took the name of Innocent the
IXth, the affairs of the League seemed not to be hearkened to by him with the
same inclination wherewith his Predecessors had embraced them; for he told both
the French Agents and Spanish Ministers freely, that he would not stir to give
any relief to France, till a free Catholic King (but such a one as was
generally liked of) were chosen; whereby he seemed to point at a Prince of the
Blood Royal; for Scipio Balbani had communicated the Cardinal of Bourbon's
design to many, and their minds were much entangled with it; nor was the Pope
himself much averse from this new thought: whereupon, being earnestly
solicited to assist the so urgent necessities of the League, and not to
forsake the cause of Religion; he answered, that he could not make the Print of
the foot longer than the foot it self, and that the expenses made by his
Predecessor exceeded the abilities of the Apostolic See, and that he would
contribute Fifteen thousand Ducats a month till businesses were settled, after
which settlement he would strain himself to do the most that the strength of
the Treasury should be able to bear; which things written into France by many,
did not only disturb the minds of the French Lords, but also made the Duke of
Monte-Marciano, and Commissary Matteucci doubtful, which way they should carry
themselves. Nevertheless, he created the Bishop of Piacenza Cardinal, and
appointed him Legate in France, as a man experienced, and who already had the
management in his hands, it being commonly said, That new Ministers do maim
businesses, before they have time to understand and apprehend them. The Legate
being chosen, he wrote, that if the Duke of Parma came into the Kingdom by the
fifteenth of December at the farthest, then the Forces of the Apostolic See
should follow his Camp; but if he entered not within the said term, they should
certainly be disbanded: which did not much please the Spanish Ministers, who
saw the Pope little inclined to follow their ends; but much less the Duke of
Mayenne, who saw he could not hope for those Aids that were fit for his design.
But his death, which happened in the second month of his Popedom, did so
confound the minds of the Legate and the rest, The death of Pope Innocent the
Ninth.
that the Duke of Parma was necessitated with his entreaties and authority to
constrain them to follow him in the present need, Upon the 4th of Ianu^ry 1592,
the Duke of Parma being come into France, and joined with the Popes and the
French Forces, musters his Army. Upon the 16th day the Confederates march to
relieve Rouen, with 24000 Foot, and 6000 Horse.
and to promise the Swissers to pay them with his own money, if they were not
satisfied by the next Pope.

All things being thus settled, and the Forces drawn from all parts, the Armies
joined, and advanced with easy marches toward Nesle; where, being arrived
upon the fourth of January, the Duke of Parma would needs make a general
Rendezvous of his Forces, which he mustered, and caused to be paid a weeks pay;
and likewise the Duke of Mayenne, the Count de Vaudemont, and the Duke of
Monte-Marciano reviewed their Forces; and for that purpose, and to stay for the
Artillery and Ammunition, which moved more slowly, they lay twelve days in the
same Quarters. They set forward upon the sixteenth in the morning, and by the
way of Amiens (though the longer, yet the better, and more abundant in
provisions) marched directly toward Rouen. When they had passed Amiens, and
left behind them the River Sum, the Duke of Parma would needs distribute the
parts of his Army, and march continually in battalia, si nce they entered into
an Enemies Country, full of uneven places, Woods and little Rivers; for which
cause he would not expose himself to the danger of being assaulted unawares by
the King's readiness and celerity, which by past experience was exceedingly
well known unto him. There were in the Army about Six thousand Horse; eight
hundred Reiters commanded by the Baron of Swarzembourg, Two thousand
Light Horse (in the absence of the Duke of Pastrana) commanded by Georgio Basti
Commissary of the Cavalry, Four hundred Flemish Lances under the Prince of
Chimais, An hundred Italian Lances of the General of the Church, led by his
Lieutenant Lodovico Melzi; Seven hundred Lorain Lances and Cuirassiers
commanded by the Count de Vaudemont; and Two thousand Horse of the French
Gentry, that followed the Dukes of Mayenne and Guise, and the other Princes and
Lords of that party. The Infantry amounted to the number of 24000, whereof Two
thousand Swissers; The description of the Confederate Army.
to so small a number were they reduced that were raised by the Church; Three
Spanish Tertia's under Antonio Zuniga, Lodovico Velasco, and Alonzo Idiaques;
Two of Germans, under the conduct of the Counts of Barlemont and Arembergh;
Four of Walloons, under Monsieur du Vert, Count Octavio Mansfelt, the Count de
Bossu, and Colonel Claude de la Berlotte; Two Tertia's of Italians, that of
Camillo Capizucchi's, and a part of that which formerly was Pietro Gaetano's,
led by his Sergeant Major, and Four thousand French, under the Sieurs de
Bois-Dauphine and Balagny, and Colonel St. Paul. This Army was divided into
three Battalions; the Vanguard led by the Duke of Guise, accompanied by the
Sieurs de Vitry, and de la Chastre; the Battle, in which were the Dukes of
Parma, and Mayenne, the Count de Vaudemont, and the Duke of Montemarciano; and
the Rere-guard, commanded by the Duke of Aumale, and the Count de Chaligny with
many other Lords. The first flying Squadron of Foot was led by Camillo
Capizucchi, wherein were all the Italians; the Swissers guarded the Artillery,
which were under the command of the Sieurs de la Motte and Bassompierre;
Georgio Basti with a good Body of Carabines and Light Horse marched before the
whole Army, to scowr and secure the ways; and the Sieur de Rosne had the charge
of Serjeant-Major-General.

The King having heard the news of the coming of the Army of the League,
consulted maturely what was to be done; and having the example of Paris before
him, resolved to leave the Marshall de Biron with all the Infantry, and part
of the Cavalry before Rouen to continue the siege, and to go himself with a
good strength of Horse to meet the Enemy; not to fight with them in the open
field, but to hinder them upon Passes, to retard and interrupt their march, and
to lay hold of those opportunities which the quality of situations, and the
motions of the Confederates should afford. He was persuaded to this resolution
by finding himself so strong and powerful in Horse: The Kings Army before Rouen
amounts to 10000 Horse, and above 27000 Foot.
for the Duke of Nevers, the Duke of Longueville, the Count de St. Paul, and
many other Lords being newly arrived at the Army, there were in all above Ten
thousand Horse, and in the Camp between Seven and eight and twenty thousand
Foot; wherefore the King putting confidence in this number, left the major part
of the German Cavalry, hard to be governed, and also some number of the French
in the Camp before Rouen; and he himself with 2000 Cuirassiers, Five hundred
light horse, A thousand Reiters commanded by the Prince of Anhalt, and 2000
Harquebuziers on horseback, departed upon the nine and twentieth of January to
march up toward the ^nemy.

At his arrival at Folleville, a little Town at the entering into Picardy, The
King at Folleville having intelligence that the Army of the League was marching
near, advanced with some Horse to view it, and being met with two Troops of the
Enemy, skirmishes, and retires with all his men to Berteville.
he received intelligence, that at that very time the Enemies Army keeping the
right way toward Rouen, was passing a little lower, toward the Field that
encompasses the passage of the great highway: Wherefore, having sent the Sieur
de Rambures before with Fifteen Light Horse to make discovery, he drew out the
Grand Esquire with Forty Gentlemen upon the right hand, and the Sieur de
Lavardin with Thirty upon the left, and he himself in the midst with Sixscore
Horse advanced, that he might conveniently view what order the Army of the
League kept in marching; when they had advanced in this manner little less than
a League, Lavardin discovered some Spanish Foot, who resting themselves under a
Tree, had set up their Pikes round about it; and being about to draw near to
fall upon them, they on the right hand perceived two strong Troops of Horse
(which had been upon the Guard at the end of the highway) were already moving
toward them; wherefore crying out that the fruit of the Tree was not ripe,
they were the cause that Lavardin taking notice of the Enemy, turned
courageously about, and at the head of his men, most valiantly charged them;
who, having in the first encounter killed his horse under him, made a brisk
Onset on both sides upon him; but the fight was short; for the King being come
up with his Troop, the Horse of the League retired to their main Body. Then saw
they the whole Army as it lay still, but the Guards being diligently placed
through all the Field, the King found that he could not come nearer them, and
therefore being joined with the rest of his men, he retired that night to
Berteville.

From thence following his design, he came upon the fourth of February to
Aumale, a Castle seated upon a River, which divides the Confines of Picardy
from upper Normandy, where he quartered all his men in the Suburb; and the next
morning, being desirous himself to see the order, and view the Camp of the
Enemy, he advanced in person with the Archers of his Guard, two hundred other
Light Horse, and three hundred chosen Gentlemen, upon the way which the Army of
the League marched, leaving the care of the rest that were in Aumale unto the
Dukes of Nevers and Longueville. But as it often happened to that Prince, (that
being led on by his courage, and the curiosity of making discovery with his own
eye, in the first ranks of his Soldiers, he was suddenly entangled wonderful
great dangers) so it fell out that day; for having past a field exceeding full
of Vineyards, which spreads it self from Aumale beyond the River, The King
going from Aumale with a few Lords to discover the enemy, is forced to fight
upon the sudden in disorder; yet notwithstanding after a short resistance, puts
them to flight.
to the bottom of a Hill, and being gone up the steep thereof to the top, where
there is a spacious Plain, he fell unexpectedly among the Avaunt Coureurs of the
League, which he thought had been yet above a League from thence. The encounter
was so sudden (because the Hill being between them, had hindered each party from
discovering the other) that having neither time to retire, nor draw up in
order, it was necessary to handle their Arms, and fall in pell-mell without any
consideration. There were at the head of the French, the King himself, the
Baron de Biron, the Count de St. Paul, the Sieurs de Marivaut, de Chaseron, de
Praslin, d'Aubigny, de Rambures, and de Champlivaut, with many other valiant
soldiers; so that there was no doubt but the Avant-Coureurs of the League,
being both in number and courage much inferior, must give place to their fury
and valor; and indeed, after a short resistance, they betook themselves openly
to flight.

Then appeared the Duke of Parma's Army, which being drawn into Battalia, with
Military order, marched on its way along the same Plain. The whole form of
their Battle was apiece, and had an open Interval in the Front, through
which the Squadrons in the middle might draw forth to fight; and, at the Angles
of the Rere, there were likewise two Intervals; that of the Front being shut up
by the flying Squadron, and those in the Rere, by two Bodies of Horse, which
were to advance first into the Battle. The Flanks were defended by the wonted
carriages, which in admirable order went on without straggling: And by the side
of them were the Foot of all the several Nations drawn up in Divisions: Without
the Body of the Army, and of the foursquare form, the Light Horse and Carabines
in very great numbers, being divided into many Squadrons, filled up the extent
of the Plain on every side; and in the midst of the whole Camp, the Duke,
carried in an open Chair, went himself, observing what was amiss, and setting
all things in order. But the King had hardly made a stand upon the Plain, to
take an hasty view of this excellent order, when Georgio Basti (advertised by
the Avant-Coureurs) coming up with the Carabines and Light Horse of the Army,
he found himself entangled by two great clouds of Harquebusiers on Horseback,
who hailing upon them on both sides, forced him, though very late, to think of
the means of retiring. Almost all the Gentlemen that followed him were without
their head-pieces, because in such an unexpected accident they had not had time
to take them; and fought confusedly in disorder, because haste had not suffered
them to draw themselves up into a Body; so that only courage, and sense of
honor, and the Kings presence restrained them from flight, which was
necessary, if they would save their lives: But a great number falling dead on
every side (since even the best of their Arms was not proof against the
violence of those Bullets that flew from the extraordinary wide bore of the
Carabines) and the first flying Squadron of Foot already appearing, which
having heard the beginning of the fight, came up a great pace to fall in
amongst them, the King commanding his men to wheel about, but not to charge,
went on at a round trot toward the descent, to meet with his Light Horse and
Harquebusiers on horseback, which being led by the Baron de Giury and the Sieur
de Lavardin, followed him not very far off. The Enemy with no less readiness
was at his back, and on all sides the Captains of the Light Horse made haste to
cut off his retreat; for being known by his countenance, plume, and habit,
every one cried out to his companions, that it was the King of Navar, and
mutually exhorting each other to follow him, they put all their utmost
endeavors to get him into their hands. The fury of their retreat downward
(making many horses stumble and fall) did so much hinder their speed and order,
While the King views the Enemies Army, their Cavalry come up to him, and he
being in wonderful great danger, comes off wounded.
that it was necessary the King himself, with evident danger, should stay among
the last, to sustain the violence of the Enemy, and be in the greatest storm of
shot, one of which striking at last through the cantle of his Saddle, wounded
him (though without danger) under the reins. As the Kings hurt necessitated him
to fly full speed to save himself, so did it utterly rout his men, who being
come into the field below, were detained by the impediment of the stakes, and
branches of the vines, and by the abundance of the hedges; so that men and
horses fell at every step, and were exposed to the fury of the enemies, who
made such a slaughter with their Carabines, that besides the great number of
Gentlemen which were slain, the Archers of the King's Guard were almost all
left dead upon the place. But the light horse who were already come up into the
midst of the Plain, which being but short, spread it self between the Town and
the place where the fight was, being met by those who fled away, carrying news
that the King was wounded and almost dead, disordered themselves without
fighting, and facing about, fled back for company to Aumale; only the Baron de
Giury, who was at the head of them with their Captains, advancing with thirty
in his company to assist in the King's so manifest danger, covered him with his
own Cloak, which he threw about his shoulders, and upheld him for a while, till
he saved himself from the fury of his enemies. At the same time the Sieur de
Lavardin advanced with threescore of his Harquebusiers on horseback, for the
rest had also taken flight, and placing himself behind the bank of a ditch that
was by the way-side, endeavored to stop the pursuit of the Enemy; but he being
wounded at the first volley, Giury's horse killed under him, which in falling
hurt his left leg and knee very dangerously, Aubigny unhorst, Chaseron wounded,
Rambures bruised and bloody, not one of them would have been saved, if the Duke
of Nevers with a great Squadron of Cavalry (wherein were the Counts of Torigny
and Montgomery, the Sieur de Montigny, The Duke of Nevers relieves the Kings
Cavalry that was retiring to Aumale, and makes good their retreat.
and the Grand Esquier) had not advanced to disengage them. The Duke, after he
had heard of the beginning of the skirmish, and that the King was put to the
worst, had wonderful discreetly disposed that part of the Harquebusiers on
Horseback which had remained with him, along the bank of the River, to make
good the Ford, and favor the passage of those that fled; and himself, with the
main body of the Cavalry, all armed, and in excellent good order, had past the
River to relieve and sustain his men, which he saw afar off were overpowered
and oppressed by the violence of the Enemy; and his coming was very seasonable;
for if he had stayed longer, both the King himself and all the rest that were
in the Plain, would certainly have been either killed or taken. The Duke went
on till he came to a place, where (by reason that the River was overflowed) he
was fain to pass along a narrow bank, and there, not only seeing the Spanish
Carabines (encouraged by the beginning of the victory) furious in a close
pursuit, but also the Sieur de Vitry, the Baron de la Chastre, and the Count de
Chaligny, who leaving the body of the Army behind them, were run to reinforce
the fight, he took a resolution to retire without passing any farther, lest he
should lose the Gentry that were with him, if with so great a disadvantage, and
to no purpose, he should have exposed them to the Enemies whole Army, which was
like to charge them every minute; wherefore, having fetched them off, who
(their horses being lost) retired with much difficulty, having recovered Giury
and Lavardin, both very sore hurt, The Duke of Nevers having fetched off the
Kings Cavalry, follows the King, who had saved himself in a Wood.
and having gathered up many Gentlemen that were scattered about the field, he
returned wheeling off, and facing often about till he came River of Aumale,
where, being sustained by the Harquebusiers that lay along the bank, he passed
it again without any disorder; and drawing up quickly, followed the King's
steps, who with very great speed had taken toward a Wood, to retire the more
securely.

It is most certain, that if the Army of the League had advanced quickly (with
the same fury as did the Carabines) on the right hand and on the left, (for in
all that Country they might have marched freely as far as the bank) the King
surrounded and encompassed on all sides before the Duke of Nevers had arrived,
would, with all his men have remained in their power, since that
notwithstanding they did not, he had both much ado, and exceeding great fortune
to save himself; but at the same time the news being confusedly brought, that
the Enemy was present, that the King himself was there in person, that they
were fighting, and that they fled; the Duke of Parma, not suffering himself to
be carried away with common reports, and not thinking it possible, that the
King, without some secret stratagem, would have adventured himself
inconsiderately among the Avaunt Coureurs, doubting, lest in a Country where he
was not well acquainted, some Ambuscado might be laid for him; therefore,
causing his Army to make a halt, and having stopped the flying Squadron that was
already upon its march, before he advanced, he would make himself sure that he
would not be catched in a Trap; which prudent wariness nevertheless gave the
King convenience to save himself; for though the Duke of Mayenne (who, in vain,
had urged, that the whole Army might advance) set forward with a Body of Horse
at a large trot to follow him, yet it being already night when they entered
into Aumale, he was out of hope to do any good, and therefore resolved to stay
and pass no further.

The King caused his wound to be dressed in the Wood; which found not dangerous
he goes presently to Neuf-Chastel.
The King caused himself to be hastily dressed in a Wood, about half a League
from Aumale, and having found that the wound was not very deep, (for the bullet
being deaded by passing through the Saddle, stuck but in the flesh) prosecuted
his journey with very great speed, and stopped not till he came within the Walls
of Neuf-Chastel; where the Duke of Nevers having done the part of a prudent and
valiant Soldier, arrived also, though many hours after, with all his men
perfectly safe. It was feared left the next day the Duke of Parma should follow
on his voyage speedily, and hasting directly to Rouen, where the report of the
King's being routed and wounded, might have bred a fright and a confusion in
the Army, with very great danger of being defeated and scattered; nor did there
appear any other remedy to retard his march, save to defend Neuf-Chastel; which
place standing upon the Road, they did not believe he would leave at his back,
especially if it were strongly Garrisoned, lest it should obstruct the way, and
hinder the bringing in of Provisions, which were all of necessity to pass
through those parts. But the Town being weak, and the exigency requiring a
speedy resolution, the Baron de Giury, though his foot was very sorely hurt,
proffered himself to stay, and to defend it so long, that the Enemy might not
come unexpectedly to Rouen; but that the King's Army, the present terror being
overpast, might have time to settle it self again, and that the King himself
being grown better of his wound (which they hoped he would be within a few
days) were able again to set on Horseback, The King leaves the ^aron de Guiry
at Neuf-Chastel, he having under^aken to defend it, and goes to Di^pe to be
cured of his wound.
and with his presence put courage into the actions of h^s Soldiers, which was
the only means to sustain himself. So Three hundred Cuirassiers, and Four
hundred Harquebusiers on horseback being left at Neuf-Chastel with Giury, the
King, with the Baron de Biron went to Diepe, that they might be the better
cured, and the Duke of Nevers with the remainder of his men returned to Rouen
to reinforce the Army.

The Duke of Parma quartered the next day at Aumale, and the French Lords
murmuring, that if he had advanced that day, the War might easily have been
made an end of; he answered, That if he were to do it again, he would take the
same resolution, The Duke of Parma's Answer to the French Lords.
because it was dictated by reason, having till then believed, that he had had
to do with a Captain General of an Army, and not with a Captain of Light Horse,
which he now knew the King of Navarre to be: but this business bred a
discontent among the Commanders of the League; for the Spaniards and Italians
commended the Duke of Parma's wariness, and his secure way of managing the War,
and the French praised the forward humor of their Nation, and would have had
him proceed in the same manner which they saw the King hold in the promptness
of his resolutions: but the condition of the one was very different from that
of the other; for the King being General of a voluntary Army, and having no
other hope, nor any other security but himself, was necessitated to venture his
own person upon all occasions, making way with his danger for those that
followed him: but the Duke of Parma coming only to succor the Confederates,
would not hazard at once the hopes of France, and the possession of Flanders,
without expectation of some fruit by his Victory, that might countervail so
great a loss; and therefore with art and prudence, as he had done at Paris, he
pretended not to conquer, but not to be conquered. However it were, it is most
certain, that from hence there began to rise differences and discontents
between him and the Duke of Mayenne, which afterward increased every day.

The Army of the League advancing with commodious marches, laid siege to
Neuf-Chastel, which, by reason of its weakness, they believed would have made
no resistance; but the Duke of Parma, incensed at the boldness of the
defendants, The Duke of Parma besieges Neuf Chastel, which, though weak, is
gallantly defended by Giury; but a breach being made, and the assailants ready
to fall on, Giury capitulates. The Duke of Pa^ma angry at his resistance, shows
himself unwilling to treat; but being appeased, grants him honorable
conditions.
and at the impediment which he received thereby, caused his Artillery to be
planted with as much speed as was possible, and with wonderful fury to batter
that part of the wall which stood toward his Camp, which being old, and not
lined with earth, within a short space afforded a breach very convenient to be
assaulted: which Monsieur de Giury seeing, began to capitulate; and though the
Duke were at first highly incensed at his resistance, yet being appeased by the
intercession of Monsieur de la Chastre, Giury's Father-in-law, and admiring the
valor of that Cavalier, (who, to give his party time to recover breath, had
thrust himself into so great a danger) granted him honorable conditions: about
the performance whereof there arose some dispute; for Monsieur de Rebours a
Colonel of French Infantry, who had shut himself up in the Town with Giury, not
having been particularly mentioned in the Capitulations, the Duke of Parma
pretended that he not having been named, ought not to enjoy the benefit of the
Articles, but to remain a prisoner; and Monsieur de Giury argued, that having
made composition for himself and all his soldiers, though Rebours was not named
with the other Officers, because he had not his men there, was yet
comprehended, and ought to go free with all the rest; which, after it had been
a while disputed, the Duke of Parma generously remitted the difference to the
Kings own decision, who knew, whether he had left Rebours with command or
without command for the defense of the place. But the King having called a
Council of War and having heard every ones opinion, gave judgment, that
Rebours was to be understood as comprehended in the Capitulation.

But the obstacle of Neuf-Castel, though it was but for four days, gave great
help to the King's affairs; for that time was not only very considerable, but
in that interim part of the victual being spent which was brought along with
the Army of the League, it was necessary to stay to make new provisions* for
the Country, destroyed in a siege of so many months, in the sterility of the
Winter, did not afford any thing, and the victuals that were to be brought from
Picardy were of necessity to be accompanied with strong Convoys, and backed by
the Cavalry of the Army, because the King and the Baron de Biron, from Diepe
and Arques where they lay, caused all the ways to be obstructed with their
Horse. This stay was of ten days, to the great murmuring of the French; for the
Duke would not engage himself in an Enemies Country, all ruined, and not well
known to him, without such abundant provisions of victual as were necessary to
feed the Camp, not being accustomed to remit the event of his Counsels unto
fortune. In these days there happened many valiant encounters* for the King
being cured of his wound, suffered not the Enemy to repose without suspicion,
nor without danger; but matters proceeded almost alike, the encounters being
between the Cavalry, wherein the number of the Gentry on each side equalled the
proceeding, with bold attempts, prompt resistance, and gallant resolutions.

It fell out that the King, being advanced upon a hill that lay on the right
side of the great highway, by which all the Enemies Army marched, caused the
Sieur de Montigny with a Squadron of Light Horse, and the Sieur de Praslin with
another of Cuirassiers to fall suddenly into the Quarters of the Duke of Aumale
(who brought up the Rere) just at the time when he newly entered into them; but
after a short skirmish rather than fight, being in their retreat charged by the
Count de Chaligny, A skirmish grow^ almost to a Battle.
and the Sieur de Rosne, there followed in the adjoining Plain a great
encounter, to which the Sieur de Fer^aques, and the Count de Torigny son to the
Marshall de Matignen coming up with the Troops of Normandy, they fought above
two hours with singular bravery* but when they of the League would have
retired, they found themselves engaged by the Baron de Biron, who, with another
Troop fell in upon their Flank, Chicot the Kings Jester takes the Count de
Chaligny prison^^.
so that to s^ve themselves they were fain to turn their backs and run full
speed; which the Count de Chaligny scorning to do, and gallantly fighting in
the midst of his enemies, was taken prisoner by Chicot the King's Jester, but a
notable sturdy lad, who, in the taking of him received a wound from him in the
head, whereof he died not many days after. The Count being brought into the
King's presence, and being much afflicted to have been taken by a Fellow of so
base a profession, the King comforted him, assuring him, that Chicot was a
valiant Fellow, and that he ought rather to complain against himself for having
engaged himself so far; to which the Count answering, that the desire of seeing
and learning had made him so forward* the King replied, that those of his party
knew not how to teach him, and that if he would learn the art of War, he ought
to fight under his Colors, and near his person. These were the ordinary
sayings of the King, who gave the Counts ransom to the Duchess of Longueville
and her daughters, who, having been taken at Corbie, after many months
imprisonment, were fain to buy their liberty with 30000 Duca^s.

The next day, just as the Army of the League came out of their Quarters, the
Baron de Biron in the Plain attacqued the first Divisions of them led by the
Sieurs de Vitry, and de la Chastre, where the Skirmish with infinite courage on
both sides began to grow exceeding hot; but the Army still marching in Battali^
that way, the Baron resolved to retire among the Hills, which being very woody
on all sides, gave the King convenience to molest the Enemy with his flying
Army, and also to make his retreat in time of need. By reason of these so
frequent and dangerous encounters, which ceased neither day nor night, the Duke
of Parma m^rching with his Army always in order, advanced but slowly, not
stirring if the day were not very clear, and if the Country were not well
discovered, and taking up his Qu^rters betimes in the evening, that he might
have leisure to fortify and entren^h his Camp.

The Duke of Parma draws near to Rouen. A generous offer of Georgio Basti, and
Camillo Capizucchi.
But he was now come near to Rouen, and it was necessary to resolve upon some
way, either to raise the siege o^ relieve the place: Georgio Ba^^i p^ofered
himself with a certain number of Light-^orse, and two Squadrons of Lances to
march away, and arriving by nigh^, ^o pass through the midst of one of the
Kings quarters, and dispersing it, to enter into the City. The same did Camillo
Capizucchi offer to do with his Tertia, accompanied with a certain number of
Horse; but the Duke thought not these propositions proportionable to the
present need of the City, which was not only of necessity to be relieved, but
totally freed* and besides that, it was dangerous to hazard a Body of good men,
though small, against the preparations of a whole Royal Army. And therefore
after ma^ure deliberation he resolved to relieve the City with all his ^orces
in this following manner. The King, with the greater part of the Cavalry was
moved into the midst of the way on the right hand, toward Diepe and the Country
of (...) to keep strong parties abroad, that he might obstruct the passage, and
make it difficult to the Army of the League; and being drawn from Rouen the
space of five o^ six Leagues, had disposed his quarters in places separate from
one another, yet near among themselves. The Baron de Biron lay at Diepe and
Arques with the remainder of the Horse, to shut up the passage to the Army of
the League, and by following them in the ^ere, to hinder the bringing in of
provisions. At Rouen there remained only the Foot with the Marshall de Biron.
Things being thus disposed, the Duke of Parma resolved to move in the afternoon
from the place where he was quartered, and taking the way upon the left hand,
which leads straight to Pont de l' Arche (after he had gone round the wood of
Bellancomble) to turn upon the right hand, and marching all the night, to
arrive unexpectedly at Rouen by break of day, and without delay to assault the
Posts of the Marshall de Biron's Infantry; which (the besieged sallying out of
the City with their wonted valor) he doubted not but wo^ld be totally defeated
and dissipated, before the King (who, at the first intelligence of their moving
would be uncertain of their extraordinary march) could have time or opportunity
to assist it with the Cavalry.

With this intention (the weather being very fair for that season of the year)
he moved suddenly upon the twenty sixth of February, taking upon the left hand
toward Bella^comble. But, upon the twenty fifth day, the diligence and valor
of the Sieur de Villar^ had already prevented his design: for, he seeing the
King was absent with all his Horse, and that the (...) of the Camp was divided
at many several Posts, and not being willin^ to suffer another to have the
glory of raising the siege, if he could do it by himself, he determined to try
if by a bol^ sally he could put the enemies affairs in disorder* and being
advertised by an Irish^man who was (...) a way from the Camp, that since the
departure of the King with the principal Lords, the Guards were not so
diligently kept, because the Marshall de Biron could not be in all places, and
the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the High-Chancellor, with the Lords of the Council
who were remaining a^ D^rnet^^* had no exper^ence in ^ilitary matters, he set
himself in order to ^^lly in fo^r several pla^es, and assault (...) the (...)
a^ once. He caused the Townsmen armed in their several Companies to guard the
Walls, under the command of the Sieur de la Land, and he himself being
resolved to go forth in person, disposed businesses in this manner following:
Colonel Boniface was to sally from St. Catherines with his Regiment of Foot,
and two hundred Gentlemen and Officers at the head of it, being backed by the
Chevalier d' Oyse with two Troops of Horse that sallied from Martinville, and
were to assault the Post of Turinge. Pericard with his Regiment seconded by
Captain Borosey and the Sieur de Quitry, was to assault the Batteries planted
against the old Fort. Captain Giacopo Argenti with his Infantry, followed by
the Sieur de Canonville's Horse to reinforce them, sallying at the Port
Cauchoise, was to march toward the Covent of Carthusians, to make head against
the main Body at Dernetal, in case they should move to succor their Trenches.
The Governor himself with a select number of Soldiers and Gentlemen, seconded
by Captain Perdriel, salling at the Port de Beauvais, was to assault the
Battery newly raised by the French Regiments. All these things were in order at
break of day, and the sign being given by a Cannon-shot, they sallied with
singular gallantry, and with so much violence, that the passage to the Trenches
being taken both before and behind, and the Guards surrounded, they made a
wonderful great slaughter in every place, took the Cannon, some of which they
nailed, some they drew into the Moat; they spoiled the engines and instruments
of War in all places, gave vent to the Mines, blew up the Ammunition, and
filled every place with death and terror; so that all the Foot making no
further resistance, fled without stop toward Dernetal. The Alarm had been
suddenly given, and the Marshall de Byron with four thousand Swissers and
Germans, and with those Gentlemen that were remaining in the Camp, was coming a
great pace to succor his Trenches; but Captain Perdriel, who sallied after the
Governor at the Port de Beauvais with three Troops of Horse, overran all the
Plain, and wheeling and skirmishing briskly, endeavored to keep him in play;
and the same did the Chevalier d' Oyse, with Borosey, Quitry, and Cannonville,
till the Soldiers had done what they intended in the Trenches; which having
fully performed, all those four Squadrons likewise advanced to receive the
encounter of the Marshall de Byron, and between the Trenches and Dernetal they
made a bloody sight; in which, though the Sieur de Larchant a brave Cavalier,
and Captain of the Kings Guards was slain, and the Marshall himself sorely
hurt with a shot in the thigh; yet the other Squadrons of the Germans coming
up, and the English and French Infantry rallying themselves together on all
sides, they of the Town were beaten back, though with much ado, and driven to
their very gates. But the Ammunition being blown up, the Artillery taken, and
all things put into confusion, the loss was inestimable, and irreparable for a
long time. There were slain on the Kings side above eight hundred Soldiers in
the Trenches, and amongst them two French Colonels, and fourteen Captains of
several Nations; and of the Assailants not above fifty. The Governor presently
dispatched the Sieur de Franqueville through the Woods to the Duke of Mayenne,
to give him notice of what had passed, and to let him know, that it was not
necessary to precipitate any thing to relieve the City, for the Enemy was left
in such a condition, that they would be able to hurt them but little for many
days.

This intelligence being received on the twenty sixth in the evening, while the
Army was marching their appointed way, they made an halt, and the Commanders
were called to consult. The Duke of Parma was of opinion to prosecute the
design, The Duke of Parma is of opinion to follow the enterprise of Rouen, and
to prosecute the Kings forces already terrified: The Duke of Mayenne is of
another mind, and his advice is followed.
for that the Infantry being astonished by the misfortune of the day before, it
would be much more easy to dissipate them, and make themselves Masters of
their Quarters, freeing the City utterly from the siege, and effecting that for
which they were advanced so far: but the Duke of Mayenne considered that the
business they intended to do was already done, the Mines and Trenches
destroyed, the Artillery taken, and Ammunition blown up, that there remained
nothing to do, save to beat the Infantry out of their Quarters at Dernetal,
whither they were all reduced, which being excellently well fortified, was not
an enterprise that could be so easily effected without dispute; so that it
being necessary to spend many hours time about it, the King in the interim
would be come up, most powerful in Horse, with whom they must of necessity
fight, with their Soldiers tired with marching, and wearied with the first
encounter; and that the City not having need that things should be
precipitated, it was better to proceed with that circumspection wherewith they
had governed themselves till they. His opinion was followed, though many of the
Spaniards believed he gave that counsel, because the Duke of Parma should not
get the glory of having relieved Rouen; and so in the same order the Army faced
about, and returned to the quarters from whence they came.

There they consulted what was to be done. The Duke of Mayenne's opinion, in
which the other French Lords concurred, was, that the siege of Rouen could not
be raised without coming to a Battle, which, by reason of the great abundance
of Gentry that followed the King at that present, he judged very dangerous:
whereupon his advice was, ( Rouen being in such a condition, that there was no
danger it should be much straightened in many days, no no^ in many weeks) that
only seven or eight hundred Foot should be sent into the City for a
reinforcement, and to make up the number of the dead; and that the rest of the
Army should bend another way, showing that they were no longer in fear nor care
about the siege, but that they should busy themselves about other enterprises:
for the Gentry that followed the King, tired with the sufferings and expenses
of all that Winter, seeing there was not like to be any occasion of fighting
for a long while, and that the Army of the League was far off, would with their
wonted haste retire to their own houses, and that many others would leave the
Kings Camp in the same manner; which as soon as they should see come to pass,
they should speedily march back, and without losing time advance to Rouen; for
that the King would certainly be forced to draw off; or if he sought, the
Victory would be secure. The Spaniards and Italians, fearing lest others should
enjoy the fruits and honors of their labors, inclined to go forward, firmly
believing that the King would rise from the siege, rather than be catched
between the City and their Army; and since so much was already done, they
desired to perfect the enterprise: The Duke of Pa^ma sends 800 Horse into
Rouen, and then goes to besiege St. Es^rit de Rue, an exceeding strong place.
and this opinion was favored by Prince Raunuc^io, more desirous of glory than
any other. But the Duke of Parma chose to follow the advice of the French; and
having sent to Rouen eight hundred Walloons of the Regiment of the Count de
Bossu and de la Bourlotte; who arriving by night, entered without opposition,
departed with the rest of his Army; and having passed the River Sum, he
marched away as fast as he could, and went to besiege St. Esprit de Rue, a
wonderful strong place standing toward the Confines.

When the Army of the League was retired, the King, though the cause of the
resolution of the Confederates was obscure to him, determined nevertheless to
straiten the siege of Rouen more diligently than he had done before; and the
Men of War being arrived, which the States of Holland sent to his assistance,
commanded by Philip one of the Counts of Nassaw, (aboard which were many Pieces
of Cannon, great store of Ammunition, The King receives supplies by the Holland
Fleet, and applies himself with his utmost endeavors to the siege of Rouen.
and above three thousand Foot) he caused the Cannon and Ammunition to be
landed, whereof he had exceeding great need, by reason of the spoil made in the
sally, and gave order that the Holland-Ships should not only scowr the River,
to hinder the coming of Victual and other necessaries that were brought from
Havre de-Grace to Rouen, but also that they should come up close to the City,
and battering the old Palace and other places near the River, increase the
dangers and labors of the besieged. He also caused certain Barks to be manned
in the upper parts of the River toward Pont de l' Arche, which under the
command of Monsieur de l' Hospital High Chancellor of Navarre, scowred it also
on that side, and blocked it up so much the more: which Barks, the first day
they set forth, meeting with Monsieur d' Anque^il, made a very sharp fight, the
end whereof was that one of the Town-Ships being fired, and another sunk,
though the King's did also receive much harm, yet those of the League retired
under the protection of the Walls. The Holland-Ships drew near also on the
lower side, and shot an infinite number of Cannon-shot into the Town, which
nevertheless did but little hurt: but the Governor having caused three
Culverines to be planted upon a Cavalier which had formerly been raised by the
River side, after that one of their Ships was boared through and through with
them, and the Mainmast of another shot down, they drew off, to look to the
blocking up of the River, and landed Two thousand Foot more, to reinforce the
Army.

The King in the mean time set himself again to cast up Trenches, and make
Redoubts on all sides; and hastening the Works with his own presence, the
Princes and Lords assisting likewise in their turns, not intermitting to work
by night, they were brought to perfection in a few days. The first of them,
drawn from the side of Turinge, was followed more eagerly than the rest, to
recover the Cannon which at the Sally had been thrown into the Moat on that
side: But the besieged perceiving this design, The Kings Soldiers at Rouen
desire to recover their Cannon which the besieged had cast into the moat their
designs are discovered, and the defendents at last, though after many
skirmishes, draw them up with engines, and bring them into the Town with great
joy.
made an Engine to raise and draw them up; and though the skirmishes were many,
and that the Artillery and Fireworks did much mischief on all sides, yet they
of the Town drew them up to the Bulwark of the old Fort; and having brought
them into the City with great joy and triumph, set them in the Court of the
Archbishop's Palace, where the Governor lay, because it stood in a place
equally distant from those which the Enemy battered at that time. They wrought
lustily in all places; and the Count de Soissons being again past over into the
Fauxbourg of St. Severe, had begun also to raise a Battery on that side, to
divide the Forces of the Defendents, and press them on all sides* yet
nevertheless Villars, to show that he neither feared nor was straightened, caused
many Cavaliers to go forth between the Por^e de Martinville, and that of St.
Hilaire, and to make a Turnament, running at the Ring and (...) Faquin, and
making show to be fully at ease, and unconcerned, among so great and so
continual toils and labors. But the King interpreted this action, Or, Quintane.
not to va^^^y (which Villars was very far from) but to weakness, and that he
endeavored with that cloak to palliate the extreme necessity he was reduced
to, and therefore with greater diligence followed his Batteries and Mines in
every place. They continued their Sallies, with various fortune, and now at
last the smallness of the number of the Defendents slackened them, the Sieur de
Franqueville having been slain in one of them, and Serjeant-Major La Land,
with many other Officers wounded; and yet they made so brisk an one on the side
toward St. Severe, that the Count de Soissons ran himself into the Trench,
exhorting and encouraging his Soldiers, yet they of the Town having seized
upon a Redoubt, advanced into the plain, where encountering the Baron de Guiry,
who was gone on that side with some Troops of Light Horse, the fight was very
hot and terrible, Guiry himself being so sorely wounded in the shoulder, that
he was given for dead; to (...) Kings so great and so manifest trouble, that
having heard the news, he said with a deep sigh, That he had now no body to
whom he could recommend the so important charge of the Light Horse; which
Speech offended many, and particularly the Sieurs de Montigny, The Sieur de
Giury is sorely wounded; for which the King much grieved, said, That if he
should die, he had no body to whom (...) could commend the charge of the
Light-House: which speech disgusted the Sieur de Montigny and la Chappelle; the
first of which spurred on by the Kings words, continues to serve him with more
dilig^nce; and the other in despair goes over to the League.
and de la Chappelle, who pretended to the place: but Montigny continuing to
serve with singular valor, in process of time attained his desires; and on the
other side, la Chappelle discontented and made desperate by the Kings words,
within a while after went over to the Enemy: and yet Guiry's wound was neither
mortal nor dangerous, and they of the Town were heaten back with the loss of
many men.

But that which did more harm, was, that upon the 24th of March a very great
piece of the Wall of about seventy paces fell of it self between the
Porte-Cauchoise and the Monastery of St. Dominique, which while the besieged
labored to repair with Earth, Wool-packs, Baums, and other Instruments, the
King having caused some small Pieces to be suddenly brought on that side, did
them so great mischief, that in all the time of the siege they had not received
greater: whereupon Villars straightened on all sides, and having but a few
Soldiers left, not being longer able to resist so long and so obstinate a
siege, was fain to write to the Duke of Mayenne, that if he were not relieved
by the twentieth of April at the furthest, he should be forced to capitulate.
But in the interim that came to pass which the Duke of Mayenne had so
confidently foretold; for the Nobility tired out with the toils of the whole
Winter, having spent their Money, worn out their Clothes, and quite harrassed
their Horses, now that there was no more hope that the Armies should fight, had
according to their wonted custom taken leave to go see their own Houses, and
the Army was thereby so diminished, that of few less than Ten thousand there
remained few more than Five thousand; and they, because the Country was utterly
wasted round about, and destroyed by their long stay there, in a season when
the old store was spent, and the new not yet grown up, were brought to a very
weak estate; and to have wherewithal to subsist, they were forced to divide
themselves, and lie at large, scattered in many several quarters.

The Marshall de Byron, and the Duke de Bouillon had foreseen that evil, and
had labored to persuade them all to fifteen or twenty days patience longer, in
which time the event of things might be totally seen; but so great was the
necessity of many, and so precipitate the inclination of the Volunteers, that
they could not be kept, there being many even of the Commanders, who constantly
believed that the Duke of Parma had lost all hopes of relieving Rouen, and that
he had set himself in good earnest upon the enterprise of St. Esprit de Rue, to
try if diversion could work any effect, and that therefore his return was not
to be feared; but that the Infantry with the new Supplies from Holland were
sufficient to take in Rouen: Which opinion (as the French are ready enough to
be vainly conceited of themselves) to the contempt of the Duke of Parma and his
Army, was grown so common, that it was also entered into the King himself; so
that he little thought he should have any more need of the Cavalry. On the
other side, the Foot (which had passed all the Winter in the Trenches, half
drowned with the excessive Rains that fell continually after a great abundance
of Snow, and consumed with perpetual watching and toiling) were not in any
better condition than the Horse, but had more need of rest, than to be employed
in new and dangerous actions, besides the diseases, which (according as they
are wont) were spread amongst the Germans, and much more among the English, had
exceedingly lessened the number of those Forces, and the French Infantry not
staying to feel the uttermost sufferings, ran away every hour; nor could the
King (though he at last took notice of the decay and tiredness of his Army) use
so great diligence as was sufficient (after above five months wasting of
provisions) to keep his Camp plentifully furnished: Which things being known to
the Duke of Parma, and much more particularly to the Duke of Mayenne, The Duke
of Parma leaving the siege of ^ue, draws near to Rouen to relieve it.
having deferred till the very utmost time mentioned in the Governor of
Rouen's Letters, to give the Enemies Army so much the longer time to consume it
self, they arose suddenly from Rue, where they had rather made show to i^^loy
themselves, than taken any care to get the place, and being well provided of
Victual, passed the River Sum at a place called Which is between Cretoy and
S. Valery.
Blanguetaque, where spreading it self* at large, it is less rapid, and more
shallow, and in six days march came very near to Rouen; having with this
celerity made that journey in so short a space, which the time before they were
no less about than thirty days.

The King m^sters his forces, and finding himself much weaker, resolves to
r^^se his siege.
The King having heard of the Enemies sudden coming, presently made them who
were in the Fauxbourg of St. Severe come back over the River to join with the
rest of the Army, and with extreme diligence recalled all his Cavalry to the
Quarters at Darnetal, with an intention to oppose and meet the Enemy; but
having made a strict muster of his Forces, and knowing them to be so diminished
both in number and vigor, that they were no way equal to the numerous Army of
the League, he resolved to raise the siege, and reserve matters till a better
occasion; being certain that the greater part of the Nobility would within a
few days be come back to him again. But lest the Army of the League drawing
near apace, and without resistance, should disturb the order of his retreat, he
sent forth the Duke of Bouillon with the German Horse, accompanied with a few
French Light Horse and Cuirassiers upon the great road toward Neuf-Chastel, to
hinder and fore-slow the Enemies march. The Country through which the Army of
the Confederates came was all plain, not troubled with either Hills or Woods,
which was a great disadvantage to the Duke of Bouillon, who with a few men
intended to make show to be the whole Army; and yet he took his time so
opportunely to assault the Duke of Guise's Vanguard when the rest of the Army
was not yet moved out of their Quarters, that he put the first Troops of it
into some disorder, and in the first fury of the charge took a Cornet; but
Rosne, Bassompierre, and the whole Vanguard coming up, and within a while after
the Duke of Parma with the Battle, the business was reduced to faint skirmishes
upon advantage; for the Duke of Parma commanding out many Troops of Horse every
way, endeavored to discover his Wings and Rear, to find whether or no the
Kings whole Army was there; and the Duke of Bouillon perceiving his design,
made as many Fronts as the Enemy sent forth Troops, and extending his Battalion
to the utmost, would not suffer them to effect their intents; with which arts
the whole day was spent in petty Incounters, and the King with his Commanders
had time to raise his Camp from before Rouen without disorder. The Artillery
were drawn off without delay, and while the Army was imbattelling, they were
sent before with the Carriages to Ponte de l' Arche, toward which place the
King intended to retire; who after he had made a stand, The King sending away
his Carriages before, draws up his Army in battalia, and marches away from the
siege of Rouen.
about half an hour facing the City, left the siege upon the 20th day of April;
and the Baron de Byron making good the retreat, marched commodiously the same
way.

The Duke of P^^ma, with his Army in Battel-aray, arrived the same day at
Rouen; and having sent Georgio Basti to follow the Rear of the Kings Army, to
observe which way he marched, entered with the Duke of Mayenne into the City,
where having given infinite praises to the Sieur de Villars and the rest that
had been with him in the siege, he re^i^ed the same night to quarter with his
Army in the Neighboring Villages.

The End of the Twelfth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
THIRTEENTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
IN this Book is set down the Determination of the Confederates to besiege
Caudebec, thereby to open the passage of the River, and totally free the City
of Rouen: They lay siege unto it; the Duke of Parma in viewing the Works
receives a Musket Shot in the Arm: The Town is taken; but things go on so
slowly, that the King has time to get his Army together again, and taking all
the Passes, to besiege the Army of the League in the Peninsula of Caux; many
actions of importance follow: The Duke of Parma troubled with his wound, and
straightened with want of Provisions, thinks of passing the River Seine to
disingage himself from that danger which he found he was run into: He manages
that design with so much art, that he passes the River, and retires without
receiving any loss; he draws off with long marches, repasses the River at St.
Cloud, returns into Flanders, and leaves Supplies (not very powerful) under the
Sieur de Rosne. The Duke of Mayenne being angry, goes not with him; he takes
Ponteau de Mer, and falls into discord with the Popes Commissary; he enters
into a Treaty of Agreement with the King, who vexed at the unexpected passage
of the Confederate Army, lessens his own, and follows the Enemy with a flying
Camp. He lays siege to Espernay in Champagne, which had been taken a while
before by the Sieur de Rhosne; the Marshall de Byron is slain there with a
Cannon-shot; Espernay is taken, and other neighboring Garrisons fall of
themselves: The King raises a Fort upon the Seine to keep Provisions from the
City of Paris, the Duke of Mayenne attempts in vain to divert him: There arises
on the Kings side a third party of the Princes of the Blood, and many
Machinations are set on foot. Pope Clement The Eighth is created, who applies
himself with great Moderation to the Affairs of France. The Duke of Mayenne at
the Solicitation of the Pope and the King of Spain, resolves to call the
States General to Elect a King; upon this there follows diverse Artifices, and
different Treaties; King Philip sends new Ambassadors to declare his Will unto
the States. The Duke of Mayenne meets them, they disagree, but piece up again
for their own private interests. The King attempts to dissolve the States; He
causes the Catholics of his Council to hold a Conference with the
Confederates, which with the Duke of Mayenne's consent is begun at Surenne; He
takes Noyon; the King being necessitated to go speedily into Poictou, cannot
relieve it. The Catholic King's Ambassadors propose the Infanta of Spain to be
elected Queen; the Proposition is ill relished by the States, and there are
diverse practices about it. The King takes Dreux; and being constrained by the
importunities of his own Catholics, who threaten to forsake him, resolves to
turn his Religion; He removes to St. Denis, and goes publicly to Mass. He
appoints the Duke of Nevers his Ambassador to the Pope to ask Absolution; the
States of the League are troubled at it. The Duke of Mayenne seeing that he
could not obtain the Kingdom for himself, nor for his Posterity, consents that
a Truce should be treated on; the Deputies at Surenne conclude it till the end
of October; it is willingly accepted, and the States at Paris are dismissed.

THE relieving of Rouen effected with so much ease, and without Blood, by the
Duke of Parma's excellent dexterity in making use sometimes of slowness,
sometimes of celerity, according as they were seasonable, filled his Name with
infinite honor, and did very much depress that height of prosperity to which
the Kings affairs seemed to be grown up; but the businesses which followed,
though they much more clearly showed the Dukes prudence and valor, did yet
within a short time raise the Kings affairs to their former condition.

The Council of the League, after they saw the Kings Camp was raised, began to
debate what was fittest to be done. The Spanish and Italian Commanders were for
following the Enemy; and now that he was so weak, and his men tired out with
sufferings, advised to prosecute his suppression, whiles the occasion presented
it self of hoping with reason to effect it: but the French Lords (to whom
exceeding great belief was given, by reason of the knowledge they had of the
Country, and of the situations of places) showed, that he passing the Seine at
Ponte de l' Arche, and marchinging into Lower Normandy, would not only leave
them in a necessity of returning to Rouen to pass the River, but also make it
very difficult for them to follow him through a Country that was wholly the
Enemies, far from supplies, retreats and provisions; whereas he with the
fervor of the Nobility, which would presently be run together to withstand his
danger, increasing in strength every hour, and refreshing his Forces in places
so fertile and abundant, would quickly be able to look them in the face, and
reduce them, being surrounded in his Country, to some strange encounter.
Wherefore, that they might utterly free the City of Rouen, and open the River
unto it, they thought it much better to assault Caudebec, that alone hindered
the passage of the Seine; which being taken, and the intention perfected for
which they were come thither, they might afterward consider what enterprise
would be most advantageous to their common interests. The Duke of Parma, who
desired absolutely to free Rouen, and then following his wonted designs, to
return to the Government of the affairs of Flanders, did willingly embrace the
Counsel, not taking notice (by reason he was not acquainted with the Country)
that shutting himself up in the Peninsula of Caux, environed on one side with
the River Seine, and on the other two by the Ocean Sea, if the King with his
Army should possess the passage out of it, which was but one, and that narrow
one of a few miles, he would shut them up as in a net, and by reason of the
littleness of the Country, would (only by stopping provisions from him) conquer
him very easily with hunger. But the French Commanders either did not believe
that the King could so soon be in a condition to follow them, or else thought
to take Caudebec in a few hours, and retire before he should be come up to
them; and the Duke of Parma suffered himself to be led by those who knew the
situations and quality of the Country better than he, out of the apparent
reason of absolutely freeing the City of Rouen, The Army of the League with no
very good advice go to besiege C^udebec, thereby utterly to free the City of
Rouen.
which certainly without the taking of Caudebec, being deprived of the use of
the River, would have remained little less than besieged: wherefore having
thrown down the Kings Forts and Trenches, the Army of the League came before
Caudebec upon the 24th day of April.

Caudebec lies behind certain Hills (not very high nor steep, but fertile and
well wooded) in a large Plain, upon the bank of the River Seine, encompassed
with very thick Walls, but not lined with Earth, nor bettered with any kind of
Fortification. There were to defend the Town Monsieur de la Guard a Colonel of
French Infantry, and Pausania Braccioduro, who alone commanded the Italian
Light Horse; for Nicolo Nasi was dead in the Camp of a natural death. These,
not to fail in the duty of good Soldiers, took a Post without the Town between
two Hills, in the passage that led from them into the Plain, intending to keep
the siege as far as possibly they could from the Walls. The Walloons of the
Count de Bossu, and Monsieur de Vert, were sent to drive them from thence; with
whom though they skirmished a long while, and gained time, yet being exceeded
by a greater number, they were fain to retire to the Town, and leave the
passage free unto the Army of the League; but as it marched down into the
Plain, the Holland Men-of-War, who were drawn close to the bank of the River,
played upon it most furiously with their Cannon, and did a very great and
unexpected mischief to the first Squadrons: wherefore the Duke having commanded
the Army that was marching to make a stand, did with excellent order, and no
less expedition, cause his Artillery to be drawn to the side of a Hill, and
from thence to give fire with equal violence upon the Ships, so that (the
Cannon which were planted upon the Land, shooting with more certainty than
those that were upon the Water) having almost sunk the Admiral, and shot many
of their best Ships through and through, the rest drew off from the shore, and
with the stream of the River fell down to Quilleboeuf, a place that stands
something lower, but upon the same bank, and there for their security they
began to draw a Line about the Town; which for the convenience of it, in
respect of Navigation, and of the passage of the River, being made a Fortress,
was in aftertimes held in exceeding great consideration. But the Ships being
beaten off, and that trouble taken away, the Duke having quartered his Army,
caused a Post to be taken under the walls, and the next day went in person with
Prince Ranuccio, the Sieur de la Motte, and Count Nicolo Cesis, to view the
place; and whilst he diligently surveyed all things, The Duke of Parma viewing
the situation of Caudebec, receives a Musket Shot in the arm.
and because he would not trust to others, designed himself the manner of
forming the Battery, he was hurt in the midst of the right arm with a
Musket-bullet, which being shot from one of the great Towers of the Wall, took
him under the elbow, and passing between the two bones, went almost to his
hand, where (being spent before) it flatted it self, and stayed, not having
force enough to make its way out. He never changed his countenance, nor
interrupted his discourse, nor spoke of his being wounded; but it being
discovered by the standers by, who saw the blood run down from under his Cloak,
he would nevertheless make an end of giving those orders which he had begun to
design; and being brought home to his quarters, and visited by the Chirurgions,
his hurt was not found any way mortal, but exceeding painful; and so much the
more, because they having been found to make three incisions in his arm, to
find the course of the wound, and to take out the Bullet, he fell into a Fever
within a while after; which continuing upon him, he was constrained at last to
keep his Bed. After this accident, the chief command of the Army was left to
the Duke of Mayenne, and the ordering of the Catholic Kings Forces to Prince
Ranuccio, who nevertheless did not dispose of any thing without his Fathers
consent. The Cannon were planted the next day, though but slowly; and having
battered and beaten down a great space of the Wall, Monsieur de la Guard
(though against the opinion of Bracciaduro) began to treat of surrendering,
Monsieur de la Guard surrenders Caudebec to the Lords of the League.
and after some debate obtained the conditions he demanded; for the Duke of
Parma being in no very good estate, every one desired that the progress of
matters might be facilitated. So the next day the Town came into the power of
the Confederates, who to give their Army rest, and to refresh it with plenty of
victual which they had gotten there, staid there three days after the taking of
it. Upon notice of the Enemies return, the Nobility return to the Kings Army
with great Supplies.


In the mean time the Nobility of the neighboring Provinces (which had been
summoned from the very first notice of the Enemies return) were come unto the
King; the Sieur d' Humiers with Two hundred Horse from Picardy, the Sieur de
Sourdis from Chartres with an hundred and fifty, the Sieur de Hertre Governor
of Alancon with Two hundred, the Count de Montgomery, and the Sieur de
Colombiere with Three hundred, Monsieur de Canisi (Son-in-law to Matignon) with
an hundred, Odet (Son to the late Sieur de la Noue) with as many; and Colonel
St Denis with Six hundred Harquebusiers on horseback. There arrived also
Monsieur de Souvray and the Count de Lude with Three hundred Gentlemen who had
not been in the Camp before; and at last the Duke of Montpensier long expected,
and the Sieur de la Verune Governor of Caen came with Eight hundred Gentlemen,
Two hundred Light Horse, and Four hundred Harquebusiers on horseback.

The Duke of Montpensier's stay had been occasioned by his desire to obtain
Auranches, a Town in lower Normandy, which was the only one, that in those
parts, toward the Confines of Bretagne, held for the party of the League; for
having besieged it at the latter end of the year before, with hope of taking it
within a very few days, the business afterward proved otherwise; for Monsieur
de Vicq, an old soldier, and an undaunted Cavalier, who was come from
Pont-Orson, having shut himself up into the Town, had gallantly made good the
Suburbs for many days, till the Walls and Bastions of the City were made very
defensible. But the Suburbs at last being taken, and the approaches being
begun, there fell so great and so continuing a Snow, as did not only fill all
the Trenches already made, but also hindered the work in such manner, that the
Camp was fain to lie idle many days, being in the mean time tormented with
such excessive cold weather, that had it not been for the Suburbs (the houses
whereof were pulled down, and the wood of them burned to warm the Soldiers) it
had not been possible to have persisted in the enterprise. The Snow being
ceased, the Ice continued so hard frozen, and the earth therefore so dry, and
as it were turned into stone, that it could not be dug nor entered with a
pick-axe without wonderful difficulty; and yet having with great toil raised a
Platform with two Batteries, they planted upon them the Artillery, which was
brought from Caen and Falaise, and particularly one Cannon of an unmeasurable
greatness, which they called le grande Robin, with all which the Walls being
battered in two places, and also many houses beaten down by the shot that went
into the Town, it was fiercely assaulted upon the second of February, and
though stoutly maintained by those within, yet the heat of many of the
Defendants weakened the hope of holding out, in such manner, that the Sieur de
Vicq was forced to capitulate, and surrender the Town into the Duke's power;
who having set his Forces again in order, and gathered the Nobility together,
was come unto the King by whom he had been often very earnestly sent for.

Now the King's Army being in a very few days so increased, that in it there
were between seven and eight thousand horse, The Kings Army returns, being near
18000 Foot, and 8000 Horse.
and between sixteen and eighteen thousand Foot; for besides the Hollanders of
the Fleet, he had dreyned all the neighboring Garrisons; and the error of the
Confederates being manifestly known, who had unadvisedly engaged themselves in
a nook, where they must suffer and labor very much before they could get out,
resolved to cut off their retreat, and pressing them on all sides, to reduce
them (without any danger to himself) unto extreme necessity of Victual; for one
part of the passage into the Peninsula toward the Sea being shut up by Eu,
Arques and Diepe, which places being strongly Garrisoned, did, in great part,
obstruct the way, and the Seine being blocked up by the possession of
Quilleboeuf, and by the Holland Fleet, there remained nothing but wholly to
shut up the other part of the entrance toward the River Sum, which alone led
from the Peninsula into the Provinces of Normandy and Picardy. The King
therefore being departed with exceeding great celerity from the Walls of Pont
de l' Arche, and marching without stop, though with his Army in Battalia, came
upon the last of April within sight of the Enemies Camp, which being gone from
Caudebec the same day, had taken up quarters at Yvetot, a great Town, which
afforded much convenience for lodging.

It was a remarkable thing, that the King also by not well heeding the
situation of the place through which he marched, put himself in manifest danger
of being defeated: For that Country being all inhabited by Lords, who possess
many Towns there, it is for their pleasure and convenience all full of large
Parks, encompassed with great well built Walls, as high as a man on horseback,
and some of these there are, that take up the space of three or four miles. Now
the King advancing through this Country toward the Camp of the League, it was
was necessary, keeping the ordinary way, to pass between two very great Parks,
one of which was on the right hand, and the other on the left, the Highway
being in the midst: wherefore the Cavalry and Infantry being fain to march but
few in front, The King marching with his Army between the walls of two Parks,
puts himself in great danger, which he escapes by reason of the D. of Parma's
being in a Fever.
the Kings Army was brought into such a condition, that the Vanguard was past
the Parks, the Battle was shut up between the Walls of them, and the Rere was
yet remaining on the hither side: So that if it had been assaulted, the
Vanguard would have been fought withal, and defeated, and neither the Rere nor
Battle would have been able to assist it. The Duke of Montpensier who led the
Van, perceived it, when being come past the Parks, he discovered the Enemies
Army encamped upon the side of an Hill; but not being able to do any thing
else, he drew his Squadrons still into order as they came, and by redoubled
Messages hastened the Kings marching up with the Battle. The Enemy likewise
perceived it, and Count Alessandro Sforza, a Cavalier of great foresight and
experience, ran himself (as he has often told me since) to give the Duke
notice of it, showing with how much ease and facility the Victory might be
gotten by reason of the enemies error; but the Duke very ill of a Fever, in
great pain with his wound, and lying in his bed, could not so soon take a
resolution, and told Count Alessandro, That to fight with the King of Navar,
live men were necessary* and not such bloodless carcasses as he was: Yet having
called the Duke of Mayenne, Prince Ranuccio, and the other Commanders, he gave
them order, if the occasion would bear it, to fall in upon the Enemy, and
causing himself to be set in a Chair, he made himself also to be carried to the
place where the Kings Army was seen to appear advancing between the Parks; but
at such time, when by the diligent care of the Duke of Montpensier, the
Vanguard had already taken up their station, and the Battle was almost all
past, and before the Camp of the League (which was come into quarters but a few
hours before) could be drawn together in Arms, the Kings whole Army was past,
and settled again in its former order; so fair, and so evident an occasion being
lost by reason of the Generals being hurt.

The Armies being quartered at less than a miles distance from one another,
there remained a thick Wood between them upon the right hand, The Armies
quarter within a mile of one another.
which the days following gave matter for many remarkable encounters; for they
of the League, that night drew a Trench at the entry of it toward the Enemy, to
keep the possession of the Wood unto themselves, and placed there to guard it
the Count de Bossu's Tertia, which was Two thousand Walloons. There, upon the
first day of May happened three hot skirmishes, whilst the King labored to
view that Post: The first between the Baron de Biron, and the Duke of Guise,
the second between the Duke of Bouillon, and the Sieur de Rosne, and the third
(which lasted till night) between the Sieur de Montigny, and the Baron de la
Chastre; yet was it not possible for the King to discover what Works the enemy
had made in the entry of the Wood; for besides the hindrance of the Cavalry,
the hail of Musket-bullets which showred from thence with infinite fury, would
not suffer any body to draw near it. But the next day the skirmish being begun
again, the Baron de Biron (though many of his men were left dead upon the
place) rushed on so far, that he discovered there was nothing but a single
line, without any sign of Cannon, and without the defense of Flankers or
Redouts; wherefore upon the third of May in the morning, the King having
commanded out three Squadrons of Foot, one of Germans, another English, and the
third French, sent them on at break of day to assault and make themselves
Masters of the Trench, who having marched very fast over the little Plain that
was between, fell unexpectedly upon the Walloons, and beat them away from their
Post, The Kings soldiers make themselves masters of the Trench, made by them of
the League before the Wood. Camillo Capizu^^hi with his Tertia, recovers the
Trench again, and secures it with fortifications.
(who, for haste of retreating, left also their baggage behind them) and
without losing time, began to fortify themselves in the Trench. But the Duke
of Mayenne and Prince Ranuccio, without giving them leisure to secure that
place, having drawn forth a great number of Carabines and Light Horse upon the
right and left hand, to obstruct the way, commanded Camillo Capizucchi with his
Tertia, seconded by that of Alfonso Idiaques, to attempt the recovery of that
Post. Camillo, out of his own fierceness, and the emulation that was between
the Italian and Walloon Infantry, rushing on boldly to assault the Trench,
entered it with so much violence, that the King's Foot, after a short
resistance, were constrained to quit the place, and in their retreat, being
surrounded by the Carabines, would have had much ado to get back safe to the
Camp, if the D. of Montpensier, the D. of Nevers, and the Count de St Paul with
three several Squadrons of Gentlemen had not advanced to disingage them. The
Italians wrought all that night, possessing all the passage of the highway,
and having made a great Redoubt with Flankers and Trenches on all sides, they
planted four pieces of Cannon there* so that the King was deprived of all hope
of being able to beat them out any more; and so the Wood remained in the power
of the Army of the League, which stood them in great stead for hutting, and for
the security of their quarters; and also was of great use for cutting wood, and
to feed the Carabines horses, that were accustomed to live upon what is daily
found in the field.

But the King (though the passage out of the Peninsula was already made good)
having a desire to straiten the enemies Camp more closely; The Army of the
League being in the Peninsula of Caux, the King strives to shut up their
passage out, being but one, and that very narrow.
that he might the sooner effect his enterprise, turned his quarters upon the
right hand by the wood-side, and possessed himself of a hill, from whence he
could batter Yvet^t, in which Bourg the Duke of Guise lay with the Vanguard;
and having planted seven pieces of Cannon behind a Trench, which was brought to
perfection in a very few hours, he began to play upon the enemies in the flank,
in such manner, that the Duke of Guise was forced to quit the Bourg, and retire
into the quarter of the Battle. In his retreat, the Duke of Bouillon with the
Reiters, and the Baron de Biron with a strong party of French Cavalry, followed
him in the Rere; but he bringing up the last rank himself in person, and still
valiantly facing about, retired with his Baggage safe and entire, and with his
men in order, though in the skirmish some were taken prisoners, among which
were the Barons de Coutenan and de la Maison. But the King, not only out of a
desire, the more to straiten the Enemy, but to the end that continual action,
and the hope of fighting, might from hour to hour keep the French Gentry from
being weary, did not suffer so much as a minutes rest; and at last, upon the
Twelfth of May, would needs attempt to shut them up more closely, by possessing
himself of an hill that lay more forward beyond the Fortifications of the Wood,
and about the distance of Cannon shot from the Camp of the League, which was
guarded by three Companies of Walloons under Octavio Mansfelt, and three others
of Spaniards under Ludovico Velasco. To that end, The Kings soldiers take a
Post from those of the League, which after a long dispute is recovered by the
Italians and Walloons.
about break of day he sent forth Count Philip of Nassau with his Troops; who
marching on secretly by the Wood-side, and afterward having left it upon his
right hand, assaulted that Guard so unexpectedly, that within half an hour the
defendants were beaten from it, and the Count began to entrench himself, and to
give sign that Cannon should be brought up thither: but they of the League,
considering the great inconvenience which they were like to receive from that
Post, presently sent the Walloon and Italian Infantry to recover it; the
Swissers, with the French and Spanish Foot, standing in Battalia to keep the
field; and likewise the Cavalry in Arms stood ready without the Trenches to
back the Foot. The King, on the other side, had drawn up his whole Army out of
their quarters, and caused his Light Horse to scowr the Plain, thereby to
hinder the Hollanders (who had gained that Post) from being encompassed; for
which purpose also, the Duke of Montpensier, with Eight hundred Horse on the
one side, and the Duke of Bouillon with One thousand Reiters on the other,
being upon the wings of the Battle, stood ready to reinforce them. There was a
sharp fight about the recovery of that Post, and they labored a^ it with much
blood, for the space of two hours; but at last the Italians overcoming all
obstacles, regained the Hill, and with great execution drove back the
Hollanders; the Cavalry of both Armies running on each side, to suppress, and
defend them, which made it generally thought, that they should fight that day
with all their Forces: but neither would the Duke of Mayenne hazard the whole
sum of affairs without the presence and consent of the Duke of Parma, nor did
the King desire to put it then to a Battle, being confident that within a few
days he should overcome the enemy by want of Victual. Yet fought they still,
with great and redoubled encounters, for the space o^ ten hours; the Cannon
thundered on all sides, and the Commanders engaged themselves more than once;
particularly Prince Ranuccio, who (his horse being shot under him) was in great
danger to remain a prisoner to the English; and the D. of Parma causing himself
to be taken out of his Bed, and to be set on hors-back, advanced to the Front
of his Army, doubting, that either opportunity or necessity might draw the Army
to a Battle. Night put an end to these encounters. But the next day the K. who
could neither take nor give rest, having intelligence that the Light Horse of
the League was lodged in a quarter very assaultable, and that might be beaten
up before the rest of the Army could stir to relieve it (an error always
pernicious in all occasions of War) fetching a great compass, went thither
himself in person; and having found them in no very good order, by reason of
Basti's absence, The King beats up the quarters of the Light Horse of the
League.
(who being sick of a Flux, was retired to Caudebec to recover his health) he
put them in so great confusion, that having lost their quarter, two Captains,
and their Carriages, they had much ado to get to the main Body of their Army,
which though it was diligently making ready to give relief, yet the business
having been very soon dispatched, the King had time, after he had beaten and
driven away the Enemy, to retire to his own quarters.

But the Duke of Parma being so ill, that he was often troubled with long
tedious swoundings, had great need to take some rest; and having already begun
to think of the means of getting out of that dangerous place wherein he found
himself, he judged it very fit to draw back his Army nearer the Walls of
Caudebec, along the Bank of the River, whereby he might make use of the
convenience of the Town; and the Army changing quarters, might avoid the cause
of diseases, and be more opportune for his design: Wherefore, upon the 16th of
May, the weather being dark by reason of a thick mist, which afterward turned
into a very great Rain, he caused the Camp to rise in the morning by break of
day, without noise of either Drum or Trumpet; and the Cannon and all the
Baggage going before, he led the Army to quarter in a place half a League from
the Town, between two Hills, before which there was a large Plain. Now to
deceive the King, that he might not discover the moving of his Camp, (besides
the advantage of the weather, The Duke of Parma sends Prince Ranuccio to
assault the Kings out-guards; and while they are fighting there, being favored
by a mist, he removes his Camp without noise of either Drum or Trumpet.
and the silence and order wherewithal his Soldiers marched) Prince Ranuccio
advanced as far as the entrance of the Wood before any thing stirred, and fell
upon the Kings out-guards, making as if his design were to enlarge himself, and
to that end he would have beaten them from their Post; which whilst they of the
King's party are intent upon with their utmost endeavors, whilst their minds
are wholly taken up there, and while thick volleys of shot rattle on all sides,
there was no noise at all heard of the moving of the Camp; and the Prince,
after a continued skirmish of three hours together, lessening his Forces by
little and little, and sending off the Squadrons one by one to join with the
Rereguard brought up by the Duke of Aumale, at last himself also, with only Two
hundred horse, followed the rest of the Camp at a round trot, leaving the King
astonished, when after the air was grown clear, he saw what an artificial
retreat the Army of the League had made. But the Prince being come to the place
where the Army had been encamped, found three pieces of Cannon left there,
either by the negligence or fear of him that had the charge of drawing them
off; wherefore, not to leave them, to the lessening of his reputation, in the
enemies power, he was constrained to recall his fleeing Squadron to disingage
them, and to bring them off safe: which, though it were done with great
celerity, yet would it have spoiled and frustrated the admirable art of this
retreat, if the King had been more ready to follow them: so subject oftentimes,
in the affairs of War, are the greatest actions to miscarry by the least
disorders.

But the King being come to quarter that night in the place which they of the
League had quitted, advanced the next day to discover them; and having
considered the situation of the Country with no less sagacity than they,
marched to the opposite hills, and there prudently disposed his whole Army into
quarters, persisting still to straiten and shut them up, as his design had been
from the beginning. The Duke of Montpensier with the Vanguard very strong in
Horse, lay upon the right hand, and spread himself so far toward Diepe, that
the Garrison of those places which obstructed all the ways, met mutually with
his parties that scowred the field. The King with the Battle, in which was the
greatest strength of Infantry, lay encamped upon the foot of the hills upon the
great Road of Picardy. The Duke of Bouillon with the Rere, wherein were the
Reit^rs, kept the left hand, possessing that pass which leads from the Country
of Caux toward Rouen; so that all passages being stopped, there was no part of
the way that remained free. The Army being encamped in its several Posts, the
King (contrary to his ordinary custom) strove to secure himself, that the Enemy
might not force him to a Battle; and therefore he strengthened and fortified
all his quarters, spo^led and blocked up all the ways, and labored with all
industry, that the Enemies Commanders, by making some brisk attempt, might not
be able to force his Quarters.

The Army of the League shut up in the Peninsula, is reduced unto necessity of
Victual, and is in a great strait.
The Camp of the League was already reduced to such want of Victual, that it
could subsist no longer; for neither did the River (obstructed by the Holland
Fleet) furnish it with Provisions, nor did the Country longer afford any
convenience to feed it, that Corn being spent which was found at the taking of
Caudebec, all the Country eaten up, and all that wasted which industry had been
able to supply; and not only of other things, but even of water there was very
great want; for that of the River being spoiled by the flowing of the Sea, was
not only very ill ^asted, but also wonderfully unwholesome. To this was added
the sufferings of their Horses, which, besides the scarcity of forage, being
harrassed in the fields with continual Rains, died every hour in great
abundance; and the Foot being many days behind, and without money to relieve
themselves in their present necessity, was afflicted and consumed with the many
tedious sufferings. On the other side, the King having Diepe and St. Valery
near him, and behind the way open into the most fertile Provinces of Normandy
and Picardy, though no better stored with Money than the Enemy was, did yet
abound in Provisions, and his Soldiers spreading themselves far abroad to
forage, supplied the want of their pay with plundring the Country.

Wherefore, the Duke of Parma seeing himself reduced to so strait and so
necessitous a condition, thought there was no other remedy for it but to pass
over to the other side of the River Seine, and getting out of the Peninsula, to
remove into the spacious Plain of lower Normandy, and so dis-intangle himself
from the King's designs, who already believed that he had him sure in the not.
But as this was the only wholesome resolution for the safety of his Army, so was
it most difficult to be effected: for it was not to be doubted, but if the King
were aware of it, he might easily destroy him in crossing the River, and they
were so near Neighbors, that it could not in reason be hoped that passage could
be concealed. He communicated his thought to the Duke of Mayenne, and the Sieur
de la Motte; but it seemed to them not only dangerous, but impossible, knowing
how hard it is to pass a little Ditch, when the opposition of the Enemy is
near; much less was a good event to be hoped for in passing a mighty broad
River, swelled in that place by the Salt-waters, with an entire Army, full of
Baggage, hindered with Ammunition, and great store of Cannon, a fierce and
powerful Enemy being at their back; yet necessity urged, and the safety of that
Army could no other way be provided for: Wherefore the Duke being straightened
within himself, resolved to try if by dexterity he could bring that thought to
pass. To which purpose, having made Eight Ensigns of Berlotte's Regiment, by
little and little, to cross the River in certain small Boats, he caused a Fort
to be raised upon the other Bank, which, in the form of a Star, had three spurs
toward the River, to command and secure it; and made another to be raised over
against that upon the Bank, where the Army was, but with the Redout toward the
River, and the Front opposite to the place from whence the Enemy might appear,
and in it, besides the Count de Bossu with a Thousand Foot, whereof most were
Musketeers, he planted four pieces of Cannon that might command a great way
off, and keep the passage of the field open. The Duke of Parma, to free the
Army, which was in a manner imprisoned in the Country of Caux, resolves to pass
the River Seine, and his attempt succeeds.
At the same time many great Boats were making ready at Rouen, with wonderful
secrecy, whereof in that place there were a great number, which were wont to
carry Merchandise upon the River, and they fastened pieces of Timber and Planks
together, after the manner those Bridges are made, whereby great Rivers are
commonly wont to be passed. Other little Boats likewise were prepared with six
Oars in each, to help and tow the greater with more facility, and some great
floating-Bridges like Rafts were made of exceeding thick Beams, sufficient to
sustain and carry the Artillery. These Boats (which with the benefit of the
stream of the River, and the ebbing of the Sea, were come from Rouen in a few
hours) being arrived (the evening before the One and twentieth of May) without
losing a moment of time, the same night the weather being clear, the French
Cavalry and Infantry passed over with the Duke of Aumale, then the Artillery,
and all the Baggage of the Army, after them the Swiss-Infantry, and about peep
of day, the Walloon, Spanish, and Itallian Foot; Prince Ranuccio remaining on
this side the River, with Appio Conti, who (the Duke of Montemar^iano being
gone for Italy) commanded the Forces of the Church, and with them a Thousand
Italian Foot of Capizucchies, and Two hundred Horse; with which turning in Arms
toward the Enemy, they made as if they would skirmish in the field.

The King seeing a small number of men upon the Hills, and that they stirred
not, though his Light Horse ran up and down the Plain, began to suspect, that
(as the time before) the Enemies were changing their quarters, but not at all
that they were passing the River, which enlarged, by the flowing of the tide,
is in that place more like a Sea than a River. To assure himself of the truth,
he sent forth the Baron de Biron to discover what they were doing, who having
got up to the top of a Hill, upon whi ch no body appeared, returned galloping
with great speed, and related how the Ene mies were passing the River; at which
news, the King without further thought, hasted that way with all the Cavalry,
and left the Foot to follow him. But the Cavalry could not hinder the Enemies
passage, unless first the Count de Bossu's Fort were taken, The King perceiving
the Enemies design (though too late) goes to hinder their passage over the
River; but they were past already.
which with Cannon and Musket Shot scoured the whole Plain on every side, and
was a shelter to protect those that passed the River; which the King having at
last taken notice of, and thinking that enterprise too difficult, and of too
great delay, possessed himself of another Hill that commanded the river, and
gave order, that with all possible speed, the Artillery should be brought
thither, to play upon and sink the Boats that were passing. But while they were
making ready, and drawing thither in a confused haste, the whole Army was
already past over; whereupon, the King almost transported with despair, not
being able to do any thing else, ran to charge Prince Ranuccio, who last of
all, retiring by little and little, was gotten under the protection of the
Fort. The King advanced precipitately within reach of the Cannon and Musket,
further than was fitting, but he was quickly forced to retreat with some loss,
but with no effect; so that the Count de Bossu's Regiment, and Capizucchi's
Thousand Foot, did also pass the river one after another, and the Cannon that
were in the Fort being drawn off, piece by piece, were put upon one of the
great Floating-bridges; and last of all, Prince Ranuccio embarked with his
Horse, at which time, the Kings Artillery were come up to the Hill, and began
to fire upon the Boats that passed over, and likewise upon the Fort de la
Berlotte; but the Cannon shooting under-metall, did but little harm in all
places.

Greater was the danger, in regard of the Kings Men of War, which at that very
time appeared upon the river from Quilleboeuf, and went to fall upon that Raft
that carried the Artillery, which were taken last out of the Fort, for being
but slenderly guarded, it was doubted, they might easily fall into the Enemies
power; but Prince Ranuccio, who in this whole action gained infinite praises,
not being able to suffer the loss of his Artillery before his eyes, in the
safety of which consisted the greatest reputation of that enterprise, getting
out of the Boat, in which he was passing aboard a little Bark, made haste in
person to relieve them, which the Sieur de la Motte, Camillo Capizucchi,
Colonel St. Paul, and many other Gentlemen and Officers, having likewise done
with other little Barks, and the Fort de la Berlotte, playing with great
violence cross the River, the Kings Ships desisted, and the Artillery coming at
last safe to the shore, were landed in a moment by two Spanish Tertiaes,
commanded to receive and accompany them, though the Kings Artillry, no less
than the other, thundered with infinite violence upon the place. The whole Army,
Cannon, and Carriages being past, without leaving any thing that was of moment,
Prince Ranuccio would not stir from the river till all the Bridges and Boats
were burned in every place, to the end they might not serve the King to pass
over and follow them, and having entirely perfected all he intended, without
any show of disturbance, he came up toward evening to the rest of the Army
that was marched off from the river.

But neither could the passage of the River (which had been effected with so
much industry, and (which imported most of all) without having received any
loss at all) quiet the mind of the Duke of Parma, doubting, that the King might
pass over his Army at Pont de l' Arche, and resolve to follow him; which, if it
had come to pass, in the condition he was in (the weariness of his Forces being
considered, and principally his not having money to maintain his Camp) he
doubted he should incur very great dangers and troubles: wherefore, having
quartered at Neubourg (which place was sacked and burnt by his Army) he marched
with so great speed toward Paris, that he came to St. Cloud in four days; and
not willing to pass through the City, lest he should give his Forces occasion
to disband, he caused a Bridge of Boats to be made, and having repassed the
Seine, never slackned his haste till he came to the Wall of Chasteau-Thierry in
Champagne, far from the enemy, and upon the way to return straight into
Flanders.

In the mean time the King, who was unexpectedly fallen from a certain hope of
suppressing his enemies, The King dissolves his forces, and sends the Lords to
their Governments, and with a quick* fleeing Army follows the march of the
enemy.
to a certain assurance that he had lost his pains, labors, and expenses, and
the blood shed from his own Person and his Subjects in the space of so many
months, seeing the City of Rouen relieved, the Army of the League gotten away
safe to another place, his Gentry wearied and wasted, the Germans diminished in
number, and tired out with their late sufferings, after he had been two days,
not only afflicted in mind, but also perplexed and ambiguous in his thoughts,
resolved to lessen his Army, as he had likewise done after the siege of Paris,
and freeing himself and those of his party from trouble and expense, to expect,
with a fleeing Army, what resolution the Commanders of the League would take.
The Nobility departed, the Lords returned to their Governments, and the King
having mustered the Germans, and reformed their Companies one into another,
with Three thousand Horse, and between five and 6000 Foot, marched after the
Enemy to the confines of Champagne and Picardy.

But the sufferings of all the winter past bred such grievous diseases among
those that had been in the Camp, Francois de Bourbon Duk^ of Montpens^er, as he
was returning to his Government of Normandy, dies at Lisie^x the third of June*
1592.
that a wonderful great number of Gentlemen and valiant Commanders either died
or lay long sick; among which, Francois de Bourbon Duke of Montpensier, being
sick of a Fever, in his return to his Government of Normandy, was stayed at
Lisieux by the violence of his disease, where he departed this life upon the
third of June* A Prince of infinite high courage, and inestimable goodness, and
for those qualities very worthy of the most eminent Command whatsoever, if
nature had afforded him more vivacity, and a more perspicuous understanding.
About the same time, not far from Beauvais, died Monsieur de Giutry, a man of
exceeding great valor, and who, for prudence and experience, had lived in a
singular reputation among the Hugonots who, next to the D. of Bouillon, had
placed all their hopes in him and Monsieur de la Noue.

At the departure of the Army of the League from the River Seine, the discords
and discontents between the Generals were discovered to burn more than ever:
for the D. of Mayenne, who was not pleased with the drawing off so soon from
the King, The Duke of Mayenne murmurs against the Duke of Parma, ascribing the
glory of all the actions to himself.
and leaving matters again to his discretion, did publicly attribute unto
himself the honor of having relieved Rouen without striking a blow, and of
having by patience and industry caused the King's Army to dissolve, without
having remitted the sum of affairs to the uncertain event of a Battle: That
likewise as the removing of the impediment of Caudebec, and the clearing of the
passage of the Seine, was necessary; so it had been propounded and obtained by
him: That if afterward the Duke of Parma, not trusting any body, would needs,
without occasion, put his person in danger, in a place and in an action that
was not worth the cost, and if his wound had given the King time to recruit,
and to shut them up in a corner (from whence quickly disingaging themselves,
they had found convenience to retire) it was no fault of his counsel, which was
very good and wholesome, but a defect of the execution, which had not been
remitted to him: That the industry of passing over the River, could not but be
praised; but if it had been employed in making a Bridge to come and go freely
over the River, the passage of Victuals would thereby have been opened on that
side; whereupon the King, being without money, and his Army wearied and
consumed, would have been constrained to march off with shame, and to leave the
Field open to them, to effect profitable and signal enterprises: but because
the Spaniards would spend but sparingly, and because they would afford but
petty supplies, and yet were obstinate to rule, command, and govern all things
their own way, it was come to pass, that now all the past toils and expenses
were thrown away, and the King recovering strength, would again make himself
superior, both in force and reputation.

On the other side, the D. of Parma said publicly, that with the Arms of the
Catholic King alone, he had two several times happily delivered the League,
and redeemed the two principal Cities of France out of the enemies hands: That
he had taken away the victory and reputation from the King of Navar, The Duke
of Parma sh^wing that he had twice delivered the League, attribute^ the cause
unto the French, why the King of Navarre was not utterly suppressed.
who oppressing the French in all places, had been opportunely bridled only by
the power of his Army: and that now also, though the Count de Vaudemont with
the Forces of Lorain had left him, and though the chief French who were
interessed had come but slowly to the Army, he would have made an end of
suppressing the King, if they would have agreed to follow him, and if by
imprudently thrusting themselves into a net shut up on all sides, they had not
spoiled the fruits of the Victory, and lost the opportunity which presented it
self of ending the War victoriously at the last: That the Catholic King poured
out the gold and blood of his Kingdoms prodigally for their benefit; and they
on the contrary, having no other aim but to grow rich in particular, cared but
little for the public good, and much less for the safety of the Kingdom: and
finally, That he would not stay unprofitably and without fruit at Rouen, and
suffer not only the affairs of Flanders, but even also those of France, to go
to ruin without remedy.

From these words their actions were not different: The Duke of Mayenne upon
excuse of taking Physic, stays at Rouen.
for the Duke of Mayenne pretending a necessity to take Physic, would needs
stay at Rouen, and not follow the Army that marched away; and the Duke of
Parma, vexed that he would not go with him, would not leave him any Forces at
all; but on the other side, taking with him the Duke of Guise, gave out, that
he would leave the Command to him of those Spanish Forces that should stay in
France* which more than any thing else nettled the Duke of Mayenne, who (the
Cardinal-Legat departing also with the Army) remained alone and forsaken, being
scarce able to obtain, that the Pope's Swissers and Commissary Matteucci should
stay with him at Rouen: and yet even this also was a stone of exceeding great
scandal* for Matteucci, a man of a harsh carriage, and most wilful in his
opinions, either having such orders from Rome, or because he had not money to
pay them, would needs dismiss the Swisses within a while after; neither was it
possible, by any kind of reasons, persuasions, or threatenings, to alter his
determination; but the Duke of Mayenne having earnestly desired him to stay
them yet a month longer, offering to pay them himself, if he would not keep
them in his own pay, could not prevail any thing at all: whereat highly
incensed, and grieved that he was ill dealt with by them all, he gave order
that Matteucci should be seized upon; which, though it were not effected,
because he hid himself in the habit of a Soldier, and departed with the same
Swisses, and because the Duke, the first fury of his wrath being over,
dissembled the business, and did not care to have his order put in execution;
yet notwithstanding the Legate complained grievously about it, and the thing was
very ill taken at Rome; whereupon, the Duke's discontents multiplied on all
sides; which had so much power on him, that he began afresh to lend his ear to
a Treaty of Peace, which Monsieur de Villeroy had never given over to manage,
out of a desire to conclude an Agreement with the King, and by that means to
free themselves from the mischief (as he said) of foreign Forces.

Monsieur de Villeroy had kept the Treaty alive, sometimes with one, sometimes
with another of the King's party; and as either side had the better, so did the
Treaty vary accordingly: for when the King felt himself much straightened by the
Enemy, he fell into a thought of satisfying the party of the League, and of
freeing himself from danger and trouble; and when the Duke of Mayenne found
himself either ill dealt withal, or slenderly assisted by the Confederates, he
also inclined toward the hopes of an Accommodation: but the insuperable
difficulty that was in the King's conversion, because he would not do it at the
request of his enemies, and the Duke's not being willing to conclude the
Treaty, unless he were first a Catholic, had always cut off the practices,
and put the business in a total desperation. But about this time, Monsieur de
Villeroy having treated long and freely about it with Monsieur de l' Ominie one
of the King's Secretaries of State, who had been taken prisoner, and was at
Pontoyse; he, after he had his liberty, treated of it with the King, just at
the time when, by reason of the Duke of Parma's drawing near, he was both in
danger and trouble: wherefore he gave order to the Sieur du Plessis Mornay, who
formerly had treated about it (being a man in whom, by reason of his wisdom and
learning, he confided very much) that he should renew the discourse of it again
with Monsieur de Villeroy, who having written several times to the Duke of
Mayenne, and to President Ieannin concerning it, at last, after much treating,
the Duke, who had never been willing to condescend to any particular, had, The
Sieur du Ples^is Mornay Secretary of State to the King, and the Sieur de
Viller^y for the Duke of Mayenne, Treat of an Accommodation, with mutu^l
promises of Secrecy. President Ieannin, by order from the D. of Mayenne
signifies those Conditions to Monsieur de Villeroy (who was in Treaty) which
the Duke desires for the effecting an Accommodation.
at this time, declared himself by Villeroy, That if the King would give
security of his conversion, and satisfaction to him, and the other Lords of his
party, he would agree to acknowledge and submit himself unto him. Du Plessis
and Villeroy treated together with mutual promises of secrecy; but no evasion
could be found, whereby, the King not turning his Religion at the present, they
of the League could be secure, that he would do it for the future, since they
alleged, that the King had from the beginning promised those very Catholics
that followed him that he would do it, and yet had never performed it to them;
whereupon, it could not be hoped, that he would assuredly do it at the
importunity of his Enemies: Besides, that the King would make that promise with
uncertain and ambiguous words, and with a reservation of being taught and
instructed, which, as they were like to afford sufficient matter of excuse, to
whatsoever resolution he should take, so did they not quiet the Duke of
Mayenne; and the Conditions that were propounded in his particular, and in that
of the other Princes and Lords of his party, did not absolutely satisfy them:
Wherefore, after much treating, and after much writing and replying, in the
end, President Ieannin wrote by the Dukes order to Villeroy, and gave him
Commission to propound for the last Conditions: That the business of the Kings
Conversion should be referred to the Popes arbi^rement, to whom the King should
send the Marquess de Pisani, accompanied with Cardinal Gondi, to know his
pleasure, and to receive those Conditions in that matter which the Apostolic
See should judge convenient; and that he himself would send a person expressly,
and would give order to his Agents at Rome to promote the business, and help to
overcome the difficulties, that the Pope might be brought to some reasonable
determination: That for security, that the King should persevere in the
Catholic Religion, and maintain the Peace, the Places, Cities, and Fortresses,
should for the space of six years remain in the hands of those that possessed
them at that present, to restore them to the King, and to his free disposing
within that time, if they saw the Peace go on sincerely: That the Government of
Bourgogne, with all the places also, that held for the King, should be left to
the Duke of Mayenne, which Government should be hereditary to his Sons, with
authority of disposing and distributing the Benefices, Offices, Governments,
and Places, which should become void in that Province for the time to come*
That the King should give him an Office of the Crown, superior to the rest, as
it might be of Constable, or of his Lieutenant General: That he should give him
such a sum of money as should be sufficient to pay those debts which he was run
into upon that present occasion: That to the Government of Bourgogne, that of
Lions and Lyonois should be added: That the King should provide another
Government for the Duke of Nemours, which should be equivalent to it: That the
Duke of Guis^ should have the Government of Champagne, and two strong Holds for
his security, the Duke of Merc^ur that of Bretagne, the Duke of Ioy^use that of
Languedo^, the Duke of Aumale that of Picardy, and for his security St. Esprit
de Rue: That all the Lords of the League should be maintained in their Places,
Offices, Dignities, and Governments, which they had possessed before the
beginning of the War: That the Catholic King should be comprehended in the
Peace, and reasonable satisfaction given to him for his pretensions: That there
should be an Act of Oblivion concerning all things that had befaln in the War,
and that the Narrative and Preamble of the Accommodation should be written in
such manner, as it might clearly appear, the Duke of Mayenne had not
acknowledged the King till then in respect of Religion, and that now he did it
by reason of his Conversion with the Popes consent, and that also it might
expressly appear, he had no hand in the death of the late King Henry his last
Predecessor.

These Conditions the Sieur de Villeroy imparted to Monsieur du Plessis, and
gave him an extract of them, they being set down at large, with their Causes
and Reasons in the Presidents Letter. Du Plessis first made small show to
approve of them; but Villeroy replied, That this was not an Agreement with the
Hugonots, who by all Laws Divine and Humane, were obliged to acknowledge their
King established; but a Capitulation, whereby the Lords of the Union were
contented to acknowledge, or, to say better, upon certain conditions to make
one King, who was not Possessor of the Kingdom; that, that acknowledgment of
theirs coming to pass, the King would thereby attain the Crown of France, which
he possessed not; and that therefore the Conditions ought not to seem strange
unto him: That the Lords of the League did now require all which they thought
fit for their security, because when the acknowledgment was once made, they
should be then no longer able to treat or demand any thing, but as Subjects
simply to beseech their Sovereign Lord: That it was no wonder they should
demand much at one time, being very certain, that after that they should never
obtain any thing more during his Reign, nor perchance in that of his Sons
neither: That the Duke of Mayenne had showed himself so good a Frenchman, that
he would rather acknowledge a French King, though an Enemy, upon these
conditions, than a Stranger, though a Friend and a Confident, upon much greater
ones: That the King had always said he would content and secure the Lords of
the House of Lorain, and all the others of their party; and lately, while the
War was in the heat before Caudebec had affirmed as much with his own mouth to
the Baron de Luz, with whom he had discoursed long about it, in the field,
telling him, That if the Lords of the Union would acknowledge and follow him,
he would not refuse any conditions; and particularly, that to his power he
would give worthy satisfaction to the Duke of Mayenne, whom he knew to be a
good Prince, and a good Frenchman: That the Marshall d' Aumont had by his
orders repeated the same to the same Baron, and therefore that ought not to
appear strange now, which he himself had proffered but a few days before. But
the Sieur du Plessis considered, that to refer the business of the Kings
Conversion to the Pope, from whom, by reason of the Spaniards power, nothing at
all would be obtained, replied, That it was not a thing to be expected from any
other means, but from Gods Divine Inspiration, after such Instructions as
should make him know himself to be in an error; for otherwise it was an
unlawful thing to demand it, and much worse to grant it, the Soul being first
to be thought of, and then the affairs of the World: And as for the other
conditions, repeating them one by one, he showed, that if all the Governments,
and all the Places and Benefices should remain in the gift of the Lords of the
Union, the King would neither have any thing to reserve* nor to grant to those
of his own party; and that it would be a monstrous thing to see all the
Provinces in the hand of one only Family, and the Princes of the Blood, and so
many other Lords excluded, who had labored, and endangered their lives for the
Kings Crown. And yet after having again promised secrecy, (which the Duke of
Mayenne required above all other things) he said he would speak with the King
himself concerning it, and refer the resolution to his pleasure.

But being come into the Kings Council at Bussy where they were, he was so far
from favoring the Treaty of Peace, and the Conditions propounded, or from
observing that secrecy he had promised, that publicly in the presence of all
the Council, he demanded pardon for having till then, not any way out of an
evil intention, but through inadvertency deceived His Majesty, since such
Conditions had been propounded to him, that he was ashamed of them, and did
much disdain to publish them: He confessed, that he had believed too much, out
of his desire of Peace, and out of a will to serve the Public Cause, but the
Conditions that were propounded, were so unjust and dishonorable for the King,
and so pernicious for the whole Kingdom, that they plainly showed the Duke of
Mayenne, and those of his party, had no thought of Peace; but that they sought
to hold the King in hand, and to work a jealousy in the Spaniards, to draw
money and satisfactions from them: That the things propounded, were such as did
not deserve any answer, nor did he think them worthy to be heard by that
Council; and yet having proposed them with this Preamble, not only the whole
Council, but even the King himself thought them not so exorbitant, as he
represented them; and so much the rather, because every one knew that demands
are high in the beginning, but afterward in the course of a Treaty, they fall
by little and little; so that they were all scandalized at du Plessis: Nor was
there any one who was not of opinion, that he as being an Hugonot, abhorred the
Kings Conversion, and therefore desired not, but rather crossed the Peace. The
King being of the same mind, gave the Sieur de Villeroy to understand, that he
would willingly treat with him by word of mouth; and the Marshall de Byron,
and the Duke de Bouillon, desired to confer with him, though both of them were
little inclined to Peace; Bouillon, because he was an Hugonot; and Byron,
because his whole fortune depended upon the Wars, whereupon by the continuation
of them he hoped to rise to the height of Power and Honor, and those Offices
and Titles which the Duke of Mayenne demanded, he grounding himself upon his
own merits, aspired and pretended to for himself.

Du Plessis continuing his intention, The Treaty of Agreement divulged by the
Sieur du Plessis, comes to the ears of the Princesses and Spanish Ministers,
working a contrary effect to what he that published them desired.
and publishing his secret thoughts to men of understanding, divulged the whole
Treaty, contrary to his Faith given to Villeroy, and to many persons showed
Copies of the Articles propounded; whereby they were not only known to all the
Kings party, but also the Princesses who were in Paris saw them, and believed
them; so that they made grievous complaints that the Duke should go about to
establish a Peace, without making it known to them, and to the Lords of his
party: and, which was much worse, they came also to the knowledge of the
Spanish Ministers, who though they believed not the business could so easily be
established, were yet filled with jealousy and suspicion. Du Plessis believed
that at one time he should work two good effects for his own intentions; one,
to cross and totally break all Treaty of Peace, because he thought he had
discovered that the King, to obtain it, inclined to change his Religion, which
the Hugonots feared above all things; the other, to make the Duke of Mayenne be
distrusted of his own party, and particularly by the Spaniards, whereupon the
disunion and ruin of the League would more easily follow, But as counsels that
have too much of a man's particular interest, have often (either by the will of
God, who is not pleased with them, or by reason of their own deceitfulness)
very different events from what the Intenders of them confidently design unto
themselves, this divulging produced an effect very diverse from what du Plessis
did assuredly expect: for it wrought no ill effect in the party of the League,
and on the Kings side it made an exceeding great stir and confusion.

It hurt not the Duke of Mayenne, because the Pope was much satisfied with his
candor, seeing that without the Kings Conversion he refused all other
particular greatness and advantage, and that he referred the whole business of
Religion to the Apostolic See; and the Spaniards being fallen into some fear
that Peace might easily ensue, forbore to give the Duke of Mayenne further
cause of discontent; and the Duke of Parma necessarily departing by reason of
his health, The Duke of Parma leaves Forces in France under the Sieur de Rosne
depending upon the Duke of Mayenne, to whom also the other Spanish Ministers
forbear to give further discontents.
and in respect of the affairs of Flanders, left some Forces in Champagne, and
gave not the command of them to the Duke of Guise, as he had intended, but left
the charge of them to Monsieur de Rosne with the title of Camp-Master-General,
he being to obey the Duke of Mayenne without contradiction; and Iuan Baptista
Tassis going to him, endeavored by his dexterity to remedy the late disgusts,
Diego d' Ivarra continuing with the Army, because he knew his presence was not
pleasing to him. To this was added, that the Duke, who had entered into that
Treaty, out of the despair which he was brought unto, seeing that he had
already recovered his authority and reputation, which he had in great part lost
with the Popes Ministers, and with the Spaniards, was afterward more backward
in lending an ear to Peace: But thinking that his having been deceived by the
revealing of that secret, contrary to promise, afforded him not only excuse,
but a lawful occasion for him, also to make use of the Treaty for his own
profit, he continued it in such manner, that it served to keep sometimes one,
sometimes another faithful, according as need required.

On the other side, the Catholi^ks of the Kings party, The Catholics of the
Kings party displeased, that the Peace should be treated by the Sieur de
Plessis, a Hugonot, renew the Treaty of a third party.
wakened by the noise of this Treaty, and highly disdaining, that the Peace
should be negotiated by the means of a Hugonot, and that the Kings Conversion
should be promised to the League, which they by many reiterated instances had
not been able to obtain, began a fresh to contrive a third Party, and more
boldly than before, to assemble themselves severally, and discourse of
forsaking the King, or to make an agreement with those of the League, in such
manner, that the business having often been consulted of between the Cardinal
of Bourbon, the Count de Soissons, the Duke of Longueville, the Count de St.
Paul, the Duke of Nevers, the Marshall d' Aumont, Monsieur d' O, Monsieur de
Lavardin, the Count de Lude, and many other Lords, they gave the Duke of
Mayenne to understand, that it would be profitable for the common safety and
security, to unite all the Catholics, and desire the King, that within the
term of a certain, prefixed, reasonable time, he would turn Catholic, and give
security for the maintenance of Religion; which if he would do, he should be
acknowledged and established; and if he would not, they all together should
elect a Catholic King, who should be acknowledged and obeyed by all. This
practice beginning to grow warm, the King seeing that the event would be,
either a forced dishonorable Conversion, or the utter ruin of his affairs,
since from secret consultations that matter was come to open murmurings, he
caused Villeroy to be very earnestly solicited (by the means of Monsieur de
Fleury, his Brother-in-law) to come personally to confer with him, and resolved
to apply himself of his own accord to a reconciliation with Rome.

Innocent the Ninth, after a long and troublesome Conclave, Innocent the Ninth
is succeeded in the Papacy by Cardinal Hippolito Aldobrandino, with the name of
Clement the Eighth, being aged Fifty six years.
was succeeded in the Apostolic See by Hippolito, Cardinal Aldobrandino, a man
not weakened with age, being not above fifty and six years old, but endowed with
mature prudence, and singular dexterity in affairs of State, which he had
gotten by continual practice in the Court, and by the management of the most
important businesses of his time. He having assumed the name of Clement the
Eighth, though he had been favored by the Spaniards in his Election, and was
therefore full of kind grateful demonstrations toward them, was not yet
totally^disposed to let himself be ruled by their designs, but would depend
upon himself, and after the chief interest of Religion, would have an aim at
the general safety and equality. He held a great correspondence with the
Commonwealth of Venice, and with the Great Duke of Thuscany, judging that State
to be not only the Foundation-stone of the Liberty of Italy, but also a wary
Reconciler of the Peace of Christendom; and him, by reason of his great
prudence, to be intent to follow the same way; and therefore he straightly
confirmed that confidence with the Senate, which his Ancestors had in that
State, having taken refuge there in their adversities: And with the Great Duke
(forgetting those ancient factions for which his Father had been banished out
of the City of Florence) he contracted a new confident correspondency, to
advance (by the assistance and advice of these) the Government of the Church to
the common benefit and safety of Christians.

The first and most important business that represented it self unto him, was
that of France; in which, as matter of Religion was chiefly considered by him,
so the private emulations, the ancient discords, and the present ambition of
the Great Ones were very well known unto him. But because time and opportunity
were to administer those overtures that were necessary for the Peace and Union
of that Kingdom, he determined in himself, in the mean time, to sustain the
League with convenient relief, but not with that interessed fervor his
Predecessors had profusely done, desiring things should be in such a condition
as might not tend toward the division and destruction, but to the safety and
restoration of so great a Kingdom; which he thought would follow, if a King
were elected and established who was not only a Catholic, and obedient to the
Apostolic See, but also a Frenchman, and of such a condition as might draw
along with him the general peace and satisfaction. He therefore confirmed the
Cardinal of Piacenza in his Legation, judging him, by reason of his long
employment there, not only to be well informed, but also more fit to manage
that business than any other: and though he in times past had shown himself
very partial to the Spaniards, yet the Pope thought that his Master being
changed, and his Commissions altered, he would, as a prudent experienced man,
endeavor rather to satisfy his intention, than to follow the interests of
Spain, the ends whereof could not always run united with those of the Sea of
Rome: Clement the Eighth gives supplies unto the League with more moderate
expenses and resolutions than his Predecessors had done.
but having, by the confirmation of the Legate, showed (as much as was
sufficient) his intentions to be well (...) toward the League, in other
matters, under color of the present disabilities of the Apostolic See, he
freely declared that he could not assist the Confederates with more than
fifteen thousand Ducats by the month; showing that the excessive expenses
formerly made, to the wasting of the Treasury, and to the burdening of the
people, had not produced any fruit equivalent to so vast a charge, and to so
great preparations; and insisting upon that remedy which he esteemed
convenient, he gave the Legate order to endeavor the assembling of the
Free-States, to the end that a King being chosen with a common consent, all
machinations might be cut off, the way locked up against ambition, and that as a
certain end, and a visible apparent mark, they might aim at the good of
Religion, and the restoring of Peace in the Kingdom.

These thoughts (which by many conjectures were known unto both parties) as
they put the Duke of Mayenne in good hope that the Pope was inclined to
acknowledge his merits, The King, by the means of Mocenigo the Venetian
Ambassador, prays that Republic to treat with the Pope concerning his
reconciliation with the Church.
and his so great labors, and would favor his designs; so did they not
displease the King, who despaired not in that moderation to find some temper to
settle his own affairs; wherefore being forced by the Commotion of the
Catholics, who all were already determined to see some resolution, he
discoursed at Vernon with Giovanni Mocenigo the Venetian Ambassador, and told
him, that having a purpose to find some way whereby an overture concerning his
affairs might be made unto the Pope, he desired that the Republic, which he
knew had a very near correspondence with him, would either by an express
Ambassador, or by the means of the ordinary Resident at Rome, assist that his
just intention, having determined to procure that Cardinal Gondi, in whose
prudence and candor he confided very much, should go into Italy, and with him
the Marquess de Pisani, in the name of the Catholic Nobility of his party, to
treat of the means of attaining to a Peace and Reconciliation; but that this
Treaty being in appearance very difficult, by reason of the Considerations at
Rome, and of the extraordinary power of the Spaniards, he believed the
intercession, counsel, The King desires Ferdinando de Medici, Grand Duke of
Thuscany, to use his endeavors also with the Pope, and the College of
Cardinals, in favor of his business.
authority, and endeavors of that Republic would serve as a Pole Star in so
important a business. He found the Ambassador ready to give notice of it at
Venice, who knowing the good intentions of the Senate toward the conservation
of the Kingdom, assured him, that he should have all manner of assistance he
could desire. The same did he cause to be treated of with the Grand Duke, by
Girolamo Gondi, requesting him not only to use his endeavors with the Pope,
(wherein he more esteemed the power of the Venetian Senate) but also to deal
with the Cardinals, to the end, that the business coming into debate, it might
be crossed as little as was possible.

These Foundations being laid, he solicited Monsieur de Villeroy's coming; for
he designed to set things right with the Duke of Mayenne in such manner, that
he also might favor his affairs in the Court of Rome, since his reconciliation
with the Apostolic See coming to pass, the scruple of Religion would be taken
away, and the Duke of Mayenne might with his honor embrace those large
advantageous offers which he would make him. But the Duke, who had taken a
distrust by reason of the trick put upon him by du Plessis, and who hoped to
settle his own affairs with the Spaniards, suffered the Treaty to run on, that
he might make use of it for his own profit, but without any desire to conclude,
those thoughts being again revived in his mind, which despair had before
disordered and destroyed. Wherefore, though Villeroy went to Rouen to him, and
afterward had a conference with the King himself by night at Gisors, yet went
they not on to treat of any conditions; but the Duke consented, that the King
should send to Rome, leaving the Treaty to go on, and be concluded when the
business was settled with the Pope; and the King was content that the Duke
should assemble the States of his party, to treat with them concerning the
present resolution.

The Spaniards had never intermitted to press for the assembling of the States,
and jointly with the Cardinal Legate, had made both public and private
instances about it, and the Duke had always interposed difficulties and delays;
sometimes alleging the urgency of following the management of the War;
sometimes saying, it was fit first to treat and conclude with the Princes of
the party; and sometimes the difficulties of assembling the Deputies, because
of the general combustion of the War, by reason whereof they would very
unwillingly forsake their own Houses and Cities in the present distractions,
and that they would not venture to take so great journeys with the danger of
their lives; but at last his backwardness was ascribed to an irregular
ambition, and to a desire of continuing in the power he held at that present;
neither could he without grievous complaints, nor without danger of discord and
disunion refuse any longer to call the Assembly; wherefore turning his thought
to remove that scandal, from whence arose all the discontents with the Spanish
Ministers, he considered, that as to deny the meeting was dangerous, and now at
length odious to every one, so the difficulties that would spring up, and those
which he would artificially interpose, should be so many, that the States
should dissolve and end of themselves, without coming to any determination* and
in the mean time, they might afford him convenience and opportunity either to
revive his authority, or else to find means of reconciliation with the King, if
so be he could not bring to pass, The Duke of Mayenne, who had still deferred
the Convocation of the States, writes to the Cardinal Legate, and to the Duke of
Parma, that the time of assembling them was now present.
that the Kingdom should fall to his posterity: Wherefore, as the Spaniards did
now show a desire to satisfy and honor him, and the same did the Legate by
Commission from Rome; so he showing, that he would grant that in courtesy,
which he would not yield to for fear, nor for threatenings, wrote to the Legate,
and to the Duke of Parma, that now the time to assemble the States was ripe, he
would give satisfaction to the Princes who had solicited him with so much
earnestness, and would come at last to a resolution; and therefore they should
endeavor to get Commissions from Rome and Spain, because within a few months
the Deputies should be convened; for which effect, he dispatched Letters to
every Province, and every Bailiage, to the end they might choose Deputies to
meet in the place that should be appointed for the holding of the
States General.

At the same time, Cardinal Gondi and the Marquess de Pisani are chosen to be
sent to Rome.
the King had caused Cardinal Gondi to treat concerning his passage into Italy,
and had required the Catholics of his party, to appoint an Ambassador to the
Pope, which though some opposed, alleging, That the Parliament had decreed
that for the time to come, none should send to Rome upon any emergent occasion,
yet the King answered, That the Decree was made in the Papacy of Gregory the
Fourteenth, but that he granted leave to send to the present Pope; so the
Marquess of Pisani was chosen, and Cardinal Gondi was contented to take that
journey to satisfy the King, and to procure the general repose of the Kingdom.

This determination did in great part stop the resolution of the Catholics,
The Decree of the Parliaments of Tours and Chalons, that none should run to
Rome for the procuring of Benefices.
who were attentive to see what that Embassy would produce, being partly
satisfied in that the King began already to treat of reconciling himself to the
Pope and the Apostolic See. The Decree which the King made about this time
concerning the disposing of the Benefices of the Kingdom, did help much to
appease them; for after that the Parliaments of Tours and Chalons had decreed,
that for the conferring and confirmation of them, none should go any more to
Rome; and after that the Congregation of the same Prelates had made the
Declaration in favor of the King, those Benefices that became void, were
disposed of to all kind of persons without regard, in reward of their expenses,
in requital of their labors, and for particular inclination; and the
administration of Spiritual Matters was by the Grand Council, assigned to one
of the Priests of the Diocese, with title of Spiritual Oeconome: Which was not
only against the Decrees of the Cannons, but scandalous and dangerous, contrary
to the good of the people, and very near the custom of the Hugonots. Renaud de
Beaune Archbishop of Bourges, The pretensions of R^n^ud de B^aune, Archbishop
of B^urges, upon the Spiritual Superiority of the Galliae.
a man of exceeding great learning and singular eloquence, had thought, that he
having the name of Patriarch, (that title they use to give to the Archbishop of
that City) it was very easy, and no less reasonable, that the authority of
disposing the Benefices of the Kingdom should be conferred upon him, as
Spiritual Superior of the Galliae, and that he should hold that degree
thorowout all France, which the Pope holds over the Universal Church; and as
this thought had long been nourished in his mind, so had he attempted all those
means which he thought proper to effect his design; to this end, at his
exhortation, the Popes Bulls had been so sharply handled; to this end, those
that represented the Apostolic See had been so hotly proceeded against; and to
this end, the disorder in conferring of Benefices being now represented, and
the abuse of those Oeconomes chosen by the great Council, (a Temporal
Magistracy whom it concerned not to judge of Spiritual sufficiency) it was
endeavored in that heat of men's minds, that a resolution might be taken, and
that a Prelate might be constituted in the Galliae, Superior to all the rest
in power and dignity, to whom that election should be committed. But the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and the other Catholic Lords, exclaiming that this was an
express way to alienate themselves from the Apostolic See, to make the Kingdom
Schismatical, and for ever to cut off all hopes of an Accommodation; that they
would never endure it, and that as soon as ever that Decree should be made,
they would take some course to secure their own affairs: The King declared
publicly, That he would not take away the obedience from the Apostolic See,
and that if (not to foment the evil) it had been decreed, That Money should not
be carried to Rome, to the end, War might not be made upon the Kingdom with its
own blood and substance, that had been established by way of provision, as long
as the Popes should persist to oppose the lawful Successors of the Crown: A
Decree made by Henry the Fourth, in favor of the Ecclesiastical Dignities, and
of the Catholic Religion.
That he did not intend, nor mean, there should be any innovation; but to
maintain Ecclesiastical Matters, and the Religion and Privileges of the
Gallique Church, in the same being he had found them at his coming to the
Crown: And finally, he caused the Council to decree, That the Bishops every one
in his own Diocese should create the Administrators of Spiritual Matters, and
that where the Bishoprics were vacant, the Metropolitan should supply that
defect; and for want of him, the nearest Bishop; which did exceedingly quiet
the minds of the Catholics, and did also for some time stop their resolutions.

The Duke of Mayenne besieges Ponteau de Mer.
In this interim Matters of War went not on more slowly than the Councils and
Treaties of Peace; for the Duke of Mayenne, being cured of his indisposition at
Rouen, was come forth with part of his Forces to lay siege to Ponteau de Mer, a
place, which because it was near, did incommodate and straiten the Commerce of
that City; and on the other side, The Sieur de Villars goes to besiege
Quilleboeuf, a Fort not yet brought to perfection.
Monsieur de Villars was likewise gone to besiege the new Fortress of
Quilleboeuf, to open totally the passage and navigation of the Seine, being
displeased (besides the impediment and inconvenience of it) that the Hollanders
and English should nest themselves in that place, very opportune to receive
their Ships, and seated in the midst between his Governments of Havre de Grace
and Rouen, molesting and endamaging both of them.

The King, who was yet in the confines of Normandy, dispatched Colonel Grillon
thither with one thousand and five hundred French Foot, and the Sieur de
Bouquetaut with an hundred Gentlemen of that Country, desiring no less to keep
that place, than his Enemies did to drive them out of it. The Fortifications of
it were yet imperfect: for though the Holland-Fleet had wrought diligently at
them, yet the time had not served to bring them to perfection; so that the
Bulwarks were not faced with Stone, and the Ramparts not only of simple Earth
not well settled, but were hardly above a man's height, though they were most
skilfully drawn out, and diligently designed by expert Artists.

Villars presently planted five Pieces of Cannon to batter an Half Moon, which
defended the Gate that stood toward the Land; and having got together a great
number of Country People, who followed his name voluntarily through the whole
Country, he approached with a Trench, and began to sap in such manner, that he
got under the Half Moon, and brought it into such a condition, that it was
easy to be assaulted. The besiegers fell on exceeding fiercely at the first;
but the number of the Defendents was so great, that the resistance proved no
less fierce within: and the assault being renewed the next day, Grillon having
left the charge of the defense to Colonel Rebours, and to the Sieur de Bellebat
Governor of the place, sallied out so furiously on the other side with
Bouquetaut, that having found no resistance in the Trench, he did a great deal
of mischief, destroyed part of the Redoubts, nailed two Pieces of Artillery;
and if Villars his Cavalry, with Captain Borosey, and Captain Perdriel being
alighted from their horses, had not run unto the danger, the Trenches would
have been utterly taken, and the Infantry defeated: The Sieur de Villars is
forced to rise from Quill^boeuf.
so Grillon after many hours being got in again with much ado, Monsieur de
Villars knowing the weakness of his Forces, and despairing of doing any good,
raised the siege the next day, and returned to Rouen. Matteucci was the
principal cause of this disorder: for if he had not dismissed the Swissers,
there would have been such a Body of an Army before Quilleboeuf, that perhaps
the siege would have ended another way.

The Duke of Mayenne had better success at Ponteau de Mer: The Duke of Mayenne
taken Ponteau de Mer
for having laid siege unto it, and fortified his Trenches well with Redoubts
equally distant, he secured the weakness of his Forces in such manner, that the
Artillery being planted, and having begun to batter, the Governor, who had not
so great a strength as those of Quilleboeuf, took a resolution to surrender,
saving their goods and persons; and on that side the passage remained free to
bring Victual into Rouen.

In this time the Duke of Parma, not only troubled with his wound, The Duke of
Parma goes into Flanders to the ^aths of Spaw, to be cured of the Dropsy.
but also with another wonted indisposition, by which he was going apace into a
Dropsy, resolved to go to the Baths of Spaw in Flanders, and to carry back
with him the greater part of the Army, to provide for the affairs of those
Countries, and particularly of Friseland, where the States of Holland daily
made great progress. Yet he left six hundred Foot more than ordinary in Paris,
being entreated so to do (against the Duke of Mayenne's will) by the Legate and
the Spanish Ministers, and three thousand Foot more, Italians and Walloons,
with six hundred Horse, which were to assist in the quarters about Paris, at
Soissons and in Champagne; the Command of which (though the Duke of Guise
aspired to it, and sued for it very earnestly) he gave to the Sieur de Rosne,
with the title of Camp-Master-General, and with order expressly to obey the Duke
of Mayenne, being resolved at this time to give him all possible satisfactions
that might keep him firm to the party, and alienate him from all practices of
Peace.

With these Forces and those of the Province, Monsieur de Rosney went before
Espern^y, a Town seven leagues from Chalons, of a moderate circuit, but of an
ancient form, and in the condition it then was, not fit to make resistance
against any reasonable siege; thinking that it being taken, he might, by
filling it with men, much straiten and incommodate Chalons, where the
Parliament resided, with a greater number of persons, especially that Town
being situate upon the current of the River Marne. Monsieur de Rosne takes
Espernay.
The siege was short: For being violently battered, and a great breach being
made in the Walls, which were very old, and fell without much trouble, the
Sieur de St. Estienne, who had not a Garrison sufficient to defend the weakness
of the place, yielded it up without staying for the last experiments.

The King, who having left Normandy was come to the confines of that Province,
not having had time to relieve that place, as soon as he knew it was taken,
resolved, that he would recover it, more to show that he regarded the
conveniences of the Parliament, than for any other respect: Wherefore having
sent the Duke of Nevers, and the Marshall de Byron before, he, according to
his custom, The King sends his Forces to recover Espernay.
running at large over the neighboring places, came even to the Walls of
Chalons. The Sieur de Rosne had with wonderful great diligence made up the
Walls that had been broken down by the late Battery, and had carefully caused
Trenches and Ravelines to be made, considering well that the King would set
himself without delay to recover what was lost. There were in the Town six
hundred French Foot, and as many Walloons of the Count de Bossu's Tertia, and
about sixty Horse, many small Pieces of Artillery, and a convenient quantity of
Ammunition; and the Country people of those quarters being gathered together,
labored continually to better the Works. The Kings Infantry came before the
Town upon the Six and twentieth of July; and being suddenly quartered, the
Marshall de Byron would needs advance with twenty Horse to view the situation,
The Marshall de Byron, a Commander of great valor, is killed with a
Cannon-shot, July 26. in the Sixty fifth year of his age.
and the Works which the Enemy had made for their defense: But he was scarcely
come upon the way that leads to the Town upon the South Side, when a
Cannon-shot (among many which the defendents fired at random) taking him at the
rebound in the midst of his body shattered him in such manner, that without
speaking one word, he fell suddenly from his horse dead upon the ground. The
loss of this Commander was unspeakable: for all the Kings affairs depended upon
his prudence, experience, discipline and valor; and not only the charge of the
Armies rested wholly upon his shoulders, but matters of Government, counsels of
State, Treaties with Princes, and the particular affairs of the Kingdom, were
all ordered by his advice, in such manner, that those who were partial to him,
attributed all that had succeeded prosperously, either in War or in other
affairs, to his endeavors; and those that flattered him more boldly, publicly
called him The King's Foster-father. And truly it cannot be denied by whosoever
was present at those affairs that happened successively from the Kings coming
to the Crown, to the time of Byron's death, (which were the most difficult,
most important, and, as a man may say, the Foundations of his Reign) but that
in the prudence and vigilance of this man, consisted all the life and spirit,
not only of counsels, but also of enterprises and action. But yet those that
emulated him, forbore not to attribute many disorders to his fault; and
particularly, that not desiring for his own ends, that discords should be
quieted, but that the Wars should continue, because, while they lasted, he
governed the Kings mind, and all the affairs of the Kingdom, and not stirring
much for matters of Religion, (for which from his youth he had showed himself
to care but little) he was the occasion that not only the Civil Wars continued,
with so great a both public and private ruin, but that the King with arts and
promises deferred the so necessary effect of his Conversion. He was slain in
the beginning of the sixty and fifth year of his age, being entire in mind,
strong in body, full of careful diligence, and indefatigable in Military
exercises.

After his death, the whole charge of the Army remaining to the Duke of Nevers,
the siege of that Town began to be set in order; and the King having received
the news of what had happened, The King wept ^or the Marshall de By^on.
after he had spent many hours in tears and public condolings, with great
celerity moved to return to the Camp. There were also three hundred
Walloon-Foot of Berlotte's Tertia come from Rheimes to enter into the Town, for
the relief of the besieged, the conservation of that place seeming to be of
great concernment to the Confederates. These marching that way, and being
already near their entrance, were overtaken by the Baron de Byron, who, to
revenge his Fathers death, had set forward to the Camp before all the rest; and
not willing to pretermit that occasion of cutting those Foot in pieces which he
found in the field without any convoy of Horse, ran furiously to assault them.
The Foot were not at all dismayed, being part of them Pike-men, and the rest
Musketeers and Firelocks; and getting into a hollow way, shut up on both sides
by two high Banks of Earth, as it were by two Ramparts, made an halt, and
facing about, fiercely received the charge of the Horse with their Pikes, and
in the mean time their Companions mingled among them with their shot, failed
not to fire incessantly upon them; so that two Captains of Horse, and many
Gentlemen being killed, it seemed very difficult to force them: Monsieur de St.
Luc came up with another Squadron of the Kings Cavalry, which marched toward
the Camp, who thinking it a great shame that so few Foot should make resistance
in the field, rushed forward to make the same attempt; but being received with
the same constancy, he was repulsed no less than the others: And much worse did
it happen to Monsieur de Giury, who came up last with the Light Horse; for
going to make the same charge, he left his own Lieutenant dead upon the place,
with above sixty of his men; so that the Foot being no longer molested with the
Cavalry, came out of the hollow way, and went up an Hill all full of Vines;
from whence, without delay, they were to march down to the Moat of the Town
toward the West corner: But in this time, the King himself coming coming up
with the rest of his Forces, and seeing the affront his Horse received from so
small a party of Foot, ran forward gallopping to the very edge of the Moat; and
though the Town ceased not to play both with their Artillery and Muskets, yet
passing swiftly by, he went to charge the Foot, who being come down from the
Hill, were already gotten into the Plain, whereby their way being so cut off,
that they could not get under the Walls, they were surrounded on every side,
and after a long and valiant resistance, were at last cut in pieces, though
with the loss of above two hundred of the Kings side, and above two hundred
more wounded.

The same day he straightened the siege on all sides, and without losing time,
began to hasten the taking of the place; and because the besieged had labored
all those days that were past to fill their Moat with Water, that they might
gain more time to bring their Works to perfection, he employed his first study
to divert the Water another way, which spent three days time; but the passage
was no sooner opened to drain the Moat, when the Baron de Byron, impatient to
stay for the effect of the Artillery, The Baron de Byron, to revenge the death
of his Father, scales a great Tower at Espernay. and takes it, but is sorely
wounded.
which nevertheless were planting by the industry of Monsieur de St. Luc, gave
a scalado to a great Tower, newly made defensible by those within, and being
come up close together, so that they fought only with their Swords, he renewed
the assault so obstinately, twice or thrice, that at last he carried it with
great slaughter on both sides; but whilst in lodging his men there, the Earth
was throwing up to shelter them from the Town, he was sore wounded with a shot
in the shoulder. That Tower, and the other defenses being taken one after
another, the Artillery having made an open breach in the old Wall, Espernay
yields it self, with condition to leave their colors, which were much
desired by the King, because there were some Spanish Ensigns among them.
the defendents began to remember that they had not sufficient Forces to
sustain the assault; and therefore having sent to capitulate the second day,
they concluded to march out free with their Baggage, but to leave their
Colors, which the King by all means would have, in respect of the Spanish
Ensigns of the Count de Bossu, which for reputation the King desired to have in
his power. The Town was delivered up into the hand of the Duke of Nevers,
Governor of that Province, upon the Ninth day of August.

From Espernay the Army went to take in Provins, a City of Brie; which for the
unequalness of the situation, and the greatness of its circuit, was not very
defensible, being full of Gardens and Vineyards, very thinly peopled, and very
ill provided of Soldiers; and yet things proceeding slowly, and the siege not
pressing, all the rest of the month was spent about it, and it came not into
the Kings power before the second of September.

The next thing that lay fit for the Army to besiege, was Meaux; whereof, as
being nearer to Paris, and opportune to straiten that City, not only the
Parisians were exceeding jealous, but even the Duke of Mayenne himself, who
being come to Beauvais, dispatched the Sieur de Vitry thither with Eight
hundred Foot, and Three hundred Horse, who together with the Sieur de Rantilly,
Governor of the Town, and with the ordinary Garrison, labored in such manner,
that it was made very defensible; which the King considering, and judging, that
the taking of it would be difficult, and a work of time, resolved (passing
beyond Meaux along the bank of the River Marne, which leads to Paris) to raise
a Fort in the middle of the River, in an Island called Gournay, to the end,
that standing between both, it might hinder their commerce and the navigation
of the River, whereby without loss of time in besieging Meaux, he might reap
the same, or perhaps greater fruit. This was the thought of the Duke of Nevers,
who having had the care of executing it, applied himself to it so diligently,
that within a few days the work began to rise apace, the Fortification being
made in the likeness of a Star with five acute Angles, and an high Platform
raised in the midst. The King with his whole Army was quartered upon the Bank
of the River, where forcing the Peasants of all that Country round about, and
making his Foot Soldiers work by Companies in their turns, he endeavored to
have the Fort made defensible.

On the other side, the Parisians anxious because of that impediment, which
would bring them into a worse condition for matter of victual, and increase
that dearth to extremity wherewith the City was already much afflicted, ceased
not to stir up the Duke of Mayenne to oppose the raising of that Fort, so
prejudicial to the common interests; nor did the Duke desire less than they, to
be able to oppose it; but the small Forces he had with him constrained him to
proceed slowly: For it was necessary first to stay till the neighboring
Garrisons were drawn together; and after they were met, the Count de Colalto's
Germans, who were many Pays behind, mutinied against him, and without them he
could not move with any hope of good success. The Germans at last were quieted,
a certain sum of money being paid them; but in the mean time, many days were
past, whereby the Duke of Nevers had so much the more leisure to bring the Fort
into a posture of defense; and so much the more difficult became the attempt of
hindering it; and yet the Duke advanced on the other side of the River,
intending to fight and to possess an Abbey, which standing over the River, he
might afterward batter the Fort from thence as from a Cavalier; but the Sieur
de Praslin, and the Count de Brienne, being in it with a very great number,
both of Horse and Foot, they skirmished hotly for the space of two whole days
together, before the Duke could seat himself in a convenient place to oppugn
it, and as soon as the Artillery was brought and planted, the King appeared
(who had been indisposed some days at St. Denis) at whose coming a Bridge of
Boats being put over, the Garrison in the Abbey was so reinforced, that those
that defended it, were not content to sally fiercely every hour to skirmish
with the Army of the League, but had also lodged themselves with many trenches
in the field, and with them had brought themselves even under the Dukes
Redoubts, and to the same Post where the Artillery were placed; wherefore it
appearing not only difficult, but in a manner altogether impossible to gain the
Abbey defended by so numerous a Garrison, and relieved, and sustained from the
Kings Camp by the convenience of the Bridge of Boats, the Duke not persisting
obstinately, retired to quarter in the Village of Conde, there to expect the
Sieur de Rosne, and Colonel St. Paul, whom he had sent for with the Foreign
Forces, and with those of the Province of Champagne, judging it impossible to
oppose the Kings Army, if his own were not much increased by the arrival of
those Supplies; but having expected them in vain, from the 16. till the 22 of
September, he retired at last to Meaux, without being able to hinder the
perfecting of the Fort; from whence (that he might not lose his time
unprofitably, and that he might give some ease to the afflicted Parisians) he
went after not many days to besiege Crespy, a place of the County of Valois,
and having taken it without more dispute, he made the passage more easy and
more secure for some quantity of victual, which might be carried into Paris
from that fertile Country round about.

While the Heads of the Parties entertain themselves with these petty actions,
one to straiten the City, the other to enlarge it from want of provisions, the
Treaties of each side went on with more heat than matters of War. The Kings
mind was intent upon the affairs of Rome, having from the Popes Equity and
Prudence conceived great hope^ that he might reconcile himself to the Church;
The King desires a reconciliation with the Catholic Church, by way of
Agreement, not by way of Pardon
but he wished rather, that the business should pass by way of Composition and
Agreement, than by means of Humiliation and Pardon; and therefore desired, That
the Venetian Senate and the great Duke of Thuscany should interpose as
Mediators, to negotiate that Reconciliation with the Apostolic See: The treaty
whereof standing thus in suspense, withheld the minds of the Catholics, till
the end were seen, and did not alienate the Hugonots, who were not yet sure
that the agreement would be effected, but were rather full of a reasonable
hope, that that manner of treating at Rome would not bring forth any fruit at
all. Cardinal Gondi having conferred with the King in his passage, and having
with his pasport taken his voyage through the places that were of his party, had
made some stay at Florence, desiring that some of the Cardinals might first be
gained by the Great Duke.

The Marquess de Pisany took his journey at the same time, and having passed
the Alps, was come to Desenzano upon the lake of Garda, a place belonging to
the Republic of Venice, to procure that the Senate, by means of their
Ambassador, might first break the y^e in introducing the Treaty with the Pope.
But these attempts were yet very unseasonable: for the things that were still
acted in France by the Kings Council and the Parliaments of Tours and Chalons,
(where they had damned the Popes Bulls, and the Commission given concerning the
Legation of the Cardinal of Piacenza, and many other Declarations of suchlike
nature) gave small sign of the Kings Repentance and Conversion, and had put the
Pope as it were in a necessity of protecting the League, and of resenting those
injurious demonstrations which had been attempted against him with so little
respect, as well for the security of Religion, as for the reputation of his own
person: nor could he yet secure himself that the King, who for the time past
had been so obstinate in his belief, could so all of a sudden sincerely turn
Catholic; but he doubted that it was a mere fiction, to establish himself in
the Kingdom; and therefore he judged it to be his office, Causes that make the
Pope backward in determining about the affairs of the Crown of France.
by length of time, and by many Arguments and Conjectures, to make himself
certain of his inward Conversion, that he might not complete the destruction of
Religion by a precipitate determination, and such a one as was little seemly
for the dignity of his Person, and that opinion the World had conceived of him.
To this was added the power of the Spaniard, who possessed the greater part of
the Cardinals; the obligation the Pope himself had to that party, which had
brought him to the Papacy: whereupon he was necessitated to carry himself very
dexterously with them: the humor of that Court, which cannot endure those
things that seem to it prejudicial to the Ecclesiastical authority, and to the
Majesty of the Church, and besides these, the Kings misfortunes before Rouen,
which were then fresh, and divulged with the additions of same, made the Treaty
unproper, and by no means opportune at that present. And the Duke of Mayenne,
who had given Villeroy some liberty to favor the Kings Conversion with the
Pope, thinking it as lawful for him to deceive his Enemy, The Duke of Mayenne
gives Villeroy liberty to favor the Kings Conversion at Rome, and at the same
time opposes it with all his power.
as it had been lawful for his Enemy to break his word with him, and to divulge
the secret of those Treaties that had passed in confidence of privacy, being
now more than ever entered again upon his old design by the means of Des Ports
and the Bishop of Lisieux, his Agents in that Court, he did both by deeds and
words, to his power, oppose those things that were treated in favor of that
Conversion. Wherefore the Pope being resolved not to give any scandal
concerning himself in the beginning of his Papacy; and not finding things in
such a condition, that with the security of Religion, and the decency of the
Apostolic See, he might lend an ear to what was propounded, Pope Cl^m. 8.
gives notice to Cardinal Gondi and to the Marquess de Pisans, that they should
not enter into the Ecclesiastical State.
having showed his reasons to the Venetian and Florentine Ambassadors, he wrote
unto the Legate to give the Cardinal of Gondi notice that he should not stir out
of France: which Commission being arrived late, found him already departed:
whereupon, having afterward heard that he had past the mountains, he
dispatched Father Alessandro Franceschi of the Order of Preachers, his
Chaplain, to meet him, and to forbid him in his name to come any further; for
he was resolved, he being a malignant Cardinal, and an adherent to Heretics,
neither to see him, nor hearken unto him: and by the means of his Nuncio
residing in Venice, he caused the Marquess of Pisani to be resolutely
advertised, that he being suspected of Heresy, having followed and fought for
an Heretic, should by no means enter into the State of the Church; for if he
did, he should be forced to proceed against him. The Cardinal, who was at
Ambrogiana, a place of the Grand Duke's near Florence, Cardinal Gondi sends his
Secretary to Rome, to excuse himself to the Pope.
not at all dismayed at the Popes so resolute advertisement, desired the Friar
to give it him at length in writing, and with him dispatched his Secretary to
Rome, to clear himself of those things that were objected against him: He
showed that from the beginning he had not been willing to subscribe unto the
League as he had been desired, because, being an eyewitness, he saw, and by
long practice in the customs of France, knew that Union was not set on foot by
true zeal and sincere affection to Religion, but to palliate the ambition of
the Great Ones, and to cover the interests of State, which it was not fit for
him, being a Clergyman, to give his assent unto, nor to make himself minister
of other men's passions and affections: That he had made his excuse about it to
Pope Sixtus Quintus, who being made acquainted with the truth, had taken his
determination in good part: That if he had treated with the King of Navarre
during the siege of Paris, to free the City from the extreme misery of hunger,
he had done it with the consent and leave of the Apostolic Legate: That if he
at that present had treated personally with the King himself, he had done it
that he might not put himself in danger of being made a prisoner in his
journey, and of being obliged afterward, to the disreputation of his quality,
to meet and treat with him by force: That he had obeyed the intimation which
the Legate Sega had sent after him to the confines of Lorain; for he had given
him notice, that if he meant to treat any thing in favor of Heretics, or of
the King of Navarre, he should not come to Rome; whereupon, he having no such
intention, had continued his journey: That he marvelled the Pope should refuse
him leave to come and prostrate himself at his feet, to render him due
obedience; where, if he were guilty, he might not only reprehend, but also
punish him: That he was ready to give a particular true account of his actions;
and if he were found in a fault, he refused not to undergo such chastisement as
he deserved: That his intention was to come to Rome, to make the Pope
acquainted with the calamities and miseries of France, which perchance were not
sincerely represented to him: That as a Prelat and Bishop of France, and as a
Cardinal, he came to let him know, there were above forty Bishoprics vacant,
the revenues whereof were enjoyed by Women, Courtiers, Soldiers, and persons
far from the Episcopal profession; and that in the mean time, the poor Souls
were dispersed without a Pastor: That he thought himself obliged to represent
unto him, that the Curates of Parishes, Priests and other Clergymen, having
abandoned their proper Function and the care of Souls, were busied in bloodying
their hands, and living in the profession of Arms: That he should feel his
Conscience burdened, The unhappy condition of Ecclesiastical affairs in the
Kingdom of France.
if he did not let him know the danger so noble, so great a Kingdom was in, of
becoming schismatical, unless some course were taken for the safety and union
of it: That this seemed to him to be the duty of a good Christian and a good
Catholic, not of an Heretic, nor of a favourer and promoter of Heresies: That
if his Holiness had been pleased to hear his opinions concerning the discords
and calamities of France, he would have told them, and submitted them to his
most grave and prudent judgment; and if he would have imposed him silence, he
would have held his peace, since for his part, when his Conscience was once
discharged, he intended not to pass any further.

These reasons boldly proposed by the Secretary, who was brought in by the
Florentine Ambassador, made a deep impression in the Pope, who having from this
man, and from the discourses of the Venetian Ambassador, comprehended many
particulars, was confirmed in his opinion, either with the full consent of
every one, to raise one of the Princes of the Blood unto the Crown, or else
that perhaps one day he might with the honor of the Apostolic See, and the
restoration of all the Orders of France, see the King of Navarre reconciled
sincerely to the Church, and all the discords of the Kingdom composed in that
point. But because this hope was yet weak and obscure in the uncertainty of the
future, nor did he think it fit either to precipitate the natural course of
things, or utterly to forsake the League, (which, if for nothing else, served
at least for a spur and necessary instrument of the Kings Conversion) he
resolved to persist yet in that manner of appearance he had begun, in the mean
time dexterously and with convenient patience promoted the secret of his
thoughts. Therefore, though in a short writing to the Cardinal of P^a^enza
divulged in print, he declared that he desired a Catholic King and an Enemy to
Heresy should be elected, and that he abhorred that one who still persevered
in his errors should be admitted to the possession of the Crown, and therefore
made show to consent also to the assembling of the States, to come in the end
to a good and wholesome election; yet he dispatched his Nephew the Pronotary
Agucchi to the Legate himself, The Pope sends Monsignor Agucchi to Cardinal Sega
Legate in France with pr^dent Instructions concerning the affairs of that
Kingdom.
giving him secret advice to carry himself very dexterously and very
cautiously, and not to suffer that in the Assembly of the States, Votes should
either be forced or corrupted, but that men's wills should be free, and their
voices not interessed: That he should not permit the election of a King, who
was more like to kindle discords, than to put an end to the War: That he should
endeavor no wrong might be done to any one: That that course should be taken,
which by the most easy, most secure way, and with the least novelty that could
be possible, might produce Peace; and that he should not be over-scrupulous,
but yield what he handsomely might, to time, and the nature of affairs; and
provided Religion were secure, he should pass by many other considerations in
the order and manner of treating: Admonishing him finally, That this was a
business of so great importance, as could never be sufficiently pondered and
examined; and that therefore he should keep himself from hasty resolutions, and
from specious counsels, and that without other respect, he should aim only at
the quiet of Souls, and at the service of God. The Pope believed these
Instructions, without any further Declaration, would be sufficient to the
prudence of the Legate, to cause moderate proceedings in the States, and to make
him understand, that he should not carry the election for a Foreign King, about
whose establishment, longer and more ruinous Wars would necessarily ensue, than
ever yet had been; but that, if with the honor of the Apostolic See, and the
Security of Religion, Cardinal Sega affectionate to the Lords of the League,
and persuaded by hope, being become partial to the Spaniards, does not execute
his orders accordding to the Popes intentions.
he could either establish a King of the House of Bourbon, or compose the
discords with the King of Navarre, it would be a much better and more expedient
determination. But the Legate giving himself wholly over to the will of the
Spaniards, by whom he hoped to be raised to the dignity of being Pope, (since
the favorable endeavors of the Catholic King, being in good earnest added to
the merit of his labors, he thought himself in a condition to attain it) and
having by his long residence in France, and by conversation with the Parisians
already contracted a partiality to the League, and an enmity to the King, was
either so blinded by affection, that he could not, or so drawn by his own
designs, that he would not understand the Popes meaning, and therefore set
himself with all his power to advance the enterprises of the Spaniards.

The Duke of Mayenne interpreting the Popes manner of proceeding to be in
favor of him, applies himself to the Convocation of the States, with hope to
be chosen King of France.
But the Duke of Mayenne being by his Secretary des Ports, and by the Bishop of
Lisieux, advertised in part of the Popes moderate Commissions, judged, that his
mind inclined to favor him, and that those words of causing a Catholic King
to be elected, who might be a Defender of the Church, and an Enemy to
Heretics, but such a one as might be established with the general approbation,
without commotion or subversion, pointed at his person; and therefore firmly
hoping he should have the Popes favor, and by consequence the Legates; and that
the attempts of the Spaniards were not fomented by them, having loosened
himself from the Treaty of Peace, he turned his mind wholly upon the assembling
of the States, being intent to do it in such manner, that it might succeed to
the advantage, and secure establishment of his Affairs. For this purpose he had
with exceeding great diligence labored, that the Deputies who were selected,
might not be of those that were taken with the gold or promises of the Spanish
Ministers, but of his dependents; and where those could not be had, he at least
obtained, that they should be for the most part men of good understanding,
affectionate to their Country, and the general good, thinking, that such would
hardly condescend to a Foreign King, and one that was not of their own Blood.
The place where this Assembly of the States was to be held remained to be
resolved on; and the Spaniards, who designed at the same time when it should be
convened, to make the Duke of Parma enter into France, and draw near with the
Army to back and color the Catholic Kings pretensions, desired principally,
that it might be the City of Soissons. The Duke of Lorain proposed the City of
Rheims, (as nearest to him) from which the Spaniards did not much dissent. But
President Ieannin, and the Sieur de Villeroy counseled the Duke of Mayenne to
reduce the Assembly into the City of Paris, without having regard to the length
of the journey, the danger of the Deputies, or to the incommodiousness and
dearth of victual, to give content and satisfaction to the inhabitants thereof,
who were wonderful earnest to have it so; and had need after so many calamities
to be comforted and kept faithful: And moreover to make the Congregation of the
States more public and more famous by the quality of the place, and not to put
the Cities of Rheims or Soissons in danger; for it was considered, that the
Duke of Parma coming thither, accompanied according to his custom, with strong
Forces, might easily force the Assembly to his will, and make himself Master of
those places, which would be hard for him to obtain in Paris, as well by reason
of the greatness of it, and the number of the people, as because it was further
from the Frontiers, and all surrounded and encompassed with the Kings
Fortresses, full of strong Garrisons, which upon all occasions might be called
to hinder any violence that should be offered to the City, or to the States.
Besides this, the City was better inclined than ever it had been in former
times; for the pernicious power of the Sixteen being weakened, the Government
remained in the hands of the wonted Magistrates, elected with great care by the
Duke of Mayenne himself, and the Incendiaries not being there, they quieted the
minds of the people without those insurrections that were wont to disturb all
businesses: Moreover, the Parliament residing in the City, might serve as a fit
instrument to treat and hinder many things.

This determination did very much displease the Spanish Ministers, and they
opposed it at the first, showing the necessity of the Duke of Parma's being
there, who could not advance so far into the Kingdom, and withdraw himself so
far from the Frontiers; and arguing also, that the great number of the Deputies
would increase the dearth and necessity of the Parisians. But the objection
concerning the Duke of Parma was removed by his death; and the interests of the
Parisians was not put into consideration, for they themselves persuaded the
Spaniards to desist from interposing any hindrance, because the City esteemed
it to be for its advantage and profit, The City of Paris is appointed for the
Convocation of the States.
and much more for its honor and reputation, that so famous an Assembly should
be made in their City, they intervening and assisting in it. The Cardinal Legate
assented also to this opinion, as well not to incommodate himself with the
expense of new journeys, as because he thought by the heat of the Parisians to
bring the Assembly to make election of that King, who should be of greatest
satisfaction to the Apostolic See, and to the intentions of the King of Spain.
The Duke of Mayenne leaves the command of the Army to the Sieur de Rosne, and
goes himself to Par^^
Wherefore the Duke of Mayenne having left the Government of the Army to the
Sieur de Rosne, by him created Marshall and Governor of the Isle of France,
went to Paris with a small retinue, and there with his presence, and with his
words labored to comfort the afflicted people for the dearth of victual, and
the interruption of commerce and trading in the City, showing them, that within
a few days there would be some course taken in the Assembly of the States, and
convenient order settled totally to free the City, and ease it of its present
necessities; striving with liberal promises, and by honoring and cherishing
every one, (especially the Magistrates of the City, and the Preachers) to gain
the good will of the people, which by his late severity he feared he had wholly
lost.

It was not without great reason that the Duke of Mayenne hoped at last to
transfer the Crown upon himself and his Posterity; Causes that move the Duke of
Mayenne to hope to be chosen King of France.
for considering the present estate with due regard, it was clear, that neither
the Union of the Crowns, nor the Election of Infanta Isabella (things labored
for by the Spaniards) would ever be endured by the French, who by no kind of
interest, by no kind of practice, could ever be brought to submit themselves to
the Empire of their natural Enemies; and though some particular men, corrupted
with money, or by the expectation of places and honors, had accommodated their
gust unto it; yet the general, which was more powerful, would never have been
persuaded by any means: Wherefore these pretensions failing, and being
excluded, he thought (and reason told him so) that the Catholic King could not
concur more willingly to the election of any other than his own person; since,
if either the Duke of Lorain, or the Duke of Savoy should be elected (as the
report went) by the party that they should make, new States and power would be
added to the Crown of France, with the augmentation whereof, it was likely the
Catholic King would not be well pleased, but rather that it should decrease in
strength and greatness; he did not see that the Catholic King could expect to
draw greater fruit from his past labors and expenses, than in choosing him; who
by reason of the need he should have of him to establish himself in the
Kingdom, would be constrained by necessity to content him, and to condescend to
many things which the rest pe^haps would not so easily consent to. The same he
judged of the Pope; who, as far from interests, and full of that moderation
which he made show of, would more willingly yield to him than any other, not to
deprive him of the fruit of his so great labors, considering that he alone had
sustained the Catholic party, and the Cause of Religion, which no other,
either by authority or prudence could have been able to sustain. He saw the
French generally inclined and disposed in favor of him, by reason of his
authority in the party, whereof he had so long been the Chief; and that between
the Dignity and Office he now possessed, and the full power of King, there was
no other difference but the title, he already holding the administration of
affairs as Lieutenant of the Crown: He knew that not one of the rest of his
Family could equal himself to him, either for valor, merit, experience or
authority, and that the sole shadow of his will would confound and terrify
them all. To this was added the diligence wherewith the Deputies had been
elected to his advantage, the inclination of the Parliament, newly (by the
punishment of the Sixteen) by him restored to its being, the dependence of the
Council of State, and the art of managing this design, in which Conditions all
the rest were incomparably inferior to him.

The some conceit had the Duke of Parma, who (after that his counsel of
overcoming things with patience, and drawing matters out in length, was no
longer hearkened to in Spain) thought the election of the Duke of Mayenne more
profitable for the Catholic Kings affairs than that of any other man, because
he might be established with more facility, less charge, and more advantageous
Conditions: wherefore he writ into Spain about it, and it appeared that in the
course of the business he would have favored his affairs, either because he so
judged it profitable for King Philip as he demonstrated, or (as the other
Ministers said) because he desired not that the Spanish Monarchy should
increase to such a height, and come to the only one in Christendom, without
counterpoise or opposition. But his death, which happened upon the second day
of December, in the City of Arras, after a long painful sickness, did something
vary the state of things, as the Spaniards then said, to the advantage of the
Catholic Kings affairs; but, The Duke of Par^a's death was hurtful to the
interests of the King of Spain.
as it appeared afterward by the effects, to their notable damage: for the
reputation of his name being removed, which had already brought the humor of
the French as it were into obedience, they neither much esteemed the other
Spanish Commanders and Ministers; nor were the Ministers themselves equal to
him either in knowledge or authority; and having conceits and opinions
different from those which he prudently nourished in his mind, and wherewith he
had managed the business till then, they went on afterward with such a
precipice, that the Catholic Kings affairs took an impression very different
from what they held at that present. But the Duke of Mayenne, with the loss of
him, lost also much of his hopes; and seeing the other Ministers, particularly
Diego d' Ivarra, utterly averse from him, he began to doubt he should be forced
to take another resolution, and thought to guide his businesses with more art
and caution than he had formerly done. Nevertheless the Convocation of the
States was advanced so far, that it could no longer be deferred: and it was
necessary to assemble it, as well not to break absolutely with the Spaniards,
as to satisfy the Popes importunities; but most of all, because the Deputies
were already elected, and many of them upon their way to Paris.

These things happened Anno 1592, in which year various fortune had with diverse
accidents troubled the other Provinces of the Kingdom. Monsieur de la Valette
Governor of Provence, had in the beginning of the year laid siege to
Rochebrune, a place held in that Province by the Duke of Savoy; and after he
had in vain battered it many days, being resolved to remove his Artillery, and
plant them in another place, where he had discovered the wall to be weaker,
Monsieur de la Valette is slain with a Musket shot at the siege of R^c^ebr^ne.
and the passage to go on to the assault more easy, began new Trenches to
plant his Cannon there; about which Work whilst he labored in person to hasten
the perfecting of it, he received a Musket Shot in the head, and being carried
into his Tent, died within a few hours. A Cavalier who (having sagacity of wit,
joined to valor and undauntedness of mind) had with slender Forces,
honorably, without loss, sustained the much superior power of the Duke of
Savoy. When he was dead, Provence remaining without a Governor on the Kings
part, Monsieur Les Diguieres, who was wont to help in those necessities, left
the care of Dauphine to Colonel Ornano, and hasted thither with his usual
diligence, and having joined the Forces of that Province to his own, with
infinite expedition made himself Master of all the Towns and Castles seated
upon the banks of the River Vare, The River Vare is the confine that separates
Italy from France.
which divides Italy from France; and then having suddenly past the River, and
thrown down the Fortifications raised by the Duke, to hinder the entrance into
his Territories, he with wonderful terror to the people pillaged all the
Country to the very Walls of Nizza* and having repassed the River, The Sieur de
Les Digui^res makes great incu^sions against the Duke of Savoy
set himself with prosperous success to take in the neighboring Castles; yet
not thinking it fit to assault either Aix, Marseilles, or the principal Cities,
because he had neither Army nor preparations sufficient to undertake any of
those enterprises.

But while he stays in Provence, the Kings affairs received exceeding great
damage in Dauphine: Monsieur de Maugiron Governor of Valence for the King,
gives up the place to the Lords of the League.
for Monsieur de Maugiron Governor of Valence (whatsoever the occasion was)
agreed to put that City into the hands of the Duke of Nemours, and of his
Brother the Marquess de St. Sorlin Governor for the League in those parts;
which being executed without impediment, the Duke of Nemours, intent to follow
the prosperity of his fortune, battered and took St. Marcellin, and after that,
many other places, which being diligently fortified, had hindered the Forces of
the Leagues from joining on that side with the Duke of Savoy. Wherefore Les
Diguieres being by this diversion constrained to depart out of Provence, left
the field open to the Duke of Savoy, The Duke of Savoy recovers the places
taken by Les Diguieres, and takes Antibo.
who having past the Vare, and recovered all the places that had been taken
from him, advanced to lay siege to Antib^; which Town standing upon the Sea,
and for the famousness of the Port being very considerable, was taken by him,
though with difficulty and length of time.

But Les Diguieres being returned into Dauphine, removed him out of Provence by
diversion, as he by the means of the Duke of Nemours had been diverted before:
for having rallied an Army rather good and expert than numerous, he resolved to
pass the Alps, and carry the War into Piedmont; and having overcome Mount
Geneure, the ordinary Pass to conduct Armies on that side of the mountains, he
enlarged himself along the valley of Perosa and the Marquesate of Saluzzo, with
so much noise and terror to the people, that the Duke leaving the charge of
Provence to Count Fr^ncesco Martinengo, was forced to come to remedy the
destruction of his Country. The quality of the place steep and mountainous,
begirt with rocks and clifts, and encompassed round about with the Alps,
especially in a season when Winter in those parts was already growing on, (for
it was about the end of September) hindered the progress of Arms, and did not
suffer the Armies to encounter with all their Forces: and yet the French having
taken Perosa, and the Tower of Luserne, advanced as far as Briqueras; and
having had intelligence that the Dukes Commanders gathered part of their Army
at Vigone, resolved to assault the Camp before all their Forces were drawn
together: so having advanced by marching all night, upon the fourth of October
in the morning they suddenly assaulted the Town; where, by reason of the
difficulty of the situation, and the resistance of the defendents, the toil was
long, and the conflict dangerous; yet the Savoyards being but few, and the
place of it self but weak, they were defeated, six hundred Soldiers slain,
many Commanders taken, and ten Colors of Foot; and the French being returned
victorious to Briq^eras, began with wonderful diligence to fortify that place,
which being made defensible by the forcing all the men of those quarters to
work, they left a good Garrison in it, and advanced toward Saluzzo, (at such
time as the Duke was already come with his whole Army to Villa France) and
having no more important enterprise to attempt, applied themselves to take
Cavors, a mountainous place defended by a very strong Tower, situated just
above it: but while they with art and industry strive to get near it, and to
plant the Artillery, the Duke passing another way, marched by night to assault
Briqueras, judging that the Works not being yet finished, it would not be very
hard to get it from the Enemy; and it being taken, they remained environed in
such manner, that in the narrow Passes of that Valley they might easily be
defeated: but he found a brisker resistance than he expected; wherefore, after
a most fierce assault of four hours, he resolved to retire, knowing that the
French were so near, that it could not be long before they came to relieve
their men* which proved very true: for Monsieur Les Diguieres, leaving the
place besieged, which was but little, and might be blocked up with a few, went
with the rest of the Army whither he was guided by the noise of the shot, which
ratled aloud among the mountains: but having found the Duke was departed from
Briqueras, he resolved to follow him speedily; and having overtaken his
Reer-guard near a Village, as they were passing a certain Rivulet, assaulted it
so violently, that he disordered the last Squadrons of Cavalry. The rest of the
Army made a halt, and skirmished furiously for many hours, till being all tired
out, and the night drawing on, the Duke retreated to Vigone, and Les Diguieres
returned to Cavors, where the Tower and Castle being extremely battered, at
last surrendered; and he having overrun and pillaged those Valleys, being
hindered by the Snow and the coldness of the weather from proceeding to other
enterprises, marched back into Dauphine about the end of December.

The Duke of Espernon going into Provence recovers Antibo, and all the towns
held by the Duke of Savoy as far as the River Vare
But the Duke of Espernon was come into Provence; who having heard of his
Brothers death, and being desirous to keep that Province, the Government
whereof had been given him by King Henry the Third, in which he had substituted
the Sieur de la Valette, went thither with all his Forces, and without much
dispute recovered Antibo, and reduced into his power all the Towns as far as
the River Vare, which by reason of their weakness were a prey sometimes to the
one side, sometimes to the other; and though many in the Province, even of
those that were of the Kings party, did not follow him; yet he trusting to the
Forces he had brought, applied himself diligently to subject all the Towns to
the obedience of his Government.

Antoine Scipion, Duke of I^yeuse, lays siege to Villemu^* Fortres^ near
Montauban.
The Kings affairs went on also prosperously in the Provinces of Guascogne and
Languedoc; for Antoine Scipion, Duke of Ioyeuse, Brother to Anne, who was slain
in the Battle of Coutras, and chief Commander for the League in that Province,
having obtained many Victories, taken many places, and made his name formidable
in those quarters, had at last besieged Villemur, a Fortress not far from
Montauban, with a design as soon as he had taken it, and spoiled all the
Country about, to strengthen also Montauban it self, the secure receptacle, and
for many late years the settled standing quarter of the Hugonots. But the Duke
of Espernon passing at the same time with his Army to go into Provence, and
having stepped a little out of his way to relieve that place, Ioyeuse knowing
himself inferior in strength, arose from the siege, and went to the Towns of
his own party, till the Duke of Espernon being gone on his journey, he thought
he might opportunely venture to Villemur, and prosecute his begun design.

Monsieur de Temines enters with men into Villemur.
There were in Villemur Three hundred Foot, a very weak Garrison to sustain so
sharp a siege; wherefore Monsieur de Temines who was in Montauban, being
resolved not to suffer the besieged to perish without relief, went from thence
with Two hundred Firelocks, an hundred and twenty Cuirassiers, and a select
number of Gentlemen, by ways that were not ordinary, and through secret uneven
passages got into the place, desiring rather to labor in the defense of
Villemur, than when it was lost to be put to defend the Walls of Montauban. The
Duke of Ioyeuse having taken the Outworks, and made his approaches to the Moat,
planted Eight pieces of Cannon, and with them battered the Wall very furiously,
and not failing in any thing that was the part of a valiant diligent Commander,
being abundantly furnished from Toulouse with those things that belong unto a
siege, straightened it in such manner, that the danger was already urgent, and a
speedy resolution was necessary, either to relieve the besieged, or let them
perish: Whereupon Henry d' Anville, Duke of Momorancy, Governor for the King
in that Province, not willing to receive that affront before his own face,
gathered the Forces he had together, and having called to his assistance the
Gentry of Auvergne which were near, dispatched Monsieur de Lacques, and with
him the Sieurs de Chambaut and Montoyson, to the end, they might endeavor
either to raise the siege, or to relieve the Town with powerful assistance some
other way. These made their Rendezvous at Bellegarde; which the Duke of Ioyeuse
having heard, left his Infantry to continue the siege, and he himself with the
Cavalry, and a certain number of Firelocks, ran fiercely to assault them. The
encounter at the first was hot and furious, whereupon they of the King's side
began to be put in disorder; but Lecques having caused two Culveri^s to give
fire, as also two other lesser Pieces, which they had taken out of Montauban,
stopped the assailants in such sort, that at last they drew off without having
wrought any further effect, and the Duke of Ioyeuse returned to his quarter,
continuing the siege with so much security, and so much contempt, that he
quartered his Cavalry scatteringly in the Villages about, to the end, that in
the sterility of that Country, they might be more commodiously furnished. But
the Viscount de Gordon being come to assist them of the King's party, they
being increased in courage and in strength, (for they had One thousand eight
hundred Horse, and little less than four thousand Foot) resolved suddenly to
fall upon the Dukes Trenches, judging, that if the besieged (as they promised
themselves from the valor of Monsieur de Temines) should sally upon them on the
other side, they might easily pass through the Trenches, and put relief into
the place. With this design, The Kings Forces sent to relieve Villemur, assault
the Duke of Ioyeuse's Camp, and make themselves masters of the first Trench.
being (upon the Nineteenth of December at night) entered into a Wood, which
largely spreading it self, reaches near to Villemur, they arrived so
unexpect^^ly the next morning to assault the Duke of Ioyeuse his Camp, that
they entered the first Trenches, before those that negligently guarded them,
had time to stand to their Arms. The Duke having heard of the enemies coming,
and the flight of his Guards, sent Two hundred Harquebusiers on horseback
before, to hold the enemy in play, and giving sign by Three Cannon-shot to his
Cavalry to hasten to the Camp, stood firm with his Forces in Battalia between
the first and second Trench, to receive the assault of the Royallists, who
encouraged by the prosperity of that beginning, charged them valiantly, and
were no less fiercely received. The conflict lasted with great uncertainty of
the Victory for the space of an hour and an half; but in the mean time, While
the Royalists fight with the Leaguers with equal fortune, Temines sallies with
most of the Garrison of Villemur, and catching the Enemy in the midst, routs
them, and puts them to flight.
Monsieur de Temines with the greater part of the Garrison, sallying at the
Skitgates of the Fortress, and having drawn up a small, but a valiant Squadron,
fell upon the Rere of the Dukes main Body, which hardly made any resistance; so
that not being able to sustain the violence on both sides, the Infantry took
flight, and ran without stop, to pass over a Bridge, which for the convenience
of the Camp they had caused to be made of Boats over the River Tar: But the
Bridge being weak, and the crowd exceeding great, it broke under so great a
weight and the men upon it in a miserable confusion were all drowned. The Duke,
who being got upon a Pad-nag, had used all the endeavors of a good Commander to
stop his men, made his retreat with a few Gentlemen, still fighting till he
came to the bank of the River, where he found the Bridge already broken, and
his men drowned; whereupon, being nessitated to pass the River upon the same
Nag, he was carried away by the Water, by reason of the weakness of his Horse,
and for haste to get over, fell into the midst of the stream, and was drowned
with no less misfortune, than his Forces had perished in their flight. In the
mean time the Cavalry was got together at the warning of the three Cannon shot*
but the General being dead, and their Trenches taken every where, they
endeavored to save the relics of them that fled, and retired without
troubling the Enemy. Thus the Camp of the League being routed, with the loss of
a Thousand men, Two and twenty ^nsigns, and all their Artillery, Villemur
remained free from the siege, and the Kings Forces much superior in that
Province.

But matters proceeded very differently in Bretagne. The Prince of Conty,
Commander in chief of the Army in Poictou, and the Country of Maine, was joined
for the defense of the Kings party with the Prince of Dombes, Governor of
Bretagne, C^aon a great strong Town that held for the League, is besieged by
the Princes of C^nty and Dombes.
and they had jointly resolved to besiege Craon, a great strong Town seated
upon the Confine that divides Bretagne from the other Neighboring Provinces;
in which, there being a very great Garrison, it overran and pillaged all the
Country about. Wherefore, having gathered together all their Forces, they set
themselves about this enterprise; one on the one side, and the other on the
other side of the River, which running through the midst of the City, divides
it into two parts; but as it commonly comes to pass, that where more than one
General commands in Armies, things always go on, not only slow and coldly,
but also disorderly and confusedly, the siege very hopefully begun, was delaid
and protracted so long, that the Duke of Mercoeur had time to draw his Forces
together to relieve that place, as he much desired: For which purpose, having
sent for the Spaniards from Blavet, and gathered together all his Horse and the
Gentry of the Country, having also raised Two thousand Breton Firelocks, he
marched with speed toward Craon, at the time when the Prince of Conti having
diverted the water out of the Moat on his side, and the Prince of Dombes
battering fiercely on the other, the besieged were brought in danger of not
being able to make good the first assaults. At the Dukes advancing, the Princes
not judging it good for their Armies to be divided, with the River between
them, resolved, That the Prince of Dombes should repass the River, and join
with the Prince of Conti in the same quarter, which was done before the Enemies
arrival; but with so little circumspection, that not to deprive themselves of
the convenience of repassing the River, either through inadvertency,
carelessness, and something else, they left the Bridge standing, and very weakly
guarded, which they had made upon Boats over the River about a League below the
Town. The Royallists raise their siege at Craon, by reason of the Duke of
Mer^oeurs arrival with relief.
The Prince being past over, and the Armies reunited, they desired to free
themselves from the encumbrance of their great Artillery; wherefore having
without loss of time drawn them off from the Wall, they sent them before to
Chasteau Gontier, whither they had designed to retire, and their great shot,
which by reason of the number of them, and their haste, they could not carry
away, they buried in diverse places to hide them from the Enemy. But the Duke de
Mercoeur, who finding the Bridge entire, had speedily past the River without
resi^^^nce, marching in gallant order, advanced so quickly, that the Princes
had scarcely raised their Camp, and set the Army in Battalia to draw off, when
the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin, who led the Vanguard of the League, appeared in the
Field, and began to send forth his Light Horse toward them. Many of the most
expert Commanders, and particularly Charles of Montmorancy, Lord d' Anville,
condemned the Counsel of retiring in sight of the Enemy, arguing, that there
was no example of any such resolution, but had ever been pernicious to Armies;
it not being possible but that the one should retire with terror and disorder,
and the other advance with violence and boldness: wherefore they were of
opinion, that standing firm in the Post they held, and drawing, (if they had so
much time) a Trench before the front of the Army, they should stoutly expect
the enemies assault; and that recalling the Artillery, which was not gone very
far, they should turn furiously against them. The Prince of Dombes did in great
part assent to this advice; but the Prince of Conty, superior in authority and
years, and who commanded in chief, because he was upon the confines of his own
Government, sent to tell him that he should retire, according to the order
already appointed, because, being inferior in Force, he would not endanger
that Army and all the neighboring Countries: wherefore marching before with
the Vanguard led by Hercule de Rohan Duke of Montbason, and with the Battle
which he himself commanded, he left order that the Prince of Dombes should come
after with the Rere-guard: but he, straitened and followed at the heels by the
Enemies Cavalry (for, not only their Vanguard pressed him, but also the Duke
of Mercoeur with the whole Forces had overtaken him) was at last constrained to
stand, and facing about, to close up against* the Enemy, whose boldness he
repressed for a while, till, being surrounded with so much a greater number,
and being forsaken by his men, after he had showed all the proofs of a valiant
resolute Commander, he was fain (being in a manner left alone) to retire, The
Kings Forces desiring to make their retreat in sight of the enemy, los^ almost
all their Foot, who are cut in pieces. The Prince of Conty, without ever
turning his face, saves himself with all the Horse at Chasteau-^ ntier.
quitting the passage to the Enemy, who fiercely prosecuting the course of
their Victory, fell upon the Infantry, which retired very disorderly, by reason
of the narrowness of the ways: whereupon, without so much as making the least
show of defending themselves, they were destroyed and dissipated in a very
short space, there being an exceeding great slaughter made of them by the
Lighthorse and the Spanish Foot. The Prince of Conty, without ever turning his
face, came with his Cavalry untouched to Chasteau Gontier in the evening,
whither the Prince of Dombes came up to him a while after, with no more but
Eleven Horse. The Artillery left upon the way by those that had the charge of
conducting it, fell all into the Enemies hands; and the Gentry, as soon as they
were come safe into a place where they could not be pursued, disbanded of
themselves, and every one severally betook himself to the security of his own
house. This defeat, which happened the Three and twentieth of May, weakened the
King's Forces in those parts so much, that not only Chasteau Gontier being
quitted by the Princes who retired further into the Country, but also Maine and
Laval, with all the neighboring places, came into the power of the League. The
Prince of Conty retired into the Country of Maine, and the Prince of Dombes by
a different way went back to Rennes; and the English, wounded and disarmed, got
into the Suburbs of Vitre, leaving the possession of the field for many days
to the Duke de Mercoeur.

The Marescal d^ Aumont was already appointed by the King to be Governor of
Bretagne: for the Prince (whom from henceforth we will call Duke of
Montpensier*) had already succeeded his father in the Government of Normandy,
and for his Lieutenant had chosen Francois de Espinay Sieur de St* Luc, a man,
who, by the readiness of his wit, the ornaments of learning, and his valor in
Arms, was risen to a very high estimation; who, having gathered Forces from all
parts, and made a levy of Foot in the Country of Brouage, of which place St.
Luc was Governor, hastened their coming, because the Duke of Mercoeur having
taken the Castle of Malestroit, prepared himself to besiege Vitre, a
considerable Town, in the conservation whereof the sum of affairs consisted.
The King's Commanders having drawn their Forces together, at their first coming
besieged Main, a City more great than strong; and having gotten it upon
conditions, stood doubtful whether they should pass forward to meet the D. of
Mercoeur, or stay to attempt Rochefort, a wonderful strong place, which did
incommodate all the places thereabout, and particularly the City of Angiers. At
last, at the importunity of the people, and of the Gentlemen that followed
them, they resolved to try what they could do upon that place: but the taking
of it proved so difficult, being defended by the Sieur de St Offange, that
after Two thousand and five hundred Cannon-shot, and the loss of much time, and
the best Soldiers of the Army, the rains of Autumn falling, and the Duke of
Mercoeur's relief drawing near, they were at last constrained to rise without
having obtained their intent. But the Duke having held the Enemy in suspense,
by taking several ways, and by making show of turning, sometimes to one place,
sometimes to another, came suddenly to Quintin, whither 700 Germans were
gotten, who were under the command of the D. of Montpensier in those parts; and
having found them unprovided of those things which were requisite to make a
long defense, he forced them to yield, with express conditions to go out of the
Province, and not to serve any more against him; a thing which proved very
hurtful to the King's affairs; for he had no Foot that were more forward, more
expert, nor better disciplined than they.

The loss of the King's party was augmented by the defeat of the English who
being (as they still are wont) afflicted with grievous diseases, and brought to
a very weak estate, had obtained leave of the Duke of Montpensier to go to
Danfront in lower Normandy, to change the air, and to recover their strength by
rest: but being set upon in the way by the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin, with the
Garrisons of Laval, Craon, Fougeres, and of the near adjacent places, they were
so shattered, that of so great a number, hardly 200 remained alive.

On the contrary, the affairs of the League in Lorain went on unsuccessfully:
for, while the Duke of Bouillon, who had taken Stenay with a Petard, and
possessed some lesser places, at last went to relieve Beaumont, besieged by
Monsieur d' Amblise General for the Duke of Lorain: the Armies encountered
fiercely, and the Lorainers losing their Trenches and Artillery, were utterly
routed and dispersed: after which business, the Duke of Bouillon took Dun
suddenly, by having likewise fastened a Petard to the gate; and overrunning all
the Country without hinderance, had put the Forces of the League in very great
confusion.

In this condition of affairs began the year 1593, the general dispositions of
men's minds, as well of the one side as the other, being more inclined to the
settling of affairs, than to the management of Arms. The first novelty of this
year* was the Duke of Mayenne's Declaration, made from the December before, but
not published before the fifth of January; in which, making known his intention
in assembling the States of his party, he prayed and exhorted the Catholics
that followed the King's party to unite themselves to the same end with him,
and to take some course for the safety and peace of the Kingdom. It was of the
tenor following.

CHarles of Loraine, Duke of Mayenne, The Declaration made by the Duke of
Mayenne for the congregation of the States, published the fifth of January,
1593.
Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, To all persons present
and to come, Greeting. The inviolable and perpetual observance which this
Kingdom has had of Religion and piety, has been that, which has made it
flourish above all others in Christendom, and which has caused our Kings to
be honored with the name of Most-Christian, and First Sons of the Church; some
of them having, to obtain that so glorious Title, past the Seas, and gone as
far as the utmost bounds of the earth, with most powerful Armies, to make War
against the Infidels; and others of them, fought often against those that
sought to introduce new Sects and Errors contrary to the faith and belief of
our forefathers: in all which Expeditions, they were always accompanied by
the Nobility* who voluntarily exposed their lives and fortunes to all dangers,
to have part in that only true and solid glory of having helped to conserve
Religion in their Country, 1593.
or to establish it in places far remote, where the Name and Worship of our
Lord was not yet known: from whence not only the fame of the valor and zeal
of the whole Nation resounds in all parts, but by the example of it, other
Potentates have been stirred up to follow in the honor and danger of so worthy
enterprises, and of so laudable achievements. After this ardor, the holy
intention of our Kings, and of their Subjects, was not at all cooled nor
changed, till these last days that Heresy has been secretly introduced into
this Kingdom, and increased in such manner, by the means which every one knows,
that there is now no more need to set before our eyes, that we are at last
fallen into so lamentable a misfortune, that the Catholics themselves, whom
the Union of the Church ought inseparably to join together, have, by a new
prodigious example taken Arms against one another, and disunited themselves in
stead of joining together for the defense of their Religion: Which we judge to
be come to pass by the wicked impressions and wonted artifices Heretics have
made use of, to persuade them, that this War is not for Religion, but to
destroy and usurp the State; though we have taken Arms, being moved thereunto
by so just a grief, or rather being constrained by so great a necessity, that
the cause thereof cannot be ascribe d to any others, than the authors of the
most wicked, disloyal and pernicious counsel that was ever given to a Prince;
though the King's death happened by a blow from Heaven, and by the hand of one
man alone, without the help or knowledge of those that had but too much cause
to desire it; and notwithstanding we had made protestation that all our aim and
desire tended only to preserve the State, to follow the Laws of the Kingdom,
by acknowledging for King the Cardinal of Bourbon, the nearest and first Prince
of the Blood, declared so to be in the lifetime of the late King, by his
Letters Patent, verified in all the Parliaments, and in that quality designed
his Successor, in case he should die without male-children, which obliged us to
confer that honor upon him, and yield him all kind of obedience, fidelity, and
service, as our intention was to do, if it had pleased God to free him from the
captivity he was in: And if the King of Navarre, from whom alone he could hope
for that good, had been pleased (obliging all Catholics) to set him at
liberty, to acknowledge himself as King, and to stay till Nature had brought
his days to an end, making use of that occasion to cause himself to be
instructed, and to reconcile himself to the Holy Church, he should have found
all the Catholics united, and disposed to yield him the same obedience and
fidelity, after the death of the King his Uncle. But he persevering in his
Errors, it was not possible to do it, if he would remain under the obedience of
the Apostolic Roman Church, which had excommunicated him* and deprived him of
all the rights he could pretend to the Crown: Besides that, by so doing, we
should have broken and violated that ancient custom, so religiously kept for so
many ages, and through the succession of so many Kings, from Clouis till this
present, not to acknowledge any King in the Royal Throne, who was not a
Catholic, and Obedient Son of the Church, and who had not promised and sworn
at his Consecration, and at his receiving the Crown and Scepter, that he would
live and die in it, defend and maintain it, and extirpate Heresy with his
utmost Forces; the first Oath of our Kings, whereupon that of the obedience and
fidelity of their Subjects is grounded, and without which (so zealous they were
in Religion) they would never have acknowledged that Prince, who pretended by
the Laws, to be called unto the Crown. A Custom judged so holy and necessary
for the welfare and good of the Kingdom, by the States held at Blois in the
year 1566, when the Catholics were not yet divided in the defense of their
Religion, that it was by them held as the principal and fundamental Law of the
State, and it was established by the Kings will and authority, that two of
every Order should be deputed and sent to the K. of Navar, and the Prince of
Conde, to represent unto them from the States, the danger they put themselves
in, by forsaking the Holy Church, and to exhort them to reconcile themselves
unto it, and to denounce unto them, that in case they did not, if they should
chance to succeed unto the Crown, they should be perpetually excluded as
incapable. Nor is the Declaration which was afterward made at Rouen in the year
1588. confirmed in the Convocation of the States last held at Blois, that this
ancient Law and Custom should be inviolably observed, as a Fundamental Law of
the Kingdom, any thing else but a simple approbation of the judgment given upon
that point by the foregoing States, against which he cannot object any just
suspicion to condemn or reject their opinion and authority. So the late King
received it for a Law, and promised and swore to the observing of it in his
Church, 1592.
and upon the precious Body of our Lord; as likewise all the Deputies of the
States did in the last Assembly, not only before those inhumane murders which
made it infamous and fatal; but also afterward, when he no longer feared those
that were dead, and when he despised those that remained, whom he held for
lost, and in despair of all safety, having done it, because he knew himself to
be bound and obliged to it by right, as all superiors are to follow and
conserve the Laws, which are as the principal Pillars, or rather the
Foundations of their State. Therefore the Catholics of the Union cannot be
justly blamed, who have followed the Decrees of the holy Church, the example of
their Ancestors, and the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which do require the
profession of the Catholic Faith, as an essential and necessary quality in
that Prince that aspires to the Crown by being next of blood, because he is
King of a Kingdom which is gained to Jesus Christ by the power of the Gospel,
which it has received so many ages since, and in the form as it is Preached in
the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church.

These reasons have made us hope (though some appearance of duty retained many
Catholics with the late King) that after his death, Religion, the strongest
bond of all other to join men together, would unite them all for the defense of
that, which ought to be more dear to them than life: But against all humane
belief, we see the contrary is come to pass; for it was easy in that sudden
moment to persuade them, That we were guilty of his death, of which we never so
much as thought; That honor obliged them to assist the King of Navar, who
published, that he would revenge it, and promised them that he would turn
Catholic within six months; and being once engaged in it, the injuries which
Civil War produces, the prosperous successes which he has had, and the same
calumnies which the Heretics have continued to publish against us, are the
true causes that have kept him in it till this present, and that have given the
Heretics means to proceed so far, that Religion and the State are in manifest
danger thereby. And though we long foresaw the mischief this division would
bring, that it would be the cause of establishing* Heresy with the Blood and
Arms of the Catholics, and that this could only be hindered by our
Reconciliation, which we for this end have sought with so much earnestness; yet
has it never been in our power to attain it; so much have men's minds been
transported and possessed with passion, that they have hindered us from using
the means of our own safety. We have often caused them to be entreated, that
they would enter into conferences with us, as we offered to do with them, to
take some course in the business. We have caused to be declared, both to them,
and to the King of Navar himself, upon some proposition made for the quiet of
the Kingdom, That if leaving his error, he would reconcile himself to the
Church, to his Holiness, and to the most holy See, by a true^unfeigned
conversion, and by actions that might give testimony of his zeal toward our
Religion, we would most willingly have added our obedience, and all that is in
our power, to help to put an end to our miseries, and would have proceeded with
such candor and sincerity, that none should justly have been able to doubt, but
that such was our true intention. These overtures and Declarations have been
made at such times, when we were in greatest prosperity, and had means to
undertake greater matters, if we had had such a thought in our mind, rather
than to serve the public, and seek the general quiet. To which he answered (as
it is known to every one) that he would not be forced by his Subjects, calling
the Prayers that were made unto him to return into the Church, by the name of
force, which he ought rather to have taken in good part, and as a wholesome
admonition which represented to him his duty, to which the greatest Kings are
no less obliged, than the meanest persons of all the Earth; for when a man has
once received Christianity in the true Church (which is ours, whose authority
we will not put in doubt with any whosoever) he can no more go out of it, than
a Soldier enrolled can depart from the Fidelity which he has promised and
sworn to, without being held for a desertor and violator of the Laws of God and
the Church. He likewise added to the said Answer, That when once he should be
obeyed and acknowledged by all his Subjects, he would cause himself to be
instructed in a free general Council; as if Councils were necessary to condemn
an error so often reprobated by the Church, especially by the last Council of
Trent, as solemn and authentic as any other that has been celebrated these
many ages. And God having permitted that he should have the advantag^, after
the winning of a Battle the the same Prayer was reiterated, 1593.
not by us who were not then in a condition to do it; but by persons of honor,
desirous of the public good and repose of the Kingdom, as it happened likewise
in the siege of Paris, by Prelates of great authority, who moved by the Prayers
of the besieged, disposed themselves to go unto him to find some remedy for
their miseries. At which time, if it had been resolved, or rather, if the Holy
Ghost, without whom none can enter into his Church, had so put into his mind,
he might have caused the Catholics to hope much better of his conversion, who
justly do suspect a sudden change, and are sensible in a thing that so nearly
touches the honor of God, their lives and consciences, which can never be
secure under the dominion of Heretics. But, the hope he then was in, to subdue
Paris, and by consequence with the terror of his Arms, and the means which he
promised to himself he should find in it, to possess the rest of the Kingdom by
force, made him reject that Counsel of reconciling himself to the Church, which
might have united the Catholics, and preserved Religion. But after that the
City was freed, by the help of the Princes and Lords, of a good number of the
Gentry of the Kingdom, and of the Army of the Catholic King (who has always
with his Forces upheld this Cause (for which we are most obliged to him) sent
under the Command of the Duke of Parma, a Prince of happy memory, sufficiently
known by the reputation of his name, and of his great deserts, he ceased not
nevertheless to enter into his first hopes, because this foreign Army, as soon
as it had raised the siege, went out of the Kingdom; and he having commanded
his own party, drew together a great Army, wherewith he made himself Master of
the field, and then caused openly to be published without dissembling it, that
it was a crime for any to entreat him, or speak to him about Conversion, before
they had acknowledged him, and taken the Oath of obedience and fidelity to him;
that we were obliged to lay down our Arms, to present our selves before him so
naked, so disarmed, to beseech him, and to give him absolute power upon our
lives and fortunes, and upon Religion it self, to use it or abuse it as he
pleased, by our baseness putting it in eminent danger; whereas by the authority
and means of the holy See, the help of the Catholic King and other Potentates,
who assist and favor this cause, we have always hoped that God would be so
merciful to us, as to preserve it; who all would have had nothing more to do in
our affairs, if we had once acknowledged him; and this quarrel of Religion
would have been decided with two much advantage to Heretics, between him the
Head and Protector of Heresy, armed with our obedience, and the whole Forces
of the Kingdom; and us, who should have had nothing to resist him, but bare
weak supplications, addressed to a Prince, more desirous to hear them, than to
provide for them.

But how unjust soever this will is, and though the following of it is the true
means to ruin Religion; yet among those Catholics that assist him, many have
suffered themselves to be persuaded, that it is rebellion to oppose him, and
that we ought rather to obey his Commands, and the Laws of that temporal
policy, which he would establish anew against the ancient Laws of the Kingdom,
than the Decrees of the holy Church, and the Laws of his Predecessors, from the
succession of whom he pretends to the Crown, who never taught us to acknowledge
Heretics, but on the contrary to reject them, and make War against them, and
not to hold any to be more just and necessary than it, though it be exceeding
dangerous. Here let Mem. de la Ligne, Him*
us remember, that he himself often took Arms against our Kings, to introduce a
new Doctrine into the Kingdom: That many defamatory Books and Writings were
made and published against those that opposed it, and counseled to extinguish
the growing evil betimes, while it was yet weak: That then, he would needs have
his Arms to be believed just, because for matter of Religion and Conscience;
and that we defend an ancient Religion received into this Kingdom as soon as it
began, and with which this Crown grew till it became the first and most potent
of all Christendom; which we know very well cannot be kept pure, inviolable,
and without danger under a Heretic King, though at first, to make us lay down
our Arms, and make him absolute Master, he dissemble and promise the contrary.
Late examples, reason, and that which we find every day, ought to make us wise,
and teach us, that Subjects willingly follow the life, customs, nay and even
the Religion of their Kings, to maintain themselves in their favor, and to
have share in the Honors and Benefits which they alone can distribute; and that
after they have corrupted some with their favors, they have always means to
constrain the rest by their power and authority. We are all men, and that which
has once been accounted lawful, though it were not, shall afterward be so
again for another cause which shall appear to us no less just than the first
that made us err. Many Catholics have thought, that for some consideration
they might follow an Heretic Prince, and assist to establish him; nor has the
sight of the ruin of Churches, of Altars, and of the Monuments of their
fathers whereof many died fighting to destroy the Heresy which they maintain)
nor the present nor future danger of Religion, been able to divert them. How
much more suspected ought his Forces and adherents be to us, if he already were
established King and absolute Master? since that in such a case, every one
would be so afflicted and tired, or rather ruined with the late unhappy War,
that, provided they might but live secure in repose, and also with some hope of
reward, they would choose rather to suffer any kind of trouble, than make
opposition with danger. Some are of opinion, that in a such case all the
Catholics would unite themselves unanimously to conserve Religion, and that
therefore it would be an easy matter to interrupt the design of whosoever
should attempt Innovations. Certainly we ought to desire that happiness; but
yet we dare not hope it on such a sudden: but admit that, the fire being
extinguished, there should in one instant remain no heat in the embers; and
that, Arms being laid down, all our hatred likewise should be quite extinct;
yet it is most certain, we should not therefore be exempt from all other
passions which sometimes make us run into errors; and that the danger would
always hang over our heads, of being (in spite of us) subject to the motions
and passions of Heretics, who finding that they had the advantage of having a
King of their own Religion, which is as much as they desire, would, by force or
art, do whatsoever they had a mind to. And if the Catholics at this present
would well consider the actions that proceed from their advice, they might see
it clearly enough: for the best Cities and Fortresses that are taken, are put
into their power, and into the hands of persons who have at all times showed
themselves favorers of them. The Catholics that reside in them, are every day
accused and convicted of supposed crimes, the sole, but concealed cause thereof
being only the opposition which hitherto they have made against their designs,
which they by a false name call Rebellion. The principal Offices fall into
their hands, and it is already come even unto the Crown. The Bulls of our Lord
Gregory the Fourteenth, and Clement the Eighth, full of holy Precepts, and
fatherly admonitions given to the Catholics, to separate them from Heretics,
have not only been rejected, but with all contempt trampled upon by
Magistrates, who unjustly give themselves the name of Catholics: for if they
were such indeed, they would never abuse the simplicity of those that are so.
For to make use of the example of things done in this Kingdom, at such a time
when the business was about introducing matters that were against the liberty
and privilege of the Gallique-Church, is very different from our case, the
Kingdom never having been reduced to so great an unhappiness (since it received
the Faith) as to endure an Heretick-Prince, or to see any of that quality
pretend right unto it: and if they thought those Bulls had any difficulties in
them, they, being Catholics, ought to have proceeded by Remonstrances, and
with that respect and modesty which is due unto the Holy See, and not with so
much contempt, and so many blasphemies and impieties as they did: but perchance
they thereby intended to show those, who know how to be better Catholics, that
small reckoning is to be made of the Head of the Holy Church, to the end that
they may afterward be so much the more easily excluded. In evil, men proceed by
degrees; they always begin with that which either is not evil, or at least is
evil in a lower degree; the next day they rise higher, and at last arrive at
the top of all. Thence it is that we know God to be highly incensed against
this poor desolate Kingdom, and that he will yet punish us for our sins, since
that so many actions, which tend to the ruin of our Religion, have not been
able to bend them, nor the many and often repeated Declarations made by us
(especially within these few days) that we will refer our selves in all things
to what it should please his Holiness and the holy See to determine concerning
the King of Navarr's Conversion, if God gave him the grace to leave his errors;
which Declarations ought certainly to give undoubted testimony of our innocence
and sincerity, and justify our Arms as necessary for our own safety. Yet they
forbear not to publish, that the Princes united for the defense of Religion,
tend only to the ruin and destruction of the State; though their actions, and
the Propositions made by the common consent of them all, especially of the
greatest that assist us, be the true and most secure means to take away the
cause and means from whosoever should aspire to it. The Heretics have nothing
else to lay hold of, but the Catholic King's relief, which they complain of,
and look upon with an evil eye, and would take us to be better Frenchmen, if we
would forbear making use of it; or to say better more easy to be overcome, if
we were disarmed. To which it shall suffice us to answer them, that Religion
afflicted and put into exceeding great danger in this Kingdom, had need to find
out that support, that we are bound to publish this obligation, and to remember
it for ever; and that imploring the aid of so great a King, an Ally and
Confederate of this Crown, he has not required any thing from us; and we
likewise on our parts have not made any Treaty with any whosoever within or
without the Kingdom, in diminution of the Greatness and Majesty of the State,
for the conservation whereof we would precipitate our selves willingly into all
kind of dangers, so it were not to make an He^etick master of it; a wickedness
which we abhor, as the greatest and most abominable of all others. And if the
Catholics who assist them could but lay aside this passion, depart from
Heretics, and join themselves, not with us, but with the Cause of our
Religion, and in common seek remedies to preserve it, and to provide for the
safety of the State, we should without doubt, find the conservation of both,
and it would not be in the power of him that had an ill intention, thereby to
prejudice the State, nor to make use of so holy a Cause, as of a specious, but
unjust pretense, to gain honor and authority. We therefore beseech and conjure
them in the name of God, and of this very Church (wherein we protest we will
always live and die) to separate themselves from Heretics, and consider, that
while we are opposite to one another, we cannot take any remedy that will not be
dangerous, and such as will make this whole State suffer very much before it
can do any good at all: Whereas on the contrary, our reconciliation will make
every thing easy, and will quickly make an end of our miseries. And to the
end, that as well the Princes of the Blood, as the Officers of the Crown, and
others, may not at all be kept back or hindered from applying themselves to so
good a work, out of a doubt that they shall not be respected, acknowledged, and
honored by us, and the other Princes and Lords of this party according to
their merit; We promise upon our faith and honor, provided they separate
themselves from the Heretics, that we will do it sincerely, assuring them,
that they shall find the same respect and reverence from us and them that
follow us. But we beseech them to do it speedily, and cut the knots of so many
difficulties which cannot be disentangled, if they forsake not all things to
serve God and his holy Church, and if they lay not before their eyes, that
Religion ought to pass before all other respects and considerations, and that
prudence is no longer to be so called, when it makes us forget our first
obligation. And, to proceed with more mature advice, we give them to
understand, that we have prayed the Princes, Peers of France, Prelates, Lords,
and Deputies of the Parliaments, and of the Cities and Towns of this party,
that they would be at the City of Paris upon the Seventeenth day of the month
of January next, to choose jointly, without passion or regard of the interest of
any whosoever, the Remedy which we shall judge in Conscience to be most
profitable for the conservation of Religion and the State. To which place, if
they shall think fit to send any body to make ove^tures there, which may
conduce to so great a good, they shall find all security, shall be heard with
attention, and with a desire to content them. But if our earnest request made
unto them, that they should lend an hand to this reconciliation, and the near
and inevitable danger of the ruin of this State, have not power sufficient
over them, to excite them to have a care of the common safety, and that we be
constrained, because of our being abandoned by them, to have recourse to
extraordinary remedies against our intention and desire; We protest before God
and Men, that the blame shall be attributed to them, and not to the United
Catholics, who have labored with all their power to preserve this common
Cause with good intelligence, and agreeing minds, and with the counsel of
themselves, wherein if they would labor with good affections, the hope of a
complete quiet would be near, and we all secure that the Catholics united
together against the Heretics, their ancient enemies, (whom they have been
accustomed to overcome) would quickly see an end of the War. We also pray the
Gentlemen of the Parliaments of this Kingdom to cause these presents to be
published and registered, to the end they may be known to all, and that the
perpetual remembrance of them may remain to after times, for the discharge of
us, and of the Princes, Peers of France, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, Cities and
Corporations, who have united themselves together for the conservation of their
Religion.

With this form of Declaration, though the Duke of Mayenne strengthened his
pretensions very much, and wonderfully defended the cause of his party, yet did
he not engage himself to the election of a new King, but holding things in
equal balance, left himself a way open, that upon opportunity he might take any
resolution whatsoever time should advise, and the quality of affairs permit;
for being much diminished in his hopes by the Duke of Parma's death, by the
Union which he saw between the Legate and the Spanish Ministers, who he knew
hated his person, and by the concurrence of the Dukes of Guise and Nemours, who
were not likely to be faulty to themselves, he intended not to attempt the
election of himself, and of his posterity, except in case it should seem to him
not only that he might be able to effect it, by the number of Votes, and with
the general consent; but also, that he should have such, and so secure Forces
and Dependents, that he might not need to fear, being able to establish himself
in the possession of the Crown; otherwise he was resolved, either to settle
himself in the full authority of Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, and to
follow the War, if by the means of the States he could bring matters to pass,
that he might be able to uphold the enterprise with small foreign dependents;
or else, if he proved not able to attain to these, rather to bring the States
to agree with the King by means of his Conversion, than suffer the Kingdom to
come to any other body; still firm to his principle, of neither suffering the
Union of the Crowns, nor the disunion of the Kingdom: Which resolution of his,
full of integrity and sincerity toward his Country, did not only please many
of his party, but even the King himself (to whom it was known by many
conjectures) could not sometimes forbear commending it.

But the Cardinal-Legat and the Spanish Ministers, not well satisfied with his
so ambiguous Declaration, wherein he seemed rather to aim at an Accommodation
with the Catholics of the contrary party, than at the election of a new King,
resolved to agree together, and declare their intention perfectly; and
therefore the Cardinal-Legat published a Writing in the form of a Letter, of
the tenor follo^ing.

PHILIP by the Grace of GOD, Cardinal of Piacen^^, The Tenor of another
Declaration published by the Cardinal Legate, wherein he exhorts the Catholics
of the Kings party to forsake the Heretic, and unite themselves with the
States, to elect a Catholic King.
of the Title of St. Onofrio, Legate a Latere of our Lord, Pope Clement the
Eighth, by Divine Providence Pope, and of the Apostolic See in this Kingdom:
To all Catholics, of what preeminence, state or condition soever they be, who
follow the party of the Heretic, and adhere unto him, or favor him in any
manner whatsoever; Health, Peace, Love, and the Spirit of better counsel in him
who is the true Peace, only Wisdom, only King, only Governor, JESUS CHRIST our
Savior and Redeemer. The performance of so holy and necessary a Work as is
that which concerns the charge and dignity which it has pleased his Holiness
to give us in his Kingdom, is so dear unto us, that we should account our Blood
and Life well employed, if they could be helpful to it; and would it pleased
God, that it were permitted to us to go in person, not only from City to City,
or from Province to Province, but even from House to House, as well to give a
most ceatain proof to all the World of our Affection, which is known to God, as
by word of mouth to awaken in you a generous desire, with the singular piety of
your Ancestors, that is, with the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion* to make
that prosperous flourishing State spring up again in France, from whence
Heresy has miserably caused it to fall. But since that by reason of the
unhappiness of the times, and the impediments which are but too well known, we
cannot (as it would be the intention of his Holiness, and our desire)
communicate familiarly with you, we have thought it our duty to supply that
want with this Letter, in the best manner that is possible for us. But if you
please to accept of it, and read it with the spirit of true Christians and
Catholics, free from all passion, as it is naked from all artifice which is
averse from truth, you will excite in us a most pleasing and firm hope, of
being within a short time able to offer our presence to you in all parts of
this Kingdom, not to exhort you any more to what is fit, but to congratulate
with you for what you shall so valiantly have performed, to the consolation of
all good men. Making no doubt at all, but that if entering again into your
selves, you will take care to examine your selves as you ought, you will need
neither Word nor Letter, nor any other exterior remedy, to settle you again in
your former sanc^ity: For then every one of you will see, that from Heresy
alone, as from the Fountain of all Evils, this blindness of understanding and
dazzling of spirits is sprung up in you, which hinders you from making so sound
a judgment as you were wont, of your own and other men's actions. Then for
certain you will discover the various Artifices wherewith the Heretics
continually labor to withdraw you from the devotion and obedience, which, as
true Sons of the Church, you have so religiously yielded, till these last days,
to its chief Head and the Apostolic See, whose Name and Authority they by all
means attempt to render odious and contemptible unto you, knowing, that this
point alone, by necessary consequence, draws after it the ruin of the
Catholic Religion in France, and the establishment of their impiety, which
could not take footing where the Throne of St. Peter is reverenced as it ought
to be. And not to touch any thing here, but what is most to our purpose, What
likelihood is there to think that the Head of the Christian Church, would in
part assist or consent to the ruin and destruction of this most Christian
Crown? What good could he expect, and what misfortune ought he not to fear from
thence? Although this is the principal calumny wherewith they have labored to
make you abhor the name and holy memory of the late Popes, howbeit they swerved
not at all from the footsteps of their Predecessors, whose sollicitousness for
this Kingdom you were wont not long since with reason to commend, as also the
acknowledgment which they rendered for so many, so signal enterprises, achieved
by the most Christian Kings, with most singular piety, liberality and valor,
for the benefit of the holy See; and, to omit more ancient examples, you cannot
so soon* have forgotten with what applause and thanks you received the notable
supplies which were sent against the Heretics, from Pius Quintus of happy
memory, to Charles the Ninth then your King: Can you then now accuse that in
his Successor, which you approved in him? Heresy is still the same, still
pernicious, cursed, execrable; and it is against that Infernal Monster, that
the Vicars of Christ, and the Successors of St. Peter, (not to transgress in
the duty of their Office) do wage mortal War, and not against the Catholic
Kings and Kingdoms, to whom they are Fathers and Pastors. It is against it that
witho^t exception of persons they do no less justly than wholsomly employ the
Sword of Supreme Jurisdiction which our Lord Jesus has put into their hand, to
cut off the festred putrified Members from the body of the Church, to the end
that their contagion might not be pestiferous and mortal to the rest: which
nevertheless they do as late as they can, mildness and fatherly pity still
going before in the Office of Sovereign Judge; so that their rigor never
chastises any but those that are incorrigible. But if you please to turn your
eyes upon other Countries, or rather, without going out of your own Kingdom, to
consider what usage it has ever received from the holy Apostolic See, you
will find, that since the combustion kindled in it by Heresy, which still
continues to consume it, no Pope has omitted any thing that he ought or could
do to help to quench it. The good intelligence which they have ever held with
your Kings, and the continual assistance which they have always given them of
men and other means, and the frequent sending of Legates hither, do sufficiently
show the zeal they have ever had, for the tranquillity, repose and conservation
of this most noble State. Nor were their actions ever suspected or ill
interpreted by you, while, as true Catholics and Frenchmen, you desired rather
to give the Law to Heretics, than to take it from their hand. You have always
found them to be such as need required, till these late days, that by your
discords and connivence you have suffered Heresy to gather such footing upon
you, that now it no longer demands favor of impunity from you as it was wont,
but begins it self now (as every one knows) to punish those, who, more careful
of their Salvation, refuse to submit themselves unto their yoke. A strange
unhappy revolution, which makes you detest that as a most heinous crime, which
you your selves have taught others to be a rare and excellent virtue, and which
on the contrary makes you to crown vice, which you ought still (as in former
times you have done) to condemn unto the fire. See what the deadly poison of
Heresy can do, from whose touch, so many other absurdities and contradictions
are bred, which you would not deny to be spread amongst you, if you would lay
your hands upon your hearts. For, to go about to maintain that the privileges
of the Gallique Church extend so far, as to permit that a relapsed Heretic,
and one excluded from the Body of the Universal Church, should be acknowledged
King, is the dream of a madman, which proceeds from nothing else but heretical
contagion. And from the same original we may likewise say have sprung all the
sinist^r interpretations which have been made of the actions and intentions of
our holy Fathers. But let us see a little whether those of the late Pope Sixtus
Quintus, which are expressly declared by his Bulls concerning the business of
the most illustrious Cardinal Gaetano's Legation, can, in any part, be
calumniated. That Cardinal was sent by the aforesaid Pope, of happy memory,
into this Kingdom, not as a Herald or King at Arms, but as an Angel of Peace;
not to shake the foundations of this State, nor to alter or innovate any thing
in its Laws or Policy, but to help to maintain the true, ancient, Roman
Catholic Apostolic Religion; to the end that all Catholics being united
together for the service of God, the public good, and the conservation of the
Crown, with a mutual unanimous consent, might with security and repose, obey,
and yield themselves subject to one only Catholic and lawful King. Now as
these intentions were pious, and directed toward the common safety; so can it
not be denied but that the effect and execution of them has been endeavored,
as well by the said Pope Sixtus, as by Cardinal Gaetano; not perhaps with that
severity which according to some men's judgments had been necessary, but with
all the mildness, clemency and charity that could be desired from a most loving
Father toward his dearest Children. No sooner was that wise Legate entered into
the Kingdom, but, to begin to lay his hand in good earnest to the work, he
addressed himself at his first arrival to all those whom he believed he should
find so much the more disposed to show him all favor in the administration of
his Charge, by how much greater were their obligations and means to do it: he
sent some Prelates purposely unto them, to confer particularly about what might
concern the fruit of his Legation: those men, as also all the Archbishops,
Bishops, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, and others, (with whom he treated, or
caused to be treated during his Legation, and to whom he wrote about this
matter) can give testimony whether he ever exceeded the limits of his
Commission, and how much he always protested that his Holiness had no other aim
nor design, than to maintain and defend the Catholic Religion, and to conserve
this Crown entire for the lawful Catholic Successors that were capable of it.
But if by the same means he complained that having as it were forgotten, not
only the singular Piety and Religion of your Ancestors, but the conservation,
and together with it, the reputation of your Country, and, which is worse, the
safety of your Souls, you had joined your selves to the party of him who you
could not but know was deservedly cut off from the body of the Church; of him
whom as such you had long ago, and also a few months before, most justly
pronounced, in a full Congregation of the States, to be incapable of this most
Christian Crown; of him whose Arms never knew how to shed any other blood than
that of the Catholics; and who finally, by an example altogether barbarous,
had in the person of one man alone, violated all Laws both divine and humane,
having suffered his Uncle, a Cardinal of the holy Roman Church, Prince of the
Blood, a man of so pious and holy a life as the most eminent Cardinal of
Bourbon was always known to be, to die in captivity, under the custody, and in
the sacrilegious hands of an Heretic. These complaints were not without great
ground and reason, nor ought you to have been displeased with them who made
suchlike demonstrations to you. And in effect, experience has certainly made
you sufficiently know, that they were wholesome and charitable; and from how many
adversities you might have freed this Kingdom, if lending your ears to him, and
to his holy Exhortations, you had readily separated your selves from the
Heretic, to apply your selves with the rest of the Catholics to any good or
quiet. But the same unhappiness which then made you to reject them, rendered
vain also the Interviews and Conferences which followed many times after
between the Legate and his Prelates, and some principal Lords that are amongst
you. Whilst things here were in these terms, and that at Rome Sixtus Quintus
the Pope, desirous to withdraw you from the Heretic, and to win you to Jesus
Christ, gave free access and audience to those whom you sent unto him, while
every thing (to shorten it) seemed to be done to your hands, in stead of
embracing the fair occasion that God offered you, of being able to free your
selves and your Country from the infamous yoke of Heretics, you suffered your
selves to be transported with the wind of an unhappy prosperity to those
designs and hopes that have reduced this poor State to the desperation you now
see it in. The death of Pope Sixtus Quintus of glorious memory, and that of
Urban the Seventh who succeeded him, having given place to the succession of
Gregory the Fourteenth, he began presently to let you see, that a particular
care and sollicitousness for your Salvation, and the preservation of this most
Christian Monarchy, is inseparably joined unto the Papacy. The Breve which he
was pleased to send us in the month of January 1591, which was published; the
Bulls and other Breves which in the month of March following were represented
to you by Mansigno Landriano the said Popes Nuncio, (whatsoever the Heretics
can say to the contrary) could not, nor ought not by you to have been taken in
another sense. Well did the good Pope judge, (as being a man endowed with
singular piety and prudence) that while you were mingled among Heretics, (the
known plague of this Kingdom) your Salvation was desperate; that therefore it
was necessary you should quickly withdraw your selves far from them, otherwise
you would within a short time miserably lose your own Souls, together with
theirs, and expose your bodies and estates to those troubles and ruins which
you have since suffered and continued to prove every day. To these most urgent
and lively reasons which he alleged to you in this matter, he added his
Remonstrances full of charity, and to them his fatherly Exhortations: certainly
it was a very great fault that you would not lend an ear unto them, and yet a
greater to go about to calumniate them; but so injuriously to use, not the
insensible Paper which contained his will, but in it the name and authority of
the Head of the Church, and by consequence of the holy Apostolic See it self,
this is a wickedness which comprehends in it as many new kinds of crimes, as
there are words in the pretended Decrees which were published thereupon in
Tours and Chalons; and yet the enormity and greatness of these misdeeds, and of
those likewise which in this business were committed by them of the Clergy that
were present in the Council at Chartres, has till now been dissembled by them
who might have made some just resentment of it. Nor did Pope Innocent the
Ninth, of happy memory, who succeeded him, carry himself otherwise toward you,
whose sudden death would yet be more lamented by good men, if Divine
Providence, which never forsakes the holy Church in time of need, had not by
the election of the most blessed Father Clement the Eighth, provided us of such
a Pastor, as the necessity of the times requires, being one who comes not
behind his Predecessors in any kind of rare virtue; but rather in what concerns
the particular care which they have always had of the safety and secure repose
of this Kingdom, seems to go before them all. Nor was he sooner raised to the
Supreme Degree of Apostleship, but all the faithful transported with joy,
turned both their eyes and minds upon him, as upon a clear Sun, which God the
Father of Light, and Giver of all Consolations, seems to have made shine in
these our days to dissipate the darkness of so calamitous an Age. And when
every one began to have certain hope, that each of you opening his heart to
receive the beams of so clear, so gracious a Light, would draw near in the
obedience and union of the holy Church, under the authority and conduct of so
great an Head: Behold, that to our infinite grief, another pretended Decree
brought forth by Heresy at Chalons, is published against the Bulls of his
Holiness concerning our Legation, whereby they still make trial to banish all
hopes from us, of that which ought to be most dear to all persons, jealous of
Gods glory, and of the honor, repose, and conservation of this Kingdom. For,
(let them say what they will to the contrary, whom the true and lawful
Parliament of Paris (which has still retained its ancient equity and
constancy) has grievously condemned as men, who by their carriage manifest
themselves to be rather slaves to Heresy, than Ministers of Justice) it is
impossible ever to see France enjoy a durable peace and tranquillity, nor any
other kind of prosperity, whiles it groans under the yoke of an Heretic. This
is no less true than known to every one of you, whose Consciences are
sufficient to bear witness of it, besides many of your outward actions, which
clearly enough do let us see what you think among your selves; since by your
wonted Protestations and Remonstrances, wherein you declare, That the obedience
you yield to the Heretic has no other foundation but a vain hope of his
conversion, and of his again becoming capable of the Crown; it clearly appears,
that the fault of acknowledging a relapsed obstinate Heretic for the King of a
most Christian Kingdom, seems too heinous to you to confess your selves guilty
of it. But since his obstinacy has already deprived him of all the rights
which he could pretend to, it likewise takes from you all pretenses and
excuses, that you can allege in his favor and your own discharge. It is now
time, that you discover boldly all that you have in your hearts; and if there
be nothing in them that is not Catholic, as your former actions have made
known, when the sorcery of Heretics had not yet bewitched you, declare for
Gods sake with the rest of the Catholics, that you desire not any thing so
much as to see your selves united under the obedience of a most Christian King,
both in name and actions: It will be a prudent thing to have such thoughts, a
magnanimous one to endeavor the execution of them, and a virtue every way most
perfect to do both. Now as at this present there is no more just, nor more
lawful means to compass this end, than the holding of the States General, to
which you are invited by the Duke of Mayenne, who following the duty of his
Office and Authority, has ever sought, and does now more than ever seek (with
a piety, constancy, and magnanimity, worthy of eternal praise) the most certain
and secure means to defend and secure this State and Crown in its integrity,
and to maintain the Catholic Religion, and the Gallique Church in its true
liberty, which consists principally in not yielding obedience to an Heretic
Head: So we have thought fit in this place, to protest unto you, that
containing our selves, as our intention is, within the limits of the charge it
has pleased his Holiness to give us, we neither could, nor would in any way
assist or favor the designs and enterprises of the Duke of Mayenne, nor of any
other Prince or Potentate in the World, be he who he will, but rather with all
our Forces would oppose them, if we should know that they were in any part
contrary to the common votes and desires of all good men, true Catholics, and
good Frenchmen, and in particular, to the holy, pious intention of our Lord;
which moreover by these presents, we desire to declare to have no other aim nor
object but the glory of God, the conservation of our holy Roman Catholic
Apostolic Faith and Religion, with the utter extirpation of Heresies and
Schisms, which have reduced this poor Kingdom of France to so miserable a
condition, which his Holiness desires to see principally crowned with its
ancient splendour and majesty by the establishment of a King truly most
Christian; such an one God in mercy grant the States General may name; and such
an one no Heretic ever was, nor ever can be. Thither then in the name of his
Holiness do I invite you, to the end, that separating your selves totally from
the company and dominion of the Heretic, you may with minds free from all
passion, and full of an holy zeal and piety toward God and your Country, assist
in all that you shall judge may serve to extinguish the general combustion,
which has even almost burnt it to ashes. It is no longer time to propose vain
excuses and new difficulties, you shall find no others but those that proceed
from your selves: For if you please to come to the said Assembly for the effect
you ought, we can assure you in the name of all the Catholics, who by Gods
Grace have still persevered in obedience and devotion to the holy Apostolic
See, that you shall find them most ready to receive you, and to embrace (as
Brothers and true Christians, whom with the price of their bloods and very
lives they desire to save) a holy peace and reconciliation with you. Take order
therefore that in good earnest we may see you there separated from the
Heretic; and in such a case demand all the securities you shall think
necessary, that you may freely go and come, speak and propose in the said
Assembly all that you shall judge most expedient to attain to the desired end.
The Duke of Mayenne is ready to grant you them, and we on our part make no
difficulty to oblige our selves that nothing shall be done to the contrary in
any kind, offering in that respect to take you, if there he need, under our
especial protection, that is, of the holy Church, and of the holy Apostolic
See: And we conjure you again, in the Name of God, that at last you would with
lively effects show, that you are true Catholics, conforming your intentions
to that of the chief Head of the Church, without longer deferring to render to
our holy Religion, and to our Country, that faithful duty which it expects from
you in this extreme necessity. There is nothing to be expected from your
divisions, but desolation and ruin; and though from elsewhere every thing
should succeed according to your wish, (which me thinks you should not dare to
promise to your selves under an Heretic Head) yet ought you nevertheless to
consider, that Schisms, which this Kingdom seems to be full of, do in the end
turn into Heresy, which God of his Mercy be pleased not to permit, but rather
to enlighten your hearts and minds, making them capable of his holy
Inspirations and Benedictions, to the end, that being all united in deed and
will, in the unity of the holy Roman Catholic Church, under the obedience of
one King, who may deservedly be called Most Christian, you may in this life
enjoy a secure tranquillity, and finally come to that Kingdom which his Divine
Majesty has prepared from eternity for them, who persevering constantly in the
Communion of his said Church, out of which there is no Salvation, do give clear
testimony of their lively Faith by holy and virtuous actions.

With this Writing, in appearance like that of the Duke of Mayenne's, but
indeed full of matter very different, did the Legate endeavor to establish the
principal end of the Assembly to be, not to treat of business with the
Catholics of the Kings party, not to agree with him if he should resolve to
reconcile himself to the Church, not to raise any Prince of the Blood to the
Crown, but to elect a new King, not only depending upon the Apostolic See, but
approved also by the Catholic King, that they might make use of the power of
his Arms and Moneys to protect and establish him. And though the Pope (being
made acquainted with the Legates inclination, and particularly advertised by the
Venetian Senate, that there was great suspicion of him, and that many were
scandalized, because they thought he seemed to have more care of the
satisfaction of the Spaniards, than of the safety of the State and Religion)
did declare himself much more than he had done before by the Pronotary Agucchi,
by the means of Monsignor Innocentio Malv^gia, Pope Clem. 8. sends Innocentio
Malvagia into France, in the place of Commissary Matteucci, with more
particular Commissions to Cardinal Sega the Legate; but they work small effect.
sent by him to be Commissary of the Army in the stead of Matteucci, and gave
him particular Commission, that above all things he should take heed of a
monstrous election, not generally approved, and that might be like to cause new
Wars more pernicious than the former; yet the Legate (either because he really
thought the interests of Religion so linked to those of Spain, that they could
not be separated; or in respect of his own private designs, which persuaded him
to get the Catholic Kings favor absolutely; o^ else by reason of the enmity
he had contracted with the King, because of the Declarations made by the
Parliaments against him; or that the Popes so obscure Commissions were not well
understood by him) did not take himself off from his first manner of treating,
but with the pretense and color of Religion, (which truly was very great) did
wonderfully serve all the Plots and Practices of the Spanish Ministers. These
were yet uncertain of the means, but most certain of the end of their treating;
the Council of Spain having determined, that for the greater decency and
speciousness, the Union of the Crowns should not be mentioned; a thing rather
to be discoursed of in the Infancy, than to be hoped for in effect; but that
the election of the Infanta Isabella should be propounded, which by diverse ways
came to the same end.

The Spanish Council resolves to propose the election of the Infanta Isabella
to be Queen of France. Diego d' Ivarra, ill affected to the Duke of Mayenne,
practices with the Deputies of the States apart, to dispose them to the
election of the Infanta; but every one of his private treaties comes to the
Duke of Mayenne's knowledge.
But at this time in Paris there was no other Spanish Ministers except Diego d'
Ivarra, who continuing his disaffection to the Duke of Mayenne, and being of
opinion that without him the Catholic Kings Forces, Money and Authority were
sufficient to cause the States to make that election, continued still private
practices with the Deputies; all which nevertheless came perfectly to the Duke
of Mayenne's knowledge. Laurenzo Suarez de Figueroa, Duke of Feria, appointed
Head of the Embassy, was expected, and with him Inigo de Mendozza a most
learned Spanish Lawyer, sent to dispute (by way of right) the lawful Succession
of the Infanta, and Iuan Baptista Tassis, who, that he might give them
information, was gone as far as the confines of Flanders to meet them: but
these also came with an impression that the Infanta's right was evident, and
that the Catholic Kings Forces and Authority were so feared in France, that
without the Duke of Mayenne they should be able to obtain their intent of the
Assembly: and though Iuan Baptista Tassis told them otherwise, believing that
without the Duke of Mayenne they could not compass any end; yet they being
prepossessed with the opinions of Spain, and far from the moderate counsels
which the Duke of Parma in his life time had held and represented, persevered
in their conceit, and continued on their practices in the manner they were
begun. Iuan Baptista Tassis, and together with him the Counselors of Flanders,
who knew the French humor, and by reason of their neighborhood saw things at
a nearer distance, counseled that they should march into France with a
powerful Army, and that with it Count Charles of Mansfelt (to whom that charge
was committed) should draw near to Paris: That at the same time with great sums
of money they should gain the Duke of Mayenne especially, and then the other
principal Lords, and every particular Deputy that had credit and authority in
the Assembly; and that to the Lords of the House of Lorain, who were chief of
the Union, large advantageous offers should be made, and full security given
them for their performance: and with these Conditions, and not otherwise, they
thought the election of the Infanta which was to be propounded, might be
brought about: for if the French were not besieged and taken, on the one side
by profit, and on the other by fear, they thought it impossible that of their
own voluntary will they shall ever consent to submit themselves to the Spanish
Dominion: And if the Princes of Lorain, who were in so great power, and in a
very near hope that one of them might attain to the Crown, were not by
exceeding high and secure Conditions removed from that design, they did not
think that ever they would condescend to transfer that to others, which they
pretended to for themselves: besides, there was no doubt, but that to establish
an election so new, and so contrary to the nature of the French, powerful and
extraordinary Forces were necessary, and such preparations of Soldiery, Money
and Commanders, as might overcome those difficulties and oppositions which
would discover themselves much more in the progress, than in the beginning of
the business. To this was added, that to break into a matter of so great
difficulty, a great increase of reputation was necessary, and a certainty that
the King of Navarre might, without much length of time, be overcome and
suppressed; which was not possible to be effected without very great store of
Men and Money.

These were the solid and well-grounded counsels of those, who, judging with
reason of the importance and weightiness of those affairs, were of opinion,
that for the Catholic Kings honor, the thing should not be propounded,
without an infallible certainty of bringing it perfectly to an end. The Spanish
Ministers ill informed of the inclinations of the French, and of the Duke of
Mayenne's authority, contrary to Iuan Baptista Tassis's opinion, prosecute
their Treaty a wrong way.
But those that were newly come from Spain, either by reason of the different
opinion that was there, or of the relations given by Diego d' Ivarra, judged
quite differently, that neither many Forces ought to be drawn into France, nor
much money distributed, nor that the House of Lorain should have satisfaction
in deed, but in words and appearance only; because, by keeping the Duke of
Mayenne low, and by driving him and his party into a straight, they thought
they should put them upon a necessity of consenting to their demands, that
thereby they might obtain such assistance from them, as might raise them from
the abject condition they were reduced to: for they were moreover informed,
that they were not inclined to content them willingly; that if they should free
the League, and particularly the City of Paris, from their present want and
scarcity, they would not afterward be content to condescend to the Catholic
Kings will; gratitude being but a weak instrumen^* where such weighty matters
were treated on; but that then rather they would consent unto it, when they saw
no other remedy to free themselves from misery; which would be so much the more
effectual, by how much the more nearly it pressed and straightened them: That
to give money now, was but to throw it away, without any ground or assurance
that it should produce the effect, and to satisfy the greediness of those who
being once glutted with Spanish gold, and having compassed their own designs,
would not care afterward to satisfy their promises as they ought: That in
plenty and prosperity the French would be proud and insolent; but in want and
necessity, abject and tractable: That it was not fit to dismember the Kingdom,
and tear it in pieces, to give part to this, and part to that man of the House
of Lorain, thereby to attain to it afterward, being weak, mangled and
destroyed.

The present state of the Catholic Kings affairs inclined most toward this
Counsel: for his treasures at this time being much exhausted by his past
expenses, and by the commotions of Arragon, he could not draw together those
sums that would have been necessary for the first advice* and the affairs of
the Low Countries, and of the Army there, being, by reason of the Duke of
Parma's death, in great weakness and confusion, it was not possible to make so
great a Body of men, as the contrivance of that design required: and finally,
the nature of the Spaniards made them begin with thrift and parsimony to manage
the affairs of that Kingdom, which was not yet begun to be obtained. For these
reasons, the Spanish Ministers would needs follow the last counsel; persuading
themselves also, that by their arts, and the Legates assistance, they should
overcome many difficulties, and that with words and promises they might supply,
where deeds were defective.

But the Duke of Mayenne, to whom these conceits were in great part known, was
very certain, that without his will and consent they could never obtain any
thing; The Duke of Mayenne knowing the Spanish practices, as he was certain
that without his consent none of their designs would take effect, so was he
troubled at the pretensions which the Lords of his House had to the Crown as
well as he.
and by reason he saw the Spanish Ministers so disaffected to him, but much
more because he hoped to attain the Kingdom for himself, was wholly averse from
contenting them; only the discords that arose between him and the others of his
Family, held him in suspense: for the Duke of Lorain still pretended right unto
the Kingdom, and the superiority above the rest of his Family; and the Dukes of
Guise and Nemours pretended to the Crown no less than he; the first, by reason
of the name and merits of his Father, upon whose blood (as he said) the whole
structure of the League was grounded: and the other, because of his prosperous
defense of Paris, whereby he judged himself to have deserved more than any one
of the rest, and to have that people at his devotion: besides that, being both
of them young and unmarried, they were not so averse from the election of the
Infanta, hoping that one of them might be destined for her husband. The Duke of
Mayenne being led by this doubt, resolved to prepare many strings to his bow,
that he might have several ways to hinder the designs of the rest, and to bring
his own businesses to their appointed end. Whereupon, after having by his
Declaration invited the Catholics of the Kings party to a Treaty, (a Weapon by
him esteemed most powerful, to cross the Spaniards in the business) he also
caused the Cardinal of Bourbon's design to be renewed, that he might keep it
alive, and make use of it in convenient time and place: and Iehan le Maistre, a
man totally depending upon his will, having after the death of President
Brisson taken the place of first President of the Parliament, he began by his
means, not only to deal with the Counselors of that Parliament, and
Magistrates of that City, but also with those, who, because they inclined to
favor the King, were called Politics, that in time of need he might also make
use of their he^^; and having found the Parliament most disposed to his
designs, and grounding himself very much upon the support of the Commanders of
the Militia chosen and raised by him, he propounded and obtained (for the
greater reputation of so great an Assembly, and for the greater assurance of
the election of a King, a thing of so great weight and consequence) that also
the Parli^ment, and Governors of Provin^es, and the Commanders of the Militia,
might Vote in the Assembly of the States, not every one by himself, but by
Deputies for each body, to the end, that by the counterpoise of these, he might
balance the Votes of the other Deputies, if they should ever dissent from his
will; wherein (because he was exceeding well versed in the business, and knew
the persons very particularly) he proceeded with so much art and dissimul^tion,
that the Spanish Ministers and the Legate did not take notice of many things
till after they were established; and he gained more men with ar^, than they
were able to do with gold or promises* and on the other side, they could hardly
design the framing an engine, but he, sounding the end of it, found many
evasions to dissolve or hinder it.

The Overture of the States is made in Paris, Ian. 26. 1593.
In this state of things, time no longer allowing, that the celebration of the
States should be deferred, the Overture (as they call it)* of the Assembly was
made upon the Six and twentieth of January, at which all the Deputies being met
in the Hall of the Louvre, and with them all the Magistrates and Officers of
the Crown, the Duke of Mayenne fitting under the Cloth of State, The Duke of
Mayenne fitting under the Cloth of State as King in the Hall of the Louvre,
makes the Overture of the States, exhorting them to elect a Catholic King,
able to sustain the weight of the Crown.
(as Kings are wont to do) said, That he had called, and with very much ado
assembled that Solemn Meeting, that they might take some course to find a
remedy for the calamities and miseries that afflicted their common Country: He
exaggerated the evils of the present condition, the danger of Religion, and the
unhappiness of the War; and concluded, that the only remedy was the election of
a King, who in the first place should be so constant and sincere a Catholic,
that he should prefer the good and honor of the holy Church before his own
life; and in the second, should be such an one for valor, experience and
reputation, that not only unruly minds might willingly obey him, but also might
be able to fight with and conquer the Enemies of the Church and Kingdom.
Wherefore he exhorted the Assembly, that being met, not to moderate grievances,
or to find means to pay the debts of the Crown, (things ordinarily introduced
to be treated of in the States) but to provide a King, a Pastor for themselves,
and the whole people of the greatest Kingdom of Christendom, they should not
let themselves be carried away with any private interests, but should take that
holy, that worthy resolution, which the present need and their common safety
required.

When he had done speaking, Cardinal Pelle-ve, as Ecclesiastical President of
the Assembly, with a long tedious* Oration full of digressions, praised the
Duke of Mayenne's zeal and valor, and by several ways coming round about
again, concluded at last with exhorting the Assembly to elect a King, who as
the present exigent required, might be totally devoted to the holy Apostolic
See, and an Enemy to Heresy, against which more than any thing else, it was at
that present necessary to make opposition. The Baron de Senecey for the
Nobility spoke to the same effect, but much more briefly, and to the purpose;
and the same did Honor de Laurent, Counselor in the Parliament of Provence,
for the third Order of the Commons. There was nothing else treated of at this
first meeting, it being the custom only to use these Ceremonies at the first
overture.

The next day in a particular meeting, which was held among the chiefest about
this business, there was a very sharp dispute between the Legate joined with the
Spanish Ambassador, The Cardinal Legates Proposition.
and some of the greatest Personages of the Assembly; for the Legate proposed,
That at the second Session for the beginning of the States, all should take a
solemn Oath, never to be reconciled to, nor acknowledge the King of Navar for
Superior, though he should turn his Religion, and make show to live as a
Catholic; to which the Duke of Mayenne not consenting, as a thing very
different from his practices and intentions, the other Deputies that were
present spoke against it with diverse reasons: But the Legate urging, with
wonderful vehemence, at last the Archbishop of Lions said, that the States were
Catholics* obedient to the holy Church under the superiority of the Apostolic
See in such cases, The Archbishop of Lions his Answer.
and met together in obedience to the Pope, and that therefore they would not
be so impudent as to go about to bind his hands, and presumptuously to declare
that which he had not declared, preventing his Judgments, and declaring the
King of Navar irreconcilable to the Church by a vain determination, which was
out of the Secular Power, and wholly proper to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction;
and that therefore they were resolved not to proceed to that Oath, lest they
should offend their own consciences, and the Majesty and Jurisdiction of the
Pope and the Apostolic See. Which reason, with the decency thereof, stopped the
Legat's mouth; and the Duke of Mayenne's intention not to proceed to that
Declaration prevailed.

But upon the Twenty eighth day there came one of the King's Trumpets to the
Gate of the City, desiring to be brought in, A Trumpet of the Kings comes to
Paris, and brings a Packet to the Governor, which being opened by the Duke of
Mayenne in the presence of the Confederates* contains an offer from the
Catholic Lord; and Prelates of the King's party.
that he might deliver a Packet of Letters directed to the Count de Belin
Governor of it, and being asked what his business was? he answered freely and
publicly, That he brought a Declaration of the Catholics of the King's party,
addressed to the Assembly of the States; and being come before the Governor, he
gave the Letters into his hand, and made the contents of them more fully known
among the People. The Governor carried the Packet to the Duke of Mayenne, who
lay troubled in his Bed; and not being willing to open it, but in the presence
of all the Confederates, he sent for the Legate, the Cardinal of Pelle-ve,
Diego d Ivarra, the Sieur de Bassompiere Ambassador from the Duke of Lorain,
the Archbishop of Lions, Monsieur de Rosne, the Count de Belin, the Viscount
de Tavannes, the Sieur de Villars by him newly declared Admiral, Monsieur de
Villeroy, President Ieannin, and two of the ordinary Secretaries, which they
called Secretaries of State; in the presence of whom the cover being taken off,
there was a Writing found with this Title: The Proposition of the Princes,
Prelates, Officers of the Crown, and chief Catholic Lords, as well Counselors
of the King, as others, now present with his Majesty; tending to the end of
obtaining Peace, so necessary to this Kingdom for the conservation of the
Catholic Religion, and of the State: made to the Duke of Mayenne and the
Princes of his Family, the Lords and other persons sent by some Cities and
Corporations, at this present assembled in the City of Paris.

Having seen the Title, and every one being desirous to hear the contents, the
Writing was read by one of the Secretaries, being of this Tenor following: THe
Princes, Prelates, Officers of the Crown, and Chief Catholic Lords, as well of
the Council, as attendance of His Majesty, having seen a Declaration Printed at
Paris in the name of the Duke of Mayenne, dated in the month of December,
published with the sound of the Trumpet in the said City upon the Fifth day of
this present Month of January, as is found at the bottom of it, and which came
into their hands a^ Chartres, do acknowledge, and are of opinion with the said
Duke of Mayenne, that the continuance of this War, bringing the ruin and
destruction of the State, does also by necessary consequence draw along with it
the ruin of the Catholic Religion, as experience has but too well showed us,
to the great grief of the said Princes, Lords, and Catholic States, who do
acknowledge the King, whom God has given them, and serve him as they are
naturally obliged, having, with this duty, ever made the Conservation of the
Catholic Religion their principal aim; and have then always been most animated
with their Arms and Forces to defend the Crown under the obedience of his
Majesty, when they have seen strangers, enemies to the greatness of this
Monarchy, and to the honor and glory of the French name, enter into this
Kingdom; for it is too evident, that they tend to nothing else but to dissipate
it, and from its dissipation would follow an Immortal War, which in time could
produce no other effects, save the total ruin of the Clergy, Nobility, Gentry,
Cities and Countries, an event which would also infallibly happen to the
Catholic Religion in this Kingdom. Thence it is, that all good Frenchmen, and
all those that are truly zealous thereof, ought to strive with all their Forces
to hinder the first inconvenience, from which the second is inseparable, and
both inevitable by the continuation of the War. The true means to prevent them,
would be a good Peace, and a reconciliation between those whom the misfortune
hereof keeps so divided and armed to the destruction of one another: for upon
this foundation Religion would be restored, Churches preserved, the Clergy
maintained in their estates and reputation, and Justice settled again; the
Nobility would recover their ancient force and vigor, for the defense and
quiet of the Kingdom; the Cities would recover their losses and ruins, by the
re-establishment of Commerce, Trades, and employments (maintainers of the
people) which are in a manner utterly extinct; the Universities would again
betake themselves to the study of Sciences, which in times past have caused
this Kingdom to flourish, and given splendor and ornament unto it, which at
this present languish, and are, by little and little, wasting to nothing; the
fields would again be tilled, which in so many places are left fallow and
barren, and in stead of the fruits they were wont to bring forth for man's
nourishment, are now covered with thorns and thistles: in sum, by Peace every
one might do his duty; God might be served, and the people, enjoying a secure
Peace, would bless those who had procured them that happiness; whereas, on the
contrary, they will have just cause to complain, and curse those that shall
hinder i^. To this effect, upon the Declaration which the said Duke of Mayenne
makes by his writing, as well in his own name, as in the names of the rest of
his party assembled in Paris, where he alleges, that he has called the
States, to take some course and Counsel for the good of the Catholic Religion,
and the repose of this Kingdom; it being clear, that if for no other reason,
yet because of the place alone (where it is neither lawful nor reasonable, that
any other but they of their own party should interview) no resolution can
proceed from it, that can be valid or profitable for the effect which he has
published: and it being rather most certain, that this can nothing but inflame
the War so much the more, and take away all hopes and means of reconciliation;
the said Princes, Prelates, Officers of the Crown, and other Catholic Lords
now present with His Majesty, being certain, that the other Princes, Lords, and
Catholic States who acknowledge Him, do concur with them in the same zeal
toward the Catholic Religion, and the good of the State, as they agree in the
obedience and fidelity due unto their King and natural Prince; have, in the
name of all, and with the leave and permission of his Majesty, thought fit, by
this Writing, to make know (...) the said Duke of Mayenne, and the other
Princes of his Family, Prelates, Lords, and other persons assembled in the City
of Paris, that if they will enter into conference and communication about the
means proper to bury these tumults, for the conservation of the Catholic
Religion and of the State, and depute any persons of worth and integrity to
meet jointly at a place which may be chosen between Paris and St. Denis, they
will on their parts send thither upon the day that shall be appointed and
agreed upon, to receive and carry all those resolutions and overtures which may
be proposed for so good a purpose, as they are confident, that if every one
will bring those good inclinations he is obliged to, which they for their parts
promise to do, means may be found to attain to so great a happiness: protesting
before God and men, that if, neglecting this way, they shall use other unlawful
means, which cannot choose but be pernicious to Religion and the State, if they
shall complete the reducing of France to the last period of all calamity and
misery, making it a prey and a spoil to the insatiable greediness of the
Spaniards, and a trophy of their insolency, gotten by the practices and blind
passions of a part of them, who carry the name of Frenchmen, degenerating from
the duty which has been held in so great veneration by our Ancestors the fault
of that evil that shall come thereby, cannot, nor ought not justly to be
ascribed to any others than those who shall be notoriously known to be the sole
authors of such a refusal, as men who prefer the ways that are fit to serve
their own particular greatness and ambition, and that of their fomenters,
before those which aim at the glory of God and the safety of the Kingdom.
Given in the King's Council (where the said Princes and Lords have purposely
assembled themselves, and, with his Majesty's permission, resolved to make the
abovesaid Propositions and Overtures) at Chartres the Seven and twentieth of
January, 1593. Subscribed R^vol.

The first mover of this Writing, penned and presented in this manner, was the
Sieur de Villeroy: for being of himself averse to the Spanish attempt, and
rather inclined to an Agreement with the King, than to any other resolution;
and being set on by the Duke of Mayenne, desirous to put some Treaty on foot,
to make use of it, as occasion should serve, for his own advantage, wrote to
his brother-in-law the Sieur de Feury, that addressing himself to the Duke of
Nevers and the other Catholic Lords that were with the King, The Sieur de
Villeroy, averse from the Spaniards, and a friend to peace, writes to the Sieur
de Fleury to advertise the Catholics of the danger the King was in, and of the
attempts to cause the Infanta Isabella to be elected Queen.
he should show them in how great danger the affairs of the Kingdom were, with
how much earnestness the Spaniards had set themselves to promote the election
of the Infanta Isabella, how many there were, that for their own interests
favored that election, and how the Duke of Mayenne, who had never been able to
endure the King to be reconciled to the Church, was now in such a necessity,
that he would be constrained to agree with the Catholic King, if by some means
they did not interrupt those proceedings. That they should consider, if
strangers should obtain their intent, and that the Lords of the House of
Lorain, and the other Confederates, should oblige themselves unto it, in how
great danger the King would be to be deprived of the Kingdom, being to fight
with the Spanish power, which then would employ it self wholly to his ruin;
the minds of the French Confederates would become irreconcilable, as if of
their own accord they had put themselves under the servitude, and engaged
themselves under the dominion of strangers: the way to a reconciliation with
the Pope and with the Church would be shut up, when once he should have
approved of the election which the States were to make within a few weeks; and
that therefore time was not to be lost, but some way found to interrupt the
course of those designs.

These Considerations were represented by the Sieur de Fleury, not only to the
Duke of Nevers, but to Gaspar Count of Schombergh, who about that time having
been sent for by the King, was come to Court. He by birth was a German, and by
nature a man, not only of great courage, but free in his opinions and words;
and for his experience and valor, highly esteemed by every one; wary in his
courses, provident in his actions, infinitely inclined and very faithful to the
King, and (which at that time was much to the purpose) one, who had not been
present at the consultations that had been held among the Catholics about
forsaking him, and for this cause had more authority and belief with him to
treat upon this business, than the Duke of Nevers and many others: Wherefore,
being of opinion, that the Considerations represented by Villeroy were most
important, and that to them many others were added; for already every one knew,
that the Cardinal of Bourbon was thinking to depart, and go over to the League*
and that many Princes of the Blood, and other Lords, were inclined to follow
that resolution; that the Catholics, for the most part, holding themselves
deceived and mocked by the King's promises, were very ill satisfied; and that
every one weary of the War, longed impatiently for Peace, he found a fit
conjuncture to discourse with the King about it; and with solid effectual
eloquence, wherein he was very prevalent, made him fully acquainted with those
reasons, which out of respect were coldly, and but in part represented to him
by others; and demonstrated to him the nearness of his ruin, unless he
suddenly took some course to content the Catholics, and to cross the designs
and attempts of the Spaniards. The conjucture of the time was also favorable:
for the King's late prosperities had brought him into such a condition, that if
the Catholics persevered constantly to serve him, he had but little need of
foreign Forces; which of how little benefit they were, and how much mischief
they did to his Country, he himself had already found: The Sieur du Plessis was
far off, who, with his reasons, partly Theological, partly Political, was wont
to withhold him, and put scruples in his mind, to the end he might not change
his Religion: The Duke of Bouillon, a Hugonot, was ever of opinion That the
King could not be a peaceable possessor of his Crown unless he turned
Catholic; perhaps to the end he might remain Head of the Hugonots.
and the Duke of Bouillon, then Head of the Hugonots, who was present at the
business, had ever been one of those who were of opinion, that the King could
never be a peaceable possessor of the Crown, unless he changed his Religion:
and perchance for his own interest it displeased him not that the King should
turn Catholic, to the end the first place among the Hugonotsa might remain to
him: Wherefore, all these obstacles being removed, and necess^ty urging; for
already the Cardinal of Bourbon and Count Soissons, with many other, began to
talk very plainly; and the States assembled by the League being in much greater
consideration with the King, than perhaps they were with the Confederates
themselves; after many consultations with the Duke of Bouillon, the Duke of
Nevers, the High-Chancellor, and President de Thon, to whom, by reason of his
learning and experience, the King gave much credit, he resolved that the
Catholics should make this Overture, with intent either to interrupt the
course of the State by that means, or else to resolve upon an Accommodation and
Reconciliation with the Apostolic See, and the Lords of the house of Lorain.

As soon as the Writing was read in the presence of the Duke of Mayenne, and
the other Lords, The Legate's opposition against the Propositions of the King's
Catholics.
the Cardinal of Piacenza rose up in choler, and without consultation or
deliberation said angerly, that that Proposition was full of Heresies, and that
they were Heretics that should take it into consideration, and therefore it
was by no means fitting to give any Answer to it: Cardinal Pelle-ve and Diego
d' Ivarra assented without any demur; but the Duke of Mayenne remained in
suspense, as also the rest that were present, who durst not immediately oppose
the Legate's words. But Villeroy and Ieannin not losing courage, without
contradicting the Cardinal, found another evasion, and said, That the Writing
not being directed to the Duke of Mayenne alone, but to the whole assembly of
the States, and the Trumpet having freely said so to many at his entrance into
the City, whereby the business was become public, it was fit to communicate it
to the States, and refer it to them, to the end that the Deputies might not be
disgusted in the very beginning, and believe that they were not freely and
fairly dealt withal, but that endeavors were used to conceal many things from
them, and to deceive them; That this would be an ill beginning, and would not
only cause suspicion, but also disunion among the Deputies. The Count de Belin
added, that the Trumpet had not only told, that the Writing was directed to
the whole Assembly, but had also scattered some copies of it among the People,
as he thought he had heard, whereby it was so much the more public, and could
not be concealed from the Deputies.

It was determined, that every one should consider of what he thought most
convenient to resolve about it in the same place against the next day; It is
concluded by the Votes of the major part of the Lords in the private meeting,
that the Writing should be read in the assembly of the States, notwithstanding
the opposition of the Legate and the Spaniards.

The tenor of a Manifest published by ^he King at C^ar^^es.


which being come, though the Legate and Spanish Ambassador labored stiffly
that the Writing might be suppressed and rejected, the Duke of Mayenne
nevertheless, with the votes of the major part, concluded, not to use his
Deputies ill, nor give them cause of distaste; but bearing that respect to them
which was fit, would have the Writing read in the full Assembly, where
afterward that should be resolved on that should be thought most convenient:
which while it was deferred, by reason of the contrariety of opinions, and of
the Obstacles that were interposed, the King being at Chartres, published a
Manifest upon the nine and twentieth day; wherein, after having briefly
attested his singular affection toward the general good and safety, He said he
was extremely grieved to have happened in such perverse times, wherein many
degenerating from that fidelity toward their Princes, which had ever been
peculiar to the French Nation, did now use all their studies and endeavors to
oppugn the Royal Authority, under pretense of Religion; which pretense, how
falsely it was usurped by them, was clearly seen in the War twice attempted
against the happy memory of Henry the Third, which it was not possible to value
so much, as to think the cause thereof could be attributed to matter of
Religion, he having ever been most Catholic, and most observant of the Sea of
Rome, and employed with his Arms even against those that were not of the
Catholic Religion to subdue them, at the same time when they having furiously
taken Arms, ran to Tours to suppress and besiege him; and that now it was more
clear than the Sun it self, how improperly and unjustly they made use of the
same color against him; for by how much the more they sought to mask and
palliate their malignity under that specious cloak, so much the more, breaking
forth, did it show it self clearly to the eyes of all men; nor was there any
one who knew not, that their conspiracy, attempted for the oppression and ruin
of their Country, was not caused by zeal to Religion; but that their union
appeared manifestly to be composed of three kinds of Persons for three
different reasons. First, the wickedness of them, who led by an incredible
desire to possess and dissipate the Kingdom, had made themselves Heads and
Authors of this Rebellion. Secondly, the craftiness of Strangers, ancient
enemies to the French name and Crown, who having found this opportunity of
executing their inveterate designs, had voluntarily joined themselves with
their assistance to be Companions in so perfidious a Conspiracy. And lastly,
the fury of some of the meanest dreg^ of the People, who being abandoned by
fortune to extreme beggary and misery, or else led by their misdeeds in fear of
Justice, out of a desire of spoil, or hope of impunity, had gathered themselves
together to this factious confederacy. But it being the custom of Divine
Providence to draw good out of evil, so it had now miraculously come to pass,
since that the Duke of Mayenne, by setting down in Writing his reasons of
assembling a Congregation in Paris, by him called the States, had clearly laid
open and manifested his designs by his own confession: for striving with all
his power dissemblingly to represent the face of an honest man, and to make it
believed that he had no thought of usurping that which belonged not unto him,
he could not in the interim give greater testimony of his ambition and impiety
toward his Country, than by framing an Edict, and sealing it with the Royal
Seal for the Convocation of the States, a thing reserved only to the
Royal-Power, and never communicated to any other; whereby he had made clear to
the World his usurpation of the Royal Office and Majesty, and his crime of
High Treason, having taken upon him the Royal Ministry, and the proper marks of
Sovereignty. But, What eye was so dazeled, or what mind so blinded, as not to
see how false those things were which he had inserted in his Edict with so much
pomp of words? That the Laws permitted him not to ^ender due observance and
obedience to the King God had given him: a Lie as appar^nt* as it is true, that
the Salique-Lam, a wholesome fundamental one, born at one birth with the
Kingdom, has ever been the basis of the Subjects obedience, and the foundation
and safety of the Crown: That open injury is done to the constitution of this
Law, when the lawful Dominion of him is called in doubt or controversy, who,
by the prescribed order of it is called by God unto the Crown: That the force
and authority of this Law is so great and venerable, that no other Law has
power to prejudice it, and the Kings themselves, which are loose from other
Laws, are subject, and not superiou^ to this alone; and that therefore it was a
vain thing to allege against it the Decree of the States at Blois in the year
76; for not the King, nor the States, but that Law it self, ought to decide the
Succession of the Kingdom: and yet, What man of sound understanding could ever
hold the Assembly at Blois to be a lawful Congregation of the States? in which
the liberty of votes being taken away, and the voice of good men suppressed,
there was nothing else minded by the Conspirators of that Confederacy (the
fruits whereof are now found) but to oppugn the King's Authority who then
reigned, and to reduce him to the slavery of his enemies, disposing of the
affairs of the Kingdom, according to the will and fancy of factious persons:
That perchance that violence used against him, from which he had so much
labored to defend and free himself was not clear enough; who was he that could
believe the late King would voluntarily break and violate that Law, by virtue
of which his Grandfather Francis the First was come unto the Crown? But, What
needed there other proofs? The same men who had forcibly and treacherously
caused that Decree to be made, had themselves waved, forsaken, and declared it
ineffectual and of no validity; for if the Duke of Mayenne had esteemed that
constitution valid, after the seditious deposing of King Henry the Third caused
by him, he would not have entitled himself Lieutenant General of the State and
Crown of France before the Kingdom were vacant, but Lieutenant to the Cardinal
of Bourbon, to whom, by that seditious Decree, the Kingdom appertained. But
what? not only then, but also after the King's death (who was by them caused
to be murdered) he, for three months together, usurped the same title,
declaring, how little valid he esteemed the determination of those States; that
therefore it was manifest and known, that it was not out of reverence to the
determination of his own States, which they now publish, that he made use
afterward of the fained person of the Cardinal of Bourbon, when it was
convenient for him; but thereby to usurp the Royal-Power and Ministry, and to
gain time and means to establish himself in his intended usurpation. But that
no less vain was the reason he alleged, viz. That he was not a Catholic, but
of a different Religion; for he was neither Infidel nor Pagan, but confessed
the same God and the same Redeemer the Catholics confess and adore; nor ought
some difference in opinion to make such a desperate irreconcilable division.
That he would not be obstinate, nor refuse to be taught and instructed, and
that he was ready, if his error were shown him, to forsake it, and reduce
himself to those rites which the Catholics of his Kingdom desired, and that he
wished he could, with safety of Conscience take away all scruples from all his
Subjects; but he prayed the Catholics not to wonder if he did not so easily
leave that Religion which he sucked with his milk, nor ought it to appear
strange, that he should not forsake the ancient institution of his life, unless
first he were made to see the error, which they were of opinion he ^as in,
which when it should come to pass, no body should need to desire his readiness
and willingness to condemn his fault* and enter into that way which should be
known to be the best. That it was fit, i^ a business that concerned his Soul
and eternal life, he should proceed with great circumspection; and so much the
more, because his example was like to draw many with it, whom he would not help
to damn, but willingly to save them if he could. That therefore he had often
demanded Councils, not to oppose himself against those already celebrated, as
his Enemies reported, but, to the end, that he together with them of the same
Religion, might be instructed and taught thereby: that it was no absurd thing
to celebrate a Council, and moderate many matters which times and occasions
produce: and to say they had already been decided by other Councils, was
nothing; for so all later Councils would have been vain and absurd in
confirming and ordering things again which had been settled and determined by
former ones: That ^f a more speedy and more proper way were found for his
instruction, he would not refuse it* and that he had given clea^ testimony of
it to the World, when he gave leave to the Catholics under his obedience to
send Ambassadors to the Pope to take some course in it, and when he so often
caused his very adversaries to be told, that i^ the midst of Arms it was no
time to talk of Conversions, but that making Peace, they should resolve upon a
Conference wherein he might be instructed; but that they, abusing his goodness,
had made show to lend an ear unto it, only when for their own designs they
desired to work a jealousy in the Spaniards: That it was certain, they
abhorred to have him instructed, since now in their Writings, they reckoned it
as a thing to be despaired of, having never yet so much as attempted it, and
because that presently as soon as the Marquess de Pisani's Embassy tending to
that effect was agreed upon, they had, by all possible means, crossed his
negotiation, and brought it so to pass, that the Pope would not admit him to
his Audience: That if they published and vaunted, That they would refer the
business wholly to the Pope, He on the other side did not despair, but the Pope
at last, knowing their subtilty and cunning, would take that resolution which
should be most conformable to decency and reason: That therefore seditious
persons ought no longer to tempt the good Catholics that stood armed for the
defense and safety of their Country; but that they rather should acknowledge
their error, and, as members gone astray, return to join themselves with the
rest of the Body: for, except the Princes of Lorain, who were strangers, all
the Princes of the blood, Prelates, Lords, Officers of the Crown, and in a
manner all the strength of the Gentry, were of his party, and made the true
Body of France united for the defense of their Liberty, and the safety of the
Kingdom: That they should consider how unworthy, how monstrous a thing it was,
to open the Gates to the Spaniard to come and invade the bowels of the Kingdom;
their Ancestor^, and even they themselves, having spilt and poured out so much
blood to drive them from their confines: That they should see how impious that
insatiableness was, which, for covetousness of Gold, sold the French Name,
Glory, and Liberty* but that it was no wonder they felt not the pri^^ of
conscience in that business, since they felt it not in the most cruel Parricide
committed on the person of the late King, which they were so far from detesting
and abhorring, that they impiously attributed it to Providence and the hand of
God* That if (as they now made show) they would be held innocent of that fact,
which obscured the glory, and laid a foul blot of wicked perfidiousness upon
the Name of the French, they should not at the same time joy and rejoice at it,
commend, exalt, and Canonize the Name of the Murderer, and do so many other
barbarous monstrous things; but should rather show, that they were moved at so
great a wickedness, and resolved to reconcile themselves to that Country that
had bred, nourished, and raised them to the height of greatness; and not take
part with barbarous Nations, that are enemies to, and separated from France, as
in language and manners, so in candor and disposition* That if these reasons
could not prevail to persuade those that were gone ^stray, and make them know
their error, at least they would confirm the resolution of good Frenchmen, to
continue constantly in the defense of their Country, wherein He, ^s he had for
the (...) past, so he would also for the future afford them always his
example, exposing his body, health, blood, and life before them all, as a
sacrifice for so worthy, so profitable a work: That his affection and devotion
till that present, were sufficiently known, and with what tenderness of mind he
had embraced the Catholics, conserved, protected, and maintained them in their
possessions, and in their privileges, ^ow he had ^voured and preserved their
Religion, and constantly and inviolably observed all that he had promised them
at his coming to the Crown; and now, 1592.
for more security, and absolutely to take away all scruples, he swore before
God and Men, that he was ready to persevere in their protection and
conservation till his latest breath, and that he never would do any thing to
the prejudice or diminution of them or their Religion, and that he desired
those things which his Subjects required of him, might, to the glory of God, be
orderly and fitly executed, as he hoped in Gods divine Majesty, and in his
infallible Providence, that the effects would quickly be seen, which out of a
confidence in God's mercy he doubted not to promise and attest. That in the
mean time he, with the advice of his Council, had decreed, and by that present
manifest did decree and declare, that the Duke of Mayenne in having assembled a
Congregation in Paris under the name of States, had seditiously and unjustly
usurped the office and power of King, and that those States being null,
invalid, and seditious, were not to hold, nor to be effectual, nor any thing
that in them should be done, established, or determined.

This Writing, which carried with it no necessity of an Answer, was, according
to the disposition of men's minds, variously received and interpreted; but, that
of the Catholic Lords of the King's party sent to the Assembly at Paris, held
the Confederates anxious and sollicitous for different respects* for the Legate
having caused it to be examined by the College of the Divines of Sorbonne,
persisted to say, that being heretical, it was not worthy of any answer; and
the Spanish Ambassador said, it was but a trick to disturb the good for which
they were met together: but the Archbishop of Lions, Villeroy, Ieannin, the
Count de Belin, and those of the Parliament, maintained, that what a kind of
one soever it was, it ought neither to be despised nor rejected, and gave their
reasons for it; and between these the Duke of Mayenne stood doubtful what
should be resolved; for, on the one side he had a great desire to begin a
Treaty with the Royallists, and on the other he would not absolutely alienate
nor exasperate the Legate and the Spaniards. In the end, after many
consultations held privately with his friends, he resolved to defer the
consideration of that business in the Assembly till he had conferred with the
Duke of Feria, and the rest that were coming, and till he had seen the strength
of the Army, and what Orders Count Charles of Mansfelt had, The Duke of Mayenne
resolves to deferr the business of the protestation of the Kings Catholics
till he had conferred with the Duke of Feria, Ambassador from Spain to the
Assembly of the States.
who was already prepared to enter into the Confines, to the end he might
regulate himself afterward according to time and occasion; wherefore he
determined to go and meet the Ambassadors, and to receive and employ the Army
himself, lest the Duke of Guise should go to receive it, and (to the lessening
of his reputation) have it consigned to him by the Spaniards, who openly
favored him. He hoped also to make some progress in the War, which might
augment his credit and reputation; but above all it was necessary for him to
draw a certain sum of money from the Spaniards, to be then distributed (in
favor of him) among the Deputies, many of whom, by reason of the dearth of
Paris, and their own poverty, had urgent needthereof.

This resolution being taken, he called the Deputies of the Assembly, and
prayed them to busy themselves about smaller matters, but not to deliberate
any thing concerning the Election till his return, The Duke of Mayenne having
left order with the Deputies not to meddle with matters of importance till his
return, goes to Soissons; where having conferred with the Spanish Ambassadors,
they break out in disgusts
it being fit that all the Catholic Ambassadors should be there, as likewise
himself, together with the Duke of Guise, and the other principal men of the
party, which he would bring along with him within a few days; and because his
praying was commanding, they all promised it without contradiction; and he
having left Monsieur de Villeroy and Presiden^ Ieannin to prevent those secret
practices which might be set on foot in the mean time, went with Four hundred
Horse to Soissons, where he had given order that his French^For^^s should be in
a readiness. Being come to that City upon the ninth of February, he found the
Duke of Feria, and the other Spanish Ambassadors there; with whom having
conferred, discontents began to break forth in their first meeting.

In Spain they thought it very agreeable to justice and decency, that the
Salique Law should be broken, because all they of the Family of Bourbon were
notoriously either Heretics, or favorers of Heresy, and that the Kingdom
should come to the Infanta Isabella the Catholic King's Daughter, who, by the
ordinary Laws, was the nearest heir to the late King, as being born of
Elizabeth his eldest sister. And on the contrary, when it was alleged, that
the posterity of the Royal Family failing, the authority of making a new King
returned to the commonalty of the People of France; they replied, that though
that were true, yet was it seemly, that the Commonalty in that election should
have respect to the Law of Nations, which always calls the nearest heirs; and
that it was very fit much should be condescended to, in regard of the so great
expenses the Catholic King had been at, and of those many things he had done
for the maintenance of the Crown and of Religion; since with great detriment to
his own affairs, he had employed all his Armies, and all the revenues of his
Kingdom, through the course of so many years, for the benefit of the affairs of
France; which if he from the beginning had abandoned to the discretion of the
Navarrois, there was no doubt but it would have been constrained to bend its
neck, and receive the yoke of Heresy: whence certainly would have proceeded
the total ruin of every Catholic in particular, and the general servitude and
dishonor of so Christian a Kingdom. Thus these Counselors having persuaded
themselves that these reasons would have the same efficacy in the minds of the
French, The Duke of Feria and M^ndozza Spanish Ambass^dors, urge the Duke of
Mayenne for the election of ^he Infanta Isabella to the Kingdom:
had concluded to apply themselves speedily to the advancing of so great a
design. Wherefore the Ambassadors* having this express order from Spain, and
believing also by Diego d' Ivarra's Letters, that the election of the Infanta
would willingly, and without contradiction be embraced by the States, did not
defer to urge the Duke of Mayenne about it, to the end that he assenting to it,
might favor that Declaration.

They said, that the Catholic King pretended justly to that election; first,
by reason of the right which the Infanta (as born of the eldest daughter of
France) pretended to that Kingdom; and then by reason of the benefits France
had received from him, and of those likewise which it might receive for the
future, he being resolved to use all his force and power to free them from the
contagion of Heresy, and to establish that Crown as soon as could be possible,
in a quiet peaceful condition. To this purpose they added many magnificent
promises to every one in particular, and much more largely in the Duke of
Mayenne's interests, showing, that the Catholic King would use him honorably,
increase him in riches and reputation, and make him the first person in the
whole Kingdom: finally, they demonstrated the honor the Catholic King did him
already, in putting his Arms under the authority of his Command, having given
order to Count Charles absolutely to obey and acknowledge him superior.

The Duke of Mayenne, who had already at his first coming been advertised, that
Count Charles brought not above Four thousand Foot, and One thousand Horse, and
that the Ambassadors had no order to pay him any more than Five and twenty
thousand Ducats, a sum much inferior to the greatness of his present need,
answered the Ambassadors Proposition very resentingly, and with more boldness
than he was wont, and reproached them with the weakness of those Forces, and
their thriftiness of money, which things were not like to free the Confederates
from the yoke of Heresy, nor to make the Kingdom peaceable, as they boasted in
their words, but to continue the calamities of War without end, and to reduce
the affairs of the League unto extreme weakness and misery: That it had been
seen in times past, how the Catholics Kings Armies were hardly come in sight,
when presently they vanished again, fomenting, but not remedying the mischiefs
that afflicted the Kingdom; which now appeared much more clearly, since in that
very point, when a course was to have been taken for the common safety, and
when he, to satisfy their so great importunities and complaints, had, with
infinite difficulty, assembled the States of the Crown, there came such poor
assistance, as neither the Army was sufficient to give heat and authority to so
great a business, nor the money able to supply, or so much as give the least
ease to the present necessities* That he marvelled exceedingly at that
preposterous manner of proceeding: That now indeed the prudenc^ of the
Catholic King, and his Counselors was requisite* and that he knew no good
could be expected for the future by that way: That it was a vain thing to
propose the Infanta for Queen, and not to send ^itting means to make her be
acknowledged, and to establish her in the Kingdom: That this was a difficult
weighty important business, and not well rellished by many, and to carry it on
with such feebleness of Forces, and so small reputation, was only the way to
destroy and ruin it, which, out of his observance to the Catholic King, he
would not endure: That the mind of men, who had settled the sum of their hopes
in the present Congregation, would be incensed and put in despair, when they
should see a stranger-Queen proposed, and that without power or means of
attaining to the Crown: That this was a thing averse from the nature of the
French, crossed by the impediment of the Salique Law, no way consonant to the
ears of Freemen, and such as were not accustomed to suffer themselves to be
brought under; and that therefore it was necessary first to engage men's minds
both with high reputation, and the noise of great Armies, and also to win their
affections by the allurements of profits and riches; but to propound so great a
matter in so faint a manner, was neither conformable to the greatness of the
Catholic King, nor decent for the name and reputation of the Confederates; and
that for his part, he neither thought fit, nor was able, nor knew how to engage
himself in that Proposition, being certain, not only that nothing at all would
be effected, but that in despair it would necessitate the Deputies to turn to
an Agreement with the Heretics, rather than precipitate themselves into a
bottomless pit of perpetual misery, where both the public and private
desolation were most visible.

This answer appeared as strange as unexpected to the Ambassadors, The Answer
of the Catholic Ambassadors to the Duke of Mayenne.
and they perceived at the very first, that they were far from the imaginary
reckonings they had made; yet persisting in their Proposition, they answered,
That the commotions of Arragon, and the long indisposition, and afterward the
death of the Duke of Parma, had hindered the King from making those
preparations, which should within few months (if there were need of them) be
made ready: That the Succors of the Catholic King had always been so
powerful, and so opportune, that they had manifestly delivered the Kingdom and
Religion from the oppression of the Heretics; and that the French could not
complain of any but themselves, who of themselves had lost battles, and brought
themselves under in such manner, that afterward the King of Spain had been fain
to forsake his own affairs, to recover them as it were from death to life: That
the sums of money were not small, but the greediness of the French very great
and unsatiable; and yet when they should give just reasonable satisfaction to
the Catholic King, He would strive to the utmost to content them; but that to
desire all advantages, all conveniences, all satisfactions, and all
contentments, and to give none at all, was not an equal dealing, nor a fair
reasonable way of proceeding: That they should resolve to declare their good
will in acknowledging the rights of the Infanta to be just and valid; and for
the rest, it was not to be thought the Catholic King would be careless of his
Daughters interests, but would empty his Kingdom both of men and money to place
her in the Throne, and to establish her perfectly: That the King, weary of so
many disturbances* and of so many expenses without fruit, would no more tire
his people and ruin himself, unless he knew the charge and labor should in
the end come to effect; but the Infanta being chosen, he would send Fifty
thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse, which should be paid till the enterprise
were perfected; and would freely pour out all the Treasures of his Kingdom upon
the French.

The Duke of Mayenne smiling at the proffer of these future Magnificences, said
it was necessary to think of present things; and that to make the States
swallow that bitter Pill of Foreign Dominion, it was necessary to temper it
with the sweetness of profit and reputation, else it would prove impossible to
get it down. But Inigo Mendozza (more able to dispute among learned men* than
to manage so weighty an Affair of State) replied, That they knew all the
Deputies would not only accept the Infanta, but also beseech the King to grant
her for their Queen; and that he alone opposed that Election, which already was
desired by them all. The Duke grew angry, and told Mendozza he was little
acquainted with the businesses of France, and not knowing the magnanimity of
the French, promised himself they should govern the Deputies, as they were wont
to do the stupid senseless Indians; but that in the effect he would find
himself much mistaken. Mendozza added, That rather in the effect they would
make him know, they were able to make the Infanta be elected by the States
without his help. But the Duke not enduring that, replied, That he feared it
not; and that if he should not consent unto it, all the world would not be able
to make that election. To which the Duke of Feria answering, said, They would
quickly make him perceive his error, and would take away the command of the
Army from him, and give it to the Duke of Guise. The Duke of Mayenne by reason
of the answers and threats of the Spanish Ambassadors, departs in anger from
the Meeting.
This netled the Duke of Mayenne more than all the rest; and as he was most
passionate in his anger, he added, that it was in his power to turn all France
against them, and that if he pleased, he could in a week shut them all out of
the Kingdom: That they played the parts rather of Ambassadors from the King of
Navarre, than the Catholic King, nor could they serve him better if they were
paid by him: but they should not think to use him as their Subject, for he was
not so yet, nor did ever think by that manner of usage to be so for the future;
and scornfully taking leave, departed from them.

Iuan Baptista Tassis took the business in hand again the next day, striving to
pacify and overcome him with promises; but the Duke told him freely, that if
now they used him in that manner, he might, if he were not mad, perceive how he
should be used when he was obliged, and a vassal; and refused a great while to
confer any more with the Duk of Feria, The Popes Ministers and others labor so
far that the differences between ^he Duke and the Spaniards are composed in
show, but not in their hearts
and Mendozza. But Pronotary Agucchi, and Commissary Malvagia, who were present
by order from the Legate, and Count Charles of Mansfelt, who was come thither to
consult what should be done with the Army, labored so far in the business,
that on the one side the Spaniards knowing they could do nothing without the
Duke of Mayenne; and he, when the violence of his anger was past, remembering
that he was not in such a condition that it was convenient for him to lose the
supportation of the Spaniards, differences were composed again at last, but
with so much prejudice to the Catholic Kings designs, that the Duke to put a
hard bit in their mouths, wrote to Villeroy, Ieannin, and the Archbishop of
Lions, by all means to cause the Writing of the Kings Catholics to be
answered, and that he should begin the conference which they proposed, to the
end they might have that refuge in a readiness, whenever they should be ill
dealt withal by the Spaniards for the future; and yet dissembling on both
sides, they agreed among themselves, that the Duke of Mayenne should assent to
the election of the Infanta, and favor it with the States; and on the other
side, that she being elected, he should have the Title of the Duchy of
Bourgogne, the Government of Picardy for his life, the Title and Authority of
the Queens Lieutenant General through the whole Kingdom, that all debts should
be paid him, as well those that were contracted in the name of the Public, as
those in his own particular; and that he should be repaid all the money which
he could make appear he had spent of his own; they paid him Five and twenty
thousand Crowns at that present, and consigned Letters to him for Two hundred
thousand more, and gave order to Count Charles of Mansfelt with the Army to
obey him, and dispose of himself according to his Orders.

This Convention pieced up in this manner, did indeed stop the discords and
disgusts for the present, but made not things so secure as to go on unanimously
in their endeavors f^r the future; for the Duke of Mayenne on the one side,
did not believe himself obliged to observe what the necessity of public
affairs had extorted from him by force, and the Spaniards as they had but
little confidence that he would observe them, so were they ready to embrace any
occasion that should present it self, of treating and establishing the business
without him. But being departed from Soisons upon the Five and twentieth of
February, and come to Paris, as soon as they began to converse with the
Deputies, they easily perceived that the Duke of Mayenne ruled all the
Assembly, and that without him nothing at all could be obtained.

On the other side he being gone to the Confines where the Army was, found it
so weak, that he lost hope of doing any enterprise of such moment, as was like
to bring him either profit or reputation. They all agreed that the Army should
not advance into the inward parts of the Kingdom, but for diverse ends: the
Spanish Ministers, to the end Paris might not be freed from scarcity, following
their conceit that it was profitable for their designs the League and the City
should be streightened and kept low; the Duke of Mayenne on the other side, to
the end the Spaniards might not take heart by the nearness of their Forces, and
Count Charles, because by reason of the weakness of his Army, and that he had
but little money, would not engage himself in places far from the confines, and
in actions of long and difficult event; wherefore though the Legate and the
Parisians were earnest, that the Army should advance and besiege St. Denis, to
free the passage of victuals into the City on that side, yet it was
nevertheless unanimously determined, that the Forces should be employed in
other enterprises, among which, the Duke of Mayenne was better pleased with the
besieging of Noyon than any other, as well because he had almost a certain hope
of taking that place, and coming off, with increase of credit and reputation,
as to dispatch quickly, that he might return to the assistance of the Assembly;
also because it was near to Rheims, where the Lords of the House of Lorain were
to meet, before the State should come to a final determination.

The Forces being come together from all places, the Army drew before the Town,
and having fortified their quarters, without delay, began to break ground, The
Duke of Mayenn^ with the Spanish Forces commanded by C^a^l^s of M^n^f^lt, and
with the Popes commanded by Appi^ Conti, and with his own besieges Noyon.
to cast up trenches and raise batteries. There were in the Army four thousand
Foot, and one thousand Horse of the Catholic Kings; twelve hundred German
Foot, and one hundred Horse, paid by the Pope; which Forces were commanded by
Appio Conti as General of the Church, and by Commissary Malvagia; and between
five and six hundred German Foot of the Prince of Aiguillon's Regiment; three
thousand French Foot, and between eight and nine hundred Horse of the Duke of
Mayenne's, with which were the Dukes of Guise and Aumale, and the Sieur de
Rosne, and de la Chastre. In the Town was Monsieur d' Estree with nine hundred
Foot and about eighty Horse, but not assisted by the Townsmen, who by an old
inclination had ever desired to be under the Confederates. Within a few days
three batteries were planted, one of which was that of the Walloons, under the
command of Berlotte; another where the Spaniards wrought under Antonio Zunniga,
and Ludovico Velasco; and the third, where the Germans were, under the command
of Appio Conti; and the French being entrenched on the side toward Chauny lay
upon the way from whence relief might come. This siege lasted but few days, in
respect of what men had thought i^ would; for the Duke of Mayenne himself with
extraordinary diligence would needs assist at all the works, and show that now
he commanded alone without the superiority of other Generals, he knew how with
valor and celerity to bring an enterprise to perfection; wherefore being
busied both in mind and body, and applying his utmost endeavors to it, he
wearied the besieged in so many places, and with so many sorts of Mines,
Batteries, turnings of Water, and frequent assaults, that not being longer able
to resist* they agreed to surrender, Monsieur d'Estr^e surrenders Noyon to the
Duke of Mayenne afte^ a few days siege.
and upon the last of May Monsieur d' Estree delivered the Town into their
hands, whereupon there was grievous complaint in the Army; for by reason of the
pains the Soldiers had taken, they pretended the pillage of it belonged to
them; but the Duke of M^yenne a^erse from rapine, and knowing how well-affected
the Townsmen were, would not suffer strangers to enrich themselves with the
Blood of the French.

But in the time of this siege a thing happened which did very much weaken the
Army of the League: for the Colonel of the Popes Lands-Knights having denied to
obey Appio Conti, who commanded him to make his men work at the trenches, as
the other Soldiers did, and being come from words to swords, Appio Conti was
slain by a thrust the German made at him, who being seized upon in the midst of
his men by the Duke of Mayenne himself, escaped afterward out of the hands of
them that kept him; whereupon the German Captains furling up their Ensigns,
refused to bear Arms any more; which not displeasing Commissary Malvagia, he
(though the Duke stiffly contradicted it) dismissed them from the Popes pay,
with no less error than Mat^e^cci had formerly sent away the Swissers. The
Catholic Kings Foot were likewise diminished, especially the Walloons, who
because they were not paid ran in great numbers from their colors; and the
French, according to their wont, were both decreased in number and abated in
force; wherefore it was necessary to omit the prosecution of other enterprises,
Mansfelt not being willing to advance further, either because of the weakness
of his Army, or of his Orders from the Spanish Ministers, the Parisians almost
in an uproar, solicited the enterprise of St. Denis; which the chief
Commanders not being willing to undertake at that time, and they of the City
insisting still that the number of their Garrisons might be increased, to the
end they might be able to convoy their provisions more securely, which were
taken away and hindered by the Kings Garrisons, it was determined in Paris that
the Popes Germans should come in thither, It is determined at Paris that the
Popes Forces should enter into the City, ^ut their Commander being killed, and
the Soldiers dismissed, the Duke of May^nne sends hi^ Son^ Regiment thither to
put heart into his adherents.
that neither the Spaniards nor the Duke of Mayenne's Forces might be
increased, but the Legates Order arriving after the death of Appio Conti, and
after the Commissary had dismissed the Germans, the Duke of Mayenne laid hold
of the occasion, and in stead of them, sent in the Regiment of the Prince his
Son, thereby giving warmth to them that depended upon him, and desired his
greatness. Noyon being taken, and the Army half dissolved, Count Charles
retired toward the Confines, expecting an opportunity to return into Flanders,
and the Duke of Mayenne went to Rheims to meet with the Princes of his Family,
and then to go and assist the Assembly of Paris.

The King at this time was forced by an unthought-of accident to go to Tours,
which was not without prejudice to his affairs, and particularly caused the
loss of Noyon. He from the year 1587. had treated about giving his Sister the
Princess Catherine in marriage to the Count de Soissons; Count Soissons, to
whom the King had formerly promised his Sister the Lady Catherine to wife,
departed from the Camp, and went secretly into Bearne, where being assisted by
Madam de Granmont, once beloved, and after forsaken by the King, he intends to
marry the Princess; but the King being advertised, goes into those parts, and
bringing back his Sister with him, cuts off the Counts designs.
but things not having succeeded according to agreements, by reason whereof the
Count went unto him to the Army in Xaintonge, they remained as ill satisfied of
one another, as the Princess was pleased with the gentle fashion and behavior
of the Count; wherefore though he both departed from, and returned to the party
of the Catholics during the States at Blois, yet had they continued secret
conversation by Letters, whereby their hearts in progress of time were the more
enflamed, and they were gone so far by the means of the Madam de Granmont, that
the Count, who was one of those that thought of forsaking the King, being come
to Tours under the apparent pretense of visiting his Mother, posted from thence
secretly into Bearne, with an appointment to contract and consummate the
Marriage with the Lady Catherine. But the King (who hoped the Marriage of his
Sister would be a means to gain him the friendship of other Princes, and
therefore made several designs about it) had his eyes so intent upon the Counts
actions, that he dived into that intention before it was executed: For having
in former times long loved Madam de Granmont, and then left her after his
departure out of Gascogne, as she did all she could to disoblige him, out of
disdain for having been forsaken; so his Sisters, most tru^^y Gentlewomen,
being corrupted by the Kings gifts, were as ready to give him notice of every
particular: Wherefore being come to the knowledge of all that was in agitation,
he gave order to some of the Parliament to go into Bearne, and hinder that
Contract; and he having before sent the Baron de Byron (by him created Admiral)
under pretense of taking possession of that dignity in the Parliament, followed
him speedily, leaving his household and Council at Char^res, and having caused
the Princess to come to Tours, he brought her with him, after the space of two
months, unto the same City, being exceedingly angry to see himself so little
esteemed by those of his own Blood. But this was a thing that made him more
clearly know, it was high time (nor could he any longer defer) to take some
resolution, and to establish his affairs* since that even the Princes of the
Blood were openly alienated from him. Thus every little accident, though it
seemed cross, was yet always favorable to his greatness and establishment.

Whilst they were fighting about Noyon, with no less ardour did they contend in
Paris about resolving upon the Answer that was to be given to the Catholics of
the Kings party; The Writing of the Kings Catholics sent to the Convocation of
the State^, is damned by the Spaniards for Heretical, and therefore they urge
that it should neither be accepted nor answered.
for the Spaniards supported by the Cardinal-Legat, strove to cross it, and for
a manifest reason alleged, that the Writing being heretical, as the Divines of
Sorbonne had declared, it could not be taken into consideration, nor ought the
States to give an Answer to it: That which made it heretical, they said, was,
because it affirmed that Subjects were obliged to yield obedience to their
Prince, though he were an Heretic, both known to be such, and condemned by the
holy Church: They added, that this was a net to catch the inclinations of the
simple, an obstacle to hinder the progress of the States, and a stone of
scandal to retard Gods service; that it was not fit to lose time about their
Enemies subtilties, nor about the interpositions of the King of Navarre, from
whom it was certain that Writing was derived, since they themselves that caused
it to be presented, confessed they did it with his consent, and it was
subscribed by no other man but Revol, one of the Secretaries of State; and
therefore, as he that will do well ought not to hearken to the temptations
which the Devil suggests; so they that would procure the safety of the Kingdom,
and the establishment of Religion, should in no sort mind the interpositions of
the King of Navarre, and those that spoke by his instigation, and through his
very mouth. On the other side, many of the Deputies said, that they ought not
to shut their ears against those of the same Blood and Religion, who perchance
sought to amend their errors, and cure their Consciences by retiring to the
party of the good Catholics, and adhering to the Confederates; that if it
should come to pass, the King of Navarre would remain so weak and abject, that
it would need no great pa^ns to vanquish him; that all means ought to be used,
and covetously laid hold on, which might lead to Peace, that being the last end
to which all good Frenchmen tended, and to which for their own safety all
aspired; and if with a common consent the way to attain to quietness could be
found* why should they ingulf themselves in new miseries of War, and in new
perpetual distractions of Arms? That to this end, the Duke of Mayenne had in
his Declaration invited the Catholics of the contrary party to meet and confer
with him: That he had protested this unto them, adding, that if they resolved
not to unite themselves with him, they should be guilty of all the subsequent
mischiefs and calamities: Which Protestation the Catholics trusting in, had
now demanded a Conference, and if they should not accept it, they should make
themselves guilty of the same crimes: That their speaking by the Kings
permission, imported nothing; for things are not done and obtained all at once:
That being now subject to his power, they were necessitated to speak in that
manner; but that afterward being persuaded and drawn by little and little, by
reason and gentleness, perchance they would make a more clear, more express
resolution: That it was no matter though Revol we^e Secretary to the King of
Navarre, for he was a Catholic, and perchance no less inclined to a revolt
than the rest: That it was already known, how even the Princes of the Blood
thought of changing their party, that the Catholics were ill satisfied,
because the promises of his Conversion were not kept; and therefore it was
necessary to foment that beginning of alteration, to help them to bring forth a
firm determination, and by means thereof reunite all the Members into one Body,
to attain the safety and (...) of the Kingdom.

This was the more plausible opinion, and it was carried by the Duke of
Maye^ne's Confidents, from whom they had received order to bring it to pass;
nor did the^e want any thing, save the Legates consent, from whom neith^r the
States, nor the Duke himself would in any wise alienate themselves. Therefore
the Archbishop of Lions went to him, and demonstrated, that if the Proposition
of the Royalists were not accepted, some very great tumults would follow; for
the Nobility and the Order of Commons stood so stiffly for it, that being tired
out with the Wa^, and (...) of Arms, they would make an insurrec^ion, with
great danger of revolting to the King of Navarre: That no harm could be feared
from that Conference; for such persons should be employed in it, as there would
be no danger of their forsaking the cause of Religion: That if the Catholics
of the Kings party would join with that of the Confederates, it would be the
very point of Victory; and if on the other side, they should show themselves
averse from doing so, it would be easy, after having given satisfaction to the
World, and to the States in appearance, to dissolve the Conference a thousand
ways: That also in the time of Cardinal Ga^^ano there had been many Treaties
and Conferences, both by himself and others, and yet no absurdity had followed;
and if at that present there should not be one, he would not only be accounted
scrupulous and severe, but also obstinate, and an Enemy to Peace: That if only
through his opposition, the proposal of the Catholics were not embraced, it
would be attributed to an unseasonable pride, and a too interessed union with
the Span^ards, which perchance would not be pleasing at Rome; that already all
men murmured at it, and that the demand was so just, that whosoever should
refuse it, would manifestly put themselves on the wrong side. The Legate (whose
ears were already filled with the popular discourses, which condemned his too
much assenting to the Spaniards; the Prevost des Merchands having added, that
the City, which by this Conference hoped for the benefit of being partly freed
from scarcity, would certainly mutiny if it were refused, The Cardinal-Legat
persuaded by the Archbishop of Lions, consents in secret that an answer should
be given to the Catholics of the Kings party.
and those of the Parliament still boldly crying, and giving out, that they
would make Protestation to the States) at last yielded in secret, that the
Catholics should be answered, and that the Conference should be accepted, but
without his apparent consent. So with a general Vote it was decreed in the
States, that the Conference should be accepted, and upon the Fourth day of
March they framed an Answer to the Catholics of this Tenor.

WE have seen some few days ago, the Letter which was written to us; The Tenor
of the Answer, wherein the Conference demanded, is accepted.
and sent by a Trumpet in your Name; which we could wish came from you with
such zeal and affection as you were wont (before these last miseries) to bear
to the preservation of Religion, and with such respect and observance as is due
to the Church, our Lord the Pope, and the holy Chair; we should for certain
quickly be agreed and united together against the Heretics; nor would other
Arms be longer necessary for us, to beat down and break in pieces these new
Altars which are set up against ours, and to hinder the establishment of
Heresy, which (because it has been tolerated, or rather honored with reward
and recompense, when it should have been punished) is not contented now adays
to be received and accepted; but will become Mistress, and domineer imperiously
under the Authority of an Heretic Prince. And though that Letter name no body
in particular, nor is subscribed by any of those whose names it bears, and that
we therefore are uncertain who sent it us, or rather certain that it was done
at the suggestion of others, (the Catholics not having in the place where you
are, that liberty which is necessary, to bear, deliberate, and resolve with the
counsel and judgment of their conscience, any of those things which our misery
and the common safety require) yet should we not have so long delayed to make
answer to it, had it not been that we stayed expecting to have the Assembly
fuller, and increased by a good number of persons who were upon the way to come
unto it, of whom the greater part being arrived, out of a doubt that our so
long silence may be calumniated, We do it this day, without deferring it to
another* in expectation of the rest who are yet to come. And we declare first
of all, That we have all sworn and promised to God, (after having received his
most precious Body, and the blessing of the holy See by the hands of the
Cardinal-Legat) that the scope of all our counsels, the beginning, means, and
end of all our actions shall be to secure and preserve the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion, wherein we will live and die. Truth it self which cannot
lie, having taught us, that by seeking the Kingdom and Glory of God before all
other things, temporal blessings shall be added thereunto; among which in the
first place after Religion, we put the conservation of the State entire; and
hold that all other means of hinderance ruin and destruction, grounded only
upon humane wisdom, smell of impiety, are unjust, contrary to duty, and the
profession we make to be good Catholics, and without likelihood of ever having
any good success. And we being freed from those accidents and dangers wh^^h
good men foresee and fear by reason of the mischiefs He^esie produces, will
not reject any counsel which may help to diminish our miseries, or bring them
to an end. For we acknowledge, and are but too sensible of the calamities which
Civil War brings forth, and have no need of any body to show us our wounds; but
God and men know who are the authors of them. It suffices us to say we are
trained up and instructed in the Doctrine of the holy Church, nor can our Souls
and Consciences have repose and tranquillity, nor taste any happiness while
they are in fears and jealousies of losing Religion, whose danger can neither
be dissembled nor avoided, if men continue as they have begun. Thence it is,
that, judging as you do that our reconciliation is most necessary, we seek it
with a truly Christian charity and pray and conjure you in the Name of God to
grant it us. Nor let the blames and upbraidings which the Heretics cast upon
us any way hinder you. As for ambition, which they publish to be the cause of
our taking up of Arms, it is in your power to see us within, and discover
whether Religion be the cause, or pretense; leave you the Heretics, (whom at
the same time you both follow and detest:) If we lift up our hands to Heaven to
give God thanks, if we be disposed and ready to follow all good counsels, to
love you, to honor you, to yield you that respect and service that shall be
due to you; then praise us as honest men, who have had the courage to despise
all dangers for the preservation of Religion, nor have wanted integrity and
moderation to forbear the thought of any thing that is against honor and
reason: but if the contrary happen, then accuse our dissimulation, and condemn
us as wicked persons; by so doing you will set both Heaven and Earth against
us, and make our Arms fall out of our hands as conquered, or leave us so weak,
that the Victory over us will be without danger, and without glory. In the mean
time, blame the mischief of Heresy which is known to you, and rather fear that
canker that devours us, and every day gets ground, than a vain imaginary
Ambition, when there is no such thing; or, if there be, it will be left alone
and poorly attended, when it shall be deprived of the cloak of Religion. It is
likewise a calumny to accuse us that we bring Strangers into the Kingdom: it is
necessary either to lose Religion, with our Honors, Lives and Estates, or else
to oppose the force of the Heretic, whom nothing can please but our ruin; and
therefore we are constrained to make use of them, since your Arms are against
us* They are the most holy Fathers, and the most holy See that have sent us
relief; and though many have been called to that supreme Dignity since these
last troubles, yet have there not been one of them who has changed his
affection toward us, a most certain testimony that our cause is just. It is
the Catholic King, a Prince allied and confederate to this Crown, only
powerful now adays to maintain and defend Religion, who has likewise helped us
with his forces and powers, yet without any other reward or recompense, but the
glory which so good a work has justly acquired him. Our Kings against the
Rebellion of Heretics, and in the like necessity have had recourse to them; we
have followed their example, without entering into any Treaty prejudicial to the
State, or to our reputation, though our necessity has been much greater than
theirs. Rather set before your eyes, that the English, who assist you to
establish Heresy, are the ancient Enemies of the Kingdom, who yet bear the
title of that usurpation, and have their hands imbrued in the innocent blood of
an infinite number of Catholics, who have constantly suffered death for the
service of God and the Church. Cease likewise to hold us guilty of High
Treason, because we will not obey an Heretic Prince, whom you call our natural
King; and have a care, that bending your eyes to the Earth to look upon humane
Laws, you forget not the divine Law that came from Heaven. It is not Nature,
nor the right of Nations that teaches us to acknowledge our Kings, but the Law
of God, the Law of his Church, and that of the Kingdom, which require from the
Prince that is to command us, not only proximity of blood, which you stand
upon, but also the profession of the Catholic Religion; and this quality has
given name to that Law which we call the Fundamental Law of the State, always
followed and observed by our Ancestors without any exception; though the other
of proximity of blood has been sometime altered, the Kingdom remaining
nevertheless entire, and in its former dignity. To come therefore to so holy
and necessary a reconciliation, we accept the Conference which you demand,
provided it may be only between Catholics, and to deliberate about the means
of preserving Religion and the State. And because you desire it should be
between Paris and St. Denis, we entreat you to like of Mont-Martre, St. Meaux,
or Chaliot in the Queens Palace; and that you would be pleased to send those
that shall be deputed by you, upon some day you shall think fit, before the end
of this month, whereof we being advertised, will not fail to have ours there,
and to proceed with sincere affection, free from all passion, praying to God
that the event of it may be such, that we may find the preservation of Religion
and of the State; and a good, secure durable peace, as we also pray him to
conserve you, and give you his Spirit to know, and embrace the most wholesome
profitable counsel for the general safety.

This answer being received and read in the Council of the King, who was not
yet come back from his journey into Poictou, they that were there present
determined to prosecute the Conference, but to defer the particulars thereof
till they had the Kings consent to them, and the general votes of the Council.
Thus by a Writing full of courteous expressions, they excused the delay, and
finally, having received their approbation, and replied again with other
Letters, Surenne is chosen for the place of conference.
they concluded to hold the Conference at Surenne between Paris and St. Denis.

There was great contention at Paris about the election of the persons that
were to intervene at this Treaty; for the Legate and the Spanish Ambassadors
strove to procure that one of them might be Guilliaume Rose Bishop of Senlis, a
man of a sour nature, and sharp eloquence, which for many years he had
profusely used against the Kings, and against their party; and on the other
side, they that inclined to peace, desired the Sieur de Villeroy might be
admitted, who by many was excluded as partial to the King: at last for the
common satisfaction they were both left out, and those that were unanimously
chosen were, the Archbishop of Lions, Pericard Bishop of Auranche, The persons
elected on both sides to intervene at the Conferen^^.
Godefr^y de Billy Abbot of St. Vincent de Laon, the Admiral Villars, the Count
de Belin, the Baron de Talmay, the Sieurs de Montigny and Montaulin, President
Ieannin, and President Maistre, Estienne Bernard Advocate in the Parliament of
Dijon, and Honor de L^urent Counselor in the Parliament of Aix. They of the
Kings side chose the Archbishop of Bourges, the Sieurs de Chavigny, and
Bellieure; the Count de Schombergh, President de Thou, Nicholas Sieur de
Rambouillett, the Sieur de Pontcarre, and Secretary Revol. But at the first
meeting, with the mutual consent of the Deputies, there were added the Sieur de
Vic Governor of St. Denis on the Kings side, and for the League the Sieur de
Villeroy, who the Duke of Mayenne desired by all means should assist in the
Treaty, and in the progress of it the Sieurs de Rosne and la Chastre were
likewise admitted.

In the mean time, the Duke of Feria, upon the second of April, had solemn
public audience of the States, at which in a Latin Oration, he proffered the
Catholic Kings assistance and supplies to the Assembly, for the conservation
of Religion, and the election of such a King, as the condition of the times
required, and likewise presented Letters from King Philip, wherein after many
courteous expressions, he referred himself to what the Duke of Feria, and the
other Ambassadors should represent in his name, who said, that they reserved
themselves to do it, when the Duke of Mayenne and the other Princes should be
come unto the States, who were yet at the meeting at Rheims with the Duke of
Lorain.

The Lords of the House of Lorain being met at Rheims to treat about the
election of a King, differ in opinions by reason of their own interests.
There their minds were no less disagreeing, nor the opinions less differing
than in the States; for the Duke of Lorain seeing the rest were not inclined to
yield to him as Head of the Family, and knowing the Spaniards were already
engaged in the design of getting the Infanta elected, began to be weary of the
War which he had sustained all those late years to the great damage of his
people; and though the Spaniards sometimes scattered reports, that the Infanta
being chosen Queen should take the Cardinal his Son to be her Husband, it
seemed to him so absurd, that he was not at all inclined to believe it, and
since he could attain to nothing else, would have been content with Peace,
whereby the Cities of Thoul and Verdun should remain his. On the other side,
the Duke of Mayenne desired he should persist in Arms, and favor the election
of him and his Sons, thinking his pains and endeavors deserved that reward,
and that no other body at that present was able to undergo that weight, but he
rather gave signs of this intention than propounded it, and labored
dexterously to insinuate it into the rest; among which as the Dukes of Aumale
and Elboeuf adhered to him, so the Dukes of Nemours and Guise assented not,
both being intent to endeavor for themselves, and full of hopes that the
Spaniards might at last concur to marry the Infanta to one of them. The Duke of
Mayenne strove to withdraw them from that thought, by letting them see it was
far from the intent of the Spaniards, who had no other design than to get the
Crown into the power of the Infanta, and by her, either in her lifetime, or
after her death, to have it united and incorporated to that of Spain, to which
it was very repugnant to give her a young French Husband, and such an one as
might be able not only to govern her, but also the people, and forces of the
Nobility and Kingdom.

Girolamo Gondi with the Grand Duke of Thuscany's consent, treats an Agreement
with the Duke of Lorain in the Kings behalf, offering him the Princess
Catherine in marriage for the Prince his Son; and the Count de Schombergh
treats an agreement with the Duke of Mayenne, but with weak hope of success.
It was a remarkable thing, that though this was an Assembly of the House of
Lorain, the King should yet have a very great party in it; for by the Grand
Duke of Thuscany's consent, Girolamo Gondi had formerly begun, and now
continued to treat with the Duke of Lorain, to induce him and the rest to think
of agreeing with the King, proposing his Conversion, full caution and security
for Religion, and to give his Sister in Marriage to the Prince of Lorain, with
those Cities which the Duke desired and pretended to; and on the other side, by
means of the Count of Schombergh he had begun to deal with the Duke of Mayenne,
showing him that they might with much more ease, agree privately between
themselves, than if they should stay for the event of the conference, for he
was ready to gratify him, and give him that really in present, which the
Spaniards promised but verbally to give in future. But the hopes of every one
of these interessed persons were still too fresh and lively, which dazzling
their understanding and incumbering it with passion, would not suffer them yet
to come to this determination; so that neither agreeing among themselves, nor
in any third person, they parted at last without any conclusion; save that the
Duke of Lorain gave Commission to the Sieur de Bassompier his Ambassador to the
States, to adhere in the Treaty to the Duke of Mayenne's will, in what
concerned their interests and the affairs of the Spaniards, without declaring
himself in the business of election. The Duke of Mayenne with his Nephew of
Guise, and the Duke of Elboeuf, went toward Paris, being yet uncertain of his
own design; the Duke of Lorain more desirous of quiet than any thing else,
returned into his own State, and the Duke of Aumale went into Picardy to assist
Count Charles, who staid about the confines with the forces of the Catholic
King.

In the mean time the Conference at Surenne was begun, upon the Nine and
twentieth of April, where after the first Meetings, and mutual Exhortations, to
lay aside all affections and interests, and to apply themselves sincerely to
the common good and safety; the Deputies showed one another their Commissions
and Authority; A Truce is concluded and published, for four Leagues about
Paris, and as much about Surenne for the security of them that treated; the
Parisians rejoice at it very much.
they gave Passports and Safe conducts on both sides, and a discourse was begun
of making a Cessation of Arms in the neighboring places, to the end that the
Deputies themselves, and those of their retinue might stay freely, and treat
without disquiet or suspicion, which Truce was afterward established and
published upon the Third of May for four Leagues about Paris, and as much about
Surenne; which did so rejoice the Parisians, who had been so many years shut up
and imprisoned within their Walls, that every one might easily perceive how
much joy and consolation the peace (if it should follow) would bring to all the
people of France. Both parties agreed in this one point, that peace was
necessary to raise up France from her present miseries and future ruin; every
one praised it, and showed himself ready to embrace it, but they disagreed
absolutely in the means proper to attain it. For the Deputies for the League
held, the foundation of all things to be Religion, and that no other agreement
ought, or could be concluded, wherein the first and chiefest consideration was
not about it; and therefore exhorted the Royallists to forsake the Heretic
Prince whom they followed, and uniting themselves all to one end, unanimously
to choose a Catholic King, such a one as might be acceptable and approved by
the Pope, by whose establishment, the roots of discord being extirpated, which
sprung up from diversity of Religion, they might jointly come to settle Policy,
good Government, Peace, and the repose of the Kingdom. On the other side, the
Deputies on the Kings part maintained, that the foundation of Peace, was the
acknowledgement of, and obedience to a lawful Prince, truly French, and called
by the Laws: Under whose shadow all of them reuniting themselves, troubles and
dissentions might be made to cease; they said, Religion was a second
consideration, for Christians anciently had obeyed and acknowledged many
Princes that were not only Heretics and Schismatics, but also enemies and
persecutors of the Church, and the most holy, most learned Fathers of
Christendom, nay, even the Apostles themselves had taught and preached that
obedience; and therefore they exhorted those of the League to reunite
themselves in the acknowledgment of their King, to whom the Crown undoubtedly
belonged, both by a right lineal descent, and by virtue of the Salique Law; for
as he would give all kind of securities, the most full and ample that could be
desired for the preservation of Religion; so, in time, he might also be reduced
to embrace and follow the Catholic Doctrine, from which he did not show
himself absolutely averse.

The Archbishop of Lions, and the rest of his fellow Deputies could not endure
to hear this Doctrine, but abhorred and confuted it with detestation, though
the Archbishop of Bourges, with great flourishes of Learning, Authorities, and
Examples, labored to maintain it; but they on the other side said freely, This
was the way to make the Kingdom Schismatical, and alienate it from the
Fellowship of the Catholic Church, and that they would rather choose to lose
their lives, than consent to so brutish, so pernicious a thing; and then again,
the Archbishop of Bourges demonstrated, that to be so obstinate upon that
point, was a subjecting of the Kingdom to the Dominion, not only of Foreign
Princes, but of its most bitter enemies, and that for their parts (since they
knew they might live with Liberty of Conscience, and in the maintenance of
their Religion) they would not by any means make themselves guilty of so great
a crime. After long disputations, the Archbishop of Bourges proposed, that
since they could not frame themselves to acknowledge a King, that was not
publicly and certainly a Catholic, they would jointly exhort King Henry to
change his Religion, and come into the bosom of the Church; for if he should
accept of the invitation, and resolve to do so, all doubts and occasions of
dissenting from him would cease, and if he should refuse it, then every
Catholic would forsake him, and all united together would choose another Prince
of the Blood, that were a Catholic, and one generally approved. The
Confederates replied, they neither could nor ought to exhort, nor invite the
King of Navar, who had not only oftentimes showed he regarded not, nay, rather
despised those invitations, but also having promised them to turn Catholic,
had deceived them and abused their credulity; Wherefore, if he had made no
reckoning of his friends, much less was it to be believed, he would value his
enemies, and that having by the Apostolic See been declared a relapsed
Heretic, and excommunicated, they could not treat with him, nor meddle with
any thing that appertained to his interest. The Royallists showed, that now he
seemed to be of another opinion, and that the invitations formerly made unto
him, had been threatening ones, accompanied with force, and therefore he had
rejected them, as unseemly to his reputation; but that now he took those
exhortations in good part, which were made to him by way of extremity, and
showed a thousand signs that he would reconcile himself to the Church; that he
had not kept his promise by reason of the hinderance of Arms and War, for it
was fit his conversion should be with decency and honor, and without violence,
and that they hoped to see him a Catholic very shortly: to which the others
replied, that they should be very glad of his conversion (if it should come to
pass) for his own souls sake; but that these were politic artifices to deceive
the simple, nor could they ground any resolution at all upon it.

Diverse Sittings were spent in these disputes, without coming to a conclusion;
so that many judged (as they had prognosticated from the beginning) that the
Conference would be dissolved without fruit. Hence the Spaniards taking
courage* both because of the resolution which they of the League showed, that
they would never assent to acknowledge any other King than one that was
sincerely a Catholic; and because of the perseverance they saw in the King and
his Deputies, to set the point of Religion after the Salique Law and the
politic Government of the Kingdom) resolved to make the utmost push for it,
and to propose the election of the Infanta for the last engine of their
attempt. Wherefore the Cardinal-Legate having caused many Processions and
Prayers to be made, with no less pomp than devotion, to beg of God that he
would inspire the States in the good choice of convenient means for the common
safety: There met in his Palace upon the nineteenth of May, besides the Spanish
Ambassadors, May the 19, 1593, there is a private meeting in the Legates Palace,
where the Lords of the House of Lorain are present, and other Deputies
representing the three Orders.
who where to make the Proposition, the Dukes of Mayenne, Guise, Aumale, and
Elboeuf, the Count de Chaligny, the Sieur de Bassompier in the name of the Duke
of Lorain, the Sieur de la Pierre for the Duke of Savoy, Lorenzo Tornabuoni for
the Duke of Mer^oeur, Cardinal Pelleve, and the Count de Belin Governor of
Paris; and in the name of the States six Deputies to treat with the Spanish
Ministers, the Archbishop of Lions and the Bishop of Senlis for the Clergy,
the Sieurs de la Chastre and Montolin for the Nobility, the Prevost des
Marchands of Paris and Estienne Bernard for the Commons. In this meeting,
wherein all the spirits of the States, and the very soul of the League
consisted, the Duke of Feria began to detest the Conference that was held with
those of the Kings party; saying, that the Cardinal-Legate and he had assented
to it only, that they might not fail of any possible means to reduce those
that were gone astray into the bosom of the holy Church, and to the end that
the obstinacy of the Politics being more clearly seen, who set Religion behind
the consideration of temporal things, the World might be certified of their
wickedness, and of the good intent of the Catholic King, whose principal
object was Christian Charity, the safety of Religion, and (with these
conditions) the peace and happiness of that most Christian Kingdom; but this
trial also having been made, that nothing might be left undone, and to satisfy
the curiosity of all men, it was now at last time to dissolve those Treaties,
which, without hope of any fruit, carried with them the danger of many
mischiefs, and thenceforth apply themselves to the election of one, who, by
common consent should possess the Crown; for which end they were met together
with so much difficulty, and from so many several places: that as the Catholic
King, who had spent so much gold, and poured out so much blood of his Subjects
for the upholding of that cause, had never refused any overture of those
remedies which he believed might conduce to the general good; so at last he was
come to know, that there was no better nor more helpful resolution for all
parts than one alone, wherein both justice and decency, profit and convenience
did jointly concur; that this was the election of the Infanta Clara Eugenia
Isabella Daughter to his most Catholic Majesty, The Duke of Feria in the
meeting proposes the election of the Infanta to be Queen; being Daughter to
Philip the Second King of Spain, by Elizabeth el^est sister to H^nry the Third,
King of France
to be Queen of France, to whom, as born of Elizabeth, eldest daughter to Henry
the Second, whose male-line was ended, the Crown justly and lawfully belonged,
as by a thousand Authorities, and constitutions of Law and Reason it was easy
to prove; that the King wished and desired the consent of the States should
concur in that just election for the more general satisfaction, to the end,
that the gratitude of the French, remembering how much he had done for their
service, might agree with the justice of the cause, to establish the common
peace and contentment. Here he enlarged himself fully in the Infanta's praises,
showing her prudence, worth, and magnanimity, qualities worthy to order so
noble a Government; and finally concluded, there were already Eight thousand
Foot and Two thousand Horse ready at the States least request to enter into the
Confines, and that as many more should be ready within three months, all which
Forces should be paid by the King till the Wars were ended; and that the Duke
of Mayenne should have an Hundred thousand Crowns paid him every month to
maintain Ten thousand French Foot, and Four thousand Horse; that if these were
thought less than was requisite, the Catholic King would add so many more as
should be sufficient; it being to be believed, that out of the infinite
affection he bore his daughter, he should not fail to employ all his force to
make her a free peaceable possessor of the Kingdom; promising and assuring last
of all, that the Princes of the House of Loraine especially, and then all the
other Lords and Gentlemen should be largely requited and contented, the Clergy
brought to their first splendour, the Nobility satisfied, the People eased, and
all the several Orders of France settled, not only in full peace and
tranquillity, but also in the ancient luster and glory of their Nation.

The Duke of Feria having concluded his speech in this manner, the Bishop of
Senlis, who, with Impatience had expected the end of it, without giving time to
any other body, whom it concerned, by order, to tell his opinion, stood up, and
said scornfully; The Bishop of Senlis though a ^ie^er Enemy to the King,
answers the (...).
The Politics were in the right, who had ever said, that interest of State was
hid under the Cloak of Religion, which he, with those of his coat, having, with
infinite labor, always endeavored to confute in their Pulpits, he was now
sorry at heart to hear from the mouths, and by the confession of Ambassadors,
that it was true, and that the Preachers deceiving themselves and others, had
defended and protected a thing that was false; that from thenceforward he
should believe the Spaniards were no less politic than the Navarrois, but he
prayed them for their own honor, and the (...) of the Holy Union, to desist
from that thought; For the Kingdom of France having, for the space of Twelve
hundred years, been gloriously possessed by Men, according to the institution
of the Salique Law, it was not fit now to transfer it upon Women, who, by the
variety of their Marriages, might call in variety of Masters, and subject the
French Nation to the dominion of Foreigners. This free, unexpected answer,
made by one of the chief instruments of the League, and of the Kings sharpest
enemies, did not only dismay the Spanish Ambassadors, but many also of the
Assembly, doubting that so free a reproof, made without any respect, might
discompose all things, and put them in confusion. The Duke of Mayenne
dexterously excuses what the Bishop of Senlis had too freely spoken.
But the D. of Mayenne endeavored with dexterity to excuse the Bishop of
Senlis his words, ascribing them to excess of zeal, or too much fervor of
mind, intimating, that sometimes he went beyond himself, and showing, that when
he was made sensible of reason, and what was fit, he would of himself correct
that, which, being drawn by his first violence, he had so licentiously spoken
unawares. The Ambassadors took heart again at the encouragement of the Duke of
Mayenne, of Cardinal Pelleve, and some others; but truly it remained evident,
that it was not out of ambition, or for any interests (as many would have had
it thought,) but because his conscience so persuaded him, that the Bishop of
Senlis, in all the course of those commotions, had so profusely favored the
party of the Union, and spoken so sharply, and with such continued Liberty
against the person of the present King, and the memory of him that was dead.
However it were, certain it is, his words helped to abate the credit of the
Spaniards, and his example moved many of those who followed the League, not for
their own interest, but in respect of Religion.

And yet the Spaniards not losing heart, by reason of the Duke of Mayenne's
dissimulation, and of the hopes they had in many of the Deputies, demanded
public audience in the assembly of the States, and having obtained it, upon
the Six and twentieth day Iuan Baptista Tassis was the first that spoke, who,
with a short, but very cunning speech, made the proposition of the Infanta,
Iuan Baptista Tassis and Inigo Mendozza propose the Election of the Infanta in
the public Assembly of the States.
and after him Inigo de Mendozza with a long disputation divided into seven
heads, explained the rights that she pretended to the succession of the Crown;
both of them concluding, that it was not to put that in controversy, which was
to be acknowledged from the voluntary election of the State, but to inform and
satisfy them, that he alleged those reasons, to the end, that with prudent
advice, the free disposal of the assembly might go along with right and conform
it self to Justice; the Infanta being willing to acknowledge that from them by
way of election, which duly belonged to her by rightful succession. This
proposition was no less deeply resented by the major part of the Deputies, than
it had been by the Bishop of Senlis; many disdained, The Spanish proposition is
ill relished by the Deputies, and esteemed unjust.
that the dominion of Strangers should be proposed to them, as to men who were
either slaves to the will of others, or ignorant of their own interests: others
laughed to see this proposition made without preparations of Arms, men, and
moneys, as both need and the reputation of the business required: others
condemned the Spaniards of little discretion, in having had the boldness to
declare their design, without having prepossessed their minds and disposed them
toward it, by the powerful preparative of private interest; and there wanted
not of those who disputed also about the right; and said, that though women
should be declared to have right to the inheritance of the Crown, it probably
belonged not to her, but to the Kings of England, who were first descended from
daughters of France, and with whom there had been so many, and so tedious Wars
to reject that pretention, and to uphold the Salique Law, and the legitimate
succession of the Males. But they that were most of all displeased at it
(though secretly) were the Princes of the House of Lorain, who pretended to the
election themselves, and the Duke of Mayenne, though he more cunningly
dissembled it, showing in appearance, that he would not dissent from the King
of Spain^s will, nor from what he had agreed upon with the Ambassadors at
Soissons, yet he underhand stirred up the Deputies to reject that proposition,
as dishonorable to the Nation, dangerous in point of servitude, hurtful to
themselves, and to the liberty of those that should come after them, and not
grounded upon any present security, but all vainly supported by the uncertainty
of future promises.

There was no doubt but the Deputies would unanimously refuse that proposition,
yet not to exasperate the Spaniards, and to give matters time to ripen, they
answered, after many complements, that their desire should be taken into
consideration, to the end an answer might be given as soon as was possible;
which while it was expected, the Duke of Mayenne, to find out a way to exclude
that business, began to treat with the Ambassadors, what Husband the Infanta
should have when the Sates had elected her Queen, and urged them to declare
what Commissions they had from the Catholic King concerning that. The Spanish
Ambassadors Answer concerning a Husband for the Infanta.
Their answer was altogether like the rest of the treaty, for they made no
scruple to declare, that the King thought of matching her to Ernest, Archduke
of Austria, the Emperors Brother, whom he had also appointed to succeed the
Duke of Parma in his Country of Flanders. This answer was presently excluded;
for all replied with joint consent, That they would not have a King of a
different Language and Nation, and that the Ears of Frenchmen could never
endure to hear it; and though the Duke of Mayenne, for diverse respects, feigned
to approve of the Archduke, the rest notwithstanding declared freely they would
none of him; which, The Duke of Mayenne being assured, that none of his Sons
should be named for the Infanta's Husband, prosecutes the Treaty with the
Royallist.
as soon as the Spaniards knew, seeing the Infanta's election would go but in a
desperate course, if some considerable prop were not added to uphold it, they
said they had Commission in case the States approved not of the Archduke, to
propose, that the Catholic King would marry the Infanta to a French Prince,
who should be nominated and elected by him within six months. This Proposition
displeased not all of them in general, because there were many pretenders,
among which were the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Nemours, and the Cardinal of
Lorain; but the Duke of Mayenne publicly commending the proposition,
endeavored to sound, whether they inclined to any one of his Sons, and being
sufficiently certified they were not like to consent unto it, because they
would not put the Dominion of the Kingdom into his hands, being certain the
Infanta should be barely a Wife, not a Mistress, he began to draw the contrary
way, much more than he had done before, and applied himself to foment the
Conference, which had never been intermitted at Surenne between the Catholics
of both parties.

The King, who had notice of all that was in agitation, sought every way, by
means of the Conference, to hinder each resolution of the States; but his
Deputies could not do much in it, by reason of the important opposition of
Religion, nay, rather his own Catholics were discontented themselves, that his
Conversion so much desired, and so often promised, was deferred more and more
every day. The Princes of the Blood threatened openly, and now thought in good
earnest of taking some resolution, because they saw the election of a King of
another Family was so closely treated of: And every one, even of himself, fell
easily into an opinion, that by going over to the League, he might come to
marry the Spanish Infanta, and have the protection of the Catholic Kings
Forces for his establishment; Pretenders to the Infanta out of hope to attain
the Crown.
whereupon, not only the Cardinal of Bourbon was extraordinarily moved, but
also the Count de Soissons newly disgusted, by being put beside the marriage of
the Princess Catherine; the Prince of Conti reckoned not the insufficiency
which was believed of him, to be to his disadvantage, but rather thought the
Spaniards would like him the better, to the end that the Infanta remaining
without issue, there might some hope continue of uniting the Crowns; and
finally also, it was pretended to by the Duke of Montpensier, a Prince valiant
in War, of a most ready Wit, handsome person, and graceful Behavior: So that
the Infanta's election perchance was better thought on among the King's party,
than among those of the League. But particular men, who had not these
pretensions, and were only moved by two respects, That of their own profit,
and that of Religion, exclaimed openly, That the Kings stubbornness gave to the
Spanish cunning and boldness opportunity of breaking out; that now at last all
the Kings excuses and delays were come to an end; that even he himself had no
longer the heart to allege any reason, nor propose any excuse; that it was
evident he was bewitched with the subtilties of the Ministers, and fast tied to
the Doctrine of his Arch-Hereticks; that it was fit now at last to think of
their Souls, of their Religion, of the safety of themselves and their Children,
and not be made instruments to send themselves, and all their posterity to the
Devil; that they should even let him and his desperate Hugonots go to perdition
alone, and not carry the whole Kingdom with him for company.

Next after respect of Religion, particular interests immediately succeeded;
every one detested the toil and burden of War, every one had compassion upon
himself, upon the sufferings of his own Family, the ruin of his domestic
affairs, and the continued expenses, that found no end; every one sighed, every
one longed for the repose and quietness of Peace; and among all the rest,
Monsieur d' O, weary of being Treasurer without Money, Bellegarde, St. Luc,
Terms, Sancy, Grillon, The Royallists excluded from the hopes of reigning, and
weary of their toils, make great complaints against the Kings obstinacy,
saying, That whereas before they had a King of gold they had now, a King of
iron.
and all the old Servants of Henry the Third, bewailed themselves, and their
ill Fortune, which, in stead of a King of Gold, whom they were wont to have,
had given them now a King of Iron; for the late King poured forth Gold
plentifully to the benefit of his Servants, whereas the present King, in the
narrowness of his Fortune, being no less thrifty in his mind and nature,
propounded nothing for reward or recompense, but Wars, Sieges, Skirmishes, and
Battles: They said, they could no longer sustain the intolerable toils of War,
and to live inchased between a Back and Breast of Iron, as Tortoises are in
their shells; that they could not abide a King accustomed after the Hugonot
fashion, to run up and down day and night, to live by rapine, upon what they
could find in the miserable Cottages of poor Country people, to warm
themselves at the flame of an house on fire, to have their Horses their
Chamber-fellows when they slept, or the stinking Cattle of wretched Peasants;
that War was ordinarily made for some time to attain peace and quietness: But
now they served a Prince, who did not care to end the troubles of War,
accounting volleys of shot, wounds, death, and battles, to be the only
delights. These complaints sometimes accompanied with railings and cursings,
sometimes spoken among Proverbs, and in raill^rie, after the French manner,
were so public, that they came to the Kings ears, which were continually
filled by the serious advertisements of the Count de Schombergh, and the
High-Chancellor, to whom was added Jacques Davy Sieur du Perron, who, while he
negotiated the Cardinal of Bourbons affairs, had, by disputing, converted the
Baron de Salignac, one of the Kings Bedchamber, whom he long had favored, and
by his means had got himself in to converse with the King at idle-times in his
most private Lodgings; where, sometimes with serious Learned Disputes,
sometimes with Eloquent Discourses, sometimes with Elegant Poetry (in which he
was very excellent) sometimes with witty, merry talking, had gotten so much
favor, that from pleasing entertainments, he was begun to be admitted also to
the handling of more weighty matters. This man seeing the way to his own
greatness, was much more easy by the Kings Conversion, than in the Cardinal of
Bourbon's Exaltation, set himself to procure it by most vigilant means, and
with all possible endeavors, making use of the present conjuncture, with
admirable wariness and discretion.

All these things (but particularly the necessity) which were very well known
to the King, at last moved him so, that to begin with some security to declare
himself, he gave order to the Count de Schombergh, and Secretary Revol (who
were come to him, to know what they should finally propose in the Congregation
at Surenne) that they should sound the minds of the Catholics of the League,
The King persuaded by those he trusted in, and by necessity, causes a
Proposition to be made in the Conference at Su^enne, to find how his Conversion
would be relished, if he should resolve to turn.
to find how they were like to relish and receive his Conversion, if he should
truly determine to return unto the Church; which business having been consulted
of among his Deputies, they resolved to make overture of it, by demonstrating
to them of the Union, that the King would observe his promises within a few
days; wherefore, being met at their wonted Conference (in which they had till
then contended with great difference, and without concluding any thing to the
purpose) the Archbishop of Bourges told them, he brought them good news, and
such as would rejoice every true French heart, which was, that the King,
touched by Gods inspiration, would, within a few days, comfort all his
Subjects, by turning to the Catholic Faith, and reconciling himself to the
Church, The Archbishop of Bourges tells them in the Conference, that the King
inspired by God would turn to the Catholic Religion.
and that therefore, as they were certain this news would be acceptable to them
all, so they prayed them to see what ways might be taken to favor and promote
that Conversion, or to guide it in such manner, that it might bring forth the
general peace and quiet. All the Deputies of the League remained in suspense at
this proposition; but the Archbishop of Lions, lest that doubtfulness of mind
should be discovered, answered readily, that he believed his fellow Deputies
would give him leave to say, they rejoiced at the King of Navar's conversion,
that they were very glad of it, The Deputies of the League answer the
Archbishop of Bourges his proposition.
and that they prayed to God it were true and real; and for the rest he
demanded time to consult with them in private, which having done for many
hours, because their opinions differed, they at last answered, that (as they
had said before) they rejoiced at his conversion, which though it should come
to pass, it belonged not to them to know and declare, whether it were good and
sincere or no; that that was a business which concerned the Apostolic Sea, and
the Popes judgment, wherefore they could not so much as think of any thing
depending upon that Conversion, the censure whereof was not under their power
and authority; and though they persisted in this opinion, yet the Kings
Deputies would needs present a Writing to them, which contained three points;
One an offer of the Kings Conversion; another, that in the mean time while that
came to pass, the means of securing Religion, and concluding Peace might be
treated of; The Kings Deputies present a writing to those of the League, which
is accepted.
and the third, that while these things were doing, a general cessation of Arms
might be concluded through the whole Kingdom. The Deputies could not refuse to
accept this writing, which being by them brought to be discussed by the D. of
Mayenne and the States, the debates were very long and various; for as the
Royalists endeavored to discover the intentions of the Confederates, so they
would not declare what they would do if the K. should publicly return unto the
Church

But this Proposition, made by the Kings party, wrought such a jealousy in the
Spanish Ambassadors, that with their utmost spirits they pressed for a
resolution to their desire, The Spaniards fearing the propositions of the
Royallists, offer, that their King should give the Infanta in marriage to one
of the Princes of the House of Lorain.
for the facilitating whereof, they were fain to offer, that the Catholic King
should be content, the Infanta should marry one of the Princes of the House of
Lorain; but this proposition also raised many doubts, because there was no
certainty, the Infanta being once elected and declared, that either she, or the
King her Father would observe that promise, to which any private man can hardly
be obliged, much less a Queen or Princess; and again, because if that first
Husband should dye, she might perhaps take another, either of the House of
Austria, or a Spaniard, or of some other Nation; likewise, because she having
no children by this marriage, the King of Spain would afterward pretend right
to the Crown; but much more than all the rest, because the Duke of Mayenne saw
himself and his posterity excluded from that advantage, whereupon, not only
this business was protracted, without coming to any resolution, but it was
determined in the States, that there should be a very moderate answer made to
the Writing presented by those of the Kings party in the Conference, without
untying, or breaking off the thread of that Treaty; wherefore, both parties
being met at la Roquette, a house in the field, without the Port S. Anthoine,
the Archbishop of Lions said, that as concerning the King's Conversion, they
wished it might be real and unfeigned, but that not only they could not hope it
was so, but on the contrary, they had great cause to believe it was not without
dissimulation; for if it had proceeded from sincerity, so many delays and
puttings off would not have been sought, and if he were touched with any
inspiration, he would not remain in his Heresy, and in the public exercise of
it, he would not cherish and keep about him the principal Ministers that taught
it, nor would he still leave the chief Offices of the Kingdom in their hands;
and yet because it appertained not to them to approve or reprove that
Conversion, they lest the Judgment thereof unto the Pope, who alone had
authority to determine it; as for the Treaty of Peace, and security of
Religion, they could not treat thereof for the present, for many
considerations, lest they should treat with the King of Navar who was without
the Church, The Cardinal Legate writes to Cardinal Pelleve, to make protestation
in his name unto the States, that they can neither treat of the Kings
conversion, peace, nor any thing else, because of the Decree of the Canons, and
the Oath the Deputies had taken.
and lest they should give a beginning to the acknowledgment of him, or
anticipate the Pope's judgment. Then for the point of Cessation, they would
give answer to that when satisfaction was given to the two first Articles. Thus
neither assenting, nor very much dissenting, they held the matter in suspense
till the Duke of Mayenne saw whether the business begun with the Spaniards was
like to end.

But the Cardinal-Legat being wonderfully solicitous, not only because the
Spanish negotiation went on difficultly, but much more because he saw men's
minds inclined to the Cessation, out of the hope they had conceived of the
King's conversion, and the desire of quiet, used his utmost power to hinder it;
and faining himself not well, wrote a Letter to Cardinal Pelleve upon the
Thirteenth day of June, praying him to go to the States, and in his name to
make them a grave Remonstrance of the danger and damage that depended upon the
Conference of Surenn^, and advertise them that not only they could not treat
concerning the conversion of the Navarrois, but not so much as about Peace, a
Cessation of Arms, or any other business with him, as well by reason of the
Decrees of the sacred Canons, and the Declarations of the Apostolic See, as
also of the Oath they had taken, never to assent to; or make an agreement with
the Heretic: Which things were set forth in the Letter with great vehemence of
words, protesting in the end, that if they should continue to treat of Peace,
or a Cessation, he would depart from the City, and from the Kingdom, that he
might neither assent to so great an evil, nor disobey the Commissions he had
from the Pope. This Letter first read by the Cardinal in the States, and
afterward published in print to the knowledge of every one, did something
bridle men's minds, who were running on eagerly toward a cessation of Arms.

In the mean time the King knowing how much harm the want of reputation, and
the weakness of their Forces did unto the Spaniards, and not being willing to
run into the same error, resolved to set himself upon some notable enterprise
not far off, with the noise and fame whereof he might increase his reputation,
and foment those affairs that were transacting in favor of him: wherefore,
having drawn his whole Army together, with great diligence he commanded out all
the neighboring Garrisons, and made plentiful provision of Cannon, Ammunition,
Pioneers, and other things proper for a secure resolute design, upon the
seventh of June he had laid siege to Dreux, The King, to give reputation to his
party, besieget^ Dreux.
a Town but sixteen leagues from Paris, which for its situation, fortification,
and the quality of the defendents was accounted very strong. The Suburbs of the
Town were valiantly taken the first day, they within who before thought to
defend them, being beaten back in all places; but when they had lost all hope
of making them good, they endeavored to have burnt them down: The whole Army
being quartered with great celerity, they began the next day to throw up four
Trenches, which were hastened with so much diligence by the Baron de Biron, and
the Sieur de Montlouet, one of the Field-Marshals, that upon the thirteenth day
all four of them were brought into the Moat; nor with less diligence were four
Batteries planted; one of four pieces of Cannon against the great Bulwark,
toward the Port de Chastres, another of six against the Port de Paris, the
third of three against the curtain toward the great Church, and the fourth of
five Pieces in the F^uxb^urg St Iehan, which battered a great Tower that stood
on that side. The King hastened and encouraged the Works in all places with his
presence; wherefore, scarce was the Orillon of the great Bulwark beaten down,
when two Colonels drew near to view the place, which being by order taken by
the Army for the beginning of the assault, all the several Nations ran
furiously to it, striving in emulation who should be first to give the onset.
Whereupon the besieged, over-matched by the number and resolution of the
Assailants, forsook the Orillon, in which a Regiment of French lodged and
fortified themselves the same evening. The next day all the Batteries continued
playing upon the wall, and the breaches being already made, and the Army ready
to fall on in four several places, the defendents took a resolution to quit the
Town, and retire into the Castle, which while they were doing in disorder, they
were overtaken by the Army, The defendents quit the Town, and having fired many
houses to gain time to save themselves, retire into the Castle
which at the same time entered furiously, and were constrained to fire some
houses of the Town, that they might gain time enough to retire. But the fire
having done very much harm, and burnt down many buildings on all sides, at last
by the Kings command it was quenched by the Swissers, who remained last in the
battalia near his Person. So upon the eighteenth day, the Town remained in the
King's power: and with the same eagerness they began to besiege the Castle;
within the Out-line whereof, without the circuit of the Walls, there being a
great deal of Cattle, many of the Townsmen, and also many Countrymen who were
got in thither; the Baron de Biron caused a Petard to be fastened the same
night unto the Gate, and with a great slaughter of the enemies but not without
the Blood of his Soldiers, whereof he lost above an hundred, made himself
Master of that Out-line, with all the spoil. But the taking of the Castle, by
reason of its situation and strength, proved very difficult, and a very great
number of men were slain, till the Count de Torigny making them work,
notwithstanding any danger whatsoever, had perfected a great Trench, under the
favor whereof, the Batteries were planted; which, while the King, a despiser
of all danger, was carefully over-seeing, two Colonels were killed close by
him, and the Duke of Montpensier sore hurt with a shot in the chin, which
grazing upon his jaw, wounded him also in the shoulder. Over against the Kings
Batteries there stood a Tower of an ancient form, and of so perfect a
structure, that the Cannon-shot which were made at it did very little harm.
Wherefore an English Engineer, considering the great waste of powder that was
spent with very little or no fruit, took a resolution to try another means, and
having under shelter of certain double Planks, lined with Plates of Iron got
unto the foot of the Tower, he caused three great holes like Ovens to be dug
under it, and putting a Barrel of Powder in each, gave fire to them; which
though it wrought a much less effect than a Mine uses to do, yet it threw down
part of the Tower, and made such a breach, that the Artillery did better
service in battering the rest: Nevertheless, the besieged were not dismayed at
it, but with valiant constancy continued for some days to make resistance. But
so diligent and eager was the oppugnation without, that at last, after many
experiments, and many assaults, the defendants, who, besides their not having
any Commander of authority to govern them, saw also, notwithstanding the
nearness of Paris, that no relief appeared from any place, resolved, out of
extreme necessity, to yield themselves, and delivered up the Castle into the
Kings hands upon the Eighth of July.

The noise of the Kings victory dismayed the Deputies in Paris, who, in this
interim had labored no less in their Negotions, than they at Dreux had done in
matters of War; for the Spanish Ambassadors being resolved to make the utmost
trial, met with the principal of them again in Council, and told them, that to
take away all obstacles that might hinder the Infanta's Election, the Catholic
King would be content, as soon as she was chosen, The Spanish Ambassadors
promise in their Kings behalf, to give the Infanta in Marriage to the Duke of
Guise, as soon as she should be chosen Queen; which troubles the Duke of
Mayenne.
to marry her to the Duke of Guise, which, though it stung the Duke of Mayenne
to the quick, yet being taken unawares, and finding no other remedy, upon the
sudden, answered, That he returned most humble thanks to his Catholic Majesty
for the so great honor he vouchsafed to do his Nephew, but he desired to see
the Ambassadors Commission, and to know whether that condition were expressed
in it; for, by how much the greater and more desirable the favor was, so much
much the more warily was it fit to proceed in believing and embracing it. The
Duke of Mayenne thought verily, that the Ambassadors had not that power from
the Catholic King, but that they propounded it of themselves, being drawn by
the necessity of affairs: But he presently perceived the contrary; for, they
taking their Commission, showed an Article, wherein, by way of interchange, was
contained the election of the Infanta, with express condition, that she should
be married to the Duke of Guise. The Duke of Mayenne was astonished, not
knowing any way to untie that knot, nor could he dissemble so well, The Sieur
de Bassompierre, Ambassador for the Duke of Lora^n, demands to have that Treaty
suspended till his Master were advertised of it.
but that they all perceived the alteration of his countenance: But the Sieur
de Bassompierre, Ambassador for the Duke of Lorain, relieved him, who said,
that a thing of so great importance ought not to be concluded without making
his Master acquainted with it, who, as he had been principally interessed in
the expenses and troubles of the War, so was it fit nothing should be concluded
without having first his opinion and consent; and here, to give the Duke of
Mayenne leisure to think, he enlarged himself in a long discourse of what the
Duke of Lorain had done in favor of the League, and of the esteem that was fit
to be had of his authority. The Spaniards, when he had made an end of speaking,
answered, that they assented the Duke of Lorain should be informed of all that
passed, who they were certain would be well pleased with the honor done unto
his Family. In the mean time, the Duke of Mayenne having recollected himself,
after he had again thanked the Catholic King, and the Ambassadors, said, That
he accepted the offer; but, as it was not convenient for the Catholic Kings
reputation, that the Infanta should be elected, without having first certain
means to establish her* So neither was it fit to hazard the State of his
Nephew, and of the whole Family, without those conditions, which being
acceptable in general, and necessary for the present affairs, were sufficient
to maintain and secure him for the future: For that end he demanded time to
consult, and to propose those conditions, wherewith the design was to be
effected. With this delay they parted, the Cardinal Legate and the Ambassadors
remaining extremely contented, and as it were assured, that they had steered
that Negotiation into the desired Haven. The Duke of Mayenne desirous to
disturb ^he Proposition of the Spaniards, p^ss many difficulties into the Duke
of Guise his consideration.


But the Duke of Mayenne, intent by all means to disturb it, began to work upon
his Nephew, telling him, he doubted the Spaniards had propounded him, not to
effect the business, but to deceive him; he not being able to persuade himself,
that they should should have labored and done so much to bring the Infanta to
the Crown, and should after be content to subject her to an Husband, who being
a Frenchman, and encompassed with his own party, might govern her, and be King
indeed, while she should only be Queen in title: That no profit nor advantage
of any kind whatsoever would redound thereby to King Philip and his Kingdom;
for if his desire were only to marry his Daughter to a King of France, he might
easily compass that with whosoever should possess the Crown, whether he were
Friend or Enemy; but if he aspired to unite the Crowns, this was not the way to
do it, and therefore he could not see what advantage could thereby result unto
the Spanish Monarchy; wherefore it was good to think and provide against the
deceit that might lie hidden under it: That to elect the Infanta now, and
reserve themselves afterward to marry her within a certain time, was to refer
it to her choice, either to take or refuse him; and that it was necessary to
find some conditions to secure the Match: But moreover, though the King of
Spain should proceed sincerely in that business, it was good to consider
(without letting ones self be deceived by passion) what means there were to
establish themselves in the Kingdom: That there was no doubt, but the Duke of
Lorain, who had hoped to have the Kingdom for himself, or that the Infanta
should marry the Cardinal his Son, would be disgusted at it, and withdraw his
assistance; which, how much hurt it would do, might easily be comprehended, by
reason of the opportuneness of his State, through which all the supplies passed
that came out of Germany to both parties, that it might be doubted the Duke of
Savoy would do the same, who had till now upheld the War in Provence and
Dauphine; for being deprived of the hopes he had already conceived of obtaining
the Kingdom, or at least some Province of it, he would no longer submit himself
and his States to the dangers and calamities of War; that the Duke of Nemours
was already almost wholly averse from them, and only the respect he bore to an
elder Brother yet held him, which if it were taken away, he doubted not but he
would do his own business himself; that the same was to be feared of the Duke
of Mercoeur, as soon as he should lose the hopes of obtaining Bretagne:
Wherefore the Forces of the League being diminished in that manner, it was good
to think how they should be able to oppose the Kings power, which they could
hardly resist now they were all united; that the King of Spain had his hands
full with the War of Flanders, and the commotions of Aragon; that his Kingdoms
were exhausted, and that he was indebted Two Millions to the Genoueses; that he
had no good Commander in Chief, and therefore it was to be doubted he could not
perform all he promised; and in conclusion, that this was a Rubicon, the n^me
of a River in Italy, which Julius Caesar passed in the beginning of his
expedition against Pompey, wh^nce, To pass the Rubicon, is become a phrase for
to enter into a dangerous exploit.
Rubicon which could never be sufficiently thought upon before it was past over.

To these considerations, the Duke of Guise answered moderately, The Duke of
Guise, though inwardly of another mind, answers, that he will not digress from
his Uncles Counsels.
making show that he would not digress from his opinion, but in his mind he
thought otherwise; whereof his treaties, and manner of proceeding, the
concourse of his adherents, the meetings that were made in his house and his
Mothers, gave manifest conjecture; wherefore the Duke of Mayenne, not trusting
absolutely to him, thought as a second means to propose such high conditions as
might terrify the Spaniards; which were, That the Duke of Guise should be
elected King at the same time when the Infanta should be chosen Queen; that the
election should be kept secret till the marriage were consummate; to which
effect, the States should give authority to the Duke of Mayenne to declare it
when it should be time, that in case the Infanta should die first, the Duke of
Guise should remain King alone, and govern the Kingdom by himself; that if she
were left a Widow, she should be obliged to take a Husband of the House of
Lorain, with the counsel of the Princes, Peers, and Officers of the Crown; that
if she had no issue, the eldest of the Duke of Guise's Brothers should succeed,
and so the firstborn of the Family successively from male to male; that only
Frenchmen should be admitted to Offices, Places, Dignities, Benefices,
Governments of Provinces, Cities, Castles, and Fortresses of the Kingdom; that
the command of the Militia, The Duke of Mayenne faining to be glad, but
desiring indeed to hinder the Duke of Guise's greatness, ask^ exorbitant
conditions of the Spaniards.
together with Authority of Lieutenant General, should be left unto the Duke of
Mayenne; that the Government of the Provinces of Bourgogne, Champagne, and
Brie, should be given to him and his Heirs for ever, with power to dispose of
the Governments, Offices, and Benefices of them all; that Two hundred thousand
Crowns should be paid to him in present, and Six hundred thousand more within a
certain time, for which fit security should be given him; that the debts should
be paid which he had run into upon occasion of the present War; that One
hundred thousand Crowns Revenue should be assigned to him for himself and his
posterity, as also the principality of Iainville, and the Cities of Vitry and
St. Disier; and after many other lesser demands, that all the presentations and
nominations he had made of Churches, Benefices, Governments, Donatives, Places
and Favors bestowed by him as Lieutenant of the Crown should remain valid, as
likewise all those he should make or grant, till the consummation of the
Marriage, and the establishment of the King and Queen.

But these conditions though they were high and difficult, did no way startle
the Spaniards, who already were resolved to satisfy him, provided they might
attain to the Infanta's election, being certain they should find a thousand
occasions, and a thousand excuses afterward, to observe only what they should
think convenient, and being also willing that the Duke of Mayenne should be
reasonably requited; The Duke of Mayenne seeing himself excluded from the
Crown, begins a Treaty to bring in the Cardinal of Bourbon.
but he seeing he was excluded from the reward of his labors, and that they
thought of giving the Kingdom to others, and not to him and his posterity,
though the foundation of all things consisted in his person and endeavors, and
finding that the conditions propounded were neither sufficient to divert the
resolution of the Spaniards, nor the inclination, or rather the will and desire
of his Nephew, resolved to set other engines awork, to interrupt the course of
those proceedings; wherefore having still (though but luke-warmly) kept the
Cardinal of Bourbon in good hopes, he now prosecuted that business with so much
heat, that it was brought in a manner to a conclusion. He demonstrated to every
one of the Deputies apart, how odious a thing it was to break the Salique Law,
how difficult to exclude the House of Bourbon from the Crown, whose succession
they had confirmed when they declared the late Cardinal of Bourbon King, by the
name of Charles the Tenth; how dissonant it would be to men's ears, and how
unpleasing to men's minds, to hear, Treaties were held to introduce the
succession of Women, and the assumption of new Families to the Crown, while
there were so many Princes in the Royal Family, among which one might be chosen
to the general satisfaction; that though the King of Navarre was obstinate in
Heresy, the Prince of Conty insufficient for Government, the Count de Soissons
lost in the love of the Princess Catherine, who was no less an Hugonot than her
Brother; yet was there the Cardinal of Bourbon, who had always with his own
danger undauntedly opposed the increase of Heresy; that he was a Cardinal, and
had ever been obedient to the Church, so that he could neither be excluded by
the Pope, nor by the King of Spain; that he was in his manly age, so that he
would be a King without a Guardian, and one able to uphold the Government of
the Kingdom himself: that no great trust was to be had to the Spaniards, who
had failed so much both in public and in private; that the Ambassadors who
promised such mountains of Gold, lived themselves very mechanically, and
without that decency that befitted the Majesty of their King, and the greatness
of those offers they made; that he himself had very great sums due to him, and
yet could not get so much as a denier from them; that they had seen the gallant
exploits Count Charles his Army had done; that they had so much to do in
Flanders, they would have no leisure to mind other men's businesses; that on the
other side the Cardinal of Bourbon's election would of it self destroy and
conquer the King of Navarre; for there was no doubt but all the Catholics of
that party would follow the Cardinal, and the Navarr^is would be left alone
with the desperate dependence of the Hugonots, whereby the French Forces alone
would be able to subdue Heresy, and establish a Catholic King, and a true
Frenchman, without having further need of foreign Supplies; that it was
needful to remember the Bishop of Senlis his words, and not confirm men in a
belief, that whatsoever was past had been done out of interest and ambition,
but that it was necessary to show the world, that the sole respect of Religion
had put Arms into their hands.

These reasons seconded by his authority, wrought a wonderful impression in the
minds of the French, of themselves inclined to observe the Salique Law, and to
reverence the Royal Family; wherefore the Duke seeing he had drawn the major
part of the Deputies to his opinion, dispatched the Admiral de Villars with a
Writing of Articles with his own hand, to confer with the Cardinal of Bourbon,
who was at Gallion, a house of the Archbishop of Rouen's; but he was no sooner
gone, when he sent one post after him, to give him order not to make too much
haste; for President Ieannin, and the Archbishop of Lions, together with Madam
de Montpensier, had put him in mind of another sufficient means to divert the
Spanish designs, without running so hastily to the election of one that was his
Enemy, who also by the weakness of his understanding, and lightness of his
nature, would not be very fit to govern in times of so great distraction, and
that he endangered the dividing of his party; for it was very probable the Duke
of Guise and his adherents, upheld by the Spaniards, The Duke of Mayenne to
hinder the Spanish design, gets the Parliament of Pa^is to make a Decree, that
the Crown should not be transferred upon strangers, and to give order to him to
hinder all such like Treaties.
would not approve that election; in which case his third party would be the
weakest of them all. The remedy they propounded was that of the Parliament,
whose authority they thought suff^cient to hinder the business in agitation:
wherefore Madam de Montpensier having excited the first President le Maistre to
think of some means that the Crown might not fall into the hands of Strangers;
he, as a man of good intentions, and who had followed the League for no other
end but the Catholic Religion, set himself boldly to the enterprise, and after
the managing of it many days, assembled all the Chambers of the Parliament, and
with full consent of all caused a Decree to be made of this Tenor following:
UPon the Propositions already made to the Court of Parliament by the Procureur
General, and the business taken into deliberation in the meeting of the
Counselors of all the several Courts, the said Parliament not having (as it
never formerly had) any other intention than to maintain the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion, and the State and Crown of France under the protection of
a most Christian Catholic French King, has ordered, and does order, that this
day after dinner President la Maistre, accompanied by a good number of the
Counselors of this Parliament, shall make remonstrance to my Lord the Duke of
Mayenne, Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, in presence of
the Princes and Officers of the Crown, who at this present are in this City,
that no Treaty ought to be held for the transferring of the Crown into the
hands of Foreign Princes or Princesses; that the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom ought to be observed, and the Decrees made by the Parliament about the
declaring a Catholic and French King executed; that the said Duke of Mayenne
ought to use the authority that has been given him, to hinder the Crown from
being (under pretense of Religion) transferred into the hands of Strangers,
against the Laws of the Kingdom: Moreover, that he ought to provide as soon as
may be for the repose of the people, by reason of the extreme necessity to
which they are reduced, and in the mean time the said Parliament has declared
and does declare, all Treaties held, or that shall be held for the future,
about the establishment of any Foreign Prince or Princess whatsoever, invalid,
and of no force or effect, as being in prejudice of the Salique Law, and the
other Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

This Intimation or Remonstrance being made in public by. the President unto
the Duke of Mayenne, though he made show to resent it, and with grave words
reprehended the boldness of the Parliament; yet it bridled the Spanish Treaty
very much; for the Assembly of the States (which more than any other body ought
to have resented this decree of Parliament as made in prejudice of their
authority) showed on the cont^ary that they were not displeased at it, and
being possessed by the Duke of Mayenne's Agents, abhorred the attempt of the
Spaniards, and inclined to a Truce, concerning which they treated now more
hotly than ever in the Conference at Surenne. Much greater was the inclination
of the Parisians, who tired out with their necessities, and seeing no nearer
way to their redress than the conclusion of a Truce, the sweetness whereof they
had begun to taste in that little Cessation of Arms that had been in those
quarters, impatiently desired an accommodation, and raging, The Spanish
Ambassadors going through the streets of Paris, are mocked and abused with ill
language.
threatened the Princes and the Assembly, unless they took a speedy resolution;
and being persuaded that the Spaniards would not suffer their Army to come and
help the necessities of the City by opening the passes, only because their aim
was to curb them, and keep them down, whenever the Ambassadors went abroad in
public, they were followed with ill language and cries of derision.

The Kings seasonable resolution absolutely turned the scale of affairs; for he
knowing all things that were in agitation, doubted with reason, that if the
League should elect the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Catholics that followed him,
would all be like to forsake him, whereof there appeared such manifest signs,
and such open murmurings were heard, that it was not at all to be doubted; for
the things alleged by those of the Union in the Conference at Surenne, had
made impression in men's minds; and not only the Princes and Lords, but
generally all private men grieved and detested to spend their lives and
fortunes for the establishment of Heresy, which formerly they were wont to
fight against and persecute; and even in the Kings own lodgings there were
heard continually the voices of them that cursed their own blindness, and
exhorted one another mutually to change their resolutions, showing that since
so many promises made to them had been broken, they were obliged to take a
course for the maintenance of Religion and their common safety; that it was now
no longer time to shed their blood for a Prince obstinate in Heresy, and who
abusing their credulity so long, had fed them vainly with words; that it was
high time to take notice how by fighting madly, Catholic against Catholic,
they did nothing else but prepare the Kingdom, either for the Spaniards or the
Hugonots, equally their Enemies; that there had been enough done to maintain
the lawful Successor of the Crown, but he showed himself ungrateful for so
great services, and obstinate in his error; that he was no longer to be
followed in his perdition; but it was fit (reuniting the Consciences of the
Catholics) to establish a King who should acknowledge the gift he received
from the good will of his Subjects; that there were already so many Princes and
Lords, so many Knights and Gentlemen, and so many valiant Soldiers slain in
that cause, that the Kingdom was thereby all wounded, bloodless, and dying; and
if some remedy were not applied, they were near sacrificing the very Carcass of
France to the wickedness of the Hugonots, and to the pride of the Spaniards.

The Princes of the Blood after many Consultations, were much more resolute,
and the Duke of Montpensier who lay in Bed by reason of his hurt, told the King
when he came to visit him, that all the Princes were ready to forsake him, and
that he himself in the condition he then was, though h^: did it with grief of
heart, would not yet be the last to save his Soul, and satisfy his Conscience.
Lastly, the Count of Schomberg, being advertised by Monsieur de Villeroy, told
him, the Admiral Villars was already upon his way, carrying Articles to the
Cardinal of Bourbon, that within a few days he should hear, he, and all the
rest of the Princes would be at Paris; that God had given him the victory, and
expected the fruit thereof; that having taken Dreux with so much honor in the
very face of his Enemies, he might now turn unto God, and to the Church, and
none could believe he did it perforce. The same did Secretary Revol confirm,
the same Villeroy himself wrote unto him from Pon^oyse, showing him, that he
could not avoid one of two things, either that the Cardinal of Bourbon being
elected King, would deprive him of the adherence of his Catholics; or that the
Infanta being chosen with the Duke of Guise, all the strength of the King of
Spain would be poured out, and come like a torrent upon him.

The King moved by these considerations, or else interpreting the so urgent
conjuncture of affairs, to be as it were a Divine Inspiration, and thinking
himself called by some heavenly and more than humane power, determined to turn
Catholic, and sent Messengers with speed on all sides, to call Prelates and
Divines to assist and instruct him in his Conversion. The King sends for
Prelates and Divines from several places, and being instructed at Mante,
publishes, that he will go to Mass at St. Deni^, upon the Five and twentieth of
July.
Among these, he invited some of the Preachers of Paris, whereof some refused
to go, and some few, among which was the Curate of St. Eustache* (though the
Legate advised and commanded otherwise) would yet be present at so solemn an
action. All these being met together at Mante, the King having received
sufficient instruction in matter of the Articles of Religion that were in
controversy, seemed to clear up his mind, and visibly to apprehend the Hand of
God, which recalling him from his Errors, brought him back into the Bosom of
the Church, and made it be noised abroad, that upon the Five and twentieth of
July he would go to Mass at St. Denis.

This news his Deputies brought to the Conference of Surenne, where the
Archbishop of Bourges recapitulating all things past, The Archbishop of Bourges
tells them in the Conference at Surenne, that the King is res^lved to reconcile
himself to the Church.
concluded, That the King had caused the Marquess of Pisany to be sent to Rome,
to find means that his Conversion might be authorized by the Pope; but since he
had not been received, he would no longer defer nor put off his own Salvation,
but would reconcile himself to the Church, that afterward he might send to
render due obedience to the Pope, by a solemn conspicuous Embassy; and that
having consulted with the other Prelates and Divines, they had determined, That
the King should make himself be absolved ad futuram cautelam, and go to Mass,
that afterward he might demand the Popes Benediction; and that this for many
reasons had been thought the nearest and most secure way, as well not to put
the Crown in arbitrament to the discretion and declaration of Strangers, as to
find a speedy remedy for the necessities of the Kingdom. The Archbishop of
Lions on the contrary disputed, that he could not be received without the Popes
assent, nor absolved without his Declaration, and protested, that they would
neither account him a Catholic, nor acknowledge him King without order from
the Pope, to whom absolutely address was to be made, before coming to those
Acts of Absolution.

But the report of his Conversion being spread abroad among the people, there
was no curb could bridle men from rejoicing, nor their tongues from divulging
and arguing, that upon it depended the Pacification of the Kingdom; so that the
Cardinal-Legat in great perplexity of mind, published a Writing to the
Catholics of France upon the Thirteenth of July, wherein he advertised them of
the perverse Authority which some Prelates arrogated to themselves of absolving
the King of Navarre from Censures, and exhorted them not to believe that false
Conversion, and the perverse way that was taken about it: And lastly, forbad
all men to go to those Conventicles, with danger of incurring the Censure of
Excommunication, and of being deprived of those Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Dignities they possessed. But it was all in vain; for all men's minds were in
motion, and the obstacle of Religion being removed, every one inclined to
acknowledge the lawful Successor, and by that means to pacify the Kingdom.
From this general inclination the Great Ones were not averse; who though they
would not swerve from the Popes Judgment, and the Declaration of the Apostolic
See, The Duke of Guise tells the Spaniards, that his Election to be King of
France would prove ridiculous to others* and ruinous to himself.
thought yet it was not fit to innovate any thing more, till they saw the
effect of his Conversion, and the Popes intention; which opinion fomented by
the Duke of Mayenne, and forced by the necessity of affairs, was embraced even
by the Duke of Guise himself, who in such a conjuncture, thought his election
would prove ridiculous to others, and ruinous to himself; which he himself,
being accompanied by the Mareschals de la Chastre and St. Paul, gave the
Spanish Ministers to understand.

In the mean time, half the City of Paris ran to the spectacle of this
Conversion, The Ceremonies used in the Act of the Kings Conversion upon St.
James his day, Anno 1593. by the Archbishop of Bourg^s in the chief Church of
St. Denis.
even from the day before the Absolution, which was the Five and twentieth of
July, being the Feast of the Apostle St. James; which day, the King clothed
all in white, but accompanied with the Princes, Lords, and the whole Court,
with the Guards before them in Arms, went to the chief Church of St. Denis, the
Gates whereof they found shut, at which the High Chancellor knocking, they were
presently opened, and there appeared the Archbishop of Bourges sitting in his
Chair in his Pontifical Habit, and environed with a great number of Prelates.
He asked the King, Who he was, and what he would have? The King answered, That
he was Henry, King of France and Navarre, and that he demanded to be received
into the Bosom of the Catholic Church. To which the Archbishop replying,
asked, If he desired it from the bottom of his heart, and had truly repented
him of his former Errors? At which words the King protesting upon his knees,
said, He was sorry for his former Error, which he abjured and detested, and
would live and die a Catholic in the Apostolic Roman Church, which he would
protect and defend, even with the hazard and danger of his very life. After
which words having with a loud voice repeated the Profession of Faith, which
was presented to him in writing, he was with infinite acclamations of the
people, and incessant vollies of shot brought into the Church, and kneeling
down before the high Altar, he repeated the prayers that were dictated to him
by the Archbishop, and thence having been admitted by him to secret Confession,
he came to set under the Daiz, or Cloth of State, and with a general gladness
and rejoicing was present at the solemn Mass celebrated by the Bishop of
Nantes; after which, through a wonderful throng of people, and resounding cries
of Vive le Roy, which ascended to the Skies, He returned again to his Palace.

In this interim affairs having taken such a different impression, The Duke of
Mayenne tells the Spanish Ambassadors in the name of all the States* that they
had determined to defer the elect^on of their future King till another time.
the States gave answer to the Duke of Feria and the other Spanish Ambassadors;
who being brought into the Assembly, the Duke of Mayenne gravely gave thanks
unto the Catholic Kings Majesty, as well for the assistance of his past, and
the promise of his future Supplies, as for the honor done unto his Family, in
offering the Infanta in marriage to his Nephew the Duke of Guise; and in the
end told them, that the Assembly having well considered all things, did not
think the time seasonable to make any Election, but that they prayed his
Catholic Majesty to stay for the ripeness of opportunity, and in the mean time
not to fail them of his wonted protection and promised Supplies.

After this resolution, which dashed all the Spaniards, it was determined in
the States, that they should follow the conclusion of the Truce: and though the
Legate opposed it strongly, and protested oftentimes that he would be gone; yet
being pacified by the reasons that were represented to him, and with the offer
of causing the Council of Trent to be received in the States, he let himself be
persuaded to continue in the City, being also uncertain whether his departure
would be well taken at Rome. So in the Conference at Surenne a general T^uce
was established through the whole Kingdom for the three next months, The Truce
is concluded and published for three month^: the States are dismissed, and
invited to meet at the same place in October following; having first made a
Decree for the receiving the Council of Trent.
August, September, and October, and it was published with infinite joy among
the people in all places; after which the Duke of Mayenne being desirous to
dismiss the Assembly honorably, first caused a Decree to be made for the
receiving the Council of Trent, and then assembling the States upon the eighth
of August, he made them all swear to persevere in the Union, and not to depart
from it; and having given order that they should meet again in the same place
in the month of October following, to deliberate upon the state of affairs with
those Instructions they should have from Rome, he at last dismissed them all,
and the Deputies willingly departing, returned to their own houses.

The End of the Thirteenth BOOK.
1593.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
FOURTEENTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Book contains the means used by the King to make his Conversion more
fruitful: the continuation of the Truce for the two other months, November and
December, at the end of which Meaux first of all submits to his obedience: The
Sieur de la Chastre follows with the City of Bourges, and the Admiral Villars
with Havre de Grace and Rouen: the Count de Brissac Governor of Paris makes a
composition, and the King being received into the City without tumult, drives
out the Spanish Ambassadors and Garrison; the Cardinal-Legat departed also, and
goes out of the Kingdom. Many other Cities follow the Kings fortune; and
finally the Duke of Nemours is imprisoned, and the City of Lions surrenders it
self: The Duke of Mayenne renews other conditions with the Spaniard to
prosecute the War; he comes to parley with Ernest Archduke of Austria Governor
of the Low Countries, and at last goes into Picardy with Count Charles of
Mansfelt and the Army. The King besieges Laon; the Duke of Mayenne and the
Spaniards attempt to relieve it, there follow many encounters, at last they
retire, and the place is yielded: The Sieur de Balagny goes over to the Kings
obedience with the City of Cambray; he is likewise received into Amiens and
other Towns in Piccardy. The Duke of Montpensier takes Honfleur. There happen
diverse encounters in Bretagne, Languedoc, Provence and Dauphine. The King being
returned to Paris, is in his own Lodgings wounded in the Mouth by a young
Merchant; he is taken, confesses the fact, and is executed for^it, and the
Jesuits are banished out of the Kingdom. The King publicly proclaims War
against the King of Spain, and renews the Negotiation at Rome, to obtain
Absol^tion from the Pope. The Marshall de Byron is declared Governor of
Bourgogne. He begins the War prosperously in that Province, takes Autun,
Auxerre, and at last Dijon, and besieges the Castles of it. The Sieur de
Tremblecourt and d' Ossonville enter to infest the County of Bourgogne, (which
is subject to the Crown of Spain) and takes some places there. The Constable of
Castille Governor of Milan, goes to relieve that Province; the King goes
likewise to reinforce those that were besieging the Castle of Dijon. They
meet, and fight with wonderful various fortune at Fountain Francoise. The
Constable retires beyond the River Soane; the King follows him, passes the
River, and they fight again, without any great effect. The King returns to the
siege of the Castles, which surrender themselves; he concludes a Truce with the
Duke of Mayenne that they might treat of an accommodation; and makes his entry
into Lions. The Pope resolves to give the King his Benediction; the Ceremony is
solemnized with great joy at Rome; the news of it is brought to the Court,
whither there likewise come good tidings from Dauphine and Languedoc.

THE Kings Conve^sion was certainl^ the most proper, and most powerful remedy
that could be applied to the dangerous disease of the Kingdom; but the Truce so
opportunely concluded, did also dispose the Matter, and gave d^e time for the
working of so wholesome a Medicine; for the people on both sides, having begun to
taste the liberty and benefits that resulted from concord, in a season, when
Harvest and Vintage made them more sensible of the happiness, fell so in love
with it, that it was afterward much more easy to draw them, without many
scruples, or cautions, to a desire of peace, and a willing obedience of their
lawful Prince. As soon as the Truce was begun, men presently fell to converse
freely one with another, being not only of the same Nation, and same Blood, but
many of them straightly conjoined, either by friendship or kindred; in such sort,
that discords and ha^reds being driven away, or indeed those factions and
interests that had kept them so long divided, every one rejoiced to reunite
himself with his friends, and again to take up their former love, and
interrupted familiarity; and with mutual helps and assistances to redress those
necessities and calamities, which the length of War had produced. And there
being frequent kind meetings among all persons, every one related his past
sufferings, detested the occasions of such wicked discords, inveighed against
the Authors of such pernicious evils, praising and magnifying the benefits that
followed Peace and Concord; in which meetings and discourses, the Kings Cause
being much more favorable, (by reason of the manifest rights he had to the
succession of the Crown, and because scruple of Conscience was in great part
taken away by his Conversion) those things that were spoken in his favor,
began already to be popularly embraced, and men's minds inclined to yield
themselves to his obedience, rather than continue so ruinous a Civil War, to
satisfy the pretensions of the Duke of Mayenne, or the already manifest
intentions of the Spaniards. They of the Kings party, talking and discoursing
with those of the League, alleged the clemency and goodness of the Prince they
served, the sincerity wherewith he had turned to the Catholic Faith, his
familiarity, and affability to all his followers, his valor and courage in
Arms, his prudence and sagacity in Government, his prosperous success in
enterprises: And on the other side, asked those that were for the League, if
they did not yet perceive the Ambition of the House of Lorain, and the
subtilties of the Spaniards? Upbraided them, that they made War against the
good true. Frenchmen, in favor of the ancient Enemies of the Nation, and that
with their own bloods they sought to establish the Spanish Monarchy upon the
ruins and desolations of France; they deplored so great a blindness, and
prayed them, that recovering their wonted charity toward their Country, and
taking compassion of themselves, they would take shelter under the benignity of
that Prince, who stood with his Arms open, ready to receive and content them.

These things made wonderful impressions in men's minds, quite tired with the
War, and beaten down with the calamities they had continually endured; and the
King behaving himself with his utmost industry, graciously received, and filled
with very large hopes, all those that came to speak with him; and under
pretense of going to see their Houses, and their Friends, cunningly made his
most trusty Counselors disperse themselves into several places, laboring with
great art to draw men in all places to his devotion. And because the Duke of
Mayenne still kept practices on foot, either to conclude the Peace, or prolong
the Cessation; under this excuse the Sieur de Saucy, the Count of Schombergh,
and President de Thou went to Paris, and staying there many days, endeavored
both by wary managing the business, and by force of eloquence, to gain the King
the most adherents they could possibly. The Archbishop of Bourges went to that
City, under color of visiting his Diocese, to treat with the Sieur de la
Chastre, whom they had already discovered to be much scandalized with the
Spaniards manner of proceeding. The High Chancellor went into the Territories
of Orleans under pretense of over-seeing his own affairs. The first President
of the Parliament of Rouen went thither, to introduce some Treaty with the
Admiral Villars; for which effect the King himself also hovered about those
quarters. The Sieur de Fleury went to Pontoyse to treat with his
Brother-in-law, the Sieur de Villeroy, and the Prelates that had had to do in
the Kings Conversion, dispersed themselves into several places, to testify the
sincerity of his repentance, and to imprint those reasons by which they argued
in justification of that authority whereby they had given him absolution. In
this manner the Kings businesses went on within the kingdom, Lodovico Gonzaga
Duke of Neve^s is chosen Ambassador of obedience to the P^pe from the King
after hi^ Conversion, and four Prelates are appointed to accompany him.
whils^ Lodvieo Gonzaga Duke of Nevers, chosen Ambassador to Rome, set himself
in order to go with a gallant Train, to yield obedience in the Kings Name unto
the Pop^, and at his feet to desire the confirmation of matters already done.
The King resol^ed to send along with him Claude d' Angone^ Bishop of Man's, a
man for his learning and experience known in the Court of Rom^, Jacques Davys
Sieur du Perron elected Bishop of Eureux, Louis Seguiere Dean of Paris, and
Claude Gouin Dean of B^^^vi^, both famous Canonists: but because the Duke of
Nevers, both by reason of the quality of his person, and in respect of his
indispositions, could not make the journey with so much haste, the King
dispatched the Sieur de la Clielle post before, with Letters to the Pope full
of humility and submission, wherein he gave him account of his Conversion, and
of the Embassy he had appointed to ask his Benediction, and render him due
obedience. The King thought the Duke of Nevers very fit for that employment,
not only as being a Prince exceedingly famed for wisdom, and a person full of
honor and reputation; but also because, being an Italian, besides his
readiness of language to be able to negotiate without Interpreters, he had many
dependencies among the Princes of Italy, and much interest with many of the
Cardinals: and he added those four Prelates, that with Canonical and Theological
reasons they might be able to represent and maintain what they themselves had
done in his Absolution: But he also thought good to send la Clielle before, as
well to demonstrate his impatient desire to gain the Popes favor, as because,
being a crafty man, and of a deep reach, he hoped he might opportunely dispose
the business before the Dukes arrival. Thus did the King set forward the course
of Affairs.

But the ends were neither so certain, nor the means of handling them so
resolute on the other side; for the interests of the Confederates being
various, and often repugnant to one another, matters proceeded not in one and
the same way. The Duke of Mayenne had given notice to the Kings party, that he
had embra^ed the Truce, to expect what should be resolved on at Rome,
interposing no other difficulty but the Popes assent about the conclusion of
the Peace: And therefore he continued to treat by the means of Villeroy, and
President Ioannin, to whom he afterward added the Sieur de Bassompier, to show,
That in all things the Duke of Lorain was united with him, and by means of
these, who eagerly negotiated the conditions of agreement, he promised he would
send the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, and the Baron de Sonecey to Rome to intercede to
the Pope, that approving the Kings Conversion, he would be contented that by
acknowledging him, an end might be put to the Civil War; and setting this as
prime foundation, he treated nevertheless of securing the Catholic Religion,
The Duke of Maye^^e send^ the Sieur de Montpez^t into Spain, to treat with the
Catholic King, that the Infanta being elected Queen of ^rance, might be given
in marriage to his eldest Son.
and of establishing the affairs of his own Family: But inwardly his thought
was very different; for his hopes of attaining the Crown not being yet quite
extinct, and attributing all sinister events to the malignity of the Spanish
Ministers, and not to the intention of the Catholic King, he speedily
dispatched his Wives Son the Sieur de Montpezat, with Bellisaire, one of his
confiding Ministers, unto the Court of Spain to sound the mind of the King, and
of his Council, and to labor to remove the jealousies which the false
relations of the Duke of Feria, and Diego d' Ivarra had begot, and to desire
that the Infanta being chosen Queen, might marry his eldest Son, and if the
King consented to it, they should settle the conditions, and require such
supplies as were necessary to ^ring the enterprise to a conclusion. For this
end he had embraced the Truce, and desired it should continue to give time for
the negotiating of this affair, and for those preparations that should be made
in Spain.

On the other side, the Spanish Ministers were more than ever fixed in their
resolution, not to assent to his advancement; being certain, that when he
should have attained his intention, he would be most ungrateful for the benefit
received, and a most bitter Enemy to their Monarchy: Whereupon they not only
continued to honor and favor the Duke of Guise, and to promise him the
marriage of the Infanta; but the Duke of Feria, and Diego d' Ivarra, plotted
how to transfer the Duke of Mayenne's power upon him, and to suppress his Uncle
by his means; and they went on so far, (being drawn by hatred and disdain) that
sometimes they thought of taking away his life; but that was contradicted not
only by Iuan Baptista Tassis, and Inigo de Mendozza, men of more moderate
minds, and who measured things more by reason than passion: but even the Duke
of Guise himself was not inclined unto it, being a youth of a solid nature, and
right intention; who on the one side abhorred to plot against his U^cle; and on
the other, knew himself too weak both in reputation and forces to overcome the
mature prudence of the Duke of Mayenne* and the well-grounded authority he had
settled in his party. They that helped to keep the Duke of Guise's youthful
thoughts in the right way, were the Mareschals de la Chastre* Rosne, and St.
Paul, who had been long ago bred up by his Father; and both because they had
been exalted by the Duke of Mayenne, and because they knew the arts of the
Spaniards, dissuaded him from setting himself upon that precipice, offering to
his consideration, that he had neither Men, Moneys, Cities, nor Commanders that
depended upon him; that the Spaniards were reduced* to extreme necessity for
want of Money, Count Charles his Army destroyed, the affairs of Flanders in an
ill condition, and without a Head that was able to order matters of so great
weight; that on the other side, the Duke of Mayenne held all the Cities and
Fortresses of the party in his own hands, that he had a long settled Authority
among the people, was highly esteemed for valor and prudence, that all the
French Forces depended upon him, that the Duke of Lorain was joined with him,
that the Dukes of Aumale and Elboeuf depended on his will, and the Parliament
was united with him; so that to let himself be engaged by the persuasions of
Strangers, was nothing else but to expose his own fortune to a most certain
ruin, to please two malignant Ministers, who sowed fire and flames, to satiate
that hatred which without much reason they had conceived; which considerations
added to the weakness and ill carriage of the Spaniards, made such an
impression in the Duke of Guise, that he began to be disgusted with them,
accounting himself mocked in the marriage of the Infanta, and being incensed
that they should go about to use his youth as an instrument to ruin his Family.

Among these, the Cardinal-Legat, as he did not totally assent to what the
Spanish Ministers plotted against the Duke of Mayenne; so was be displeased
with him for having crossed the election of the Infanta, and of the Duke of
Guise; in the invention whereof, he thought he had (to the exceeding great
glory of his wisdom) found means absolutely to gain unto himself the good will
of the Catholic King, with the securing of Religion, and the exclusion and
suppression of the King of Navarre; which were the three principal points of
his designs, and that he had also found a person of the Nation who was liked of
by the people, which was the point whereupon he pressed the Popes Commissions;
and now seeing that thought frustrated, and the Truce purposely concluded with
the contrary party, he was extremely vexed at it; wherefore still persisting
and continuing to persuade the Confederates not to make any reflection upon the
imaginary Conversion of the Navarrois, (so did he yet call him in contempt) he
labored to make an agreement amongst them, to the end that the States coming
to meet again, they might perfect the establishment of the Royalty; for so they
called the joint election of the Infanta and Duke of Guise to be King and Queen
of France.

The Pope neither approves of the Infanta's election nor marriage, as things
not fe^sable; but only seems to consent unto them not to disgust the Spaniards.
He strove likewise to imprint these opinions, at Rome by frequent Letters,
penned according to his desire; but the Pope, a man of mature prudence,
suffered not himself to be absolutely persuaded by the Legates intelligence; but
being* advertised of every particular by the Venetian and Florentine
Ambassadors, neither approv^d the Infanta's election, nor her marriage with the
Duke of Guise: but seeing the business of it self very difficult, and crossed
by so many impediments, he judged it vain, and no way feisable, and therefore
cared not to declare himself, seeming only to giv^ his consent, that he might
not alienate the King of Spain from him, with whom he saw it necessary to hold
a good correspondence, lest he should precipitate the affairs of Religion and
the Church into some dangerous troubles. He could have been contented from the
beginning, that one of the Princes of the House of Bourbon, that was truly a
Catholic, should have been thought fit to be mar^ied to the Infanta, because
by the elec^ion of a Prince of the Blood, all the Catholics of France would
have been elected, and had by many ways given his Ministers notice of his
intentions; and to such a Prince he could have been reunited in one body, and
by the alliance with the Catholic King, ^is assistance would have been
assured; so that neither the temporal state of the Kingdom would have been in
danger of falling into the hands of Strangers, nor the spiritual of being
oppressed by the Hugonots. For these very reasons he approved not the Duke of
Guise's election, believing the Catholics of the Kings party would never be
brought to acknowledge and obey him, whereby the War would become perpetual;
and he was likewise of opinion, that King Philip would never give his Daughter
to a weak, poor, and ill-grounded Prince, with almos^ a certain danger, that
she should never be Queen* Pope Cle^^nt could have wished that some Catholic
Prince of the House of Bourbon might be elected to the Crown, and that he
should marry the Infanta; but when he heard the Kings intention to turn
Catholic, he began to incline to hi^.
more than in name* besides, he perceived, this hated election would gain the
King of Navarre many ad^erents, and by this means tur^ more Cities to favor
him in one day, ^han he would be able to take by force in his whole life time.
One thing only kept him doubtful in t^is thought, which was the unfitness of
those Princes that were nearest in Blood; for the Cardinal of Bourbon was but a
weak man, and very unhealthful; the Prince of Conty, by reason of his natural
defects, unable to govern, and also (as it was said) to get children; the Count
de Soiss^ns, though of a good wit, and noble courage, was so drowned in the
love of the Princess Catherine, (the Kings Sister, an obstinate Hugonot) that
the Catholics du^st not confide in him; and the Duke of Mo^tponsier, a youth
of exceeding great worth, was more remote in the degrees of Royal
Consanguinity; wherefore as soon as he knew that the King was disposed to re^urn
to the obedience of the Catholic Church, he began to incline toward him,
thinking it the shortest way to settle the commotions, and remove the dangers
of the Kingdom. But it was a business not to be resolved on without great
deliberation, as well to be assured that his Conversion was sincere, and that
the heart of a Lion lay not hid under the s^in of a Lamb, as because it was not
known which way the French would receive tha^ alteration; wherefore there was
much to be thought on, both to be by all means possible made certain, that the
King was a true sincere Catholic, and that the people would willingly submit
themselves to his devotion; for if the King should but feign that Conversion
for Interest of State, Religion would be thereby left in manifest danger; and
if the people should not accept him, the Popes own reputation would be in no
less danger, for having run to approve the Conversion of a relapsed Heretic,
more hastily than the common people; besides, the respect which by all means
was to be born to the King of Spain, (already possessed of the Title of
Defender of the Catholic Faith, and Protector of the Sea of Rome;) who very
clearly showed he h^d spent so much Gold, and poured out so much Blood of his
Armies to preserve Religion in the Kingdom of France, counseled that in a
matter of high importance he should proce^d with great dexterity, length of
time, and with well weighed, and perfect maturity* being certain that King
Philip's supplies had hindered the King from getting the total Victory, whilst
he was obstinately an Hugonot, and therefore to them was the reward and
gratitude due for the Confirmation of the Gallique Church, and great heed was
to be taken not to establish a fierce and powerful Enemy, who might afterward
disturb him very much in the possession of his Kingdom.

By these reasons the Pope was pers^aded not to yield, nor assent at the very
first, but to let himself be counseled by the event of things; Giacopo
San^esio a Servan^ to the Family of Aldobrandino, favored by Clement the
^ighth, was afterward enriched, and elected Cardinal.
and yet to begin his principal ^ntention, he thought good to give some glimpse
of hope to those who negotiated secre^ly at Rome for the King, whom they called
King of Navarre. The Pope favored a principal servant of the Family of
Cardinal Pietro Aldobrandino, named Giacopo San^esio, a man obscurely born in a
Castle of the Marches of Ancona, who had long served the Cardinals Father (as
they said) for a Companion of his Studies, whilst he was employed in cause^ in
the ^^ta Romana, and because he was exceeding faithful, and not of too
searching a nature, and therefore a man of very few words, Arnaud d' Oss^t
Ag^nt at Rome for the Queen Dowager of Henry the Third.
the care of all his Domestic affairs lay upon him* This man was acquainted
and sometimes held discourse with Arn^ud d' Oss^t, a man born at A^c^e in
Gascogne, of mean parentage, but of a most excellent wit, and most regular
course of life, who having been brought to Rome by Monsieur de Faux Ambassador
from France, staid afterward behind in the Family of Cardinal d' Este, and
besides his singular learning and eloquence, was by many years experience,
exceeding well versed in the Court of Rome. He being a private man, and long
time accustomed to be seen in the Court, was not observed by any body, and
managing Spiritual businesses for the Queen Dowager of Henry the Third, Giacopo
Sannesi^, a Friend of d' Ossats, has order from the Pope to treat with him
(but as of himself) about the affairs of the King of France and the Kingdom.
as the erecting of Monasteries, granting of Indulgences, and other such like
things, might without show of any business of importance, negotiate with
Sannesio in a corner of the Antichamber, seeming only to talk of ordinary
things; wherefore, the Pope who avoided open proceedings, and desired to draw
the thread of the business secretly, gave order to Sannesio, that as a Friend
to this Frenchman, (who was well known to him to be a man of worth) he should
begin as of himself, to treat of the Kings affairs, which Treaty being begun
thus underhand, proceeded so far, that when Monsieur de la Clielle arrived,
there had already past many overtures on both sides.

Monsignore Serafino Olivario having received Letters from the King, brought by
Monsieur de la Clielle, shows them to the Pope.
The Sieur de la Clielle was come to Rome, with Letters from the King to
Monsignore Serafino Olivario, Auditor of the Rota Romana, a Prelat, who because
he was descended of French Ancestors, had ever been faithful to the Crown, and
desired to serve the Kings cause, but saw the passage very difficult, not only
to introduce the Sieur de la Clielle to have audience of the Pope, as he
required, but also to treat in any kind of way, concerning that business: yet
being a man of a sweet pleasing nature, both very dextrous, and affable in his
discourse, and therefore acceptable to the whole Court, and even to the Pope
himself; coming to have audience, under pretense of other businesses, he at
last brought in that; and in the end would needs show the Pope the Letter which
the King had written to him. The Pope, either taken at unaware by Serafino, or
intending to persevere constantly in his dissimulation, or being troubled to be
in a manner constrained to impart his designs to other than those he had
determined, showed himself highly displeased, and would have broke off the
discourse of that business, if the Auditor talking sometimes seriously,
sometimes in jest, had not appeased him, concluding finally, That one ought to
lend an ear even to the Devil himself, if one could believe it possible for him
to be converted. The Pope likewise turning the business into mirth, jested a
great while with Serafino, who pressing him still for an answer, and urging him
to hear la Clielle not as the Kings Agent, but as a private Gentleman, from
whom perchance to his satisfaction he might learn many secret particulars; the
Pope told him he would think upon it. The same evening by the means of Sannesio
he gave d' Ossat directions to go talk with the Gentleman that was come from
France, and to give him good hopes of his negotiation, and advertising him (but
as from himself) that he should not be dismayed for any difficulty whatsoever he
should meet withal.

The Sieur de l^ Clielle is brought secretly to the Pope, leaves the Kings
letters, and departs with no very good answer.
The next night Silvio Antoniani the Popes Chamberlain went to Serafino's House,
and taking only the Sieur de la Clielle into his Coach, brought him by a
private way into the Popes Chamber, where he having told him that the King of
France had sent him to his Holiness Feet to present those Letters to him,
(which he had in his hand) the Pope without staying till he had made an end,
brake forth into angry words, complaining that he had been deceived, and that
he had thought he should have received a private Gentleman, and not an Agent of
a relapsed, excommunicated Heretic, and commanded him to depart out of his
presence. La Clielle not at all dismayed, (according to the advertisment that
had been given him) added many words of humility and submission, Cardinal
Toledo treats often with la Clielle, but resolves that the Pope cannot admit
the Kings desires, he being a relapsed Heretic.
and said that being able to do no more, he would leave the King his Masters
Letters, and the Copy of his Commission, which he had brought in Writing; and
though the Pope angerly bade him carry them away, yet he left them upon the
Table, and having kissed his Foot, was carried back to the place where he had
been taken up.

The day following he had order to confer with Cardinal Toledo, with whom
having had very long discourses three several times, still it was concluded
that the Pope could not admit the Kings desires, because he had formerly sent
to the Apostolic See, and yet had returned to the vomit of Heresy, and the
Cardinal having taken particular information of the Kings businesses, D' Ossat
gives order to la lielle to per^wade the ^King to go on in showing himself a
Catholic.
and of the condition of the affairs of France, left the matter so undecided.
But the night before la Clielle departed from Rome, his answer was with great
secrecy given him by the means of d' Ossat, that the King should go forward in
showing himself truly converted, and should give signs of being sincerely a
Catholic; for the Pope was resolved to reject the Duke of Nevers to satisfy
his own Conscience, and to try the Kings constancy, yet with the opportunities
of times, he should at last obtain his intent.

With this conclusion la Clielle went toward France, Diverse Treatises are
printed against the Absolution of Henry the IV* given him by the French
Prelates.
without having so much as conferred with Monsignore Serafino, (which had been
given him in charge) the Pope desiring that every one should believe him most
averse from approving the Kings Conversion, which the greater part of the Court
of Rome thought to have passed with some dis-reputation to the Pope, and that a
few Prelates had licentiously arrogated that power to themselves which belonged
only to the Apostolic See; whereupon there wanted not those who wrote, and
printed diverse Treatises, wherein they argued that a relapsed Heretic, and one
declared to be excommunicate, could not be admitted to a Catholic Kingdom, and
that the determination of the French Prelates to give him Absolution was
Schismatical, and to be censured by the Tribunal of the Holy Office, for so
they call the judgment of the Inquisition. D' Ossat answers them, but cannot
ge^ leave to prin^ his discourse.
Arnaud d' Ossat wrote against these Treatises, maintaining with many reasons
taken out of the Sacred Canons, and from the Doctors of the Holy Church, and
with many pious Christian Considerations, that the Pope not only might, but
also that he absolutely ought to approve the Kings Conversion, and admit him to
the obedience of the Catholic Church; but though in that discourse there was
never any thing found, that was not manifestly Catholic, and though he wrote
with exquisite modesty, yet could he not get leave to print it; and all he
could do, was to show some Copies of it to discreet persons, which was not only
not reproved, but secretly approved even by the Pope, who was not displeased
that men's ears should by little and little be made acquainted with this
Doctrine.

But the Legate being wholly of another opinion, and more than over-desirous of
the proposed Spanish Election, was busy in managing all the Engines that were
proper to bring that design to perfection; and therefore besides many exceeding
long Letters, and many distinct informations sent to the Pope and to some
Cardinals, he at last also dispatched Pier Francesco Montorio, to give more
exact advertisements, and to cross the Kings Embassy; but a politic device
which he subtly made use of, redounded to the exceeding disadvantage of his
design; for Montorio falling sick at Lions, took a resolution to dispatch his
instructions post to Rome, to the end they might arrive there before the Duke
of Nevers: in which the Legate having written that he thought it convenient, by
some means which should seem fit, to hold the Duke of Nevers in hand, and
prolong the business, till it could be known whether, when the Truce was ended,
the Spaniards were like to attain to the Election, and to have sufficient
Forces in readiness to establish it, keeping the King of Navarre also doubtful
in the mean time, to the end he might not apply his wonted spirit to make
preparations for War. This Item served the Pope afterward for a pretense to
admit the Duke of Nevers, who having in this interim passed Langres, was gone
toward Italy, through Switzerland, and the Country of the Griso^s; but being
arrived at Poschiavo a Town in the Valtoline, The Pope sends Antonio Possevino
a Jesuit^ to tell the Duke of Nevers, that he should not come to Rom^ to
execute his Embassy, because the King was not yet acknowledged a Catholic:
thereupon the King goes to Man^u^.
he was met by Father Antonio Possevino a Jesuit, who was sent to him by the
Pope, to let him know, that as he rejoiced in the report of the King of
Navarre's Conversion, so could he not admit an Embassy, in the name of a King,
whom he acknowledged not for such as he styled himself, and that therefore he
might spare the pains of coming. The Duke not losing heart, though much
troubled, went forward, but not the straight way to Rome, and being come to
Mantua, he sent Possevino back unto the Pope, endeavoring by many reasons
written to him, and the Cardinals his Nephews, to obtain permission to execute
his Embassy, and the Marquess de Pisani, Cardinal Gondi, and the Monsieur de
Metz Leiger Ambassador for the King at Venice being come unto him, they with a
common consent wrote, and treated many things, which were promoted at Rome by
the Venetian and Florentine Ambassadors: Cardinal Toledo also carrying himself
very favorably in the business.

The Pope making use of the advertisement the Legate had given him, to color
his secret intention, showed that Article of Montorio's instructions to the
Duke of Sessa Ambassador for the King of Spain, and to many Cardinals depending
upon that party, and feigned to let himself be drawn by that respect, and that
to that end he would not totally exclude the Duke of Nevers; and though both
the Duke of Sessa, and the Spanish Cardinals stiffly opposed it, affirming, that
at the end of the Truce, the Catholic King would certainly have such forces in
a readiness, as should, to the general satisfaction of the Confederates, be
able to establish the proposed election; yet the Pope took a middle way, which
was to admit and hearken to the Duke, not as an Ambassador from the King of
France, The Pope sends Possevi^o again to the Duke of N^ver^ to bid him come ^n
to Rome* where he should b^ received as a Catholic Italian Prince, though not
as an Ambassador.
but as a Ca^holick Prince, and as an Italian, and therefore he sent back
Possevin^ to him again to Man^^a, to let him know that his intention, and last
determination, and to advertise him tha^ he should come without state, and with
but a small retinue, to the end he might not be held, and acknowledged in the
degree of an Ambassador, but of a priva^e person; which though the Duke thought
very hard, and from so difficult a beginning* guessed he should compass no
prosperous end of his Embassy, yet he resolved to go forward, as well because
he would not digress from the Council of the Venetian Senate, and the other
Princes who were the Kings Friends, as also to make the uttermost royal in a
business of so mighty importance.

An ^nsurrection in the City of Lyon^ against the D^^e of N^mours, who being
Governor, plotted to make himself absolute Lord, but being discovered, he is
imprisoned, and the Government given to the Archbishop of the City.
But in France, there happened at this time (besides the ordinary discords) a
new misfo^tune to the League: for the City of Lions unexpectedly ^ook Arms
against the Duke of Nemours, who was Governor th^^^of, and proceeded so far
that they made him p^isoner in the Cas^le of Pierre Ansise. The Duke of
N^mours, a Prince of great courage* but of a haughty imperious nature, being
departed full of pride by reason of his prospe^ous defense of Pa^^, and come
unto his Government of Lions, had begun (...) no^rish a design within himself,
to reduce it into a free Signiory, together with Bea^ioloi^ and Po^ests, (which
were three Precincts jointly under his command) and to add (...) them as many
other places and towns as he could; and his Brother the Marquess of St. So^l^^
having the Government of Dauphine, he designed to unite that Province also unto
himself, and by that means joining his State to that of the Duke of Sav^y,
(from whose House his Family descended) to be assisted, and fomented by him;
but because he knew that neither the Nobility, nor people would ever consent
willingly to separate themselves from the Crown of France, and submit
themselves unto his tyranny, he had by long contrivance been raising all those
means, which might serve to obtain his intent by force: For this purpose he had
under several pretenses, driven many of the chief Citizens out of the City; and
exposing the Nobility to manifest dangers, was glad to see many of them perish,
who were able to oppose his design; nor that sufficing him, he had upon several
occasions caused a great many Forts, and Citadels to be built, which
encompassed the City of Lions with a Circle, having begun at Toissay,
Belleville, and Tisy, and then continued at Charlieu, St. Bonnet, Mombrison,
Nirie^, C^i^drieu, Vienne, Pipe^, and lastly to perfect that circumference, he
treated with the Sieur de St. Iullen, that for Fifty thousand Crowns he should
let him have Quirieu to raise another Fo^t there likewise, and passing from the
Circumference unto the Center, he meant to rebuild the ruined Citadel of Lions,
and designs and platforms were already draw^ for that purpose. In these strong
places he kept Garrisons of Horse and Foot* that depended upon his pleasure, and
not having enough to maintain them of his own, fed them wi^h extorting from the
people, and with a pernicious license of plundering and spoiling the Country.
To these actions were added outward shows not unlike them; for he kept about
him a great retinue of Strangers, undervalued and abused the Nobility of the
Country, and in his public writings no longer ^sed the Title of Governor, but
barely of Duke of N^mours, as an absolute Lord. In this inte^im the time of
holding the States at Paris being come, he* though invited, would neither go,
not send thither, still speaking dishonourably of the authority and actions of
the Duke of Mayenne, his Bro^her by the Mothers side, and when the Truce was
concluded, though he declared that he accepted it for as much as concerned the
Kings party; yet nevertheless would he not dismiss the least part of his
Soldiery, but rather entertaining and raising new every day, kept the Country
more oppressed in the time of the Cessation than it was before in the heat of
War. The principal men and the people of Lions moved by all these things,
resolved to complain of it to the Duke of Mayenne, who for the safety of the
City, and the maintaining of his own reputation, thought it good to withstand
his Brothers ambitious designs, and therefore under color of desiring that the
Archbi^hop of Lions should go to R^me with Cardinal Ioye^se, he caused him to
go unto that City, giving him Commission to maintain the peoples liberty, and
to give him ^o^ice of every par^icula^, to the end he might seasonably provide
against danger. This Remedy hastened the breaking out of the mischief; for the
Duke of Nemours having no good corresponden^e with the Archbishop, and seeing
the Citizens ran popularly after him, thought to dra^ some Comp^nies of
Soldiers into the Town, either for his own security or to bridle the people,
who were already half in an uproar: But this news being come amongst the
Citizens, increased by the won^^d additions of the report, they no longer
delayed to rise* and having taken Arms, barricadoed up the City, and shut the
Duke into a corner of the Town, who having in this necessity desired to speak
with the Archbishop, whom before he had not cared to see, the event proved
different from his design; for the Archbishop making then no account either of
his words or complements, (which he knew proceeded but from necessity)
continued to exhort the people to defend their own liberty; and told them which
way they should manage their business; so that, finally the barricadoes being
made up close, and a greater number of men being in Arms, they of the Council
went armed unto him, and told him that for the security of his person, the
people being in a mutiny, and for the safety of the City that was in danger to
be sacked, By a Decree of the chief heads of the City of Lions, the Duke of
Nemours is pu^ out of the G^vernment, and the Marquis^ of St. S^^lin out of
that of D^up^i^e.
they intended he should retire into the Castle of Pierre Ausise, which not
being able to contradict, he was at last brought thither, and with more severe
Guards diligently looked to; and the chief men having assembled the Council,
made a Decree whereby they deprived him of the Government, and likewise the
Marquis his Brother, (though from him they confessed they had never received
any injury at all) and gave the Authority of Governing the City unto the
Archbishop, which was afterward confirmed upon him by the Duke of Mayenne.

But this news being come to Paris, many were exceedingly troubled at it, the
Spanish Ministers grieving that they had lost one of the chief Instruments of
their power; but Madam de Nemours being afflicted much more for the danger and
ruin of her Son; and many there were who persuaded themselves that all the
mischief proceeded from the Duke of Mayenne, who not only had desired to abate
the arrogance of his Brother, but had also done it to get Lions into his power,
and join it ^o his Government of Bourgogne, that he might remain Master
thereof, whatsoever the event of things should be; it being known to every one,
that in the Treaties he held with the King, and also with the Spanish
Ministers, he had demanded that Lions and Bourgogne should jointly be granted
to him; wherefore though he labored to seem discon^ented and angry at the
accident that had happened unto his Brother, there was not any body that
believed him, seeing he not only omitted to treat of freeing him indeed, though
he talked much of it; but also that he had confirmed the authority of Governor
upon the Archbishop, which those Citizens had conferred upon him.

This new dissension opened a passage to new troubles, The Duke of Ma^enn^ and
Guis^ united th^mselves in affection, and agr^e jointly to favor each other in
the election to be King.
which at that time were like to have steered a more prosperous course; for the
Duke of Mayenne had at last reunited himself, and composed matters with the
Duke of Guise, their common Friends having made them perceive that their
discord would in the end be the ruin of them both; whereupon the Duke of
Mayenne, to free himself from the aspersions of crossing his Nephews
advancement; and the Duke of Guise, not to show himself regardless of his
Uncle's labor in upholding the party, were mutually agreed that if the Duke of
Mayenne found means to attain the Crown for himself, the Duke of Guise should
be obliged to keep united with him, and assist him with all his Forces; and in
case the Duke of Mayenne could not obtain the Kingdom for himself, or for one
of his Sons, he should likewise be obliged to help the Duke of Guise to attain
it either by the marriage of the Infanta, or some other way.

This accommodation did infinitely displease the Duke of Feria, and Diego d'
Ivarra* Tassis being returned from Flanders, treat^ with respect and confidence
with the Duke of Mayenne.
who saw themselves deprived of the proper instrument to keep the Duke of
Mayenne in jealousy, and to be able when occasion should require by that means
to keep down and suppress his greatness; and yet Iuan Bap^ista Tassis being
returned from Flanders* who had been there to confer with Don Pedro Enriquez of
Toledo, Conde de Fuen^es, who held the Government of the Low Countries till the
arrival of the Archduke Ernest, began to treat of piecing up again with the
Duke of Mayenne, such being the opinion and desire of that principal Minister,
who perceiving well that without his help and consent, all other attempts would
prove frui^less; and though the Spanish Ministers at Paris thought themselves
deceived, and ill dealt withal by him, yet the Conde did not judge it a fit
time to take revenge, but to manage things with patience and dissimulation,
since they had seen by experience, that the principal Deputies of the States;
depended upon the will and authority of the Duke of Mayenne. At Tassis his
a^rival they began to trea^, the Legate also interposing, though he was much
more in^lined to the Duke of Guis^, but not being willing to digr^ss from the
King of Spain's re^olutions, not only by reason of his ancient inclination, but
also because in that State of affairs there was no breaking friendship and good
correspondence with him, without indangering Religion.

Tassis began with letting him know the good will the Conde de Fuentes bore
him; then he went on himself condemning the perverse carriage of his Colleagues;
and in the end intimated and implied; but did not affirmatively declare, That
the Catholic King would be content to give the Infanta to one of his Sons
provided they could but agree in other matters. After this conference the other
Spanish Ministers began to change their manner of proceeding, and to bear more
respect to the Dukes person and authority, and the Cardinal-Legat himself to do
the same; so that it was easy for him to believe there were new orders come
from Spain in favor of him; The King of Spain, provided the Infanta might be
elected, resolves to give her any husband.
as it was true, King Philip being finally resolved to procure the Infanta's
election with any Husband whatsoever, and having conceived an opinion, that the
Duke of Mayenne standing fixed in his design of attaining the Crown for his
posterity, would consent to most profitable conditions for his Kingdom.

But that which made the business difficult was the present weakness of the
Kings condition; for his Treasures being wonderfully exhausted, he could not
make those great preparations that were necessary to uphold so great an
enterprise, and he was brought so low that the Merchants could no longer accept
his Bills of Exchange; and the Genoueses, to whom he was indebted many
Millions, refused to make new payments: this weakness was with all possible
care concealed by his Ministers, and they continued to affirm that against the
end of the Truce, twelve thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse should be in a
readiness to enter into Picardy, and one hundred thousand Crowns should be paid
to the Duke of Mayenne every month to maintain as many French Forces; and, to
gain the greater belief, they strained themselves to pay him twenty thousand in
present, and give him Bills for sixty thousand more upon their credits,
striving in all things to win, and still to increase new hopes in him every day
more and more.

This piecing up with the Spaniards, besides the accommodation with the Duke of
Guise, was the cause of interrupting the Treaty of Peace which had been
continued many days with the Kings Deputies, in which though not only Monsiuer
de Villeroy, but also President Iannin had labored very much, yet was there
not any conclusion agreed upon; for the King was grown jealous, that the Duke
of Mayenne treated but feignedly, without any desire to conclude; and this
suspicion grew from some of the Legat's Letters to the Pope, which were
intercepted, wherein though he spoke very ill of the Duke of Mayenne, and
imputed it to his ambition, and malignity that the Infanta and the Duke of
Guise were not elected; yet he affirmed he had tied him up in such a manner,
that he should never conclude an agreement with the King of Navarre, and that
he had taken a secret Oath to that purpose in a Writing signed by him, the
Dukes of Aumale and Elboeuf, the Count of Brissac, the Mareshals of Rosne, and
St. Paul, and many others of the principal men, a Copy of which Writing was
enclosed in the same Letters, wherefore Villeroy going to the King to treat on
still about the Peace, he would do nothing else but show him the Letters, and
the Writings, whereof he also gave him a Copy to show the Duke of Mayenne, who
not being able to deny, but that the Oath was true, excused himself yet for it
with saying, that he had always intended to conclude the Peace with a
reservation of the Popes consent; and if he should approve it, he was then
immediately loosened from the obligation of that Oath; nor did the sight of the
evil which the Legate wrote concerning him, at all withdraw him from his
resolution; for he interpreted those to be old opinions, and that the new
orders from Spain, had varied all things; wherefore applying himself to join
close with the Spanish Ministers, from the Treaty of Peace, he came to
negotiate the prolonging of the Truce, The Truce is prolonged for two months
more.
to give things time to ripen; nor was it hard to obtain the lengthening of it,
for the other two months, November and December, because the King also desired,
before he moved any farther, to know the event of the Duke of Nevers Embassy,
and the Popes resolution.

But this accommodation made up betwixt the Duke of Mayenne and the Spaniards,
made the Pope more wayward to the Kings entreaties, not being willing to admit
his reconciliation, whilst he doubted the French of the League would not follow
his judgment, but continue the War, being united with Spain; it being fit for
the reputation of the Apostolic See, for the security of Religion, and for the
satisfaction of the World, that he should be the most wary, the most constant,
and the last man that should approve the King's conversion; lest those
mischiefs which might proceed from the establishment of a K. not yet well
settled in his Religion should be imputed to his lightness and cred^lity*
wherefore the Duke of Nevers being come ^ear to Rome, The Pope se^d^ the D. of
Neuers word, he intends not be shall stay at Rome above ten daye^.
he sent Possevi^o to him again, to let him know, he intended not he should
s^ay above ten days in the City, and that he had forbidden all the Cardinals,
either ^o see him, or treat with him; which things, though they seemed
wonderful hard to the Duke, yet being resolved to prosecute the business to the
utmost, and believing all these were but shows to set a higher price upon his
favor, he went on and ent^red privately into Rome, at Porta del Borgo upon the
twentieth day of November.

He went the same evening privately to kiss the Pope's feet, The Duke of Nevers
being entered privately into R^me, goes the same evening to kiss the Pope^ feet.
and at the first audience desired only that his time might be prolonged, the
term of ten days being too short to treat of a matter of so great moment, and
that he might have leave to visit the Cardinals, and to deliver the Letters he
had to them from the King, offering to treat of that business in the presence
of the King of Spain's Ambassadors* and of the Duke of May^nne's. Agents, and
to show them that a King of France could not but be received, who humbly suing,
and being converted, desired to return unto the obedience of the Church. He had
no other answer from the Pope, but that he would consult with ^he Cardinals*
and with their Council would resolve; but in his following audiences the Duke
endeavored, with many reasons, and great eloquence, to persuade the Pope,
first of all, that as being Pope, and the Vicar of Christ, he could not reject
one who being conver^ed return^d into the bosom of the Church; and then, that
as a prudent experienced Prince, he ought not to refuse the obedience of the
stronger, and more powerful party; and finally, that as a Protector of the
Common liberty, he ought not to permit, that the Kingdom of France, by the
continuance of a rui^^^^ desperate War, should run the hazard of being divided
and dismembered, with manifest danger of the libe^ty of all Christian Princes,
and particularly of the Sea of Rome. He enlarged himself upon the first ^oint
with proofs of Scripture; and with many examples, and authorities of the
Primitive Church, and the Fathers; but knowing the difficulty did not consist
in that, he enlarged himself much more in the other two; and thinking the Pope
persisted to be so obd^rate, particularly because he doubted of the King's
Forces, and that the Catholics of the League, united with the King of Spain,
were strong enough to suppress him, he took much pains to show, that the major
part of the Parliaments of France, all the Princes (except those of the House
of Lorain,) the flower of the Nobility, and two thirds of the Kingdom followed
his party, that his adversaries were few and of mean quality, disagreeing among
themselves, and full of desperation* so that to the King's perfect
establishment, and the total quiet of the Kingdom, there wanted nothing but the
consent of the Apostolic See, and the benediction of his Holiness. He reckoned
up all the King's Victories, which did indeed proceed from his valor, but also
from the power and strength of the Nobility and people that followed him; he
exaggerated the weakness of the Spaniards, who might well keep the Civil
dissentions alive by art and industry, but could not sustain them by force of
Arms. He strove to show the articles and artifices they used, and that their
aim was to usurp the Kingdom, as they had lately discovered their secret in the
proposition of the Infanta: he excited the piety and justice of the Pope, not
to make himself author of violating the Salique-Lam and the other fundamental
ones of the Kingdom; not to assist those who labored to dispoile the lawful
blood of the Crown; and finally not to permit, that discords should be sowed
under his name to the utter ruin of the foundations of a most Christian
Kingdom, and first* born of the Holy Church. Last of all he concluded, that he
brought along with him some of those Prelates who had given the King
absolution, and who desired to present themselves at his feet, to give him an
account of what had been done, their minds giving them, that they should make
him clearly see, they had not swerved from the obedience of the Apostolic See,
nor from the rites and customs of it, and that what they had done was
conformable to the Sacred Canons, and the mind of the Holy Church.

The Pope was constant in his determination, and though the Dukes reasons moved
him, yet being resolved howsoever not to be too hasty; and so much the rather
because the Duke seemed to urge, that the Absolution given to the King in
France, might be confirmed and approved, but not to propose the submitting of
the King to the censure and judgment of the Apostolic See, he said, he would
think upon a^ answer, and two days after, not having the heart to talk any
more with the Duke, and to answer his reasons, he let him know by Silvio
Antoniani* that he could not prorogue the term of ten days, The Pope lets the
Duke of N^ver^ know, that he cannot prolong the term or ten days, and that he
could not admit the Prelates who came along with him to his presence, unless
they submitted themselves to the Penitenti^ro Maggier^, who is the chief
Officer that has power to absolve a Penitent.

The Duke of Nevers falling upon his knees beseeches the Pope at least to give
the King absolution in Foro Cons^ientiae, an^ it is denied.


lest he should discontent those Catholics, who, being obedient to the Church,
had ever, and did yet uphold Religion, and that that time was sufficient,
having nothing else to treat of; that it was not fit he should speak unto the
Cardinals, having been admitted as a private man, not as an Ambassador; and
that as concerning the Prelates that came along with him, he could not admit
them to his presence, unless first they submitted themselves to Cardinal Santa
Severin^ the chief penitentiary, to be examined by him.

This was the Popes last resolution: for, though the Duke obtained another
audience, yet could he not alter his determination, but he sent Cardinal Toledo
to let him know the same things, with whom, having had many long discourses,
the substance of the business varied not; and though the Duke, very much
troubled with a Catarrhe, was of necessity fain to stay beyond the time of ten
days, yet could he not prevail any thing at all; and finally, being brought to
his last audience in the Popes presence, after having at large repeated all his
reasons, he fell upon his knees, and beseech'd him, that at least he would give
the King absolution in Foro Conscienti^: but neither could he obtain this, and
departed exceeding ill satisfied, having finally, with more liberty and spirit
than he was wont, aggravated the wrongs that were done unto the King, and the
injuries that were put upon his own person, who, forgetting his want of health,
his age, and quality, had taken the pains to come that journey, for the safety
and quiet of Christians.

After he was gone from his audience, Cardinal Toledo came to him again, and
told him, that if the Prelates did so much abhor the face of Cardinal Santa
Severina, they should be heard by the Cardinal of Aragon, Chief of the
Congregation of the Holy Office; but the Duke answered, that they being come as
Ambassadors in company with him, he did not mean they should be used as
Criminals, but that the Pope should admit them to his presence; for, to him, as
Head of the Church; they would give a good account of their actions: but the
Cardinal replied, that it was not decent for them to contend and dispute with
the Pope; the Duke added, that he would be content, if the Pope would but admit
them to kiss his feet, and that then they should render an account to Cardinal
Aldobrandino his Nephew.

But neither would the Pope accept of this condition; whereupon the Duke of
Nevers having distinctly set down in writing all that he had done, departed
from Rome, taking the Prelates with him, and went to the City of Venice, where
the Bishop of Man's published a little book in Print, wherein he set forth the
reasons that had moved the Prelates to absolve the King; The Duke of N^vers
goes away d^s^ontented from Rome.

The Duke comes to Ven^ce, where the French Prela^es print a Book of the
reasons that moved them to absolve the King.


one of which was, that the Canons permit the Ordinary, whom it concerns, to
absolve from excommunication, and every other case when the penitent is hindered
by a lawful cause from going to the Popes feet himself* and another, that in
the point and danger of death the penitent might be absolved by any one; in
which danger the King manifestly was, being every day exposed in the encounters
of War, to the peril of his enemies; and besides that, conspired against a
thousand ways by their wicked treacheries, to which reasons, adding many
others, he concluded, they had power to absolve him ad futuram Cautelam,
reserving his obedience and acknowledgment to the Pope, which he at that time
fully rendered him.

When the Duke was gone, the Pope having assembled the Cardinals in the
Consistory, declared, That he had not been willing to receive the King of
Navar's excuses and obedience; because his conscience would not suffer him to
lend his faith so easily to one that had formerly violated it; that to admit
one to so potent a Kingdom, without great regard, and due caution, would have
been a very great lightness; and being certain, that others would have
believed, and followed his judgment, it was not fit, proceeding blindly, to
make himself a guide to the blind, and to lead the good French Catholics to
the ruinous precipice of damnation; and that therefore they should be assured
he would continue constant, and would not accept of false dissimulations, and
politic tricks in a matter of so great consequence. Thus the Spaniards
remained satisfied, and the Catholics of the League contented; yet was not the
King moved with all this, or turned aside from his first intention, the Sieur
de la Chelle's relation having applied an antidote to that so bitter potion.

The King at this time was at Melun, in which Town one Pierre Barriere was
taken and put in Prison, who had conspired to kill him; but by whom he was
instigated is not well known; he was born obscurely in the City of Orleans, and
followed the profession of a Waterman in those Boats that are wont to go upon
the Loyre; Pie re Barriere; a Vagabond fellow, having conferred with two
Friars, resolves to kill the King, but being discovered, he is taken, tortured,
and put to death.
but being known for a man of a brutish cruel nature, he had been made use of
in the acting of many villainies: from which, and the dissoluteness of his
carriage, being grown to a vagabond kind of life, he was as last fallen upon a
thought of this fact, which having impar^ed to two Friars, the one a Capuchin,
the other a Carmelite, he was (as he said) earnestly persuaded to it by them;
but being yet doubtful and uncertain in his mind, he would needs reveal his
Secret also to Seraphin^ Banchi, a Dominican Friar, born in Florence, but
living in Lions. This man struck with horror, to hear the boldness, and wicked
intent of this Fellow, dissembled nevertheless, and told him, It was a thing to
be well considered, and not to be so soon resolved on, and bad him come again
the next day for his answer, which he would think upon, and study to know how
he should determine the question; in the mean time, thinking how the King might
be warily advertised of it, he entreated the Sieur de Brancaleon, a servant of
the Queen Dowagers, who was then in the City, to come to him the same day and
hour he had appointed, and they being both of them come at the same time, he
made them stay, and talk a great while together, to the end that Brancaleon
might know Ba^ri^re perfectly; then having told him he could not yet resolve
what counsel he should give him, because the question was very full of
difficult doubts, he dismissed him, and discovered the whole business to
Brancaleon, to the end, that giving the King notice of it, the mischief might
be prevented. Barriere going from Lions, and coming not many days after to
Paris, conferred about it, first with the Curate of St. A^dre, and then with
his father Vadare Rector of the Jesuits, who (as he affirmed) persuaded him to
do the deed; wherefore he departed resolved to attempt the execution of it, and
being come to St. Denis, lingered after the King, to find an opport^nity to
effect his design. But being come with the King to Melu^, Brancaleon also came
thither, by whom being known and pointed out, he was put in prison by the
Archers of the Grand Prevost, and being examined and brought face to face with
Brancaleon, he confessed that he was once minded to have Killed the King, and
that he had conferred about it with the Dominican Friar at Lions; but that
afterward having heard of his conversion, he was resolved not to do it; and
that he was going toward Orleans, in which City he was born, being determined
to put himself into a Monastery of Capuchins; but these things he spoke with so
much insolency, and contempt, as plainly showed him to be guilty, having also a
great two-edged knife about him, which gave proof of his intention to commit
the fact; whereupon, having been many times examined, and tortured, he was by
the appointed Judges condemned to die; which sentence being told him, with
persausions to a sincere confession of his crime, he confessed the whole
business, and related all the particulars distinctly; thence being brought to
the place of execution, and having ratified all he had said before, he suffered
the usual punishments, as a reward for his audacious rashness.

In the mean time the term of the Cessation was almost expired; and the Duke of
Mayenne, intent to gain the most time he could possibly, had again dispatched
the Sieur de Villeroy* the King, to get it prolonged; but he not having been
able to obtain any thing, ^e after him dispatched the Count de Beli^, who was
persuaded he should compass it; but the King was utterly averse* from that
intention, knowing certainly that they desired to gain time, not to expect the
resolutions from Rome, but indeed the supplies and preparations from Spain; and
therefore he was determined to lose no more time, but since his adherents had
held many practices through the whole Kingdom, he made haste to let the War
break out, that he might see whether those Mines that were prepared, would take
effect. Wherefore, though the Duke of Mayenne, besides others, used also
Sebastian Z^m^rti (who* of a Merchant of Piedmont, was become a man of great
business in Court) and though the President de Thou, and the Count de
Schom^erg^ met with him at Paris, yet was it not possible by any conditions,
how large soever, to persuade the King to prolong the Cessation, no not for a
few days.

But, no sooner was the term of the Cessation expired, when the effects of the
Kings conversion, and of the practices his Ministers had opportunely set on
foot, began to show themselves; for Monsieur de Vitry Governor of Meau^, who
being deep in arrears, had, in the time of the Truce, been with the Conde de
(...) to get them paid, and having not only failed of that which he thought it
most reasonable to demand, but also waited many days before he could be
admitted to tell his business, a thing absolutely intolerable to the French
impatiency; he came back full of spite and discontent, often repeating those
words, which are almost grown a Proverb, No Money, no Vitry.
Point d' argent, point de Vitry; wherefore, taking occasion from his inability
to pay the Soldiers himself, Monsieur de Vitry, Governor of Meaux, goes over to
the King's Party, and causes the Townsmen to send Deputies to the King, to
deliver the place into his hands.
he called the people of the Town to a Parley, and told them, he had constantly
followed the party of the League as long as the business was matter of
Religion; but now the King was turned Catholic he would not deny him due
obedience, nor follow them, who, for ambition and interest, would prosecute the
War, and therefore delivered up the keys of the Town into their hands, and
leaving them at liberty to dispose of themselves, went straight to put himself
on that side which he manifestly saw was in the right; and putting on a white
Scarf, and making all his Soldiers wear the same color, was going to march
out of the Town; but the people, excited by those few words, and the example of
their Governor, cried out unanimously, For the King, for the King, and
presently chose four Deputies to go and deliver the Town into his power.

This place was exceeding opportune, as well by reason of its nearness to
Paris, as because it shut up the passage of the River Marne; but, the example
of it to all the other Towns of the League, was of much greater consequence;
for being the first that submitted it self to the King's obedience, it was
likely to open a way to a novelty of such importance, that the sum of affairs
consisted in it; wherefore, the King deliberating (as his custom was) in his
Council what course was to be held, and what conditions should be granted to
it, was in a little suspense, because the opinions of his Counselors were
different among themselves; some of a more fiery nature (who could not so
easily forget the past insolences of the Common people, and the inveterate
enmity of the factions) with the adherents of the Hugonots, (for yet some of
them came to Council) would have had them that returned unto their obedience,
bridled with severe conditions, and that they should redeem their former
faults, and offenses by sharp repentance, being desirous to wreak their long
settled hatred, and proudly to triumph upon the enemies which they already
accounted conquered. But the more wise and moderate men considered, that these
returned unto their obedience, neither through the necessity of a Siege, nor
for fear of force, but out of the instinct of their own will, and that it was
therefore fit, the example should be such as might invite and allure other
places of greater importance to follow it, that this beginning was to serve for
a rule to other Compositions, and Agreements; wherefore, since the King used
all possible endeavors to win the People to acknowledge him, it would have
been a cross Counsel, The Duke of Alva, by granting a strict ambiguous pardon
to the Flemmings, alienates more Cities from the Catholic King, than his
former punishments and rigours had done.
now to reject, and fright them with sharpness, and severity; that it was
necessary to help this first motion to bring forth a happy obedience; to
accommodate ones self to the imperfections of the subjects, and with the bait
of good usage to promote those wavering thoughts: they called to mind how
pernicious the pardon granted to the Flemmings by the Duke of Alva had been by
reason of his strictness, exceptions, ambiguities, and want of sincerity in the
conditions, whence it came to pass, that that strictness and doubtfulness of
pardon alienated more Cities and more People from the Catholic King, than so
many punishments, so much blood, and so many violences had done before;
therefore, they exhorted the King to grow wary at his Neighbors cost, and not
to run into those errors which they heard the Spaniards reproached with every
day.

This opinion being without doubt the best and most fruitful, The Deputies of
Meaux are graciously received by the King, who grants them many Privileges,
and confirms the Government upon Monsieur de Vitry, and his Son.
suited wonderfully with the King's nature inclined to gentleness and clemency,
and with the necessity of his affairs* and the knowing that his enemies, though
weak and divided, were not yet suppressed, and utterly ruined, induced him to
consent unto it, and to resolve to open that so large gate, that all others
might run willingly to pass in at it; wherefore, having received the Deputies
with kind demonstrations, he graciously granted the Citizens of Meaux all
conditions they knew how to ask, among which, that the exercise of the
Catholic Religion alone should be allowed in their Town; he granted them also
exemption from many impositions, the confirmation of the offices and benefices
granted by the Duke of Mayenne, and the continuation of the immunities and
ancient Privileges of the Place; he confirmed the Govenment upon Monsieur de
Vitry, and after him upon his eldest Son; and gave him a certain sum of money
to pay his debts, and also paid the Soldiery that followed him, and entertained
them in his service.

This blaze of liberality, and clemency, spread a wonderful luster through all
parts of France, so that upon the same thereof, many others resolved to follow
the example, and to try if they could find more quiet in the King's goodness,
than in the troubles of the War, and so much the rather when they saw the
King's Edict published upon the fourth of January, 1594. Wherein, with a great
and specious flourish of words, he confirmed the foresaid Conditions; 1594.
which Edict was also received without any kind of delay, and approved of in
the Parliament.

About the same time the Sieur d' Estrumel, Brother in law to Monsieur de S.
Luc, The Sieur de Estrumel and Monsieur de la Chastre, compound with the King
for themselves and their Government.
and Governor of Peronne, Mondidier and Roye made agreement for himself, and
those three principal Towns of Piccardy, to put themselves under the King's
obedience; but to make his revolt more specious, he would first make a Truce
for many months, whereby those aforesaid Towns remained neutral. The same did
the Sieur d' Ali^court and Monsieur de Villeroy with Pontoyse; for the King was
content they should remain neutral by a particular Truce, that he might make
use of Villeroy in drawing on the treaty of Peace, which was yet kept alive
with the Duke of Mayenne.

But Monsieur de la Chastre, one of the principal men of the League, declared
himself for the King freely, and without any pretense in the beginning of
February; for having in vain demanded supplys of men and money from the Spanish
Ministers, being incensed at the repulse, and weary of the discords, which he
saw in his party, he agreed with the King, by means of the Archbishop of
Bourges, for himself and the Cities of Orleans and Bourges, obtained for them
the same conditions that had been granted to Meaux, and for himself the
confirmation of the degree of Marshal of France, conferred upon him by the Duke
of Mayenne, and of the Governments he had in possession, which after him were
to come to his Son the Baron de la Maison.

In the same month happened the composition with the City of Lions; The City of
Lions declares for the Kings P^rty.
for the people of that place having expected that the Duke of Mayenne should
either come thither in Person, or send a man of great authority to accommodate
the business with the D. of Nemours, and to remove him from that government, by
giving him a convenient recompense, he not being able to leave Paris in the
condition it was in, and not having an equivalent recompense to offer, (for the
Government of Guienne which the Duke of Nemours would have accepted, was
already promised to the Duke of Guise, and the Marquess of Villars who
commanded there, would not hear of submitting himself to any other body,) he
could neither remedy the popular Commotion, nor oppose the force of the
Marquess de S. Sorlin, who, to recover his Brother, molested the whole Country
of Lions with exceeding great plunderings, and also straightened the City;
wherefore, after the people had in vain expected many months, not knowing what
resolution to take, they at last called Colonel Alfonso Corso, who was near
that place with a good number of men, and having brought him into the City,
publicly set up the Royal Standard, having thrown and beaten down all the Arms
and Monuments of the League every where.

A while before the City of Aix in Provence being straightly besieged by the Duke
of Espernon, and seeing they could receive no relief, neither from the Duke of
Savoy, The City of Aix in Provence besieged by the Duke of Espernon, being not
relieved, submits to the Kings obedience.
nor from any other part, the Count de Carsy being in it, who had married a
daughter in law of the Duke of Mayenn's, and was Commander in Chief of the
forces of that Province, took a resolution, since the King was turned
Catholic, to submit himself to his obedience; but upon condition that the Duke
of Espernon should not come into the Town, to whom both the Citizens, and the
Count himself professed a particular enmity, in which point they were satisfied
by means of Monsieur Les-diguieres, and of Colonel Alfonso Corso.

In this so violent a motion of the principal Heads and Cities of the Union,
part whereof had already agreed to obey the King, and part talked of agreeing,
the Cardinal's Legate was in great fear and trouble, for he having promised at
Rome that there should follow no alteration upon the King's conversion, was now
in great perplexity, for fear the Pope should account him, either a light, or a
negligent man, and having persuaded and urged, that the King's Embassy might
not be received by the Apostolic See, he doubted not that all sinister events
would be imputed to his evil Counsel, and was extremely vexed that so much
labor, and so great endeavors used by him to bring the affairs of the League
to the end he pretended, should now prove vain and unprofitable, and that all
the engines of his contrivance should be overturned in a moment; wherefore,
being fallen into a profund consideration, he after long consultation, resolved
to set forth a Writing, wherein he informed and assured the people of France,
that the Pope, judging the King of Navar's conversion to be feigned, The
substance of a Writing set forth by the Cardinal Legate* to keep the Catholic
League on foot.
and counterfeit, had neither approved it, nor admitted the Duke of Nevers as
his Ambassador, but as an Italian Prince, and a private person. He protested
moreover, that the Pope would never approve of that conversion, nor admit the
King into the bosom of the Church: upon which ground he exhorted all
Catholics not to swerve from the judgment and union of the Apostolic See, nor
from the obedience of the Pope. With this Writing he thought he might stop the
motion of men's minds, that inclined to submit themselves to the King, and
judged, that the scruple of Conscience would be stronger to withhold them, than
the consideration of temporal Laws to spur them on; but this Counsel produced a
contrary effect; for most men were incensed, that so great a Prince should be
refused to be received to repentance, whereas the Church is wont, with so much
pains, to endeavor, and with so much tenderness to embrace the conversion of
every meanest sinner; and the people being persuaded, by a desire of Peace, and
rest, and abhorring civil discords, which had produced so many mischiefs, both
in public and in private, were much the more ready to take a resolution, and
shelter themselves under the Kings obedience; and yet the Legate, either
persevering in his old opinions, or his heart not suffering him to unsay what
he had writ and advised at Rome, continued firmly to uphold the League, as well
with the Pope, as among the French Lords themselves, with whom he was every day
at close consultations.

Equal to his was the trouble and terror of the King of Spains Ministers, who
seeing some of them were fallen off, whom they accounted the most confiding
men; and though pieced up, yet not totally trusting to the intelligence they
held with the Duke of Mayenne, not seeing that the Duke of Guise himself was
very well satisfied, they knew that all their hopes would vanish, if the
present need were not speedily succored, which was very difficult, as well by
reason of the want of money, as the ill conditions of the affairs of Flanders;
and though they bestirred themselves with all their power, they could neither
find any that would pay their bills of exchange, nor that would have to do with
them; and to be fain to stay for those provisions that came slowly out of
Spain, was a remedy too late, and too far off; they resolved therefore to make
use of the nearest assistance, which was that of Flanders, and dispatched many
messengers to hasten the advance of the Army, and at last Iuan Baptista Tassis
went thither himself: but besides that, there was no way to pay their Forces;
for want whereof, some Spanish Tertia's, and a great many Italian Horse had
mutined. Count Charles of Mansfield also, who was to command the Army
(desiring, for his own interests, not to stir from Flanders, either because he
inclined not to obey the Duke of Mayenne, or else not thinking, that with so
few men, and no money, he could come off with honor,) interposed many delays,
and many hindrances, so that the Spanish Camp, small in number, ill provided,
and disagreeing, durst not advance from their own confines.

The Duke of Mayenne (...) avering i^ so man^ adversities, ^hinks to make his
pe^ce with the King.
But the Duke of Mayenne was more afflicted and troubled than all the rest. He
saw the Count de Carsy, and the Marshall de la Chastre lost, in whom he was
formerly wont to confide more than in any others; the City of Lions gone, to
which place he had resolved, what ever happened, to ^educe the relics of his
fortune; his Brother the Duke of Nemours no longer Prisoner to the City, but to
the King himself; Meaux and Pontoyse in the Kings hands, which Town so nearly
bridled the City of Paris, the people whereof, allured on the one side by the
benefits of Peace and Plenty, and on the other spurred on by their ancient
inclination, and respect of Conscience, wavered in their resolutions, and it
was uncertain to which Party they would at last incline. For all these c^uses
he was many times thinking to make his peace with the King, before he was
forsaken of all, to which the Sieur de Villeroy persuaded him with frequent
Letters, proposing to him honorable and advantageous Conditions; which he
showed him, that when he was brought lower, he could not be able to obtain; but
would be forced to capitulate, not as the Head of the Union, nor as
Lieutenant General of the Crown, but as a particular Prince* and private
person; but on the other side, he knew not how to quit his old hopes, in which
the Spaniards did all they possibly could to confirm him; besides that, to make
his Peace without the Popes consent, to whose judgment he had refe^red
himself, seemed to him so undecent a thing, and so contr^ry to his reputation,
that he could not accommodate his mind unto it, and whatsoever the event of
businesses should be, he was resolved rather to perish, than show that the past
War had been embraced by him, out of an ambitious end, and not for the
maintenance of Religion; and he made less reckoning of his own ruin, and the
destruction of his Family, than of the loss of his honor and reputation, which
he thought he should lose, if he digressed it never so small a matter from the
will and determination of the Pope, and the Apostolic See; for which reasons
he depended wholly upon those informations that were expected from Rome, and
from the Court of Spain, and in the mean time had sent Monsieur de Rosne into
Flanders, not only to hasten that Army, but also that by him he might be
sincerely advertised of the quality of those Supplies which he might certainly
hope for from thence.

In this interim, Cardinal Ioyeuse, and the Baron de Senecey, sent last of all
by him to the Pope, and the Abbot of Orbais sent by the Duke of Guise, were
come to Rome upon the Two and twentieth of January, and being brought to have
audience of the Pope, after the narration of all things that had past (the
sinister course of which they imputed to the evil Counsel, and the too evident
covetousness of the Spaniards,) they beseeched him that he would be Mediator,
to know King Philip's last resolution, and firm determination; and that he
himself would be pleased with men and money to succor the danger of Religion,
and the urgent necessity of the League, as his Predecessors had done; to which
Propositions, the Pope, after having related what had past with the Duke of
Nevers, answered, The Pope being sued to by the Duke of Mayennes Ambassadors,
for supplies of men and money, excuses himself by the War of Hungary against
the Turk.
That as concerning the Catholic King's determination, he would endeavor to
know what it was, and to confirm him in the good intention of defending the
Faith, and upholding the League; but as for his assisting with men and money,
he began to excuse himself from that, by the emergent occasion of the War with
the Turk in Hungary, in which he was necessitated for the universal safety of
Christians, to employ the sinews of his strength; and yet he said, That in as
much as he was able he would not fail to lend his assistance also to the
affairs of France. It was not very difficult for the Ambassadors, and
particularly for the Baron de Senecey, a man of a quick understanding to
apprehend the Popes meaning, he being very backward to spend money, and not
well satisfied in the affairs of the Union; wherefore they wrote unto the Duke
of Mayenne, that he must think to furnish himself by other means; for from the
Pope there was nothing to be hoped for, nor was he to depend upon him for the
obtaining of any considerable Supplies*

In the like course also went the negotiation in Spain; for the Sieur de
M^^tpezat having, after many delays, treated with the King himself, and
besought him, that without referring himself to his Ministers that were in
France, The King of Spain shows the same coldness in assisting the League, to
the Sieur de Montpezat.
he would declare his pleasure, as well in matter of the election and marriage
of the Infanta, as of the supplies of men and moneys, for the establishment of
the Princes that should be elected, and also of the Conditions he would grant
the Duke of Mayenne, he could never draw any other conclusion from him, save
that he would write to Rome, and to the Archduke Ernest, to settle what should
be resolved on, and done, and that it was necessary to expect the informations
and answers from both places, which coldness and irresoluteness openly showed,
that the King, either through weariness, or weakness, was little inclined to go
on with the War; but, on the other side, Don Bernardino Mendozza, by his long
abode there, well versed in the affairs of France, having before this written
to the Sieur de Rombouillett, that if any body were sent to the Court of Spain,
to treat in the name of the House of Bourbon, it was very probable that the
Catholic King would agree to Peace, the King not passing by that occasion had
caused the Sieur de la Varenne (a Gentleman of great understanding, and deep
reach, and one whom he trusted) under pretense of going to see that Court, and
traveling through several parts of the World (as the French use to do) to join
himself even with the company of Montpezat, and to go to the Court of Spain
along with him, where, having conferred oftentimes with Mendozza, and others of
the Council of State, he brought back word at his return, that the Spaniards
would certainly conclude a Peace, if means could be found that it might be
propounded and negotiated with their reputation; which, though it was
attributed to the arts of that Counsel, to make use of the same engines against
the Duke of Mayenne that he used against them, yet being come to his knowledge,
either purposely, or by chance, it confirmed him in the suspicion he was fallen
into, by reason of the doubtful answers which his Ambassador had received from
the Kings own mouth.

But whilst at Rome they refer the resolution of Affairs unto the Court of
Spain, and in Spain they are referred to the Advertisements from Rome and
Flanders, the humor of the French which was not capable of so much patience,
wrought so effectually in favor of the King, that all things were in great
commotions, and the Union of the Confederates dissolved of it self in all
places. The people of Paris murmured, and kept a noise, The Parisians murmur by
reason of their sufferings, which they begin again to feel, and so much the
more, because the point of Religion being taken away, they every day hear of
the Kings good usage of the Catholics.
being reduced to exceeding sca^^ity, and the benefit they had felt a while
before, during the Truce, made their present sufferings more troublesome, more
intolerable, the dearth grew every day more necessitous, and the interruption
of commerce, and the decay of trading had brought the common people to extreme
misery for want of victual, insomuch, as that powerful incentive failing,
wherewith the Chief among them were wont to keep them to the League, which was
the danger of Religion, since that by many signs the King's conversion was
seen to be real and unfeigned; every one inclined to free himself from trouble,
and by peace to make an end of the continued sufferings of so many years. They
saw, that in those places that submitted themselves to the King's obedience,
the Catholic Religion was maintained, the Clergy-mens goods restored to them,
Garrisons taken away from those places that belonged to Churches, the exercise
of the Hugonot Religion excluded, the Corporations maintained in their
privileges, the Catholics had their Offices confirmed upon them, the
Governments put again into the hands of the same Commanders, and that there
appeared no innovation nor danger of any kind whatsoever* The ^ame of the
King's devotion flew abroad, and his inclination to the benefit of the
Catholic Religion, that his Council was composed of all Prelates, and persons
bred up in the same Faith; his clemency and benignity were exalted; his mind
far from revenge commended, and besides all this, the plenty and quiet they of
his party enjoyed, were envied by those of the League in the extremity of their
sufferings. The covetousness of the Spaniards, and the ways they had gone in,
had filled every one with discontent, the discords that reigned among the heads
of the Faction, put every understanding man in despair of expecting any
prosperous end after so long toyls, and labors; wherefore the people began to
make many Conventicles and Meetings, and the Politics failed not to represent
fitting considerations to all degrees and qualities of Persons; nor did the
Count de Belin, who, as Governor, had the charge to hinder the progress of this
inclination, seem to take any care of it: either because he was indeed
unsatisfied with the Duke of Mayenne, and the Spaniards; or because he thought
it impossible longer to withhold the City from revolting, and therefore agreed
to get the King's favor, that he might by him be confirmed in that Government.

But the Duke being present, it was not hard for him to find out what way the
Governor went, The Count de Belin is removed from the Government of Paris, and
the Count de B^^ssa^ elected in his place.
and being instigated by the importunities of the Legate, and Spanish
Ambassadors, he resolved to remove him from the Government, which when i^ was
known, the Parliament opposed it stiffly, but in vain, because the Duke of
Mayenne, after having severely reprehended the Counselors of Parliament, would
by all means have the Count de Brissac accepted, whom he desired to satisfy by
that means, he wonted Government of Po^ctiers having been violently taken from
him a while before by the Duke of Elboeuf, in which change the Duke was very
much deceived; for Bris^ac (though he depended upon, and had been anciently
bred up in his family, yes) h^ving spent all his own, to follow the Duke's
fortunes, he had also lately been deprived of that Government which he only
loved* whereupon he was full of secret discontent and was not likely to omit
those occasions that should represent themselves to set his fortune right
again* nor was the Government of Paris proposed to make him amends; for besides
the expense which the splendour of that charge carried along with it, which was
very unproportionable to his present ability, he was also certain that he
should not continue in it* for there was a Treaty already of giving the
Government of the Isle of France to the Marquess of S. S^rlin, and though they
talked that it should be given him excluding the City of Paris, yet was it very
probable, that by the importunities of his Mother he at last would obtain it.

But the Duke after he had settled Brissac in the Government, confiding
absolutely in him, The Duke of Mayenne being resolved to lie no longer idle, to
the lessening of the reputation of his Party, goes from Paris.
resolved to go from Paris to S^issons, and from thence to the Army, believing
((...) it was true) that his lying idle lessened his reputation, and gave the
people greater convenience to revolt; and yet at his departure many things
crossed him, and he was put in a suspicion of the new Governors fidelity, and
of the intelligence which the Pr^vost des Merchands held with many Politics
that were affected to the Kings party. The Legate, and the Spanish Ambassadors
exhorted him likewise not to go, but their words were ^ot taken in good part,
he thinking they desired his abode in the City, that they might confer the
charge of the Army and of managing the w^r upon the Duke of Guise; indeed he
was something moved by the persuasions of his Mother Madam de Nemours, she
telling him that the sum of all things consisted now in the conservation of
Paris, and that she had discovered some practices that past between the
Politics of the City and the new Governor; but neither was that able to
dissuade him from his departure; for it diminished his reputation, and
prejudiced the course of affairs too much to stand with his hands at his
girdle, and let himself be straightned to the last necessities without seeking
any remedy; and he considered, that if the King being Master of Pontoyse and
Meaux, and by consequence also Master of the Rivers, and having Dreux, Orleans
and Chartres in his power, should have a mind to besiege Paris, he should be
locked up in the City, and not be able to do any thing to relieve it; and
having notice that the King had made a Levy of Six thousand Switzers which were
ready to enter into the Kingdom, and knowing that the Queen of England was
sending new supplies of Men and Ammunition, he thought it necessary to draw the
Forces of the Confederates together, to make opposition in the Springtime, if
the King should take the Field with a great Army, which could not be done
unless he himself in person were active in the business, not judging the Duke
of Guise, or the Duke of Aumale either for authority or experience sufficient
to raise, or command the Army, in which charge the secret intentions of men,
now more suspected by him than ever, would not suffer him to trust any other
person. Moved by these reasons, and not being able to persuade himself that the
Count de Brissac would forsake him, and change that Faith which he, his Father,
and his Grandfather had ever constantly kept, he at last departed and took his
Lady, and his Son with him, leaving his Mother, his Sister, the Cardinal-Legat,
and the Spanish Ambassadors at Paris.

But he was no sooner gone, when the Governor finding himself alone, and
little valuing all the rest that were in the City, thought that occasion for
the raising of his fortune again, was not to be lost; wherefore having drawn
Iehan Viller, The Count de Brissac presently begins to deal with the chief men
of the City, to persuade them to submit to the Kings obedience.
the Prevost des Marchands, and the two chief Eschevins, which were Guilliaume
du Ver, Sieur de Neret, and Martin l' Anglois, Sieur de Beauripaire unto his
party, he went on to deal with the first President, and the other Counselors
of the Parliament. These were displeased with the Duke of Mayenne, because in
many occasions, and particularly in the last of changing the Governor, he had
(as they said) used them sharply and ingratefully, and openly derided and
abused them, and much more were they disgusted at the Spaniards, by reason of
the Proposition of the Infanta, against whose election they had showed
themselves openly; but that which imported most of all, was, That the
Presidents and Counselors of the Parliament, (as men distrusted and
disaffected) were ill used by the Catholic Kings Ambassadors, and by the
Garrison of Italians, Walloons, and Spaniards, which depended on them so, that
they not only heard proud threats, and opprobrious speeches against themselves
to their very faces, with often mentioning the name of Brisson, but their
Servants and Caterers were abused in the Markets by the Soldiers, even to the
violent taking away from them whatsoever they bought; for which they having
often complained to the Duke of Mayenne, had not gotten any remedy, but only
persuasions to be patient; but at last from this long sufferance, they turned
to fury, which wakening men's minds, (as it was wont) had made them see how near
they were to the hated servitude of strangers, and how much better it was to
secure their own fortune with the stronger party, and free themselves at last
from anguish and trouble; wherefore it was not hard to draw them to the opinion
of the rest, and bring them to consent to submit the City to the Kings
obedience.

Things being thus settled within, and the Governor thinking himself to be in
such a condition as to dispose of the people his own way, began to treat with
the King by means of the Count de la Rochep^t, with whom he had an exceeding
near affinity and friendship, and being come from the beginnings of a Treaty,
to agree upon the conditions, the Count de Schomberg, Monsieur de Bellieure,
and the President de Thou, were employed in the business, who within a few days
concluded what was to be done as well to satisfy the Count de Brissac, as to
gain the City without tumult, or bloodshed, and finally the Count himself
having conferred in the Field with the Sieur de St. Luc, who had married one of
his Sisters, under pretense of treating about her Portion, about which they had
been long in suit, it was jointly agreed upon, Conditions of agreement
concluded between the King and the Governor of Paris.
That in the City of Paris, the Fauxbourgs thereof, and ten mile round about,
there should be no public exercise permitted, save of the Roman Catholic
Religion, according to all the Edicts of former Kings: That the King should
give a general pardon to all of what state or condition soever, that had in
word or deed upheld and fomented the League, stirred up the people to sedition,
spoken evil of his person, written or printed against him, thrown down or
despised his Royal Arms, or the Arms of the Kings his Predecessors, or that
were guilty in any kind whatsoever of the past seditions, excepting those that
had traitorously conspired against his Person, or that were accessory to the
murder of the late King: That the goods and persons of the Citizens, should be
free from violence and plunder, all the Privileges, Prerogatives, and
Immunities confirmed, and kept in the same degree they were wont to be in the
times of former Kings: That all Places, Offices, and Benefices into which the
Duke of Mayenne had put men when they were vacant by death, as well within the
Parliament as without, should be confirmed unto the same persons, but with an
obligation to take new Patents from the King: That all the present Magistrates
of the City should be confirmed if they would submit themselves to the Kings
obedience: That every Citizen that would not stay in the City, might have free
liberty to depart, and without further leave carry away his goods: That the
Cardinal-Legat, Cardinal Pelleve, and all the Prelates with their Servants,
might with their goods and furniture freely stay, or go, how, and when they
thought it seasonable: That the Princesses and Ladies that were in the City,
might stay, or go in like manner with full liberty and security: That the
Spanish Ambassadors with their attendants, goods, and families, might also have
Pass-ports and Safeconducts, from the King, to go securely whither they
pleased: That the Soldiers of the Garrison, French and strangers of any Nation
soever, might march out of the City armed in rank and file, their Drums
beating, Colors flying, and light Match, to go whither they thought good: That
two hundred thousand Crowns should be paid to the Count de Brissac in
recompense of his expenses, Particular conditions concluded in the favor of
the Count de Brissac.
and losses, and that he should have twenty thousand Franks of an annual
pension, the Charge of Marshal of Fr^nce conferred upon him by the Duke of
Mayenne should be confirmed, and the perpetual Government of Corbie and Mante
granted to him; which things with many other of less moment being agreed upon,
both sides applied themselves to the execution of them.

The King desires to be crowned; some object that it cannot be done but at
Reimes where the Sante Ampoule or holy Vial is kept which (they say) was
brought from Heaven by an Angel to anoint King Clouis.
The King at this time was at Chartres, where he had caused himself to be
Crowned, and Anointed, or (as they call it) Sacre; about which there had been
many difficulties, which nevertheless by the authority of the Council were
seasonably removed; for he, that he might take away the doubts of scrupulous
minds, desiring to his Conversion to add this Ceremony, which is wont to be
used to all Kings, some objected that the Consecration by an ancient custom
could not be but at the City of Reimes, nor by the hands of any other than the
Archbishop of that Church; but having diligently over-looked the History of
former times, the learned found that many Kings had been Consecrated in other
places; and since that City was not in the Kings power, reason consented not
that he should therefore remain without that due Ceremony which they thought
necessary for his perfect Establishment. This difficulty being removed, there
succeeded another, how the King could be Anointed without the Oil of St.
Ampoule, which was kept in the Cathedral of that City, and which (as fame
reports) was brought down by an Angel from Heaven, purposely for the
Consecration of King Clouis, and the other Kings of France his Successors; but
neither of this was there any other necessity save bare tradition: whereupon it
was determined that neither the City, nor the Oil being in the Kings power, the
Oil should be brought that is kept in the City of Tours, in the Monastery of
the Friars of St. Martin, of which there is a report (confirmed by the
authority of many Writers) that it was likewise brought from Heaven to anoint
that Saint, when, falling from the top of a Ladder, all his bones were broken,
and shattered in pieces; wherefore Monsieur de Souvray Governor of Tours,
having caused that Vial to be brought out in Procession, by those Monks that
had it in keeping, and having placed it under a rich Canopy of State, set round
pompously with lights, in the top of a Chariot made expressly for that purpose,
and guarded by four Troops of Horse, he himself going before it all the
journey, brought it along with him to the City of Chartres, and with that Oil
they Anointed the King at his Consecration, causing it afterward to be carried
back to its place, with the same Ceremony and Veneration.

There arose also a Competition among the Prelates, Which of them should
perform the Act of Consecration; for the Archbishop of Bourges pretended, that
Function belonged unto him, as Primate; and on the other side, Nicholas de
Thou, Bishop of Chartres, alleged, That the Ceremony being to be Celebrated in
his Church, it could not be taken away from him. The Council sentenced in
favor of the Bishop of the Diocese; and so upon the Twenty seventh of February
the King was consecrated with great Solemnity and Pomp, both Ecclesiastical and
Military, the twelve Peers of France being present at the Ceremony; six
Ecclesiastical, and six Secular, which were, the Bishop of Chartres, Nantes,
The French says Dinan.
Man's, Maillezays, Orleans, and Angiers, representing those of Reimes, Langues,
Laon, Beauvais, Noyon, and Chalons: and for the Secular Peers, the Prince of
Conty for the Duke of Bourgogne, the Duke of Soissons for the Duke of Guienne,
the Duke of Montpensier for the Duke of Normandy, the Duke of Luxemburgh in
stead of the Earl of Flanders, the Duke of Retz in stead of the Count de
Toulouse, and the Duke of Vantadour in stead of the Count de Champagne; the
Archbishop of Bourges did the Office of Grand Aumosnier, the Mareshal de
Matignon of High Constable, the Duke of Longueville that of High Chamberlain,
the Count de St. Paul that of Grand Maistre, and the High Chancellor Chiverny
holding the Seals in his Right Hand, sat on one side of the Cloth of State.

The King, according to the custom of the Kings of France, The obligation of
France upon the day of their consecration.
upon the day of this Solemnity, received the Communion in both kinds, took the
Oath which all the Kings of France are wont to take, to maintain the Catholic
Faith, and the authority of the Holy Church, and at his coming out of the
Church, touched those that had the Kings Evil, to the number of three hundred;
from the Church he went unto the Feast, where, according to the custom, sat
the twelve Peers that had been present at the Ceremony, the Princess Katharine,
Sister to the King, with the other great Ladies that were at Court, and the
Ambassadors of the Queen of England, and the Republic of Venice. After Dinner
the King went to Vespers, where he received the Order of the St. Esprit,
renewing his Oath for the conservation of the Faith, and the persecution of
Heresy; which Ceremonies as they filled the hearts of his own party with great
joy and gladness; so did they the more move the inclination of the others to
acknowledge and obey him.

In the mean time the Treaties in Paris were ripening for the reducing of that
City, being managed with great dexterity and secrecy by the Governor, the
Prevost des Marchands, and President le Maistre; but thwarted more than ever by
the violent persuasions of the Preachers, who ceased not to cry from their
Pulpits, that the Kings Conversion was feigned and dissembled, and no body
could acknowledge him with a good Conscience. The business was likewise crossed
by the practices and boldness of the Sixteen, who since the accident of
President Brisson, having remained with small credit, and less power, being now
fomented by the Legate and the Spaniards, and no less by the Dutchesses of
Nemours and Montpensier, (who had turned their Sails according to the Wind)
they began to rise again, meeting frequently, often stirring up commotions, and
proceeding audaciously against those that were suspected to be of the Kings
party; but the Governor making use of his authority, and also of the Duke of
Mayenne's Name, labored to dissipate and suppress them, under color that he
would have no Conventicles, nor armed insurrections in a time of so great
suspicion: and finally, having accorded with the Parliament, they caused
public Proclamation to be made, By an artif^c^ of the Governor of Paris a
Proclamation is made that upon pain of death, and confiscation of goods, none
should assemble but in the Townhouse.
That upon pain of death, and confiscation of goods, none should go to any
Meeting, except in the Townhouse, and in the presence of above five
Magistrates. Upon the foundation of this Decree, the Governor sharply using
force, did within a few days destroy and take away the opposition of the
Sixteen, insomuch, that being at last in such a condition, that he was able to
dispose of the City, he resolved that he would receive the King upon the Twenty
second of March in the Morning; and to this end, having spread a report that
the Duke of Mayenne was sending Men and Ammunition from Soissons to reinforce
the City, and that it was necessary to send to meet them, The Count de Brissac
having agreed to receive the King into Paris, sends for^h the ^orces he
distrus^s, feigning that the Duke of Mayenne was sending Supplies, and that it
was necessary to meet them.
he caused Colonel Giacopo Argenti to go forth the day before with his French
Regiment, in which he confided not, sending them toward Beauvais, by which way
he said those Supplies were coming; Martin l' Anglois had already dealt with,
and by the promise of a great sum of money, drawn St. Quintin over to his
party, who commanded the Tertia of Walloons that was in the Town: But the
suspicion of it being come to the Duke of Feria, he caused him to be laid hold
on upon the One and twentieth day, and removed that whole Tertia, as likewise
that other of Spaniards into the quarters near his own house, which being about
the Rue St. Antoine, in the remotest place from that part where it was intended
the King should be brought in, it proved very much to the purpose, that the
strongest Forces were quartered at so great a distance. The Neapolitan Tertia
commanded by Alessandro de Monti was sent by the Governor into that part of
the City which lies beyond the River, saying, He would keep them there in a
readiness to receive a great quantity of Victual which was to be brought in on
that side the next day. Only the Germans were retained toward the quarters of
St. Honor and St. Denis as being more easy, either to be persuaded, or
defeated; the Governor not being willing by emptying that quarter utterly, to
increase the suspicion that already began to spread hotly in all places.

The Evening being come, the Governor having at his house assembled the
Prevost des Marchands, and those Heads and Magistrates of the People, which he
hoped would consent, laid open to them his intention, the Articles of Agreement
made with the King, and the necessity they were reduced to of freeing
themselves by peace from those sufferings and dangers which had no other
remedy; and having found them all unanimously disposed to follow his advice, he
exhorted them to do it freely, and with a good heart, and to provide, that the
alteration of things, and the introducing the King might be effected without
stir or tumult; to which every one there present being ready, they, about Nine
of the Clock at night, dispatched Tickets subscribed by the Prevost des
Marchands, to the greater part of the Masters of the several Wards, whom they
had changed and chosen their own way, advertising them that the Peace was made,
and that the Accommodation being to ensue the next morning, they should take
care there were no uproar, but that every one embracing Peace, which was so
necessary, and so long desired, should raise no tumult, the safety and goods of
the Citizens being certainly secure.

This order being given, (which past with infinite secrecy, and was willingly
executed by all) the Governor went to Port Neufue about midnight, and having
brought the Germans thither, set them in order with their Arms, and in a short
time caused the Earth to be taken away wherewith that Gate had been dammed up
long before. The like did the Prevost des Marchands at the Port St. Denis,
where having left Martin l' Anglois to guard it, he went to meet with the
Governor at Port Neufue. The night had been exceeding rainy, The manner used
by the Governor to bring the King into the City of Paris.
and with thunder and lightning very stormy and dark; wherefore the King having
marched with his Army from Se^lis to St. Denis the night before, was two hours
after the time appointed before he appeared; and in the interim the whole City
being in a commotion, the noise was heard by the Spanish Ambassadors, of which
the Duke of Feria presently drew the Infantry that lay about him into arms, and
Diego d' Ivarra riding hastily on horseback to Port Neufue, asked in his
wonted haughty manner* What was doing there? But the Count de Brissac no less
haughtily answered him, That he was not obliged to give him an account what was
done: But in courtesy he would tell him, that the Men and Ammunition which
were coming from the Duke of Mayenne were to be received there; for that to
avoid falling into the Kings hands, they were come a by-way on that side, and
therefore he might be quiet, and go take his rest. Diego either believing this,
or knowing there could not be any opposition, went also to the quarter of the
Spaniards.

The manne^ how the King and his Forces entered into Paris.
It was already Four of the Clock in the morning, when Monsieur de St. Luc
arrived with the first Troops of the Army at the Tuilleryes without the Gate,
and having given the sign by three Rockets that were fired in the Air, as they
had agreed, the Count de Brissac advanced to see if it were he, and to speak
with him; and being come back to the place where the Prevost des Merchands
staid, they presently caused the Gate to be set wide open, at which Monsieur de
St. Luc entered first of all, marching on foot with his Pistol in his hand, and
placed Captain Favas with an hundred armed men in two rows to guard the same
Port, and he himself with the Sieur de Vic, and Four hundred Soldiers of the
Garrison of St. Denis possessed the Rue St. Thomas; then followed Monsieur d'
Humieres and the Count de Belin, After eight years space (for so long it was
since King Henry the III. fled from thence) the City of Paris returns into
obedience, and Henry the Fourth enters into it.
(who was already gone over to serve the King out of anger for being put out of
his Government) and Captain Raullet all on Foot with their Arms ready, and
advancing with Eight hundred men, made themselves Masters of the Pont St.
Michel. Thirdly, entered Monsieur d' O, Governor of the Isle of France, and
destined to be Governor of Paris, who with the Baron de Salignac, and Four
hundred Soldiers marching along the Wall, went to possess the Port St.
Honor; the Marshall de Matignon who led the Switzers, having at his entrance
seen the German Foot in Arms, cried out to them aloud to throw down their Arms,
which they refusing to do, he having commanded those that followed him to
charge their Pikes, caused about twenty of them to be slain, and as many cast
into the River; whereupon the rest throwing down their Arms, were taken and
brought by him to St. Thomas Church; from whence he spread himself with his
Switzers as far as the Croix de Tiroir in the midst of the Rue St. Honor.
After him entered the Sieur de Bellegarde, and then the Count de St. Paul with
two other Squadrons, who made a stand before the Louvre, spreading themselves
as far as St. Germains Church. After these marched the King himself on foot
likewise, completely armed at the head of Four hundred Gentlemen, and enclosed
between two rows of the Archers of his Guard; and having found the Count de
Brissac at the entry of the Bridge, he presently took off his own white ^carf
he wore, and having put it over the Counts shoulder, embraced him closely; and
at the same time the Governor crying out aloud, Vive le Roy; the word was
taken up first by the Prevost des Merchands who stood behind him, The Count de
Brissac cries Vive le Roy, and the same cry runs through the whole City.
and then from one to another was doubled through all the Wards of the City; and
even they themselves that were not privy to the business, joyfully reiterated
the same cry. The King passing on in the midst of a Lane made by his own men,
commanded that none upon pain of death should do injury to any body, and with
the same attendance went strait to the Church of Nostre-Dame, where he was
received by the Priests with no less applause than he had been in other places.
The last that came in, was the Marshall de Retz, who advancing in excellent
order to the utmost parts of the City, to secure those quarters, met Diego d'
Ivarra, who with two Companies of Spaniards was coming toward the tumult; but
the Kings Forces coming in so much a greater number, The people strive who
shall mark themselves first with white Ribbands and white Crosses in their
Hats, and open their Shops, the City being quiet within two hours.
they retired where the rest of them were, and the Marshall possessed the Rue
St. Martin; that of St. Denis being already possessed by Monsieur Vitry, and
the Sieur de la Noue, who entered at that Gate. At the Kings coming out of the
Church, the people already certain of what was come to pass, and assured of
their own safety, took up the cry of Vive le Roy again, more joyfully than
before, and began with very great emulation of one another to put on White
Ribbands* and Crosses of the same color in their Hats, striving with joy and
gladness who should be the first to open their Shops; so that within two hours
the City was as quiet, as if there had been no innovation at all.

Before the King went to the Louvre, he sent Monsieur du Perron (a while before
returned from Rome) unto the Cardinal-Legat: Letting him know, that it was in
his own liberty either to go or stay; but that he prayed him to find out some
means that they might confer together, since the Pope had refused to admit
Ambassadors; to which he answered, that since he was at liberty, he would not
only go out of the City, but quite out of the Kingdom, which though the King
endeavored to dissuade, yet was it not possible to hinder him, as well because
he would not be constrained to treat any thing with a Prince that was not
acknowledged by the Pope, as because of his old inclination; which even when
all things were in desperation (perhaps to show himself constant) he could not
dissemble; The Cardinal-Legat goes out of the Kingdom.
and yet being used with great respect, he staid six days in the City, and
thence being accompanied by the same du Perron as far as Montargis, he
continued in his way to go straight out of the Kingdom.

At the same time the King entered, Cardinal Pelleve was drawing his last
breath, who having heard the resolution of businesses, said angerly, that he
hoped yet the Arms of the Spaniards and good Catholics, would drive that
Hugonot out of Paris; and as soon as he said those words, he departed out of
this life.

The Count de Brissac went to the Spanish Ambassadors, and gave them charge
from the King to set St. Quintin at liberty, which they refused not to obey;
and having recalled Alessandro de Monti to join with the Spanish Forces, they
resolved to be gone the same day; wherefore in the afternoon being accompanied
by Monsieur de St. Luc, and the Baron de Salignac, they came in the midst of
their Forces, which marched in order toward the Port St. Martin, at the
entrance whereof the King stayed on horseback to see them depart. They bowed
down exceeding low, and were courteously saluted by him again; so without more
words they went forth of the City, and being convoyed by the Kings Forces as
far as Bourget, they took the way toward Soissons, and so traveled to the
Frontiers.

The King with the same affability sent the High Chancellor, and Monsieur de
Bellieure to visit the Dutchesses, and to make his excuse if that day he had
not time to visit them in person, who having accommodated their affairs,
departed, being very civilly used, and honorably accompanied; the King with
his courtesy exceeding the obligation of his promises.

Many out of jealousy depart with the Cardinal-Lega^, and with the ^panish
Ambassador.
The Bishop of Senlis, one Orleans an Advocate, Boucher a Curate, Nicholas
Varade a Jesuit, Christophle Aubre Curate of St. Andre, Pelletier the Curate
of St. Jacques, Jacques Culli Curate of St. Germaynes, John Hamilton Curate of
St. Cosme, Father Guerin a Franciscan, and diverse others of the Preachers, and
Eschevins of the City went away, some with the Legate, and some with the Spanish
Ministers, all the rest of the people, and many of those that had been the
Kings bitter Enemies remaining, against whom (according to his promise given)
he suffered not any commotion at all to be made.

The Bastile after five days resistance is surrend^ed to the King by the Sieur
du Bourg.
The Bastile remained in the Enemies hands, governed by the Sieur du Bourg, who
for the first and second day was so far from making any show of yielding, that
on the contrary with many Cannon-shot he labored to infest the Town; but after
that a Battery was raised against him, and that he found he wanted Victual and
Ammunition, he surrendered it the fifth day, and having left it in the Kings
power, followed the journey of the rest.

Thus without tumult, without difficulty, and without blood, the City of Paris
was recovered absolutely to the Kings obedience, who having caused a general
pardon to be published, sent his Army forth of the Town, to quarter; recalled
the Parliament, opened the ways for provisions, to the public comfort of men
of all qualities; and within a few days settled the City again in its former
populousness and ancient splendor.

The Example of Paris was followed by Monsieur de Villars Governor of Rouen,
who having treated and concluded by the means of Maximilian de Bethune Sieur de
Rosny, agreed about the same time to acknowledge the King, bringing with him
the free navigation of Seine, Harfleur, Havre de Grace, and all the Coast of
upper Normandy. The Treaty of his Agreement had been something difficult; for
Villars demanded the confirmation of the degree of High Admiral, which Office
he executed in the party of the League, and the Baron de Byron, who a while
before had obtained that dignity of the King, Monsieur de V^llars Governor of
Rouen submits himself to the Kings obedience.
was very unwilling to let it go; but in the end it being clear that those who
returned to the Kings obedience, were to be allured by the Confirmation of the
Offices, and Governments whereof they were in possession, the Baron was fain to
quit it, receiving in stead thereof the degree of Mareshal, which his Father
had held very long; and yet was it not without his exceeding great discontent,
though the King made him a gift of Twenty thousand Crowns, and promised him
many Governments, he pretending his merit to be the chief in all the Kings
Victories, and that it was not fit to deprive him of his honor and revenues to
give them to Enemies; which though he with his wonted freedom of speech
exaggerated oftentimes, saying he would give his Office of Mareshal for a Nag
of Fifty Crowns, yet could he not divert the Kings determination, whereupon he
conceived so great disdain, as in aftertimes brought forth wonderful great
inconveniences. But Villars having got the charge of Admiral, the confirmation
of his Governments, entertainment for the Provencial Soldiers that followed
him, and the Government of Havre de Grace in reversion for his Brother the
Chevalier d' Oyse, declared himself in the end of March, and put those places
under the Kings obedience, which obtained all things fit, as well for the
maintenance of Religion, as their particular interests.

Thus the whole Province of Normandy being come into the Kings power, there
remained only Honfleur in the lower Province which held for the party of the
League. That Town stands in a corner which like a Peninsula thrusts it self
forwards and advances into the Ocean Sea, over against Havre de Grace, lying on
the other side just in the place where the River Seine falls into the Sea, so
that between the two Fortresses there is nothing but the current of the River
which receiving the flux of the Sea, and largely overflowing, is two great
French Leagues in breadth. The Commander of this place was Commendatory
Grillon, who as being a Provencial had got thither a great Garrison of that same
Country, and there being with him in it one of the Sons of the Sieur de
Fountain Martel, a principal man in the Country of Caux, Captain la Tour, a
valiant and expert Warrior, Captain Glaise Nephew to the Governor of Caen, one
Truville a Curate, who from a Priest was become a famous Commander, and many
other Soldiers and Gentlemen who followed the same faction, they had made it a
principal retreat, and overrunning and pillaging the Country, and taking any
prisoners without regard, imposing taxes upon rich men, and with a good number
of barks well manned, making prize of those vessels that past at the mouth of
the River, had filled the place not only with store of Soldiers, and all
preparations for War, but also with abundance of riches: wherefore the Duke of
Montpensier, The Duke of Montpensier lays siege to H^nfl ur, which was the only
place that held for the League in lower Normandy.
desiring to take away that obstacle, that stood in the midst of his
Government, and to free the neighboring people from those sufferings, resolved
to besiege it in the beginning of April; wherefore he summoned in the Gentry of
all the Province, and with two thousand English Foot that were newly landed to
go into Bretagne, eight hundred Germans who had served in those parts a great
while, four French Regiments drawn together out of the Garrisons of that
Province, which amounted to the number of three thousand, three hundred
Harquebussiers on horseback, and eight hundred Gentlemen marched from Lisieux
upon the tenth of April, and appeared before the Town upon the eleventh in the
morning.

The Town on the land-side, is encompassed with a Moat of forty paces broad,
through which the Sea ebbs and flows, and over it stands a spacious Bridge,
upon Pillars of Stone, but covered above with planks, and timber which the Duke
had designed to possess himself of, at his first arrival; wherefore while the
Army drew near with an easy march, Colonel la Liserne advanced with his
Regiment toward the Bridge, being seconded by Monsieur de Fervaques with two
hundred and fifty Horse, but they of the Town foreseeing the design, had placed
two Falconets upon the Bridge, and had given the charge of making it good upon
Truville the Curate with one hundred Foot; whereupon at the arrival of the
Kings Infantry, they began a fierce skirmish; to which Captain la Tour coming
on the Towns side with another hundred of the stoutest Soldiers, la Liternes
Foot began to retire, when the Sieur de Fervaques (perchance with more courage
than discretion) ran full speed to beat back the Enemy, who already was
advanced into a large place without the narrowness of the Bridge; but Truville
and la Tour, when they saw him so far engaged, that he was come within shot of
their Falconets, made so seasonable use of them, that being laden with Tarling
is small pieces of Iron; for which kind ^f Charge, the narrow ^ore of Falconets
is not very pr^per; and therefore I rather gh^ss they were Perriers, which are
commonly used for that pu^pose.
Tarling, they killed above twenty of his men at a clap, and wounded twenty
more, among which Henric^ Davila who wrote this History having his Horse killed
under him, was in very great danger of being slain; but Fervaques wheeling off,
the English came up to the skirmish, which (being reinforced sometimes by the
French Foot, sometimes by the Harquebusiers on horseback, sometimes by
Fervaques with his Horse again) lasted that whole day, without being able to
beat the Defendents from the Bridge.

Monsieur de Surrenne one of the Field Mareschals, caused a Fort to be cast up
that night, over against the Bridge; which though the Artillery from within
annoyed it very much, was yet made defensible the next day, and having planted
four pieces of Cannon in it, they played so hot upon the Enemies, that Truville
the Curate being killed with a Culverin Bullet, they were forced to forsake the
Bridge; but they showed so firm resolution, that they would not leave it to
retire into the Town till they had seen all the wood-work burnt, or thrown into
the water. The three days following, the Artillery were planted, which to the
number of fourteen Pieces battered from the Gate to the Seashore on the
West Side; but they were so much despised by the besieged for some few days at
first, that Captain la Tour feared not between shot and shot to appear upon the
Wall, nor, for all the Cannoniers could do, (who interpreted that action to be
in scorn of them) was it possible either to hit him or daunt him; and yet
within five days they had made so great a breach with their Artillery, that
upon the two and twentieth day, the Foot advanced to give the assault.

The Moat had been very ill discovered, The Kings Forces going on to the
Assault without having well discovered the Moat, are killed in it with showers
of Musket-Bullets.
(a thing more pernicious than all others in matter of assault) and the
Commanders believed it had been full of Sand, brought up by the flowing of the
Sea, that might have been able to bear the weight of those that should fall on;
so that watching the opportunity of the Tide, the English and the French, when
the Water was at the lowest, gave on in several places of the Moat; but though
they found firm Sand at the first, and so went on; yet being come into the
middle, they sunk in so deep, that many of them stuck fast, without being able
to get out, and so like wild Beasts catched in a Net, were with cries and
hissings pelted to death with small shot by the Enemies that were upon the
Wall. Captain Gasconet was slain there with eighty French; and of the English
above 150, with their Lieutenant Colonel.

But the Duke vexed at this so great mischance, would needs after that be
present himself in all businesses, and with very great art, and no less
diligence caused certain Bridges to be made of a middling length, which reached
from the edge of the Moat as far as the Mud, each having in the Front of it a
little Gabion filled with Earth, under favor whereof, casting great brush
Faggots, Stones, and other rubbish into the hollow of the Moat, they labored
to fill it up by little and little, though it was done with evident danger, and
the loss of a great many of the best Soldiers, by reason of the continual
showring of Musket Shot, Stones, Fireworks, and other inventions, with which
the Defendents used incessantly to offend them. But the work being finished in
four days, they found the Enemy had cast up a great Trench within, wherewith
they had made up and covered all that space of the Wall that was battered:
Whereupon the place being viewed, it was judged very difficult, and in a manner
impossible to enter it. Wherefore the Duke making all their endeavors to be
employed that same night at the Bridge which was broken down, caused it to be
so pieced up with new Beams and Planks, that it might be passed over, though
with some difficulty, and but few in Front, which was effected beyond every
ones belief; for the night was short, and they wrought in the dark, except only
the light the Defendents made by throwing great store of Fireworks to discover
what was doing. The same night five pieces of Cannon were drawn thither from
the next Battery, and they began furiously to give fire by break of day, in
such manner, that they beat down the Tower of the Gate, and a great part of it
before the besieged had time to make any Or Cuttings off.
Retrenchments. Scarce was the breach so wide, that two or three might enter
abrest, when the Sieur de Pompiere and the Baron d' Ailly, with two valiant
Squadro^s ran furiously to the Assault; but finding a no less valiant
resistance from the besieged, there began a short, but furious conflict,
wherein they of the Town prevailing, by reason both the Commanders that made
the Assault were sorely wounded, the Infantry within half an hour drew off from
the Wall; which that it might not be repaired, the Artillery began to play
again without intermission; so that toward the evening Colonel la Liserne, and
Colonel Colombiere, two Brothers, renewed the Assault in the same place, which
though constantly sustained by those within, yet the stoutest Provencials being
slain, Captain Glaise wounded, Fountain Martel lamed, their Fireworks spent,
and four of the best Pieces they had broken, Commendatory Grillon began to
think of surrendering; so that news coming thither opportunely by Sea, that the
Admiral Villars, and the City of Rouen, Monti-villier, Honfleur, and Havre de
Grace, standing on the other side of the River, had embraced the Kings party;
being by that means deprived of all hope of being relieved, he bent his mind to
think of saving the abundance of riches they had there gotten together: For
which purpose it was necessary to make composition, and not stay till they were
brought to the utmost weakness. Wherefore having sent to parley with the Sieurs
de Fervaques and Surene, Honfleur is delivered up to the Duke of Montpensier.
he at last concluded to surrender upon condition to go forth, their goods and
persons safe, laying down Twelve thousand Crowns for the payment of the Army,
and to march on the other side of the River, to those Towns that held yet for
the League. Thus the Town being put into the hand of the Sieur d' Aleret,
Governor of Tuques, a Servant of the Duke of Montpensier's, the whole Province
of Normandy remained in the Kings obedience; for la Fountain Martel, who was
Governor of Neuf-Chastel in the County of Gaux, submitted himself in like
manner about the same time.

But already the people, and the Governors being weary of the troubles of War,
and allured by the Kings clemency, and the liberal conditions he gave, who with
full satisfaction contented the desires of all those that came over to his
Party, made haste in all places to acknowledge him; and the Court was full of
those that negotiated the Peace, either of their Friends and Dependents, or of
the Cities and Towns that came into the Kings obedience. Abbeville and
Montrevil followed this counsel in the Province of Picardy; Places that ^ield
themselves to the Kings obedience.
Troys, a great City, and well-peopled, in the Province of Champagne; Sens, a
City and Archbishopric, in the confines of Brie and Bourgongne; Again,
Ville-neufue, and Marmande, in the confines of Guaseogne; and finally, the City
of Poictiers was reduced to the Kings devotion by Scevole de St. Marthe,
Treasurer of France, a man no less adorned with excellent Learning, and
sweetness of Eloquence, than with Experience and Civil Prudence.

Charles de Lorain, Duke of Elboeuf, compounded also by means of the same St.
Marthe, to come over to the Kings Party, with promise, The Duke of El^oeuf is
the first of the House of Lorain that makes his peace with the King.
that the Government of that Town should be reserved for him, and that he
should have Thirty thousand Franks in Pension: But he desired the Agreement
might for some time be kept secret, hoping that even the Duke of Mayenne also
would come in within a while, and desiring, if it were possible, not to
separate himself from him.

But the Duke of Mayenne was quite of another mind; for being still entangled
in his long-setled hopes, or thinking it so befitted his reputation, he was
resolved to look Fortune in the face, and not to come by any means to terms of
Agreement, unless the Popes judgment and consent preceded. Wherefore after he
went from Paris, going straight to Soissons, he began with infinite diligence
to reunite his Forces, and set them again in order, and had sent to the Duke of
Lorain, that together with the Dukes of Guise and Aumale, he would come and
confer with him in some convenient place, to take some resolution about their
common affairs; judging, that if they would keep united with him, they might
gather so many Forces again together, as being assisted with Supplies from
Spain, they might easily, either set their own Fortune on foot again, or
advantage themselves in a beneficial and honorable Accommodation, in case the
Pope should resolve to approve the Kings Conversion.

The Duke of Lorain came to Bar-le-Du^, in the confines of his State, The Lords
of the House of Lorain meet at Bar, to treat of their common interests.
and there were the Dukes of Mayenne and Aumale; but the Duke of Guise could
not be at the meeting, because the Province of Champagne was all in a tumult,
not only by reason that the City of Troys had driven out his Brother the Prince
of Iainville, and declared for the King, but because the Count de St. Paul,
anciently bred up in, and depending on his Family, was suspected to plot new
designs: Wherefore not to leave those places that yet acknowledged him, he was
fain to stay in the Province, and to send Pellicart his Fathers old Secretary
in his name unto the Meeting. There the opinions disagreed; for the Duke of
Lorain, weary of the War, to the end, that he might not see his state more
destroyed by the continual passing of Foreign Forces, inclined wholly to Peace.
But on the contrary, the Duke of Aumale, a man of a fierce obstinate nature,
was more than ever inflamed to follow the War, and had determined rather to put
himself and the place he held in his hands, under the Dominion of the
Spaniards, than submit himself to the discretion and obedience of the King. The
Duke of Guise kept his opinion the more secret by not being present, and his
Secretary with excuse of giving him information of the things in Treaty, and of
expecting his Orders thereupon, held his sentence ambiguous and unresolved. But
the Duke of Mayenne, in whom the sum of the business consisted, and who was
able to turn the rest to his opinion, as he was firmly resolved not to make
Composition without the Popes consent, so thinking that might without much
difficulty be obtained, if it were but endeavored, was in that case uncertain
what he should demand; and whether it were better counsel to follow the hopes
of the War, or accommodate himself to the security of Peace: But because he saw
the Duke of Lorain, The Duke of Mayenne seeing the Lords of his Family were
inclined to peace, permits the Duke of Lorain to treat of it in all their
names, and in the mean time endeavors to reinforce himself, that being armed,
he might obtai^ the better Conditions.
and thought he found the Duke of Guise more inclined to Peace, he took a
middle Resolution; and permitting the Duke of Lorain to manage a Treaty of
Agreement in the name of them all, he caused them all jointly to determine that
their Forces should draw together, and that Supplies from Flanders should be
earnestly labored for, that they might have means to expect what end the Popes
judgment would have, and that by the reputation of their strength, and by
force, they might extort more advantageous conditions of Agreement. Wherefore
the Duke of Lorain presently dispatched Monsieur de Bassompier into France, to
treat with the Count de Schombergh and Villeroy of an Agreement, and at the
same time gave order that two hundred Lanciers, and three hundred Harquebusiers
on horseback should go to Laon, to join with the forces of the Duke of Mayenne,
who having till then, by the means of Monsieur de Rosne, treated with the
Archduke Ernest, who was newly come to Govern the Low Countries, going now to
la Fere, he sent the Vice-Seneschal de Montlimar, and his Secretary Des Ports
to him.

The opinions of the Spanish Ministers were no less entangled, yet very
different from what he believed; for Count Charles of Mansfelt, and Count Peter
Ernest his Father, a man of long experience, and much reputation, President
Riccardotto, and the major part of the Flemish Counselors, were of opinion,
that at last, giving over the vain and ruinous hopes of France, and agreeing
with the King in some advantageous resolution, they should apply their utmost
forces to their own interests in the Low Countries, where the united Provinces
with the opportunity of the Armies being diverted, and of the Commanders being
far off, had in a few years made exceeding great progresses, so that the
Catholic King, according to the common saying, lost his own State by
attempting to get another's; but on the contrary the Conde de Fuentes, and the
other Spanish Counselors, wrong informed of the affairs of France by the Duke
of Feria, and Diego d' Ivarra, persisted still in the thoughts of getting the
Infanta elected, or at least to make themselves Masters of many places, and get
firm footing in Picardy and Bourgongne, Provinces confining upon Flanders,
which in the end should either remain to the Crown of Spain, or if the King of
France got them by composition, he should be necessitated to lay down money in
exchange, and to piece up the vast expenses which the Catholic King had
profusely been at for the space of so many years. While the minds of the
Counselors were in this doubtfulness, came the news of the loss of Paris,
which made the Archduke resolve upon this last Counsel of the Spaniards; for
now all hopes failing that the League should be longer able to subsist, The
Archduke Ernest at the news of the loss of Pa^is resolves to think no longer of
the Infanta's elec^ion, but to seize upon some places in the Provinces,
confining upon Fland^rs to make amends for the past expenses.
having lost the City of Paris its first Basis and principal Foundation; and on
the other side, not judging that the Catholic King, either could very easily
obtain, or for his reputation ought to demand Peace, he thought it a very
prudent Counsel (disintangling themselves from the engagement and impediment of
the League in which it was necessary to spend without measure, to maintain many
who at last proved either faithless, or almost fruitless) to make war in King
Philip's own name, to employ all their forces in one place and spend for their
own interests, and since to talk longer of the Infanta's election would be but
ridiculous, to endeavor at least with the present opportunities to get
possession of the places of Picardy and Bourgongne that they might be a limit
to the affairs of Flanders, and serve partly to make amends for their past
expenses.

With this resolution he presently dealt with Monsieur de Rosne, who agreed to
serve the Catholic King for eighteen thousand Crowns of annual pension, The
Vice-Seneschal for money put a Spanish Garrison into la Fere. The Duke of Aumale
for 40000 Crown^ Pension revolts unto the Spaniard with the places under his
Government.
and without much difficulty compounded also with the Vice-Seneschal de
Montelimar, that for the recompense of thirty thousand Crowns, and retaining
the title of the Government for himself, he should bring a Spanish Garrison into
la Fere, the principal Fortress of all Picardy. They treated at the same time
with the Duke of Aumale, who was inclined more than any other to follow them,
and with the establishment of forty thousand Crowns Pension they brought him
over with the Towns he possessed, and with an hundred Curassiers, and two
hundred Light Horse; nor did they fail to work with the other Governors in
both Provinces, and to give warmth unto those practices; the Archduke gave
charge to Count Mansfelt, that drawing the Army together without delay, he
should advance, and make War resolutely upon the Confines of Picardy.

The Archduke wrote all this distinctly to the Court of Spain, showing that
thi^ was the most profitable and most expedient resolution; but offering to
consideration at the same time, The Archduke Ernest informs them in Spain of
the state of affairs, and lets them know his determinations.
that it was necessary to reinforce the provisions both of men and money, to
maintain it; that till then they had spent unprofitably to feed the instability
of the French, who as long as they had been able to suck their milk, had made
themselves fat at the expenses of others, and now they saw the breast dry,
revolted another way, and returned to their own nature; that their natural
enmity with the Spanish Nation and their own lightness, could never consent
they should think of any thing either profitable, or honorable for the Crown
of Spain; that the proposition of the Infanta, though born of a Daughter of
France, and gotten by that King who had emptied his Kingdoms to succor their
necessities, seemed to them as strange and monstrous, as if the Dominion of a
Scythian, or an Indian had been propounded; that when to mitigate it, they
propounded that she should marry a Frenchman, to show clearly there was no
design of subjecting them to the Spanish Empire, the discords and ambition that
reigned amongst them had not suffered them to consent; but they had rather
thoughts of making peace with their common Enemy, than to yield to one another;
that the little resistance which had been made in not satisfying their
devouring greediness profusely with Spanish Gold, had in a moment not only
disgusted them, but put them in an uproar; for their natural impatience had
brought so many Cities, and so many great Lords to submit themselves without
regard to the faith and discretion of their Enemy, that already the principal
Foundations of the League were fallen away; the Cities of Paris, Orleans,
Rouen, Bourges, and Lions revolted; the Admiral Villars, the Count de Brissac,
the Marshall de la Chastre, and the Sieur de Vitry, principal Heads of the
Union, and who had sustained the weight of the late War, were gone over to the
Kings obedience, and already the Duke of Elboeuf of the very House of Lorain,
notwithstanding his sharp inveterate enmity to the House of Bourbon, either
treated or had concluded an Agreement; that therefore it was no longer time to
refer the Infanta's rights to the arbitrament of the French, but to uphold them
by force of Arms, and prosecute the enterprise under his own name, and with his
own hopes; that already in Bretagne (a member apart, in which the Salique Law
had nothing to do) the forces of the Spaniards were vigorous and powerful,
which (if they were assisted, and by help of the Sea opportunely recruited)
would be able to maintain that Province; that in Picardy they held many places
gained by means of the Duke of Aumale, Montelimar, and Rosne; that endeavors
should be used to draw the Duke of Mayenne to serve in the same manner, not as
Head of the League, but as a Commander for the King of Spain; and by his means
the attaining of many places in the Duchy of Bourgongne should be attempted;
that the same should be done with the Duke of Guise for the places of
Champagne, and with the Marquess de St. Sorlin for those of Dauphine; that the
Sieur de Montpezat might be treated with in Spain to obtain some places, to get
footing in Provence; that Count Charles was already advanced with the Army to
the Confines of Picardy, in which Province they might make very great progress
before the King could draw an Army together sufficient to oppose them; but that
it was necessary to cut off delays, to hasten the raising of moneys, to make
Leavies in Italy and Germany to increase the Army, and to labor now in good
earnest to do themselves service, and no longer to uphold the pretensions and
interests of others; that by possessing themselves of many places, especially
upon the Confines, where they might be relieved and maintained, a War would be
prepared for the King of France, who would be fain to spend many years in the
regaining of his own, and by keeping him busy at home, that might hinder him
from having time to think of the affairs of the Low Countries, and of the
recovery of the Kingdom of Navarre: and finally, if it should be convenient for
the Crown of Spain to desire peace, the King by having that pawn in hand, might
make himself be partly satisfied for his expenses and losses; so that the
profit and reputation which would ensue from that Counsel being present and
manifest, the Expedition likewise ought to be present, and the Supplies quick
and resolute.

These Letters, very conformable to the humor and designs of the Spaniards,
The Archdukes resolutions are approved and embraced in Spain.
prevailed to cause a resolution in the Court of prosecuting the enterprise
according to this determination: Wherefore, though the Sieur de Montpezat
strove to get a favorable return to the Duke of Mayenne's demands, he was
answered much more resolutely than before; that Orders were given to the
Archduke, and that determinations were to be settled there, at which the Duke of
Mayenne being near might be present himself: And King Philip was so pleased
with this Counsel, that applying his whole mind unto it, and with a more than
ordinary brevity dispatching the execution of business, in which he was wont to
be very slow, he gave fitting Commissions in Flanders, Italy, and to his own
Council, concerning what should presently be done.

But this design which (by many conjectures) was found out by the Duke of
Mayenne, The Duke of Mayenne seeing the thread of his hopes broken, and knowing
himself to be constrained to one of two Resolutions, wav^^^ in determining and
interposes obstacles to gain time.
made him more sollicitous than before, seeing himself reduced between two
extremes, to the hard necessity, either of agreeing with the King, without
expecting the Popes determination, or else to put his own liberty and the
places that depended upon him into the hands of the Spaniards, contrary to what
from the beginning he had firmly resolved. On the other side, it afflicted him
that the Duke of Elboeuf had made his peace with the King; on the other, that
the Duke of Aumale had made a Composition with the Spaniards, and in this
doubtfulness sometimes he inclined to follow the Duke of Lorain's counsel, and
conclude Bassompier's Treaty; sometimes to meet with the Archduke, who had
invited him to come to Mons, and there jointly to treat of their common
Affairs; but before he determined to make peace with the King, he thought best
to stay for new informations from the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, and the Baron of
Senecey; and before he treated with the Archduke, he desired to see a new
dispatch from Montpezat, that might certify him what was resolved on in Spain;
and amidst these ambiguities he was well pleased that Madam de Guise should
treat for her Son with her Sister the Duchess of Nevers, to the end, that she
might interpose to make his peace with the King; and he was glad to hear that
the Queen Dowage^ was gone into Bretagne, to treat an Agreement with her
Brother the Duke of Mercoeur; nor did it displease him, that his Mother Madam
de Nemours, and his Sister Madam de Montpensier, being departed from Paris,
where they had often discoursed with the King about the present affairs, were
come to him to propound Conditions of Peace: But in all these things, he not
only interposed delays, but secret obstacles and impediments, to the end, that
businesses might be drawn out at length, and that between Peace and War, the
Progress of Arms, and the Resolutions of the Towns that remained of his Party
cooling, might allow him the benefit of time, to which, being by nature a
Friend, he now thought it the only remedy for the safety of the present
conjuncture. But that which kept him most of all from inclining absolutely to
an Agreement with the King, was, the obdurateness of the Pope, who though
(after the Duke of Nevers his departure, lest he should utterly break off the
Treaty of the Kings Absolution) he had given way that Cardinal Gondi might come
to Rome, The Pope permits Cardinal Gondi (who had stayed some time in Florence)
to come to Rome, but with a command, not to speak a word about the Affairs of
France.
yet had he done it with express command, that he should not open his mouth
concerning the Affairs of France, whereby the Popes secret intention being hid,
it was in appearance manifest, that he continued in the thought of rejecting
the Kings earnest desires: And on the other side, that which withdrew him from
agreeing with the Spaniards, was the obstinate persecution of him by the Duke
of Feria, and Diego d' Ivarra; who after their departure from Paris, had
discoursed with him at Laon, and attributing all things that had come to pass
amiss to his fault, used him scurvily, and openly threatened him, which he not
enduring, but imputing the ill success of things to their imprudence, despised
and abused them no less both in words and actions.

Count Charles of Mansfelt enters into France with his Army, and besieges la
Cappelle.
But the Duke of Mayenne's doubts were removed, and he necessitated to take some
resolution by Count Mansfelt's entry into Picardy with Ten thousand Foot, and a
thousand Horse, and a convenient Train of Artillery; and though the Duke of
Aumale counseled him to advance into the Province, and besiege Corbie, yet he
resolved to fall upon la Cappelle, a place near the Frontiers of the Duchy of
Terriache, accounted reasonably strong, but at that time (as they had
intelligence) in as great want of Ammunition, as it was full of abundant store
of Victual; so that they hoped, the taking of it on the one side would prove
very easy, and on the other very profitable for the future sustenance of the
Army.

La Cappelle, situate in a spacious Plain, is of a Quadrangular form, of no
great circuit, and flanked in the Angles with four Bulwarks: It has a deep
Moat, and full of Water, which coming rather from a Rivulet than a River, that
runs through the Field, is swelled and raised by a Bank or Dam, placed upon the
edge of the Moat: It was likewise encompassed with a covered way, and a
Counterscarp after the Modern Fashion; so that if to the strength of the place,
there had been store of Ammunition, and constancy in the Defendents, it would
have held the Spanish Army long in play. But the coming of the Enemies having
been altogether unexpected, (for first, it was not believed they would come
into France without the Duke of Mayenne, and then it was thought they would sit
down before Corbie) the Defendents had so little Courage, or so little Conduct,
that at the very first arrival, Agostino Messiaes Tertia of Spaniards, and the
Marquess of Trevicoes Tertia of Italians, made themselves Masters of the
Counterscarp without dispute, and yet not having lodged themselves in the place
where the dam of the Water was, they fought two days with very great loss of
men, before they could possess themselves of it; for the besieged having placed
their greatest hopes in the defense thereof, strove with store of Cannon-shot,
Fireworks, and an incessant Hail of Musket-bullets, to keep the Enemy far from
thence. But the third day Colonel la Berlotte advancing suddenly with his
Walloons in another place, came at last to the dam, and having broken the
Engines that s^opt the Water, and by the help of Pioneers made a descent to
drain the Moa^, it remained quite empty within a little time; wherefore the two
following days, the Trenches were made, and perfected; and with a Platform
which it was easy to raise in respect of the softness of the Earth, they
planted Fourteen pieces of Artillery, Ten that battered right upon the Wall,
and two at each Flank, that cleared and took away their defenses. The Artillery
played twelve hours together, and the breach having been viewed, la Berlotte
with his Walloons advanced to fall on; but they within having thrown down a
certain old Tower, and made the ruins of it fall into the Moat, the Water was
thereby stopped in such manner, that rising in an instant, it drowned above
seventy of the assailants, and the rest had much ado to save themselves, being
played upon in their retreat with three Falconets laden with Tarling, which the
Defendents had turned toward the breach. The next day they labored to make a
new passage for the Water to run out, which though it was effected more easily
than before, yet there were slain seven Captains, and above one hundred
Soldiers; but the defense of the Water being utterly taken away, The Sieur de
Mailleraye, Governor of la Cappelle, surrenders to Count Mansf^lt.
and a very great space of the Wall being beaten down, the Sieur de Mailleraye,
Governor of the place, not staying for the utmost force of the Army, resolved
to surrender, and marching out with his Garrison, their Goods and Persons free,
delivered up the place into Count Charles his hand.

In the interim the King labored with infinite diligence to set the affairs of
Paris again in order, for the establishment whereof to the general
satisfaction, it was necessary to increase the number of the Parliament, and of
the other Magistrates; he not being willing to break his word, or pay them with
ingratitude, who having been nominated by the Duke of Mayenne, held the degree
of Presidents or Counselors, and who had lent their effectual endeavors, as
well in excluding the Election of the Infanta, as in reducing the City to his
obedience: And on the other side, not thinking it fit to put out them who in
the worst times had kept the Parliament in the City of Tours. Wherefore
President le Maistre who had held the first place, The Parliament of Paris
decrees, That the King ought to be obeyed as lawful Prince, declares them
Rebels that disobey; and takes away the Duke of Mayenne's Office of Lieutenant
General.
yielding to President Harley and his other Seniors, took the seventh place;
and Iehan Huillier, Prevost des Marchands, was created President of the The
Court of Accounts or Exchequer; there is one of them in every Parliament.
Chamber des Comptes; as Martin l' Anglois Sieur de Beaurepaire, and Guilliaume
du Ver Sieur de Neret, obtained the degree of Masters of the Requests of the
Palace Royal. The Parliament being settled, and reformed, and the High
Chancellor with the Officers of the Crown sitting in it, it was solemnly
decreed, That obedience ought to be yielded to King Henry the Fourth, as lawful
Successor of the Kingdom, declaring all those to be Rebels, who should deny to
acknowledge and obey him; and with another Decree they deprived the Duke of
Mayenne of the Office and Title of Lieutenant General of the Crown. The like
Decree was made by the College of Divines of Sorbonne, who to the number of
Seventy, The College of Sorbonne declares the Kings Absolution valid, and the
Doctors thereof come to do him solemn homage at the Louvre.
declared the Absolution that was given the King to be good, and valid; and
that, without mortal sin, none could deny him the obedience that was wont to be
yielded to the other most Christian Kings of France; and going to the Louvre
with the same company, they did him solemn homage, Jacques d' Amboise, Rector of
the University, speaking for them all; which Ceremony was the more welcome to
the King, because they were the Men that had even oppugned the lawful Title of
his Succession.

But the affairs of Paris being settled, he received news that Count Charles had
besieged la Cappelle, and having presently dispatched the Mareschals of Byron
and Matignon to draw the Army together, he himself with Monsieur de Guiry, Two
hundred Gentlemen, and Four hundred Light Horse went toward Picardy the same
day that he was advertised of it. But being come to Chauny, word came to him
that the place was lost; to make amends for which, he began to think of setting
himself upon some enterprise.

If the news of the siege and taking of la Cappelle was very sad and
displeasing to the King, it was not much more welcome to the Duke of Mayenne,
who apprehended clearly, that since the Spaniards had not made any application
to him, they were resolved for the future to manage the War of themselves:
which thing grieving him extremely, because it not only deprived him of the
remainder of his hopes, but also took away from him both his reputation and
force, by means whereof he thought to better his condition for the
accommodation, which he might have occasion to make with the King, and judging
that all proceeded from the sinister relations of the Duke of Feria and Diego
d' Ivarra, he resolved at last, laying all respects aside, to have an enterview
with the Archduke, and try to set his affairs right again with the Spaniards.

The Archduke likewise desired this enterview, not for the same end the Duke of
Mayenne had, but to see if he could induce him to put himself under the
Catholic King, as the Duke of Aumale had done, and to deliver up into his
hands those Towns and Fortresses, which yet depended on him: and therefore with
courteous friendly Letters, and with messages full of trust and confidence, The
Duke of Mayenne goes to Bruxelles to treat with the Archduke.
invited him to come to Bruxelles; which not being longer to be deferred, the
Duke leaving his second Son the Count de Sommerive at Laon, with part of the
Forces commanded by Colonel du Bourg, (he that came out of the Bastile) went
with the remainder as far as Guise, where having left all his Soldiery, he
passed on with a Train of only threescore Horse to meet the Archduke, who
having received him with all the most exquisite demonstrations of Honor, in
other matters showing himself very averse from the beginning, to the demands
which he made. The Spanish Ministers advise to keep the Duke of Mayenne
prisoner in Flanders.
The Duke thought that the same Spanish Ministers, who had crossed him in
France, did so likewise in his present Treaty; and therefore being in private
with Iuan Baptista Tassis, and President Riccardotto, he began at large, with
the narration of all particulars, to show that the adverseness of businesses
had proceeded wholly from the imprudence, and perverse managery of those
Ministers; to whom it not being obscure what was imputed to them by the Duke,
(for they were provoked to clear themselves of many things) they went on so far
in anger, that they began to counsel the Archduke to keep the Duke of Mayenne
prisoner, and trust the managing of affairs of France unto the Duke of Guise,
accusing the Duke of Mayenne of perfidiousness, and too crafty and dissembling
a nature, and that only minding the object of his ambition, he was much a
greater Enemy to the Catholic King, than to the King of Navarre. But the
Archduke not only thought that a counsel too unworthy, and such an one, as he
believed, would gain him the general hatred of all men; but also judged that in
many things the Duke had reason on his side, and that those Ministers had
indiscreetly abused him beyond measure; nor did it seem strange to him, since
the Spanish Ministers had treated of making any other man King of France,
without consenting to his person; that he on the other side paying them in
their own coin, should think of any other resolution, rather than to content
and satisfy the Spaniards; and as he was a Prince of great virtue, and a
Friend to what was just and fit, he counted it too great a fault, to deny the
principal recompenses and honors to so principal a Head, and, one that had
done so much for the common benefit: Besides, he was of opinion that those
Ministers counseled very crosly, to take away the management of affairs from a
man of so great reputation, and such experienced wisdom, to put it into the
hand of the Duke of Guise, a young man, and though of a high spirit, yet by
reason of his youth, and want of experience, little able to rule so great a
weight. To all this he added the continual treating of the Duchess of Guise,
to make her Sons peace with the King, which besides that it was known in the
Archdukes Court, It is resolved at Bruxelles, that the Duke of Mayenne shall
join with Count Mansfelt to oppose the King together
was likewise dexterously mentioned by the Duke of Mayenne at convenient times;
for which reasons, there having been many meetings between the Princes, the
business in hand began to change its form, the Archduke knowing that the Duke
of Mayenne was not in so weak a condition, as that he would easily submit
himself to the Spanish yoke: and on the other side, that he abated much of his
former pretensions by reason of the urgent necessity which pressed him at that
present; so that both of them reserving themselves for the opportunity of
aftertimes, determined that the Duke of Mayenne should go with his forces to
join with Count Mansfelt, and that jointly with a common consent they should
manage the War, to oppose the Kings proceedings, deferring till another time,
both the establishing of conditions, and the manner how they should order
matters for the future.

The King (to whom the Duke of Nevers (lately returned out of Italy) and the
Duke of Bouillon, were joined) was already marched from Chauny with twelve
thousand Foot, The King besieges Laon, in which the Duke of Mayenne's Son was,
with much of the Dukes wealth
and two thousand Horse, with intention to besiege Laon; where besides the Duke
of Mayenne's young Son, there was also the greatest part of his Personal
Estate; but to come upon it the more unexpectly, and catch the Defendents
unprovided, he marched with the Army before, and by the way of St. Quintin and
Cressy, came near to la Chappelle, making show as if he would assault the
Spanish Camp; but while standing near and facing the Enemy, they were
skirmishing with one another, he gave order that the Rear led by the Marshall
de Byron should march off, and go back to besiege Laon, whither not many hours
after, having first sent away the Sieur de St. Luc, and then the Baron de
Salignac, he with the Duke of Nevers departed the next morning, and came last
of all before the Town.

In it with Colonel du Bourg, and the Count de Sommerive, there were many
Commanders of note, six hundred French Foot, two hundred Germans, three hundred
Neapolitans, sixty Cuirassiers, and two hundred Light Horse, and besides the
Soldiers of the Garrison, the Townsmen also concurred willingly to defend the
place; they had great store of Ammunition and Fireworks, and the Commanders
(who had suspected a siege) had prepared and fortified all convenient places in
such manner, that the siege seemed like to be of great difficulty, and
uncertain event; and so much the rather, because the Spanish Camp being near*
it might keep the Kings Army in jealousy many ways; nor was it to be doubted,
but that the Duke of Mayenne would use his utmost Forces to relieve and
disingage his Son. Wherefore the King, intent before all things to shut up the
passage against the relief which might come from many places, sent Monsieur de
la Chastre, with the Troops under his command, to lie upon the way that leads
from Reims, and the other places of Champagne, doubting that the Duke of Guise
with the Forces he had in that Country, and perchance reinforced by the Duke of
Lorain, might come on that side: on the other side, the Duke of Nevers places
himself upon the other way that leads from Soissons right unto the Town; the
Duke of Longueville with his Troops of the Province, quartered upon the way of
Noyon, and of la Fere, and all these causing the field to be scowred with
infinite diligence, were ready to oppose and fight with them that should
advance to bring either victual or other relief to the besieged. The principal
Pass by which the Spanish Army might come directly remained yet, upon which the
King lay himself; and because the way was encumbered with an Hill that had a
Wood upon the right hand, and a great Village upon the left, he took up his
Quarters within the Village, and made Count Soissons and the Sieur de Vic
encamp on the other side, at the entry of the Wood; and upon the top of a Hill,
where the way was, Monsieur d' Humieres lay in the Field with three hundred
Cuirassiers, and the Baron de Giury with five hundred Light Horse: besides, to
the end the Enemy might not come unexpectedly, he sent the Sieur de Clermont of
Amboise with five Companies of Harquebusiers on horseback to lie at Cressy,
and strengthened the Garrison of St. Lambert, a Castle standing upon the same
way the Enemies might come directly.

The Passes secured in this manner, five Redoubts were begun to make approaches
to the Moat; of the first of which the Marshall de Byron had charge, Monsieur
de St. Luc of the second, the Baron de Salignac of the third, Monsieur de
Montmartin of the fourth, and the Count de Granmont of the last; and in every
one of them the Infantry being set on work, besides many of the Country people,
they labored with wonderful great diligence, though they of the Town, both
with their Artillery and strong Sallies, strove to hinder their Works in every
place; insomuch that the two first days, before the Besiegers had time to
recover themselves, there were above four hundred Soldiers slain, and among
them the Sieur de Forcade, one of the Marshall de Byron's Lieutenants, and
there were wounded the Baron de Terms, who lost a leg, and the Marquess de
Coeuvres, who within a few days died of his hurt.

But in the mean time the Spanish Army (which had received order from the
Archduke resolutely to relieve Laon, Count Mansfelt having received order from
the Archduke to relieve Laon with his forces as the Duke of Mayenne should
think fit, marches within a league of the Kings trenches
according as the Duke of Mayenne should think fit to manage the business)
having left Cressy and St. Lambert on the left hand, took upon the right, and
came upon the thirteenth day of June within a league of the Kings trenches: the
Duke and Count Charles, as soon as the Quarters of the Army were entrenched and
fortified, intended to make themselves Masters of the Wood that was before
them, and by means of it to draw so near the Town, that they might relieve it
without venturing the sum of affairs. The Sieur Montluet was fortified in the
Wood with four Companies of Foot, who, when upon the fifteenth day, two
Captains, the one an Italian, the other a Spaniard, advanced with fifty men to
discover the quality and situation of the place, and of the way, repulsed them
valiantly, but without any great difficulty, because there came so few of them,
and had no design to take that Post: But the next morning the event of the
business was quite contrary; The Spaniards ^eat the Kings forces out of a Wood,
where they had fortified themselves
for la Berlotte entering unexpectedly into the Wood with two thousand Foot,
did with small resistance beat out Montluet, who making his retreat in the Rear
of all his men, was taken prisoner; and the Kings Regiment of Guards being
advanced to oppose the Enemy, three Captains and many valiant Soldiers were
slain in the first encounter: So that they being thus handled, would have
retired, if Monsieur de Vic, with the Regiments of St. Ange and Navarre, had
not come up to resist the Enemy: But the Tertia's of Agostino Messia, and the
Marquess de Trevico, being likewise advanced, the service was exceeding hot at
the entry of the Wood; and to second these, Count Soissons, and the Baron de
Giury advanced on each hand; and on the other side, the Duke of Mayenne with
his own Troop, and the Lorain Light horse appeared in the entry of the Wood, to
back the Foot of his own party. But the courage of the Infantry was not equal,
and the Horse by reason of the narrowness of the place, fighting among Shrubs
and Trees, could do but little service; whereupon the Kings Regiments receiving
very great loss in the fight, began to stagger; and so much the rather, because
the Duke of Mayenne seeing a Wing of Musketeers advance in the opening of a
Meadow, had fallen upon them with threescore Horse, and cut them all in pieces;
whereby it not only appeared, that the Enemies would have possession of the
Wood, but also the Foot was in exceeding great danger of being defeated. Thus
difficult and dangerous was the state of the encounter, when the Marshall de
Byron came up, and knowing the hazard of the Infantry, and of utterly losing
the Wood, drawn by his wonted fierceness, he alighted from his Horse, causing
the Count de Torignyes and Sieur de la Curee's Troops to do the like, and
placing himself in the Front of the Battle, sustained and stopped the violence of
the Spaniard. At the same time the King also came up, who though the Trees and
Hedges hindered him very much, would needs have the Baron de Guiry advance with
all his Horse, to attack the Lorain Cavalry, which being gallantly received,
for the Duke of Mayenne himself was there in person, the conflict was as
difficult, as bloody; and supplies hastening upon both sides from all parts,
Count Mansfelt came into the Wood, and the Sieur d' Humieres went down from the
Hill, so that the business grew to a certain kind of battle, in which though
all fought not, yet the major part was either engaged or hindered by the
unfitness of the place. The fight lasted with various success, and several
encounters till the evening, at which time, the King having caused all his
Infantry to lie upon the very way near the Wood, to fortify against the Front
of the Enemy, and stop up their passage, sent back his Horse to their wonted
quarters. But the Duke of Mayenne, and Count Mansfelt considering that the most
part of their Foot were advanced to make good the Wood; whereby their quarter
was left so weak, that it might with danger be assaulted by the King in the
Rear; and so much the more, if he should resolve upon it by night, they quitted
the Wood by little and little, and drew off their men to the Camp, the Wood
being left free, and exposed to the incursions, and skirmishes of both Armies.

The Kings forces take a great deal of Victual and Ammunition which were
brought from No^on, to be put into Laon.
While they fought here and kept the Kings forces busied, the Duke of Mayenne
had given order, that Nicolo Basti, and the Sieur d' Escluseaux, Colonel of a
French Regiment, should move from Noyon with abundance of Victual and
Ammunition, to put it into Laon, for the relief of the place; but the Duke of
Longueville, who scoured the ways on that side, having notice of it, laid an
ambush for them not far from the Town, which though it was discovered by the
Scouts that went before, yet the Convoy being either affrighted at that
unexpected encounter, or thinking all the Kings Cavalry was there, took a
resolution to retire, which not being able to do without time, and much
confusion, by reason of their carriages, the Sieur d' Escluseaux, who was in
the last Ranks, as soon as his men were routed remained prisoner; the Powder
was divided among the Soldiers, and the carriages of victual burnt, but Nicolo
Basti got back safe to Noyon.

The greatest difficulty of the Spanish Camp was want of victual, without which
they could not lie long in that place, where while they staid, they did so
incommode the King, that he could not prosecute the besieging of the Town;
wherefore the Duke of Mayenne had caused great store of provisions to be made
at la Fere, having determined to have them brought to the Camp, the straight
way, which was in a manner behind them; for this purpose Six hundred Spanish
Foot, a thousand Italians, and an hundred Light Horse were gone thither, the
Commanders thinking that guard sufficient, because they believed not the King
would dare to pass by their Camp, and leave it behind him, to go to a place, so
far off, and so dangerous to fall upon them; but the thing proved otherwise,
for the Marshall de Byron, taking with him the Sieur de Montigny, eight
hundred Switzers, and as many French Foot of the Regiments of Navarre and St.
Ange, two Companies of English, the Baron de Giury with the Light Horse, and
four hundred Horse of the Count de Torignyes, and the Sieur de la Curees,
departed by night from the Camp before Laon, and being come with wonderful
silence within a League of la Fere, caused the Horse to lie hid in two little
Woods, which were on each side the way, The Marshall de Byron having placed
himself in ambush, falls upon and takes great store of victual, which were
going from la Fere to the Enemies Camp.
and he with his Foot hid himself in the Fields, which being full of Corn
almost ripe, gave them convenience to lie unseen. The Spanish Camp was not
above two Leagues from that place, and people going continually from thence to
la Fere, they were often like to have discovered the ambush, if the Marshall
very patient, beyond his own nature, had not with mavelous silence withheld
his men, who many hours being already passed, began to be hungry, and were with
much ado kept in by him; yet they persevered so long, that toward evening
certain Carriages began to appear; having intended to have gone under favor of
the night: Much more difficult was it then to withhold the English from falling
upon the enemy before the time; but in the end, part of the Carriages being
past, they rose up furiously and assaulted the Guards on all sides. The Van
which was of Italian foot, made resistance valiantly, and the same did the
Battle which was of Spaniards; but the Rear finding themselves nearer la Fere,
faced about precipitately to retire; but with so ill fortune, that falling
among the Horse, which was already come out of the Wood, it was in a moment cut
in pieces. The defeat of them was a wonderful disadvantage to the rest of their
companions, who, drawn into a Body, bravely withstood the fury of the Kings
Infantry; for, being left unguarded in the Rear, they were assaulted also on
that side by the Harquebusiers on Horseback, and yet facing every way, and
sheltring themselves with their Carriages, they made it good a great while, and
that with no small loss to those of the King's party, among which, Colonel St.
Ange, and Monsieur Faveroles Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Navar were
wounded, and still marching on, fought valiantly with their Pikes and Swords,
being partly defended and covered by their Carriages, till the Marshall de
Biron, fearing least the noise of it being heard, the whole Spanish Army should
fall upon their backs; and therefore making haste to put the business to an
end, caused the Gentry to alight, and advancing at the head of the Switzers,
charged with so great violence, that the less number, not being able longer to
resist the greater, the Italians and Spaniards stoutly defending themselves,
were all slain upon the place: The Horse that fled were pursued by the Baron de
Giuri, even to the Gates of la Fere; and of all those that were about the
Carriages, very few were taken prisoners. On the Kings side were killed above
Two hundred, and few less wounded, among which, in the last brush, the Sieur de
Canisy, Son-in-law to the Marshall de Matignon, and the Sieur de la Curee. In
this place also Henrico Davila (who was one of those that alighted from their
horses with the Count de Torigni) put his Ankle out of joint with getting over
one of the Carriages, and was in very great danger, of being lamed for his
whole life. The Marshall de Biron considering, that by reason of the enemies
nearness, he might be assaulted every moment, set fire on the Carriages to the
number of Four hundred; and having spoiled some, and bringing away others of
the Teams that drew them, retired with infinite celerity the same night.

But the Spanish Army failing of this hope, the Commanders were no longer able
to subsist, and therefore determined to take some resolution, before they were
further straightned by the necessity of hunger; but they disagreed among
themselves, about the manner of their retreat; for Count Mansfelt, for the
greater security, would have raised the Camp by night; and the Duke of Mayenne
fearing both confusion, and dishonor, would needs have the retreat made by day:
And because Mansfelt persevered in his opinion, he was content, that the
Vanguard, led by the Sieur de la Motte, and the Battle commanded by the Count
himself, should march away, with the greater Artillery, before it was light,
and he, with the Rere, undertook to make the retreat by day. In this occasion,
both the discipline and valor of the Duke of Mayenne (qualities for the most
part obscured by ill fortune in his military enterprises) appeared clearly; for
being to retire four Leagues, through an open Country, in sight of the Enemy,
who had so much a greater number of gallant horse, he did it with so great
order and resolution, that he received no damage at all in his retreat. He
placed eight Corpse de Guard, part Italians, and part Spaniards, commanded by
Ceecho de Sangro, and Don Alonzo Mendozza, and behind these he put the flying
Squadron, in the Rere of which, he himself, with his Pike in his hand, and with
him the Prince of Avellino, the Marquess of Trevico, Agostino Messia, Don
Antonio de Toledo, Don Iuan de Bracamonte, The Duke of Mayenne makes his
retreat by day in the face of the Enemy, much superior to him in number, with
so good order, that he receives no los^ at all.
and above 100 Reformadoes, and a little before la Berlotte retired with his
Tertia of Walloons, who had six Fieldpieces with them, ready to be turned
against the Enemy: As soon as it was broad day light, the Walloons began to
march; and after them the flying Squadron; at which time the King (who had
notice of it from Parabere, being encouraged by the Marshall de Biron, who
affirmed, he had left so many broken Carriages, and so many dead bodies upon
the way, that the Enemies would find it extreme difficult to make their
retreat) advanced with his Cavalry to fall upon them in the Rere: but the eight
Corpse de Guard, who were the last that moved, retired with admirable
expertness; for as soon as the Wings of Musketeers had given fire, they fell
off into the Rere of the Pikes without facing about, but fronting still toward
the Enemy, and in the mean time the shot played that were among the Files, who
had no sooner ended their volleys, but the hinder Wings were come to be the
Front, and while they gave fire, the Squadron retired without turning their
backs: after which, the second following, and after the second the third, and
so the rest one after the other, drew off all by little and little to the Rere
of the flying Squadron; which, when the Baron de Giury was come up unto, with
the Count de Soissons, and the rest that were at the Head of the Kings Cavalry,
they fiercely charging their Pikes, and pouring forth a terrible thick hail of
Musket Shot, repulsed them in such manner, that they wheeled about, not daring
to charge in amongst them; which having been done several times, the retreat
went on with particular honor to the Duke of Mayenne, who, very tall of
stature, and completely armed, stirred up the courage of all by his words and
example, and also with his own hand over-turned the Sieur de Persy upon the
ground, who, with a Troop of Light Horse had the boldness to charge his
Squadron. But being come (already tired with service, and with heat) unto a
narrower way, la Berlotte presented his Artillery, placed on each hand upon the
banks of ditches, in such manner, that the Kings Horse were constrained to make
an halt, letting the whole Camp march off safe unto la Fere: Nor did the
obstacles alleged by the Marshall de Biron prove any hinderance; for the
retreat proceeding slowly and warily, without hurry or confusion, the Pioneers
had time to free and clear the way.

But the enemies Army being gone, the King returned unto the Siege, and began
to batter the Town; and while the Artillery played upon it, from every redoubt,
they made a mine, to blow up the Ramparts, and make a breach with more speed
and Security; but the besieged, not being willing to lose themselves, without
making due resistance, sallied out at the Skyt-gates upon the first of July,
and fell into the Marshall de Biron's and the Sieur de Montmartin's Trenches,
with so much violence, that making themselves masters of the Redoubts, they
made a very great slaughter there, Eleven Captains, and above Two hundred
Soldiers being left dead upon the place; But the Marshall de Biron coming
happily at the noise, and the soldiers running armed from all parts into the
Trenches, the enemy was at last beaten in again, who, taking another course,
made a furious counter-battery, from whence they dismounted and spoiled many
pieces of Cannon, and yet all things being repaired with mavelous diligence,
there was already a great part of the Wall beaten down, after which, the
Rampart appearing high, it was necessary to stay till the mines and works under
ground were brought to perfection; which, while they were about, the Baron de
Guiry, who, with extreme diligence hastened the work, The Baron de Guiry slain.
was shot in the head with a Musket in the flower of his age, and to the
infinite grief of every one, lost his life; a Gentleman of great courage, and
exceeding worth, but of so sweet behavior, and so pleasing a wit, improved
with additions of Learning, that forcing a general affection, he was praised
and beloved by his very enemies; The mines (which had been many days in hand)
being perfected, The mines are sprung, Laon is assaulted, and valiantly
defended.
had very different effects; for the Sieur de S. Luc's proved fruitless,
because the water got into it; the Count de Grammont's had vent given it by the
besieged; the Sieur de Montmartin's threw down the Wall, but did no hurt at all
to the Rampart; only the Marshall de Biron's, and the Baron de Salignac's
wrought very great effects, and yet being assaulted, one by Colonel Grillon,
and the other by the Count de Torigny, they were valiantly made good by the
defendents, who having at the same time sprung Fougade is a kind of mine of
about eight or ten foot square, covered with stones, pieces of Timber, bricks,
and such things as ^hey do mischief to to the ^ssailan^s, b^ing fiered when
they come upon it.

The number of the defendents being diminished, they, not longer able to hold
out, Capitulate and Surrender.


a Fougade, and blew up many of those, who inconsiderately were advanced upon
the Rampart; the next day the assaults were redoubled several times, the Duke
de Bouillon and the Marshall de Biron having the care of them: in which,
though the assailants could not lodge themselves upon the Rampart, yet the
besieged lost so many men, that without relief it was not possible for them to
hold out longer; wherefore they began to parley, and upon the 22th of July
Capitulated to surrender, if within twelve days the Duke of Mayenne did not
either raise the Siege, or put at least six hundred Foot into the Town: but in
such manner, that the besieged might not assist the relief any way, except
only in opening the Gate to it when it came, nor might receive less than Three
hundred Foot at a time; Which Articles being made known unto the Duke, the King
sent the Duke of Montpensier, the Admiral Villars, and the Sieur de Balagny,
(who had newly submitted himself to his obedience) to possess the ways as far
as la Fere, and hinder the passage of relief, which not being come within the
time prescribed, the Count de Sommerive, Colonel de Bourg, President Ieannin,
and the whole Garrison marching out with their Arms, and Baggage, were
convoyed as far as la Fere, the King honoring the Duke of Mayennes young Son
with great demonstrations of courtesy.

The besieged of Laon had hoped, the Duke of Guise would bring them some relief
by the way of Champagne, and the King had suspected the same; but the affairs
of that Province were so distracted, that it was not possible for him to think
of stirring at that time; for there were not only practices on foot in every
Town, but with every Governor in favor of the King; and not only the people
were inclined to acknowledge him, as had been clearly seen in the Commotion at
Troyes; but more pernicious thoughts reigned even among those of the very party.

Monsieur de St. Paul, a man of mean parentage, had, by all the degrees of War,
raised himself to the Office of Colonel in the time while the Duke of Guise's
Father was living, and had served him with so much valor and fidelity, that he
deserved not only to hold one of the first places in his favor, and also to
be advanced to higher charges of Command; but being favored by his protection,
had, by the marriage of a very rich Widow, settled himself in a gallant and
plentiful fortune. He, after the accident at Blois, having, as one of the
principal dependants, taken part with the D. of Mayenne, continued to serve
with so much diligence, and so prosperous success, that he not only was
appointed Lieutenant to the Government of Champagne, which Province was
governed under the name of the Duke of Guise, though a prisoner; but also in
process of time he was by the Duke of Mayenne created and declared Marshall of
France: He, when Paris was besieged, having gathered together great store of
victual in the Province of Brye, put them happily into the City, while the King
stood facing the Duke of Mayenne, and he thence drew so great a profit, that,
added to the Dowry of his Wife, he made himself possessor of very considerable
riches, which, together with his pay from the Spaniards, (who at first
proceeded with an open free hand) gave him convenience to gain many followers
and dependents, and to set himself in a condition of high reputation. His
prosperity of fortune was accompanied (as it is wont) with pride of mind, and
haughtiness of carriage, in so much, that the Duke of Guise, being at liberty,
and come into the Province, he who was accustomed to rule of himself, did very
unwillingly hear of submitting himself to his command: and since the obligation
of benefits received, and the greatness of his blood did not permit him to
refuse obedience, he endeavored at least to keep at a distance from him, and
interpreting his Orders and Commissions his own way, only executed what suited
with his own fancy, and excused himself for the rest under several pretenses.
The declining of the affairs of the League increased his Pride and his
Ambition; and seeing the Princes of Lorain disagreed among themselves, and were
ill-grounded, he took the greater boldness, and in his thoughts went on to a
design of making himself Master of certain places, whereof he had the command.

He began with seizing upon the Duchy of Retel, belonging to the Duke of
Nevers, and with intolerable arrogance assumed of himself the title of Duke of
Reteloys; nor stopping here, he went on plotting which way to make himself
Master of Vitry, Rheims, ^ocroy, and St. Disier; and he was the more fixed upon
his thought when he saw the Spaniards intent upon gaining the French Lords and
Commanders, and getting them into their pay; intending, as soon as he was in
possession of those places, or some of them, to put himself under the
protection of the Spaniard, and labor to establish himself in his usurped
greatness.

To this end he began to introduce a Garrison of his adherents into the City of
Rheims, Col. St. Paul takes upon him the title of Duke of Retelois, and while
he plots to get also the City of Rheims, he is killed by the D. of Guise.
and to design the building of a Citadel, which might serve for a curb to keep
the Citizens in obedience, who, not being accustomed to be commanded by a
Militia, fearful of losing their liberty, and of being made subject to many
burdens and insolences of the Soldiers, (to keep whose affection St. Paul
cared not, though they plundered and oppressed the people) oftentimes took
recourse, and made their complaints thereof unto the Duke of Guise, who having
written also about it many times, and seeing he was not obeyed, not only took
a wondrous great disgust at it; but also began to perceive St. Paul's arts and
his intentions. Wherefore, departing from Paris after the Truce was expired,
and being come into that Province with an intent to remedy so great a danger,
he wrote resolutely that there should be no more soldiers brought into that
City, the fidelity whereof he suspected not: But St. Paul continuing his
design, without making reckoning of the command he had received, and the
complaints of the Citizens multiplying, the Duke went thither well accompanied
to bridle the insolency of the attempt; but so far was St. Paul from forbearing
that on the contrary, being either in greater necessity or suspicion, he
persisted yet to call some Companies into the Town; which being come to the
Dukes knowledge, and he inflamed with a generous disdain, not thinking to
endure it, was the cause, That coming one morning out of the Church, and
meeting with St. Paul, who daigned not to company him, he asked him the reason,
Why, contrary to his Orders, he yet brought more Soldiers into the City? to
which he answering, That he did it for the common security, and because he had
notice of some practices that were on foot in the Town; the Duke seeking to
make a quarrel, replied angerly, and with high injurious words, That those were
inventions of his own; but that he would teach him to obey. St. Paul being
incensed with these contumelious speeches, and not enduring such a public
affront, told him, That being Marshall of France, he acknowledged no superior
in matters of War: And in saying those words, whether by chance, or by way of
boasting, put his hand upon his Sword; at which action, the Duke running upon
him with his Sword drawn, and thrusting him quite through the body, instantly
took away his life: With him fell his ill grounded greatness; but the Soldiery
was displeased at it, which, by reason of his indulgence to them, and of the
profit they made under his command, loved and honored his name; nor were the
Citizens (though they rejoiced at his death) any way satisfied afterward; for
the strength of the League still declining, the Duke of Guise resolved both to
keep the Soldiers there, and prosecute the design of making a Citadel.

But the example of Rheims stirred up all the other Cities, and many Governors
of the Province; in such manner, that all of them were in a commotion, and had
an inclination to put themselves under the King's obedience, to free themselves
from imminent dangers. The Sieur de Pres^^ay, Governor of Chasteau-Thierry,
submits himself with that place to the Kings obedience.
So that scarce could the Duke of Guise withstand the troubles of his own
Government, much less was he able to succor or assist the necessity of others:
Nor was his stay there, and his diligent care sufficient to keep them all
faithful; for the Sieur de Peschay, Governor of Chasteau-Thierry, at the same
time when Laon was surrendered, made composition with the King, and with the
same conditions the rest had, keeping his Government, went over unto his party.

Almost about the same time happened the revolt of the City of Amiens; for, the
People stirred up by the Kings adherents, who told them, That the Duke of
Aumale having made agreement with the Spaniards, was likely to put the City
under the dominion of strangers, The Citizens of Amiens raise a tumult against
the D. of Aumale, and put themselves into the Kings hands.
attempted to drive out the Duke who was in the Town without a Garrison; for
the inhabitants alleging their privileges, would not receive any; but the
tumult having lasted four days without any certain resolution, the Duke of
Mayenne came thither, who being admitted only with the company of his Guard,
appeased (as he thought) the tumult, and reconciled the Chief Citizens to the
Duke of Aumale; but, after he was departed, to return again to the Army, the
people took up Arms afresh, crying out openly, For the King, for the King; and
having brought Monsieur d' Humieres into the City, drove out the Duke of
Aumale, who, having lost the hope of being able to uphold himself, chose to
depart, before he should enter into a thought of seizing upon his person.

The Sieur de Balagni was before this gone over to the King's party, with the
City of Cambray; which having been in the power of the French, ever since the
time of the Duke of Alancon, and after his death possessed by his mother, as
inheritrix of what her son had gotten, had been put under the Government of the
Sieur de Balagny, who, the Queen being dead, and the revolution of France
following, chose to take part with the League, The Sieur de Balagny, who had
had the Government of Cambray from Queen K^therine, as hetress to the D. of
Alancon, and after adhering to the League, had made himself Master of it, makes
composition with the King, up-very large conditions.
to the end the Spaniards might be kept from troubling him; and, of Governor,
by little and little made himself absolute Master, both of so noble and famous
a City, and of its most fertile Territory; but now the affairs of the League
declined, he desiring to keep that dominion, held a Treaty with the King, that
if he would declare him Prince of Cambray, and after his declaration protect
him from the Spanish Forces, he would submit himself to his obedience, and to
the Sovereignty of the Crown of France, and that moreover he would receive the
King's Garrisons into the City, and Castle, obliging himself to serve him in
time of War, with Two thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and that on the
other side the King should pay Seventy thousand Crowns every year to maintain
the Garrison at his devotion. It was not hard to ob^ain these conditions from
the King, as well because of his desire to keep the supreme dominion of that
Principality unto himself, as to oppose such a difficult encounter unto the
enemy upon the frontiers; and though these reasons were manifest and apparent,
yet many stuck not to say, that the King condescended to grant Balagni that
Principality which was already in the power of the French, to please Madam
Gabrielle d' Estree, whom he ardently loved, and who was nearly allied to
Balagni: However it was, the King having caused the Patents to be dispatched,
and allowed in the Parliament before he went from Paris, sent the Marshall de
Re^z about this time to make him be elected, and declared Prince of Cambray by
the City, confirming the Title to his Wife, his Sons, and his posterity, and
after the taking of Laon, he entered personally into the Town with his Army,
received the homage of obedience, and having settled a Garrison, and the affairs
of the City, returned to Amien^, where, being received with wondrous pomp, he
granted the same conditions to the Citizens, which, with his wonted liberality,
had been granted to the other Cities. In this expedition, the King created two
Mareschals of France, the Duke of Bouillon, and the Sieur de Balagni, intending
to make use of them both in the War, which he already designed to make against
the Spaniards.

The news of the King's prosperous successes, which, from several parts came
successively to Reme, moved, but did not much trouble the Pope; for, having
already secretly given the King hopes, that he would give him his Benediction,
and signified so much unto him, not only by the Sieur de la Clielle, but also
by words that might receive a double interpretation, intimated as much to Paulo
Paruta, the Venetian Ambassador, a prudent man, who was well able to apprehend
the Pope's intentions; he was pleased to hear businesses went on in such a way,
that he might not prevent, but be prevented by the motion of the people; and
that he might come to his last determination, in such manner, as he might seem
to be drawn unto it by necessity, and that the Spaniards might not condemn him
of too inconsiderate forwardness, nor accuse him of want of inclination to the
interests of their greatness; For this cause he had from the beginning of the
year, permitted Cardinal Gondi to come to Rome, and though he did it with a
manifest injunction, that he should not open his mouth about the affairs of
France, yet secretly in their private meetings he gave him leave to allege and
repeat all the King's reasons to him, to represent the disorders, and wants of
the Clergy, to put him in mind of the causes, why Religion would be in danger,
if he should not satisfy the King, and finally, to inform him of every small
particular, that he might make use thereof to the advantage of his design; For
this same cause (though he knew it) he was not offended at the Decree of the
Divines at Paris, in favor of the King, but rather was well pleased, those
very men, who had made the preamble and way to make him be excommunicated,
should now be as active in smoothing the passage to his reconciliation; and
though upon all occasions he showed anger and disdain in his words, in his
private actions he did not so, but rejoiced as often as he heard that his
perseverance was interpreted obduratness, telling the Spaniards, as well
Cardinals, as Ambassadors, who were at his ear every day, that he suffered
much, and exposed his own reputation to a general blame, because he would not
dissent from their desires; in the mean time* he also satisfied his own
conscience, by making himself certain of the King's constancy, and of the truth
of his conversion, and by means of Sannesio, and d' Ossat had let him know,
that many conditions were necessary to his rebenediction, and particularly,
that he not having any lawful heir male, Cardinal Gondi being returned to
Paris, commands as superior of the Clergy of that City, that they should use
again the Prayers that were w^nt to be made for the King of France, and that
they should acknowledge H. the Fourth, their lawful King.
the young Prince of Conde, who was nearest to the Crown, should be taken out
of the hands of the Hugonots, and bred up in the Catholic Religion, to the end
that whatever should happen, they might not fall again into the former dangers
and inconveniences; which having been also intimated by way of discourse, both
to Cardinal Gondi, and the Venetian Ambassador, the King was not only
advertised of it, but counseled to take away that scruple, because it might
hinder the progress of what was in Treaty; wherefore he began to think, by what
means he might get him out of the Hugonots hands, who, after the King's
Conversion, esteemed him much more dearly, that they might breed themselves up
a head, and support unto their faction.

But Cardinal Gondi thinking himself informed of all those things that might
take away the Popes doubts, and facilitate the King's reconciliation, resolved
to return into France, and to endeavor the execution of them, by speaking with
the King himself in person; so being come to the Camp before Laon, he was two
days in close conference with the King, and going from thence to Paris, feared
not to command the Clergy to use those Prayers again, which were wont to be
made for the most Christian Kings, and absolutely to acknowledge Henry the
Fourth for their true and lawful Lord, sharply also reprehending, and driving
from his presence, certain men of Religious Orders, who dared to oppose that
determination; which, though (as other things) it was written to Rome, and
amplified, the Pope made no other show of resenting it, than to tax Gondi for
no good Cardinal, and to threaten, that with time and opportunity he would
punish him for his fault; adding, that the affairs of France were in such a
condition, as it was not fit to put more fuel to that fire, which was already
kindled; since the businesses of the Catholic Union went on so ill, that it
would be no small matter to be able to uphold it; but the news of the taking of
Laon, and the retreat of the Spanish Camp being come, the Pope made show to be
very angry; and desiring to find means to make it appear, that the fault was
the Spaniards, he told the Duke of Sessa, that the Catholic King desired to
have him to resist only with spiritual Arms, but that he in the mean time was
not careful to make use of Temporal ones; that he should remember, though
Excommunications are pernicious to the Souls of the obstinate, yet are they not
destructive of their corporal affairs; and that whosoever would have businesses
effected, Words of Pope Clem^nt the Eighth to the Duke of S^ssa the Spanish
Ambassador.
must unite the two Swords, and proceed equally with both hands; that he saw,
or thought he saw, the Catholic King was already weary of expense, and of the
War, and that if it were so, he desired to be made privy to it, that he might
in time find the best remedy that might be for the danger of Religion, since
the French Union was already in a manner dissolved, and the Spanish Armies
either could not, or did not care to sustain that weight. These stinging words
of the Pope, deeply pierced the minds of the Spaniards; who, suspecting the end
to which he tended, and not being willing to give him that occasion, which they
were of opinion he sought, they wrought with the same heat not only into Spain,
showing the King the necessity, either of yielding, or of doing something in
good earnest, but also to Bruxelles, to the end the Archduke might sustain the
manifestly falling affairs of the League.

Wherefore the Duke of Mayenne, after the loss of Laon, being gone back to that
Court, to find means to settle their common affairs, yielding now something on
both sides to the quality of the time, they treated a little more pleasingly to
each other; for the Duke knowing himself in a weak estate, The Duke of Mayenne
goes to Bruxelles, where he is treated with compliance.
had abated much of his first demands, and the Archduke knowing it was no time
to exasperate him, for fear he should be driven into utter desperation; and
seeing that he could neither accommodate his mind, nor his ears to hearken to a
Treaty of putting himself under the Catholic Kings obedience, as Rosne and the
Duke of Aumale had done, he resolved to hold him in hand with a show of fitting
conditions, and of a Treaty in a manner equal, still keeping alive the
proposition of the Infanta's election, being certain afterward to bring
matters to his own end and intention, and to behave himself in his secret
design, in such manner as time and opportunity should advise; Wherefore, there
having been a long Treaty between President Riccardotto, and President Ieannin,
and the Princes themselves, having often conferred together, they at last
agreed to establish a Capitulation, which seemed just and honorable to both
parties.

The Substance of the agreement concluded between the Duke of Mayenne and the
Spaniards at Bruxelles.
The Agreement contained in substance, that the Catholic King should continue
to use the Duke of Mayenne as before, in the quality of Lieutenant General of
the State, and Crown of France, and that so he should be acknowledged in all
places and Armies, where he should chance to be: That the Ten thousand Crowns
by the Month, should continue to go on, which had been assigned to him by the
Catholic King from the beginning: That he on the other side, should continue
to make War in those Places, where he should think best, and particularly in
the Province of Bourgongne; for the upholding whereof, certain supplies of
Horse and Foot should be given him; That whatsoever should be acquired, should
be held by him in the name of the King, who, in due time should be chosen, by
the common consent of the French Confederates of the Apostolic See, and of the
King of Spain; That the said King should be obliged, to reinforce his Armies to
make War in Dauphine, Picardy, and Bretagne, those conquests likewise which
should be made, being to be held in the name of the future King, under French
Governors: and that the Dukes of Lorain, and Guise, and the other Lords, and
Heads of the Union, should be exhorted to continue the War.

The Duke of Mayenne, thinking, that by these conditions (though ambiguous) he
had in some measure stopped the precipice of his affairs, departed from
Bruxelles, and with a Gentleman sent from the Archduke, went straight to Nancy
to speak with the Duke of Lorain; His intention was to try to keep him united
to the League, and to persuade him to continue the War* The Duke of Lorain
makes a truce with the King.
but he by the means of Monsieur de Bassompier, had not only concluded a Truce
with the King of France, but also being desirous to disburthen himself of the
expense, permitted his soldiers to take pay under him; wherefore the Baron d'
Ossonville, and the Sieur de Tremblecourt with Three thousand Foot, and Four
hundred Horse, had put on white Skarfs, and were gone to serve the King, having
obliged themselves to molest the County of Bourgogne, which till then had been
neutral, and had not been troubled on any side. The Duke of Mayenne having
found things in this Condition, and not having been able to remove the Duke of
Lorain from his inclinations to Peace, resolved to go into the Duchy of
Bourgogne, (the Duchy and the County are Provinces divided one from another;
that appertaining to the King of France, and this by ancient division to the
King of Spain) and there endeavored to establish himself absolutely, holding
already the most part of the Towns, as Governor of the Province; for he had
plotted, whatsoever event his affairs should have, to retain either the free
dominion, or at least the Government of that Duchy. But the King, who was very
well aware of his design, after he saw the Treaties of Peace broken off, which
had been held by the means of Villeroy and President Ieannin* resolved to
oppose what he intended concerning the Duchy of Bourgongne; and that he might
make use of the boldest of all his Commanders, he chose the Marshall de Biron
Governor of that Province, and made him be set in order with convenient Forces
to go to recover those places.

In the mean time Tremblecourt and Ossanville were gone into the Or County of
Bourgongne.
Franche Compte, and having suddenly made many incursions into the Country,
took Vesu and Iainville, putting the whole Province in wondrous terror, and
confusion: for, by reason of the Neutrality which had made the People secure,
there were no Forces in the Province able to oppose their invasion; wherefore,
having hastily demanded succors both from Savoy and Flanders, The King sends
the Lorain ^orces that were come to him, to make incursions into the County of
Bourgongne.
though some few were sent to keep Garrison in the principal places; yet the
Winter beginning, would not suffer greater preparations to be made by the
Spaniards, and so much the rather, because the very season hindered the King of
France his Soldiers from being able, in respect of the smallness of their
number, and the quality of the weather, to make any greater progress.

That which completed the disordering of the League, was the composition of
the Duke of Guise, who, either incensed that the Duke of Mayenne had hindered
his greatness, or else vexed, that the Spaniard had showed him a flash of
exaltation, and then had presently drawn in those beams, shutting up the
passage to all other favors; and knowing that his Fathers ancient greatness,
was all turned upon the Duke of Mayenne, whereby he, both in regard of his
youth, and because he had no Dependents, was fain, not only to yield the first
place, but also to content himself with one of the inferior ones, resolved,
about this time, to establish his own fortune with the King, The Duke of Guise
leaves the League, and makes his composition with the King.
and by the means of his Mother, and of the Marshall de la Chastre, agreed for
himself, his Brother the Prince of Iainville, and Monsieur Louis destined to an
Ecclesiastical life; to restore Rheims, Vi^ry, Rocroy, St. Disier, Guise,
Moncornet, and the other places in Champagne, and the quarters thereabout unto
the Kings obedience, receiving in recompense thereof the Government of
Provence, Four hundred thousand Crowns, to pay the Debts their Father had ran
into* and many Ecclesiastical preferments for the third Brother, which formerly
were the Cardinal of Bourbons, who, after a long sickness, held by the
Physicians to be an Hectic Fever, departed this life about this time, not
without suspicion of Poison. The Treaty of this agreement had been very long;
for the Duke of Guise stood to retain the Government of Champagne, The Duke of
Guis^, as hei^ of the House of Anjou* pretends rights unto Provence.
and the King would not deprive the Duke of Nevers of it, and there were
likewise exceeding great contentions, about giving him the Government of
Provence: for the Duke of Espernon, who had gotten it after the death of his
Brother, and had, by many successful enterprises against the Duke of Savoy, and
against the League, settled himself in the command, was not willing to leave it;
nor was it this alone that hindered it; but the High Chancellor, and many of the
Council persuaded the King, not to put that Province into the Duke of Guise his
hands, to which he pretended right, as heir of the House of Anjou; but the King
desired on the one side to have the Duke of Espernon leave that Government,
into which he had skrew'd himself, in the greatest distraction of affairs,
without his Commission: and on the other, he knew that it was necessary to
remedy the present, without having so unseasonable a fear of the future:
besides that, the Duke of Guise's ingenuity and moderate nature, of which he
had given clear testimony in the businesses lately treated by the Spaniards,
persuaded the King to a confidence in him. Therefore the Agreement was
established, whereby, as the King's party increased in strength and reputation,
so the League was not only weakened and languishing, but little less than
utterly dissolved.

Now, having told the principal matters of the War, appertaining to the main
body and substance of affairs, The Duke of Mercoeur is disgusted at the
Spaniards in Bretagne, because they would not meddle in matters out of that
Province.
the things that happened in the remoter Provinces of the Kingdom, ought likewise
briefly to be related. The party of the League was most firmly settled in
Bretagne, and more powerful there than in any other place; for, besides the
Forces of the Province, which (much more united than any other) followed the
Duke of Mercoeur, who, by the prosperity of many successes, had raised himself
to a very high estimation, there were also Five thousand Spanish Foot under Don
Iuan de l' Aquila, who, possessing Blauet, and the neighboring places about
it, were ready to help wheresoever need should require in that Province. But,
their minds here were neither more agreeing, nor more satisfied than in other
places; for the Duke of Mercoeur was discontented, that the Spaniards should
proceed with ends and designs apart; nor could he frame his ears to hear talk
of the pretensions which the Infanta of Spain had unto that Province, as
contrary to those rights which his Wife Margaret Countess of Pontievre
pretended also to it: nor did other things trouble him more, than the
Commission they had, not to meddle in matters out of that Province; insomuch,
that when the course of Victory carried him upon some important design into the
neighboring Provinces, they clipped his wings, because they should not pass
beyond the limits of Bretagne; They, on the other side, were ill-satisfied,
that he limitting them within the circuit of Blauet, would not suffer them to
take footing in the Province; and because going forth of that Fortress, seated
in the extremity of a Peninsula, they had begun to raise a Fort in the neck of
another Peninsula, which blocked up on the land-side, and hindered the entrance
of ships into the Port of Breast, a place frequented by the Northern Nations,
the Duke seemed not to consent unto it, and to use many arts, that the
Fortification might not go forward.

On the other side, the Marshall d' Aumont Governor for the King, had more
courage than strength; for the wants of the near adjacent Provinces, did not
suffer him to draw together above One thousand English Foot, Two thousand
French, and Four or five hundred Horse of the voluntary Nobility of the
Country: but after that the King's conversion began to give him favor, and to
move the humors of the Province, he advanced, and received Laval, a Town that
voluntarily submitted to him, and then having laid siege to Morlais, he took
it, notwithstanding the Duke of Mercoeur labored to relieve it; and being
recruited with new English Foot, led by Colonel Norris, The Marshall d' Aumont
Governor for the King in Bretagne, besieges the Fort of Croisil, begun by the
Spaniard.
which had been in Normandy, he resolved to assault the Spaniards new Foot
before it was brought to perfection, and before they could settle themselves in
the possession of that fertile and populous Seacoast: Wherefore, having drawn
the Army together, in which there were Two thousand English Foot, commanded by
Colonel Sir John Norris.
Norris, Three thousand French, commanded by the Baron de Molac, Three hundred
Harquebusiers on horseback, and Four hundred Gentlemen, and being abundantly
furnished with Artillery, Ammunition, and other necessaries, by Monsieur de
Sourdiac Governor of Breast, who, being hard by, to ease himself of the trouble
of the Spaniards, supplied all wants, he brought his Army before it upon the
Eleventh of October.

The Fort was seated upon a natural Rock, and encompassed by the Sea quite
round, except only where the Peninsula joins to the firm Land; on which side
they had raised two Bulwarks in form of a Tenaille, and between them was the
Gate, with its Drawbridge, Moat, and Counterscarp, all designed with excellent
skill, though not yet perfected to a defensible condition. The Governor of the
Fort was Don Tomaso Prassides, an old experienced Commander, and he had with
him Four hundred Spanish Foot, with plentiful provisions of all things
necessary for the defense of it. The difficulty of that siege appeared at the
very first; for, as soon as they began to break ground, and make their
approaches by the help of Trenches unto the edge of the Counterscarp, they
found, there was not above two foot of earth, after which they met with the
impediment of the hard rock; wherefore it was necessary to make use of Gabions,
in the bringing, planting, and filling whereof, they disputed for the space of
nine days, with great execution upon the Besiegers; they within with singular
art making use of small pieces of Artillery, wherewith they were abundantly
stored, and fallying out at the Skyt-gates sometime of one Bulwark, sometimes
of the other, molested them continually, no less by day than they did by night;
but at last the constant resolution of the Besiegers, overcame the difficulty
of the enterprise, and having planted twelve pieces of Cannon, they began to
play upon the Bulwarks; and though at the first their Bullets, striking upon
the Earth, did little harm, yet their continual battering having broke the
fence of Bavins wherewith the Rampart was fastened together, and made it slip
down, the Moat began to fill by little and little, affording better convenience
of advancing to make the assault. Wherefore the Baron de Molac wi^h the French
assaulted the Bulwark on the right hand; and Colonel Norris with the English
assaulted the other on the left: The French assault Coisil, but are bravely
repulsed by the Spaniards.
But though the assault was bold and violent, the Spaniards received it with so
much constancy, that after a wondrous hot fight of three hours, the Assailants
were precipitately beaten off, above an hundred being slain, with three French
Captains, and four English; and that loss was much increased by their own
Cannoniers; for they, as the Assailants were retiring, going to fire their
Artillery against the Defendents that were upon the Rampart, did it with so
little discretion, that they blew up their Powder, and killed many of their
Soldiers. This accident gave the Spaniard great opportunity to make up their
Works again; for while they stayed for new Supplies from Breast, of powder, and
new instruments to use their Cannon withal, they had time to mend up their
Bulwarks again with the same Earth, fortifying them with two strong Pallisadoes
(the French call them Storm-piles.
Phraises) which compassed them round about: But the Battery being furnished
again, they began to batter again upon the fourth of November, with more fury
than they had done before; and the Pallisadoes yielding easily to the force of
the Cannon, they began to plain the way once more, and make it fit for an
assault; which whilst it was just ready to be given, there came such a sudden
storm of Thunder and Lightning, and such abundance of Rain, that it was
necessary to defer it till the next day, in which time the besieged cut off the
points of the Bulwarks, and made a retrenchment, to cover themselves in such
manner, that the next morning they sustained the assault very valiantly with
small loss to themselves, The French renew the assault, but are beaten off with
great loss.
and a very great one to the Enemies, who were scarce gone down from the
assault, and settled to their rest, when the Spaniards sallying out to the
number of seventy, suddenly made themselves Masters of the Battery of the
French, killed a Colonel, and above two hundred other Soldiers, whom they
found unprovided, and laid to sleep, and nailed three pieces of Cannon; yet the
Baron de Molac being come up, they were beaten back into the Moat, not having
lost above eleven of their men.

The Siege went on but slowly; for the Marshall d' Aumon^ being burdened with
years, but more with toil and labor, was fallen dangerously sick; and yet the
continual molestation they of the Fort received, consumed them from day to day,
in such manner that they began earnestly to solicit relief; The Duke of
Mercoeur takes no care to relieve Croisil.
but the Duke of Mercoeur took small care of them, for he was not displeased
that the Fort should be taken, knowing the Spaniards aimed to possess
themselves of all that coast, which, full of Islands, secure Harbors, and
great well-peopled Towns, by reason of the Supplies it might receive from the
Spanish Fleet, was mavelous opportune to nourish a long War, and dangerous
combustion in all Bretagne; wherefore though he had been constrained to grant
them Blauet, yet he took it extreme ill, they should endeavor to enlarge
themselves further; for this cause alleging diverse excuses, and causing many
obstacles and impediments to arise, he still deferred the relief; Don Iuan del
Aquila, who had not any number of Horse with him, could very hardly move to
raise the siege of Fort Croisil, (for so they called the place) yet the siege
still pressing, and it seeming to him a very great fault to let his own
Countrymen be destroyed without assistance, he advanced with four thousand
Foot, and two pieces of Cannon toward Quimpercorantin, to see whether the
jealousy of that place could move the French to draw off; but having met the
Sieur de Mombaraut, who lay upon that way with two hundred Curassiers, and
fifty Harquebusiers on Horseback, though he retiring by little and little, Don
Iuan del Aquila marches to relieve his Countrymen; but having neither horse nor
other preparations sufficient, he finds the enterprise very difficult.
drew at last within the Walls, yet the Town was so secured thereby, that the
fear of losing it made no necessity of raising the siege of Croisil, besides he
had no such Artillery, nor preparations, as were sufficient for that
enterprise; wherefore turning another way, and passing under the Walls of the
Town, he came upon the Road that leads straight from Quimpercorantin to the
French Camp, intending to encamp in advantageous places, where the Horse might
not hurt them, and try in some sort, by drawing near, to hinder the taking of
the Fort; but Mombraut following them in the Rere with his Cavalry, and the
Sieur du Tremblay advancing from the Camp with an hundred and fifty Horse more,
Don Iuan del Aquila was forced to march not only very warily, but very slowly,
lest he should be molested in open places by the Cavalry, to which the
Chevalier de Postonville, and the Sieur de Basternay being joined with the rest
of the Horse that belonged to the Camp, he was constrained to go a great
circuit of ground, to get to the Peninsula by Land, which if he had had
Shipping, he might have done in a short space by Water.

In the mean time the Marshall d' Aumont recovered of his sickness, having
called Monsieur de Sourdiac unto the Camp, pressed the besieged with his utmost
power; and having upon the eighteenth day of November, battered from break of
day, till the Sun began to decline, he caused the Baron de Molac to give the
assault, who being beaten off, Colonel du Bordet fell on, and he being likewise
repulsed, with a greater slaughter than the other, the English without delay
stormed it on the other side, and a valiant Squadron of Gentlemen renewed the
assault on the other; and though Martin Frobisher, one of the English Colonels,
and Colonel Trescane, one of the French Commanders, were killed in the first
fury of the assault, yet the Defendents being overcome more by their own
weariness, than the valor of their Enemies, were at last, after two hours
resistance, After many assaults the defendents of Croisil are all cut in
pieces, but with fame of most remarkable valor, and very great loss to the
assailants.
all cut in pieces, without stirring one foot from the defense of the Rampart,
upon which they fought desperately to the last man, and that with so much loss
to the Assailants, of whom there were slain that day above six hundred, and all
the best and stoutest Soldiers of the Camp, that if Don Iuan del Aquila, who
was come very near, had marched straight on, perchance the Marshall d' Aumont
could not have escaped a very great defeat, and the Fort would the same day
have been lost and recovered; but he staying for fear of the Cavalry, and
quartering so near that he heard the rattling of the shot while the fight
lasted, when he at the same time was told of the singular courage, and total
destruction of his Countrymen, he resolved to retire the next morning; and not
being followed by any body, marched away to Blauet without any other attempt.

After this the Kings forces increased in that Province; for the Sieurs de St.
Luc, and Mommartin, departing from the siege of Laon, were come thither with
five Companies of Switzers, three Regiments of French, and three Companies of
Harquebusiers on Horseback, who in their march having either by force, or
composition taken many weak Towns, brought the Duke of Mercoeur to a necessity
of uniting himself with the Spaniards, to hinder these new Forces from joining
with the Marshall d' Aumont, and thinking of some enterprise of great
importance; so that the disgust ceasing which had been about Fort Croisil, Fort
Croisil slighted by the French.
(which after it was taken, was by Monsieur Sourdiac utterly slighted with
great forwardness in the Country people) the Duke of Mercoeur resolved to unite
all the Forces in one body, and labor to resist the Kings, as he had very
prosperously done until that present.

In the beginning of this year there brake forth a little fire in Provence; the
sparkles whereof would have caused a wonderful great combustion in those parts,
if there had not been seasonable provisions made against the beginning of it.
The Provencials and Gascons are by long and ancient emulation naturally
Enemies, which respect not having withheld King Henry the Third from giving the
Government of Provence to the Duke of Espernon, though he was a Gascon by
birth, the Gentry and people of that Province were so incensed at it, that it
was necessary to force them with an Army to yield their wonted obedience; which
as it was an occasion very much to increase the followers and adherents of the
League, so would it have produced other mischiefs, if his Brother Monsieur de
la Valette, who was left to govern as his Lieutenant, had not with singular
dexterity, and mild gentle usage appeased their minds, and brought them to make
more account of the merit of virtue, The City and Parliament of Aix, not being
able to resist the Kings forces under the Duke of Espernon, surrender upon
condition, that the Duke shall have no superiority in that City.
than difference of birth. But after his death the Duke of Espernon being come
thither with greater Forces than his Brother had, began also to execute his
Government, and follow the War with more vivacity, exacting a punctual
obedience from those of the Kings party, and fighting vigorously against the
rest, who held part with the League, among which the Count of Carsey, and the
City and Parliament of Aix which he had besieged, when they saw they could not
resist so powerful an Enemy, were content to yield to the King, and for him
unto Monsieur de Les Diguieres or Colonel Alfonso Corso, but with express
condition, that the Duke should have no Power nor Superiority in that Town,
which though it was promised them, the Duke nevertheless made himself the
stronger, and (being the more exasperated by the ill will they had showed
against him) began to build a Fort, which commanding the City might keep it in
subjection; this the Citizens impatiently brooking, and the same humors
reigning through the whole Province, they dispatched Agents to the Court, to
beseech the King to take the Government from the Duke of Espernon, and provide
another Governor. The King, who by reason of the uncertainty of his affairs,
had till then dissembled, nor at that present was willing to alienate the Dukes
affections from him, and who on the other side saw the discontents of that
Province, and the troubles that were like to come, thought it a moderate way to
refer the business to the Marshall d' Anville Governor of Languedoc, who was
newly by him made High Constable of the Kingdom: The Marshall d' Anville is
deputed by the King to compose the differences of the Provencials by removing
the Duke of Espernon.
For on the one side the Provencials being well affected to his person; and on
the other, the Duke of Espernon having married a Niece of his, he thought that
by his prudence and dexterity, he might find a middle way, whereby both the
people might remain satisfied, and the Duke handsomely removed from that
Government; but after that he saw the Duke resolved to maintain himself in that
Office, and the Constable slack in finding out a remedy, he gave order to Les
Diguieres to go, as he was wont, from Dauphine into Provence, and with as much
speed as was possible, oppose the Duke of Espernon, into whose designs he
thought he could not see very clearly. Les Diguieres ready to make use of Arms,
and enclining to satisfy the Provencials, having drawn together seven thousand
Foot, and twelve hundred Horse, marched without delay, to pass the River
Durance, and to enter hostilely into the Province against the Duke of Espernon;
but being come to the River side, he met Monsieur de la Fin, a discreet man,
versed in the affairs of the Court, who coming from the Duke of Espernon,
persuaded him to stay his voyage; for without the trial of War the Duke was
ready to obey the Constable's Orders, according to the Kings intention and
command; which Les Diguieres believing, resolved to stay in the same quarters,
not being willing to precipitate matters for the delay of a few days, which
were afterward prolonged by his falling sick of a fever, which necessitated
him to stay much longer in that place. But though la Fin passed often between
them, and went also to know the Constable's pleasure, yet could no invention be
found to accommodate so different interests; for the Duke pretended, that by
his Sword he had acquired the merit of that Government, having maintained it in
the most difficult times against the Duke of Savoy, The Duke of Espernon
declares, that he will defend the Government of Provence; and the Sieur de Les
Diguieres goes with good forces into the Province to put him out.
and against the League, at his own charge, with his own Forces, and with the
blood of his own Brother; and therefore declared that he would defend it in
what kind soever: On the other side, Les Diguieres argued, that there was no
reason to put the whole Province in desperation, and make it incline to cast it
self into the protection of the Duke of Savoy, or of the Spaniard; and that the
Duke of Espernon had so many Governments, that he might be contented without
usurping this, to the damage and prejudice of the Kings affairs: and because
the diversity of Religions stirred up their minds one against another, Les
Diguieres being a Hugonot, and the Duke sincerely a Catholic, they were very
sharp upon one another; besides, the one having been so much favored by Henry
the Third, and the other an Enemy who had always lived in rebellion during his
Reign, there grew a private enmity between them, very prejudicial to the
public businesses they had in hand; whereupon the Treaty of Agreement being
broken, Les Diguieres past the River with his whole Army in the beginning of
the month of May, and the same day there was a hot encounter between the Forces
of the two Armies, which lasted many hours: but though the difference was not
great in the event, yet Les Diguieres remained Master of the Field, and the
Duke made his retreat without receiving any loss, carrying away many of the
Enemies prisoners with him.

But at last the Duke seeing the Forces of Dauphine joined with those of
Provence against him, and (as he was very prudent) not seeing any seasonable
opportunity of forming a third party, nor no support ready to which he could
have recourse for the present, having about the same time received the news of
the revolt of Paris, and of the other Cities of the League, The Duke of
Espernon refers himself to the Constables arbitrament, who declares that he
should go out of the Governmen^.
he thought it no wise resolution to swerve from the Kings obedience, when
others returned so fast unto it; and therefore taking hold again of the Treaty
of Accord, which had never been totally intermitted, he submitted himself to
the Constables arbitrament; who declared that he should put the Fort of Aix
into the hands of Monsieur de la Fin, and draw out his Garrisons from Thoulon,
St. Paul, Treques and Mirebeau, till such time as the King should determine the
manner of proceeding for the future: in execution of which order, the Duke
delivered the Fort into the hands of la Fin upon the tenth of May, and the same
day Les Diguieres entered into Aix, and was received with great solemnity by
the Citizens; but whiles their Arms are suspended in expectation of orders from
the Court, Les Diguieres taking for an excuse that some of the Dukes Soldiers
had taken some of his, and pillaged the Country, and that therefore the Truce
was broken, entered suddenly into the Fort without staying for the Kings
orders, and delivered it up into the hands of the Citizens, who with a wondrous
concourse of people slighted it so in two days, that there remained not any
kind of Footsteps of it; which being performed according to the common desire,
he having left the other places in the hands of the Count de Carsy, returned
with the rest of the Army into Dauphine. Afterward followed the Accommodation
with the Duke of Guise, to whom the King granted the Government of that
Province; which though it afflicted the Duke of Espernon, yet he thought it
best to dissemble the matter, reserving himself to take a resolution with the
benefit of time; and being desirous to have it believed that the businesses
that had passed were but private enmities and contentions between him and Les
Diguieres, though he was not faulty to himself in neglecting any means possible
to keep possession of that Government.

The Duke of Savoy besieges Briqueras, and the French not being able to pass to
relieve it, he takes it.
But in Dauphine, whiles Monsieur de Les Diguieres in the beginning of September
prepares himself to go into Piedmont, having received intelligence that the
Duke of Savoy had laid strait siege to Briqueras, he was constrained to do that
by necessity which he would have done by choice before. The Duke of Savoy had
got together four thousand Germans commanded by the Count of Lodrone, five
thousand Italian Foot commanded by Colonel Barnabo Barbo a Millainese, and
fifteen hundred Horse under the conduct of Don Alonso Idiaques, with which Body
of men he resolved to try to drive the French from beyond the Alps: and because
Briqueras was the principal place they held, he laid siege before it, and
afterward having battered it with many Cannons, he caused it to be assaulted
by Don Filippo of Savoy, his Bastard Brother; and at the same time a scalado to
be given on the other side by Don Sancho Salina; wherefore the Defendents
environed on all sides, left the Town, and retired into the Castle. It was
closely besieged without delay; in which interim Les Diguieres having passed
the Mountains, came to relieve that place: but the Duke had provided against
that; for in the narrowness and difficulty of those ways, of themselves s^eep
and full of Precipices, he had caused all Passes to be so shut up, and had set
so strong Guards upon them, that after the French had made many attempts
without any fruit at all, they were constrained to retire, and the besieged
straightened on all sides, and having no longer any hope of relief, resolved to
surrender; so upon the second of October they delivered up the Castle into the
Dukes hands, who having freed himself from that impediment, within a few days
recovered Fort San Benedetto, which had been taken by Les Diguieres in his
retreat; and within a while the Snows fell, which put an end to the troubles of
this year in those parts.

The Duke of Nemours escapes out of the Castle of Pi^rre Ancise.
The Duke of Nemours escaped not long before from his imprisonment in the Castle
of Pierre-Ancise; being much more cunning in saving himself, than he had been
wary in avoiding the dangers of imprisonment: for having a certain Servant that
had an extreme long and thick head of hair, which sometimes hanging down
covered all his face, he found means to have a perruque made like it very
secretly, and knew how to manage his business so subtly, that one morning
having put his Servant into his bed, and covered him in his place, he went
forth of the Chamber carrying a Closestool-pan, as if he went to empty it, and
going hastily, escaped out of the Castle-gate, hiding himself first among
certain Houses, and afterward getting down opportunely into the Field, where
being received by some few that waited for him, he came safe to Vienne in
Dauphine, and there being joined with the Marquess his Brother, continued to
make War in favor of the League, and above all, to infest the Country, and
trouble the Inhabitants of the City of Lions, with which (besides public
businesses) he had a private enmity: but his, and his Brothers weakness, and
their want of money and adherents, would not suffer them to do any great matter.

The year was shut up with an heinous fact, dangerous beyond all belief, and
which was like in an instant to have subverted all that had with so long pains
been victoriously achieved; for the King being returned to Paris from the War
of Picardy, upon the Seven and twentieth of December, whilst having alighted
from his Horse, he, in one of the Chambers of the Louvre, saluted the Knights,
who being elected to receive the order of the St. Esprit upon New-years-day,
were come to do their wonted obeisance to him, a young Merchant named Iehan
Chastel, born in Paris, Iehan Chastel a Merchant of Paris wounds the King in
the mouth with a knife, whilst he was Saluting the Knights of the Holy Ghost in
his lodgings at the Louvre.
being got into the same room with the train of the Sieur de Ragny, and
Montigny, in the action the King used, stooping to embrace one of those
Knights, struck him with a knife in the face, thinking to strike him in the
throat: The blow being diverted, as it were by a Divine Hand, hit him in the
lips, and having met with the hindrance of his teeth, made but a slight
inconsiderable wound. At the commotion of the bystanders, the young Merchant
having dexterously let the knife fall, mingled himself in the crowd, hoping to
get out of the room undiscovered; but being known by many, he was instantly
seized on, and whilst every one transported with a just indignation would
furiously have fallen upon him, the King commanded that the Malefactor should
not be hurt; and having caused him to be delivered into the Custody of the
Grand-Prevost de l' Hostell, he was by him carried to prison, Iehan Chastel
being imprisoned and tortured, confesses that he was moved to attempt the
killing of the King by the Doctrine he had learned of the Jesui^es* whereupon
some of them are put in prison.
from whence being put into the Power of the Parliament, and examined with the
wonted forms, he freely confessed, and afterward ratified his ^onfession when
he was tortured. That he was bred up in the Schools of the Jesuits, and had
often heard it discoursed, and disputed, that it was not only lawful, but also
meritorious to kill Henry of Bourbon, a relapsed Heretic, and Persecutor of
the Holy Church, who falsely appropriated to himself the Title of King of
France; wherefore having afterward fallen into heinous and abominable sins,
even to the attempting to lie with one of his own Sisters, he fell into so
great despair of having Gods forgiveness, that he chose to execute that fact,
which he believed to be of inestimable merit, to free him from the horror and
punishment of his offenses; that he had imparted his design unto his Father,
who had effectually dissuaded him from it, but that being more effectually
moved by an inward Spirit, he had at last resolved it, and attempted to perform
his resolution; that having in his private confession conferred about it with
the Curate of St. Andre in the City of Paris, he was by him (though
ambiguously) confirmed in his intention, so that after long contriving, he had
chosen that place, and time to put it in execution.

As soon as he had made this confession, they presently sent to lay hold on his
Father, Mother, and Sisters, with the Writings that were in the house, among
which there was nothing found considerable, save a Confession written with his
own hand, wherein he had set down his sins, to confess them to the Priest,
which for the most part consisted in wicked and beastly dissoluteness But the
ill will the Parliament bore unto the Jesuits, (the first Authors and
continual Fomenters of the League) added to the conjectures drawn from the
confession of the Traitor, who said more than once that he learned that
Doctrine from them, was the cause that their College was suddenly beset, and
that some of them were led to prison, and the Writings which every one had in
his Chamber diligently searched, among which in the Closet of Father Iehan
Guiguard born at Chartres, there were many Writings found which taught the
Doctrine, praised the murder of the late King, persuaded the killing of the
present, and contained many other such like things, with odious Epithets and
Attributes given to those Princes, and many others. They likewise proved many
things of that like nature, spoken in the fury of the War by Father Alexander
Hay a Scotch-man; and others not very unlike, spoken in the same times, by
Father Iehan Guerat Master in Philosophy, and the ordinary Confessor of this
Iehan Chastel; Iehan Chastell is condemned to be dragged in pieces by four
horses.
wherefore after many debates in the Parliament, the Counselors at last agreed
in this sentence, That Iehan Chastel being bare-head, and barefoot, before the
gate of the Cathedral Church, should abjure the Doctrine which till then he had
believed, and confess the enormity of that parricide which he had attempted,
and then be put into a Cart, and his flesh pulled off with pincers in the four
principal places of the City, and being brought to the place of execution, his
right hand should be cut off, holding the same knife wherewith he had hurt the
King, and finally that he should be dragged in pieces by four horses; that the
Jesuits, as well those that were professed, as the others not professed,
should be as Enemies of the Crown, and of public tranquillity, be banished out
of the whole Kingdom, their goods and revenues distributed to pious uses, The
Jesuits are banished out of the whole Kingdom of France.
and all Frenchmen prohibited to study or converse in their Schools; that
Father Iehan Guigard should be condemned to the Gallows, and Father Iehan
Gueret; and Father Alexander Hay perpetually banished from all places under
the dominion of the Crown; that Pierre Chastel the Delinquent's Father should
be banished for ever from Paris, and nine years out of the whole Kingdom; that
his House standing right over against the great Gate of the Palace of the
Parliament, should be razed to the very foundation, and a Piramide erected in
the place, wherein the present Decrees should be registered, as well against
Chastel, as against the Company of Jesuits; the Mother and Sisters of the
Criminal were let at liberty.

The Divines of Paris make a Decree, wherein they declare the Doctrine that
teaches to kill Princes, to be Heretical.
To this decree of the Parliament, the Divines of the City being met together in
Cardinal Gondi's House, added a Declaration, whereby they determined, that the
Doctrine which taught to kill Princes was Heretical, prodigious, and
diabolical, and gave expressly in charge to all men of Religious Orders, to
acknowledge and obey King Henry the Fourth as their lawful Prince, and Lord;
and that in their Masses, and Canonical hours they should insert those prayers,
which were wont to be said for the safety of the most Christian Kings of
France. In the end of the Decree they entreated the Cardinal, as Bishop of that
City, to beseech the King in the name of them all, that he would send a new
Embassy to the Pope, to hinder by his reconciliation, the imminent and manifest
danger of Schism. This was procured by the Cardinal himself, who believing he
had apprehended the Popes mind, desired to give the King a fair color and
occasion to try again to get his benediction.

In this condition of affairs began the year 1595, the first business whereof
after the King was cured, 1595.
was the promulgation of the Edict in favor of the Hugonots. They at the Kings
Conversion, had not only been much moved to their hopes lost of having a King
of their own Religion, and of obtaining by that means, that it might be the
chief in the Kingdom, and that the Catholics should be reduced to be but by
permission; but they had also begun to waken new thoughts, and practice new
designs, to unite themselves more closely to one another, and to provide
themselves a new Head. For which having turned their eyes upon the Duke of
Bouillon, they perceived that he, as a most prudent man, was very backward to
separate himself from the Kings prosperous fortune to follow the uncertainty of
new, and not well grounded hopes; and therefore he protracted businesses that
he might take some counsel from the maturity of time. The Marshall d' Anville
embraces the Kings Conversion.
The Marshall d' Anville likewise, who in former times would have readily
embraced that occasion, at that present was little inclined to side with them;
for being already old without Sons, (for those he had were unfortunately lost)
newly married to a young Wife, out of a desire of issue, and as concerning the
rest of his fortunes, firmly established in his Government of Languedoc, was
not like to adventure himself upon new designs, and put that into the
arbitrament of fortune, which with so much pains, and so long patience, he had
attained among the difficulties of a thousand dangers; wherefore they had
necessarily set their thoughts upon the Prince of Conde yet a Child, who living
at St. Iehan d' Angely with his Mother, was bred up in the rites of their
Religion; but the tenderness of his age, and the many accidents that might
happen before he could come to man's estate, held the whole Faction in suspense
and trouble; wherefore ever and anon, making meetings and assemblies, sometimes
at Rochel, and sometimes at Saumur, sometimes at St. Foy, and sometimes at
Montauban, and not abstaining to speak high injurious words against the King,
calling him an ungrateful man, and one that did not acknowledge what they had
done for him, and threatening not only to forsake him, but also to take that
Crown away from him, The Hugonots threaten to forsake the King, and take the
Crown from him which they said they had gotten him.
which they professed (though without reason) that they had gotten him, they
put jealousy and trouble into the mind of the King himself, who by long
experience knowing their humors, and what they might contrive, and put in
execution, doubted not only that they would alienate themselves from him, but
that before he could absolutely conquer the forces of the League, they would
stir up War against him otherwhere. And though he had gained one Morlas an
Hugonot Minister, born in Bearne, and not Rottan, another born in Piedmont,
subtle men, of great-authority and eloquence, who discoursing severally, among
those of their Religion, concerning his Conversion, exhorted the party not
utterly to lose their confidence, but expect the benefit of time, making
profession that they were privy to some secret designs of his; yet he feared
these arts would not be sufficient to bridle the violence of some new dangerous
insurrection.

This Doubt which had retarded his Conversion much longer than the necessity of
his affairs required, had also made him yield to many things which were
contrary to his own Genius, and inclination; for he had declared the Marshall
d' Anville High Constable of the Kingdom; though t here were many to whom he
had much great obligations, that he might confirm him to his devotion, and
deprive the Hugonots of the hopes of having him. He had likewise preferred the
Viscount de Turenne before the Duke of Nevers, in the marriage of the Heiress
to the State of Bouillon, whereby he had attained that Dukedom, and now he
employed him in the War upon the Confines of the Low Countries, to divert his
thoughts, and engage him in long businesses, far from the Countries possessed
by the Hugonots; and finally desiring to get the young Prince of Conde out of
their hands, and in some part to sweeten the bitterness which they generally
had received at his Conversion, he thought of causing that Edict to be
proclaimed and ratified, in the Parliament, which Henry the Third had made in
favor of them, in the year 1577. which was much better regulated than all the
rest.

It was a very hard matter to get it to be received in the Parliament, where
the debates were very long and diverse; for by how much the more dexterously
the King labored to proceed in the business, lest he should discontent the
Pope, and put him into an ill opinion of his inclination; so much the more
ardently did many of the Counselors oppose it: and the King not being willing
that either the Chancellor, or any other should go in his name to desire it,
the first President Harlay and President de Thou, who knew his intention, had
much ado to persuade the rest (who thought they did as they ought) to consent
unto the promulgation of it. But in the end, the Counselors whom the King had
confirmed through favor, after the reducing of the City, and particularly
Lazare Coqueille formerly a great Stickler, and a Minister for the League,
desirous to show themselves less sharp and severe in what concerned the
Hugonots, lest they should seem to persevere in their old opinions, labored so
far, that the Decree was received and proclaimed; though neither did this
publication much satisfy the Hugonots, with whom the King, both by reason of
his past Obligations, and present need, proceeded mildly, and kindly, After
many difficulties, the Edict in succor of the Hugonots, is accepted by the
Parliament, and proclaimed; being the same which King Henry the III. had made
Anno 1577.
endeavoring to remove suspicions out of their minds, and confirm them by good
usage to his devotion, and knowing by his long conversing with them, the
poverty of many of the principal Hugonots, and the narrowness of the condition
they were in, and being certain that the Heads and Incendiaries being taken
away, the poor common people would be abundantly contented with quietness, and
security, he procured that many Deputies should be sent from several places, to
treat of the affairs of that party, the most part of which he afterward gained
to himself, with gifts, pensions, and promises, so that by mild and gentle
ways, he insensibly took away the pulse and strength from the whole party; but
if the Kings incredible want of money, and his own nature, frugal in expenses,
together with the hard austerity of Monsieur de Rosny, who then managed the
Finances, had given this remedy liberty to dilate it self more amply, those
that are well versed in the Kingdom, believe that a few years of such sweet
poison would have extinguished that faction which so many years of desperate War
had not with the effusion of so much blood been able to weaken.

The second action of this year was the Kings resolution to denounce open War
against the King of Spain; for though in the beginning of the year before,
Henry the IV. resolves to proclaim open War against the King of Spain.
the Duke of Bouillon, united with Count Philip of Nassaw, had taken some weak
Towns in the County of Heinault, and in the Duchy of Luxembourg, that was
rather an incursion than a formed War, and partly by reason of the sharpness of
the weather, partly for want of money, they quickly retired, having also
received no small loss from Count Charles his Army in their retreat; but now
the King had determined to proclaim open War, and turn all his Forces against
the States of King Philip. This resolution to many seemed strange and
unseasonable, considering that the King of France was so troubled, and so
unsecure at home, that he had no need of foreign contentions; they saw the
Kingdom so exhausted of men and moneys, and so tired and worn out with Civil
War, that they knew not which way he would be able to sustain the weight of a
Foreign War; and recalling to memory that the King of Spain, without hazarding
at all his own affairs, had in times past troubled, and little less than
conquered the King himself in the heart of his own Provinces, and in the midst
of his Forces, it seemed to them a ridiculous thing, that now with his Forces
still divided, and discords still burni^g in his State, he should dare to think
of offending the States of the Catholic King founded upon the Basis of so
great a Monarchy; wherefore they should have thought it much more to the
purpose, for the King to have endeavored by some tolerable conditions to
attain Peace, than to provoke and stir up War, so much the more, by the vanity
of a public Declaration.

But the Causes that moved the King were very powerful; for he foresaw that the
overture of a Foreign War would help to close the wounds of a Civil War, Causes
that moved King Henry the IV. to proclaim Wars against Spain.
as skilful Chirurgions are wont with seasonable Cauteries to divert the
hurtful humors that corrupt and infect our Bodies; He knew there was nothing
that could move the French more to a Reconcilement and Reunion, than the
appearance of a War with the Spaniards, the natural Enemies of their Nation; he
desired the War might no longer carry the name of a Civil War for Religion, but
of a Foreign one for interest of State, and that in the flame of this
Controversy between Crown and Crown, the yet remaining sparks of the League
might be extinguished; he knew that howsoever he should still have the
Catholic Kings forces against him, which since they could by no means be
avoided, it was less hurtful to have them open and public, than treacherous
and dissembled: He thought the Princes confederate with the Crown of France
would have much less caution in lending him favor and assistance in the War,
between the Spaniards and the French, for matter of Empire, than between
Frenchmen and Frenchmen, whether they were real or feigned for matter of
Religion: He considered that nothing would more please, nor satisfy the
Hugonots, than War against the Spaniards, in which they being employed with
their utmost spirits, their minds might be withdrawn and diverted from the
thoughts of new designs; besides all these causes, having made a League
offensive and defensive with the United Provinces of the Low Countries, with a
mutual obligation of concurring jointly in War, and hoping to draw the Queen of
England and some of the Princes of Germany into the same confederacy, it was
necessary to employ his forces in some enterprise of common profit and
convenience in Flanders, and the County of Bourgongne, and being desirous to do
it for his own reputation, and to interess the other Confederates, he judged
the Declaration of the War to be very proper to stir up the minds of his
Subjects, and to necessitate the forces of the Confederates: But above all
being again to treat of his Reconciliation to the Apostolic See, and knowing
he should have all the power of the King of Spain against him, he desired to
have him known for his open Enemy, and that he and his Ministers might not be
admitted to that deliberation, as being excluded, and excepted by the public
and open War, which should yet be between the Crowns; and if the minds of great
persons, among so many interests of State, are sometimes also moved, and driven
by passions, the old persecution he had suffered from the Catholic King,
stirred up and spurred on by the so late danger, in which he was like to have
lost his life, by the suggestions of persons whom he esteemed to be dependents
upon that Crown, had perchance some part in this resolution; for the execution
whereof upon the Twentieth day of January, Upon the 20th of Ian. 1595. Henry
the IV. causes War against Spain to be proclaimed by his Heralds in all the
Confines.
he caused a Declaration to be published, and the same to be proclaimed by
Heralds in the Towns upon the Confines, wherein after having related all the
injuries done by the King of Spain unto himself, and the King his Predecessor,
imputing also the act lately attempted against his person to the suggestion of
his Champions; he denounced open War against him by Land and Sea, took away all
Commerce between the two Nations, and permitted his Subjects to invade, spoil
and possess the States under the Dominion of that Crown.

King Philip answered this Proclamation about two months after with another
Writing, King Philip answer^ the King of France his Declaration about two
months after.
wherein reckoning up the benefits and supplies lent to the most Christian
Kings, his Confederates and Allies, he declared and protested, that he would
not break the peace which he had with the most Christian Crown, and the good
Catholics of the Kingdom, but persevere in their assistance, and defense, to
the end they might not be oppressed by the Prince of Bearne, and the Hugonots
his Confederates, and commanded all his Subjects not to molest or hurt those
French, that should follow the Catholic party in the Kingdom, giving order on
the other side to his Governors and Commanders, to defend his Countries, and
likewise to offend the Prince of Bearne, and his adherents.

This Declaration was slow, but so were not the preparations; for not only in
Fla^ders Count Charles his Army was recruiting, to enter upon the Confines of
Picardy in the Spring, but also Hernando de Valeseo Constable of Castile, and
Governor of the State of Milan, was preparing a great Army in Italy, to march
into Bourgongne, and in Spain new Forces were raising, that they might send new
Supplies to Don Iuan del Aquila in Bretagne, as soon as the season would
permit; the like preparations were made in France, Holland, and England, so
that the course of this year seemed on all sides likely to prove formidable and
bloody.

In the mean time, the King, cured of his hurt, 1594.
had celebrated the solemnity of the Knights of the Holy Ghost; among the
Ceremonies whereof, he renewed his Oath of living and dying a Catholic, and of
defending Religion, The Venetian Ambassadors sent to congratulate the Kings
assumption to the Crown, are received with great demonstrations of honor.
and afterward with great pomp and demonstrations of honor, he had received
Vincenzo Gradenigo, and Giovanni Delfino, Ambassador of the Venetian Senate,
who came to congratulate his assumption to the Crown, and Pietro Duodo, that
came to reside in the place of Giovanni Mocenigo, who, for the space of seven
years together, had made his residence with him, and the King his Predecessor;
having, with exceeding great praise of singular prudence, managed the most
weighty businesses in the ambiguous revolutions of past affairs.

The first action in the War of this year, was the taking of Beaune, a
principal Town in the Duchy of Bourgogne, wherein some of the chief Citizens
having begun to mutiny from the year before, to put themselves under the Kings
obedience, the Duke of Mayenne, who had a special jealousy concerning the
affairs of that Province, (as being his own particular government) went
speedily, at his return from Lorain, into that City, where, having found
businesses all in a combustion, he caused fourteen of the Citizens, which
seemed to him more inclined to an alteration than the rest, to be imprisoned in
the Castle, and having removed that difficult scruple, he, in all things else,
sought to appease the generality of the Citizens, without using any kind of
severity; He endeavored to make them understand, that he was about to conclude
the general peace, with the Popes consent; and therefore it would be much more
honorable, much more advantageous to them, to be included in the general
agreement, than to compound by themselves, and forsaking him, who had always
governed them gently, refer themselves to the uncertain discretion of a new
Governor, with which reasons thinking he had settled their minds, he left a good
Garrison in the Castle, and a convenient one in the Town, and went with speed
to Dijon, where he feared some insurrection, no less than in other places; but
being advertised, that after his departure, there had been new tumults at
Beaune, he would needs return to provide against them, and began to contrive
how to fortify both the Town and Castle, which being not to be done, according
to the design of Carlo Bonaventura an Italian Engineer, without pulling down
some principal Monasteries, and a great many private houses to the very ground,
the Citizens opposed it; showing the Duke, that it was no time, to come to so
precipitate a determination; but he, entering by this opposition into a greater
jealousy of their inclinations, resolved to prosecute the Fortification, and
brought in a greater strength of Soldiers, which were distributed into several
parts of the Town, to bridle the People, and to secure them to his devotion;
and having given convenient order for these things, he departed, to oversee the
rest of the Province, and secure other places, believing he had sufficiently
provided against that danger; but the Citizens, exasperated by the pulling down
of their houses, and by the imprisoning of the chief of them, The Citizens of
Be^^ne in the Duchy of Bourg^ngne calling the Marshall de Biron, submit
themselves to the Kings obedience.
resolved to use their utmost force to deliver the City to the Marshall de
Biron, who, with Two thousand Switzers, Four thousand French Foot, and Twelve
hundred Horse, was come into those quarters in the month of January; wherefore,
having secretly invited him, and settled the agreement, that he should present
himself at the Gates of the City upon the fifth of February, they, upon the
same day, as soon as it was light, took Arms, and running up and down the
streets with white Scarfs, began to cry out, For the King; to which the greater
part of the common people answering, Jacques Richard, one of the Plot, ran to
that Gate, which alone was wont to be kept open, and letting down the
Portcullises that were on the inside, shut out the guard of Soldiers, who
negligently and carelessly guarded the Raveline; then many others running
thither armed, they made themselves Masters of the Gate, driving out the
soldiers that were upon the guard, who, having forsaken the Raveline to save
themselves in the Fields, were, by the Country People (no less exasperated than
the rest) miserably defeated and dispersed. At the same time Guilliaume
Allesan, and Michel Richard, two other contrivers of the business, ran to the
house of the Sieur de Montmoyon Governor of the Town, and suddenly made him
prisoner, having killed Guillermin a Colonel of Foot, and some other Captains
that were with him; and Carlo Bonaventura the designer of the Fortifications
(who, in his own defense, had wounded Alesan, and many others) being almost
stoned by the fury of the people, could scarce, by the diligent care of some,
be carried alive into the common Gaol. The Gate and the Governor being taken,
the next work was to master the Quarters of the Soldiers, who, though divided
in different places, had fortified themselves there from the bebeginning of the
tumult; 1595.
in which combustion the City being all in an hurly-burly, and even the very
Women and Children betaking themselves to Arms, they began to fight in many
several parts of the Town with various and bloody events: In the mean time came
the Marshall de Biron, who had delayed longer than the Citizens had appointed,
and being entered into the Town with his whole Army, the Soldiers, who were no
longer able to make resistance, yielded, saving their goods and persons; and
he, with very great and unusual severity restraining his soldiers from pillage,
appeased the whole tumult that night. The next day siege was laid to the
Castle, which, being battered with Twelve pieces of Cannon, after Three
thousand shot, and having held out Two and forty days, surrendered it self into
his hands.

The Baron de S^n^cey goes over to the Kings party with the City of Ossonne.
The Baron de Senecey, with the City of Ossonne followed the example of Beaune*
for, he having been Ambassador to the Pope, and having found there was no
hopes, either from Rome or Spain, of such Supplies as were necessary to uphold
the enterprise, and having diligently informed the Duke of Mayenne of it, and
exhorted him (in vain) to embrace peace, he took a resolution, and submitted
himself to the Marshall de Biron, upon condition to keep the Government of
that place.

The Citizens of Autun resolved to do the same; but because that Town was
guarded with a good Garrison, nor could the inclinations of all be sounded
without evident danger of discovery, The Citizens of Autun put themselves under
the Kings obedience.
the Heads of the design determined to call the Marshall, and not to make any
stir at all till he was at the Gates; one of which being kept by them, they had
resolved to open to him: wherefore be being come secretly into the Suburbs upon
the eighth of May at night, the Mayor of the Town, who had undertaken to bring
him in, with great silence caused the Gate to be opened, into which a Captain
entering first of all with Five and twenty Cuirassiers and Fifty firelocks,
quickly made himself Master of that Post; and having sent word that the Pass
was secure, the Sieur de Sapiere and the Marquess of Mirebeau entered, after
whom followed the whole Army, which being drawn up in the open space between
the Walls and the houses of the Town, was divided into four parts, which took
possession of the streets of the City four several ways: One of these having
fallen upon a good number of Soldiers, which, according to the Military custom
were going Patrouilles, there began a furious conflict in the dark, at the
tumult whereof all the Guards being wakened and in Arms, as likewise all those
Citizens that were not privy to the business, they continued with various
uncertainty fighting all the night, till day being broke, every one perceived
that the City was possessed by the whole Army; whereupon, all laying down their
Arms, and hiding themselves in houses, Biron caused a pardon to be published
through all the Streets, and having plundered the Soldiers of the Garrison, and
sent them forth of the Town, it remained without further harm under the Kings
obedience.

The affairs of Bourgongne being in this condition, the Constable of Castile
having past the Mountains with ^ight thousand Foot, The Constabl^ of Castile
with 8000 Foot, and 2000 Horse goes into the Franche (...), and being united
with the Duke of Mayenne, recovers some places, and takes others.
and Two thousand Horse, had crossed through Savoy, and was come into the
Franche Comte, where, being united with the Duke of Mayenne, who, with Four
hundred Horse, and a Thousand French Foot was gone to meet him, recovered
Iaunevillet (which they of the King's party had quitted) and resolved without
delay to besiege Vezu; in which Town the Sieur de Tremblecourt was with Four
hundred Foot, and 60 Horse; nor was it very hard to take it, because his
weakness would not suffer him to make any great resistance: whereupon the Duke
of Mayenne, who, as a Soldier of greater experience, commanded in Military
matters, having caused a Battery to be planted, made an open breach within few
hours, and the Sieur de Tremblecourt not being obstinate to make a vain
defense, The Sieur de Tremblec^urt not being relieved by the Mar^schal de
Biron, surrenders the Castle of Vezu to the Constable of ^astile.
resolved to retire into the Castle, and expect relief from the Marshall de
Biron. But he could not receive the assistance that was needful in due time;
for the Marshall being at the same time called by the Citizens of Dijon,
resolved to attend that as the more important occasion; so that the Sieur de
Tremblecourt not being able in a weak place to resist the Forces of a whole
Army, was constrained to surrender the Castle.

But the Citizens of Dijon, having declared themselves unseasonably, ran a very
great hazard of being suppressed; for the Viscount de Tavanes who governed that
Province as the Duke of Mayenne's Lieutenant, being advertised of their
intention, drew all the neighboring Garrisons together with infinite celerity;
and while the chief Citizens stood perplexed, and irresolute, whether or no they
should call the Marshall de Biron, for fear of being scacked, Tavanes appeared
with a considerable force to enter into the City; but that being denied him by
the people already up in Arms, he turning toward the Castle, was willingly
received by the Governor of it: There, after having refreshed and ordered his
men, he caused an hundred of his stoutest Horsemen to alight, and placed them
in the front of the Squadron, and then encouraging his men to fight gallantly,
marched down in order the common way, to enter the passage toward the
Marketplace, where, being encountered by the Townsmen in Arms, there began
between them a sharp and obstinate fight, which lasting stiffly from the
morning till it was far of the day, some of the Heads of the people, taking a
resolution in necessity, determined to send for the Marshall de Biron, who,
having already many days expected that opportunity, hovered up and down about
those quarters. But, not being able to bring the Army with that celerity, which
so sudden an exigent required, the Marshall having left order, that the
Cavalry should follow him with all speed, entered into Dijon with only Sixty
Gentlemen toward the evening; at whose arrival the Citizens recovering
courage, who not being able to resist, were already reduced into a corner of
the Town, and then the whole Army coming up successively one part after
another, Tavanes not willing to lose the Castle, while he contended obstinately
to get the Town, resolved to retire thither, and leave the possession of the
Town unto the Army; wherefore, making the Rereguard of his Squadron face about,
he drew off softly, and still fighting, got safe into the Fortress, the day
being quite shut in but leaving it to the care of the wonted Governor, he
retired himself into the Castle of Talan, a little distant from the Town. The
Marshall was reduced into a great straight, his Army not being sufficient to
divide it self and besiege both Castles; and because he feared the Duke of
Mayenne, and the Constable of Castile, having dispatched at Vezu, would come
straight to Dijon, he solicited the King by redoubled Messengers, to advance
into Bourgongne, whither the greatest weight of arms was already inclined.

The King had staid at Paris longer than he had at first intended; for
President Ieannin being come unto him, they had great hopes to conclude the
lately renewed Treaty of Agreement, which afterward was prolonged many days;
for not only the King was backward in granting conditions, by reason of the
prosperity of his affairs in Bourgongne; but also the Duke of Mayenne,
according to the variation of hopes varied also his determinations, and without
proceeding further, would have had a Truce established, to expect (as he said)
the Popes resolution, and (as the Kings said) the resolution of King Philip;
and finally, the revolt of those Towns having happened on the one side, and on
the other, the Constable being come, the Treaty dissolved without conclusion*
and the King having left the Prince of Conti to govern Paris, and with him the
Count of Schombergh to counsel him, was come to Troy^ upon the thirtieth of
May, to draw his Army together in that place, and to march thence whither need
should require. Thither the earnest desires of the Marshall de Biron came unto
him, who solicited him to march speedily to Dijon; wherefore, without
interposing any delay, he, with the Troops that were with him, having left
order that the rest should follow, took his way, with all haste, toward
Bourgongne, having with him the Count of Auvergne, the Duke de la Tremouille,
the Marquess de Pisany, the Count de Torigny, the Chevalier d Oyse, the
Marquisses of Tresnel, and Mirepoix, and the Sieurs de Chiverny, Liancourt,
Vitry, Montigny, d' Interville, and de la Curee.

Being come to Dijon upon the fourth of June, he presently gave order, that
both the Castles should be beleagured, setting the Count de Torigny to besiege
that of the City, The King comes to Dij^n, and gives order, that both the
Castles be besieged.
and the Baron of St. Blancard, Brother to the Marshall de Biron, to take in
the Castle of Talan; but because to shut up the Castle round about was a work
of many da^es, all the Infantry not being yet come up (which could not march so
fast as he had done) the King resolved to advance with the major part of
Cavalry toward the Spanish Camp; for, having intelligence, that the Constable
had cast two Bridges over the River Saone at Gray, to pass all his Army at
once, and come to raise the siege of the Castles, he hoped to foreslow him,
till such time that all his men were come up, and the Trenches brought to
perfection. The Duke of Mayenne had likewise, The Constable of Castile,
persuaded by the Duke of Mayenne, advances with his Army to attempt the
recovery of Dijon.
partly with reason, partly with authority, partly by entreaty persuaded the
Constable to advance to recover the City of Dijon, telling him, that the
Marshall de Biron's Forces were much inferior to his, and that the Castles, in
which the sum of affairs consisted, afforded them a very easy way to drive out
the Enemies; and though the Constable (a Lord of high birth, and great riches,
but small experience in the affairs of War) was very unwilling to do it, yet
his confidence in the Dukes prudence and valor, and his not knowing that the
King was so near, had induced him to yield unto it; wherefore, having passed
the River the day before with his whole Army, he had quartered himself in the
Villages on this side of the River, eight Leagues from Dijon. Things being in
this condition, and neither the Constable, nor the Duke of Mayenne knowing of
the Kings being come, he, without losing time, upon the seventh of June in the
morning departed from the City with Twelve hundred Gentlemen, and Curassiers,
and Six hundred Harquebusiers on hors-back, and gave order that all should
march toward Luz, he being to break his fast that morning at the house of the
Baron of that Town, and to stay there for some intelligence of the Enemies
moving: Luz stands upon the confines of Bourgongne, and of the Franche Comte,
four Leagues from Gray, and as much from Dijon; so that he was in the way
between the City and the Spanish Camp, between which and Gray there was nothing
but the current of the River; As soon as the King was come to the place
appointed, and not meeting that intelligence he expected, to know what the
enemy did, he sent forth the Baron d' Ossonville, with Sixty Light Horse, to
discover and to bring him back the certainty of all things; The Baron
d'Ossonville sent ^orth to discover the Army of the League, is charged, and
constrained to retire.
and he, resting his men, and refreshing his horses at leisure, gave order,
that at three of the clock in the afternoon all should meet at
Fountain-Francoise, a village upon the edge of his confines, there to dispose
of themselves according to the information he should receive. It was not yet
noon, when he and the Marshall de Biron, with Three hundred horse went that
way to be upon the Rendevouz first of all, to order and dispose the Forces as
they came one after the other, but when he was two miles from
Fontain-Francoise, he saw three Horsemen come full gallop toward him, who
brought word, that the Baron d' Ossonville being charged with Three hundred
Horse of the League, was forced to retire, not having been able to discover any
thing, and that he desired relief, that he might be able to withstand the
greater Forces of the enemy; The King not knowing what to believe, whether the
300 Horse were the enemies Vanguard, or else but some party that was scouring
the Campaign, sent forth the Marshall de Biron, and the Baron de Luz, and the
Marquess de Mirabeau followed by 60 horse, to succor Ossonville, and to know
matters more certainly; who, advancing at a large trot, The Marshall de Biron
going to receive the Baron d'Ossonville, puts a Troop of the Enemies Cavalry to
fl^ght.
out of has^e to recover Ossonville, as soon as he was out of
Fontain-Francoise, discovered a Troop of 60 light horse which were upon the
steep of the hill, just upon the way that led to S. Seine, a village that stood
upon the great Road which led straight to the River Saone; wherefore he
resolved (without doubting) to charge them, and to advance to the top of the
hill, from whence he thought he might discover all the Country: nor was it
hard for him to obtain his intent; for the light horse received the charge
without opposition, and left them the hill free, which, as soon as he was
gotten upon, he discovered the whole Spanish Army at a distance, which marching
in its ranks, was coming to quarter at S. Seine, standing in a Plain, which on
the right side is bounded with a hill, and on the other is covered with a Wood;
wherefore, being desirous to carry back certain news of the quality and order
of the enemy, he resolved to advance, that he might have means distinctly to
observe the march and order of that Camp; but he was no sooner descended into
the Plain, when he saw the enemies Three hundred Horse, who having routed and
pursued Ossonville, came resolutely toward him: The Marshall knowing himself
inferior in strength, thought to retire without doing any more, giving the
Baron de Luz order to make a stand in the Rear with twenty of his men, and
endeavor to detain the enemies, if they should come up to molest him; which the
Baron courageously performing, their fury came upon his back with so much
violence, that being overthrown with his horse, and four of his men slain, who
gallantly faced about, the rest were constrained to gallop away: The Marshall
de Biron being without his headpiece, is wounded in the head.
Wherefore, the Marshall being likewise forced to face about toward the
enemy, fell in furiously to dis-ingage the Baron, who, having freed himself
from his horse, and much more difficulty from the enemy, had got over a ditch
and came toward him with his Sword and Pistol in his hand: The encounter was
very sharp and furious in the beginning; but the Marshall who fought without a
headpiece, being wounded with a ^lash in the head almost at the very first,
and some of his men being slain and trampled under foot by the fury of the
enemy, he began, by reason of the inequality of the Forces, to be in extreme
danger of being defeated; yet was he not at all dismayed, nor did he slacken the
ardor wherewith he fought, being accompanied by the Baron d'Ossonville, who
again was joined with him, and the Baron de Luz, who was fortunately gotten
again on horseback, till at the same time there appeared out of the Village,
and out of the Wood eight Squadrons of the enemies horse, which separating
themselves from the Army, came a round pace toward him; wherefore, having
something repressed the first violence of them, who charged him first, he
turned his bridle, and rallying his men, began to retire, galloping to get to
Fontaine-Francoise, where he believed the King to be already come, with all the
rest of his Forces: But the hour assigned for the Rendezvous was not yet come,
wherefore the King, though he had with him only Two hundred horse of the
Nobility, and sixty Harquebusiers on horseback that were come up before the
rest; and though he had no other Arms on but his back and breast, yet was he
necessitated to advance, The King, half disarmed, succors the Marshall de
Biron.
and receive the Marshall de Biron, who was hotly pursued at the heels by a
much greater number of the enemies.

The first Troops of the League were led by Louis d' Hudan Sieur de Villers,
and Captain Giovan Battista Sansoni a Milanese; the first one of the Duke of
Mayenne's field Mareschals; the second, Lieutenant of the Constables
Light Horse: the other French Troops were commanded by the Sieur de Tenissay,
and the Baron de Tianges, and the Italian and Bourguingnon Light Horse, by Don
Roderigo Bellino, and the Marquess de Varambone. An hundred Carabines marched
first to begin the charge, and after the other Squadrons followed the Duke of
Mayenne, with a body of Gens d' Arms. The King was put upon a necessity of
fighting with all this fury of the enemies, and his Forces being not yet come
up, he closed upon the right hand with the Dukes de la Tremouille, and d'
Elboeuf, the Baron de Terms, and the Sieur de la Curee; and, upon his left
hand the Marshall de Biron, though weary and wounded, with the Baron of
Ossonville and Lux; and with the Marquess de Mirabeau. Monsieur de Villers with
his Squadron charged that part where the Marshall de Biron was; and Giovan
Battista Sansoni fell upon the other where the King himself was; but with
different fortune, though they fought with equal courage on both sides; for
Monsieur de Villers at last beat back the Troops of Ossonville and Lux, and
forced the Marshall to retire as far as Fountaine-Francoise; but on the other
side where the King was, new Troops of Gentry and Cavalry coming up straglingly
every minute, who, having heard the danger he was in, advanced with all
possible speed to assist him; Sansoni was killed with five wounds, and his
horse being routed and dispersed, were driven back, even to the last Squadron
of the enemy; Nor could the Sieur de Villers prosecute the victory on his side;
for having received a shot in his arm, he was likewise constrained to retire;
For all th^s the King's danger lessened not, for the Baron de Tianges and the
Sieur de Tenissay advanced with fresh and numerous Squadrons to charge, and the
same did the Marquess Varambone, and Roderico Bellino, in that place where the
Marshall de Biron fought; so that being very much inferior in number, their
men wearied, and their horses haggled out and tired, they were almost in a
certain danger of being overcome; yet the King, with his voice even hoarse, and
with the example of his own valor, encouraging every one; and the Marshall de
Biron all bloody, and covered with sweat and dust, charging desperately among
the first, they prevailed so far, that each fighting beyond his own power, and
above his own strength, they gave time to the rest who were upon the way to
come up; amongst which* the first were the Count of Auvergne, Monsieur de
Vitry, and after them the Count de Chiverny, the Chevalier d'Oyse, and the
Monsieur d' Inteville; The King follows the Forces of the League, which retire
still skirmishing.
At the arrival of these (after whom the whole Army was believed to follow) the
Duke of Mayenne caused the Troops to withdraw from the fight, and the King
seeing it was no time to think of any other safety than what courage afforded,
followed them with a gallant skirmish to the Plain and Wood of S. Seine, where
they met the Spanish and German Infantry, which advancing valiantly in two
divisions, came to give their charge: when they appeared, The Constable of
Castile, no^ to hazard the Fra^che ^^mte by a Battle, makesa halt, having
resolved not to fight.
the King drew back his bridle, and the D of Mayenne having rallied all his
Horse into one great body, made show as if he would charge him: but the King's
Troops were already arrived; whereupon the number of the Cavalry was not much
different, and the Constable of Castile riding up to the head of the Army,
commanded his men to make an halt, being resolved not to hazard all his Forces,
and all the Franche Compte to the danger of a Battle: wherefore, it being
already late, The Constable retires with his Forces, though the Duke of Mayenne
labors to the contrary.
the King began to retire with a gentle pace toward Fontaine-Francoise; and the
Enemy, though at first, to conserve their reputation, they made show that they
would follow him, retired also without doing any thing else.

The Spaniards lay that night at S. Seine, the King's Forces at
Fountaine-Francoise, and his own person at Lux, having that day run one of the
greatest dangers that befell him in all the revolutions of the past Wars; in
which he ought to acknowledge his safety, no less to his own valor, than the
courage of those were with him, among which, after Biron, the principal praises
were given to Marquess de Mirabeau, the Count de Grammont, and the Sieur de la
Curee: In this encounter, which fame published to be much greater than the
truth, there were killed about forty on the Spaniards side, and of the King's
above sixty; the wounded were many more, nor fewer were the number of those
that were taken prisoners on both sides: each party labored to draw the fame
of the victory and the honor of that day unto it self; the ^panish Commanders,
because the number of the slain and prisoners were greater on the Kings side;
the French, because they remained Masters of the field, and likewise of the
dead bodies, and because they made the enemies retire to their very quarters.
But that which confirmed the victory on their side, was, the determination of
the Constable, who, having heard from the Prisoners, that the King himself was
there, and had been in the fight, resolved (though the Duke of Mayenne labored
much to the contrary) not to pass any further; and the next morning having
caused his Army to repass the River, went to lie in a place of advantage,
having Gray behind his Camp, and the obstacle of the River before it. The King
advanced the next morning with all his Cavalry, to see which way the Enemies
would move, and being come to the hill from whence he discovered the Plain, and
the Village of St. Seine; he stood there a long time in Battalia, not seeing
the retreat of the Spaniards, in respect of the Wood, and of the opposite hill;
not would the King, being without his Foot, in a various Country, full of
advantageous places, and not well known unto his men, put himself into the
danger of falling into some great Ambuscado; but it being already past noon,
the Sieur de Tremblecourt, and d' Ossonville, with a few horse, went up to the
very entry of S. Seine, where certain Peasants that were working in the Fields
told them of the retreat of the Army, whereof having speedily informed the
King, he advanced at a round trot to fall upon the Enemies Rere; but he found
that already they were all safely past the River, and the boats taken away,
upon which they had made two Bridges; wherefore, having scowred and beaten the
ways along the banks of the River, he returned that night to his quarters at
Lux, and the next morning went to Dijon to hasten the Siege of the two Castles.

The Duke of Mayenne on the other side, not having been able to persuade the
Constable to stay beyond the River, began to entreat him, to let him have some
number of men, wherewith he might go and defend his own in Bourgongne; but
neither was it possible for him to obtain that; for the Constable, who was come
only to defend the Franche Comte, thought he had done enough in recovering
Vezu, and all the other Towns the French had gotten possession of, and would no
more put himself to the arbitrament of fortune, so much the rather, because his
want of experience in Military matters, made him very much to fear, every small
encounter; and though he had a great Army about him, he thought not himself
secure from the celerity and courage of the King of France; besides the
continual Treaty the Duke of Mayenne held of making his peace with the King,
The Duke of Mayenne seeing himself forsaken by the Spaniards, and advertised
that the Pope inclined to the absolution of the King, makes an agreement with
him.
rendered him suspected to the Constable, and to all the Spanish Ministers, nor
would they trust any thing of moment to his fidelity: wherefore (seeing himself
destitute of all succor; and that the Constable, being grounded upon good
reasons, was not like to change his resolution) he determined at last to close
up the treaty of agreement, and so much the rather, because he was advertised
by his Agents at Rome, that the Pope manifestly inclined to the Kings
absolution; and therefore having sent the Sieur de Liguerac to Dijon, he
concluded upon these terms; That he leaving the Spanish Camp, should retire to
Chalons, upon the River Saone in the same Province of Bourgongne, where,
without using Arms, he should expect the event of the deliberation at Rome; and
that on the other side, the King should not any way molest him, nor any of his
followers, nor should attempt any thing upon Chalons, and that in the mean
time, while the Advertisements came from Italy concerning the absolution of the
King, the difficulties should be smoothed, and the conditions agreed upon,
wherewith the Duke should turn unto the Kings obedience. This truce or
suspension of Arms being established, the Duke (making as if he had a mind to
relieve the Castles of Dijon) departed from the Constables Camp with the French
troops, and went straight to Chalons, where presently the Kings Deputies
arrived to conclude the agreement, and he gave order to the Viscount de Tavanes
and the Governor of the Castle of Dijon, to surrender both the Castles without
delay.

But the King having dispatched that enterprise, resolved to go into the
Franche Compte, to attempt something against the Constables Army, and with
Seven thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse marched toward the River Saone.
The King goes into the Fra^che Com^e to molest the Spaniards.
The Constable lay still at Gray, thinking it a very convenient place to hinder
the passing of the River, and to turn which way soever the French Army should
move* which being quartered at S. Seine, fought all the banks for many days,
without finding an opportunity to pass; but, it being already the month of
July, and the waters of the Saone very much fallen; by reason of the time of
the year, the Sieurs de Tremblecourt, and d' Ossonville, who attempted all
manner of means to pass, found that the River was fordable in a certain place
about three miles from Gray, The French pass the Rive^ Saone at a Fo^d, and the
Spaniards that lay to defend the Pass, for want of Ammunition, were forced to
leave it and retire.
which was guarded onel^ by One hundred Spanish firelocks; wherefore, upon the
eleventh of July in the morning they appeared upon that Pass, with Two hundred
Curassiers, and Five hundred Harquebusiers on Hors-back, and began to try the
Ford where the River was shallowest. The Spanish firelocks opposed them, and
bravely resisting, hindered the Enemies passage with their utmost power; but
having no more Ammunition then what they carried in their Flasks, after they
had fought for the space of half an hour, they were necessitated to retire; at
which, the French taking courage, passed resolutely to the other Bank of the
River, and after them the Count d' Auvergne, and the Marshall de Biron with
Five hundred Horse more: The news of the Enemies passing was already come to
the Spanish Camp, and the Foot that had fought there, murmuring at the
unskilfulness of their Commanders, who had left them without Ammunition,
retired toward their Quarters, when Hercole Gonsaga advanced with the first
Squadrons of Horse to beat back the French, and make them repass the River,
being not believed to be many in number; but having found the truth to be
different from what they thought, after the first volley he could not withhold
his men from yielding to the greater number, though he fighting valiantly, and
sharply rebuking those that turned their backs, did the Office of a very
gallant Commander. The Spaniar's are routed and dispersed.
Cavalliere Lodovico Melzi followed with another Troop of Horse, and having
avoided the encounter of the first, who precipitately ran away, fell in
courageously to oppose the enemy* but the French were so much stronger, there
coming up new Troops of Horse every minute to reinforce them, that it was not
possible for him to stop their fury, but being routed and dispersed, fell foul
upon the last squadron of Horse, wherewith Don Alfonso Idiaques came to second
him, in such manner, that the Squadrons mingling confusedly with one another,
being justled and disordered by the violence of those that fled, they that came
up to charge, began likewise to run away without stop; in which flight, it
being necessary to pass a great Ditch full of water and dirt, to come to the
quarters of the Army, the disorder proved so great, that many precipitated
themselves into the Ditch; and many, not to incur the danger of being thrown
down and trampled under foot, fell into the power of the French; among which,
Don Alonso Idiaques, his horse having fallen under him, Don Alonso Idiaquer
taken prisoner.
was unfortunately taken prisoner by the Sieur de Chauliot, and was fain
afterward to compound for a ransom of Twenty thousand ducats. The French
seeing the Constable's Infantry drawn up on the other side of the ditch,
stopped their pursuit, and stayed for the King; who, having past with all his
Army, lodged in the nearest Villages two miles from the Enemies Camp.

By these two great disorders the Spaniards gave the King of France liberty to
pass; for there was no doubt, but if the Foot that guarded the Pass had been
more in number, and better provided with Ammunition, they would have hindered
the first that came over, in respect of the difficulty of the passage, and the
height of the banks of the River; and after they were past, if all the Cavalry
had advanced in order to beat them back, it is most certain, they would either
have totally defeated them, or made them repass to the other side of the River:
but coming up disorderly, and in a manner scatteringly, they gave the French
opportunity to conquer, and put themselves in danger of being utterly cut off;
and therefore knowing Soldiers cannot endure those rash runnings out of the
trenches of Camps, without order or consideration, at every litt^e call of a
Trumpet; and that which the inexpert count boldness and resolution, they, with
very good reason call rashness and ignorance.

But the King of France his passage, made with so much fortune or valor,
produced little effect; for the Constable keeping himself in his wonted quarter
excellently fortified, and placed between Gray and the current of the Saone,
the King not having power to force it, and not being in a condition to assault
it, went on the other side to make incursions, and spoil the Country, and spent
the time without receiving any fruit, save that Besancon, a Town no way strong
nor tenable against his Army, to free itself from danger, compounded for many
thousands of Ducats. In the mean time the King's Camp was full of many
dangerous diseases, whereof, being in an enemies Country, and in the exercise
of Arms, there died very many, among which was the Count de Torigny, who had
the Office of Field-Mareschal: For which reason, and because there came every
day ill news from Picardie, the Cantons of the Switzers interposing as common
friends, and particular Protectors of the Franche Compte, the wonted neutrality
was established in that Province, which the King going out of, went to Dijon,
and the Constable Velasco having left part of his Army, returned with the rest
to his Government of Milan.

At Dijon, the business of the Hugonots still troubling the King, and he
desiring, for his own security, The Princess of Conde being dexterously
referred by the King unto the Parliament of Paris, concerning an imputation
laid upon her, of being privy to her husbands death, is cleared thereof by the
Parliament, having promised first to turn Catholic, and that her Son should be
instructed in the same Religion.
and for the Pope's satisfaction, to get the Prince of Conde out of their
hands, caused a Petition to be presented by the kinsmen of the Princess his
Mother, wherein, relating in her name the imputation that had been laid upon
her, of having been privy to the death of the Prince her Husband, and the
sentence that had been given against her by Judges that were not competent, nor
capable to sentence her, they demanded, that she, having till then been kept in
prison, at S. Iehan d' Angely, the King disanulling the first sentence, would
be pleased to grant, that the Parliament of Paris, a natural and competent
Judge, might hear her cause, and, having discussed the proofs, give sentence
upon it: to which Petition the King answered, That if the Princesses Kinsmen
would oblige themselves to put her into the power of the Parliament of Paris,
he would disanul and make void the sentence that had been given, and would
refer the case to the aforesaid Parliament, into whose power the Princess was
to be delivered within the space of four months. This served for a color and
excuse to take away suspicion from the Hugonots, to deprive them of power to
detain the person of the Princess and of her Son. And the King sent the
Marquess de Pisani to S. Iehan, who, though the Hugonots murmured at it,
brought them both away to Paris, where the Princess having declared, that she
would live for the time to come in the Catholic Religion, was absolved by the
Parliament of that imputation that had been laid against her; the Prince of
Conde remaining not only in the King's power, but instructed and bred up in the
Catholic Religion.

The Duke of Montmorancy came likewise to the City of Dijon, and there took
possession of his Office of Constable; the Hugonots being thus deprived of
those props, wherewith they had designed to uphold themselves. The Pope was by
these lively effects very much confirmed of the King's sincerity, who already
was wholly averse from them, and wholly intent to secure the State of Religion
within his obedience; He showed the same inclination by the strict orders, The
Pope almost assured of the Kings sincerity, inclines toward him, and shows
himself averse from others.
and particular Commissions which he had given to restore the use of the Mass
in all those places from whence it had been taken; and he labored continually
in seeking means to restore the estates of the Clergy possessed by others,
which, by reason of the difficulty of the matter, proved very hard and
troublesome; for the Lords and Gentlemen, who, in reward of their services had
obtained them, and had already possessed them a great while, could hardly be
brought to leave them without equivalent recompenses; which, by reason of the
number of the pretenders, and the narrowness of affairs, in a time of so great
distraction, it was not possible to satisfy; yet the King, with infinite
patience and dexterity studied how to compose things, so that if he could not
altogether, he did at least in part satisfy the Clergy, though of necessity
many of the principal of them could not be absolutely contented; but discreet
persons commended both the King's inclinations, and dexterous manner of finding
a way to compose interests that were so oppositely diverse and repugnant.

These things brought by fame unto the Court of Rome, did opportunely promote
the King's interests; but much more were they helped on by the contrary
circumstances, which troubled the mind of the Pope, and of that Court; for
Schism was in a manner totally settled; the Parliament continued diligently to
hinder, that none should go su^ for Benefices at Rome, and whosoever procured
any by such suits, did not certainly obtain the possession of them; the King,
by some one of the great Council, did still dispatch Spiritual Oeconomies to
the Bishoprics, and other cures of Souls that were vacant* the name of the
Apostolic See seemed to be utterly forgotten; and the King's Forces
prospering, it was doubted he would demand Absolution no more; the Duke of
Nevers having s^id publicly at his departure, that they should not look to
have any more Ambassadors sent to Rome: wherefore though the Treaty was set on
foot again by means of Cardinal Gondi, and that d' Ossat continued to treat
with Sannesio, and with Cardinal Aldobrandino, yet the Pope fearing the
mischief that was imminent, and considering the example of other States that
had withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the Apostolic See was wonderful
anxious, by reason of the danger of this division. To this was added the Kings
confederacy contracted with the States of Holland; and the League which was
still in treaty with England; whereupon it was doubted that so near confederacy
being made with Heretics, Religion would in some part be injured by it. That
which the more incited the Pope, was the sharp War made by the Turk in Hungary;
for being constrained to think of the progress of the common Enemy on that
side, he desired to appease the tumults of France, that he might turn all his
Forces for the maintenance and benefit of the Commonweal of Christians; for all
these reasons being resolved within himself to condescend to the Kings
benediction, to which he thought himself obliged in Conscience, he began to
think of softning the Catholic King; and therefore besides satisfying him in
all his demands, The Pope sends his Nephew G ovan Frances^o Aldobrandino into
Spain, to ^reat of the affairs of Hunga^y, and also of the Kings absolution.
he resolved to send his Nephew Giovan Francesco Aldobrandino into Spain under
color of treating of the affairs of Hungary, but withal to negotiate the
absolution of France; to which he labored to bring the King of Spain gently,
by showing that he depended much upon his consent: In the mean time by the
means of Monsieur d' Ossat, he secretly let the King know that things were
already ripe, and that if he sent new Ministers to treat, the absolution
perchance might be concluded.

The King desirous to reconcile himself fully to the Church, thought at first
to send a gallant Embassy; but being informed of the Popes intention, who
desired that the business should pass privately, and with terms of very great
submission, he determined to send only Jacques Davy Sieur du Perron, who should
treat of matters together with d' Ossat, being also desirous in case the
business should not take effect, that the manner of treating might not make it
the more eminent and remarkable. These men seasonably making use of the
conjuncture of present affairs, managed the Kings intentions modestly and
dexterously, showing no less the prosperousness of his enterprises, which at
last had gained him the whole Kingdom; than his Piety and most ardent affection
toward Religion, from whence proceeded his infinite patience, hardened to bear
so many repulses as had been given him by the Pope. But those that were well
versed in the affairs of the World, gave loose reins to their discourse
concerning those very things which much troubled the Pope, and said freely
through the Court, that in the end the Kings patience would turn into fury, and
that having subdued his Enemies, and made himself a peaceable Master of his
Estate, it was to be doubted he would care but little to reconcile himself to
the Pope, or rather it was to be feared, that with a dangerous Schism in the
Church of God, he would attempt to revenge so many past injuries and
persecutions; and upon these points they repeated and alleged those reasons,
for which it was just and convenient to receive and satisfy him* The Pope
being between two contrary respects, one not to alienate nor offend the
Catholic King; the other not to lose the obedience of the Kingdom of France,
went very warily, and endeavored, that time, the course of things, patience
and dexterity might unloose that so difficult and so dangerous knot: He knew
that those that took part with the King of France had reason on their side;
that at length there was enough said, and enough done, to assure the sincerity
of his Conversion, and that by standing firm against so many repulses, he had
merited the pardon and reconciliation of the Church: but on the other side he
doubted the Spaniards might upbraid him, that they had been more constant, and
more jealous Defenders of the Majesty of Religion than he, and he thought it
very hard to alienate King Philip an ancient and confirmed Defender of the
Church, for a Prince, which, till then, had ever been an Enemy, and a
Persecutor of it; to this was added, that the merits of the King of Spain
toward the Apostolic See, and the many enterprises he had done for the
service of Christendom and of Religion, had gotten him so great authority in
the Roman Church, Monsignor Se^^fino tells the Pope that Cl^ment the Seventh
lost England, and Clem^nt the Eighth would lose France.
that it seemed not fit for the Pope to determine a matter of so great
consequence, without his liking and consent.

But whilst the Pope dexterously protracts this determination, the Kings Forces
gaining every day greater power, and greater fame, constrained him to come to a
conclusion; and the words of Monsignor Serafino wrought much upon him; who
discoursing often with him, and, according to his wonted liberty, mingling
jests with serious matters, being asked by the Pope what the Court said about
that business; answered, That it was now a common saying, that Clement the
Seventh has lost England, and Clement the Eighth would lose France: which
conceit having pierced deeply into the Popes mind, spurred on by the evidence
of reason, and the effectual solicitations of the Venetian and Florentine
Ambassadors, he determided to take his resolution upon his Nephews relation,
who assured him that in Spain men's minds were no longer so ardent as they were
wont to be in the affairs of France, and that being exceedingly exhausted of
money, and weary of the War, they would make no great stir at the determination
of Rome, though they yet showed perseverance, desiring that the resolutions of
his Holiness might be protracted for some few days more, out of a desire to
better their own conditions, than out of any hope they had that the King of
France at last should not obtain absolution: wherefore the Pope taking courage,
after he had oftentimes felt the pulse of the Duke of Sassa, the Spanish
Ambassador, upon that point, he at last could not but tell him, that the
taking a course about the affairs of France could no longer be deferred, and
that therefore he was resolved to hear the opinions of the Cardinals about it,
to the end that with their advice he might determine what should be thought
most convenient* The Duke of Sessa believed that the Pope would hear and gather
the Votes of the Cardinals in the wonted Consistory, and in the wonted manner,
and knowing that many of them depended upon the will of the Catholic King, and
that many others of themselves dissented from the King of France his
Absolution, did not argue much upon that particular, because upon a diligent
scrutiny of the Votes, he was of opinion that the Absolution would not pass in
the Consistory, and he was certain the Pope would not do contrary to what the
plurality of Votes should determine: The Pope that he might have the more free
and secure opinion of the College of Cardinals, resolves to hear them
privately one by one.
But Clement, who would not refer a thing of so great weight, managed till then
with infinite dexterity, to multiplicity of opinions, which if they should be
laid open, would appear to be guided with particular interests and respects,
after he had brought the Catholic Kings Ambassadors not to refuse that the
business should be put in consultation, went not the ordinary way, but having
called the Consistory, after he had read the Kings Letters and Supplications,
declared that he would hear the counsel of the Cardinals about them; yet not
briefly and confusedly at one only time, but that they should one by one come
into his Chamber, where no other body being present, he would hear them
privately; and gave them charge that they should come four every day severally
to private audience, and to discourse with him concerning the present business.
The Pope (shwing by this prudent manner, that he would exclude all private
respects, and give the Cardinals confidence to tell their opinions freely,
without fear that they should be discovered) reserved unto himself the
arbitrament of the determination, being able, when all had spoken, to declare
what pleased him best, and to say in which opinion the major part of Votes
concurred, so that none might be able to oppose or contradict: and just so it
came to pass; for having first caused solemn prayers to be made in every Church
of the City, and having in himself showed signs of profound and singular
devotion, he, for the space of many days, heard the Cardinals one by one; and
finally, being all met in the Consistory, he said he had heard the opinions of
all the Cardinals, and that two thirds of them voted that the King of France
should be absolved from Censures, The Pope in the Consistory declares, that two
thirds of the Cardinals had voted the absolution of Henry the IV. and that
therefore he was resolved to treat with his Procurators about it.
and received into the bosom of the Church; and that therefore he would treat
with the Kings Procurators, and in his Name impose upon them those penances and
those conditions which he should think most profitable and advantageous for the
service of God, and the exaltation of the Church. Cardinal Marc Antonio Colonna
would have contradicted, and standing up, began already to speak; but the Pope
imposed him silence, saying, It had been sufficiently consulted of already, and
determined with the plurality of Votes; and therefore he did not mean that
should be any more put into disputation, which had once been ordered and
decided.

In this manner having dismissed the Consistory, the Pope betook himself to treat
with the Kings Procurators concerning the Conditions, which already had been
debated many days by the means of Cardinal Toledo, who though a Spaniard by
birth, and a Jesuit by Profession, yet either because his Conscience did so
persuade him, or for some other reason, was favorably inclined to the Kings
affairs; and though he labored much, because the Pope would needs declare that
absolution Null that had been given him by the French Prelates at St. Denis,
and the King stood to have it approved and confirmed by his accomplishment, and
because many things opposed the publication of the Council of Trent, which the
Pope by all means urged to have; and most of all because the Pope pressed to
have the Decree made in favor of the Hugonots to be broken and disanulled,
which could not be done without stirring up new Wars; yet such was the
dexterity and prudence of the Kings Procurators, and such the moderation of the
Pope, that with convenient words and clauses all things were set right in such
manner, that the reputation of the Catholic See was kept whole, and the King
was not put into a necessity of new perturbations.

Things being settled and concluded, the Pope, upon the 16th day of September,
Upon the 16 of Sept. 1595. the Pope in the Porch of St. Peter's does with solemn
Ceremony absolve Hen. IV. from censures, and he is received into the bosom of
the Church.
went with all the Cardinals in their Pontifical habits into the Porch of St.
Peter's, where he sitting in the Throne prepared for that* purpose, and
encompassed with all the Cardinals, except Alessandrino and Aragon, who were
not present at that solemnity; Jacques Davy and Arnaud d' Ossat appeared in the
habit of private Priests, and holding the Kings Proxy in their hands, upon
their knees presented the petition to the Secretary of the Holy Office, which
being publicly read, the Secretary standing at the foot of the Throne,
pronounced the Popes Decree, which cont^^ning the narrative of the whole
business, did appoint and ordain that Henry of Bourbon, King of France and
Navarre, should be absolved from Censures, and received into the bosom of the
Church, being at that present obliged to abjure all Heresies held formerly by
him, to undergo the public penance that should be enjoined him, and observe
the conditions established by his Holiness, which were these following: The
conditions established at Rome, to be observed by the King of France.
That the Catholic Religion should be introduced into the Principality of
Bearne, and four Monasteries of Friars and Nuns founded there: That the Council
of Trent should be received in the whole Kingdom of France, except in those
things that might disturb it, which the Pope was willing to dispense withal:
That within the term of one year the Prince of Conde should be given to be bred
up in the hands of Catholics: That in the disposing of Benefices and other
matters, he should observe the course agreed upon with the Kings his
Predecessors, taking away all abuses: That Catholic persons, and such as were
of exemplary life, should be nominated unto Prelacies: That all lands and goods
taken from Churches and Religious places should be restored without a judicial
way, and without contradiction: That those that were elected into Magistracy
should be persons no way suspected of Heresy, nor such as favored Heretics,
either directly or indirectly, but such as should not tolerate them, save in
what could not be done without tumult and War: And that he should give account
of his Conversion and Abjuration to all Christian Princes. The spiritual
penances injoined him were, That every Sunday and Holy Day he should hear a
Conventual Mass, either in his own Chapel, or some other Church: That,
according to the custom of the Kings of France, he should hear Mass every day,
and that upon some set days of the week he should say certain prayers: That he
should fast Fridays and Saturdays, and receive the Communion publicly four
times in the year.

The Procurators accepted the Conditions, The Kings Procurators kneeling at the
Gate of St. Peter's Church do with a loud voice abjure the Heresy of the Kings
false belief.
and the public ingrossments were demanded by them; and then kneeling down at
the Gate of St. Peter's Church, they with a loud voi^e abjured the Heresies
that were contained in a certain Writing; after which Abjuration, being touched
upon the head by Cardinal Santa Severina the chief Penitentiary with his Rod of
Office, they received Absolution: at which action the Gates of St. Peter's
Church were opened, the whole Church resounded with joyful musical voices, and
the Castle of St. Angelo with all its Artillery gave signs of extraordinary joy
and gladness: the Procurators clothed in their Prelatical habits were present
at the Mass in the wonted place of the French Ambassadors; after which they
went to St. Louis the French Church, where the joys and rejoycings were
redoubled; the Court and the people of Rome expressing infinite contentment,
the one being much inclined to favor the French, and the other rejoicing at
the reunion of so noble and so principal a Kingdom.

The Pope deputed Cardinal Toledo Legate to the Kingdom of France; but
afterward, Cardinal Alessandro Medici, who after was Pope Le^ the XI. is
appointed Legate into France.
whatsoever the occasion was, having changed his mind, he appointed Cardinal
Alessandro de Medici, he who succeeded him in the Papacy. The Procurators who
had happily brought so hard a matter, and of so great consequence unto a
conclusion, were at several times by the same Pope created Cardinals, having
often publicly said, That the modesty and prudent managery of them both had
overcome those infinite difficulties that arose in his mind about the
determination of that business.

The news of the Absolution was brought unto the King by Alessandro del Been,
dispatched Post from Rome; who thinking to find him at Lions, arrived there
when he was already departed to return to Paris: For, having concluded a
general Truce with the Duke of Mayenne for three months, to the end, that the
conditions of Agreement might be conveniently treated of, and the event
expected of matters at Rome, which went more slowly than was believed, the King
(having settled the affairs of that Province, and given way to treat an
Agreement also with the Duke of Nemours, and his Brother the Marquess of St.
Sorlin) was returned speedily to Paris, to attend the business of Picardy,
where the Arms of the Spaniards made themselves be sharply felt: In which time,
the Marshall de Bois Dauphin, one of the Duke of Mayenne's nearest dependents
submitted himself to his obedience: And on the other side, the Duke of Elboeuf
formerly reconciled unto him, had established a Truce with the Duke of Mercoeur
for Bretagne; so that all things in all places inclined to favor the
Pacification of the Kingdom, save only, that on the side toward Flanders, by
reason of the new War kindled particularly with the Spaniards, there arose by
little and little new occasions of perturbation and trouble.

The End of the Fourteenth BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars of France. By HENRICO CATERINO DAVILA. The
FIFTEENTH BOOK.
The ARGUMENT.
THis Book relates the progress of the Spanish Forces in Picardy; the taking
and recovery of Han; the siege of Castelet; the design of the Conde de Fuentes,
General of the Forces in Flanders, to besiege Cambray, the preparations for
that purpose: To facilitate that enterprise, he resolves to besiege Dourlans
first, and sits down before it: The French Commanders on the other side prepare
themselves to relieve it; they attempt to put in men, and come to a Battle; the
Spaniards get the Victory, and the Admiral Villars is slain, with many of the
Nobility: The Conquerors storm Dourlans with a very great slaughter: The
Spanish Army beleaguers Cambray; the Duke of Nevers, who was arrived a while
before for the defense of that Province, sends his Son the young Duke of
Rhetelois to relieve the besieged, who fortunately passes through the Enemies
Camp, and enters the Town. After him the Sieur de Vic gets in, and they defend
themselves constantly. The people ill satisfied with the Government of Balagny,
who had gotten that Principality, mutiny, make themselves Masters of a Gate,
and open it to the Spaniards; the French retire into the Citadel, where
finding neither Ammunition nor Victual, they are constrained to surrender; the
Conde de Fuentes grants them honorable conditions. The King departing from
Bourgongne, marches to relieve them, but comes not time enough: He consults
what is best to be done, and resolves to besiege la Fere; there follows an
Accommodation with the Duke of Nemours and the Duke of Joyeuse, and finally
also with the Duke of Mayenne, who comes to wait upon the King before la Fere.
Albert Cardinal and Archduke of Austria comes out of Spain to govern the
Low Countries; he puts relief into la Fere by means of Nicolo Basti; but the
King slackens not the siege for all that. The Archduke resolves to try if he
could raise him by diversion, and suddenly assaults Calais* and takes it: He
obtains Guines, lays siege to Ardres, which yields for want of men to defend
it: la Fere yields to the King at the same time, who finding his Army in an ill
condition, resolves to disband it. Cardinal de Medici, the Pope's Legate,
arrives in France, and is received there with great honor. An Accommodation is
treated with the Duke of Mercoeur, who artificially prolongs it. The King
assembles the States in the City of Rouen to provide moneys, and settle the
affairs of his Kingdom; being indisposed, he retires into the quarters about
Paris. The Spaniards surprise Amiens the chief City of Picardy. The King
exceedingly stricken with that loss, resolves to besiege it without delay; the
varieties of the siege and defense are related. The Archduke marches with a
very potent Army to relieve that place; the Armies face one another many days,
and have diverse encounters: The Archduke retires, and the besieged City
surrenders. The King makes an incursion into the County of Artois; but because
of the Winter and of the Plague, he retires. A Treaty of Agreement between the
two Crowns is introduced by the Cardinal-Legat; the Deputies of both parties
meet at Vervins: The Duke of Mercoeur submits himself unto the Kings Obedience:
After some defficulties in respect of the Duke of Savoy, the general Peace is
at last concluded and published.

MAtters of War went not on so prosperously for the King of France in the
confines of Picardy, as in Bourgongne, and the Franche Comte; for the Spanish
Forces ordered by Commanders of experience and resolution, having found in the
French either little unanimity, or much weakness; besides the slaughter of men
which had happened in diverse encounters, had likewise made themselves Masters
of many Towns and places of importance.

The Duke of Bouillon, and Count Philip of Nassaw, had from the year before
prosecuted the War unsuccessfully in the Duchy of Luxemburg, and made diverse
incursions into it; where having possessed themselves of some places of small
consequence, they were so streightened by Count Mansfelt's Army, but much more
by the inundation of the Rivers, and the excessive abundance of waters, that
they were necessitated to retire, one into the City of Sedan, the other by Sea
into Holland; and though the Duke of Bouillon had afterward in the beginning
of the year raised the siege of la Far which the Spaniards had laid, yet that
was done rather by art, than force, and, except some excursions, things were
quietly settled on that side.

By the death of the Archduke E^nest the Government of the Low Countries is
given to the Count de Fuentes.
But the Archduke Ernest dying unexpectedly in the beginning of March, the Conde
de Fuentes took the Government of the Low Countries, who full of Warlike
Spirits, and desirous to restore the reputation of the Spanish Forces, applied
his mind with all diligence to reform the Discipline of the Militia, which he
had seen flourish gloriously in the time of the Duke of Parma; wherefore Count
Charles of Mansfelt being gone to serve the Emperor in the War of Hungary, he
was left alone to the administration of both Civil and Military affairs, and
making use of the assistance of the Sieur de la Motte, Count Charles of
Mansfelt goes to serve the Emperor in the War of Hungary.
the Prince of Avellino, Monsieur de Rosne, and Count Giovan Giacopo
Belgiojoso, and Colonel de la Berlotte, old experienced Commanders, that were
observant of Military Discipline, he had not only quieted a great part of those
that mutinied for want of pay, but also reforming and re-ordering the companies
of every Nation, and filling them up with old Soldiers, he had brought himself
into such a condition, that with an Army more valiant than numerous, he might
put himself upon the attempt of some gallant enterprise; which whilst he was
contriving in his mind, they of the Province of- Haynault and of the County of
Artois propounded unto him the taking of Cambray, offering a good number of
men, and great contributions in money as soon as they should see the Army
encamped before that City, from whence those Provinces received great and
continual damage with the interruption of commerce and the hinderance of
tillage. The Archbishop of Cambray made the same request, who having been
driven out from the power of that Town, proferred likewise money and Soldiers,
provided the Spaniards would attempt to recover it. This enterprise seemed
great and magnificent to the Conde de Fuentes, as well by reason of the
greatness and splendor of the City and its Territory, as for the glory he
should attain thereby; for since the time it was gotten by the Duke of Alancon,
the Spanish Forces had never had the heart to venture the recovery; and the
Duke of Parma himself, either withdrawn by more necessary occasions, or
dissuaded by the difficulty of effecting it, had given it over. But if the
enterprise carried with it so great reputation, it carried also no less
difficulty by reason of the strength of the City and Castle, of the number of
the people, the riches of the inhabitants, the Garrison which Monsieur de
Balagny kept in it, and many other circumstances which represented themselves
to the consideration of the Count, who though in mind he was resolved to
attempt it, did yet dissemble it prudently, making those preparations maturely
which he thought convenient, that he might not strike in vain.

But while being intent upon this action, he was preparing matters, The Sieur
de Gomeron Governor of Han agrees with the Spaniards, and receives their
Garrison into the Town, but not into the Castle.
a new Emergent that sprung up in Picardy did, with very great and reciprocal
danger, hasten the motion of the War. Han, a considerable Town in that
Province, was governed by the Sieur de Gomeron, who having in the declining of
the League taken a resolution to join with the Spaniards, agreed to receive
what Garrison they should think fit, not only into the Town, but also into the
Castle; to which effect Ceccho de Sangro being come with eight hundred Italian
foot, and Signor Olmeda with two hundred Spaniards, two hundred Walloons, and
four hundred Germans, Gomeron though he admitted them into the Town, would not
yet admit them into the Castle, fearing lest being become the stronger, they
should attempt to drive him out of the place; upon which doubt, there having
past many letters and messages, at last Gomeron was persuaded by Don Alvaro
Osorio, Governor of la Fere, to go into Flanders, where he should receive not
only the full sum of money that had been promised him, but also fitting
security to continue in the Government of the place; wherefore he having left
his Brother-in-law the Sieur d' Orvilliers and his own Mother in the Government
of the Castle, Gomeron having left the Sieur d' Orvilliers in the Castle of
Han, goes into Flanders, where he is kept prisoner by the Conde de Fuentes.
went himself with his two younger Brothers to Antwerpe, where the Conde de
Fuentes, incensed by the ambiguity of his Faith, made him and his Brothers be
kept prisoners, and wrote to Orvilliers, that if he did not put the Castle into
the hands of his Commanders, he would make himself satisfaction with Gomeron's
head. But Orvilliers no less doubtful than his Brother-in-law, (though the
Mother anxious for the safety of her Sons, pressed him very much) could not
tell what resolution to take, but sometimes intimating to the Spaniards that he
would give them the Castle, sometimes treating with the Duke of Longueville,
The Duke of L^ngueville, Governor of Picardy, killed by a musketsh^t.
and Monsieur d' Humieres the Kings Lieutenant in that Province to bring them
in secretly to suppress the Spanish Garrison that lay in the Town, kept both
parties long in hope, till Monsieur d' Humieres proffering him larger
conditions, and that all the Spanish Commanders that should be taken, should be
given to him to exchange Gomeron, he resolved at last to adhere unto the
French; wherefore (the Duke of Longueville having been slain a while before,
with a Musket Shot, received by chance in a Volley which his Soldiers gave him
in honor) his Brother the Count de St. Paul, to whom the King had granted the
same Government, having sent to the Duke of Bouillon to meet him at St.
Quintin, resolved to attempt that enterprise, though by reason of the doubt of
Orvilliers his fidelity, and because of the strength of the Garrison it was
thought very difficult. Monsieur d' Humieres undertook the charge of ordering
the business, and that he might effect it prosperously, took very great care to
gather together all the Gentry of the Province, and all the Soldiery that was
in the neighboring Garrisons.

In the mean time the Conde de Fuentes having settled the affairs of Flanders in
good order, was advanced with eight thousand Foot and two thousand Horse unto
the confines to take in Castelet, a place built by King Henry the Second, in
the time of the Wars with the Emperor Charles the Fifth upon the confines of
the Territory of Cambray; The Conde de Fuentes goes into Picardy, and besieges
Castelet, with a design afterward to besiege Cambray.
and because the taking of this place was necessary to the besieging of that
City, he had encamped himself before it, and battered it with twelve pieces of
Cannon, which not interrupting the designs of the French, who thought it much
more considerable to take Han, than to relieve Castelet, had taken the field
with Four thousand Foot, and above One thousand Horse, encamping sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, in the quarters about that Town. But though
they dissembled it, and made show to have some other design, yet their drawing
so near, and some provisions that Orvilliers made in the Castle, had put Ceccho
de Sangro, and the other Spanish Commanders in a jealousy, who doubting of
that which indeed was true, determined to shut up the assage of those ways that
went from the City to the The open space without the C^stle, from the edge of
the Counterscarp.
Esplanade of the Castle, and there being three that led thither, they drew a
traverse cross every one; raising them with Barrels and Earth, and made holes
through the Houses on all sides, that with their small shot they might gall the
place that extended it self from the City to the Moat and Raveline before the
Castle Gate; and for more security, they sent with speed to the Conde de
Fuentes, letting him know the suspicion they had, and desiring relief.

Orvilliers having agreed with the French brings a strong party into the Castle
The French on the other side, being assured of Orvilliers his fidelity, by many
of his Kinsmen that were in the Army, drew near betimes in the evening between
the Gate of the Castle, and that of the Town which led to the way of Noyon; but
the Perdues that lay without the works, having given the Spaniards notice of
the Enemies arrival, Ceccho de Sangro caused many Cannon shot to be made that
way, whereby the French knowing that the Garrison was advertised, and in order
to receive the assault, resolved to enter into the Castle, and go down to fall
upon the Town on that side: The Count de St. Paul with all the Cavalry, The
French go out of the Castle of Han, and attack the Spaniards that hol^ the Town.
and a Body of a thousand Foot stood firm in the field: Monsieur d' Humieres
and the Duke of Bouillon went into the Castle, where the difficulty of
assaulting the Enemy appeared exceeding great; for the Gate of the Raveline was
so narrow, that it forced them to go out but few at once straggling, and as they
went forth they came upon the Esplanade which lay open to the shot of the Town;
wherefore they would not put themselves in so manifest danger in the darkness
of the night, but staying for the morning, resolved to open the Gate of Relief,
which was walled up, and through it, go down without opposition into the Moat,
from whence cutting away part of the Counterscarp, they might come forth upon
the Flank of the Castle, in a place that was not subject to their shot. This
they effected at Sunrise, and being divided into three Squadrons, each of
which had One hundred Gentlemen completely armed in the Front of it* they
marched on to fall upon those of the Town, who standing ready at their Works,
received the assault very valiantly. The conflict was sharp and obstinate,
fighting on both sides with old Soldiers, full of experience and valor, but
the event had different success in the three several places where they fought;
for Monsieur d' Humieres being fallen on to assault the Traverse that was guarded
by Baldassare Carracciolo and Marcello del Giudice, was not only opposed, but
after two hours fight repulsed with much blood; on the other side, upon the
left hand where the Sieur de Sessavalle, and Colonel la Croix assaulted the
Traverse guarded by Signior Olmeda, they fought with equal fortune without
advantage; but in the middle way, where the Visdame of Amiens, and the
Governor of Noyon assaulted Ceccho de Sangro, after they had fought a great
while, ( Ceccho having received two wounds with a Pike) the French broke
through the Traverse, and though they found a firm resistance every where, yet
they got near to the Port de Noyon, which they had designed to open, and bring
in the Count de St. Paul at it; but Ceccho taking a resolution in the extremity
of the danger, caused the houses of that quarter to be set on fire, which
carried by a prosperous wind for him, followed the French so close at the
heels, that it constrained them to retire, the flame making such havoc, that
they were fain to cease the assault: It was already Noon, and the Soldiers
being weary every where, slackned the fight; and yet Monsieur d' Humieree
seeing the wind turn, and the flames of the fire fly toward the Spaniards,
set his Squadron again in order, and placing himself in the Front, went to
renew the assault, in the beginning whereof he received a Musket shot in the
head, and fell down dead upon the ground; which accident abated not the courage
of his men, but being relieved by the Duke of Bouillon with fresh Forces, they
at last possessed themselves of the Port de Noyon, by which the Count de St.
Paul entering with the rest of the Army, the Spaniards straightened on all sides,
never turned their backs, but still courageously fighting, retired into the
Fauxboug de St. Sulpice, where having fought till night, and the relief not
appearing, which they expected from the Conde de Fuentes, ordering their Pikes,
they made show, that they would yield themselves; but the French either
incensed for the death of Monsieur d' Humieres, or by reason of their most
ardent hatred against the Spaniards, prosecuted the Victory without regard, and
would have put them all to the Sword, if the desire of recovering Gomeron had
not persuaded them to take many prisoners. Of the Spaniards side there were
killed about Eight hundred men* Ceccho de Sangro, Bassadassare Carracciolo,
Signior Olmeda, Ferrante Nimfa, Marcello del Giudice, and Alessandro
Brancaccio, were all taken prisoners, with many other Officers and Soldiers.
Of the French were killed about One hundred and twenty Soldiers, and forty
Gentlemen, among which Colonel la Croix, the Sieurs de The French says
Haranc^nes.
Bayancourt, des Masieres, Lieutenant to Monsieur de Surville, and many
Captains of Foot. Among the wounded were Colonel Lierville, and the Sieurs d'
Arpajon, and de Chalande.

The Conde de Fuentes, having received intelligence of the assault which his
soldiers expected, left the Duke of Pastrana at the siege of Castelet, and
went, with a part of the Army to relieve them; but being come the day after the
fight within three miles of Han, he heard the news of their misfortune, and not
thinking it fit to attempt any thing for that time, returned to prosecute the
siege he had begun; whereby the French remaining free Possessors of the Town
and Castle, left the Sieurs de Sessavalle and Plainville with a convenient
Garrison in the Town, and consigned Ceccho de Sangro, and many prisoners to
Orvilliers, with the exchange of which he might redeem the Sieur de Gomeron:
But the event of the business proved very different, for the Prisoners having
secretly dealt with a Neapolitan, (who, Many Prisoners are left with the Sieur
d' Orvilliers, that he might exchange his Brother-in-Law the Sieur de Gomeron.
as the Sieur de Gomeron's Rider lived in the Castle,) they came to an
agreement, That he, and two other Soldiers of the Garrison, should free them
out of the room where they were shut up, and furnish them with Arms, so that
they might unexpectedly, not only recover their liberty, but by killing
Orvilliers, make themselves Masters of the Fortress. The business succeeded
prosperously at first; for Ceccho de Sangro with his Companions, suddenly
assaulting the Guards at noonday, possessed and locked up the Castle Gate; but
running to the Governors Chamber to kill him, they found that he with those
about him, were already in a posture of defense. Whereupon there began a very
sharp fight among them, at the noise whereof the Commanders that lay in the
Town suspecting the matter, ran violently to the Castle, and tried to get in
with Ladders, and so the conflict was reduced to a third party; but, the
Italians not having strength to resist in two several places, made composition
with Orvilliers, by the means of Madam de Gomeron, that opening the Gate
toward the field, they should suffer them to go out freely, and he as before
should remain absolutely Master of the Castle. Thus the Prisoners being at
liberty, Gomeron remained without hope of help in the power of the Spaniards;
and yet his Mother ceasing not to try all means to free her Son, had, with
Tears, Prayers, and Promises, brought Orvilliers into such a wavering
doubtfulness of mind, that he seemed inclined to make a new agreement with the
Spaniards; wherefore she judging, that if their Camp should draw near, he would
easily resolve to receive it, writ to the Conde de Fuentes, that if he came
with the Army, Orvilliers would deliver up the Castle to him.

In the mean time the Count had battered the Walls of Castelet, and given it a
violent assault, which, though it was stoutly sustained by those within, yet as
they fought, the fire taking and blowing up all their Powder, the Sieur de
Liramont, The Count d^ Fuentes, upon hopes given him by Madam de Gomeron, comes
before Han: but his design of taking it not succeeding, he causes Gomeron to be
beheaded in sight of the French.
Governor of the place, was necessitated to surrender, and their goods and
persons being safe, he came forth in a soldierly manner; whereupon the Count
having dispatched that enterprise, moved with the whole Army to draw near to
Han; but at his arrival, Orvilliers, more uncertain in his mind than ever, and
not knowing what to determine, opened the Gate that was toward the Town, and
fled out of the Castle, retiring to Roys; and the Sieur de Sessavalle being
entered with Two hundred Soldiers, began to fire his Artillery against the
Spanish Camp, at which the Conde de Fuentes much incensed, caused Gomeron to be
brought within sight of the Castle, where, in the presence of all, he made him
to be Beheaded, and sent back his Brothers Prisoners to the Castle of Antwerp.
The Count, persuaded by the heat of Passion, was minded to besiege the Town,
but the next day, when that first motion was quieted, not being willing to
interrupt the already intended enterprise of Cambray, he raised his Camp and
marched away to spoil, and pillage the places of that Country: At the first
arrival of his Army, Clery and Bray, weak Towns of that territory, standing
upon the River Sum, yielded without resistance, and to the infinite terror of
the Country people, they began to plunder Cattle, and to spoil the Corn in many
places; but the Forces were not yet in readiness which the Provinces of Artois
and Heynault had obliged themselves to contribute, and without them, by reason
of the great circuit of the Town, and the number of the Defendants, the
Commanders thought not fit to attempt the siege: Wherefore the Count, that his
Army might not be idle, and to facilitate the enterprise of Cambray by shutting
up the passages in many several places, resolved to fall upon Dourlans, The
Count (...) Fuentes besieges Do^^lans.
a Town not very great, but reasonable strong, and situate near the confines,
that separate Picardy from the Territory of Cambray; but on the higher side
above Peronne and Corbie, the Sieur d' Arancourt was in the Town, and the Sieur
de Ronsoy as Governor of the Castle, for all the places of that Province, was
near the confines, are secured by Castles; the most part of them stronger by
situation than by art, with Walls of the old fashion, flanked only with great
Towers; but this, either by reason of the nearness of the danger, or of the
Governors diligence, was much bettered by Ramparts and Ravelines, according to
the manner of Fortification of our times. The weakness of the Garrison that was
in the Town, being very much inferior to what need required, encouraged the
Count to set himself upon that enterprise; but though he resolved it upon the
sudden, and turned that way without losing a minutes time, yet could not the
siege be laid, and the passages blocked up so speedily, but that the Duke of
Bouillon was advertised of it, who being taken at unawares, put in four hundred
Gentlemen, and eight hundred Foot; but it was a very pernicious Counsel; for,
if he had put into the Town all the Foot that he had with him, which was above
Two thousand, he would not afterward have been necessitated to attempt with so
great a loss to relieve it; and if he had not engaged the Gentry within the
circuit of those Walls, he would have been so strong in Horse, that by
obstructing the ways, he might have forced them to rise; but in sudden
occasions, the wisest persons do not remember all things. As soon as these
Forces were entered into the Garrison, which, in all, amounted to the number of
Eleven hundred Foot, and Five hundred Horse, the fault began to appear; for,
there being no Commander of Authority, to manage the weight of the defense,
There being no commander of authority in Dourlans, and all desiring to command,
there grows a confusion among the Defendants.
the Lords and Gentlemen of the Country who were there, by desiring all to
Command, put all things in disorder and confusion, so that their presence,
which would have been very proper, very helpful in the field, proved rather
destructive than serviceable in the Town; And yet every one knowing it was
needful to keep the Enemy at a distance from the Walls, they betook themselves
to bring some of those Ravelines that were without the circuit of the Ramparts
into so good forwardness* as to retard the approach of the Enemy for some
days; but the defect of the Garrison appeared likewise in this; for the
Gentlemen did not care to lay hand to the work, and the Foot being few in
respect of the necessity, all preparations went on but slowly.

Monsieur de la Motte, Camp-Master-General of the Spanish Army, is slain,
Monsieur du Rosne is chosen in his place.
The Spanish Army encamped before Dourlans, upon the fifteenth day of July, and
the same evening Valentine Sieur de la Motte, who executed the Office of
Camp-Master-General, going to view the place near at hand, to resolve on which
side it should be fittest to assault it, was killed with a Musket Shot in the
right eye; a Soldier, who, from small and low beginnings, passing through all
Military degrees, was risen with a most renowned fame of valor and experience,
unto the eminency of the most remarkable Offices, and most important commands.
The man whom the Conde de Fuentes designed to supply his place, was Christian
Sieur du Rosne, who, by his sagacity, (which was exceeding great, (added to the
valor and experience of many years,) had gotten himself an infinite reputation
among the Spaniards; and by his Counsel, before all other things, they began to
fortify the quarters of the Army, and with Forts and Halfmoons to shut up the
Enemies, as well to hinder the relief that might endeavor to get into the Town,
as to secure his Camp, which was not very great, from the sudden assaults and
attempts of the French. These Works being ended, there remained to be resolved,
on which side the Place should be assaulted; for many were of opinion to begin
with the Castle first; and many others finding it very difficult to take the
Castle, advertised to possess themselves of the Town first, to facilitate the
way to the taking of the Castle. But after long consultation, a third opinion
carried it, propounded by du Rosne; which was, that the Town should be
assaulted on that side, where it joined with the Castle, because at the same
time a breach might be made in the Wall, and part of the defense of the Castle
taken away: The quality of the situation advised the same, which (in respect of
the River Oyse that passes there) was more easy to be made defensible; whereby
the Batteries would be the stronger and better sheltered from any attempt the
Duke of Bouillon or the Count de S. Paul should make; who, it was already
known, were with very great diligence drawing their Forces together, to relieve
the Gentry which they unadvisedly shut up in the Town. The first violence of
the siege met with an Half Moon without the Ramparts, that separated the Castle
from the Town; which, though of nothing but earth, yet being by length of time
firmly knit together, did little fear the battering of the Cannon: Wherefore,
Monsieur du Rosne having found the small fruit of playing upon it, began two
Trenches, to approach covered from the shot both of the Town and Castle, and
brought them within a stones cast of the Half Moon; but while the Defendants
believed he would continue them to the Moat, he suddenly caused two Squadrons
that were prepared ready, one Italians, the other Walloons, to sally out of
them; who, some scrambling up upon the Earth, others clapping scaling ladders
against it, got so quickly upon the Parapet, that they fell in pell-mell with
the Defendants, before the Artillery of the Castle could hurt them. The fight
was short, but valiant; for the Defendants were all soldiers of experience; and
yet their being taken so at unawares, was the cause, that after they had fought
a quarter of an hour, being over-pow'red by the greater number, they were
forced to retire, saving themselves within the covered way that was without the
moat of the Town. Monsieur de Rosne entering the Halfmoon, commanded la
Berlotte's Tertia to cover and fortify themselves in that place, having
designed to make use of that same Post to plant his Battery in it: The Walloons
were diligent and careful in fortifying themselves; but they of the Town were
no less ready to hinder their work; for with three Sacres that were upon a
Platform of the Town, and on the other side, with the Artillery from the
Castle, they did so play upon the place where the besiegers wrought, that the
slaughter of them was very great; and yet the Italians, Spaniards, and Walloons
working by turns, the Half Moon was at last made defensible, and in it they
planted seven Culverins, which battered the Works of the Castle, and six Cannon
that played against the wall of the Town; insomuch, that having shot
continually for two days together, matters were brought to such a pass, that
they were ready to open two trenches into the Counterscarp, wherewith
approaching, they might advance to the assault.

But, in the mean time, the Duke of Bouillon and the Count de St. Paul being
joined with the Admiral Villars, and the Forces of Normandy, were intent upon
relieving that place; but not so much for the importance of the Town, as in
respect of the great number of Gentlemen that were shut up in it; and though
the Army they had was not very numerous, yet they were confident the Gentry
which they had with them would enable them to put in men and ammunition, by
forcing the Guards on some side or other, though they were diligent, and well
strengthened by the Enemy. The Sieur de Sessavalle's design was, to enter into
the Town with a Thousand Foot, and Four and twenty Carriages of Ammunition, and
at the same time to make the 400 Gentlemen that were in Dourlans, retire into
the Army* wherein, besides the Infantry, there were Twelve hundred Curassiers,
and Six hundred Harquebusiers on Horseback; and because the circuit and the
entries into the Town were unequal, and some on this side, some on that side of
the River, which nevertheless, by reason of its shallowness, might be forded in
many places without difficulty; they determined to divide themselves into three
Squadrons, and appear three several ways, to keep the enemy divided and
employed in diverse places; they consulted among themselves the evening of the
twenty third of July, what was best to be done; the Count de S. Paul was of
opinion (to which the Marquess of Belin, and the Sieur de Sessavalle assented)
that they should stay for the Duke of Nevers, who being appointed by the King
to the superintendence of the affairs of that Province, was already near at
hand: it seeming to them a very great rashness, to attempt that then with
exceeding great danger, which they might undertake within two days with more
force, and more hope of good success: But the Duke of Bouillon (an old emulator
of the Duke of Nevers, not only by reason of their difference in Religion, but
also of the fame of wisdom, The Duke of Bouillon intending to relieve Dourlans,
caus^s the Commanders to resolve, that his opinion should be executed.
to the first place whereof they mutually aspired) could not endure to hear of
staying for his coming and that the glory should be reserved for him, which he
pretended should result unto himself, by raising the siege, or relieving the
Town, and having drawn the Admiral to his opinion, he caused it to be
determined in a manner by force, that the next morning they should try their
fortune.

On the other side, The Count de Fuentes having left Harnando Tells at the
siege, draws off to meet and hinder the relief.
the Count de Fuentes knowing that all the hope of the French could consist in
nothing, but keeping him distracted in several places, resolved to advance
three miles to meet them, that he might oppose their attempt with all his
Forces united; and having left Harnando Tells Portocarrero to guard the
Battery, with Twelve hundred Foot, and Gasparo Zappogna with a Thousand more to
defend their quarters and works, he, with all the rest of the Army advanced
upon the same way the enemy was coming: The Prince of Avellino led the Van,
wherein were two Squadeons of Horse, one Walloons and Flemings, and the other
Italians; and on the Flanks of them, two Wings of Spanish Musquettiers, the
Duke of Aumale, and Monsieur du Rosne followed with two Squadrons of Infantry,
which had each of them four fieldpieces in the Front, and in the last was
placed the rest of the Cavalry, with the Count himself, and by his side a
Battalion of Germans.

On the other side; the Admiral and the Duke of Bouillon led the Van; the Count
St. Paul was in the Battle, and had by him Monsieur de Sessavalle, with the
Foot that were to go into Dourlans, and the Marquess of Belin commanded the
Rear. It was the four and twentieth of July, the Eve of St. James the Apostle,
and it was near noon, when the Armies marching mutually to meet, came within
sight of one another; without delay, the French Vanguard with very great
violence charged the two Squadrons of the enemies Cavalry, whereof that of
Walloons, which was upon the left hand, being broken and disordered by the
Admiral, manifestly ran away; but that of Italians, where the Prince of
Avellino was, did long sustain the fury of the Duke of Bouillon, till the
Admiral, who had routed and driven away the Enemy, drawing near upon the Flank,
it likewise was constrained to retire, though without falling into disorder;
but the Wings of Spanish Musquettiers coming up, the service was hot and
furious, and so much the more, because the Walloon Horse rallying again, had
likewise faced about, and fought with no less courage than the rest. In the
mean time, Sessavalle advancing out of hand, to march to Dourlans, fell into
one of the Squadrons of Foot that followed, being led by the Duke of Aumale,
and there beg^n between them a no less fierce encounter than there was among
the Horse. But as soon as du Rosne saw those Squadrons charge one another so
courageously, he, with that which he led, turning a good pace upon the right
hand, possessed himself of a higher ground, which was upon the Flank of
Sessavalle, and first raking through them with his fieldpieces from thence,
and then falling in with two Wings of Musketeers that were in the Front of his
men, did so great execution upon them, that the Sieur de Sessavalle and Colonel
St. Denis* being slain, and all their Colors lost, the French Foot were so
dispersed, that they could no more be rallied, and the Carriages of Ammunition
remained in the power of the Enemy. In the mean time, the Conde de Fuentes
getting up to an high place, from whence he discovered the various fortune of
his men, sent out two Squadrons of Horse to assist the Prince of Avellino, and
Monsieur du Rosne, with the Duke of Aumale, having put their Squadrons again in
order, advanced on each side to the place of fight. Wherefore the Duke of
Bouillon knowing how to yield to fortune, without being willing to adventure
any farther, retired with small loss toward the Battle, with which the Count
de St. Paul, reserving himself untouched, had not at all engaged in the
encounter; but the Admiral, who much more fiercely had, from the beginning,
rushed upon the greater number of the Enemy, having seen the Sieur d'
Arginvilliers, Governor of Abbeville, and the Sieur de Hacqueville, Governor of
Ponteau de Mer, The Admiral Villars fighting gallantly, is slain.
Captain Perdriel, and above Two hundred Gentlemen of Normandy fall dead before
him, though later, and with more difficulty, would likewise have taken a
resolution to retire, if pity and gallantry had not called him afresh into the
midst of the Battle* for seeing his Nephew, the young Sieur de Montigny, with
fifteen or twenty of his followers, totally engaged, and sharply prosecuted by
the Spanish Infantry of Antonio Mendozza, he calle^ back his men that were
retiring, and furiously turned about his Horse to fetch him off; but being
surrounded by the Spanish Musketeers, and his passage cut off by the Italian
and Walloon Cavalry, fighting valiantly, and wounded in many places, he fell at
last from his Horse; and though telling his name, he offered Fifty thousand
Crowns in ransom, he was killed, in cold blood, by a Spanish soldier; and
another, to get a very rich Diamond Ring he wore, without any regard cut off
his finger* for which crimes they were, by the severity of the Count de
Fuentes, both put to death. All those that followed him were killed upon the
place close by him, though, fighting desperately, they made the Victory very
bloody to the Enemy. The Duke of Bouillon (either judging it a greater service
to the King to save the rest of the Army, or else moved by his ill will toward
the Admiral, who was a very zealous Catholic) persuaded the Count de St. Paul
(who being a young man, referred himself to the opinion of those that were
elder) that without making further trial to recover the day, they should get
the Battle into security. But the Marquess de Belin detesting that advice, fell
on with the Rere, to relieve the danger of the Admiral; and yet being
encountered by four Squadrons of Lanciers, whom the Count de Fuentes sent out
against him, he had not strength to resist their fury, and being routed and
dispersed in a moment, the rest saved themselves by flight; but he and the
Sieur de Longchamp remained the enemies prisoners: And this was one of those
encounters which gave clear proof, The Marquess de Belin, and the Monsieur de
Longchamp, are taken prisoners by the Spaniards.
that Cuirassiers in the field are very much inferior to the violence of
Lances. The loss the French received in this Battle, was greater, in regard of
the quality, than number of the slain; for they were not in all above 600, but
most part of them Gentlemen, and persons of note, whereof the whole Army was
composed; which made the D. of Bouillons excuse the better, in that he had
saved the remainder, though it was a most constant opinion, that if all the
Squadrons had charged at once, or if he obstinately fighting, had called up the
Count de St. Paul with the fresh Forces to his assistance, he might either have
put relief into Dourlans, or at least might have retired without receiving so
great a loss. On the side of the Spaniards there were killed but few, and all
obscure persons, and among the wounded, none was reckoned on but Sancho de Luna.

While the Armies fought thus, the besieged in Dourlans were not idle; for
having heard the noise of the fight hard by, they made a gallant sally to
assail the Trenches, in which, finding the Posts well fortified, and all the
Guards in Arms, they were no less valiantly repulsed; though in that action
they received not much loss. The Conde de Fuentes returning victorious to the
Leaguer, While the Armies fight in the Field, the besieged sally into the
Trench; but are repulsed.
and freed from the fear of being any more infested by the French, applied
himself, with all his study, to hasten the end of the siege, which, though the
defendents answered with very remarkable courage and valor, yet was not their
conduct and experience correspondent; so that it manifestly appeared, the Town
(though with much slaughter) would fall into the power of the Spaniards. Upon
the 28th day the besieged made a great sally in the heat of the noonday, and
because they found the Foot ready and prepared for their defense, after a long
fight they were at last constrained to retire; and while they did so very
softly, and without any sign of flight, being assaulted by the Cavalry, and
charged very furiously on the flank, they lost many of their men, and were fain
to run back full speed to the very Counterscarp. The next day the Artillery,
having battered not only the Walls of the Town, but made a breach also in a
corner of the Castle, the Count caused the assault to be given; and to divide
the strength and courage of the defendents, he sent Foot to fall on in both
places. The Spaniards stormed the Castle, the Walloons the Town, and a while
after the Italians entering into both Trenches, reinforced the Assault: In this
occasion, the valor of Hernando Tells Portocarrero appeared most remarkable,
who being the first that got up into the breach of the Castle, fought there
with so much courage, that the Count de Dinan being slain, who, The Spaniards
assault Dourlans, and take it, and to revenge the slaughter of Han, put all to
the Sword without regard: A great number of the French Gentry are slain there,
and the Town sacked.
on that side had the charge of the defense, and the Squadron of those within
being beaten back and broken, the Castle was taken with a wonderful great
slaughter; from whence the Assailants going down, without having found any
obstacle or impediment of Trenches or Casamats (for the unskilfulness or
discord of the defendents had been such, that there was no Works cast up) they
impetuously also possessed themselves of the Town; where, in revenge of the
slaughter of Han, (the name of which sounded aloud in the mouth of every one)
all that were in it, were, without any regard, put to the Sword, in the
violence of the fight: so that of so great a number of Gentlemen and Soldiers,
scarce the Sieur de Haraucourt, and the Sieur de Gribo^al, with forty soldiers,
remained prisoners, there being slain upon the place Monsieur de Ronsoy
Governor of the Castle, the Sieurs de Francourt and Prouilles who had principal
commands, above Three hundred Gentlemen, and above Six hundred Soldiers. The
Town was sacked in the heat of the action, and continued at the dis^retion of
the Soldiers till the evening, and then those had quarter given them who were
retired to the security of the Churches. The Conde de Fuentes having obtained
so full a Victory, The Conde de Fuen^es gives the Government of Dourlans to
Portocarrero, and applies himself to the enterprise of Cambray.
betook himself to repair the ruins of the wall, and to throw down the Works
without, and having given the Government of the place to Portocarrero, who had
behaved himself so gallantly in the taking of it, applied himself with very
great diligence to make preparation to besiege Cambray, not being willing
unprofi^ably to lose that prosperity which the countenance of fortune shew^d him

In the mean time the Duke of Nevers was arrived at the half-defeated, and
quite affrighted Army, and though he strove to dissemble those errors that had
been committed, yet talking with the Count de St. Paul, and the Duke of
Bouillon at P^quigny, he could not fo^bear telling them, that in their
consultations they had been too courageous, and in their re^reat too prudent;
By which words, and their old emulation, the Duke of Bouillon being disgusted,
departed from the Army; and likewise the Count de St. Paul not very well
satisfied, retired to Bologne, the whole weight and care of the defense
remaining upon one man alone. The Duke of Nevers having taken the charge of the
Army, though brought to a very weak estate, drew into Amiens upon the second
day of August, to secure that City, which, by the near slaughter of Dourlans,
was struck with very great terror; and because the Citizens running popularly
to him, showed him in how great fear they were, lest Corbie, a Town not far
from the place where the Enemy was, should fall into their hands, he promised
to go into it the next day himself in person, and so having left his son, the
young Duke of Rhetelois at Amiens, he went without delay to Corbie; in which
Town, though weak, he began to set himself in order to receive the Spanish
Army, in case it should march that way; but the next day, the Conde de Fuentes,
who was not above seven Leagues from thence, having raised his Camp from
Dourlans, advanced in one days ma^ch near to Peronne; wherefore the Duke with
all his Forces leaving Corbie, went to quarter at Arboniers, that he might go
the same night into Peronne. The Spaniards upon the fifth day passed near the
Walls of the Town, marching toward S. Quintin; wherefore the Duke being sent
to by the Viscount d' Auchy, who was in it, went thither upon the sixth in the
morning, which day the Spanish Army made a halt in the same quarters, and
stayed there four days, to make provision of victual from all parts, and upon
the eleventh of August, drawing within four miles of Cambray, discovered their
design of besieging that place, freeing all the rest from the suspicion they
had been in.

The Marshall de Balagny who was in Cambray, knowing himself weak in the
number of his soldiers, and much more hated of the inhabitants, who could not
endure his Dominion; and besides that, not having any means to pay and maintain
the Soldiers, solicited the Duke of Nevers, by four Messengers, dispatched post
one after another, to assist him with some men, and pleasure him also with a
sum of money, letting him know the little confidence he had in the people, and
the great terror that was in the Garrison, by reason of the noise of the
slaughter at Dourlans. The Duke of Nevers having called a Council of War, The
Duke of Nevers having called a Council of War, resolves not to engage himself
in Cambray, but sends his Son the Duke of Rhetelois, who afterward was Duke of
Mantua, with a good relief.
was doubtful a great while whether he should go into Cambray himself in person
or not; for, on the one side, the jealousy of keeping that City, and the Glory
of defending it, spurred him on; and on the other, the necessity of
endeavoring to recruit the Army, and set it again in order, dissuaded him from
it; but all the Commanders agreeing, that he ought not to engage himself, since
they hoped, that Balagny would supply what was needful in the Command within
the Town, and that his presence would be most necessary to prepare relief; he
resolved to send his Son Charles, Duke of Rhetelois, with Four hundred Horse,
and four Companies of Firelocks, which he mounted all on Horseback, that they
might march the faster; he sent, in company with his Son, the Sieur de Bussy,
and Trumulet, the first a Colonel of great experience, the other Governor of
Ville-Franche; He gave the command of the Firelocks to the Sieur de
Vaudricourt, a soldier of long experience, and intended, that within a while
after, his Son Monsieur de Vic should attempt to get into the Town, with an
hundred Horse, and Four hundred other Foot, to the end that he might supply the
charge of the defense, in those things which the Marshall de Balagny could not
attend, or had not experience in, under whose obedience all those Forces were
to be.

In the mean time the Conde de Fuentes having received Five thousand Foot, sent
from the confining Provinces, under the Prince of Chimay, and a Regiment of
Walloons, raised and paid by Louis de Barlemont Archbishop of Cambray, was
drawn before the Town upon the fourteenth day, and presently began to shut up
those passes by which the relief might enter, which he thought would come;
which diligence, not at all retarding the Duke of Rhetelois, he put himself
upon the adventure of getting into the City, and having marched all night,
appeared by break of day upon the Plain, which largely incompasses the Town on
every side; His appearing by day, contrary to what he had designed, was caused,
not only by an excessive Rain that fell that night, but much more because
being to pass a certain Water in the Village of Aune, over a Wooden-bridge,
part of it was fallen, so that he was fain to make a halt, till with Planks and
beams, the Bridge were hastily made up again: wherefore the Spaniards, who had
had time, both to be advertised of it, and to get to Horse, at the Dukes
arrival were drawn up into the Plain, expecting him in very good order upon the
straight way; He made a stop when he perceived the Enemy, being not well
assured what he should do; but the Guide that led him, well versed in the
Country, showed him, that between the Enemies Horse, and a lower Gate of the
City, there was a hollow, craggy way, which could not so easily be past, so
that turning on that side, they might get under the Walls of the Town, before
they could be overtaken by the enemy, who of necessity, were to take a great
compass, not to disorder themselves in the hollow of that way; wherefore, the
Duke placing himself courageously at the head of his men, went out of the great
Road, and declining upon the left hand, marched a round trot whither his guide
led him, hoping to get to the Gate without any obstacle of the Enemy: but when
he was drawn very near the Town, he found a Corpse de Guard of Fifty Horse, who,
at the Alarm, which sounded aloud through the whole field, had set themselves
in order to stop the way; wherefore, being necessitated to fight, he shut down
his Beaver, and having encouraged his soldiers, charged up with so much fury,
that in the first encounter, he routed and beat back the Enemies Troops,
without the loss of any one man, and having quickly wheeled about, he closed
up, and in his first order continued to march on his way at a good rate; but he
was not advanced Two hundred paces further, when he fell upon another body of
an hundred and twenty Horse, which being charged with the same fierceness, were
fain to retire without making any great resistance. In the mean time the main
body of the Spanish Horse, which from the beginning had discovered him, The
Duke of Rh^telois, having overcome many impediments, and fought with two
Squadrons of the Enemy, enters with relief into Cambray.
moved on with no less celerity toward him; but, the hinderance of the hollow
way, and the dirt of the field, which by reason of the rain the night before,
was all wet and slippery, retarded their march so much, that when the first
Troops came to charge the Duke, he was already defended by the Artillery of the
Town, which thundering with exceeding great violence, and scouring all the
field, hindered him from receiving any harm; so that entering into the City, and
being received with mavelous joy by every one, he found he had lost only one
Page, and an inconsiderable part of the Carriages, which having not been able
to come so fast as the rest, fell into ^he hand of the Spaniards.

The Duke of Rhetelois his getting in, necessitated the Count de Fuentes to
strengthen the siege more closely, that he might hinder any new relief from
entering; to which likewise he was persuaded by his want of money to pay and
maintain the Army, since though the Bishop of Cambray, and the confining
Provinces, had obliged themselves to contribute Five hundred thousand Florines,
yet they denied to pay them down, before he had begun the siege, and was got
upon the Counterscarpe. The manner of Count de Fuentes besieging Cambray.
To this was added his ardent courage, carried on by the felicity of former
success, which excited him to undertake, even beyond the number and strength of
his Army, as it were presaging a prosperous event, notwithstanding many
difficulties; wherefore the City being great in circuit, and not having men
enough, he resolved, with Forts and redoubts, to shut up all that part, which
on this side the River Scheld (that divides the City in the middle) lies
toward France; judging, that with the impediment of Fortifications, he might
supply that defect, all the Soldiers in his Army not being sufficient to
possess so large and ample a Plain, which contains the space of many miles; but
it appeared in this occasion, as it has done in many others, that Forts and
Redoubts (if they be not joined with a convenient number of resolute men) do
not hinder the entry of those, who take a resolution to pass, with the hazard
of some Cannon shot; and yet the Count de Fuentes having caused Four thousand
Pioniers to come out of the adjacent Provinces, and having Seventy two pieces
of Artillery of several sizes, and wonderful preparations of all Instruments of
War and Ammunition, full of hope and courage, began to incompass the City on
all sides, but on that especially, where it might be relieved by the French.
Between Port Neufue, and the Port de St. Sepulcher, over against that part of
the City that stood toward the South, he caused a Fort to be raised after the
manner of a Platform, which being able to contain One thousand Foot, was (by
the name of the Bourg close by it) called the Fort of Guiargni, and caused
another, not very much less, to be cast up over against the place where the
River enters into the City on the West side, which they called the Fort de
Premy, from the name likewise of the adjacent Bourg; and between these two
there were seventeen Redoubts, like so many Sentinels, in each of which, there
were Twenty five men, and the two Forts, with all the space between them, were
guarded by the Prince of Chimay, with the Forces that were newly come out of
the neighboring Provinces: Besides these Posts between the Port de
Quentimpre, and the Port des Selles, winding toward the North, there was
raised another great Fort, which they called St. Oloy, where the Count de Bie
commanded with a Regiment of Germans; from the Port des Selles as far as the
Citadel, over against the Bastion de Robert, a place that extends from the
North unto the East, they resolved to plant the Battery; therefore, in that
space they intended to cast up Trenches, and the command thereof was given to
Agostino Messia. The Count de Fuentes with the Cavalry of the Army, and two
Tertia's of Walloons was quartered in two little Villages behind the
Fortifications, and Ambrosio Landriano, Lieutenant General of the Light horse,
with Four hundred Horse, and Six hundred Foot, placed himself upon that way
that leads to Peronne, keeping continually many Ambuscadoes in diverse Woody
places, to assault and hinder the passage of those that should hazard the
attempt of entering the Town.

Things being disposed in this order, they began to break ground, the Engineer
Pacciotto, and Colonel la Berlotte overseeing the Works, the one for his skill
in Fortification, the other for experience in War, men of exceeding high
estimation: But the work proved difficult beyond all belief; for in the lower
places where the River Sckeld passes and overflows, they could not dig above a
span for water, and the higher places were so gravelly and stony, that they
could not approach without great toil and much time; and yet the Soldiers
accustomed to labor, full of courage, by reason of their past victories, and
aspiring to sack so rich a City, wrought with incredible patience: Either
Monsieur du Rosne, or the Count himself, continually overseeing the Works, and
with words, promises and gifts, hastening the perfecting of them; so that upon
the first of September, two very large Trenches were brought to the edge of the
Moat, between the Bastion de Robert, and a Raveline in the midst of the
Courtine. It is evident, that if the besieged had, with Sallies and
Counterbatteries molested their Works, they must needs have approached with
extreme difficulty, and perchance without fruit at last; but it was well known,
that Monsieur de Balagny, either had lost his courage, or had not much
experience; for, during the space of ten days, that the Works of the Spaniards
lasted, the Defendants continually lay idle, without molesting them in any
kind; and the young Duke of Rhetelois, who, by reason of the tenderness of his
years, referred himself to the discipline of others, though he said, and
labored very much, could not, or had not credit, to move the rest to do any
thing; in so much, that even the very day the Trenches were opened, there would
have been nothing done, if he himself levelling a Culverin, had not given fire
luckily against the Enemy; for it shot into the very mouth of their Trench; by
which example, his Gentlemen excited more than many others, shot many pieces of
Cannon, and did some harm to the besiegers.

But the day following Monsieur de Vic came in opportunely, a man of great
credit and long experience, who having happily avoided all the Ambushes laid by
Landriano, The Sieur de Vic with great difficulty enters with men into Cambray.
got near the City, upon the second of September in the morning, with all his
men on Horseback* and because the guards of the Infantry were but thin, and
few, he passed between Fort and Fort, without receiving any harm by the
Artillery that played on all sides, and got, without any loss, near the Walls of
the City, not far distant from the edge of the Moat; but when he believed he
had escaped all dangers, he saw himself unexpectedly charged in the Rere by a
Body of Italian Horse, which led by Carlo Visconte, was advanced full gallop
toward him; so that to avoid that imminent danger, since already, all the rest
of the Cavalry were at his back, he presently caused all his men to alight, and
leave their Horses a prey unto the enemy, who, while they were greedily busied
in catching them, afforded them so much time, that he with most part of his men
got into the Moat; whither, though the Spaniards advanced courageously, yet
they could neither hurt him, nor hinder him, (after a long skirmish, and an
infinite number of Cannon shot) from coming safe into the Town. His presence
seemed to put heart and spirit into the Defendants; for the same night, the
Soldiers striving who should work fastest, two Platforms were raised, behind
the Courtine that was played upon by the Enemy, and a Cavalier at the Gorge of
the Bastion de Robert, in which places many pieces of Artillery were planted,
and they made a furious Counter-battery with so much violence, and so much harm
to the besiegers, that having lamed their Artillery, and dismounted them,
broken the Carriages, and beaten the Gabions all in pieces, the Spaniards were
three days without being able to do any thing of importance against the Town:
At the same time he caused two Mines to be made, which being prosperously
brought under the principal Battery, blew it up into the Air, and buried five
pieces, overturning and disordering all the rest. Nor did he cease in the mean
time, opportunely to make some Sallies, though the great number of places which
were necessarily to be kept guarded, would not allow them to be frequent or
numerous.

Against so gallant a defense, Colonel la Berlotte who had the principal charge
of the siege, approached more under favor of Gabions than Trenches, though
with the loss of many Soldiers, till he came to pierce the Counterscarp; but
it proved so high, that it was necessary to make use of Ladders to go down into
the Moat, which appeared wonderful dangerous, for the Flank of the Bastion de
Robert, and a Casamat (made about that time in the Moat) played openly on both
sides upon whosoever dared to come unto the Ladders, wherefore it was necessary
to raise a battery of five Culverins, which thundered against the Flank of the
Bastion de Robert; and at the Casamat they fought desperately four days
together, with an innumerable company of Fireworks, to make themselves Masters
of it. But to take the Casamat by reason of the valor of the defendents,
proved exceeding difficult; and in the Flank by the Bastion, Monsieur de Vic
had caused five pieces of Cannon to be planted so low, that no violence was
sufficient to hinder them from doing mischief, wherefore the Commanders
resolved to remove the battery to a lower place, close to the Port des Selles,
where the whole Camp working with infinite eagerness, in two days time they
planted two and twenty pieces of Cannon, which played upon the Curtine, and upon
the Flank six great Culverins, which discurtining the Flank of the Bastion de
Robert made it very dangerous for the defendents to stay and make good that
place. Almost at the same time Colonel de la Berlotte with two other Trenches,
made his approaches so far, that having under covert passed through to the
Casamat, he forced the besieged to quit it; so the Moat remaining free, the
Artillery began to play, and the Army to set it self in order, to give the
assault.

It troubled the Conde de Fuentes to hear that the Duke of Nevers staying at
Peronne, had gotten together above Four thousand Foot, and between Seven and
eight hundred Horse, wherewith he thought he would without all question hazard
himself to relieve the City, in which he had so great a pledge as his own Son;
wherefore having with mavelous diligence made all the Avenues to be cut off,
and blocked up, he caused another great Fort to be raised at the mouth of the
Highway, in which he put Gastone Spinola with one thousand Foot, and all the
Army was with admirable order disposed in such manner, that standing all to
their Arms at every little stir, the whole Plain was on all sides filled with
Forts and Squadrons, each between the other, which, Flanked with the Troops of
Horse, and with field pieces in their Front, made it most difficult to get
through the Town, without very great danger, or without coming presently to a
Battle. But want of money troubled the Count no less than this, for the
neighboring Provinces much forwarder to promise, than able to perform had been
able to raise but half the money they had promised, whereof he had been fain to
spend a great part in satisfying the Soldiers that had mutinied at Liramont,
to the end that being quieted they might come to reinforce the Army; wherefore
the provisions of Spain proceeding with the wonted delays, the Count was
reduced into very great perplexity how to maintain his Army, which being all
employed either in the approaches, or guard of the Forts, could not enlarge it
self to live upon the Country, though the season of the year, and the fields
full of fruits, were very favorable for the sustenance both of men and horses:
To these respects was added, the difficulty of the siege, which (by reason of
the strength of the City, the number and valor of the defendents, and the
prudence and diligence of Monsieur de Vic) proved so hard and dangerous, that
many counseled to raise the Camp without losing themselves upon an impossible
enterprise, and not stay for the King of France his coming, who being
victorious in Bourgongne, was already known to be moving toward Picardy.

But in the midst of these difficulties there arose new unthought-of accidents:
The people of Cambray accustomed to live under the pleasing Government of the
Archbishops, had impatiently brook'd the Rule of the Marshall de Balagny, and
their disdain and heart-burning had increased so much the more after the King
of France, depriving the Crown of the Dominion it had over it, had granted it
in Fee to Balagny, whose haughty covetous mind did very much augment the
discontents of the Citizens. To this evil was added the insupportable nature of
Madam de Balagny the Mareschals Wife, who being partaker in the Investment, did
not only turn and govern her Husband as she pleased, but with extortions,
rapines, womanish taunts, and extreme ill-usage had brought the City into, a
general desperation: wherefore when the Spanish Camp began to hover in those
quarters, the people under color of sending to demand relief from the King,
had dispatched unto him two of their most noted Citizens, who propounded, that
if the King would take away the Dominion of the City from Balagny, and
incorporate it into the Crown of France, they at their own charge would pay the
Garrison, and defend and maintain it against the siege of the Spaniards, so that
the King should be put to no manner of trouble nor expense at all; which
request having been rejected by means of Madam Gabriele, infinitely beloved and
favored by the King* they were returned, and by putting the business in
despair, had absolutely stirred up and enraged the people. When men were thus
ill-affected, the necessity of the Siege came upon them, The Sieur de Ba^agny
in nec^ssity, coins copper-money
in which Monsieur de Balagny being utterly without money, found a way to coin
certain pieces of Copper, commanding by a public Proclamation, that every one
should receive them without dispute, they being afterward to be changed, when
the City was freed from the present siege; but many being very backward to take
that money, (as well because they knew not what the event of the siege would
be, as because they trusted little to the faith of Balagny) were the cause that
he and his Wife used many violent ways to make their Decree be obeyed; by
which, the people exasperated, took their opportunity when (the breach being
made) all the Soldiers were disposed in several places upon the wall, and
rising tumultuously in arms, The Citizens rising in an uproar, make themselves
Masters of a gate, and send their Deputies to capitulate with the Count de
Fuentes.
made themselves Masters first of the Marketplace, kept by a Mainguard of two
hundred Switzers, and then of the Port de S. Sepulcher, which as furthest from
danger, was least guarded, and then dispatched two of the principal Citizens to
treat of surrendering upon certain Conditions: These happening into the
Squadron of the Prince of Avellino, were sent by him to the Conde de Fuentes,
who being assured by the Prince that the Citizens had indeed made themselves
Masters of the Port^ de S. Sepulcher, commanded the Battery to cease, and
applied himself to treat with the Deputies.

In the mean time Monsieur de Vic having heard the noise, was come into the
Marketplace, striving to appease the tumult, and quiet the Citizens with
effectual persuasions, since that by force they could not be compelled, being
very many in number, fierce in courage, well armed, and, which imported more,
not only Masters already of all the streets, but also of a gate, whereby they
might let in the Spanish Army at their pleasure: but his words did no good at
all, so that accommodating himself to the necessity of time, he exhorted them
to treat warily with the Spaniards, and to secure their business well, lest
they should run into the precipice of being sacked, as it often uses to happen
to those who slacken their defense, while they treat of composition. This he
said, and persuaded the people, because he desired to prolong the time, that in
the interim he might withdraw his Soldiers into the Citadel. After him came
Madam de Balagny, who with a manly spirit made a long discourse unto the
people: but her presence did rather stir up than appease the tumult; insomuch,
that scarce were the Soldiers gotten into the Citadel, when the people began
to open the gate they had got into their power. The Deputies at the same time
came in with the Capitulations subscribed by the Conde Fuentes, which in
substance contained, That the City should be freed from plunder, The Citizens
open the gates and receive their Deputies with the Capitulations, and the
Spaniards are brought into Cambray.
and should have a general pardon for all things past; That the Citizens should
enjoy their ancient Privileges, and remain under the obedience of the
Archbishop, as they were wont to be before; which Articles being accepted by
the people, Gastone Spinola and Count Giovan Giacopo Belgiojoso entered without
delay into the City with three hundred Horse, and after them Agostino Messia
with the Spanish Foot, and without any tumult or loss to the Inhabitants,
possessed themselves of the place. The same night entered the Archbishop with
the Conde de Fuentes, and were received with mavelous joy by the Citizens,
who were glad after the space of so many years to see themselves free from the
vexation of an insolent power, and to return to their old manner of Government.

In the mean time the French were retired into the Citadel, with a resolution
to defend it a long time; but they presently perceived the impossibility of
their design; for having opened the Magazines of Corn, and other Victual, they
scarce found wherewithal to subsist two days: This unthought-of defect
proceeded from Madam de Balagny, who no less imprudent than covetous, had
(unknown to her Husband) sold all that was in the public Store; so that the
Count de Fuentes having sent to summon the Defendents to yield before the
Artillery were planted, they seeing they could not sustain themselves, did to
the wonder of every one that knew not the cause, and to the amazement of the
Count himself, accept the proposition of surrendering upon certain Articles that
were demanded by them; which the Count showing to bear respect to the youth of
the Duke of Rhetelois, and to the valor and reputation of Monsieur de Vic; but
indeed, that he might not make the obtaining of the Castle more difficult to
himself, did very largely grant them.

The Conditions were, That the Citadel should be consigned into the hands of
the Count de Fuentes, with all the Artillery and Ammunition of War; and that on
the other side, he should be obliged to cause the Castle of Clery, taken by his
men a while before, to be dismantled within six days; that the Duke of
Rhetelois, the Marshall de Balagny, Monsieur de Vic, and all the other Lords,
Commanders, Gentlemen and Soldiers of what Nation soever, might march out in
rank and file, their Cornets and Colors flying, Match lighted, and Bullet in
mouth, and that to that end, those Colors should be restored unto them, that
had been left in the City, and that they might march on their way, with
Trumpets sounding and Drums beating: that the Arms, Horses, and Baggage
belonging to Soldiers, which had been left in the Town, should be restored;
and if any thing were wanting, the value of it should be paid at that price
which should be agreed upon by Monsieur du Rosne, and Colonel Messia on the one
part, and the Sieurs de Vic and de Buy on the other; that likewise Madam de
Balagny, with all the other women, the sick and wounded men, Courtiers, and
servants of any person whatsoever might go forth freely; that the prisoners
should be freed without ransom; that Monsieur de Balagny's debts, whether about
the money, or any other occasion, should be remitted, neither should he be
molested, or his baggage seized on for them; that all that the said Marshall,
his Wife, Sons, Captains, Officers and Servants had done in times past, should
be forgiven and forgotten, neither should any of them be therefore questioned,
either by the Catholic King, or the Citizens of Cambray.

These Conditions were concluded upon the seventh of October, and were executed
the ninth, which day all went forth in the manner determined, marching toward
Peronne; only Madam de Balagny, (being desperate no less because she was to
leave the Principality, than because of her own improvidence, by reason whereof
they were necessitated to yield the Citadel) out of anguish and affliction of
mind, fell grievously sick, and not only refusing to take medicines, but also
even all kinds of nourishment, died miserably before the time of their marching
out was come.

The Count de Fuentes having so fortunately obtained so many and so signal
Victories, whereby his Name resounded with infinite fame, seeing his men were
tired, The Count de Fuentes having put the Government of Cambray into the
Archbishops hands, leaves Picardy, and goes to Bruxels.
and out of order, by their past toils and sufferings, and finding himself in
exceeding great straits for money to satisfy the arrears of their pay,
resolved to dissolve his Army, and draw it into several quarters; so much the
rather, because the season was near to the usual rains of Autumn, and because
the King of France was expected in Picardy with a victorious Army; wherefore
having put five hundred Spanish Foot into the Citadel of Cambray, under the
command of Agostino Messia, and having left two thousand German Foot to defend
the Town, he gave the Archbishop liberty to govern the City, in the same manner
he was wont to do, before it came into the power of the Duke of Alancon; and
having divided his Foot into the Towns of Artois, Heynault, and Flanders, he
went to the City of Bruxels, at such time when the King of France was come with
the greatest speed he could possibly to Compeign, being exceedingly afflicted
at the sufferings of his party, for which not only that whole Province was sad
and grieved, but even the very City of Paris was full of fear and terror,
seeing the Spaniards run on victorious in a Country so near it.

These were the Progresses of War between the French and the Spaniards upon the
confines of Flanders; but they were no less prosperous this year; for the same
party in the Province of Bretaign, though they were still managed under the
name of the League; for the Duke de Mercoeur (though there was no very good
correspondence between him and the Spaniards; yet making use of their shelter,
in things which were of common interest, and holding the principal places of
the Province, and the major part of the Nobility of the Country at his
devotion) hindered all the proceedings of the Marshall d' Aumont, and Monsieur
de St. Luc, who commanded on the Kings side; and though for the most part, they
spent their time in incursions, and actions of small moment, wherein fortune
often varied, yet the sum of affairs inclined still in favor of the Duke,
insomuch that he had in a manner reduced all the Province into his power; The
Marshall d' Aumon^ is killed with a Musket shot.
which was the more easily effected by him, because the Marshall d' Aumont,
while he fruitlesly busied himself about the siege of the Castle of Comper, a
wondrous strong place, was wounded under the left Elbow with a Musket shot,
which broke both the Bones, whereof he died within a while after. Wherefore
Monsieur de St. Luc, who succeeded him in that command, though a Cavalier of
exceeding great valor, yet neither by the authority of his person, nor by the
dignity of his charge, could he equal the reputation wherewith the Marshall
upheld the precipitate declining of affairs; to which was added, that the King
having conferred the dignity of Marshall upon Monsieur de Lavardin, which St.
Luc expected should have been conferred upon him, he was afterward by
discontent of mind, much cooled, and taken off from action; so that it was
necessary for the King to call him to him, and give him hopes of rising to
those honors which seemed due unto his merit, by which changes, the affairs of
War, on that side, went on but with small success.

But if the affairs of the League seemed something prosperous in Bretagne, the
adverseness of them in Dauphine, reduced the state of it to utter ruin. The
Duke of Nemours held in that Province, the City of Vienne, whither he had
retired after the loss of Lions, and having well fortified the Town with the
Castle of Pipet, near unto it, and furnished them with French Horse, and
Italian Foot, he did continually infest the Country about Lions, obstructing
the ways, and interrupting the commerce, which that Merchant-City has with the
Neighboring Provinces; so that by his fierceness and diligence, he put all the
Country of Lions into such fear, that from the beginning of the year, they had
begged of the King to send them such relief as might be sufficient to free them
from those streights to which they were reduced. But the King busied in the
affairs of Bourgongne, While the Duke of Nemours who upheld the League in
D^uphine, goes to Tu^in and Milan to get supplies, Colonel Disemieux his
Lieutenant delivers up the Fortresses unto the Duke of Montmorancy, whereupon
he seeing himself deprived of all retreat, in despair falls sick and dies.
gave order to the Duke of Montmorancy, (whom he had already declared
Constable) that he should go down from Languedoc, and assist the City of Lions
against the Duke of Nemours, which he preparing to do, Nemours knowing he was
unable to resist, and hold out of himself, resolved to make his addresses to
the Duke of Savoy, and to the Constable of Castille for supplies, for the
facilitating whereof, he determined to go personally to Turin and Milan,
leaving the Sieur de Disemieux, a Colonel of Foot, and a near Confident of his,
to govern his (...) and the Town of Vienne: But the High Constable Montmorancy,
coming much sooner than the Duke believed, united his Forces, with those of
Alfonso Corso, and fiercely made War against his party. Whereupon Disemieux,
either following the inclination of Fortune, (as most men are wont to do) or
not thinking his strength sufficient to make resistance, agreed underhand to
deliver up Vienne unto the Constable; provided, the Duke of Nemours his Forces
might be suffered to march away without molestation, and retire into Savoy; and
to the end the design might be the more easily effected, and not be opposed by
the Captains of the Garrison, or Officers of the Town, he secretly gave the
Castle of Pipet into the hands of Alfonso Corso; and then having unexpectedly
sent for the Constable to one of the Town-gates, which was guarded by those he
trusted, he at the same time let the Captains of the Garrison know, that the
Enemy was at the Gates, that he had delivered up the Castle, and had made an
agreement to admit him into the Town, upon condition that they might march safe
away: Wherefore they being confounded and affrighted at a thing never thought
on before, but much more at the urgency of the business, since the Constable
was already received in at the Gate, accepted of the safe conduct, without
contradiction, and retired unmolested to the confines of the Duke of Savoy. All
the other Towns followed the example of Vienne; insomuch, that the Duke of
Nemours returning out of Italy, found not any place where he could stay;
wherefore going to Anicy, a Town of his own Patrimony, he was so oppressed with
despair, that he fell into a grievous sickness, which brought him to his end in
the Autumn of this year.

Thus the whole Province of Dauphine being reduced unto the Kings obedience,
there remained only the War which Monsieur Les Diguieres (passing the Alps) had
carried into Piedmont, which though it varied with diversity of effects, and
with frequent valiant encounters, which by the difficulty of places where they
happened, were rendered more sharp and bloody; yet in the main it proved of very
great damage to the Duke of Savoy, whose Country was the seat of the War.

Nor were the affairs of the League more prosperous in Gas^ogne and Languedoc;
for though the Duke of Ioyeuse (who after his Brothers death had left the
Cloister of Capuchins, The Duke of Ioyeuse who formerly turned Capuchin for his
wifes death, now upon occasion of his brothers death leaves the Cloister, and
takes arms for the League.
and put on arms to sustain the weight of that Government) labored to keep the
Nobility united, under pretense of expecting what would be determined at Rome;
yet many of them weary of the War, and dejected by so many adversities of their
party, came in daily to acknowledge the King; and the Parliament of Toulouse
was so divided, that part of the Counselors declaring for the King, went forth
of the City, and retired to Chasteau Sarrazin, where being succored by the
Duke of Va^tadour, the Constable's Lieutenant in the Government of Languedoc,
and by the Marshall de Matignon Governor of Guienne, the War was fiercely
kindled: but fortune and the will of men inclining already to favor the King's
affairs, first the Town of Rhodez came in, with many Castles and Towns
depending upon it; and then Narbonne and Carcassonne, principal places for the
League, making a tumult, yielded themselves; so that the Duke of Ioyeuse was as
it were shut within the walls of Toulouse, and kept himself up with nothing
else but the mere hope of the Accommodation which was closely treated by
President Ieannin for the whole League; for the Duke of Mayenne who for that
purpose was come to Chalon, after the King's Absolution was published, (which
to the exceeding great prejudice of his own affairs, he had resolved by all
means to stay for) that he might show the end of his designs had been barely
respect of Religion; and that therefore he had never been withdrawn from the
Pope's obedience by any adversity whatsoever; being now freed from that
impediment, closed up the Treaty of Agreement, in which, as Head of the Par^y,
he reserved an entrance for all those that would follow him.

In the Treaty of this Accommodation there arose two wondrous great
difficulties, Difficulties that interposed themselves in the settling of the
Accommodation with the Duke of Mayenne.
which were very hard to be overcome; one, the great sum of the debts
contracted by the Duke of Mayenne, not only in many places, and with many
Merchants of the Kingdom of France, but also with the Switzers, Germans, and
Lorainers, for the raising of Soldiers; for the Duke of Mayenne standing upon
it to have them paid by the King, and he at that present not having money to
satisfy them, it was very difficult to find a mean in that business: the Duke
being resolved that his estate should not be liable to the payment; and on the
other side, the Creditors neither consenting to transfer nor defer what they
had trusted, but would have satisfaction in ready money; The other difficulty
was the commemoration of the late King's death; for all the Decrees and
Agreements made in favor of those of the League, who were returned unto the
Kings obedience, having still contained pardon and forgiveness of all past
offenses, except the death of Henry the Third, (which had always with express
words been distinguished and excepted:) The Duke of Mayenne would have such a
kind of mean found out, whereby on the one side he might not appear to have
been the Author of it; and on the other, he might not be subject to the
Inquisition which might be made concerning that business for the future, lest
under that pretense occasion might be taken some time or other to revenge past
injuries. It was extremely difficult to untie this knot; for not only the King
thought it very hard to let pass into oblivion so heinous a fact, and
pernicious an example of attempting against the persons of Kings, but also the
Parliament would not suffer it, and, it was most certain, the Queen Dowager,
who often had demanded justice, would oppose it.

These two difficulties hindered the concluding of the Accommodation in
Bourgongne; and the King being necessitated to go speedily into Picardy, had
taken President Ieannin with him to continue the Treaty; but nothing at all
having been concluded in the journey, much less could it be done when they were
come to Paris; for the affairs of the War with the Spaniards were brought into
so great danger, that the King and all his Ministers were taken up and
afflicted both in mind and body: wherefore the President was fain to follow the
Army into Picardy, whither the King marched with an intent to relieve the City
of Cambray; but the speedy victory of the Spaniards having taken away the
necessity of relief, the King being come to Fol-ambray, (a house of pleasure
built by King Francis the First for a hunting-seat) called all his Council to
him, The King being come to Fol-ambray, consults long about matters concerning
the Agreement with the Duke of Mayenne.
that the things appertaining to the peace with the Duke of Mayenne might with
maturity be discussed and determined. After much treating and much debating,
obstacles and oppositions arising in all things, it seemed most expedient to
send for the proofs and inquisitions that had been made by the Parliament
touching the Kings death, and also for some of the Presidents and Counselors
of that Court, to see what clearness there was in them, and that they might
determine which way was the best to manage the expedition of that business. The
Writings being seen, and the matter put into consultation, though some signs
appeared diversely against diverse persons, yet did there not appear any such
thing as was sufficient to determine the proceeding against any body; and
though neither the Queen Dowager as Plaintiff had yet brought in the
particulars of her accusation, nor the Parliament had dived very far into the
discussion and inquiry into that business; yet it was thought, the not
appearing, at that present, that the Duke of Mayenne or any of his were guilty
of that fact, might serve for a pretense of finding out a mean to satisfy his
honor, and likewise free him from the danger of future inquisition. Wherefore
it having been many days consulted of between the High Chancellor, the first
President Harlay, the Sieur de Villeroy, the Count de Schombergh, and President
Ieannin, they at last determined, That in the Decree which the King was to
cause to be published, and registered in the Parliament, there should be a
clause inserted, which in substance should contain, That the King having caused
the Process made upon the death of the late King to be viewed in the presence
of himself, the Princes of the Blood, and the Officers of the Crown in Council,
there had not been any token found against the Duke of Mayenne, nor against any
other Prince or Princess of his Blood; and that having been desirous for the
greater certainty, to hear what they alleged about it, they had sworn that
they had not any any knowledge of, The Duke of Mayenne and the Princes and
Princesses his Adherents are declared innocint of the death of Henry the Third.
nor participation in that crime; and that if they had known it, they would
have opposed the execution of it: Wherefore he did declare, that the Duke of
Mayenne, and all the other Princes and Princesses his Adherents were innocent
of that fact; and therefore he prohibited his Atturney-General to urge at any
time that they should be proceeded against, and likewise forbad the Court of
Parliament, and all other Officers and Lawyers, to make any inquisition about
it.

The difficulty concerning the payment of debts was also taken away: for the
King promised secretly to disburse unto the Duke of Mayenne Four hundred and
twenty thousand Crowns for the payment of his debts contracted to particular
persons; and as for the debt of the Leavies, the King freed the Duke of Mayenne
from it, constituting himself Play Master for him, and transferring the debt
upon the Crown, forbidding the Duke or his estate to be molested for that
occasion. It was likewise established, though not without dispute, that peace
should be made with the Duke of Mayenne, as Head of his Party; which the King
had refused, by reason of the multitude of those that were severally come in to
his obedience; and chiefly in respect of Paris, and the other principal Cities:
And the Duke of Mayenne for his own honor, and the reputation of his
agreement, stood obstinately for it.

The substance of the agreement with the Duke of Mayenne.
The King granted three places to the Duke of Mayenne for his security, which
were Soissons, Chalon, and Seure, the Dominion of which he was to hold for the
space of six years, and after the said term to restor^ them. He confirmed all
the Collations of Offices and Benefices that had been vacant by death during
his Government, provided the Possessors should take new Patents for them under
the Kings Broad-Seal. He made a Decree of oblivion and silence of all things
past, intelligences with Foreign Princes, raising of Moneys, exactions of
Taxes, impositions of Payments, gathering of Armies, demolishings or buildings
of Cities and Fortresses, acts of Hostility, killings of Men, and particularly
of the Marquess de Menelay, killed by Lieutenrnt Magny at la Fere; and finally,
all things done till the end of the War, which he with honorable expressions
declared and certified to have been undertaken and continued for the sole
respect and defense of Religion. He granted him the Government of the Isle of
France, and the Superintendence of the Finances; and to his Son the Government
of Chalon, separated and divided from the superiority of the Governor of
Bourgongne. He comprehended in the Capitulation all those that together with
him should reunite themselves under his obedience, and particularly the Duke of
Ioyeuse, the Marquess of Villars and the Sieur de Montpezat, the Duke of
Mayenne's Sons-in-law; Monsieur de l' Estrange Governor of Puyts, Monsieur de
S. Offange Governor of Rocheforte, the Sieur du Plessis Governor of Craon,
and the Sieur de la Severie Governor of Ganache. He suspended the Sentences
and Judgments past against the Duke of Mercoeur and against the Duke of Aumale,
till it were known whether they would be comprehended in the Accommodation;
granting to every one (besides the oblivion of what was past, and the full
enjoying of their Estates, Offices, and Dignities) leave within six weeks time
to come into the Capitulation, and adhere unto the peace.

Within these principal Conditions, and many other lesser ones, Difficulties
and oppositions in the Parliament of Paris, about receiving the Decree of the
Agreement with the Duke of Mayenne.
the Duke of Mayenne concluded the Agreement; but there was enough to do to get
this Decree accepted in the Parliament of Paris; for though the King with his
own mouth forbad the Queen-Dowagers Ministers to oppose the publication of it,
yet was there notwithstanding as great an obstacle and opposition: for Diana de
Valois Duchess of Angoulesme, and Bastard-Sister to the late King, appearing
personally in the Parliament, presented a Petition written and subscribed with
her own hand, whereby contradicting the confirmation of the Decree, she urged
to have them proceed in the Inquest about the Kings death: whereupon most of
the Counselors being stirred up, because the major part of their Fathers had
either been created by that King, or highly offended by the League, the
acceptance of the Decree could not be obtained; and yet the King with very
vehement Letters reprehended the Parliament, and declared that the public
peace and safety requiring that the Decree should be registered, his will and
command was that it should be accepted. Yet neither by this were the
Counselors of the Parliament quieted; but they came to this resolution, That
the Decree should be published, but with two conditions; one, That it should be
no prejudice to the right of the Duke of Mayenne's Creditors; the other, That
he should be obliged to come into the Parliament, and with his own mouth swear
that he had not been any way accessory to the fact; that he detested the
murder committed upon the Kings person, and promised not to save, protect, or
favor any one that in time to come should be questioned for it. At which
stubbornness the King more than moderately incensed, with grave resenting words
replied, That they should take heed how they put him to the trouble of leaving
the War, to come personally into the Parliament; That he was their King, and
that he would be obeyed by them. But neither did this protestation suffice; for
they determined to accept the Decree, but with such words as should show that
it was done by force of the Kings express command; which neither pleasing him
nor the Duke of Mayenne, it was necessary for the High Chancellor to go to
Paris, and after a long effectual demonstration of the interests of the general
quiet, cause the Decree at last to be approved, without clauses or conditions.

The Duke of Meyenne's example was followed, The Duke of Aumale incensed by
having been declared Rebel, keeps united with the Spaniards.
not only by those that were named in the Capitulation, but also by the
Marquess of St. So^^^n, the City and Parliament of Toulouse, and all the rest
which formerly held the party of the League, except the Duke of Aumale, who
having accorded with the Spaniards, and being exasperated by the Sentence
published this year by the Parliament, (wherein he had been declared Rebel)
would not consent to submit himself unto the Kings obedience. The Duke of
Mercoeur, though by means of his Sister the Queen-Dowager, The Duke of Mercoeur
Brother to the Q. Dowager, persists in his proposition of keeping Bret^gne to
himself.
he kept the Treaty of Agreement alive; yet being still full of hopes, by the
help of the Spaniards, to retain the Duchy of Bretagne, he deferred it, and
put off his determination till another time.

But in the interim, while the conditions of these Accommodations were treated
of, and discussed in the Council, the King exceedingly afflicted for his late
misfortune, and sollicitous by some means to repair the losse^ he had received,
wherein he seemed to bear a great part of the blame, as well by reason of his
too long stay at Lions, as of the ill-satisfaction he had given the Citizens of
Cambray in their requests, was still contriving in himself, and continually
consulting with his Commanders, to what enterprise he should apply himself. The
Duke of Nevers had formerly an intention to assault one of the places of the
County of Artois, belonging to the King of Spain, not only to do the same
mischief unto his Country, which he had done to the Jurisdiction of the King of
France; but also because he believed that long peace had abased the courage of
that people* and made many of their provisions for defense useless: Whereupon
he had exhorted the King, that increasing his Army to the greatest number he
could, he should unexpectedly fall upon Arras, or some other great City in
those quarters; judging that the Conde de Fuentes, troubled with the many
mutinies of several Nations, and reduced to extreme want of money, would very
hardly be able to reunite his Army time enough to relieve the place that should
be assaulted: But after that he being spent with a tedious indisposition,
departed this life at Nesle, The death of Lodovi Gonzago, Duke of Nevers.
this intention (which was set on foot by the reputation of the Author) came to
nothing; for the other Commanders thought it too dangerous an attempt to invade
the Bowels of an Enemies Country, where all the Towns are populous and
powerful, while by the loss of so many places, they were so much troubled at
home, and while the Spanish Garrisons overrunning all parts, kept the whole
Country in fear and terror.

True it is, that of all the places that were lost, their opinions concurred
not so well in the choice of that which they should assault, as they did in
refusing to invade the Enemies Country; for some held it best in the same heat
of affairs to besiege Cambray, to try to recover it before the Spaniards had
settled themselves, by mending the breaches that were lately made; but the
smallness of the Kings Army excluded this opinion, it not being sufficient to
begird a City of so great circuit, exceedingly well fortified with a very
strong Garrison. Many others counseled to fall upon Dourlans, to take the same
way to streighten Cambray which the Spaniards had done; but the oppositions
against this advice were, the strength of the place, and the diligence
wherewith it was guarded by Hernando Tells Portocarero, who was the Governor
of it: So that at last the opinion that prevailed was that of the Marshall de
Byron, and of Monsieur de St. Luc, (who was come to the Camp to execute the
Office of General of the Artiller^, which was left by Monsieur de la Guiche, to
whom the King had given the Government of Lions) they counseled to besiege la
Fere, a place of chief importance, but shut up in such manner by a Fen that
invirons it, that there are but only two ways to come from the field unto the
Town: wherefore they demonstrated that by blocking up those two Avenues with a
Fort upon each of them, the place might with a small number of men be so
besieged and straightened, that there being no means to relieve it with Victual,
it might without much difficulty be taken, not by force, but famine.

Upon the 8th of Novembe^ the King lays siege to la Fere, a place strong both
by art and nature.
The King resolved to follow this advice; and having drawn his Forces together
which were scattered through the Province, drew near unto la Fere upon the
eighth of November with Five thousand Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse, and
having taken the Avenues, and caused the people of the Country round about to
come in to work, he in a few days raised two Forts, each of which being able to
hold One thousand Foot, and conveniently furnished with Artillery, did totally
block up the ways unto the Town; the rest of the Foot in respect of the season,
lay in a great Village upon the edge of the Fen, and the Horse took up their
Quarters in the Villages on the North-side toward Flanders to hinder relief.
Don Alvaro Osorio, an old experienced Soldier, was in la Fere; For the
Vice-Seneschal de Montelimar, to whom the Duke of Mayenne had entrusted that
place, had by little and little given it up unto the Spaniards, reserving only
the title of Count de la Fere, and the revenue of the place, with other
recompenses, which had been liberally given him, first by the Archduke Ernest,
and then by the Conde de Fuentes. The place abounded in Ammunition of War* for
the relics of all the Catholic Kings Armies which of late years had marched
into France, had been left there, and the Garrison of Spaniards, Italians and
Germans, was not only sufficient, but more than need required for the defense
of it, which increased the want of Victual, whereof (there being but small
provision in the Town) the Kings sudden approach had not given them time to get
in any; wherefore the Forts being raised, and the passages of both ways shut up
on all sides, the Defendents began from the first days of the siege to feel
great scarcity of Victual.

The Archduke Albert Cardinal of Austria goes to be Governor in Flanders.
About this time Albert Cardinal of Austria destined by the Catholic King to
the Government of the Provinces of Flanders, was come to Bruxelles, and having
received the Administration, and the Army from the Conde de Fuentes, he began
to think how he might uphold that degree of prosperity and glory, in which his
Predecessors in a few months had settled himself with victorious actions; and
because the redoubled letters of Don Alvaro from the very beginning of the
siege gave notice of the want of Victual in la Fere, he determined before all
things else, to apply himself to the relief of that place; but it was difficult
to resolve upon, for the Army out of order by the toils and sufferings of the
late Summer, was divided into many several places, to their Winter Quarters,
and there for want of pay had made many insurrections, so that the Italian
Cavalry had mutinied afresh, and turned to seize upon Liramont; in another
place Gastone Spinola's Tertia of Sicilians had done the like, two Tertia's of
Spaniards having cast off their obedience, did likewise quarter themselves at
discretion in advantageous places; and the Walloons not openly in Rebellion,
did yet deny to stir out of their Quarters, unless they were fully paid;
insomuch that before the Merchants could satisfy the Bills of exchange brought
by the Cardinal, 1596.
and that the Soldiers could be paid and regulated with that money, much time of
necessity must be spent; and therefore there could not be a body of an Army
drawn together sufficient for that or any other enterprise. To this was added
the crossness of the season, by reason of raines and other incommodities so
contrary, that before better weather it was impossible to think of stirring
with men, Artillery, and other provisions which War requires; besides, to enter
into an Enemies Country, nay, and to the very center of one of their Provinces,
in a time, when not only the fields neither afforded sustenance for men, or
horses, but even the crop of the late harvest was consumed by the ruinous War
that had been there already, was not a thing to be thought on, by reason of the
difficulty of feeding the Army, and for fear of being reduced to some sinister
accident, by the diligence of the King of France; which considerations seemed
greater to the Cardinal, not accustomed to the dangerous experiments of War;
wherefore, after long consultation, it was determined in the Council, that
Nicolo Basti, marching with part of the light horse into Picardy, should
attempt to put some quantity of victuals into la Fere, wherewith the besieged
might subsist till the favourableness of the season, and the course of affairs
in Flanders would afford means to give them full relief.

With these Counsels ended the year Fifteen hundred ninety five, leaving many
occasions of War and bloody encounters kindled for the revolution of the year
following; in the beginning whereof, the first event was the recovery of
Marseilles, 1596.
a City and Haven of high consequence, standing in the County of Provence, upon
the sho^r of the Mediterranean Sea. The people of this City rich by Trafique of
Merchandise, and numerous in inhabitants, hold many privileges, and enjoy many
important immunities, obtained from the time that they were subject to the
Counts of Provence; and amply confirmed afterward, The City of Marseilles in
the County of Provence, is governed by the election of a Consul and Lieutenant.
when they came under the Dominion of the Kingdom of France, among which the
most principal is this, that the Citizens choose a Consul of themselves, who,
together with a Lieutenant named by him without other suffrage, governs the
affairs of the Town, keeps the Keys of the Gates, and has the care of the
defense as well of the City as of the Haven; and this Prerogative, which looks
rather like a kind of liberty, than an entire subjection, the Marsilians have
always conserved with that vivacity, that is proper to their nature and
disposition, not admitting any kind of Garrison, and governing themselves with
customs, fit for a Merchant and Seafaring life, of which two sorts of persons
the inhabitants for the most part consist.

In the beginning, when the first originals of the League began to spring up,
this City, by the authority of Monsieur de Vins, and by reason the Consul and
Lieutenant had been gained, took part with that side; and though by persuasion
of the Countess de Saux, it first received the Duke of Savoy, and then out of
jealousy of their own liberty excluded him again, within a little while, and
though the Count de C^rsy and the Marquess de Villars, were often called for
thither, for more security, yet it had ever preserved its own being, and kept
free from all foreign subjection. True it is, that having from the beginning
of the War elected Charles Cas^nt their Consul, Carlo Doria, by order from the
Catholic King, goes with ten galleys to Marseilles, to foment the Consul and
Lieutenant of that City.
and he having nominated Louis de Aix, his Lieutenant, men of subtle natures,
and of bold fierce dispositions, they agreed so well among themselves, and had
so great authority with the people, that continuing in their Magistracy for
many years, without permitting any successors to be chosen in their places,
they had made themselves as it were Lords of the City, and ruled it their own
way; But after the declining of the affairs of the League put every one upon a
necessity of thinking of himself, these men knowing themselves envied and
ill-willed by the major part of the principal Citizens, and being in fear, by
reason of their consciousness of many misdeeds, which they had committed, to
keep themselves in their Government, thought of applying themselves to the
Spanish party, and held Treaties in that Court, about putting that City into
the hands of the Catholic King, which being of so high importance and
convenience to his Kingdoms, as its greatness, strength, richness, and
situation showed it to be, orders were given to Carlo Doria, that going from
Genoua, into that Port, with ten Galleys well armed, and manned, under pretense
of sailing toward Spain, he should favor their power, and attempts, to the
end that being backed with his Forces, they might have the better means
dexterously to draw the people to put themselves under the Spanish Signory,
which Doria performing with infinite diligence, things went on in such a
^anner, that the Catholic King was not far from obtaining his intent; and so
much the rather, because this attempt was colored over with many reasons, for
which they pretended the Dominion of the County of Provence belonged to the
Infanta Isabella, besides those other rights she had to the Crown of France.

The King of France makes complaint unto the Pope, concerning the attempts of
the Spaniards.
The King of France being jealous, that the leavies of Spain and Italy, and the
great preparation of a Fleet which the Catholic King made, tended to this end,
and that the stay which the Conde de Fuentes and the Duke of Pastrana (who were
gone from Flanders) made at Geneva, was to oversee that business, was exceeding
much troubled in mind, because he could not turn that way, and gave Commission
to Monsieur d' Ossat to make complaint about it to the Pope, letting him know,
that if he withstood not that design, he should be constrained by necessity to
call the Turkish Fleet into the Mediterranean Sea for his relief; which being
effectually performed by d' Ossat, the Pope structen, and grown pale, either
through fear or anger, made a grave discourse against it: and yet, the Kings
Agent showing, that if Marseilles, and the other Towns of Provence, should fall
into the hands of the Spaniards, Avignon also, and other Towns of the Pope's
would not be without danger; he promised to use his endeavors to make that
attempt be laid aside. But there being added to the Kings complaints, the
interposition of the Venetian and Florentine Ambassadors, jealous, that a City
and Haven of so great consequence, and that overlooks Italy so nearly, should
fall to the augmentation of the Spanish Monarchy; the Pope having often
consulted about this business, and not finding any provision against it, which
he thought fit, took it to be expedient, that the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, who was
returning into France, should pass by Marseilles, and in his name use
convenient mediation to Casaut, and remove him from his design; which, though
it was diligently executed, produced but small effect; for Casaut, a fierce
man, and one more stout than prudent, did not withdraw himself for that, from
his already established appointment; so that the Venetian Senate, and the Grand
Duke began to think of some more potent remedies to oppose that endeavor; nor
was the Pope altogether averse from their intention. But this stone of scandal
was removed, either by the King's wonted fortune, or by the courage and
diligence of his Ministers.

He had newly conferred the Government of that Province upon the Duke of Guise,
and to advance matters toward their proper end, had also chosen Monsieur de
les Diguieres his Lieutenant, who, though they agreed not very well together,
by reason of the difference of their Religion, and of the ancient diversity of
their factions, were yet both ill-affected to the Duke of Espernon, who,
contending that that Government was lawfully his, used all his endeavors and
utmost industry, to put himself in the possession of it, and to drive out, no
less those of the King's party, than those that yet held for the League;
wherefore the King, desirous that he should, by some means, be constrained to
quit what he already possessed there, receiving other Governments in other
parts of the Kingdom, had appointed the Duke of Guise as his old Emulator, and
les Diguieres as an honest man, but his bitter enemy, to secure the affairs of
Provence. This determination had also other ends, and more remote
considerations; for the Duke being newly come into the friendship and obedience
of the King, with condition, to have that Government, to which the House of
Loraine had some pretensions, by the ancient hereditary rights of Anjou; the
King thought it convenient to assure himself of him, by giving him a Lieutenant
of such a condition, as not only was faithful by ancient experience, but also
wary, and resolute to oppose whatsoever attempt the Duke (in so great a discord
of men's minds, their old enmities not fully laid aside) might perchance
contrive. To these, another important respect was added, that les Diguieres,
and Colonel Alfonso Corso, residing both in Dauphine, disagreed, and thwarted
one another in the service, to the prejudice of common affairs; wherefore the
King thought to remove the occasion of that discord, by sending les Diguieres
into Provence, and by electing Colonel Alfonso Lieutenant to the Prince of
Conty, who was newly declared Governor of Dauphine.

But though the Duke of Guise nourished sincere thoughts, and no indirect ends,
yet being come into the Province, either not being well satisfied to have a
Lieutenant of so great credit, and of another Religion; or desiring that the
businesses with the Duke of Espernon should pass under the name, and by the
means of les Diguieres, not to put his own authority and name of Governor in
doubt, he had given charge to his Lieutenant to put the Garrisons out of many
Towns, which the Duke of Espernon held in them; and he himself going to Aix,
applied his mind wholly to the recovery of Marseilles, as a thing of greater
glory and importance, without allowing part in that to any body; and though
many treaties, held by the means of men banished out of that City, proved vain
and fruitless, yet at last he gained one Captain Pietro Liberta, of Corsica by
extraction* but born and bred in Marseilles, who, The Duke of Guise plots to
get into Marseilles, by means of Captain Liberta of Corsica, who guarded a Port
there.
with some certain Foot, guarded one of the Town-gates; wherefore, some of the
Exiles being got unknown into the City, and having secretly stirred up the
minds of many, who hated the tyranny of Casaut, and who feared the Dominion of
the Spaniard, they resolved, that upon the eighteenth day of February, the Duke
of Guise should, with a good number of Horse and Foot, be, about break of day,
at a neighboring Village, where, if certain signs were given him by them of
the plot, he should draw near to the Port Royale, (a Gate so called) to be
received in with all his Forces; whereupon, having drawn the men together,
which he had in that Province, except those of les Diguieres, (to whom he would
not impart any thing of his design, that he might not share in the honor of
it,) he made show that he would go and besiege a Town within five Leagues of
Marseilles; and whilst men's minds were amused on that side, he turning his
Forces another way, the evening before the day appointed, advanced, with very
great silence, toward the City; in which march, though in a very dark, and
extreme rainy night* and through dirty uneven ways, he made so much haste,
that he came in the morning, according to appointment, to certain houses near
unto the Church of St. Julian* to expect there till the countersigns were given
him.

They that were o^ the plot, doubting that the strange ill weather might have
stayed the Dukes journey, sent some of their soldiers forth of the gates, to
the end, that discovering (according to the custom) if the coast were clear
round about, they might come to know whether he were arrived or no; These
returning back with exceeding great haste, and saying, they had discovered
armed men, under St. Iulian's, were the cause that Louis d' Aix (who was come
to the gate a while before) after he had given the Consul notice of the
discovery, went out himself, with twenty of his most trusty men, to see whether
that were true which the Soldiers related. As soon as he was out of the gate,
they of the design shut down all the Portcullices; nor was it long before the
Consul came, who, while he was questioning his Soldiers, of what they had
reported, was suddenly set upon by Pietro Liberta, and four of his companions,
and being at first knocked down with a great blow of a Partesan, was presently
killed by them with their daggers; which being luckily effected, and the whole
guard willingly following the will of their Captain, the Countersignes were
given by fire to the Duke of Guise, who being advanced to draw near unto the
Gate, met with Aix the Lieutenant Governor, and without much dispute routed him
so, that, being wounded, and in a very ill taking* he ran back; where, having
found the gate shut, and possessed, he was constrained to save himself in the
moat, and from thence scaling the Wall near unto the Haven, got into the utmost
parts of the City* where, calling all his adherents into Arms, together with
Fabian Casaut Son to the Consul, who was already slain, he marched up
tumultuously with above Five hundred armed men, to recover the Gate; but in the
mean time, it had been opened, and the Duke of Guise was entered with his
Forces, and on the other side, the exiles calling the Citizens and common
people to liberty, had raised the whole Town; wherefo^e, after that Aix and
Casaut had fought for the space of half an hour at the entry of the street that
led to the Port Royal, the tumult still increasing every where of those that
being in Arms cried out Vive le Roy, et Les Fleurs-delis, they fearing to be
caught in the midst, retired into the Townhouse, where, being fiercely pressed
by the Duke of Guise, who, among the bullets, stones, pieces of wood,
fireworks, which flew on every side, fought undauntedly at the head of his
men, they being unable to resist, fled secretly from thence, and crossing the
Haven in a Boat, got one of them into St. Maries-Church, and the other into the
Convent of St. Victoir, and their men being left without help, were, in a very
little time all cut in pieces.

The whole City was already run to the Duke of Guise, with white Scarfs;
whereupon he not losing a minutes time, at the same instant assaulted, and with
small resistance possessed himself of the Forts of S. Iehan, and of Cape de
More, which are upon the Sea, and from thence began without delay to play his
Artillery upon Doria's Galleys, which were gotten near the mouth of the Haven:
great was the fright and tumult in the Galleys; but Doria, who had wisely kept
himself far from the Forts, and in the beginning of the uproar had made all his
Soldiers imbark, got out happily without receiving any harm, After a short
fight the Duke of Guise makes himself master of the Ci y and Forts of
Marseilles, and drives Carlo Dorias Galleys out of the Haven.
and putting out to Sea made away from the City. The Duke of Guise, victorious
every where, was busied all that day in taking care, that the Town might not be
indammaged in the tumult, and having lodged his men in the most principal
posts, made himself absolute Master of the City, with so much the greater
facility, because with his courage in fighting, and prudence in appeasing the
uproar, he had exceedingly won the affections of the Marsilians. Louis d' Aix,
and Fabian Casaut yielded the next after, having articled, that they might go
freely to Genona with their Goods, and that none of their adherents should be
proceeded against with more than banishment; the City, in this manner,
remaining free from their usurped Dominion, and utterly reduced unto the Kings
obedience. The gaining of this place was very seasonable, and of great
consequence, being a principal Port of the Mediterranean Sea, and a proper
landing place for the commerce of many Nations; and so much the more seasonable
was it at that time, when the Spanish power had already got footing in it; for,
if with the benefit of time, they had settled themselves there, it would have
been wondrous difficult, by reason of the neerness of the Catholic Kings other
States, to drive them out again.

In the mean time, while the reunion of the County of Provence is thus
prosecuted, the besieged in la Fere were reduced to exceeding great want of
victual; wherefore Nicolo Basti, who was destined to carry them relief, being
come to Doway, was considering with himself, which way he should manage the
business, to get some quantity of provisions into the Town; and every
resolution seeming difficult, not only because the King's Cavalry, did with
very great diligence obstruct all the ways, but because the narrow passages
that led to the Town were so much encumbered by the largeness of the Forts, that
there was no hope of getting past them; and yet necessity urging, he gave
Alvaro Osorio notice, that he should keep some little Boats ready to come forth
of the Town, as soon as the sign was given him, and to draw near the Banks of
the Fen, to receive the relief which he would attempt to bring unto that place;
which intelligence being happily got into the Town, and the appointment made,
he marched from Doway with Six hundred horse, and came by night to Chasteler,
where he caused the Gates to be kept locked, to the end, that the French might
not know any thing of his design: And having that day provided, that every one
of his men should carry a Bag of Meal behind him, and a bundle of Match about
his neck, (for they had also great want of that in la Fere) he set forth when
it began to grow dark, and having past the River Sum, went upon the way of
St. Quentin, and leaving that Town upon the right hand, marched with so much
diligence, that upon the sixteenth day of March in the morning, he came ne^r
the quarters of the Kings Cavalry, who being advertised by the Sentinels
shootings, took the Alarm, and got speedily to horse, believing that some
relief of the enemy was near; but, a thick mist, which, by chance, rose by
break of day, was so favorable to Basti's designs, Nicolo Basti, under favor
of a thick mist, passes through the Kings quarters, carries relief to the
besieged of la Fere, and returns to Camb^ay without the least loss.
that the Kings Corpse de Gardes, betaking themselves to their arms on all
sides, could not discover which way the Enemy came; and while they warily
endeavored to know and make discovery, Basti, without meeting any body,
passing between the quarter of the Reiters, and that of the Duke of Bouillon,
came to the bank of the Fen near the current of the River, and having found
Osorio ready with his Boats to receive the relief, he made the Meal and Match
be unladed with great celerity, faced about, and with the same speed, seeing
the French and German Cavalry, who at last having notice of his arrival, had
placed themselves upon the Road of St. Quentin, to hinder his retreat, he took
a contrary way, and falling into that which leads to Guise, came back
fortunately to Cambray, without meeting any opposition.

This relief (in which industry and fortune were equal sharers) gained Basti a
wonderful reputation; yet gave but little help to the besieged; the Meal that
was brought lasting them but a little while, The King makes the Course of the
River S^mi^e to be stopped* with a design to make the water rise into la Fere,
but after many difficulties, the effect answers not the intention.
by reason of their great number, and the King, who from day to day had new
Forces came up to him, straightened the siege more closely, and stopped up all the
ways, which being cut off, and fortified with Banks and Trenches, and kept
with strong guards of Horse, left no hope at all of thinking of new relief. But
the siege being prolonged by the constancy of the Defendants, the King was
persuaded by the reasons of some of his Engineers, to stop the course of the
River which caused the Fen on the lower side, thinking to make it swell and
rise in such manner, that the Defendants should be constrained either to yield
or drown. This work was begun with an exceeding great ^umber of Pioneers, drawn
together from all the neighboring places, but though they wrought at it with
great art, and no less assiduity, yet the rains of the season, which from time
to time increased the current of the River, which ordinarily was quiet and
gentle, hindered the progress by breaking down the Banks, often carrying away
the Piles, and in one hour frustrating the labors of many days; and yet the
King being himself present at the work, it was at last brought to perfection.
But it was no sooner finished, when it appeared, how deceitful the fancies of
Engineers prove oftentimes; for the Town being much higher than the Fen, (a
thing foreseen from the beginning by many, and constantly oppugned by the
authors of the design,) the water rose not above a foot or two in the Town, and
was so long making that increase, that the inhabitants had convenience to
remove their things into higher places, without receiving any damage; though
the water falling within two days, by having broke through the lowest part of
the Fen in many places, the Town remained full of dirt and mud, by the
exhalation whereof the Air being corrupted, caused dangerous diseases in the
Town, so that the besieged being endamaged only by accident, and after the
space of many days; the labors and endeavors of the Kings Army proved fruitless
in their principal intent.

There yet remained the wonted hope of Famine, which, after so many months
siege increased exceedingly, and was already become irrepairable; nor did any
thing make the Defendants hold out, but hope of relief. The Cardinal was intent
with his utmost endeavors upon giving it to them; for having in great part
quieted those that had mutined, and conveniently paid his men, he had set the
Army in a readiness to attempt the effecting of it, but none of his Commanders
(among which, the principal were the Duke of Arescot, the Marquess of Ran^y,
and Francisco de Mendozza, the Admiral of Aragon) counseled him to adventure
his Camp upon that enterprise; and the reason was in a readiness, for not only
the King in the space of many months, had had full convenience to fortify his
own quarters extraordinarily, but that which imported more, he had put strong
Garrisons, and many Horse into S. Quentin, Monstrueil, Boulogne, and all the
other Towns that stand round la Fere, in such manner, that if the Spanish Camp
should pass beyond them to raise the siege, they remaining at their backs,
would cut off the ways, and take away the concourse of Provisions; so that if
the enterprise of making the King dislodge, should require many days, (as it
was certainly to be doubted) the Army would be put in danger of some hard
encounter; To this was added, that the King, having after the publication of
the Agreement received the Duke of Mayenne with great demonstrations of honor,
being come with his attendants to wait upon him in the Camp before la Fere, and
the Constable Montmorancy, the Duke of Montpensier, and the greater part of the
Lords of all the Kingdom being come unto the Army, he had under his Colors
Eighteen thousand Foot, and little less than Five thousand Horse; an Army so
potent, especially by reason of the valor of the Cavalry, that it was
necessary to proceed with great circumspection, in advancing so far into that
Province, against so great Forces, and in the midst of so many of the Enemies
Towns. The Cardinal likewise was not ignorant, that the States of Holland,
desirous that the War should continue in Fran^e, had set forth a fleet of many
Ships to land men at Boulogne, in relief of the King of France; and that the
Queen of England, though the King consented not to all her demands, had yet, to
uphold the common interests, sent out a Navy to his assistance, with Eight
thousand Foot aboard it, which it was believed were to land in the same place;
wherefore, the Commanders doubted, that these Forces uniting together, it would
not only be vain to attempt to relieve la Fere, but also very dangerous to
make their retreat.

These causes fully debated in the Counsel, made the Cardinal take a resolution
to try to do it by way of diversion: for, by encamping before some Place of
importance belonging to the King, either he should constrain him to rise from
la Fere with his whole Army, to succor the place so straightned, or if
(persisting in the siege) he should not care to relieve it, he might easily get
another place as good as la Fere. But there arose no less difficulties in
chosing the place, that should be pitched upon; for Guise, Han, Guines, and the
other such like places that were nearest to Flanders, were not to be compared
unto la Fere; and S. Quentin, Monstrueil, and Boulogne were so well fortified,
and manned, that it was impossible to think of attaining them; so that between
the ambiguity of these considerations, the Cardinal would have been long
unresolved, if Monsieur du Rosne had not secretly persuaded him to a new
enterprise, not foreseen by any other body.

Monsieur du Rosne was, by long experience, versed in all the King of France
his Fortresses, and the example of things past made him remember how easily
Calais might be taken; for by how much more the strength of it by situation,
and art, made it in appearance be counted impregnable, so much less careful
were the defendants to guard it with that diligence wherewith places of such
high importance ought to be kept; wherefore, while that Town was under the
Dominion of the Kings of England, Francis Duke of Guise recovered Ca^ais from
the English, Anno 1557. being thereunto invited by their negligence in guarding
and maintaining it.
the smallness of the Garrison they kept in it had invited Francis Duke of
Guise to besiege it in the year 1557, which also had so happy an event, that,
contrary to the Common expectation, he made himself Master of it only by that
defect, which coming often into du Rosne's mind, he, as being curious and full
of industry, had got certain information, that Monsieur de Bidassan, Governor
of the place at that present, had not above Six hundred Foot in it, a Garrison
no way sufficient to make it good: either private interest, or the general
error of men, having persuaded him to trust more to the strength of his Works,
than to the number and valor of the defendants; some add, that the King of
France, having sent the Sieur de la Noue, and de la Valliere, to view the
condition of all the places standing upon the Frontiers of Picardy, they not
making their visitation with that secrecy, which ought to go along with such
businesses, had, with the same French lightness discoursed very freely of the
weak estate of those Frontiers, and the strength of Calais so magnified by
fame, being objected to them, they inconsiderately answered, that whosoever
should assault that Fortress in the place, and manner that was fitting, the
taking of it would be but twelve days business; which words being told du
Rosne, by one that he had employed as a Spy, excited him to search out the
place and manner which these discoverers had intimated. Thus being fallen into
a thought, that he might obtain the Town, famous for its fortification, by
reason of its standing upon the Sea, and the quality of the Haven opportune for
the affairs of Flanders, and England, he, with his reasons, made the Cardinal
Archduke incline unto it, and so much the rather, because all other
enterprises were thwarted with exceeding great difficulties.

But having determined between themselves to apply their minds to this
attempt, without making any outward show of it, they made all the other
Commanders believe, they would assault Montrevil, a place standing upon the
straight way that leads to la Fere, and less considerable than either St.
Quentin or Boulogne; and with this pretense, having caused great provision to
be made of Victual and Carriages to bring them to Doway, Arras, and the other
confining places, the Cardinal having appointed Valentiennes for the general
Rendezvous of his Forces, went thither personally upon the thirtieth of March,
where, having mustred his Army, in which were Six thousand Spanish Foot, Six
thousand Walloons, Two thousand Italians, and Four thousand Germans, Twelve
hundred men at Arms, and Cuirassiers, and little less than Two thousand
Light Horse, he divided his Forces into many parts, and made them march several
ways, to hold the Enemies in the greater suspense. He sent Ambrogio Landriano
toward Montrevil, with part of the Light Horse, and with the Marquess of
Trevico's Tertia; with the rest of the Light Horse Basti marched into the
Territory of Cambray; Agostino Messia* with a Tertia of Spaniards, and two of
Walloons went toward St Paul, and the Count de Bossa, with the Flemish Troops,
took toward Arras and Bethune; which outward shows, while they held those of
their own side in suspense no less than the French, Monsieur du Rosne, with the
Spanish Tertia's of Ludovico Valasco, and Alonso Mendozza, and Four hundred
Horse went out of Valentiennes, upon the fourth of April in the evening* and
marched all the night to St. Omer, where, having joined with Colonel la
Berlotte, Monsieur du Rosne besieges Calais with the Spanish Army.
and the Count de Buquoy, who stayed there for them with two Tertia's of
Walloons, he took along with him three pieces of Cannon, and four of smaller
Artillery, and advanced speedily toward Calais, where he arrived so much the
more unexpectedly, because being a place out of the way, standing in the utmost
point of a tongue of Land, which advances it self a great way into the Sea,
neither the Spaniards nor the French had ever thought of defending or besieging
it.

Calais stands upon the shore of the Ocean Sea, in the furthest parts of a
Promontory, not above The Author is mistaken, for it is but seven Leagues.
Thirty Leagues from England, and has a very large Haven, which sheltred on
each side with great high banks of sand (which they commonly call les Dunes) is
made secure and commodious for a very great number of Ships. The Town is
environed almost quite round with low grounds where the Sea overflows, and
drowns the Plain for many miles; and, being shut up within four banks by a very
large moat, The d^scription of the situation of Calais.
it is of a square form, having, at three of the angles (besides many great
Towers, and Ravelines along the Courtine) as many Royal Bastions of modern
structure, with their Cavaliers within them, and at the fourth angle which
reaches from the West unto the North, stands the Castle, built likewise of a
square form, but with great Towers of the old fashion, that flank it round
about, The moats are very large and deep, for they receive the water on both
sides, and the Town, which is little less than a League in circuit, is all
fortified round with thick Ramparts, though (by reason of the carelessness of
the Governors) in many places (by length of time) grown defective, and in some,
decayed and fallen down. On the outside, along the Haven, there is a great
Suburb full of Inhabitants, in regard of Traffic, and the convenience of
Mariners, and on that side a great Current of waters, which coming from the
Fenny grounds, is straightned all into one Channel, and crossing through the
Town, empties it self impetuously into the Sea. On the other side of the Haven,
and in the point of the Dunes, which cover it on the North-side, there stands a
great and exceeding strong Tower, called the Risbane, which shutting up the
mouth of the Haven, is well stored with pieces of Cannon, and with great ease
hinders any kind of Ships from entering into it. But on the side of the firm
land (which, in respect of the moorish grounds that largely environ it, is very
narrow) about a league from the City there stands a Bridge over a Water that
runs into the Sea, which being fortified with Towers, does totally shut up the
passage which leads to the Town along a very narrow bank; this is called the
Fauxbourg de Nieulet.

Monsieur du Rosne knew, that all the hope of obtaining this Fortress, was
placed in speedily possessing the Bridge of Nieulet and the Risbane; for if he
took not Nieulet, it would be very hard to pass the water, and come under the
Town; and if he possessed not himself of the Risbane, so that he might be
Master of the mouth of the Haven, there would come such supplies into the Town
by Sea, that there would no longer be any building upon the small number of the
Defendants: wherefore, marching to St. Omer with admirable celerity, in regard
of the Artillery he had along with him, he came upon the ninth of April, in the
morning, by break of day, within sight of Nieulet, and without giving the
Defendants (who were not above forty) time, either to take courage, or to
receive assistance, he made it be assaulted on the one side by the Spanish, and
on the other by the Walloon Foot, still playing with the four small pieces, not
because they did any great harm, but to increase the terror of the Defendants;
who being so few, ill provided, taken at unawares, and (which imported most)
without any Commander, who, by (his Authority, might) keep them faithful, they
basely quitted the defense, and retired flying to the Town.

Nieulet being taken, du Rosne left four Companies of Walloons to guard that
Post, and not losing a minutes time, advanced the same instant to assault the
Risbane, and having planted his Artillery in exceeding great haste, began
furiously to batter about noon; besides which, having drawn three of the
smaller pieces to the brink of the Haven, with them and with the Walloon
Musketeers, he hindered more defendants from entering into it, so that they of
the Suburb, that stands on the far side of the Haven, having often attempted to
get in, were always constrained to retire. There were but sixty men in the
Risbane, and those also without any considerable head, insomuch, that though
the place was strong, and might have been defended many days, yet they, as
soon as they saw the assault was preparing against them, utterly losing
courage, quitted it, and being fallen upon and routed in the flight, scarce
thirty of them, with the help of some small Boats, got safe into the Suburb; du
Rosne not failing to prosecute so happy a beginning, entered into the Risbane;
set the Artillery again in order, and lodged many Foot in it, to the end, that
relief by Sea might more assuredly be hindered, and there was very great need of
it; for the next morning, many Ships of the Holland Fleet, that was above
Boulogne, appeared, and labored with all possible industry to get into the
Haven; but being driven back and bored through by the Artillery of the Risbane,
they were at last made to tack about; and one Ship laden with Wine, being sunk
by many Cannon shot in the mouth of the Port, the passage was so much the more
stopped up, against whosoever should try to enter; and yet two little Barks of
the Hollanders, with two Captains and eighty men, got in fortunately, and
landing in the Suburb, staid there for the defense of it.

The Archduke Albert comes with the rest of the Army to the Camp before Calais.
In the mean time the Cardinal of Austria having had notice of the prosperous
progress of his Forces, turning all his Army that way, marched thither with the
same celerity upon Maundy-Thursday (being the eleventh of April) in the
evening, and having designed the quarters of the Camp, between Casal de Mer,
the Bridge of Nieulet, and the way that leads to Gravelin, he encamped in the
Church of St. Pierre, half a League from the Walls. The Town being besieged,
and their quarters, in respect of the situation (which was all Moorish grounds,
and full of Ditches) easily fortified; du Rosne, well informed of the defect of
the Wall on that side that stands toward the Suburb, resolved to plant a
battery in the utmost part of the Haven; for, though the impediment of passing
it, seemed in appearance exceeding great, yet he had observed, that at the
ebbing of the Sea, the water fell in such manner, that the utmost part of the
Haven remained dry, The Defendants of Calais, without attempting any thing for
their defense, suffer the Spaniards to prosecute the siege.
and the bottom was so firm and gravelly, that it afforded very convenient
means of marching on to the assault; but that he might not leave the besieged
without trouble on the other side, and to divide their weakness, he purposed to
make another battery, over against the way to Gravelin; though the Wall on that
side was extremely well lined with Earth, and defended by the Flanks of the two
Royal Bastions. Both the Batteries were perfected upon the fourteenth day of
the month, being Easter day, and upon Monday in the morning, as soon as it was
light, they began to thunder furiously on both sides; nor did the Defendants
(disheartened by the smallness of the number) make any attempt to hinder the
enemy, and only the first day, while the Risbane was battered, they sallied, to
bring in the Goods and Victuals; nor from that day forward, durst they attempt
any other business.

In this state of Affairs, the King having had intelligence of the moving of
the Spanish Camp, and not being able to discern, which way it would bend at
last, lest the Constable to Command the Army before la Fere, and marched with
600 Horse, and the Regiment of his Guard to Abbeville, and from thence sent
forth the Sieur de Monluc with 2000 Foot to Montrueil, doubting (as some
reported) that the Spanish Army would fall upon that Town; but having, upon the
13th day had notice, that the Camp was suddenly gone before Calais, he sent the
same Monluc, the Count de St. Paul, Governor of the Province, and the Marquess
de Belin, with great diligence, to imbark at St. Vallery, and try to get into
the Town; and though they boldly executed the orders they had received, yet
being driven back by contrary winds, which blew impetuously all those days,
they were constrained to return to the same place without fruit; wherefore the
King, become impatient at the near danger of his Subjects, would needs go
personally into that Port, and the cross weather still continuing, he went to
Boulogne, the next day hoping (as the Seamen said) that it would not be so
difficult to relieve the besieged from thence* but being come to Boulogne, and
the same winds holding, the difficulties were the same, or perhaps greater; nor
was there any thought of giving the besieged any succor by Land, as well the
Bridge of Nieulet, as Casal de Mer, being strongly guarded, and the Enemies
whole Army encamped on that side; wherefore the King, for a last resolution,
having put some chosen Foot aboard certain ships, sent them forth to ride
thereabout, and fight with the diversity of weather, that they might be ready,
upon the first gale of a favorable wind, to get, by some means or other into
the Haven; but neither was this course any way beneficial; for the Ships long
tossed, and driven into several places, could never get near the Haven, and if
they hag, they would certainly have been beaten back by the Risbane.

At the same time the King dispatched many Shallops to the English Fleet, to
hasten the coming of it, hoping, if those men could be landed time enough, to
make some gallant attempt, and force the Cardinal to raise his Camp from before
that Town; but it was all in vain, for the English Fleet gathered together in
the Haven at Dover, and ready to set sail, was yet detained by the Queens
different intention. The French Ambassadors, and particularly Monsieur de
Sancy, (newly gone thither for that purpose) treating closely of the
Conditions, upon which the men should land, about which the Parties being not
able to agree, by reason of the variety of interests, the time ran on without
coming to any conclusion.

But in the interim, the Spanish Artillery having played upon Easter Monday,
from break of day till evening, and the opportunity of low water happening at
that time, the Spanish Foot advanced on both sides to give a resolute Assault.
Fortune was not altogether so favorable to du Rosne's intentions in this as
she had been before: For though the wind had sat right all that day for his
Artillery, a thing of no small advantage to free him from the smoke, that he
might play the faster; yet in the evening, continuing, nay, blowing more stiffly
every hour, it would not suffer the Tide to fall so low, as that the farther
part of the Haven might be quite dry; wherefore his Foot were fain to go above
the knees in water, and in some places to the girdle, which retarding the
Assault, proved no small impediment; and yet having overcome that obstacle, and
fought till Nine of the Clock at night, (the Moon shining brightly in the Full)
the French having lost above an hundred of their men, and among them one of the
Holland Captains, resolved to retire, and having fired the Suburb in all
places, got safely into the Town. Upon Tuesday, du Rosne drew his Artillery
into the Suburb which they had quitted, and there being no Flanks on that side
that could hinder the Battery, he without any difficulty planted two and twenty
pieces upon the edge of the Moat, with no other defense but single Gabions, and
those not very high, and the next day began to batter the Wall with so great
fury, The Defendents being few, when they saw the Spaniards ready to give the
Assault, sent forth a Drum, and agree to surrender, if not relieved within six
days.
that not being lined with Earth, it in a few hours gave a large convenience of
assaulting it: But while the Infantry, being Spaniards, Walloons, and Italians
mixed together, prepare themselves to fall on, the Defendents (terrified at the
wideness of the breach, and the smallness of the number they were reduced to)
send forth a Drum to Parley, and the same evening capitulated to leave the
Town, and retire into the Castle, which they promised to surrender into the
Cardinals hands* if they were not relieved within six days.

The King, who was at Boulogne, quickly had notice of the composition of
Calais, and of the Earl of Essex his answer, who was General of the English
Landforces, with whom Monsieur de Sancy having conferred, had entertained
great hopes of getting the English to land, and that being reinforced by them,
the Castle might be relieved within the appointed time; but the Earl was not so
forward as he desired: for the King having often promised to give some place
upon the Coasts of his Kingdom, for the convenience and security of the
English, and afterward with diverse excuses deferred to do it, and his
Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth having at last (to get the Fleet to move for his
relief) condescended to promise that it should be performed; the Earl refused
to put into any Haven, or land men, unless first the promise were effectually
observed; and though Sancy urging the exigency of the need, and the shortness
of the time, desired the Earl to consider of what importance the conservation
of Calais was to their common interests, yet was it not possible to move him
from his determination: wherefore he was necessitated to write to the King to
know his pleasure; who highly incensed tha^ his Confederates should make use of
his adversity to constrain him to their own appetites; answered resolutely,
That he would rather be robbed by his Enemies, than by his Friends; and being
minded to try what he could do by himself, he saw the fury of the wind which
had been so contrary all those days past not at all abated, and therefore he
sent the Sieur de Matelet Governor of Foix with three hundred Foot, backed
with a good ^umber of the Duke of Bouillon's Cavalry, to strive to pass through
the Enemies Guards, and get in to relieve the Castle.

These coming by night close by the Quarter of the Italians, Monsieur de
Matelet with 300 Foot gets into the Castle of Calais: whereupon, the six days
being expired, the Defendents refuse to surrender.
commanded by the Marquess of Trevico, found such slack and careless Guards,
that without being perceived, they got all into the Castle, where the Sieur de
Matelet having encouraged the Governor no less then the Inhabitants and
Soldiers that were in it, after the time of truce was expired, they not only
refused to surrender, but protested they would defend themselves to the last
man; wherefore the Cardinal being assured that some relief was got in unknown
to him, gave order to Monsieur du Rosney valiantly to prosecute the assault,
who having planted his Cannon against the great Towers, or (as we may call
them) Bulwarks of the Castle, battered them with so much diligence, that upon
the six and twentieth day it was in a fit condition to be stormed. All the
Italian Foot fell on the next morning, who being desirous to cancel the
reproach of having so carelessly suffered relief to pass in, fought desperately,
and being seconded first by the Walloons, and then by the Spaniards, after a
most bloody fight of six hours, the Governor Bidossan being slain, and above
four hundred Soldiers cut in pieces, The Spaniards storm the Castle of Calais,
kill the Governor, and put all to the Sword.
they at last entered the Castle* where the Italians put all the rest to the
Sword, except Monsieur de Campagniole and some few others, who having taken
refuge in a Church, were received upon discretion. Above two hundred of the
Spanish Army were killed, among which Count Guidubaldo Pacciotto an Engineer of
high esteem, 1595.
and about one hundred wounded; a loss very inconsiderable for the taking of a
place accounted impregnable, and one of the principal ones of all France, in so
few days: but it had always been alike ill-defended by the carelessness of those
within, the effects being no way correspondent to the same of the place.

But the so easy and so sudden loss of Calais did not only much perplex the
King, but also put him in a necessity of agreeing with the Queen of England and
the States of Holland; for la Fere being not yet given up, he thought it very
hard to rise from that siege, and lose the expenses and labors of so many
months, to the no small decrease of his reputation; and on the other side, if
he did not speedily receive Supplies from both places, he was not able to draw
another body of an Army together, wherewith he might resist the victorious,
force of the Enemy; so that all other places in the Province would be given
over, with little hope that they should defend themselves more constantly than
Calais had done, a place excellently fortified by art and nature. Being moved
with this consideration, and judging that the authority of the Duke of Bouillon
would be very prevalent to work upon the Queen, whose determination he was
certain would be followed by the Hollanders, he dispatched him into England
with resolute orders, to the end that concluding a reciprocal Confederacy, the
Fleet might set sail with all speed, to land men in the Port of Boulogne.

But the difficulties were great, and the Queen had no inclination to it;
partly, because she intended to make use of the Kings necessity, to get a Port
in his Kingdom; for which end, before Calais was lost, she had been backward to
relieve it, that she might constrain the French to put it into her hand;
partly, because seeing the King reconciled to the Catholic Religion, she
thought it was in the King of Spain's power to conclude a Peace whenever he
would resolve no longer to molest the Kingdom of France: and therefore she
difficultly inclined to put her self to new expenses, which it was in the will
of her Enemies to frustrate and make ineffectual; wherefore having stiffly
denied for many days to hearken to any Treaty of new Obligations, she only
profferred to give those assist^nces for the time to come, which she could
without such great inconvenience to her self as she had done in times past: and
because the French pressed very earnestly to have the Earl of Essex come to
Picardy with the Fleet; the English answered, That it was for the most part
composed of ships and men that were Volunteers, who had put themselves together
under the conduct of the Earl, to make prize upon the Coasts of Spain, from
which design the Queen had not power to take them off, having granted them
license for that purpose; and that nevertheless they would be of great
advantage to the King of France his affairs; for the damage the Kingdom of
Spain would receive thereby, would divert the Catholic Kings Forces from the
War of Picardy. But these hopes and remedies were very far off, and the Duke of
Bouillon offering to consideration the interests of their common Religion, if
the prosperity of the Spaniards should still increase, excited both the
principal Minist^rs; and the Queen her self to employ her u^most Forces in so
urgent and so near an occurrence: and he moved much with his authority,
eloquence, and reasons, but most of all by being of the same Religion; for he
seemed to be principally zealous for the common interests, and for the
conservation of the Hugonot party in France, to the end the King might not be
constrained to come to such an Agreement with the Spaniards as might be
prejudicial to the States of Holland, to the quiet of England, and to the
Liberty of Conscience in his own Kingdom: A League concluded between Henry the
Fourth and the Queen of England, little different from that which had been made
by the English with Charles the Ninth.
and yet the business went on so slowly, and with such weighty difficulties,
that though the Confederacy with England was at last concluded, differing
little from the other contracted with King Charles the Ninth, and without
obligation to consign any Place, (for shame made the English to desist from
that demand:) and though the Duke of Bouillon went with an Ambassador from the
Queen into Holland, where the same Confederacy was established; yet the time
was so far spent, that the affairs of Picardy were no way relieved by it, and
the E^^l of Essex his Fleet having scow^ed the Coasts of Spain, was dissolved
without having done any thing considerable.

While this League was treated of in England, the Cardinal Archduke not
depending upon any body but himself, after he had spent ten days in making up
the breaches at Calais; Guines and Han having surrendered at the bare summons of
a Trumpet, he determined to set upon Ar^res, a place of a good circuit,
excellently fortified, and standing but three leagues from Calais, by the
taking whereof he thought he should absolutely secure what he had gotten: and
though the situation of it seemed very difficult, 1596.
because, standing on the top of an Hill, it (as a Cavalier) commands all the
Plain below it, which extends it self a little more than Cannon-shot, and from
the Plain there are Mountains and Woods as unfit to encamp in, as opportune for
the Ambushes of an Enemy; yet the Cardinal encouraged by his prosperous
successes, sided with the opinion of Monsieur du Rosne, who hoped to carry it
before the King could be disintangled from la Fere, and able to relieve it.

There were in Ardres the Marquess de Belin Lieutenant of the Province,
Monsieur d' Annebourg Governor of the Town, and the Sieur de Monluc, who was
come in to reinforce it, and they had with them little less than Two thousand
Foot, an Hundred and fifty Horse, and convenient provisions of Artillery,
Ammunition, and other things necessary for defense. And because the Siege had
been foreseen by the Commanders, they had labored with all possible diligence
not only to better the Fortification of the Town, but also to repair those of
the Suburbs that stands toward Boulogne; for that being the side on which
Batteries might most easily be raised, they determined by defending the Suburb
to keep the Enemy as far as was possible from the Wall. The Author of this
counsel was the Governor of the Town, a Soldier not only of much valor, but
also of great experience, whose design was to defend the ground span by span,
to give the King so much time, that la Fere falling, he might come to succor
that place before the last extremities: but the Marquess de Belin was of
another mind, and thought it a pernicious counsel to lose men in defending
useless places, and such as were not tenable; wherefore he would have had them
only engage themselves in maintaing those Posts, which for their quality might
be long made good; and yet all the other Commanders being of opinion, that the
holding of the Suburb would be a benefit of great importance, the Governors
advice carried it; and there was a convenient guard put in there to keep it.
Another difference of opinion there was among the Commanders; for the Marquess
would have had the Enemy molested, and their works hindered by smart
Counterbatteries, without sparing Ammunition; and on the other side, the
Governor judging their store but small, in respect of so great waste, desired
it might be husbanded to prolong the defense, that they might not want a thing
so necessary in their greatest exigency; and because the Marquisses Authority
was above his, he kept part of the Ammunition hid, to the end they might make
use of it opportunely when the other was spent.

With these discords (which to the great prejudice of men's own affairs, do
commonly reign where more than one commands) they in the Town prepared
themselves for the defense; but the Cardinal Archduke having left Iuan de Rivas
in the Government of Calais, upon the sixth of May moved with the whole Army,
and made his first quarters at Guines; the next day he marched to the Walls of
Ardres, so early, The Archduke marches with his Army to besiege Ardres
that in that day and the next, their quarters were perfected and fortified,
which being made (as far as they could possibly) out of reach of the Cannon of
the Town, were not yet very near to the Hills and Woods; but between the Hills
and their Works, there remained so much space, that the Squadrons as well of
Foot as Horse, might commodiously spread themselves in Battalia; and upon all
the ways that through the Woods come down the Hills, strong Corpse de Guards
were placed with double Trenches, and double Works before them, or* to say
better, behind them, in those places that stood toward Boulogne, Montrueil, and
the other of the King of France his Towns. The Army being encamped and secured
with wondrous diligence, upon Thursday the ninth of May, Agostino Messia's
Spanish Foot, and Colonel la Berlotte's Walloons advanced to make their
approaches, that they might get under the Works of the Suburb; but the Sieur de
Monluc, whose fierceness passed by no occasion of troubling the Enemy, sallied
out so briskly to skirmish, that their Works were foreslowed for a long time,
and after that another Tertia of Infantry under Iago Tesseda, and Colonel
Coquels Walloons came to reinforce the besiegers, and that Monluc was
constrained to retire; the Marquess began such a furious Counterbattery, that
they were necessitated to intermit their work, and stay till night; but it
being very clear and light, the Artillery ceased not to play with great damage
to the besiegers, who nevertheless constantly overcoming all obstacles, got to
the Counterscarp of the Suburb, and the next morning planted some pieces of
Cannon to facilitate their entry; but because Monluc ceased not to sally every
hour, Monsieur de Monluc killed with a Cannon shot.
and to keep those that wrought in great perplexity, they made no greater
progress till he being taken with a Cannon-shot, was miserably torn in pieces;
for after his death, there being no Commanders so valiant, or so diligent, the
besiegers began to batter the Works of the Suburb, which by reason of their
weakness, being easily beaten down, they made an assault with so much violence,
that the Defendents were constrained to quit it with the loss of above forty
men; but while the Spaniards and Walloons enter pel-mel, Monsieur de Montaut, a
Colonel of French Infantry, fell upon them so sharply, that after a bloody
conflict of two hours he recovered the Suburb, having impetuously driven out
the Enemy with the loss of three hundred of the stoutest Soldiers of the Army;
and yet the next day the Cannon having played from morning till noon, the Foot
stormed it in four several places, in each of which, fighting gallantly,
Colonel la Berlotte was sore wounded, Agostino Mess^a struck upon the head with
a stone, and the Suburb was defended till the evening; but the assault being
renewed on all sides, the next morning the Marquess considering the weakness of
the place, gave the Defendents order to retire, that he might not lose so great
a number of valiant Soldiers: And yet the Enemies pursuing closely, and they
that were at the Town-Gate, fearing lest they should get in pel-mel with their
own men, let the Portcullis fall so soon, that above two hundred of them were
shut out and cut in pieces.

The Foot covered themselves diligently in the Suburb* and Monsieur du Rosne
having determined to play upon that side, caused two batteries to be raised,
one of which was plied by the Spaniards with nineteen pieces of Cannon, and the
other by the Walloons with seventeen pieces of several sizes, the works of
which being not yet finished, the Counter-battery of the Town did a great deal
of mischief on all sides; but after the Batteries were sufficiently covered,
and that the Artillery began to thunder against the Flanks of the Bastions, the
Marquess either out of meanness of courage, (as the general opinion of men
would have it) or, because he thought it impossible to defend that place, and
had a desire to save himself, and so many other valiant Defendents, for a
better occasion; called the principal Officers to Council, and strove to
persuade them to surrender: The Marquess de Belin having called a Council of
War, proposes to give up the place; the Governor with the other Officers
opposes it; but he sending forth a Captain, capitulates with the Enemy.
But the Governor opposing, and likewise Charles Sieur de Rambours, a man of
great note in that Province, the Officers answered, that they would defend
themselves to the utmost; and the Marquess replying, that all the Ammunition
was already spent, and that he had no longer wherewithal to defend themselves;
the Governor made known that he had hid and preserved so much, as being
discree^ly disposed of, would be sufficient for many days, and that in the mean
time they might be relieved by the King, to whom he believed la Fere would
yield at last. To which words the Marquess replied angerly, That he deserved to
be punished for having concealed the true quantity of Ammunition from his
superior Officer, and that two days more or two days less imported little, for
he knew that the King would not take la Fere so easily; and going incensed from
the Council, though many protested against it, he presently sent out a Captain,
and articled to march forth with their Arms and Baggage, their Colors flying,
and Drums beating, and that the Townsmen might be free to stay or go as they
pleased; but those that staid were to acknowledge the King of Spain to be their
Supreme Lord. Thus to the wonder of all men, and the great murmuring of his
Soldiers, the Marquess marched forth with all his men in Arms upon the twenty
third of May toward la Fere; but Captain Mainferme, one of the Captains of the
Garrison, having the guard of a Bastion toward the Spanish quarters, would by
no means consent to the Agreement; and though the Enemies were Masters of all
the rest of the Town, he entrenched himself within the circuit of his Bastion,
and defended himself undauntedly, till the Artillery being planted, and all his
defenses beaten down, he thought he might honorably march away.

The day before this, the besieged in la Fere being reduced to extreme
necessity, and knowing by the effects the Cardinals intention, that being
intent to divert and take new places, he had no hope to relieve them any other
way, at last yielded to the Kings power, having by their constancy afforded
time and convenience to make so great and so important successes; the King
desirous to disengage himself, that he might think of relieving Ardres, granted
them the conditions they demanded; for it was agreed without contradiction,
that the Seneschal de Montelimar avouched Count of la Fere, and Alvaro Osorio
Governor of the Garrison, should march forth with all their Soldiers, Foot and
Horse, with their Arms, offensive and defensive; all their Baggage, Cornets,
and Colors flying, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, lighted Match, and Bullet
in mouth, and should be convoyed safely as far as Castelet; that they might
take along with them one piece of Cannon which had not the Arms of France upon
it, and Ammunition for ten shots; that the Seneschal should be acquitted of all
the Payments, Rents and Contributions received, La Fere yielded to the King,
who desirous to relieve Ardres, grants the besieged very large Conditions.
and that there might be no Inquest made for any past action, or crime either
against him, or any others of the Garrison, nor any of them molested for the
debts they had contracted; that the Inhabitants taking an Oath of Allegiance,
should be used as good Subjects, and pardoned all past offenses, and whosoever
would go forth with the Garrison, might have liberty to depart.

With those Articles la Fere yielded it self unto the King upon the two and
twentieth day, and the next morning he impatient of delay, moved with all his
Cavalry toward Ardres, leaving the Constable to follow him with all the rest
of the Army, intending to draw near by the way of the Woods, and by all means
to try his fortune; but he had not marched above two miles when the news came
of the Marquisses composition, which seemed so much the more bitter to him, by
how much the more lively the hopes were he had entertained of relieving that
place. Being struck with a most piercing grief, and no less kindled with a most
just disdain, seeing the course of all his designs cut off, by the
pusillanimity of one man, he would not suffer the Marquess to come into his
presence, either judging him unworthy of his sight, or doubting he should not
be able to contain his indignation: But having caused his process to be made by
the Marshall la Chastre, he was often times minded to take away his life
ignominiously; yet Madam Gabriele interposing effectually, and begging for him,
the sentence published after many days delay, contained nothing but that he
should be deprived of all his Offices, and confined perpetually to his own
lands.

Ardres being taken on the one side, and la Fere on the other, the common
opinion was, that the Armies would meet, and that the King, desirous to make up
his losses, and being grown strong by the concourse of all the Nobility of his
Kingdom, was resolved not to pass by any occasion which might opportunely
invite him to a Battle; But the Cardinal Archduke more intent to keep what he
had gotten, than forward to adventure his Army to new dangers, The Cardinal
Archduke leaving the Fortresses he had taken well provided, retires into
Flanders.
and being re-called by the urgency of the affairs of Flanders, left Villeverde
a Spanish Commander with a good Garrison in Ardres, and in three days march
retired into the Territory of St. Omer, and from thence having had notice that
the Cavalry left behind to guard the Provinces of Flanders, had had been routed
by the Garrisons of Bergen and Breda, which freely overran all that Country, he
marched further to oppose their incursions, and to turn the violence of his
Arms against the States, who during the War in France, got daily greater
footing.

The King stood long doubtful whether he should apply himself that year to the
recovery of some of those places that were lost: but finding his Infantry (the
principal instrument for the taking in of strong Towns) much out of case, by
their long lying before la Fere: for, besides the continual watchings and toils
of so many months, the illness of the Air in low moorish places, had bred many
diseases among his men; who having spent the Winter in much hardship, began now
to feel the effects of their sufferings. Besides this, he wanted the most
important sinew of War: for many Provinces being newly returned to his
obedience, and the rest that had been for him before, being undone by the War,
the whole revenue of the Kingdom was, by long troubles and infinite disorders,
quite out of frame; insomuch that being utterly without money, he was not able
to maintain his Army in Picardy, which Province by the last two years Wars, was
in great part destroyed and desolate. To these two weighty difficulties, was
added the ill success the King had had in managing the War by his Commanders;
wherefore being constrained to return to Paris, to receive the Pope's Legate,
who was come to confirm, and make those things be performed, which had been
promised by his Intercessors, in the act of the Benediction; he thought he
should reap but small fruit by his Army, in which he could not be present in
person.

For all these reasons, after long doubtfulness in the Council, The King seeing
his Army tired out with sufferings, divides it into* Garrisons, and goes to
Paris to receive ^he Popes Legate.
he determined to dismiss the Nobility, that he might have them again more
fresh for future occurrences, and to distribute the rest of his Forces into the
Garrisons of the most important places, so that he might not fear the Enemies
unexpected return, and to go himself (as soon as he had received and satisfied
the Legate) into some convenient City in the center of his Kingdom, where having
made an Assembly of the principal Magistrates from all the several Provinces,
he might apply himself with diligence to set his revenues in order, and
regulate the domestic affairs of his Court, and to make fitting provisions,
that upon a solid foundation he might set himself the next year to recover the
places he had lost in Picardy. In the mean time he hoped the League with the
Queen of England and the States, would be concluded; so that uniting all his
Forces, he intended to march so strong into the field, that the Enemy should
not be able to forbid him the recovery of his own.

Having taken this resolution, he left the Marshall de Byron with Three
thousand Foot and Six hundred Horse upon the Banks of the Sum, to the end
that coasting along the River side, he might be ready upon any occasion that
should happen in the Country. He left Peronne, Bologn, Montrueil, Abbeville,
and St. Quentin, well guarded; and the Count de St. Paul in Amiens, though that
City, great and populous, alleging its ancient Privileges, refused to receive
a Garrison, being confident it should defend it self, as it had formerly done in
the revolutions of so many Wars.

Cardinal Alessandro de Medici, who after was Pope Leo II. now Legate from the
Pope, is received with great demonstrations of honor, by Monsieur de les
Disguieres, though a Hugonot.
In this interim, Alessandro de Medici, Cardinal of Florence, and Legate from the
Pope, was come into France, with mutual satisfaction as well of the King, who
desired wholly to gain the Pope, as of the Pope himself, who could not
perfectly quiet his mind, unless he established the ancient obedience and
respect which was wont to be held by the Crown of France unto the Apostolic
See. Wherefore being arrived upon the confines of Dauphine, he was received
with great pomp, and with the Army drawn up in Battalia, by Monsieur de Les
Diguieres; who though averse from the Catholic Religion, omitted not any terms
of duty and honor, as well in receiving him, as in waiting upon him to Lions,
where having stayed a few days, he hastened his journey, and went to Moulins;
from whence though, in regard of the Plague, which was very hot in many places,
he took a much longer way, yet he came upon the nineteenth of July to
Montl'hery, The King goes post to Montl'hery to meet the Popes Legate.
ten leagues from the City of Paris. Thither the King (not with public pomp,
but as in a familiar visit) coming from Picardy, posted with a hundred in his
train to meet him; showing, by his impatiency to be with him, and his
familiarity in meeting him, his affection toward the Pope, and his particular
confidence in his person, which, besides nobleness of birth, and maturity of
years, had an exceeding great fame for wisdom, and ancient inclination to the
affairs of the Crown. The principal Lords of the Court attended the King in
this visit, but particularly the Duke of Mayenne, to let the Legate see the
sincere reconciliation that was between them, and how much the Heads of the
Catholic party were esteemed and honored. As the King in this first Interview
omitted not any exquisite demonstration of reverence toward the majesty of the
Pope, The Cardinal de Medici's solemn entry into Paris.
and toward the person of the Legate; so did not the Cardinal fail to show
himself so moderate, and so well disposed toward the interests of the King and
of the Crown, that the good expectation formerly conceived of him, was turned
into a very great affection.

The King returned the next morning to Paris; and the Cardinal going on his
journey, was met first a league from the Fauxbourgs by the young Prince of
Conde, to the end that he might know how diligently he had endeavored the
Popes satisfaction, in getting him out of the Hugonots hands: and at the Gate
of the Fauxbourgs he was received by Cardinal Gondi, all the Princes, and all
the Court, with such a throng of people, that if the Dukes of Mayenne and
Espernon, alighting from their horses, had not with Swords drawn made room
among the people, there was some danger that the vehemence of those who crowded
inconsiderately to honor him, might have stifled him in the heat and tumult.
Thus being brought into the City with great joy and contentment of every one,
he performed the wonted Ceremonies in the Cathedral of Nostre-Dame; and being
conducted to his lodging furnished with the Kings stuff, he with infinite
courtesy received the visits of the Parliament, the first President Harlay
speaking for all; and then successively the other Magistrates of the City, and
of many particular persons; every one rejoicing to see with their own eyes, and
hear with their own ears, the reconciliation as well of the King as Crown unto
the Apostolic See.

In the Parliament they accepted and published the Commissions, or (as they
call it) the power of the Legate: and though some of the Counselors were of
opinion that certain clauses should be added to the publication, which had been
wont to be used in former times, to limit and circumscribe the Authority of
Legates within the Privileges of the Gallique Church; yet the King would have
them freely published as they were, without making mention of any such thing,
to take away all scruple that might be had of the sincerity of his mind: a
thing which redounding to the full satisfaction of the Pope, and the glory of
his Papacy, not to find that opposition which the other Popes before were wont
to meet, was exceedingly well recompensed by the moderation of the Legate, whose
dexterity well instructed by prudent Orders from Rome, still declined those
occasions which might bring his Authority, the Privileges of the Clergy, or
the Jurisdictions of the Crown into controversy; the true and only way to
avoid the so hateful contentions of Jurisdiction, and a temper very proper as
well to establish the received obedience, as to serve the difficult condition
of the times. This, besides the Pope's prudence, and the Legat's moderation,
was the counsel of Gio^anni Delfino the Venetian Ambassador at Rome, and who
afterward was also Cardinal; who well versed in the affairs of France,
advertised both the Pope and the Legate, that they should not take particular
notice of the excesses formerly committed in the Ecclesiastical affairs of
France, while it was in a manner separate from the Church before the
Absolution; but that feigning not to see many things that were past, they
should content themselves with great patience and dexterity to regulate the
future: which counsel greedily received, as from a person that was well versed,
and very prudent, gave a rule to govern themselves by, in many difficult
businesses that happened afterward.

The Legate had his first public audience at St. Maur, without the City, The
King gives the first public audience to the Legate at St. Maur, and ratifies
all the Conditions accepted by his Procurators at Rome.
upon the first of August, in which the King ratified all the Conditions
accepted by his Procurators in the Absolution at Rome: By which ready
demonstration having satisfied the Pope in all points exactly, he afterward
received those Dispensations which the present conjuncture persuaded. From
these things, appertaining to the Majesty of Religion, and of the Pope, the
Cardinal-Legat passed to treat of those which concerned the quiet of the
Kingdom, and the peace of Christians: For the Pope knowing, how afflicted, and
how bloodless the Kingdom of France was, having been tormented with the so long
Civil Wars, The point of Religion being settled, the Cardinal Legate begins to
promote a Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns.
and how much need it had of ease and tranquillity to recover its ancient
vigor; and on the other side, considering how exhausted the King of Spain's
Coffers were, and how much oppressed and ruined his people, he saw the Crown of
France, by continuing the War, was in great danger to be diminished, and the
most Christian King necessitated still to keep near correspondencies and
interessed friendships with Princes that were averse from the Catholic Church:
And he believed on the other side, that King Philip being ill able to supply
two so potent Wars, though near, by keeping up the reputation of his Arms in
Picardy, came to lose much of his own in Flanders, to the increase of the
States of Holland, and the diminution of the Faith; wherefore he was resolved
to mediate Peace between those two Crowns, well perceiving that neither of them
would ever incline to demand it, if he, as a common Father, and independent
Mediator, should not interpose. To this was added, the consideration of the War
with the Turk, which was extreme fierce and hot in Hungary; which the Pope
desiring the Christian Princes should vigorously concur in, that the Forces of
the common Enemy might not increase any more, he thought it chiefly necessary
to make an Agreement between those Crowns, to the end, that both together, or
at least the King of Spain, for the common interest of the House of Austria,
might be able to lend his assistance. He therefore had given strict Commission
to the Legate, that as soon as the Kings Absolution was ratified, he should
presently begin to introduce this business, which he accounted not only
necessary for the security and repose of Christendom, but also highly glorious
to the memory of his Papacy.

Neither was the Cardinal (being a man of a mild peaceable nature, and full of
experience in the affairs of the world) less ready to procure the general good,
Emergents that persuade the King to desire peace with Spain.
and his own particular honor, than the Pope was careful to incite him to it,
so that in the first meetings after the public audience at St. Maur, he
deferred not to sound the Kings inclination, who no less quick-sighted than
others in discovering the wounds of his Kingdom, and agreeing with the general
opinion of all men, that peace was the only remedy to cure them, was inclined
to embrace any kind of peace wherein his reputation might not suffer. The
difficulties which his Ambassadors found in treating the League with England,
persuaded him the same; for he perceived very well, that the Queen aimed
without regard to get some place in his Kingdom, that she might have means to
keep him bound, and to procure greater matters as occasion should serve; and it
was not unknown to him, that she, by reason of the Irish commotions which were
then in their height, was so much taken up, that though she had a desire to it,
she was not able to spare many forces to his assistance. To this was added, the
condition of the Hollanders, who though they endeavored to have the War
continue in France, that the Spanish Forces might be diverted and divided, yet
had they not any ability to lend supplies unto their Neighbors, whilst the War
was so hot in all places at their own home. Neither were the Protestant Princes
of Germany (whose minds were now bent upon the urgent necessity of the Turkish
War) either able or willing to trouble themselves about the Kingdom of France;
which they thought powerful enough of it self, to make head against the Arms of
Spain: Insomuch, that the King being able to promise himself little of the
Foreign Aids of his ^onfederates, was fain to make his whole foundation upon
the Forces of his own Kingdom.

But these were hindered and debilitated by many weighty accidents: For the
Royal Revenues by the ruins of Civil Wars, and the multiplicity of abuses
introduced, were subverted, and little less than brought to nothing, and the
profit that was wont to rise from Imposts and Gabels in the Merchant Towns of
the Mediterranean and Ocean Seas, was extremely diminished by interruption of
the commerce with Spain, the West Indies and the Catholic Kings other
Territories: Nor did the trading in English and Dutch-bottoms help much; for
navigation being interrupted, the business was reduced rather to a kind of
Piracy than Traffic. To this want of money (the vital substance of the War)
were added other perturbations. The Duke of Mercoeur yet in Arms, and potent in
Bretagne, who with his forces overrunning and disquieting the Country,
sometimes toward Normandy, sometimes toward Poictou and Xaintong^, kept those
Provinces in continual commotion: Provence and Dauphine not yet well reduced to
obedience, and fiercely molested by the Duke of Savoy, so that it was necessary
to keep two Armies there continually employed; and, which imported most of all,
the Hugonots, The Hugonots jealous of the Kings conjunction with the Pope,
begin to plot new troubles.
either incensed, or grown jealous at the so near conjunction between the King
and the Pope, were in a manner up in Arms, and (asking liberty to meet together
to take some course about their own affairs) showed designs of new
Insurrections: Whereupon there was great danger, that before the Peace was
totally established with the Catholics, it would be necessary to begin a War
with the Hugonots.

These causes moved the King to wish for Peace; but the spur of reputation,
which had ever been very sharp in his mind, did make him in appearance desire
War: Wherefore in the first Treaties with the Legate, he told him resolutely,
that he would not accept of any kind of Peace, unless first all the places
taken were restored, and all the losses of the Crown repaired; adding such
lively a^^ent speeches, as showed he would not lend an ear to a negotiation of
Peace, till first by his Arms he had set his reputation up again in War; and
yet the Legate gathering the Kings secret intention from the state of affairs,
which were very well known to him, being upon the place; and judging it by all
means necessary to break the Ice first, though there appeared no glimpse of
hope, he dispatched Father Bonaventura Calatagirone, General of the Order of
St. Francis, to the Court of Spain, to sound how men's minds corresponded on
that side.

But the diligence the Legate showed for Peace, hindered not the King of France
from being intent upon Provisions of Arms, The King calls a Congregation of all
the Officers of his Crown at Rouen, to setle the disorders of his Kingdom, and
to demand Supplies for the War.
and preparations for the year following; wherefore having called a
Congregation of all the Officers of the Crown, principal Magistrates, and
Treasurers of his Kingdom in the City of Rouen, where besides regulating many
disorders and abuses, he intended to establish and settle his Revenues, and to
persuade the Heads of the Provinces, and the chief of the Clergy and common
people to assist him in such manner, that he might be able to uphold the weight
of the War by himself, which he accounted not difficult, as well by reason of
the urgent necessity well known to them all, as of the good condition many rich
and fertile Provinces were getting into, since Civil Wars had ceased in them, if
necessary rule and order were added to the benefit of quiet; and he thought
every one would run willingly to contribute to that expense, which was not made
as in former times, either to satisfy the Kings appetites, or to move
domestic Arms against those of the same Blood, but to maintain a War against
strangers, and to defend the Crown, assaulted and invaded by its ancient
Emulators and inveterate Enemies.

And because from the year before, there had been a Truce (though an uncertain
one, and from time to time violated and interrupted) with the Duke of Mercoeur
to treat in the interim, and find some temper of Agreement with him, the King
at this time deputed the Count of Schombergh, and President de Tho^, who were
to go to the Queen Dowager of France to treat in her presence with the Dukes
Deputies: But this Treaty was not only doubtful, but also various and unsettled;
for the Duke, a subtle man, of a deep reach, and one not easy to be withdrawn
from his designs, held several practices both in Spain and France, promising
himself yet, that he should dismember the Duchy of Bretagne from the Crown
(which had been united no longer than since the times of Lewis the Twelfth, and
Francis the First) to establish it to his Posterity; or, if he could not do so
much in favor of himself, at least, to keep up that State in the name of the
Infanta Isabella, The Infanta Isabella's pretensions upon the Duchy of
Bretagne.
who pretended to succeed unto it, as next Heir of the House of Valois, since
women were not excluded from the inheritance of Bretagne. For this purpose he
had sent Lorenzo Tornabuony to the Court of Spain, and still held practices
within the Province, to draw many of the principal men to be of his mind,
hoping he should obtain much larger conditions from the Infanta, than he could
do from the King of France. But because the adversity of the affairs of the
League crossed his designs, and the agreement of the other Princes of his
House, and particularly of the Duke of Mayenne, held his mind in suspense; He
still kept the Treaty of Accommodation alive, and still prorogued the Truce
with short additions, making use sometimes of force, sometimes of art, to
obtain some convenient place, and to keep the Provinces confining upon Bretagne
in commotion.

Following this his design, he about this time set on Charles Gondi Marquess of
Belisle, Son to the Marshall de Retz, to seize upon Fongeres, a Town of much
importance upon the Confines of Normandy; and from that place he had held a
Treaty, that the same Marquess might be let in to Mont S. Michel, a wonderful
strong place upon the shore of the Ocean, to which one cannot go by Land,
except for the space of two short hours by day and by night when the Tide is
low, which Treaty having gone on so far, that the Marquess was already certain
to be let in, he departed secretly by night from Fougeres with an hundred Horse
and four hundred Foot, and came to St. Michel just at low water; there having
given and received the appointed signs, he was invited by the Governor of the
Castle to come in with half a dozen in his company to possess the first Gate,
and bring in his men; at which invitation the Marquess, a young man, more
fierce than circumspect, refused not to enter, but seeing the Gate that led
into the first Raveline was presently shut at his back, he turned about with an
angry countenance to the Captain that shut it, and commanded him to keep it
open; which command being no l^ss haughtily answered, they of the Castle took
occasion to fall to their Arms, and having killed the Marquess with his six
Companions, they began to fire their Artillery against his party, which being
already certain of their Commanders misfortune, retired unpursued to Fougeres.

This accident slackened not the designs of the Duke of Mercoeur, who having
had the success to get the Fortress of Tifange in Poictou, and to make other
progresses in diverse parts, continued to treat of peace ambiguously, being
minded to govern himself according to the variety of affairs, sometimes
moderating his demands in the Kings prosperity, sometimes enlarging them in his
adversity, being himself no less uncertain of the event than others. Nor did
the King, to whom the cause of these alterations were known, withdraw himself
from his purpose of treating, being disposed to grant him advantageous
conditions, to exclude the Spaniards from Bretagne, and reunite unto himself
so important a part of the Crown; wherefore to that effect he had newly
destined the Schombergh and de Tho^.
Count and the President, whose wisdom he thought sufficient to deal with the
Dukes arts and inconstancy.

He likewise sent the Sieur d' Emery, The Hugonots absenting themselves from
Court, retire to places near Rochel, and drawing Soldiers together, the King
sends to treat with them and appease them.
and Godefroy Calignon Chancellor^ of Navarre to the Hugonots, who absenting
themselves from the Court, and being retired to the Towns near Rochell, had
drawn some number of armed men together, continuing to make their Conventicles
and Assemblies to the great jealousy of the King, and great indignation of his
Council: But the Duke of Mayenne, though formerly an Enemy to that party, yet
having moved the rest of the Council to consider how pernicious it was to
provoke a new Civil War at a time when the whole State was afflicted, and that
the Arms of the Spaniards insulted with many successful proceedings, they
determined to send those two persons of very great esteem to treat, to show
them that nothing prejudicial to Conscience was intended nor thought of: for
though the conditions imposed by the Pope were such as every one knew, yet that
clause was added, that they should be executed without danger of War or
perturbation; with which condition at the same time the Popes obedience and the
security of the Hugonots was preserved; since the conjuncture of the times was
manifestly such, that the King could not constrain their Liberty, not only
without commotion of War, but also not without great danger of the Crown. These
two Deputies being come to the places of the Hugonots, treated many times with
the Heads of that party, and the rest that were come to Chastelrault, and
assuring them, that the Edicts made in favor of their Religion should be
observed, stayed the breaking out of new troubles which were already
contriving; but they could not obtain that the Duke of Bouillon, and the Duke
de la Tremouille should (as the King desired) march with the Forces of that
party into Picardy; for the coming of the Legate, and the near correspondence
that past, had made them so suspicious, that they would not stir from the
places of their own security.

The Marshall de Byron making great incursions into the County of Artois, the
Spaniards attempt to oppose him; they fight, the Spaniards are ro^ted, and the
Marquess of Varambone their Commander in chief, and the Count de Montecucoli
taken prisoners.
While they were negotiating on this side, Arms were not altogether quiet upon
the Confines of Picardy: for the number of Garrisons on both sides did with
frequent encounters keep matters in commotion, and the Marshall de Byron not
failing to molest the Enemy in all places, made incursions into the Catholic
Kings Provinces in such sort, that in the month of September being entered with
his Horse into the County of Artois, he put the whole Country in a very great
tumult: wherefore the Marquess of Varambone Governor thereof, having sent for
Count Giovan Giacopo Belgiojoso, and the Count de Montecucoli, resolved to meet
him with Eight hundred Horse to put a stop to those mischiefs which he did on
all sides; but the Marshall informed of his coming, having staid the whole day
to rest himself at St. Andre, within the Jurisdiction of St. Omer, set forward
in the dusk of the evening with his men fresh, and purposed to fall
unexpectedly upon the Marquess, who thought him a great many miles from thence:
nor did he fail of his design; for having marched easily all the night, in the
morning at Sun rise he light upon the Enemies Vanguard led by Montecucoli, and
without much considering they charged courageously on both sides.

In the beginning the French had the worst; for their first Troops were beaten
back half in disorder to the main Body; but a while after the Marshall
advancing in person, charged Montecucoli so furiously, that he was forced to
turn his back full speed; it not being possible to stay his men, who fell foul
upon the Marquess his Battle and disordered it, so that he being forsaken, was
taken prisoner with Montecucoli, still fighting valiantly. Belgiojoso advanced
with the Rear, and for some time gallantly withstood the fury of the
Conquerours; but the other Bodies being routed, and he himself wounded with two
Pistol-shots in the Arm, was at last constrained to save himself by flight,
leaving the Field free to the Marshall de Byron, and free power to go where he
would: so that he would have done more harm to the Country, and perchance have
made greater progress, if the Rains of Autumn, which that year fell much before
the usual time, had not put a hindrance to his incursions.

There grows a quarrel in the Kings Ante-chamber between the Sieur de
Coqueinvillier and Monsieur de Bonivet, so that the first gives the other a box
on the ear
About this time there happened an accident at Court, which as it gave private
men an example of that moderation wherewith they ought to curb their passions,
so did it advertise Princes how far they ought to bear those terms of necessity
in their Subjects to which Honor constrains them; for a Controversy in words
arising in the Kings Ante-chamber, between the Sieur de Coqueinvillier one of
his Gentlemen-Waiters, but a man of approved Valor, and Monsieur de Bonivet, a
Cavalier of ancient Nobility and great note; Coqueinvillier forgetting the
place where he was, struck Bonivet a Box on the Ear, who restraining his own
fury, in respect of the place, they went both out of the Court, and being
separated by their Friends into several places, Bonivet sent to challenge his
Enemy, that he might be revenged of the affront he had received: but he
(acknowledging his error, in having wronged him in a place where it was not
lawful for him to draw his Sword to right himself) refused to meet him in the
field, and offered to ask him pardon, which all men knew was not for want of
courage, whereof he had given proofs in other Duels, but out of remorse of
Conscience; yet Bonivet, notwithstanding the common opinion, reiterated his
challenge oftentimes, which not only was answered with the same moderation, but
Coqueinvillier kept within doors for some time to avoid the occasion of
fighting, and yet the other urging him with injurious Letters and Messages, and
not accepting the offer he made, to refer himself to his discretion, he was at
last constrained to meet him in a private place hand to hand, where having made
his former proffers, and protested that he acknowledged himself much to blame;
he was constrained by Bonivet's fierceness to draw his Sword, wherewith having
wounded him with a thrust in the first bout, retiring back, Bonivet challenges
Coqueinvillier to a duel, they fight* and he is f^ain*
he would have ended the business at the first blood; but Bonivet furiously
insulting, and making many thrusts at him, he being so hard pressed, ran him
through the body, and laid him dead upon the ground. The news being come to the
Kings ear, who knew all that had passed very well, and bearing not only with
the necessity that had forced Coqueinvillier to fight, but for his Valors sake
forgiving also the offense he had committed in striking in the Court, said
publicly, That since one of them was lost, it was not good to lose the other
too, and granting him his pardon, he commanded the Magistrates not to proceed
against him.

In the mean time the Deputies were met together at Rouen, whither the King
came upon the eighteenth of October, (accompanied with the Cardinal-Legat, the
Duke of Montpensier, Governor of that Province, the High Constable
Montmorancy, the Dukes of Nemours and Espernon, the Prince of Iainville, the
Mareschals of Retz and Matignon, the Admiral d' Anville, the Cardinals of Giury
and Gondy, and a select number of the principal Lords of the Kingdom;) and
being received with a very solemn pomp, he spoke to the Assembly the fourth day
of November, showing them how much need the affairs of the Kingdom had of a
Reformation, and the urgency of Supplies to maintain the War upon the Confines:
Which things after they were more at large unfolded by the High Chancellor,
every one set himself with great desire to think upon those remedies which they
judged might prove convenient. But the infirmities of that Body afflicted with
so long distempers, were such as could not be so easily cured and every one
perceived how necessary a general Peace was to introduce and establish a
wholesome permanent Reformation, since that, amidst the necessities of War, new
disorders still spring up; nor can the strictness of Reformation be observed,
where Military exigencies continually extort licentious dispensations. Nor was
there any body who thought not, that the proper means to obtain peace was to
have a great strength for the War, to the end, that recovering their
reputation, and the places that were lost, the two Crowns might agree in peace
with equal honor. But as the remedy was known, so was the means of attaining
it very difficult; for the whole Kingdom was so exhausted and weakened, that the
people could confer but little to the Kings assistance; who, to maintain the
Armies in Dauphine and Bretagne, and to raise a greater one in Picardy, was
forced to think of great preparations of Men, Money, and Ammunition, which was
gotten out of England and Holland at a very great charge; and though it was
hoped, that some Provinces which had not been so much divided, might (with good
order taken) afford some considerable supply, yet that required length of time,
which the Exigency and the War would not allow. But nevertheless, not being
able to forbear doing all that was possible, every one applied himself
heartily, as well to reform, as to make preparations.

With the consultation of these affairs, ended the year 1596. And though the
Assembly continued in the beginning of the year following, 1597.
A weak Reformation is made, Provisions are ordained for the Kings wants, and
the Congregation is dismissed.
yet the Reformation was but very weak; for the matter was not disposed to
receive it, and the times were unseasonable for the rigours of a resolute
course; only the expense of the Kings Household was lessened, some supernumerary
Offices were taken away, and the Pensions of particular men were restrained,
but not in such manner, that the Treasury was much eased by it. The provisions
made for the King, were something more considerable; for the payment of the
debt^ of the Crown were suspended for the two next years, but without prejudice
to the Creditors; an increase was granted in the peoples name upon the Gabelle
of Salt, one of the chief Revenues of the Crown; all Usurpers of Confiscations
were by a severe Edict constrained not only to restore the Land, but the
profits so usurped, from which business there resulted no small benefit: And
finally, many of the Treasurers, and of the Clergy, voluntarily obliged
themselves to contribute a certain sum of money, though no very great one.

But the King having ended the Assembly at Rouen, and being come into the
quarters about Paris, to take Physic for some private indisposition, to the
end, that being freed from it, he might more freely apply himself with the
first season to the toil of Arms, a new important accident gave beginning to
Actions of War before the time. Hernando Tells Portocarrero, a man, who in a
very small stature of body, contained a lively sprightly courage, was Governor
of Dourlans: This man having in the whole course of the War, given great proof
of no less sagacity than valor, stood watchful upon all occasions that offered
themselves to atchieve something. He having begun to court a very rich Widow,
who, according to the use of the French, dwelt in the Country, was fallen into a
desire of getting her for his Wife; but having often discovered his intent, she
still answered him, That she being subject to the King of France, and he to the
King of Spain, who made War against one another, Hernando Tells Portocarrero
being by the Cardinal Archduke ^left Governor of Dourlans, contrives how to
surprise Amiens.
it was not fit to satisfy him; but that she would dispose her self to do it,
when either he had put Dourlans under the Kings obedience, or drawn Amiens (in
which City she was born) under the subjection of the King of Spain. These words
moved the spirit of Portocarrero, who (besides his natural desire to serve his
Prince, spurred on by love, and the hope of obtaining so rich a Dowry) began to
think how he might make himself Master of the City of Amiens; and having had
some discourse about it with one The French says, Du Moulin.
Dameline, a man that was banished out of the Town, he heard that the City had
refused to receive a Garrison of Soldiers, and that the Townsmen kept their
Guards diligently by night, but carelessly by day, whereupon he entered into good
hopes of getting unexpectedly within the Walls, and by his sudden arrival,
easily to make himself Master of it; but having heard afterward, that there
were fifteen thousand men in the City, well provided with Arms, and ready to
run together upon the stir of any accident, he stood long in suspense, and
doubtful in himself, whether he should attempt the enterprise, notwithstanding
that so great difficulty. He was much more out of hope, when he understood that
three thousand Swissers sent to the King to convoy great store of Artillery and
Ammunition into the City for the provisions of the future War, staid to take up
quarters in the neighboring Villages. But he took up his design again, when he
heard that the Count de St. Paul, to satisfy the obstinate importunities of
the Citizens, had made them draw away; nay, he was excited so much the more out
of a desire to get all the preparations that were brought into that City;
wherefore he gave order to a Sergeant named Francisco del Arco, (a man whom he
had tried in many occurrences) to go into the City in disguise, and diligently
to observe the quality of the Citizens, and the manner of their Guards. The
relation was very favorable to his design; for the Citizens employed
themselves by day, in following their businesses, and those few that remained
to guard the Ports, (being invited to it by the season) shut themselves up in a
room to enjoy the benefit of the fire, and the Gate was for the most part left
alone, except one Sentinel that stood at the Turn-pike; whereupon being
confirmed in his design, he dispatched the same Sergeant to the Cardinal
Archduke to obtain leave and supplies of men, that he might set himself upon
the enterprise. The Archduke consented, that he should venture upon a business
of so great hopes; and gave order to the Garrisons of Cambray, Calais, Bapaulme,
and Castelet, that upon the day appointed, they should send aid of men into the
quarters of Dourlans, to obey and be commanded by Portocarrero.

He having well fitted all things, called the help that was prepared, and gave
order, that upon the Tenth day of March, they should be toward the evening, at
a Village called Orville, a League from Dourlans; whereupon there met from
several parts six hundred Horse led by Girolamo Cara^^a, Marquess of
Montenegro, and two thousand Foot of diverse Nations, commanded by old Spanish,
Italian, and Walloon Officers; to whom Portocarrero communicating nothing else,
but that they were to go upon Amiens, marched all night; the Of youngest
Brother.
Cadet Panure, a Walloon, and Inigo d' Ollava, a Spaniard, who were privy to
the whole design, leading the first Troops, who arriving in the morning before
day, laid themselves in ambush behind certain Bushes not far from the City, and
after them the same did Captain Fernando Dizz^ with an hundred Spanish Foot,
and Captain Bostoc, with as many Irish. Portocarrero, who had made an halt with
the main Body, near the Abbey of Mary Magdalen, above half a Mile from the
Town; after that the Cadet climbing to the Top of a Tree, had given him a sign,
that the Gate was open, and that the stir of those that went in, and came out,
was over, he sent forth Giovan Battista Dugnano, a Milanese, and the same
Sergeant del Arco, to execute what had been agreed of between them.

They, with Twelve in their company, disguised like Country-fellows, after the
fashion of that Country, wore certain long Cassocks, some of Cloth, some of
Canvas, under which each had a Case of short Pistols, and a Dagger. Four of
them drove a Cart with three Horses fastened to the Draught-Tree in such manner,
that by pulling out an Iron, they might be loosned from the Cart, which being
laden with thick pieces of Wood covered with Straw, was sent before to stop
under the Portcullis, and hinder it from shutting down. Behind the Cart
followed other four, who upon their Shoulders had Sacks full of Apples and
Nuts, and after them came the other six straggling, and last of all Sergeant
Dugnano, the Captains Brother, with a great Pole.

It was already Sermon-time, (for by reason it was Lent, there was Preaching in
many Churches) and the people being gone several ways, had left few to guard
the Ports; when the first entered with the Cart at the Turn-pike, and went on
under the Gate to do the effect already designed, One of the Gates of Amiens is
possessed by twelve Spanish Soldiers disguised like Country-fellows, who
bringing a Cart under the Portcullis, and scattering fruit upon the ground,
deceive the Guards, who were very negligent.
and one of the second company making show to let his Apples and Nuts fall by
chance scattered upon the ground, many of those that were upon the Guard ran to
catch them up, and the rest laughing and mocking, took no heed to the Cart,
which being got under the Portcullis, the Horses were presently loosened, lest
being frighted with that stir they should have dragged it too far; and so that
impediment remained in the midst of the passage, that it could not be shut
down. The last came unto the Turn-pike, and at the very first killed the
Sentinel, then presently the rest discovering their Weapons, fell upon them
that were catching up the Apples, and fighting fiercely killed some of them,
and drove the rest into a room where the fire was, shutting them up in such
manner, that the first Companies of Foot had time to come unto the Gate. In
this interim the Sentinel that was above in the Gate House, having heard the
noise, speedily cut the Ropes by which the Portcullis hung, which being made of
several Bars and not all of a piece, two of the Bars broke through the bottom
of the Cart, but the other three were kept up, leaving space enough open for
two Soldiers to enter abrest. Through that passage the Commanders and Officers
advanced completely armed, and after them above an hundred Soldiers, before
any aid came from the City; and yet the people coming up on all sides, they
would at last have defeated the Assailants, (among whom Dugnano was killed with
a great wound on the head) if the Bars of the Portcullis being broken, and all
impediments taken away, the Cadet had not come in seasonably with the Walloons,
and Captain Bostock with the Irish; by which the people who ran straggling
thither without order or without Commander, being beaten back and put to
flight, and above eighty of the Citizens killed, there was no body that made
resistance any longer; for the Count de S. Paul, who was in the Town without
any Garrison, at the first notice of the business, got out of the Forte de
Beauvais and saved himself by flight. Fernando Dezza entered presently after the
first, and last of all Portocarrero with the main Body, keeping the Soldiers
from running about to plunder, as well for fear of the people, (a very great
number in respect of them) as because he doubted the Kings Forces that were not
far off, might strive to recover the Town in the first heat. But the people too
bold before the urgency of the danger, and too fearful in the act, dejected in
so sudden an accident, laid down their Arms, and the Kings Cavalry advancing to
the very Wall, having met the Marquess de Montnegro, and seen that they could
not effect any thing, returned without further attempt into their own Quarters.

The news of this loss struck the King so deeply, that despising his own
health, and breaking off the course of Physic he had begun, he posted speedily
into Picardy, accompanied with none but those that were then about him, being
confirmed more than ever in his old conceit, That where he was not himself in
person, The King for the loss of Amiens breaks off the course of Physic he had
begun, and goes into Picardy to assist the affairs of War in person.
businesses went on either carelessly, or unfortunately; and passing with great
hazard in those places where the Enemy roved about victoriously, he came to
Corbie, where the Marshall de Byron was, being resolved, or rather excited by
despair, to begin the War again, happen what would; and to encounter any danger
whatsoever to attempt some enterprise, though without hope to effect it. For he
thought nothing more contrary to his success than ease, and nothing more
beneficial than action.

But this accident struck the adjacent Provinces no less than him, and
particularly the City of Paris; They are much troubled in Paris for the loss of
Amiens, and murmur against the King.
between which and Amiens there not being above eight and twenty Leagues of
open way, not hindered by any strong place, there entered a great terror into
the people, fearing lest the Spaniards now victorious should advance to spoil
the Country, and interrupt the concourse of victual, while the King had no Army
wherewith he could withstand their progress; and the fresh sufferings which
were lately passed, did by the yet bitter memory of them, make dangers seem
more grievous, and more near than was fitting; the whole people therefore was
in an uproar; the Country frighted, the Nobility stirred up, and many murmured
against the King, as one who accustomed only to conquer in Civil Wars, yielded
in all places to the discipline, policy, valor, and diligence of Foreigners;
and others going yet farther, spoke against his manner of life, as if having
given himself a prey to the love of Madam Gabriele, he had retired to pass his
time idly with her, while the Enemy sollicitous and vigilant, insulted
furiously against the principal Cities of the Kingdom: and that which these men
said, was not without probable appearance; for the King having made great show
of the love he bore this Lady, even to the having caused the Baptism of a
Daughter born of her, to be celebrated with Royal pomp, in the face of the
Assembly at Rouen, was afterward retired in her company to the solitariness of
St. Germains, St. Maure, and the other places of pleasure near the City, in so
much that those who knew not the necessity he had to take Physic, attributed
all to the desire of ease, and to the appetite of womanish delights.

Nor was the King himself ignorant of the popular rumors; whereupon
exceedingly vexed, he ceased not with words and letters to clear himself,
attributing the loss of Amiens to the obstinacy of the Citizens, who never
would receive a Garrison, to which he would not constrain them, because that
City being newly come unto his devotion, he was unwilling the people should
believe that he fought to violate the Privileges of their Corporation, and
fail of his Promises. He showed likewise that not the pleasure of the Court,
but his need of Physic, which would admit no delay, had constrained him to
enter into a course, though the season were yet extremely cold, to the end that
after the space of a few days he might be able with perfect strength to undergo
the burden of the War himself in person. And to that which was said of his
being only skilled in Civil Wars: The King excuses against the accusations and
murmurings of the French.
He objected the two several times he had met the Duke of Parma, and what he
had done the year before against the Constable of Castile's Army; in which
enterprises (contrary to what his Detractors said of him) He had shown as much
circumspection and discipline as the custom of the French Nobility, and the
quality of times and occasions would allow.

The King besieges Amiens, being desirous to recover it.
To these words joining actions suitable, though he had not above Four thousand
Foot and Two thousand Horse, he determined to draw near Amiens to begin the
siege; for he was resolved to ^et his utmost endeavors to recover that City;
considering that it was best to begin betimes to straighten it by what means
soever he could; to the end that those within might not have convenience to
provide themselves of things necessary to feed that abundance of people that
dwelt continually in the Town. Wherefore being departed from Corbie, and past
over to the far side of the River Sum, he caused his men to encamp in the
midst between Amiens and Dourlans, to the end he might interrupt the commerce
and mutual assistance of those two places, and having left charge with
Marshall de Byron to advance the siege according as new supplies of men came
up daily to the Camp, He giving no rest unto himself, went up and down to
convenient places, drawing Horse and Foot out of the Garrisons to increase his
Army the most he could, and at last returned to Paris, to hasten such
provisions as were necessary, and to raise a sum of money, sufficient to go
through with the siege, which at that time was the utmost scope of all his
thoughts.

The City of Amiens stands upon the River Sum, which being divided into many
streams, runs through the midst of the Town, and encompasses, and washes the
Wall in many places. On the one sid^ it has the great Castle of Pequigny, and
Corbie on the other; the Castle four Leagues, and the Town seven Leagues
distant from it. The City is environed with thick and well-contrived Walls,
flanked with their Bulwarks and Ravelines, in some places more, in some less,
according as it is washed more or less by the River; and though in all parts it
be more excellently fortified, yet it is much stronger, and built with greater
industry on the side beyond the River toward Flanders. On this side the King
had given order, that siege should be laid, not only to hinder the commerce of
Dourlans, but also because he intended to fortify the quarters of his Army in
such manner, and to environ the Town so closely with Trenches and Forts, that
the Cardinal Archduke, though he came strong into the field, should not have
power to relieve it, finding it wholly shut up on the right way. But the
Marshall de Byron not having strength enough to begin the Trenches, had
quartered himself with the Vanguard in the Abbey of Mary Magdalen, and spread
himself with the rest of his Forces upon the rode to Dourlans, breaking the
ways with the Cavalry, and hindering victual or relief from getting into the
City.

On the other side, Portocarrero, though besieged much sooner than he had at
first imagined, having sent Sergeant dell' Arco to Brussells, as well to give
notice of it, as to require new supplies, applied himself with his usual
diligence to repair the Fortifications, and to provide against all other wants;
and after he saw the French encamp so near, he resolved while they were weak,
to trouble them so with sallies, that they should be fain to get further off;
wherefore upon the thirtieth of March in the morning, he gave order, that the
Marquess de Montenegro should march forth to fall upon the quarter of the
Vanguard, which was at the Abbey of Mary Magdalen, who having sent fifty
Walloon Horse before to assault the first Corpse de Guard, kept by twenty
Soldiers, he himself followed so furiously with two hundred other Horse, that
having beaten the Corpse de Guard, and taken some prisoners, he advanced
unexpectedly to the quarter of the French, and yet four hundred Horse coming
forth to receive the charge, they skirmished long without advantage, till the
Marquess feigned to give back, that he might draw the Enemy into an Ambuscado;
where Captain Inigo d' Ollava lay among certain bushes with two hundred Spanish
Foot. But the Sieur de Montigny, who commanded the French, having pursued them
gallantly at the heels as far as the bushes, made a stop, out of a doubt, that
some ambush might be laid in so fit a place; whereupon the skirmish ending,
both parts retired without doing any thing of moment.

The Marquess sallied again the next day with three hundred Light Horse,
followed by an hundred Lanciers; but the skirmish growing hot on all sides by
their mutual Firearms, neither would the French advance into the hollow
places, which are near the Walls; nor durst the Spaniards draw near the Post of
Mary Magdalens Abbey, both the Commanders doubting they might be catched in
some trap. Portocarrero then took another course to free himself from being so
nearly molested by the Vanguard of the French, and began to batter the Abbey
with many Culverines, whereof he had found store in the City, and continued to
play upon it so obstinately, that there was no staying in that Post, and the
Vanguard was fain to retire to a Village further back, from whence though they
obstructed the ways with no less facility, yet they within had more means to
provide themselves of Earth, Bavins, and other things necessary to raise new
defenses.

In this interim, the Cardinal Archduke had given careful order, Iuan de Gusman
goes to put relief into Amiens, but being discovered by the French, he has
much ado to save himself
that before the French Army grew stronger, new supplies might be put into the
Town; wherefore Iuan de Gusman going from the Territory of Cambray with four
Companies of Firelocks, but all mounted, and three hundred Light Horse, took
his way by night, that he might come betimes in the morning to the Gates of the
City, which having prosperously done, as well because the Air was cloudy and
dark, as because the French advertised of his coming, expected him not till
night; yet he destroying the benefit of Fortune by an unseasonable Vanity, as
soon as he saw himself near the City, caused his Trumpets to sound, and a great
Volley of Shot to be given in token of joy; at which noise the French who were
prepared, ran so courageously to charge them, that the Troops being instantly
mingled pel-mel, the Artillery of the Town had no longer any means to defend
their own men; who being constrained to yield to the greater number, had
retreated still fighting to the covered way, and there would have been routed
and defeated, if Fernando Dezza who defended it with two hundred Spanish Foot,
giving fire without distinction at them all, had not made the French retire. In
the mean time, the Firelocks that came with the relief, leaping from their
Horses, saved themselves almost all in the Moat, and the Marquess of Montenegro
sallying with his Horse, after the French were separated, valiantly beat them
back as far as the Abbey. The relief got in with the loss of under forty men,
yet was it great, because Kuggiero Taccone was wounded in the left Leg, and
Fernando Dezza slain with a Musket Shot in the head. There entered together with
the relief, Federico Pa^^io^te, (Brother to Guidobaldo* who was killed at the
assault of Calais) an Engineer of very great fame, of whom the Commanders had
exceeding great need for the making of works, and together with diverse sorts of
necessary matters, there got in also a good sum of money.

The Marshall de Byron gives a Scal^do to Dourlans, but the Ladders being very
much too short, the enterprise succeeds not.
Whilst with frequent bloody skirmishes, and with minds wholly intent upon the
business, they fight thus under the Walls of Amiens, the Marshall de Byron
watching all occasions of advantage, resolves to give a sudden Scalado to
Dourlans; and having caused many Ladders to be prepared, he gave order that the
Sieur de Montigny who commanded the Light Horse, should lead the Foot of the
Reerguard upon that enterprise, and he himself after having been forth in the
evening, and made diver^ skirmishes under the Walls of the City, to the end,
the Enemy might not perceive the lessening of his Camp, marched with sixty
Cuirassiers, and his own Lifeguard of Horse the same way, to give courage to
his men. It was two hours before day, when the Sieur de Flassan on the one
side, and the Sieur de Fouqueroles on the other, both Captains of the Regiment
of Piccardy, seconded by two hundred Switzers* clapped the Scaling-Ladders to the
Walls of Dourlans, which being found extremely much too short, the attempt
proved vain without any other danger, and the Assailants returned the next day
to lie before Amiens in their old quarters.

But the Marshall de Byron exceedingly vexed at this unprosperous success,
having received four thousand English, (at last, after many delays, sent by
Queen Elizabeth to the Kings assistance, in performance of the League lately
made) and many other Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot, who made great
haste from several parts, being come up, he resolved to encamp just under the
City, and fortifying his quarters, to shut up all the Avenues of the Town on
the far side of the River at the same time. His Army amounted to the number of
Twelve thousand fighting men; but he with his diligence, courage, and
vigilance, made it appear much greater, gallant in fight, careful in action,
unwearied in labor, rigorous in exacting that from others which he himself did
in his own person: The Marshall de Byron stirred up by some words of the
Kings, lab^urs unweariedly in the siege of Amiens, that his actions might
answer the Kings stinging words.
Which qualities being naturally his, were now redoubled by a Spur which he
received from the Kings words, who could not contain himself from saying
openly, That where he was not himself in person, things went on either with
little fortune, or much negligence; wherefore, the Marshall who attributed a
great part of the past Victories, to his own fortune and personal courage,
seeing now that glory called in question, which he accounted to be certainly
his, as a man of infinite pride and insupportable haughtiness, was wholly
kindled with an incredible indignation, and strove with his utmost spirits to
do something that might plainly show the effects of his Valor without the
Kings assistance or command; wherefore though the fierceness and number of the
Defendents were such, that a great Body of an Army was necessary to straighten
and besiege them, yet was he resolved to attempt it with those forces he had.

The first thing that was begun, was a Bridge over the Sum, in a Village
called Longpre, about a League above the Town, and it was fortified with a
Half Moon on each side the River, as well that they might have free passage,
both above and below the City, as to hinder the Enemies from passing the River
in that place, where the streams divide themselves, and relieving the City on
that side that was not besieged. Besides this Fortification, a Trench was
drawn, which beginning within a quarter of a League of the Town, near the Bank
of the River came in the form of a Half Moon encompassing all the Plain, and
ended at the other Bank of the River, about the same distance below the City;
and this Trench was divided into seven parts, by seven Royal Forts, which
furnished with small Artillery, scoured and flanked the Trench, utterly
shutting up all the passage of the field. Such another Trench, though of much
greater circuit, and as many Forts, closed up the outward part toward Dourlans,
and the other ways that led into the Territory of Cambray, and into Flanders,
and on that side the Trenches were much deeper, and the Works much higher to
defend them on the back from the attempts of the Spanish Armies. The whole Army
was employed about this work, and a very great number of Pioneers, who being
drawn together from the Country round about, by Birons imperious severity,
wrought day and night at an exceeding cheap rate.

The courage of the Defendents was no less fierce and resolute, who being
careful not to pass by any opportunity of interrupting the Works, sallied every
hour, sometimes on hors-back, sometimes on foot, and making the whole Camp
stand to their Arms, did, by very long skirmishes, keep the Works at a stay,
and do mischief, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another. The skirmish was
very sharp and bloody, The Defendants of Amiens sally to skirmish, and
Portocarrero himself being present, the fight is very hot and bloody.
which happened upon the twenty fourth of May, which day the Marquess and
Portocarrero sallied out several ways, each with Three hundred Horse and as
many Foot; and while Portocarrero gave a hot alarm on the lower side, the
Marquess taking toward Longpre; and passing by the side of the Trench, not yet
finished, put them that guarded it in a very great confusion, and would have
destroyed the Half Moon, and nailed three pieces of Cannon that were in it, if
the Sieur de Montigny had not hasted thither with the Light Horse, with which,
while he skirmished courageously, the Marshall de Biron thought to posssess
the Pass between his Trench and the River, and so cut off the enemies retreat;
but being advanced at a good round pace that way with many Troops of Horse, he
found, that Diego Durando, Francesco del Arco, and Captain Falme, an Irishman,
had taken that Pass, to keep the retreat free and open for their own men; so
that the fight began there again more furiously than before; for the Infantry
making use of the hollow places and bushes, which in that place were very many,
did much harm to the French Cavalry, and the Marquess having faced about,
charged the Mareschals Troop in the flank and in the rear, in such manner, that
being caught as it were in the midst, it was in very great danger of being
defeated, if the rest of the Cavalry, led by the Commendatory de Chattes had
not run speedily to disingage it, at whose arrival the Spanish Foot giving back
on the one side, and the Marshall retiring on the other, each marched off
free, it being already almost Sunset, and there remained many, as well French
as Spaniards dead upon the place.

The King came to the Army upon the seventh of June, The King comes to the Camp
before Amiens, and leaves the Command to the Marshall de Biron.
to the Marshall de Biron's great displeasure, who desired to finish his line
of circumvallation before his arrival; so that seeing Madam Gabriele was come
with him to the Camp, he cried out publicly, that she was the prosperity and
good fortune the King brought along with him; nor would he so easily have been
quieted, if the King, visiting the Trenches, had not highly commended his
diligence and industry, and given order, that he should command the Forces, and
all military matters, as he did before his coming. The King, environed with
many Princes, took up his Post in the ruins of the Abbey, among which there
were yet some Arches standing entire, nor would he stir from thence, though the
Spaniards ceased not to make many Cannon shot that way. The Constable, the Duke
of Mayenne, the Duke of Espernon, and the Prince of Iainville quartered in the
Forts, and the Marshall de Biron got into an Hermitage within musket shot of
the Counterscarp, intending to begin his approaches on that side, as soon as
the Works of his Camp were brought to perfection, in which they made huts of
boards to shelter themselves from the Rain, and other ill-weathers, since the
King, in the Council of War, had determined to approach by sapping, though it
were the longest way, that he might not endanger the lives of his Soldiers in
assaults, the War having swallowed up so great a number of them, that it was
necessary to proceed very sparingly, the whole Kingdom being extremely
exhausted of men, and the Nobility more than moderately diminished.

The pay of the Army (many of the old Officers being removed) passed through
the hands of Monsieur d' Inquerville Superintendent of the Finances, with the
assiduous unwearied assistance of Secretary Villeroy, who, having in great part
laid other businesses aside, applied himself particularly to that, as well to
the end the fraud of the Commanders might not, by deceits, increase the
scarcity of Money, which was exceeding great, as that the decrease or increase
of the Army might be known from day to day, and that the number might not
differ in effect from what appeared in their muster-Books; nor ever was there
so exact diligence used in times past; for formerly the Soldiers maintained
themselves more upon free quarter and plunder than upon their pay; but now the
Country being every where destroyed and empty, and the Foot particularly being
fain to work daily at the Fortifications, and keep continually in the Trenches,
it was necessary they should be paid, in which, and the other occasions of the
siege, it is manifest there were spent above Three Millions of Ducates.

The Artillery was commanded by Monsieur de S. Luc, who, excited by his own
genius, and the emulation of Monsieur de la Gniche his predecessor, busied
himself with infinite industry in all occasions, in which the Swissers and the
English were always more ready and more diligent than all the rest; for the
French Infantry, except the Regiment of Picardy and that of Navar, was all made
up of new men, and such as were not accustomed to toils and labors, and to
lie in the field; and yet the healthfulness of that year was so great, assisted
by the excellent Government of the Commanders, and by the conveniences that
were in the Camp, that almost none died, and but very few were sick. The
Light Horse commanded by the Sieur de Montigny were quartered at the back of
the Army, and making large excursions, convoyed in provisions, and infested all
the Country to the very Gates of Dourlans, into which Town Cavalliere Lodovico
Melzi being entered with ten Troops of Horse, there happened frequent
skirmishes, and bloody encounters between both parties.

Nor were the besieged less ready to interrupt the Fortifications, and molest
the Camp continually, A Cannon-shot lights in the Kings Lodgings, whereby the
King himself is all covered with dust.
though the French Army was increased to the number of Eighteen thousand
fighting men; and though in the Town, whatsoever the occasions were, many
diseases reigned, which, as the weather grew hotter, became also contagious and
pestilential; but the courage of the soldiers, and the valor of the Commanders
overcame all, insomuch, that their sallies slackened not, and with their
Artillery they did much harm; one shot having hit into the Arch under which the
King himself lay, and filled the place with so much dust and rubbish, that if
the building of the Wall had not been very strong, he had been in great danger
of being buried in the ruins with his attendants.

To the valor of Armies were added also Treaties with some of the besieged; so
that a Bourguignon Captain being got into the Town in the habit of an Augustine
Friar, A Treaty of giving one of the Gates of Amiens to the Enemy is
discovered, many of the accomplices are hanged, and many Augustine Friars
imprisoned.
not only induced those Fathers to receive some others with offensive Arms
into their Monastery, but also got certain Walloon soldiers to consent to open
a Gate that was furthest from the work, as soon as it should come to their turn
to guard it: but while they still treated to draw many others into their
company, notice of it came unto the Governor, who, having caused nine of the
accomplices to be hanged, made most part of the Friars be put in Prison, and
set strict guards upon the Monastery. From this accident there arose another
trouble to the besieged; for not confiding in the people, among which they
thought there were many partakers of the Intelligence discovered, they were
fain, when they made any sallies, to go round the streets of the City at the
same time with strong guards, to the end that none might rise within; and when
an alarm was given, they were necessitated to man the heart of the Town no less
than the Bulwarks. But notwithstanding all these difficulties, they omitted not
any occasion of sallying; judging that the most powerful remedy to foreslow the
Kings works, and give the Cardinal Archduke time to draw an Army together and
bring them relief.

On the other side, the Marshall de Biron, whilst all were intent, either to
make, or hinder the Works, thought to attempt some unexpected surprise;
wherefore, upon the one and twentieth day of June at night, which proved dark
and cloudy, he caused two Captains to advance silently with some Foot, and to
get down secretly into the Moat, where having cast many Saucissons into the
skip-gates, and the hollow places of the Cassamattes, they gave fire to them
without delay, and with some affright to those within; but not having been able
to aim them right, and they not taking fire equally, made more noise than they
did harm, having only beaten down some of the facing of the Wall, and some
loop-holes for small shot, and killed only three sentinels, so that the
Captains not seeing any breach at which they could make an attempt, and great
store of fireworks raining on all sides into the moat, they retired, leaving
many Saucissons, which, in regard of the Powder, were of great help to the
besieged. Saucissons are long sackes of Leather, which, filled with Powder, and
fired at a certain time, do a like effect (though much weaker) to a pettard or
mine.

This danger excited the defendants to man the Counterscarp more carefully, so
that they lodged two Companies of Spaniards there, and two others of Walloons,
who, after that, staid there day and night, and all the Cassamattes of the
Moat, were, with equal diligence, plentifully guarded, insomuch, that the
Colonel of the Regiment of Navar going to make another trial of the attempt of
the Saucissons, near the Raveline of the Gate that looks toward Long-pre, was,
at the entry of the Counterscarpe forced to return back with some loss.

In the mean time Marshall de Biron fortified the Hermitage, to begin two
Trenches of approach from thence; but the Marquess of Montenegro being resolved
to hinder that as much as he could, sallied upon the nine and twentieth day of
the Month with Four hundred Horse, backed by two hundred Irish and Italian
Foot, and advancing straight as far as the Hermitage, began so fierce a fight
with those that were at work, that the Marshall himself was fain to fall in
with his Troop; nor would that have been sufficient to repulse him, if the
Count of Auvergne had not come up with a strong Troop of Horse, at whose
arrival the Marquess retiring still fighting, the Foot came in courageously to
the encounter, and being placed in the hollow of the field, did so much
mischief to the French Cavalry, that they were fain to retire without much
resistance. Above Two hundred of the Camp were slain, and of the besieged not
above Ten.

The night following the Marshall laid an Ambush of Two hundred French Foot in
the ruins of St John's Church, which, together with the Suburbs had been
pulled down by the Defendants from the beginning, and in the morning stood with
his Horse in order, expecting their wonted sally, to which the Marquess coming
forth, with a number equal to that of the day before, and having fallen at
unawares into the ambush, lost not courage for that, but rallying his Troop
close, and wheeling, would have turned back. But the Marshall coming out of
his quarter, overtook him in the Rere, and made him face about again:
Whereupon, there was so close an encounter, that the Marquess overpowred by the
greater number, and charged in the flank and front, would have been cut off
with all his men, if the Governor with the rest of the Horse had not sallied
forth to dis-ingage him; who having for that purpose sent on two Troops of
Cuirassiers, and one of Lances to the skirmish, the service was so hot, that
for a long space they fought desperately; but in the end, the English Tertia
coming up, the Spaniards were repulsed, and driven full speed to the
Counterscarp. There were slain that day seventy of the besieged, and among the
rest Iuan de Gusman, a Cavalier of great birth, who had lately brought the
relief.

Yet did they not forbear for this to sally the next day, and charging the Foot
that wrought at the Hermitage, killed many Soldiers and Pioneers; but seeing
four Troops of Horse, and the Battalion of the English come toward them, they
turned back without doing any thing else. The Sallies continued so frequent the
following days, that the Works proceeded very slowly; but upon the fifth day
of July the Marshall having laid two Ambushes in the field, catched those that
sallied between in such manner, that Diego Benavides his company was quite
defeated, and he himself having lost his Alferes, and his Sergeant, had much
ado to save himself: And Ruggiero Taccone, who followed him with the Cavalry,
being furiously repulsed and pursued at the heels, could hardly retire safe
under the shelter of the Covered-way.

By this misfortune, and the diseases which increased, the ardor of the
Defendants was something cooled, insomuch, that Biron had convenience to plant
eleven great Pieces of Battery in the Hermitage; which scouring the field,
hindered them from sallying out of the Counterscarp, and sheltered those that
began to work at the Trenches, which going on apace, the Defendants thought to
disturb them, by making so strong a Sally, that part of what was done might be
thrown down, Biron's Artillery nailed, and that they might not be able to annoy
them for some days. Wherefore the Governor gave order, that Captain Diego
Durando, and Francesco del Arco (who had also got a Company) should stand ready
in the Covered-way; the first with Two hundred Spanish Foot, the other with as
many Italians and Walloons; and that after them, two Irish Captains should be
ready to sally with Three hundred Foot of that Nation; and for the Rere-guard,
Carlo de Sangro, with eighty Men at Arms, who marching on Foot should carry
Halbards. He gave direction, that Captain Ruggiero Taccone, and Captain
Francesco-Fonte, should sally out at the Gate that was approached to, each with
an Hundred Horse to back the Infantry, and that Captain Simone Latro, with
other Two hundred Horse sallying at the Port de Beauvais, should give an alarm
on the contrary side, and then crossing through the Field, should come to
reinforce his own party. It was the seventeenth day of July, upon the point of
noon, when the Governor, by a Cannon-shot, gave sign to fall on; at which, all
sallying courageously, Diego Durando ran into the right hand Trench, and
Francesco del Arco into that on the left, and fell in with so much violence,
that having routed and beaten off the first Guards, they assailed the Regiment
of Picardy that kept them, before it had time to get into order to receive the
charge; so that having killed the first that advanced to fight, and having laid
Flessan la Viette, and Fouqueroles, all Captains dead upon the place, they
routed and dissipated the whole Tertia, which they chased flying to the very
Redouts of the Hermitage; in which place, both the Fugitives and the Enemies
fell so impetuously into the Regiment of Champagne that was upon the guard,
that it also being disordered, plainly took flight, running to get themselves
in order in the Alarm-place that was at their back. In so great a tumult and
flight, the Spanish Commanders, valiantly followed by their men, having filled
the Trenches with slaughter, came up to the mouth of the Redouts of the
Hermitage, which would have been quitted, and by consequence lost, if the
Marshall de Biron, with four Gentlemen of his own, and with Captain Franc^sco
Benzi a Florentine, with some few other Soldiers that followed him* taking up
Pikes, had not exposed himself to the violence of the Enemy; but still fighting
desperately, though the passage of the Redouts was narrow; those few could not
hold out long, and withstand the fury of so many, neither did any relief come
up, for Captain Simone scouring the Field, and behind him the Marquess of
Montenegro and Ruggiero Taccone, and Franc^sco Font on the other side, put
every one in a necessity of defending his own post: Wherefore the Battery of
the Hermitage, and the Mareschals life were in desperate danger, if the Prince
of Iainville, who was in the nearest Fort, knowing in how great trouble they
were, had not resolved to run with One hundred men into those Redouts; at whose
arrival Sangro's men at Arms came valiantly into the fight, who better enduring
the blows that were given them, because they were armed, gave the French such a
shock, that they already were retired (though fighting) as far as the
Artillery. The Marshall de Biron being in very great danger by a sally which
the Spaniards made out of Amiens, the King alighted from his horse, and taking
a Pike, ran to help him.
The Marshall de Biron all in sweat and blood, with the right side of his hair
all burnt, still caused many signs to be given of his danger. Wherefore the
King himself not having a more ready remedy, alighted from his horse, and
taking a Pike in his hand, with those Gentlemen that were about him, ran
desperately to defend his Cannon; after whom the Count d' A^vergne, and the
Count de St. Paul, hasting up one after another, with a great number of the
Nobility, who were come out of Mary Magdalens Abbey, there grew so hot a
conflict as had the appearance of a very great Battle. They fought obstinately
above two hours, the King himself being at the head of his men; but at last the
number of the French increasing, and the Spanish men at Arms finding their
strength fail them, The Du^e of Mayenne coming in the heat of the fight with
five hundred Horse to help his own side, causes the Spaniards, who were already
weary, to re^ire into Ami^ns.
by reason of the weight of their Arms in the greatest heat of the day, began
(though softly) to retire, being still driven and charged home by the Prince of
Iainville, who, with a courage equal to his birth, fought very gallantly. At
the coming out of the Trenches, the Battle was reinforced, the Spanish Cavalry
being come up to succor their party, which charging in upon the Flank,
separated the Prince of Iainville and his company, from those of the King, and
of the Marshall de Biron* in such manner, that the conflict being divided into
two parts, one not being able to know any thing of the other, they fought
desperately with extreme danger and wondrous great contention; but the Duke of
Mayenne came up seasonably with Five or six hundred Horse, who, notwithstanding
that the Cannon of the Town fired without intermission, had passed through the
Field between the Quarters and the Moat, whither the Spaniards, being tired and
wearied out, took a resolution to retire, being pursued and followed at the
heels to the very Counterscarp. It was a great while before the Prince of
Iainville was seen, and the King staying at the mouth of the Trench, called out
aloud, enquiring earnestly after him, and every one already suspected he was
slain, when, with some few in his company, he appeared all smeared with blood,
and bruised with blows, which put joy into the sadness of the Army, of which
there were killed that day above Nine hundred men, and of the Spaniards there
remained above Ninety dead upon the place. The wounded were many, and those of
the most remarkable of the French Army, besides many private Gentlemen, among
which also Henrico Davila, who wrote this History, was hurt with a Partesan in
the right knee.

From that day, both by reason of the number that had been slain in so many
other sallies, and by diseases which still increased more and more, malignant
Fevers being apparently turned into the Plague, their sallies slackned; and in
stead of them, Captain Falme, an Irish man, and Francesco del Arco, set up
Pallisadoes round about the Covered way, to keep the enemies so much longer
employed, and at a distance, that they might not come to offend the
Counterscarp, which was defended till the last day of July. But, upon the first
of August, the Trenches being already in a condition to be opened, the
Defendants fastened two Petards unto them, and breaking through them before the
time, assaulted them, and did some harm; and yet the same day toward the
evening, the French opened them, and got upon the Counterscarp, and the
Spaniards at the same time springing a Fougade, which they had made there, sent
above forty of them into the air. The mouths of the Trenches were fortified
that night, and the second day they began to raise a great Cavalier, close by
the right hand Trench, which should batter the Defenses and Flanks of the
Bulwarks, and the following days they strove with Fougades, Saucissons,
Fireworks, and other instruments to take or destroy the Cassamats; in which
action they fought no less by night than day with a continued assault; but so
great was the industry, and constancy of the Defendants, that in many days
they could scarce get a few spans of ground. But having gone as far as was
possible by sapping, the Galleries were already brought just under the Walls;
wherefore Monsieur de S. Luc raised a Battery of eight pieces of Cannon, to
gain the Raveline that stood to defend the Bridge and the Gate. The Artillery
battered till the four and twentieth day, upon which the English and the French
severally gave the assault, and took the Raveline; but not having covered
themselves sufficiently, by reason of their weariness, and of the shortness of
the night, the next day at the beating of the Riveille, Captain Durando
assaulted them so fiercely, that a great number of Fireworks being thrown from
the Wall, and Captain Ollava's Musketeers playing upon their Flank, they were
constrained to forsake that Post, which nevertheless being all beaten in pieces
by the Artillery, and the Cavalier (brought to a just height) already
battering, it was recovered again the same night, and the Regiment of Cambray
entrencht it self in it.

But the Governor knowing the Wall was lost, caused a little Half Moon to be
made upon the edge of the Rampart, for the raising whereof they carried the
earth in scuttles and baskets; and at the same time, to anticipate the cutting
off the retrenchments, the Marquess of Montenegro caused a great Trench to be
made along the bank of an arm of the River, which runs on that side near the
Walls, that the first Works being lost, the enemy might find opposition at the
second.

In the mean time, they without endeavored to make themselves Masters of the
great Tower of the Gate, which being soundly battered, was stormed upon the
eight and twentieth day, and at the same time a Mine was sprung that had been
made between the Tower and the Wall, which having made a very great breach,
filled the entrance of the Tower in such manner, that it was separated from the
City, and deprived of relief; and yet Captain Olava with one Alferes, who had
that Guard, made it good courageously; nor did the Marquess and the Governor
labor less carefully to cause the rubbish to be taken away, that some relief
might be given them, so that working on all sides, the business was drawn on
till night, when the passage being already opened, Fourscore Irish, and as many
Italians, entered to defend the great Tower, those that had made it good
before, retiring weary, and in an ill condition; and yet the Sap overcame what
men could not, and four days after, not only the Tower, but the adjoining Wall
was taken by the French; nor was it long before they got also upon the Rampart,
where, beside the first half moon made by Gagliego, Fedrico Paccio^to had also
in the mean time made two others, by which the Assailants were hindered from
getting farther in, and in the front of them new Casamattes, and a new Trench
were made.

In this interim the King having had intelligence that Commissary Conerrea,
with many other Commanders, being departed from Doway, came to discover the
ways and quarters of his Army, left the care of the Camp to the Duke of
Mayenne, and upon the nine and twentieth of August in the evening, went in
person with the Marshall de Biron and Six hundred Horse to meet them, leaving
the Count of Auvergne to follow the day after with Eight hundred Horse more. He
himself marched before with a Hundred Gentlemen, and the Sieur de Montigny
followed him with all the rest of the Horse; in which manner marching, upon the
last day of the month in the morning, about eight of the clock, and being come
to the top of an Hill, he found himself suddenly in the front of the Enemy, who
came out of a Wood. The space between them was but short, and there was no
thought of retiring; wherefore, it was necessary to show a good heart in the
inequality of Forces, and having suddenly sh^t down their Beavers, the King
trotted on to charge the Enemy.

Nor was this boldness without its due effect; for the Spaniards, astonished at
that unexpected assault, and judging, that the courage of the French grew, from
having strong Squadrons behind them, faced about without making resistance, and
were pursued by the King fighting a great way, till being come to a little
River, which running from Miraumont, falls into the Sum near Corbie, they
passed over it precipitately, and being dissipated several ways saved
themselves with much ado at Bapaulme. Yet there were but eleven soldiers
killed with one Captain of Horse, and some few others remained prisoners: But
the King obtained not all his intent; for on the other side, Count Giovan
Giacopo Belgiojoso and Emanuello de Vega not being met nor heeded, because they
carried but few with them, got so near unto the Camp, that they had convenience
to discover all things, and returned well informed to the Cardinal Archduke.

The King being returned to the Army, and believing that relief would presently
come, Bernardo Tells Po^tocarrero killed with a Musket Shot, to the extreme
loss of the ^esieged, his valor making his very enemies ^orry for his death.
caused the works to be so hastened, that upon the fourth of September his men
attempted to gain the Half-Moons, which, though it succeeded not the besieged
received a greater loss; for the Governor Portocarrero, while he advanced to
succor the Raveline, being taken with a Musket Shot in the left-side under his
Arms, fell presently dead upon the ground; which accident, as most sad to the
Defendants, so was it, by reason of his courage, no less deplored by the
enemies.

The Marquess of Montenegro succeeded him in the command, who, with equal
valor and constancy assumed the charge of the defense; for the continuance
whereof Alonso Ribera, and Captain Durando entered into the Half-Moons; and on
the other side, Monsieur de St. Luc, with the Regiment of Navar, and the
Marshall de Biron with the English Tertia, drew two Trenches in the midst of
the Rampart, to take away the defenses on both sides, and to come to the work
that was before them, at which the Marquess and Federico Pacciotto were
continually present: and because the Infantry was in a manner consumed by toil
and hardship, and many of them lay sick, the Men-at-Arms, Cuirassiers, and
Light Horse, refused not to do the same duties, working with spades and
shovels, and fighting with Pikes and Muskets. While these Trenches were making,
Monsieur de St. Luc, a man of very great note, hastening the Works, is killed
with a Musket Shot, to the Kings great grief.
Monsieur de St. Luc, upon the eighth of September, being entered to hasten the
Works, was hit with a Musket-bullet in the head, and was carried dead into the
Camp, to the exceeding great grief of the King, who was very affectionate to
his valor and dexterity; for, being beside Military experience adorned with
learning, and endowed by nature with a most noble aspect, he did, in action,
consultation, conversation and discourse accomplish all the degrees of
perfection. The works that were before the Trenches were stormed upon the
twelfth day; but though the assault lasted from Sunrising till two of the
Clock in the afternoon, yet did not the assailants get any advantage at all;
and while in the following days they thought to redouble the assaults, and
break the constancy of the Defendants, the arrival of the Spanish Camp diverted
their minds from the Siege to more dangerous thoughts.

The Cardinal Archduke had found many difficulties in drawing an Army
together; for the Spanish Ministers having overlooked the accounts of those who
had lent Money to the King, and having used much rigor unseasonably, the
Merchants withheld their hands, and afterward money could not be provided time
enough for the payment of his Forces; whereupon, those that came out of Italy,
under the command of Alfonso d' Avalos moved late; and those that were raised
in Germany had been slowly gathered together; and yet the Cardinal overcoming
all impediments with industry and diligence, had made a general Rendezvous of
his Army in the end of August at Doway, being Twenty thousand Foot, and Four
thousand Horse; and though the States of Holland insulted in many places, and
made great progresses in Frieseland and the County of Brabant, yet he either
having such Commission from Spain, or being more inclined to defend and keep
what had been gotten in the time of his command, resolved to lay aside all
other interests, and advance to relieve Amiens; being desirous to preserve so
many good Soldiers as were besieged in it, and judging that he should obtain
exceeding great glory, if he could make the King of France retire, who was at
that siege with all the Forces of his Kingdom united.

With this determination departing from Doway in the beginning of September,
with a great Train of Artillery, and great preparations of Bridges, Carriages,
and Ammunition, he came to Arras, where, having the informations of Belgiojoso
and Vega, he propounded in the Council of War, what course was to be taken to
put relief into Amiens, or to make the French Army rise. Some Counseled to
pass the River below Corbie, and bring his Army on that side, which standing
toward France, was not besieged by the King; for putting strong relief into the
City without resistance, there would be no necessity of hazarding the danger of
a Battle, and the Kings attempts receiving a new and powerful opposition from
new supplies, would, with the help of Winter, which was coming on, prove vain
of themselves. But the greater part of the Commanders considered, that to pass
the River, and march into a Country quite destroyed, desolate, and encompassed
with so many of the enemies Towns, was a besieging of themselves; for, if the
King, who had all the passes upon the River, should hinder them from going
back, they would be constrained, either to die for hunger, or to take many
strange and dangerous resolutions; which difficulty was the principal cause,
that it was determined to go the straight way by Dourlans to the French Camp;
believing, that if the King moved to meet them, he should afford them some
opportunity to put relief into the Town; wherefore the Archduke went to
Dourlans upon the twelfth of September, The Cardinal Archduke marches with a
great Army toward Amiens.
and there having made provision of victual, as well to feed his Army, as to
put into the City, if he could make passage to it; upon the fourteenth day he
marched betimes in the morning toward the Enemy.

The first Troops of Horse were led by Lodovico Melzi, Ambrogio Landriano,
between whom marched the flying Squadron of Four thousand Foot, Spaniards and
Italians, under the command of Diego Pimentello: And in the Front of it, were
above Two hundred Captains armed with Pikes and Corslets. Next followed three
Squadrons of Infantry, two of Spaniards, led by Carlo Colombo and Lodovico
Velasco; and the third, which marched in the midst, was of Walloons, led by the
Count de Boucquoy. After these was the Battle, in which were the Duke of
Aumale, the Count de Sore, and the Prince of Orange; and the Squadron of Alonso
Mendozza, in which were two Spanish Tertia's, brought up the Rere. The
Artillery were guarded by the three first Squadrons, and on both sides of the
Army were the Carriages of Baggage chained together, as the Duke of Parma's
custom had taught them. Monsieur de Rosne killed with a Cannon shot at the
siege of Hu^st.
The charge of Camp-Master General was executed by Count Peter Ernest of
Mansfelt, an old man of venerable gray hairs, who not being able to ride on
horseback was carried in an open Litter, and had taken that weight upon him,
because Monsieur du Rosne, besieging Hulst, a few Months before, had been
killed with a Cannon shot. The Archduke likewise was carried in a Litte^, and
had near him the Duke of Arescot, and the Almirante of Aragon for Counselors.

But the King, whose Army, by the coming up of the Dukes of Nevers and
Montpensier, was so increased, that he had Eighteen or Twenty thousand Foot,
and more than Eight thousand Horse, having strongly garrisoned Corbie and
Pequigny, to make difficult the passage of the River, had an intention (being
so advised by the Marshall de Biron) to go and meet the enemy in the Field
with all his Cavalry; for judging himself much superior in number and quality
of Horse, he thought it good to keep the enemy far from his Infantry, in which
he had little confidence; but while he was getting ready to take Horse, The
King being counseled by the Marshall de Biron to go meet the enemy with all
his Horse, the Duke of Mayenne counsels him to stay and expect them: The King
embraces this counsel, and gives the charge of the Camp to the Duke.
the Duke of Mayenne came in, who having asked and understood the Kings design,
said so loud, that he was heard by many, That those that gave His Majesty such
Counsel, did not well know the quality of the Enemy; and that venturing himself
with only his Horse, against a potent old Army, he put himself in certain
danger of encountering some sinister accident; whereby afterward his Infantry
remaining alone, the men would be lost, the quarters lost, and so many toils
and labors undergone to fortify them, all lost; and his Kingdom set upon one
single point of a Dye. To which the King replying, What then was to be done?
The Duke answered, That they were come to take Amiens, and that they ought to
mind that end; wherefore, keeping the Army in the security of their Forts, they
ought to leave the thought of assaulting them, and driving from thence unto the
Archduke: And the King adding, That the enemy would pass the River, and
relieve the besieged. The Duke answered again, Let your Majesty set your heart
at rest, for the enemy neither will pass the River, nor can force these
Trenches. So the Marshall de Biron fretting, who was always inclined to
precipitate resolutions, the King concluded to stay, and let the Duke of
Mayenne manage the business of the Camp, who having caused Fifteen hundred Foot
to pass on the far side of the River, under the command of Monsieur de Vic,
presently made a Church to be taken and entrenched, which stood upon the
further Bank, little more than a mile from the Town; and having set many Corpse
de Gardo along the side of the River, went personally to Longpre to fortify it
better. The Foot were placed in the Forts and Trenches, and the Cavalry spread
it self in Battalia under the defense of the Works.

The Archduke lay with his whole Army that night at the Abbey of Betricourt, and
caused all his Cannon to be shot off, to give the City notice that relief was
near. Monsieur de Montigny, who, with the French Light Horse had still scoured
the ways within fight of the Enemy, came into the Camp about midnight, and
having given the King notice where the Spaniards were, and that they would
appear the next day, was sent to quarters, to refresh his Horse, tired with the
two last days duty. The next day, which was the fifteenth of September, the
first Troops of the Archdukes Army appeared about one of the clock in the
afternoon, which having passed a Water that was fordable two Leagues above
Amiens, and left Pequigny upon the right hand, bending their course toward the
left, made show as if they would march straight to Longpre, whereupon the
rabble of Suttlers and Freebooters, with many other persons who lay there for
greater convenience, taking flight precipitately, ran to save themselves in the
Camp, by which hurry, the Foot being affrighted (who believed it had been
Monsieur de Montigny, that fled routed from the Enemy (for his return by night
was known but to a few) forsook the Trenches so hastily, that neither the
Constable, nor the Duke of Espernon could stop their flight, but with a full
carriere they ran with their Ensigns (who fled more than the rest) toward the
River, on that side that leads to Abbeville.

A disorder among the French, gives the Spaniards* an evident assurance of
victory; but the Archduke being uncertain of the accident, making an Halt,
loses so remarkable an occasion.
In the mean time the Spaniards Flying-squadron was come within sight of the
Trenches, and the experienced Captains that were in the Front, knowing the
disorder and flight of the Colors, cried out aloud, Victory, Victory, and
Battle, Battle. But the Archduke hearing the tumult, and their voices,
though he inclined to give way that the Trenches should be stormed, yet being
persuaded by the Almirante and the Duke of Aresc^t, not to credit the
precipitancy of the Soldiers, who were still desirous to fight without
consideration, but rather to proceed warily, and first to discover the
condition of the French, resolved at last to make a halt.

In this interim, The Dukes of Nevers and Montpensier spreading the Cavalry of
the Vanguard in Battalia, hindered the Enemy from seeing the Trenches, and the
Cannoneers gave fire without intermission, to the end, the smoke might hide the
disorder that was there, giving them time to recover themselves; for, the
Marshall de Biron running full speed, made the Infantry know their error, and
pointing with his finger to show, that the Enemy had made a halt in the midst
of the field, persuaded them all within a while to return unto their Posts. In
this manner, the Archduke, by the too much wariness of his Counselors, lost so
certain an occasion of so glorious and so great a victory, which, at the first
arrival, had been very well observed by the experience of private Captains.

The Marquess of Montenegro knew the advantage no less than they, and would
have sallied upon the Trenches of the French which were in the Moat, and upon
the Rampart over against his Retrenchments; but he found, that the Regiment of
Navarre that guarded them was not moved, and that the Switzers who were
encamped something lower, stood likewise firm in their Battalia.

The rest of the day was spent in diverse skirmishes in the field, which the
King caused purposely to be made hot and furious, to keep the Enemy in play,
the Archduke still having a thought to assault the Kings Fortifications; but
the Commanders showed, that it was necessary first to fight with so great a
strength of Horse drawn up without the works, and defended by so many pieces of
Artillery, that the conquering of them was not to be thought on; and showed the
Trenches and Forts so high, that a stronger quarter had not been seen of many
years: Wherefore it being resolved at night to attempt some other way, upon the
sixteenth day in the morning, the Count de Buquoy with his Squadron, and many
Boats carried upon Carts, drew near the River to attempt to pass it; but the
Guards the Duke of Mayenne had placed there, resisted stoutly, and though they
fought with such wondrous fury in many places, and that sometimes it was likely
the Walloons would obtain their intent, yet after having labored all day they
retired without fruit.

In the mean time, they had skirmished fiercely on the other side, both with
Horse and Cannon; for the King having caused seven Culverins to be drawn to a
higher gro^nd that was behind the Vanguard, made them play from thence, and so
prosperously, that twice they light upon the Mules that carried the Cardinals
Litter; whereupon he was constrained to get on horseback, and the Enemies
Cavalry received much harm by them on all sides. The Spanish Cannon fired no
less hotly* but because they were in a higher-place, they shot so under mettle,
that they did but little execution. But in the variety of the skirmishes that
were continually made in the field, many observed, that while the business
passed between Cuirassiers and Cuirassiers, or between Carabines and Carabines,
the French for the most part had the better; but where the Flemish and
Bourguignon Men at Arms came in, the French Cavalry were fain to yield to the
violence of the Lances: to hinder which encounter, which happened to the loss
and trouble of the Nobility, the King himself advanced to the head of his
Squadrons, gave order that as the Cuirassiers skirmished they should not join
so close together, but leave a good space between one another, which having
been often done, they found that the sho^^ of the Lances not meeting a firm
opposition proved for the most part vain, which was of very great advantage, as
well because they skirmished with small Troops in the wide field, where it was
easy to them to open, as because the Spanish Lanciers were very few in respect
of the great number of French Cavalry.

Toward the evening a Trench was finished* with which the Duke of Mayenne
laboring all that day, had shut up the way to Longpre; wherefore the Count de
Boucquoi's attempt being frustrated, and there being no more hope of getting
the Pass over the River, since that neither Longpre had been attacqued, The
Cardinal Archduke re^ire^ with his Army for want of victual; the King follows
him, but seeing their excellent order forbear^
nor the Kings quarters assaulted the first day, the Commanders of the Spanish
Army (according to whose opinion the Cardinal Archduke governed himself)
determined to retire the same way they came, and make their retreat, before the
victual which they had brought with them being spent, the Army should begin to
suffer; for, as for the Country, it was so wasted, that for fifteen Leagues
round about, there was nothing to be found that could be useful either to horse
or man.

The sign of their departure appeared the next morning by their Baggage and the
Free-booters that covered all the way toward Dourlans; whereupon the King
desirous not to let the Enemy draw off without some trouble, commanded two
Squadrons of Horse flanked with two others of Carabines to fall upon them in
the Rear; but the Sun being many hours high when the Army departed, they saw
them retreat in such a mavelous order, that their main proposition being
chiefly to prosecute the siege of Amiens, the King himself thought best, and
all the rest of the Commanders concurred with him, not to attempt any thing.
The Spanish Army had faced about, so that Alonso de Mendozza led the Vanguard,
(if the first divisions that retire can be called a Vanguard) and the flying
Squadron now was left in the Reerguard to make the retreat. This, being Pikes
in the midst, with two great wings of Musketeers on each side, make a crooked
form, and an appearance something like a Half Moon, so that whosoever advanced
to charge it, fell first into a thick storm of Musket-Bullets, after which they
found a firm Battalion before them, which fiercely shaking their Pikes, made a
terrible show of a valiant opposition; and if any Body of Horse made as if they
would assail the Wings of the Squadron, presently Melzi's and Landriano's
Squadrons advanced, which with two Bodies of Lances flanked with Carabines
withstood the shock, till the Musketeers charging and setting themselves in
order, came furiously up to give fire again. In this order the Pike-men with
their Pikes upon the left shoulder, retired step by step, and facing instantly
about at every little touch of the Drum, retreated so quietly, and with so slow
a pace, that in two long hours they were drawn off little more than half a
mile; in which space the Kings Light Horse ceased not to make many attempts,
and to give many charges, but still with great loss; for they were too fiercely
answered by the ranks of the flying Squadron; The Kings Light Horse attempt by
skirmishes to do some harm to the Spanish Army; but they still come off with
the worst.
and at last Monsieur de Montigny having obtained leave to skirmish in many
several places, the Spanish Squadron made a halt, pouring out such an abundance
of small-shot, that the Light Horse were forced to wheel about, and being at
the same time furiously charged by the Carabines who came out of each flank,
they were driven back even to the Kings Squadrons, which advancing gently more
for reputation than any thing else, followed on the way the Enemy retired.
Above forty of the Light Horse were slain, and many more wounded, among which
the Sieur de Coqueinvillier received a Musket Shot in the left Arm. But after
this last charge of the Light Horse, the Kings Squadrons made a stand a while,
and the Spaniards continued retiring a great deal faster; and after they were
gotten off as far as Cannon-shot, shouldering their Pikes and Muskets, they
marched on their way without troubling themselves any further. But being come
to the water, which of necessity they were to pass, the King advanced with all
his Cavalry to see if that impediment would give him any opportunity to
disorder the Enemy; but the flying Squadron instantly facing about, made a
stand in the midst of the way, till the rest of the Army was past over; and
then observing the same order, past through the water up to their knees without
disordering their ranks at all, or making the least discernable stop: which
mavelous form of retreating, while so great and so numerous Squadrons of the
Enemies Horse covered the field on all sides, drew from the Kings own mouth,
That no other Soldiers in the World could do so much; and that if he had had
that Infantry joined with his Cavalry, The Kings praise of the Spanish Infantry.
he would dare to undertake a War against all the World. When they were past
the water, the French forbore to follow any further; for the King would needs
send back part of his Horse to defend the Camp, and toward the evening he,
with the Duke of Nevers and Montpensier, and with the Marshall de Byron,
followed the retreat of the Spaniards. The Archduke lay that night in the Abbey
of Betricourt again, and the next day passing near Dourlans, marched strait to
Arras, with a design, since he had not been able to relieve the besieged, to
apply himself to the affairs of Flanders.

After the Cardinals departure, the King sends an Herald to Caraffa Marquess of
Montenegro, to persuade him to surrender.
The King being returned to the Camp, sent an Herald to tell the Marquess of
Montenegro, that having seen the issue of the relief he expected, it was time
now to think of yielding; and that, because he d^sired not the destruction of
so many gallant Soldiers, he would grant him honorable conditions. The
Marquess (who in a note brought him by a Boy, had already had leave from the
Archduke to capitulate, would yet hear the opinions of the Commanders, who
having unanimously concluded, that by reason of the contagious mortality, of
their want of Match, of the small number of men to which they were reduced, and
because the Enemies were now Masters of the Rampart, The Marquess sends Captain
Pacciotto with the Kings pasport to the Cardinal for leave to surrender.
there was no thought of holding out) answered the King, That he desired
Safe Conduct to send a Captain to the Archduke, that he might know the
certainty of his Command, which being courteously granted, he sent Federico
Pacciotto, who brought express leave to make Composition: whereupon having
treated a while, they agreed to surrender upon these Conditions:

That the Monuments of Hernando Tells Portocarrero, and of all other
Commanders slain in the siege, The Articles of Composition.
should not be stirred, nor their Inscriptions cancelled, it being nevertheless
lawful for the Spaniards to take away their Bodies when they pleased. That all
the Soldiers that were in the City should march out in Battalia, with their
Arms and Baggage, Colors flying, Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding, and
should be fu^nished by the King with Carts to carry away their Goods and their
Sick as far as Dourlans: That if any sick or wounded person should remain in
the City, he should receive good usage, and have liberty to go away at his
pleasure: That the Soldiers should be exempt from paying for any Physic or
Surgery they had had in the City, and likewise for Two thousand pound weight o^
Musket-Bullet which they had taken up from particular men and made use of: That
Prisoners on both sides should be set free without Ransom: That the Townsmen
might stay without being oppressed, and be used as good Subjects, renewing
their Oath of Allegiance to the King of France; but those that would march out
with the Souldie^s might have free liberty so to do: That there should be a
Truce for the six next ensuing days, within the term of which, if they were not
relieved with at least ^wo thousand men, they should deliver up the City; and
that in the mean time they should give Hostages for security, a Spanish
Commander, an Italian, and a Walloon.

The Sergeant Major carried the Capitulations to the Archduke, U^o^ the 25 of
September. 1597* the Marquess of Montenegro marches with his forces out of Amiens.
who having ratified them, the Defendents of Amiens marched forth upon the Five
and twentieth of September, being Eighteen hundred Foot, and four hundred
Horse; the Marquess of Montenegro being at the head of them in a Souldier-like
gallant^y, upon a brave Horse, wi^h a Truncheon in his hand* and being come to
the place where the King and the whole Army in Battalia expected him, saying
aside his Truncheon, alighted and kissed the Kings knee, and said, A saying of
the M^rquiss to the King of France.
(so loud that he was heard by the bystanders) That he deliv^red up that place
into the hands of a Souldier-King, since it had not pleased the King his Master
to cause it to be relieved by Souldier-Commanders; which words moved every one
to consider, that if the Spanish Army had either taken the way beyond the
River, or laid hold of the occasion which fortune had presented them at the
disorder in the Trenches, the siege had certainly been raised. The King
answered, The King^ Answer*
That it ought to satisfy him, that he had defended the place like a Soldier,
and now restored it into the hand of the lawful King with the honor of a
Soldier. To these words he added many other favorable demonstrations, as well
toward him as the other Commanders, whom he desired to know by name, one by
one; and being dismissed with the praise of the whole Army, they were convoyed
safe to Do^rlans.

There entered into Amiens, the Constable, who received the place, the Marshall
de Byron, and the Duke of Mombason, and after them the King himself, who having
visited the Cathedral Church, gave the Government of the Town to Monsieur de
Vic, and went forth without making any stay* as well out of a suspicion of the
Plague, as out of a desire to march after the Archduke* who having s^aid only
two days upon the Pass of the River Ants, was in this interim gotten within the
Walls of Arras.

Upon the six and twentieth day, there happened an accident, which if it had fallen
ou^ before, would have discomposed all things, but at this time it proved
rather a matter of sport than trouble; for there brake out suddenly so great a
Fire in the Kings quarters, (the cause thereof not being at all known) that in
a short space all the Huts were burned, which was no way harmful, either to Men
or Baggage, because the Camp was already raised, and marching away. The whole
Army rejoiced, calling it a Bonfire; and many from thence took a good Omen of
future quiet, which was confirmed by the event; for the General of the
Cordeliers being returned from the Court of Spain, and come with Letters to the
Archduke about the same time, The (...) of the Fr^^ci^can^ (...) from (...) and
(...) agreed, (...) the Deputies of both parties shall meet at Vervins to treat
of Peace,
caused an interview upon the Confines which divide Pi^ardy from the County of
Art^is, between Secretary Villeroy, on the Kings part, and President
Ri^cardo^to, for the Archduke, who determined that at Vervins, a place upon the
same Confines, famous for the Peaces that had formerly been treated there, the
Cardinal-Lega^, Father Francisco Gonzaga, Bishop of Mantua, the Popes Nuncio,
and the Deputies on both parts, should meet together to apply themselves to a
Treaty of Peace.

That which moved King Philip to an inclination to Peace, was the urgency of
the affairs of Flanders, which by reason they had been abandoned for two years
together, were extremely much gone down the wind* so that the necessity of his
own affairs, constrained him not to think of getting that which was another.
To this was added, the exceeding great scarcity of money, for which he had been
fain this very year, to suspend all payments, to the disreputation of his
greatness, and the undoing of those Merchants that were wont to have dealings
with the Crown. Nor was the respect of establishing the Succession upon his Son
last in his consideration, for being now far in years, The King of Spain being
now grown old, sets his thoughts to establish the Succession of his young Son.
and knowing that his death drew near, he desired that his Successor, who was
very young, might not be engaged in a great and troublesome War, against a King
of manly age and strength, full of experience, and upheld by the manifest
favor of Fortune. His dependents add, that being in the latter end of his life
careful to satisfy his Conscience, he desired to end his days with the Peace
of Christendom, and the restitution of that which was not his own; yet it is
most clear, that the loss of Amiens gave great force to his first disposition,
The Cardinal Archduke being to marry the Infanta Isabella, and to have the
Dominion of the Low Countries with her, desires also to settle himself in the
peacef^l possession of them*
and persuaded even the Cardinal Archduke, who being to marry the Infanta
Isabella, and with her to have the Dominion of the Low Countries, endeavored
not to have so powerful and so troublesome a War as that with the King of France.

Secretary Villeroy returned with the resolved appointment, and found that the
King with his Army following the prosperity of Fortune, was encamped before
Dourlans; for having made an incursion, even to the very Walls of Arras,
filling the whole Country with terror, he perceived afterward that the places
of Picardy were left behind with very great danger, and therefore was come to
besiege Dourlans as the nearest place, the taking whereof would be of wondrous
advantage to his Country. But already the Rains of Autumn did very much
incommode and annoy him; and his Army which had been healthful till then, began
now to be troubled with the Bloody Flux, and the Plague; in such manner, that
the Treasurers putting him in mind, that all means of paying his Foot was
utterly gone, the King resolved to disband his Army, and to apply himself
heartily to the Treaty of Peace, which now, being high in reputation and
honor, and having satisfied himself and the expectation of his people, he
desired more boldly and openly than before.

The Duke of Savoy desirous to ^^ep the Marquesate of Saluzzo to himself,
cross^s the Treaty of Peace.
This reciprocal desire of both Kings, facilitated the Treaty of Peace; but the
Duke of Savoy's interests kept all things in difficulty: For though the War
these two last years had been various, and with hot encounters, and bloody
assaults, rather disadvantageous than otherwise; and though Monsieur de
Lesdiguieres having taken St. Iehan de Morienne, and all that valley in the
Alps, was gone down into Piedmont, to the ruin and spoiling of the Country;
yet he being resolved to retain the Marquesate of Saluzzo, either crossed the
Peace, or cared not to have it concluded.

But yet the meeting at Vervins held, whither Monsieur de Bellieure, and
President Sillery, came from the King of France; and President Riccardotto,
Iuan Boptista Tassis, and Ludovic^ Verichen, Auditor of Brabanza for the King
of Spain. The French Deputies were brought by the Popes Nuncio, and the Spanish
by the General of the Cordeliers; and the Cardinal-Legat came to the same
place, by whose Authority all difficulties of precedence being removed, they
entered upon the Treaty of the business; 1598.
but not before the beginning of the month of February in the year 1598, a year
destined by Divine Providence to close up the grievous wounds of forty years
past.

Great was the desire of Peace on both sides, and great likewise the Authority
of the Legate with each party, nor were the demands very different: For the
Spaniards proffered without difficulty to restore Ardres, Dourlans, la
Cappelle, Castelet, and Montaulin in Piccardy, and the Port of Blauet in
Bretagne, and desired only to retain Calais as long as the War with the
Hollanders lasted, and to give the King of France an equivalent exchange in the
mean time: The pretensions of the French, and of the Spaniard, stood upon in
the Treaty of Peace.
And the French stood to have Calais restored freely; they likewise demanded
Cambray, and renewed some old pretensions upon the Confines of Flanders. The
Spaniards showed, that all old pretensions were terminated in the Peace
concluded between the two Crowns at Chasteau Cambresis in the year 1559, and
that Cambray was not of the King of France his Jurisdiction* but a City of the
Archbishops, usurped a few years before by the Duke of Alancon's Forces, and
that therefore being a free Town, the King could not pretend any right unto it,
but that the Master of the Low Countries had the ancient protection of it; and
yet not a direct Dominion, but one established by reason. Upon these Answers
the French easily gave off their old pretensions, and the demand of Cambray;
and with as much facility did the Spaniards lay aside the demand of retaining
Calais: Whereupon all the difficulty was reduced to this point, That the King
of France would have had Blauet in the condition it then was, with all the
Artillery, Shot, and Ammunition of War* and the Spaniards stood totally to
demolish the Fort they had built, and to carry away the Artillery, and other
things which they had brought thither of their own; but this difficulty also
was easily taken away; for the Treaty being managed with great sincerity, the
French satisfied themselves, knowing that the Spaniard had reason on their side.

All other matters were of small importance, so that nothing remained, save to
treat about the interests of their adherents: for the King of France desired
there might be an Agreement made with the Queen of England and the States of
Holland; and the King of Spain would have had the Duke of Savoy and the Duke of
Mercoeur comprehended in the Peace. About this there arose a sharp contention;
for the French having said that they would not include the Duke of Mercoeur, as
being the Kings Subject; the Spaniards answered, That also the States of
Holland were the King of Sp^i^s Subjects: and here mutually upbraiding one
another that they fomented Rebels, they grew extremely angry, and broke forth
into words of indignation; and yet the Cardinal-Legat interposing, they agreed
to make their Princes acquainted with the business, and expect their resolute
orders. The Duke of M^rcoeu^ Brother-in-law to Hen^y the III. being reduced
almost to extremity, agrees with the King giving his only Daughter to Caesar of
Bourbon, Bastard Son to Hen. 4. and g^ve up what he held in Bretagne unto the
Kings obedience.
But within a few days these difficulties were removed; for the King having
left the Constable with reasonable Forces in Picardy, was gone personally to
Angiers to draw his Army together, and march with all his Forces into Bretagne.
Wherefore the Duke of Mercoeur seeing his designs ruined, and not being willing
to hold out till the last necessities, which he was not able to resist,
condescended to the Agreement; by which, marrying his onl^ Daughter to Caesar
the Kings Bastard Son, and receiving other recompenses of Pensions and moneys,
he delivered up that part of Bretagne that was in his possession unto the Kings
obedience; whereupon the occasion ceased for which the Catholic King
endeavored to include him in the Peace.

Nor was there any need to contend long for the Queen of England and the States
of Holland; for those Princes, after they had done all that was possible to
hinder the Treaty of Peace, showing themselves ill satisfied with the King,
because in the League of the year before he had promised not to agree without
them, declared that they would not be comprehended as Adherents, and that they
would have no Peace with the King of Spain.

There remained only the point concerning the Duke of Savoy, which was like to
have interrupted the whole agreement when it was brought to perfection: The
Duke of Savoy's Ambassador being present in the meeting at V^rvins, said, That
he had a promise the Duke should retain the Marquesate of Saluzzo in fee.
for the Marquess de Lullin the Dukes Ambassador, being introduced into the
Conference, said, That President Sillery, one of the Deputies there present,
had from the year before treated an accommodation with the Duke, and that the
King was then contented he should hold the Marquesate of Saluzzo in fee from
the Crown. The President answered, That it was true, the King was so contented,
but at a time when the state of his affairs persuaded him by all means to
divide the Duke from the King of Spain, and that to that condition the Marquess
knew well there were others joined, which he would not mention, lest he should
set discord among Friends; by which words he meant to infer that the Duke to
retain the Marquesate had proffered to make War against the State of Milan.
Many contentions there were about it, and the whole Treaty seemed to be
discomposed; but the General of the Cordeliers going to the King, and Iuan
Baptista Tassis to the Archduke, The differences about the Marquesate are
referred to the Pope, who is to give judgment within a year.
they returned within a few days, and concluded, that the Duke and the King
should retain what they possessed at that present, and that the difference
about the Marquesate should be referred to the Pope, who was to give judgment
within the space of one year, and then what each held of the others would
mutually be restored. But the Marquess refused that the King should retain the
Valley of Morienne, and would not ratify it without advertising the Duke, and
this by reason of his nature, would have been a difficult impediment, if good
fortune had not removed the obstacle; for the Duke about this time recovered
Morienne with a great slaughter of Les Diguieres his Forces; and on the other
side, Les Diguieres took a Fort which the Duke had built near Grenoble, and
having put the Garrison to the Sword, demolished it to the very ground:
wherefore there remaining nothing but Berre in Provence in the Dukes
possession, they agreed that he should restore that Town in present, and that
the business of the Marquesate should be decided by the Pope.

The Peace was concluded and subscribed by the Deputies upon the second day of
May, The Peace is concluded and published.
with express condition that it should not be published till a month after; for
the King of France desired that the English and Holland Ambassadors should
first be gone from Court, that the Peace might not be published in their
presence; and the Cardinal Archduke desired space to receive the Countersign of
Blauet from Spain. The Peace was published upon the seventh day of June in
Paris, and the same day at Amiens, in the presence of the Legate, and the Kings
Deputies, as by agreement it was likewise done at Bruxels; all men generally
rejoicing, that after so long and so calamitous Wars, the Kingdom of France
distracted into so many Factions, was at last reunited in the entire obedience
of a Catholic French King, to enjoy the fruit^ and blessings of Peace for the
future, in recompense of so many past miseries and afflictions.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS Contained in this HISTORY.
A.
ABbot of Orbais sent to Rome by the Duke of Mayence, treats of the affairs of
the League very effectually. Page 387 Administration of the Royal Family. 4
Admiral Coligny's Propositions to the Malcontents embraced, 19. made General
of the Hugonots, 84. hires one to kill the King, 107 flies to Rochel, 129. the
Army committed to his care, 143. sickneth, yet desists not from the Siege of
Poictiers, 155. quits it, and goes to relieve Chastel-rault, 156 wounded, and
flees, 162. being sick, is carried with the Army in a Litter, 168. Duke of
Savoy grows suspicious of him, for marrying Madam d'Antramont, a Savoyard,
against his will, 174. after many years Wars against the King, prostrates at
his feet, and is graciously received, 176. causes the Hugonots to surprise Mons
in Flanders, to force him to a War with Spain, 178. is seemingly made friends
with the Lords of the House of Lorrain before the King, ibid. prefers himself
before Julius Caesar, or Alexander the Great* 179. shot in the left elbow, 181.
King and Queen mother set strict Guards upon his House, is slain, thrown out at
the window, and dragged into a stable, ib. Cruelties used to his Body, 184. his
Statue burnt, and his Palace razed. 185 Admiral Villars goes to besiege
Quilleboeuf, 558. is forc d to rise from thence, 559. submits Rouen to the
King, 638. fighting gallantly at Dourleans, is slain. ^84 Agreement between
Henry IV. and Duke of Mayence. 694 Aix in Provence submits to the King. 629
Albanians, or Croats, 3^4. their story. 322 Ambassadors from the Low Countries
to the King of France, entreating him to take the Protection and Dominion of
their States, 259. from the Pope, King of Spain, and Duke of Savoy, to Charles
IX. to solicit the Publication of the Council of Trent, 93. from the
Protestant Princes of Germany, speaking highly to the King for the Hugonots,
are sharply answered, and depart, 300. from the King to Pope Sixtus, to excuse
the Cardinal de Guise's death, sharply answered, 382. from Venice to Henry III.
pass a Compliment in Public with Henry IV. as King of France, 427. of Venice,
sent to Congratulate Henry IV. his Assumption to the Crown. 665 Amiens puts it
self into the Kings hands, 652 surprised by Porto-Carero, 716, 717. besieged by
Henry IV. an account thereof. 718, etc. Andelot, with the Relics of the
Hugonots, sustains the Siege of Orleans, 85. mingling with the Enemy at Brisac,
lifts up the Duke of Monsalez's Bever, and discharges a Pistol in his face,
140. after loss of the Battle, dies for Grief. 142 Answer of the King, Queen,
and Parliament of Paris to the Prince of Conde's Manifesto, 62. of Grillon
Captain of the Guards. 368 Antony of Vendosm, of the House of Bourbon, he that
was Father to Henry IV. marries the Daughter of the King of Navarre, by whom
he inherits the Pretensions of that Kingdom. 10 Antonio Possevino a Jesuit,
s^nt by Pope Clement VIII. to tell the Duke of Nevers h^ should not come to
Rome, to execute his Embassage, 621. sends him again to bid him come, as a
Catholic Italian Prince, though not as Ambassador. Page 622 Arcenal is the
Magazine of Arms, designed to be taken, but not effected. 302 Archbishop of
Lions made Prisoner, 370. often examined, would never answer, alleging, as
Primate of all France, he had no Superior but the Catholic Church, 374. with
others put into the Castle of Ambois, ib is made High Chancellor to the Duke of
Mayenne, 437. he and Cardinal Gondi chose by the Council of Paris, to treat
with Henry IV 466. Archbishop of Bourges, his Pretensions upon the Spiritual
Superiority of Gallia. 558 Archduke Ernest, his resolutions at the loss of
Paris, 642. approved by them of Spain. 643 Archduke Albert, Cardinal of
Austria, goes to be Governor in Flanders, 696. his History. 704, etc. Arms of
Henry III. thrown down. 379 Armies dismissed, and Peace published, 193. an Army
sent by Henry III. against the King of Navarr, 311. one of 40000 men raised by
the Protestant Princes of Germany, under conduct of Prince Casimire, led by the
Baron d'Onaw his Lieutenant General, 313. its Transactions, 315, etc.
disbanded. 328 Assemblies secret of the Princes of Bourbon, and other
discontented Lords. 14 Assembly of the States at Fontainblea^, 28, etc.
dismissed, and a general one resolved on, 31. begins, 37. dismissed, 45. at
Moulins, the Decree made there, 98 appointed at Blois, 220. meets, 227. whether
it or the King be superior, 228. is dismissed, without concluding any thing,
232, 358. of Catholics to consult about a future King, 408. of the States
appointed by Henry IV. at ^ours. 416 Attig^y taken by Henry IV. and the
Germans, he gives them the pillage. 512 Ausone, a strong place in Bourgogne
besieged, and taken by the Duke of Guise. 305
B.
BArons take Arms against Queen Blanch Mother to St. Lewis (taking upon her the
Government in her Sons minority) to maintain the right in whom it belonged. 18
Baron de Guiry recovers Corbiel and Lagny, which had been taken by the Duke of
Parma, 478. having undertaken to defend New-Chastel though weak, against the
Duke of Parma; he does it gallantly, at last the Duke grants him honorable
conditions, 535. sorely wounded, 536. slain. 650 Baron d'Onaw, Lieutenant
General to Prince Casimire, leads the Army, 313. His excuse to the Emperor
commanding him to disband, ib. his Acts, 324. disbands his Army. 328 Battle
between the Armies, 37. at Brisac, 140. at St. Denis. 117 Bellegarde usurps the
Marquisate of Saluzza. 238 Birth of Henry IV. in the Territory of Pau, 10. in
the Viscounty of Bearn a free State, December. 13. 1554. ib. Bishop of Mons^ sent
on purpose by the King to demand absolution for the Cardinal of Guise's death.
385 Bishop of Paris gives way that the Church-Plate should be turned into money
for relief of the Poor. 460 Bishops to judge ^f Heresy. 50 Blois taken and
pillaged by the Kings Army. 70 Jean Bodin contradicts the Prelates in the
General Assembly. 229 Body of Henry III. laid in the great Church of Campeign.
416 Francis de Bonne made Head of the Hugonots, and after Constable of the
Kingdom. 212 Bourges rendered upon Condition. 71 Brigues in French signifies
Factions. 64
C.
CAhors taken and sacked by the Hugonots. 241 Calais recovered from the
English, and besieged by the Spanish Army, 702. A description of its situation,
703. agrees to surrender, if not relieved within six days; but de Martelet
getting in with 300 Foot, they refuse, the Castle stormed, Governor killed, and
all put to the Sword. 705 John Calvin a Picard preaches, and publishes in
Print 128 Principles, differing from the Roman Catholic Religion, which had
their foundaetion in Geneva; at first hearkened to out of curiosity, but at last
produce great mischief, 19. Henry II. severe against the Calvinists, of whose
death they boast much. 20 Cambray its Siege, 685* etc. yields to the Spaniard.
690 Cardinal Alessandrino, Legate from Pope Pius Quintus, refuses a rich Jewel
presented to him by the Kings own hand. 177 Cardinal Alessandro de Medici, who
was after Pope Leo XI. appointed Legate into France, 675. received with great
demonstrations of Honor by Monsieur des Dig^ieres a Hugonot. His solemn entry
into Paris, 710. settling Religion, he begins to promote a Treaty between France
and Spain. 711 Cardinal of Bourbon Uncle to the King of Navarre, desired for
the Head of the Catholics, 252. His pretensions to the succession of the
Crown, 253. put into the Castle of Amboise, 374* declared King of France by the
League, and called Charles X. 417 Cardinal of Chastillon changing his Religion,
calls himself Count of Beauvais, 64. the Lie passes between the Constable and
him, 115. flies disguised like a Mariner into England, and remains with the
Queen as Agent for the Hugonots. Page 130 Cardinal of Guise made Prisoner, 370.
is slain, and his body, and the Duke of Guise's two Brothers, burned in
Quicklime, and their bones buried in an unknown place. 373 Cardinal Gondi and
the Legate meet the Marquis of Pisani upon a Treaty, but nothing concluded, 465.
he and the Archbishop of Lions chose by the Council of Paris to treat with the
King, 466. he and the Marquis of Pisani chosen to go to Rome by Henry IV. 557.
sends his Secretary to excuse himself to the Pope, 561. notice that he should
not enter into the Ecclesiastical State, by the Pope, 163. is permitted by the
Pope to come to Rome, but not to speak a word of the affairs of France, 644.
returned to Paris, commands they should use the Prayers were wont to be made
for the King, and to acknowledge Henry IV. lawful King. 653 Cardinal Henrico
Gaetano, a man partial to Spain, declared Legate to the League in France, 431.
the Popes Commissions to him, 432. his request to Colonel Alphonso Corso, and
his answer, 433. overcoming many difficulties, arrives at Paris, 434. Grants
the Duke of Mayenne 300000 Crowns, brought for enlargement of the Cardinal of
Bourbon, 439, meets with the Mareshal de Byron, they treat of diverse things
without any conclusion 453 Cardinal of Sancti Quattro succeeds Gregory XIV by
name of Innocent IX. 530 Cardinal Hippoli^o d'Es^e Legate in France. 51 Cardinal
Hippolito Aldebrandino aged 56, succeeds Pope Innocent IX. by the name of
Clement VIII. 555 Cardinal of Lenon-Court gives the King notice of the Cardinal
of Vendosme's designs. 499 Cardinal Sega Legate in France, has prudent
instructions from the Pope by Monseignor Agucchi, touching the affairs thereof,
564. executes not his Orders, ib. his Declaration and Exhortation, 577. his
Proposition, 584. opposes an offer of the Catholic Lords, but to no purpose,
500* persuaded by the Archbishop of Lions, he secretly consents to it, 597.
sets forth a Writing to keep the League on (...), 630 Goes out of the Kingdom.
637 Cardinal of Tournon called a second time to Court. 13 Cardinal of Vendosme
raises a third party of Cat^olicks, to make himself Head, and so come to the
Crown, 498. s^nd^ Scipio Balbani to treat with the Pope, and communicate his
design, 499. Cardinal Lenon-Court gives the King notice of his designs, ib
Catharine de Medicis, Wife to Henry II. dyed in the 70th year of her age
thirty, whereof she spent in the regency and management of greatest affairs and
troubles of France. 374 Catholics besiege la Charity, which being stoutly
defended, they give it over, 156* raise the Siege before Chastel-rault, 157.
take all the Hugonots Baggage and Cannon, and 200 Colors, 163. King of Navarre
proceeds against them, 217. desire the Cardinal of Bourbon for their Head, 259
War again between them and the Hugonots, 288. recover the Castle of Ang^ers
taken suddenly by the Hugonots, 290 besiege Maran, 295. L^se a Battle, are all
killed and taken Prisoners, except a very few that save themselves by flight,
322. assemble themselves to consult about a future King, 408. resolve to
declare the King of Navarre King of France, upon assurance of changing his
Religion, 409. swear Fidelity to the King by a Writing signed and established,
410. complain of Henry IV. continuing in Calvinism, 405. they of Henry IV.
party, displeased that the Peace should be treated by du Plessis a Hugonot,
renew a third party. 555 Causes that moved the Guises to frame the League. 224.
vid. 325 Cause of distaste between Duke d'Espernon, and Secretary Villeroy,
348. of Hatred between the Prince and King of Navarre, 407 that moved the Duke
of Mayenne to hope to be chosen King. 565 Ceremonies used at the Conversion of
Henry IV. 613 Chancellor Birago made Cardinal, and Philip Huralt chose in his
place. 235 Chancellor Chiverney put out of his place, 357 recalled to his
Office by Henry IV. 466. his opinion. 467 Chancellor Olivier called a second
time to Court, 13. dies, Chancellor de l'Hospital succeeds him, 29. put out of
his Office upon the Kings jealousy, 130. and conferred upon Monsieur de
Morvilliers. ib. Charles IX. marries Izabella Daughter of Maximilian the
Emperor. 171 Charlotte de la Marc, Heir to the Duchy of Bouillon, married to
Henry de la Tour Viscount de Turenne. 511 Chartres voluntarily sets open its
Gates, 402. its Description and Siege. 494 496 Chastel-rault besieged. 156.
Siege raised. 157 Jaques Clement his birth, age and condition, 404. having
advised with the Prior and others of his Order, resolves to kill the King, 405.
his answer to a question made to him; brought in to the King* gives him a
Letter, then drawing a Knife, thrusts it into his Belly, ib. cast out of the
window, and torn in pieces. ib. Colonel Alphonso Corso's answer to Cardinal
Gaetano's request. 433 Colonel St. Paul killed by the Duke of Guise. 651
College of Sorbon declares Henry III. to have forfeited his Right to the Crown
and his Subjects, free from their Oath of Allegiance, 378. its Decree, 439.
Declares Henry IV. Absolution valid, and the Doctors thereof do him Homage at
the Louvre. 645 Conditions of Peace concluded at Orleans. 88 Conditions agreed
upon between the Deputies of the King of Spain, and the Heads of the Catholic
League. Page 254 Conditions between Henry III. of France, and the League. 353
Conditions to be observed by Henry IV. upon his Absolution. 675 Conspiracy
against the person of Henry III. 334 Constable Momorancy falls in disgrace with
King Francis, 7. recalled to management of affairs. ib. Constables Union with
the King of Navarre and Duke of Guise, 52. taken Prisoner, and his Son killed,
82. parlies with the Hugonots, and the Lie passes between him and the Cardinal
de Chastillon. 115 Consultation between the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his
brother. 369 Corbiel besieged and taken by the Duke of Parma, 477, etc. Corby
assaulted by the King, and taken. 485 Council of Trent breaks up, November. 1563.
in the Papacy of Pius Quintus. 92 Cabinet Council i^s beginning, 127. a
Proposition of receiving it made in the Assembly of the States General,
rejected, 361. The Council ^f sixteen framed at Paris, by suggestion of the
Heads of the League, 300. informs the Duke of Guise of 20000 men ready for any
design, 333. suspect a Plot of theirs discovered by the Kings preparations,
dismayed thereupon, send for the Duke of Guise, 336. of the Union, consisting
of 40 of the chiefest persons of the League. 385 Secret Council resolves to
punish the Favorers of the Hugonots. 27 Counselors of Parliament who adhered
to Henry III imprisoned in the Bastille. 379 Count de Bouchage, Brother to the
Duke of Joyeuse, after the death of his wife, whom he dearly loved, turns
Capuchin. 312 Count de Brienne defeated by the Duke of Mayenne, and taken
Prisoner. 397 Count de Brisac's Forces, that came to divert the siege of
Falaise, defeated by Monpensier, 396. is made Governor of Paris in place of
Count Belin, 632. deals presently with the chief of the City to submit to King
Henry IV. 633. Conditions in favor of him, 634* by his artifice Proclamation
is made* that upon pain of Death, and confiscation of Goods, none should
assemble but in the Townhouse, 635. his Decree to receive the King into Paris.
636 Count Egmont and his Lanciers all cut in pieces. 446 Count de St. Fiore
sends 26 Ensigns to Rome, taken by his Soldiers. 163 Count de Fuentes made
Governor of the Low Countries, 678. besieges Chastelet in Picardy, 679. causes
Goneron to be beheaded in sight of the French, and besiege* Dourlans, 681. his
manner of besieging Cambray. 687 Count Mansfelt succeeds the Duke of Deux-pont,
146. enters France, and besieges la Chapelle, 644. the Governor surrenders it.
645 Count de Schomberg treats with the Duke of Mayenne, but with weak hope of
success. 600 Count de Soissons of the House of Bourbon, 363. assaulted at
Chasteau-Guiron by the Duke of Mercaeur, and taken Prisoner, 401. removed from
the Government of Poictou. 501 Crown pretended to by the Cardinal of Bourbon,
253. aspired to by the Cardinal of Vendosme, 498. divolved upon the House of
Bourbon. 400
D.
DAughter of Charles the Great, and Godfrey of Bullen were Ancestors of the
House of Lorrain and Guise. 6 Declaration of the Duke d' Alanson, 214. of the
Heads of the Catholic League, 261. of the King of Navarre, 276. of the Duke of
Mayenne for the States, 511. of the Popes Legate. 577 Decree at Moulins. 98
Decree of the Holy Union, made to combine themselves for defense of Religion,
378. for receiving the Council of Trent, ^14. of the College of Sorbon, 439.
of Henry IV. in favor of Eccl^siaestical Dignities and Catholic Religion. 558
Deputies of Henry IV. present a Writing to the League, is accepted. 604
Description of the mis^rable condition France fell into by the death of the
Duke of Guise, 381. of the Confederate Army. 531 Design of taking Bastille,
Arcenal, Paris, and the Louvre, and to cut in pieces the Kings Minions and
Adherents, and to take him Prisoner, revealed, and not effected. 302 Device of
the Royallists, 422. of the College of Sorbon. 439 Discord arises between the
Duke d'Espernon and Secretary Villeroy, producing evil effects. 280 Dreux
Battle, 82. besieged by Henry IV. 400, 607, etc. Francis Duke of Alanson, the
Kings youngest Brother, makes himself Head of the Malcontents, with hope to
usurp the Crown, 195. imprisoned, 196. excluded from the Crown of Poland, 213
his flight and declaration, 214. declared Head of the Hugonots by the Prince of
Conde, 215. musters 35000 fighting men, 219. made the Kings Lieutenant General,
233. rejected by those called him into Flanders, driven thence by the Duke of
Parma, returns into France, and awhile after dies. 245 Henry Duke of Anjou made
Lieutenant General of the Army, 118. batters Loudun on one side, and the Prince
of Conde coming to relieve it on the other, both resolving to fight, are
hindered by coldness of weather, 136. dismisses the Nobility of his Army, sends
the rest into Garrison, and goes to Loches, 149. recovers many places from the
Hugonots, 165. goes with mighty preparations to the si^ge of Rochel, 190. not
to prejudice his Election to be King of Poland, moves slowly in that
enterpris^. Page 192 Duke d'Aumale made Governor of Paris by the City, arms
them, and orders them Commanders, 318. is in readiness with 500 Horse to assist
the Conspiracy of the Parisians, 333. b^sieges Senlis, Longueville with small
Forces raises it, loses his Artillery, Baggage, and 30 Colors, 400. going to
relieve Noyen, after a sharp Fight retires, 506. for 40000 Crowns Pension
revolts to the Spaniard with the places under his Government, 642. incensed at
being declared Rebel, keeps with the Spaniards. 695 Duke of Bouillon flies to
Geneva, and dies there. 328 Duke of Deuxponts enters France, spoiling the
Country, dies with excess of drinking before he joins the Princes. 145 Duke
d'Elbeus, first of the House of Lorrain that mak^s peace with Henry IV. 641
Duke d'Espernon sent from Henry III. to meet the King of Navarre, 25^.
Government of Provence conferred on him by the King, 283. marries the Countess
of Candale a rich Heir, 312. Treats with the Suisses Army, and they have leave
to return home, 327. is declared Admiral of the Kingdom, and Governor of
Normandy, 348. cause of distaste between him and Villeroy, ib. quits his
Government of Normandy by the Kings order, and retires to A^golesme, 51. where
he is conspired against, Villeroy f^menting the business by secret order from
the King, 356. returned to his former greatness, treats a Truce with the King
of Navarre, 389. standing upon precedence will not sign the writing to make him
King f France, parts from Court, 411. recalled by the King, 486. recovers all
the Towns he^d by the Duke of Savoy as far as Vare, 568. will not be removed
from the Government of Provence, but refers himself to the Constable, who
declares he should go out. 659 Duke of Feria and Mendozza, Spanish Ambassadors,
and Juan Baptista Tassis, at the meeting of the States, urge and propose the
Infan^a to be chosen Queen, 592, etc. their Answer concerning a Hus^band for
her, 604. promise to give her to the Duke of Guise, as soon as she shall be
chosen Queen, 608. are abused going through the streets of Paris, 611. Duke of
Guise falls into disgrace with K. Francis. 7. recalled to management of
affairs, 17. Keys of the Palace taken from him, and given to the King of
Navarre, 46. as first Peer of France, is declared to precede the rest, 47. his
union with the King of Navarre, and Constable, 52. is hurt with a stone, in a
conflict between his Servants and the Hugonots: A saying of his made him
thought Author of the War, 57. giving it under his hand that he would leave the
Court, the Catholic Lords, leave the Camp, 66. takes the Prince of Conde
Prisoner, 83. sups and lies in the same Bed with the Prince of Conde his bitter
Enemy* Made General of the Kings Forces, 84. shot in the shoulder treacherously
by one Poltrot a Hugonot, whereof ^e dies, 86. leaves three Sons, Henry Duke of
Guise, Lodowick a Cardinal, whom Henry III. caused to be murdered, and the
Duke of Mayenne, who was after Head of the Catholic League. 94 Charles Duke of
Guise having been long Prisoner at Tours, escapes at noon day, and flees to
Bourges, 510. tells the Spaniards his being chosen King would prove ridiculous
to others, and ruinous to himself, 613. he and the Duke ^f Mayenne unite, to
favor each other to be cho^en King, 623. leaves the League, and makes his
composition with the King, 655. as Heir of the House of Anjou, pretends right
to Provence, ib. plo^s to get into Marsei^les, 699. makes himself Master of it.
700 Francis Duke of Guise recovered Calais from the English, anno 1557. invited
by their negligence in guarding it. 702 Henry the young Duke of Guise, gets
great reputation by sustaining the Siege of Poictiers, 156. admitted to the
Cabinet Council, 158. reso^ves to marry Catharine de Cleves, 173. besets the
Admirals house, 183. shot in the face, 216 by his cunning, politic discourses
are brought into Assemblies instituted for Devotion, 221. [Causes that moved
him and his Brothers to frame the League, 224. v. 325. they foment the peoples
hatred against the King, 237. for^s^eing their own ruin, contrive new designs,
247.] by means of Preachers and Friars in Pulpits, and other places of
Devotion, labors to insinuate the Catholic League into the people, 250.
besieges and takes Ausone, 305. falls upon the Germans in their quarters, and
gives them a sudden assault at Auneau, and with a great slaughter obtains a
famous Victory, 326. causes a Writing to be present^d to the King, with many
cunning demands, redounding to his own ben^fit, 332. is discontented at the
Kings declaring the Duke of Espernon Admiral of the Kingdom, and Governor of
Normandy, 333. disobeys the King commanding him not to come to Paris, 337. goes
to wait upon the Queen Mother, visits the King, who is angry with him in words
and looks; perceiving what danger he was in, takes leave, and departs, 338.
being fearful of the King, is strongly guarded, and goes (with 400 Gentlemen
privately well armed) to the Louvre, to wait upon the King to Mass; his
discourse with the King and Queen Mother, 339. makes the Parisians believe the
King meant to put One hundred and twenty of the chief Catholics to death, 341.
ceases to force the Louvre, and appeaseth the people, seeing the King as it
were a Prisoner, and the City in his power. 343. he and his adherents are stung
at the Kings Speech at the Assembly of Blois, 359. sends with the King and
States to the Duke of Savoy, to demand restitution of the Marquisate of
Saluzzo, and upon refusal to denounce War, 365. his consultation with the
Archbishop of Lions, the Cardinal his brother, and Duke d'Elbeuf, 369. has an
Handkerchief sent him by his Secretary Pelicart, to bid him save himself, but
it comes not to his hands; swoons in the Council Chamger, an ill omen of his
approaching death; slain as he lifts up the hangings of the Closet-door, all
his chief Adherents made Prisoners; 'twas reported he received two millions of
Crowns from Spain, 370. his, and the Cardinal his brothers bodies burnt in
quicklime, and their bones buried in an unknown place, his virtues and
endowments both in body and mind Page 373 Duke of Joyeuse at Coutras prepares
to Battle with great confusion, 321. is thrown to the ground, offers 100000
Crowns in ransom, yet is slain. 322 Duke of Lorrain agrees secretly with the
Duke of Mayenne not to elect any to be King that was not only a stranger, but
not of their family, 513. offers the grand Duke of Thuscany in the Kings
behalf, the Princess Catharine, in marriage to the Duke his son. 610 Duke of
Mantua, Ludovico Gonzaga, marries Henrietta de Cleve sister to the Duke of
Nevers. 99 Duke of Mayenne commands his mutinous Soldiers to be cut in pieces,
18. persuaded by his sister, Madam de Monpensier, makes himself Head of the
Holy Union, at Paris is declared Lieutenant General of the Crown of France,
384. refuses a Truce, 388 defeats the Count de Brienne, and takes him Prisoner,
397. assaults the Kings Army at Tours, fights a long time, but supplies coming
from the King of Nav^rre, gives off, 398. a Treaty of Agreement between him and
Henry IV. 436. he will not hearken to it, 437. makes the Archbishop of Lions
his High-Chancellor, ibid. lays siege to Melun, 439. after twenty five days
raises the siege, and marches toward Rouen, to appease new Troubles, 440.
invites the Deputies of the Provinces, upon the death of the Cardinal de
Bourbon, to choose another King, 460. confers the Government of Paris on the
Duke d'Esguillon his eldest Son, and appoints the Marquis of Belun his
Lieutenant, 448. is troubled at the attempts of his Family, designs of the Duke
of Savoy, and delays of the Spaniard, 489. is not satisfied with the new Pope,
sends President Jeannin to the King of Spain, and Sieur des Ports to the Pope,
to solicit aid, ibid. orders Marquis Menelay to be killed, gives a Scalado to
Man^e, but is beaten off, 504. goes to assault the Suisses at Hudam, but forced
to return, 505. marches to Han, to give courage to the besieged of Noyon, 506.
will not hazard a Battle with the King, 507. afflicted for the Duke of Guise's
escape, strives to show signs of joy, but treats underhand with the Cardinal of
Bourbon and other Lords, to set up a third Party, 511. he and the Duke of
Lorrain agree, not to elect any King of France, that is not only a Stranger,
but not of their Family, or a Prince of the blood, and a Catholic, 513.
receives the Duke of Guise at Retel, with outward shows of love, but
corresponds not in their conference, ibid. going to oppose an Insurrection in
Paris, takes the Ba^^^^le, and causes four of the Council of sixteen to be
strangled, 518. murmurs against the Duke of Parma, ascribing the glory of all
actions to himself, 551. besieges Ponteau de Mer, 558 takes it, 559. gives
Villeroy liberty to favor the Kings conversion at Rome, and at the same time
opposes it with all his power, 563. interpreting the Popes proceeding in favor
of him, h^pes to be chosen King, ^64. Causes moving him thereto, his
Declaration for the States, 571. Troubled at the pretensions the Lords of his
House had to the Crown as well as he, etc. 583. sitting under the Cloth of
State as King in the Hall of the Louvre, ^xhorts the States to choose a Cathol.
King. 584. Threatened by the Spanish Ambassadors, departs in anger, 593.
besieges Noyon, is surrendered to him, sends his Sons Regiment to Paris, 595.
being sure none of his Sons should be named Husband to the Infanta, prosecutes
a Treaty with the Royalists, 604. Troubled at offering to give her to the Duke
of Guise, desires to disturb it, etc. 608. d^siring to hinder the Duke of
Guise's greatness, asks exorbitant Conditions of the Spaniards, 609. seeing
himself excluded from the Crown, treats to bring in the Cardinal of Bourbon,
610. gets the Parliament of Paris, to decree the Crown should not be
transferred on strangers, etc. 611. sends Montpezat into Spain, to have the
Infanta given to his eldest Son, 617. he and the Duke of Guise agree to favor
each other to be chosen King, 623. v. 630, 643. his office of Lieutenant
General taken away by the Parliament of Paris, goes to Bruxels to ^reat with
the Archduke, 645. makes an Agreement with the King, 670. declared innocent of
the death of Henry III. 694 Duke de Mercoeur takes the Count de Soisons
Prisoner at Chasteau-Eyron, 401. his pretensions to the Duchy of Bretagne,
482. being brother-in-law to Henry III. agrees with Henry IV. giving his only
Daugh^er to Caesar of Bourbon his Bastard-son, and what he had in Bretagne
under his obedience. 733 Duke of Monpensier begins the War against those of the
League, and besieges Falaise, 394. defeats the Count de Brisac, who came to
divest it, 396. dies at Liseaux. 551 Duke of Nemour's vigilance at the siege of
P^ris, 475. refuses the Government of it, for some discontent from his brother
the Duke of Mayenne, 488. Insurrection against him at Lions, imprisoned, and
escapes out of the Castle, 660. seeing himself deprived of all retreat, falls
sick, and dies. 692 Duke of Nevers disgusted at the marriage of Viscount de
T^renne, and Charlotte de la Ma^k, 511. relieves the Kings Army, 533. ordered
by the Pope not to come to Rome as Ambassador from Henry IV. but as an Italian
Prince, 621, 622. entered privately, goes the same evening to kiss his feet,
625. beseeches the Pope upon his knees he would absolve the King at least in
Foro Conscientiae, is denied, goes discontented to Venice, 626. his death. Page
695 Duke of Parma's saying of the Duke of Guise, 344. refuses to treat with him
without the Duke of Mayenne, 519. resolves to succor the League only for
Religion, 529. marches with his, the Popes and French Forces, in allTwenty four
thousand Foot, and Six thousand Horse, to relieve Rouen, 530. his Answer to the
French Lords, 534. besieges Neu^-cha^el* and grants Byron de Guiry honorable
Conditions, 535 sends Eight hundred Horse into Rouen, goes to besiege St.
Esprit de Hue, 539. leaves it, and goes to relieve Rouen, 540* viewing the
Siege of Laudebec, shot with a Musket in the arm, 544 showing he had twice
delivered the League, says the French were the cause the King of N^varre was
not quite suppressed, 551. goes to the Sp^w to be cured of a Dropsy, 559. his
death hurtful to the interests of Spain. 556 Duke of Savoy has certain places
restored him (by Henry III. at Thurin coming from Poland) kept by the Kings of
France for security. 207 Grand Duke of Thuscany, Ferdinando de Medicis, is
desired by Henry IV. to use his endeavors with the Pope and College of
Cardinals about his reconciliation with the Church, 556. with his consent,
Girol^mo Condi treats with the Duke of Lorrain in the Kings behalf, off^rs him
the Princess Catharine in marriage for the Duke his Son. 610 Dutch^ss of Guise
demands justice of the Parliam^nt* they grant it her, and choose those should
form the Process. 380
E.
Earl of Essex challenges Sieur de Villars to a Duel, who puts it off till
another time. 524 Walter d'Evereux, Brother to the Earl of Essex slain in the
first Skirmish at the Siege of Rouen. 523 Ecclesiastical Affairs in an unhappy
condition. 563 Edict that no body should be molested for Religion, 48. of July,
49. of January, 51. to forbid the Hugonots Assemblies in Paris, or near the
Court, 63. Another against them, 131. forbidding raising of Soldiers, 260.
against the Hugonots, 281. to succor them. 488 Emperor Rodalphus II. commands
the Baron d'Onaw, by a public Edict, to disband the Army he had raised without
his leave, upon pain of Imperial banishment. 313 Bitter Enemies Conde and Guise
sup together, and lie in the same Bed. 84 Errors imputed to Henry IV. and his
Army, 475. Excuses in his favor. 476 Espernay taken by the League* 559. yields
to Henry IV. with condition to leave their Colors much desired by him, because
there were some Spanish Ensigns among them. 561 Estamps taken by the King, the
Magistrates hanged, and Pillage given to the Soldiers, 402. caused to be
dismantled by him. 425 Estates of the Kingdom are three. 33
F.
FActions, by the name of Hugonot and Catholic, 46. of Royalists and Guizards,
365. are fought for by Learned men with their Pens, as Soldiers with their
Swords. 434 Father Robert a Franciscan, condemned to death at Vendosme, for
having commended the killing of Henry III. 426 La Fere, a place strong by art
and nature, besieged by Henry IV. 696. yields, having large Conditions granted.
709 Flanders, under that name the Italians usually comprehend all the
Low Countries. 299 Forces of Henry IV. sent to relieve Villamur, the Foot
almost all cut in pieces. 570 France, the Princes that aspired to its Kingdom.
435 Francis, go to King. Franconians, a people of Germany, not being able to
subsist in their own Country, issue out in armed multitudes, anno 419. and
possess themselves of the Gallias, being then possessed of the Romans. 3, 4
Fougade, what it is. 650
G.
GAbels, are a kind of Impositions, especially upon Salt. 114 Guard des Seaux
is Lord Keeper. 3^7, 359 Gautiers (Country People) Sixteen thousand of them
fight for the League, 395. fortified in three places; after they had fought a
long time, some are cut in pieces, and some yield. 396 Geneva undertaken to be
protected by Henry III. 250. besieged by the Duke of Savoy. 426 Gentry, always
meant by the French Nobles, as well as Lords. 237 A German Troopers bold act,
317. Sixteen of them killed by a Woman with a Knife. 328 Germans of the League
make sign of coming to the Kings Party, are received by them at the Mal^dery;
but being entered, fall hostilely upon them that brought them in, and make
themselves Masters of the place, 420. German Infantry raised for the King, turn
to the League, 441. all put to the Sword, 447. kil^ little Children to eat in
Paris, 469. joining with the King, and taking At^igny, he gives them the
Pi^lage. 511 Geux a sort of Heretics. 108 Du Ghast. Captain of the Kings
Guards, causes the Cardinal of Guise to be slain by four Soldiers. 373 Godfrey
of Bullen, and a Daughter of Charles the Great, were Ancestors of the House of
Lorrain and Guise. Page 6 Goville a stout Priest, fighting singly, always got
the victory, 525. is killed with a Musket Shot. 528 Grand Maistre is Lord
High-steward of the Kings Household, heretofore called Count de Palais, and le
Seneschal de France. 248 Gr^nd Provost de l'Hostel. 376 Grenoble, after a long
Siege, returns to the obedience of Henry IV. 484 De la Guesle runs Jacques
Clement through, who killed Henry III. 405 Guise's the three Brothers of them
made absolute Administrators of the Politic and Military Government, by reason
of their Alliance with the Dauphin. 9
H.
HAN, its Siege. 679 Harquebusiers, on Horseback, differed from our Dragoons,
in that they served both on Foot and Horseback, and it is conceived they were
the same with Argolettiers. 276 Havre de Grace delivered upon Conditions. 89
Henry II. killed in a Tournament by Montgomery, his Obsequies last Thirty three
days. 11, 12 Henry IV. his birth. 10 Henrietta de Cleve, Sister to the Duke of
Nevers, married to Ludovico Gonzaga Duke of Mantua. 99 Heresy to be judged by
the Bishops. 50 Heretics their diverse opinions, 50. A Seat of them called
Gueux. 108 House of Bourbon next to the Crown, and grown to a monstrous
greatness, was hated, and suppressed by the Kings, 5. the Crown divolved upon it.
406 House of Guise descended from that of Lorrain, reckons in the Mal^-Line of
their Ancestors; Godfrey of Bullen, and shows a Pedigree from a daughter of
Charles the great. 6 House of Lorrain, too much puffed up by prosperous success,
331. vid. Lords. House of Momorancy descended from one of those that issued out
of Franconia, with the first King Pharamond, and pretends to be the first that
received Baptism. 6 House of Valois ended in Henry III. 405 Hugonots whence
named, 20. manner of their proceeding, 21. determine to meet at Blois, where
the King and Court was* are defeated at Ambois, 25. Petition, and demand by the
Admiral Liberty of Conscience, and Erection of Temples, 30. grow insolent
toward the Catholics, 49. slight the Kings Edict, 65. their Heads declared
Rebels, 71. receive the English to Hauvre de Grace, Diepe, Rouen, 72.
Negligence, their ordinary defect, 81. one of their Ministers prints and
preaches, it is lawful to kill the King, 110. jealous of his preparations,
resolve upon a War, ib. resolving to besiege Paris, stop passages, make
incursions into the Suburbs, and burn the Mills, 112. retake the City of
Orleans, 114. accept not the Accommodations motioned by the Queen, 124. their
Manifesto, 130 set out a Fle^t to fetch in Provision, ibid. rise from before
the Catholics for want of Provision, 148. possess themselves of Chastel-rault,
etc. 152. rise and do great outrages, 167. chief of them in the Louvre are
killed, 183. Ten thousand of them massacred at Paris, at ringing a Bell,
whereof Five hundred were Barons, and Men of Quality, 85. begin again to take
Arms* 196. stir up new Commotions, 240. take and sack Cahors, 241 their Answer
to the Kings Edict 281. take the Castle of Angiers suddenly, 289. encompassed
by the Catholics, they disband, and save themselves by flight, 291. threaten
to forsake the King, and take the Crown from him, which they said they had
gotten him, 662. plot new Troubles, being jealous of Henry IVs. conjunction
with the Pope, 712. the chiefs absenting from Court, and drawing Soldiers
together near Rochel, the King sends to appease them. 713 Philip Huralt chose
Chancellor, in the place of Birago made Cardinal. 335
I.
Jesuits banished out of the whole Kingdom of France. 661 Inclinations of
Innocent IX. to the Affairs of France. 530 Infanta of Spain proposed and urged
in the Assembly of the States, to be chose Queen of France, 592, etc. her
pretensions to Bretagne. 713 Inheritance of the Royal Family. 4 Insurrection of
the Hugonots, 197. of the Parisians, 377. another appeased with the death of
diverse that made it. 464 Interview between Charles IX. and Duke of Savoy, 95.
between Charles IX and the Queen Mother with the Queen of Spain at Bayonne, 96.
between the Queen Mother, and King of Navarre at Bris, 305. between the Most
Christian King, and King of Navarre at Tours. 396, 397 John Bodin contradicts
the Prelates of the General Assembly at Blois. 229 John Chastell, a Merchant of
Paris, wounds Henry IV. in the mouth, whilst he was saluting the Knights of
the Holy Ghost at the Louvre: Confesses he was moved thereto by the Doctrine he
learned of the Jesuits, condemned to be dragged to pieces by four Horses. 661
D'^varra his opinion concerning the League. 529 Izabella, Daughter of
Maximilian the Emperor, married to Charles IX. 582
K.
Keys of the Palace taken from the Duke of Guise, and delivered to the King of
Navarre. Page 46 King Charles IX. after much opposition, declared out of
Minority by the Parliament of Paris, 91. opposes the Popes Monitory against the
Queen of Navarre, 94. makes a general Visitation of the whole Kingdom, ib.
meets with the Popes Ministers at Avignon, 95. Not being able to persuade the
Queen of Navarre to change Religion, moves her to restore the Mass and Priests
to their former liberty, 97. disbands part of his Army by advice, which proves
hurtful, 167. his answer to the Duke of Guise, resolved to marry Catharine de
Cleves, 173. commands Ligneroles to be killed, for showing he knew what he
desired to be kept secret, 175. Graciously receives the Admiral, prostrating
himself at his feet, after so many years Wars, 176. dissembles so with the
Hugonots, that he is suspected by strange Princes, presents a rich Jewel with
his own hands to Cardinal Alessandro and Pope Pius Us. Legate, who refuses it;
his Sister married to the Prince of Navarre, by dispensation from Pope Gregory
XIII. 177. displeased with the Admiral, but dissembles it, 178. visits the
Admiral, and under pretense of defending him, sets strict Guards upon his
House, 181. his words to the Prince of Conde, 186. deprives the Marshal
d'Anville, Son of Anna de Momorancy, of his Dignity, by a Decree, 198. dies
May 30, 1574. 201 King Chilperic of an Effeminate Nature, put into a Monastery
by Charles Martel and Pepin, Masters of the Palace. 360 King Clodian, second
King of France, made himself Master of Belgia, and this was first conquered. 4
King Francis I. advances Charles of Bourbon, and afterward suppresseth him,
whereupon he rebelleth, 5. taken with an Apoplexy under the Barbers hands. 38
King Henry III. succeeds Charles IX. 205. returning out of Poland, at Thurin,
restores certain places to the Duke of Savoy, kept by the Kings of France for
security, 207. is ill affected to the King of Navarre, and Prince of Conde,
Heads of the Hugonots, and Duke of Guise Head of the Catholics, 209. demands
the King of Sueden's Sister to Wife, 211. Consecrated at Rheims by the Cardinal
of Lorrain, Brother to the Duke of Guise, and next day marries Louyse de
Vaudemont, Niece to the Duke of Lorrain, 212. takes Mombrum, who had taken his
Carriages, and executes him, ibid. frames a new model of Government, 213. his
Speech at the beginning of the Assembly at Blois, 227. declares himself Head of
the Catholic League, 231. sends two Armies against the Hugonots, and makes
Duke of Alanzon Lieutenant General, 233. his manner of Life, 236. Institutes
the Order of the Holy Ghost, 238. sends forth three Armies, 242. Takes upon him
the protection of Geneva, 250. answers the Spanish Ambassador sharply, makes an
Edict against raising Soldiers, 260. his Answer to the Catholic Leagues
Declaration, 267. esteems Luigi Davila the Authors Brother, and makes use of
him in managing Affairs and War, 274. makes a specious Proposition of Peace,
275. his Edict against the Hugonots, 281. calls the Heads of Paris together,
and demands money for the Wars, of the Catholics against the Hugonots, 282. a
Saying of his, 283. confers the Government of Provence on the Duke d'Espernon,
ibid. despairing of Issue, resolves to further the King of Navarre's right to
the Crown, and unite himself with him for the destruction of the Guises, 297.
his solemn Oath, 308. Another Saying of his, sends an Army against the King of
Navarre, and gives secret Order to Savardin to oppose, but not suppress him,
311. Honors the Wedding of the Duke of Espernon, and Countess de Candale with
great Presents, 312. Goes in person to keep the German Army from joining with
the King of Navarre, 320. declares Duke d'Espernon Admiral of the Kingdom, and
Governor of Normandy, 333. commands the Duke of Guise not to come to Paris,
337. shows himself angry with the Duke of Guise coming to visit him, 338. is
strongly guarded for fear of him, 339. commands Fifteen thousand to be driven
out of Paris, 341. leaves it, and retires to Chartres, 346. orders the Duke
d'Espernon to quit his Government of Normandy, 351. receives the Duke of Guise
at Chartres with great demonstrations of kindness in appearance, 354 dismisseth
many old Servants for their too much wisdom, after the example of his
Grandfather, 357. begins the Assembly at Blois with a fine Speech, which stings
the Duke of Guise and his Adherents, 359. swears, with the States, to perform a
former Edict, 360. after much opposition, consents coldly to declare the King
of Navarre, and all others suspected of Heresy, incapable of the Crown, 362.
He, the States, and Duke of Guise, send to the Duke of Savoy, to demand
restitution of Saluzzo, and upon refusal to denounce War* 365. goes Armed to a
factious quarrel, ibid. admits Pio Mocinego Ambassador from Venice, though he
were not one of the Savii de terra firma, 367. resolves to free himself of the
Duke of Guise, 368. orders him to be killed, 369. admits every one into his
presence, speaking very resentingly, 371. A Saying of his upon the Duke of
Guises being killed, ibid. discourses a long while with Cardinal Moresini about
the Dukes death, ib. highly offended at the Popes sharp Answer to his
Ambassadors sent to excuse the Cardinal of Guises death, 382. promises the Duke
of Mayenne very great things by Letter, 384. sends the Bishop of Mons on
purpose to demand absolution for the Cardinals death, 385. puts himself in the
Fight, and orders his Soldiers at Tours, 398. takes Gergeau and Piviers, 402.
Troubled at the Popes Censure and Monitory, and fasts 48 hours, 402. his words
upon being Excommunicated, ibid. taking Estamps, hangs the Magistrates, and
gives the Pillage to the Soldiers, ib. lays Siege to Paris, 403. A Saying of
his when looking upon it, 404. called Henry of Valois, the Tyrant and
Persecutor of the Faith, ibid. is thrust into the Belly with a Knife by Friar
Jaques Clement, strikes the same Knife into his forehead, dies August 10. 1589.
having lived Thirty six years, and Reigned fifteen and two months. Page 406
King Me^ove the third King of France, continues the Conquests of Belgia by
Clodian, as far as Paris, and unites it to France. 4 King of Navarre sollicits
in the name of the Princes of the Blood, that they might share in the
Government, 16. kept a Prisoner, 36. excommunicated by the Pope, applies
himself to the Opinions of Beza and Peter Martyr, 42. dies. 76 King of N^varre,
afterward Henry IV. his Answer to Henry IIIs. words, at the Excommunication
against him, 48. is in great perplexity, 407. his Answer about changing his
Religion, 408 swears to maintain the Catholic Religion, 410. raises the Siege
before Paris, and divides his Forces to convenient places, 412. desires to
speak with Villeroy, but the Duke of Mayenne will not consent, ib. He and the
Duke treat by a third person, but nothing done, ib. appoints the Assembly of
States at Tours, 416. marches successfully to Diepe, and fortifies the places
about it, 417, etc. is in great danger in the midst of his Enemies; a Speech of
his, 421. a Saying of his, 422. refuses in modesty to go under the Canopy of
State at Amiens, 423. marches toward Paris, assaults the Suburbs gives the
Pillage to his Soldiers, 423. dismantles Estamps, ibid. takes Vendosme, gives
the Pillage to his Soldiers, condemns the Governor to death for his infidelity,
and Father Robert a Franciscan for commending the killing Henry III. 426.
acknowledged King of France by Public Solemnity at Tours, and by the Republic
of Venice, 427. makes himself Master of all Towns and Fortresses in Normandy,
428. besieges Dreux, 440. raises the Siege, 442. designs his form of Battle,
and draws it with his own hand, 443. All armed on Horseback visits and exhorts
his Soldiers with great efficacy; and at the head of his Army, lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, prays heartily, 446. his Clemency toward the French, gives
the Suisses quarter, puts the Germans that revolted to the Sword, 448. takes
Two hundred and four Ensigns and C^rnets, with all the Cannon and Baggage; on
his side but Five hundred slain, 449. after Victory, made his Commanders sup
with him at Rosny, familiarly speaking to every one, and praising the meanest
Soldier, 450. besieges and takes Melum, 454. his Answer to Villeroy, persuading
him to turn Catholic, 455. dismisses him, not resolved to grant a Cessation of
Arms, 457. assaults the Fauxbourgs of Paris, sits on his Horses back Forty four
hours at the Siege of St. Denis, 465. recalls the Chancellor Chiverny to his
Office, 466. rises from the Siege of Paris, and marches to Chelles to hinder
the relief, 471. sends a Trumpet to the Duke of Mayenne, challenging him to
Battle, 470. deceived by the Duke of Parma, ibid. withdraws and marches toward
St. Denis, 474. in the midst of night gives a Scalado to the walls of Paris,
etc. 475. coming to St Denis, without victuals or money s^parates his Army
oppressed with diseases, 476. batters Clermont, and takes it on the third day,
ibid. assaults the Spanish Army, and his Horse had cut the Rear-guard in
pieces, if Georgio Basti had not disingaged them with his Lanciers, 480.
assaults Corby, and takes it, 485. his remedies to conserve the affections and
obedience of his Party, 486. recalls the Duke of Espernon, and other Catholi^k
Lords to his Army, ibid. his design upon Paris discovered a second time, 491.
Chartres surrenders to him, 496. declares in Council the necessity of giving
the Hugonots some satisfaction, confirms an Edict of Henry III. granting them
Liberty of Conscience, 498. besieges Noyen, 605. surrendered to him, 507. gives
the Germans the Pillage of Attigny, offers Battle to the Duke of Mayenne in the
Plain of Verdun, 512. summons Rouen, and refused, etc. 524. raises the Siege,
540. his Saying of Guiry gives distaste to others, 539. returns, 545. escapes a
great danger, 546. prays the Republic of Venice by their Ambassador to treat
with the Pope, about his reconciliation, 559. weeps for the death of Marshal de
Biron, 560. desires the Duke of Thuscany also to use ^is endeavors with him and
the Cardinals, ibid chooses Cardinal Gondi and Marquis of Pisani to go to Rome,
557. sends his Forces to recover Espernay, 559. desires a Reconciliation with
the Catholic Church, by way of agreement, not pardon, 562. his Manifesto at
Chartres, 588. proposes his Conversion, to see how it would be relished, 605.
besieges Dreux, to give reputation to his Party, 607. sends for Prelates and
Divines, and being instructed at Maule, publishes he will go to Mass at St.
Denis, 612. sends the Duke of Nevers and four Prelates Ambassadors of Obedience
to the Pope, 617. goes to Mantua, 621. desires to be Crowned, 634. besieges
Laon, and surrendered, 646, 650. sends the Lorrain Forces to make Incursions
into the County of Bourgogne, 655 causes open War to be proclaimed against
Spain, 664. besieges the Castles of Dijon, 667. half disarmed, succors the
Marshal de Byron, 669 routs the Spaniards in Franche Comte, 671. is absolved of
his Heresy, 675. agrees with the Duke of Mayenne, 694. lays Siege to la Fere,
696. complains to the Pope of the Spaniards, 798. his design about Sum
answers not the intention, 700. goes P^st to Mont-le-hery to meet the Legate,
710. ratifies all his Procurators had done, 711. calls a Congregation at Rouen
of the Officers of his Crown, to settle his Kingdom, and Supplies for War, 712.
breaks off a course of Physic, and goes to relieve Amiens, excuses the
murmurings about it, 718. follows the Archduke going from Amiens, and his
praise of the Spanish Infantry. Page 730 King Pharamond chosen first King of
the French at the River Sala, and the Salique Law established. 3
L.
LAdy Marguerite being asked, If she would have the King of Navarre for her
Husband, answered nothing; being urged by the King, bowed her head. 180 Lagny
taken by the Duke of Parma before the face of the Kings Army, 474. recovered by
the Baron de Guiry. 478 The Popes Legate propounds a Truce to the Duke of
Mayenne, but he refuses it, 388. makes grievous complaints to the King, 390. is
suspected by the Pope to side with the King, 393. as soon as Peace was
concluded with the Hugonots, departs from Court, to go out of the Kingdom,
ibid. moves the Duke of Mayenne again to an Accommodation, but he refuses. ib.
League its form, 222. composed of the disaffected to the Government, and
Zealots in Religion, 251. set forward by Mendozz^, the Spanish Ambassador, 260.
the Heads publish a Declaration, 261. set the Parisians to frame a Council of
Sixteen, 300. consult to take the King returning from Hunting; to take the
Bastille, Arcenal, Paris, and the Louvre, cut in pieces the Minions, and his
Adherents, and himself Prisoner, 302. first assault the Germans in Lorrain,
316. Forty of their chiefest persons ch^se for the Council of the Union, 385.
take Vendosme by agreement with the Governor, 397. great slaughter of them at
the Siege of Senlis, 400. declare Cardinal of Bourbon King, and call him
Charles X. 417. takes a disgust at the Duke of Mayenne, which is fomented by
the Spaniards, 487. besiege Caudebec with no good advice. 544, etc. A League
concluded between Henry IV. and the Queen of England, almost the same that was
made with Charles IX. 706 Learned Men fight for their Factions with their Pens,
as Soldiers with their Swords. 434 Lewis Duke of O^leans, in the time of
Charles VIII. takes up Arms to maintain the Right of Government in whom it
belonged. 18 Ligneroles killed by the Kings command, for showing he knew what
he desired to be kept secret. 173 Livery made to Wards. 90 Lord Peregrine
Bertue Lord Willoughby, Fahter to the valiant Earl of Lindsey, who was slain at
the Battle of Edgehill being General of the Kings Army, was General of the
Forces sent into France to Henry IV. by Queen Elizabeth. 423 Lowyse de
Vaudemont, Niece to the Duke of Lorrain, married to Henry III. 212
Low Countries withdrawn from the King of Spain's Dominions, seek first
Protection from the King of France, then put themselves under the Duke of
Al^nzon, 239. send Ambassadors to the King of France, entreating him to take
the Protection and Dominion of their States. 259 Ludovico de Gonzaga, Duke of
Mantua, marries Henrietta de Cleve, Sister to the Duke of Nevers. 99 Lions, the
first that rebelled, and last that returned to obedience. 629
M.
MAdam de Monpensier persuades the Duke of Guise her Brother, to make himself
Head of the Holy Union, 384. she and others exhort him to make himself be
declared King of France. 413 Management of Affairs under Francis II. committed
to his Mother, Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of Lorrain, by his Wifes persuasion.
12 Manifesto of the Hugonots, 130. of the King. 588 Marks of Justice, is having
the Authority to dispose of the chief Ecclesiastical and Temporal Dignities.
437 Marquis de Villars made Admiral in the place of Coligny, 161. besieges
Quillebeuf, 558. is forced to rise from it, 559. submits Rouen to the King. 638
Marquis of Pisani meets the Legate about a Treaty, but nothing concluded, 465.
is chosen to go to Rome with Cardinal Gondi, by Henry IV. 557. has notice from
the Pope not to enter the Ecclesiastical State. 563 Marshal d'Anville, Son of
Anna de Montmorancy, deprived of his Dignities by the Kings Decree. 198 Marshal
de Byron meets with the Popes Legate, but nothing concluded, 453. treats with
Mocinego, but accepts not of a Cessation of Arms. 458 Marshal de Byron lays
Siege to Rouen, 558. killed with a Cannon-shot in the 65th year of his age,
559. the King wept for him, 561. his Son to revenge his death, scales a great
Tower at Espernay, and takes it, though sorely wounded, 56. routs the
Spaniards, at his entrance into Artois, 714. gives a Scalado to Dourlans, but
the Ladders being too short, it succeeds not, 720. labors unweariedly in the
Siege of Amiens. ibid. Marsh^l de Cosse, inclining to the Hugonots, makes no
progress against them. 169 Massacre at Paris. 183, 184, etc. Michael de
l'Hospital succeeds Francis Olivier in the Chancellorship. 29 Moderation more
profitable in Victory than at another time. Page 455 Money coined by the Queen
of Navarre with her own Figure on one side, and her Sons on the other. 143
Monitory Letters from the Pope, decreed to be burnt by the Parliament of
Chalons and Tours. 502 Monsieur des Disguires, though a Hugonot, receives
Alessandro de Medici, the Popes Legate, with great demonstrations of Honor. 710
N.
NAmes of Royalists and Guizards. 365 Names which the Factions give one
another. 381 A Narration of several Successes which happened through all
France. 425 Navarrists and Politics persecuted and slain. 379 Negligence, the
ordinary defect of the Hugonots. 81 Nicholas Paulain discovers all the Plots of
the League to the King, 391. and one against his person. 334 Nobility and
Militia divided into two Factions. 40 Nobility return to Henry IVs. Army with
great Supplies. 544 De la Noue sent Governor by the King to Rochel, turns
General of the Hugonots, 189. stirs up a new insurrection of them, 197. tells
the King of Navarre he must nev^r think to be King of France, if he turn not
Hugonot. 410 Noyon, its situation, besieged by Henry IV. 505. surrendered. 507
O.
OBjections against Crowning Henry IV. 634 Obligations of the Kings of France
upon the day of their Consecration. 635 Obsequies of Henry II. lasts Thirty
three days. 12 Offer of the Catholic Lords of the Kings Party, 585. condemned
by the Spaniards for Heretical. 596 Officers that adhered to Henry III.
imprisoned in the Bastille. 379 Orillons, what they are. 524 Orleans, made the
Seat of the Hugonot Faction, 61. with whose Relics Andelot sustains a Siege
there, 85. have Conditions of Peace, 88. retaken by them. 114 Opinions of the
Heretics. 50
P.
PAlace of the Admiral razed, and his Statue burnt. 185 In Paris were 800 000
Inhabitants, yet during the Siege, neither the Lecturers nor Lawyers
discontinued their Lectures or Audiences, 79. Council of Sixteen framed, and
governed by it. 300 Parisians make Insurrection at the News of the Duke of
Guise's death, 377. at the news of the Truce between Henry III. and the
Hugonots; besides public signs of Contempt, forbid him to be prayed for in the
Canon of the Mass, 394. being blocked up, are in great want of victuals, 459,
etc. their Bishop gives way the Church Plate should be turned into money to
relieve the Poor, 560. the miseries they suffered, 463. make bread of dead men's
bones, 464. their Council, for fear of an Insurrection, choose Cardinal Gonde
and the Archbishop of Lyon^ Deputies, to treat with the King, and their Speech
to him, 466 make provision of victuals, 471, etc. after 8 years space, they
return to the obedience of Henry IV. 637. murmur against the King at the l^ss
of Amiens. 639 Parley between the Prince of Conde and Queen Mother. 64
Parliament of Paris expels the Hugonots the Kingdom, 49. its Answer to the
Prince of Conde's Manifesto, 62. Eight Parliaments in France, 51. that of Paris
declares Charles IX. out of minority, 91. of Chalons and Tours decree the Popes
Monitory Letter to be burnt, 502. that of Paris the contrary, 503. of Paris and
Tours Decree none should go to Rome to procure Benefices, 557. of Tours forbids
to acknowledge the Legate, and the Parliament of Paris exhort all to give him
due reverence, 434. of Paris determines to do justice to the Duchess of Guise,
demanding it, and choose those should form the Process. 380 A third Party
composed of Catholics and Hugonots, called Politics and Malcontents. 194
Peace published, but full of jealousy, 170 published, and the Army dismissed,
193. published by Torchlight, 234. concluded between Henry III. and King of
Navarre. 390 Peers of France are Twelve, Ecclesiastical and Civil. 47
Petitions, the manner observed at Court in granting them. 213 Pope Clement
VIII. gives Supplies to the League with more moderate Expenses than his
Predecessors, 556. gives notice to Cardinal Gondi, and Marquis de Pisani, that
they should not enter into the Ecclesiastical State, 563. sends Monseigneur
Agucchi to Cardinal Sega Legate in France, with prudent instructions touching
the Affairs of that Kingdom, 564. sends Innocentio Malvagia into France, in
place of Matteuchi, to Cardinal Sega, 582. approves the Infanta's Election and
Marriage as not feasible, and seems to consent only not to disgust the
Spaniards, 618. wishes some Catholic Prince of the House of Bourbon might be
elected King, and marry the Infanta; and when he heard Henry IV. intended to
turn Catholic, inclines t^ him 619* sends Antonio Possevino a Jesuit, to let
the Duke of Nevers know he should not come to Rome as Ambassador, because the
King was not yet acknowledged Catholic, 621, etc. his words to the Duke of
Sess^ the Spanish Ambassador, 654. inclines to the King, and is averse to
others, 672. sends his Nephew into Spain, to treat of the Affairs of Hungary,
and of the King's absolution, 673, etc. absolves him in St. Peter's Porch. Page
673 Pope Innocent IX. his inclinations concerning the Affairs of France, his
death, 530. succeeded by Cardinal Hippolito Aldebrandino. 555 Pope Julio II.
excommunicates the Kingdom of France, and its Adherents. 42 Pope Pius Quintus
requires the Cardinal of Chastillon be deprived his Habit, and Ecclesiastical
Preferment, because he was of Calvin's belief, 103. Gregory XIII. succeeding
him, grants a Dispensation for the Marriage between the Prince of Navarre, and
the Kings Sister, 177. dies, 1585. Sixtus Q^intus succeeds, 284. who writes
Congratulatory Letters to the Duke of Guise, full of high praises; said he
thought he saw not clearly into the Affair^ of the League, 355. told of the
Cardinal of Guise's death, is much offended at it, and answers the Ambassadors
coming to excuse it very sharply, 382. chooses a Congregation of Cardinals, to
consult of the Affairs of France, 383. suspects Moresini his Legate to the King,
and counts him guilty, 390. declares the King liable to Censure by a Monitory,
if within Sixty days he release not the Prelates, and do Penance for the
Cardinals death, 402. resolves to send assistance to the League against the
King* 431. his Commissions to Cardinal Gaetano Legate in France, 432. his Breve
published at Paris, and the Contents thereof, 434* grows jealous Gaetano
inclines to favor the Spanish designs, 453. his death. 4^8 Pope Urban VII.
lives but Twelve days, and is succeeded by Gregory XIV. a Milanese, ib. who
resolves to send men and money to assist the League, 493. chooses Mastilio
Landriano Legate to France; assigns Fifteen thousand Crowns per mensem for the
League, ibid. sends Twelve hundred Horse, and Six thousand Foot into France,
under command of Monte-Martiano, 503. dies. 530 Preheminences of the Royal
Family, are Inheritance and Administration. 4 Princes of the Blood, ib. Prince
of Conde set at liberty, 28. practices to possess Lions, but without success,
32. committed to Prison, excepts against his Trial, and appeals to the King,
but not accepted, 37. Sentence pronounced against him, 38. set at liberty, and
declared void, 44. his Manifesto, 61. Coins the Plate belonging to the
Churches, 63. his demands in favor of himself and the Hugonots, 65. returns to
his Army, 67. going to besiege Paris, amuses himself before Corbiel, whereby he
fails of his design, 78. taken Prisoner by the Duke of Guise, 83. sups and lies
in the same Bed with the Duke his bitter Enemy, 84. offers the King a great
number of Hugonots, to make War with Spain, 109. incenseth the King with a
Letter of Protestation, 128. sells the Goods of the Church for the Hugonots,
137. is shot in the head at the Battle of Brisac, and dies, 140. his Body is
carried in Triumph upon a ^ack-horse, by the Catholics, and after restored to
the Prince of Navarre his Nephew, 141. his Son a Child, and the Prince of
N^varre, made Heads of the Hugonots, 142. is kept in the Kings Chamber du^^^g
the Massacre, and after kept Prisoner, 183. he and his Brother turn Catholics,
186. made Head of the Hugonots, 206. brings a great Army out of Germany, and
declares the Duke of Alanzon Head of the Hugonots, 215. offended at his power,
seek to make Peace with him, 219. is declared Lieutenant General of the
Hugonots, 226. will not acknowledge the Assembly at Blois to be the States
General, nor treat with their Commissioners, 230. excommunicated by Sixtus
Quintus, and declared incapable of Succession to the Crown, 284. poisoned at
St. Jehan de Angely by his own Servants. 235 Princess of Conde dexterously
referred by the King to the Parliament of Paris, about imputation of her being
guilty of her Husbands death, and is cleared by them, she promising first to
turn Catholic, and instruct her Son in the same Religion. 672 Prince of
Navarre marries the Kings Sister by dispensation from the Pope, 177. assumes
the Title of King. 179 Prince of Orange, formerly declared Rebel, is restored
to his Estate. 220
Q.
QUeen Blanch, Mother to St. Lewis, taking upon her the Government in her Sons
minority, the Barons take Arms, to maintain the Right in whom it belonged. 1^
Queen Catherine joins with the Prince of Con^^ and the Admiral in opposition to
the Triumvirate, 53. feigns an inclination to the Hugonot Religion, ibid.
forced to declare for the Catholics, and at the same time maintains hopes in
the Hugonots* 60 Queen Elizabeth of England offers Conditions to the Hugonots,
6. imprisons Mary Queen of Scots, 296. grants assistance to Henry IV. by
Viscount de Turenne. 487 Queen Margaret, Wife to the King of Navarre* her
licentious Life, causes the King and Queen Mother, to resolve to break the
match, and give him Christien Daughter of the Duke of Lorrain to Wife, who
afterward married Ferdinand de Medicis, Grand Duke of Tuscany. 397 Mary Queen
of Scots, Cousin to the Guises, imprisoned by Elizabeth Queen of England. 296
Queen Mother, and Prince of Conde parley, 64. persuades the Duke of Guise,
Constable, and Marshall de St. Andre, to leave the Court, has it promised
under their hands they will; whereupon the Catholic Lords leave the Camp, 65,
66 is threatened in a Letter to be killed, 107. with the King she visits the
Admiral, and under pretense of defending him, set strict Guards upon his House,
181. sends three Armies into several parts of the Kingdom to suppress
Insurrections, 198. favors Lugi d'Avila the Authors Brother, 274. she is
resolved to break the match between the King of N^varre and Queen Margaret, by
reason of her licentious Life, and give him Christien, Daughter to the Duke of
Lorrain, to Wife, 397. treats an Accommodation with the Hugonots, ibid. an
Interview between her and the King of Navarre, but nothing concluded, 305. A
Saying of hers, 335. becomes pale and afrighted at the Duke of Guises waiting
upon her; dissuades the King from his thoughts against him, 338. is strongly
guarded for fear of him, 339. goes to him in her S^dan, being denied passage in
her Coach: confers with him, but brings back nothing but complaints and
exorbitant demands, 344. goes with him to the King at Chartres, 354. dies on
Twe fth-Eve in the 50th year of her age, 30 whereof she spent in the Regency,
and management of greatest affairs and troubles of the Kingdom of France. Page
374 Queen of Navarre causes Churches to be ruined, and expels the Priests, 94.
goes with all the Hugonots to the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral at Rochel,
129. her Letters, and their Manifesto, 130. Coins money with her own Figure on
one side, and her Sons on the other, 143. is poisoned with a pair of Gloves.
178 An ancient Question, Whether the Assembly of the States or the King be
Superior? 228
R.
REformed Religion began to spread in France in the time of Francis I. 20
Reiters, are German Horse, 260.327 those of the League fight till they are all
destroyed. 448 Religion,, a veil of private Interests. 46 Remedies used by
Henry IV. to conserve the affections and obedience of his Party. 486 Renard,
Procurer of Chasteler, with others, put to death, for crying Bread or Peace.
464 Renaudie, a man of a desperate fortune, Head of the Hugonot Conspiracy. 21
Republic of Venice acknowledges Henry IV. King of France, and Mosenigo their
Ambassador to Henry III. passes a Compliment with him in public. 427 Rhenus, a
Vial of Oil kept there, wherewith the first Christian King Louis was
Consecrated, 47. a meeting there dissolved without any determination. 503 River
Vare divides Italy from France. 565 Rochel revolts to the Hugonots, which
serves them ever after for a Sanctuary, 122. its strong situation, 190. yielded
to the King, 192. they break the Truce, 205. permit Catholics to say Mass at
the intercession of the King of Navarre. 226 Rouen taken by the Catholics, and
sacked, 75. disliking their G^vernor de Tavennes, they make an Insurrection,
504. A Relation of its Siege, 523, 524, etc. Royal Races. 5
S.
SAla, the River where the Salique Law was established. 3 Salii Priests. ibid.
Savii de Terra Firma, are Magistrates of Venice so called, etc. 367 Secretary
Villeroy and Duke d'Espernon fall into such a discord, as in process of time
produces many evil effects, 280. foments a Conspiracy at Angolesme against the
Duke* by a secret Order from the King, 356. goes over to the League, where the
Duke of Mayenne will not let the King speak with him, who desired it, 412. he
dissuades the Duke of Mayenne from causing himself to be made King, 114.
treating with the King at Melun, persuades him to turn Catholic. 454 Secretary
Pinart, Governor of Chasteau Thierry, brings all his Goods into it* treats a
Composition with the Duke of Mayenne for Twenty thousand Crowns, and renders
it. 497 Sieur de Baligni in necessity at Cambray, Coins Copper-money, 640.
makes composition with the King upon large Conditions. 652 Sieur de Monthelon
made Lord Keeper. 357 Sieur de Vins receives a Musket Shot at Rochel, to save
Henry III. 151. he and the Countess de Seaux conclude to give the Sup^riority
of Provence to the Duke of Savoy, etc. 483. repenting himself* begins to
disfavour the Duke of Mayenne's designs, though he wrote resentingly to him.
484 Skyt-gate, what it is. 524
T.
TAvennes, vid. Viscount. Tercera Islands. 244 A kind of Toleration permitted
to the Hugonots. 46 Toquesaint, an Alarum-Bell, used as the Ringing of Bells
backward with us. 72 Henry de la Tour Viscount de Turenne, marries Charlotte de
la Mark, H^ir to the Duchy of Bouillon. 511 Tours taken by the Kings Army at
the first Assault, 70. an Interview there between the Most Christian King, and
the King of Navarre* 397. made the Headquarters Henry IVs. Party, 416. is
there acknowledged King of France by Public Solemnity. Page 427 Triumvirate,
vid. Union. A Treaty of Agreement between Henry IV. and the Duke of Mayenne,
436. Treaty propounded, the L gat and Cardinal Gonde meet the Marquis of
Pi^ani, but nothing concluded. 465 A ^ruce made for two months in the new King
Henry IIIs. absence, 205. Truce propounded to the Duke of Mayenne, who refuses
it, 388. concluded for a year between the Most Christian King and King of
Navarre, 391. concluded for four Leagues about Paris, and as much about
Surenne, 600. for three months, making first a Decree for receiving the Council
of Trent, 614. prolonged for two months. 624
V.
VALois, see Crown and House. Anthony of Vendosme of the House of Bourbon, that
was Father to Henry IV. marries the Daughter of the King of Navarre, by whom
he inherits the pretensions of the Kingdom. 10 Vendosme taken by the League by
agreement with the Governor, 397. taken by Henry IV. who gives the Pillage to
the Soldiers condemns the Governor for his Infidelity, and Father Robert a
Franciscan, for commending the killing of Henry III. 426 Veedor-General, is
Commissary-General, etc. 235 Verdun, the first City taken by the League. 265 In
Victory, moderation more profitable than at another time. 455 De Vins, vid.
Sieur. Viscount de Tavenne's error, in drawing up his divisions of his Horse,
445. Governor of Rouen, but not liking him, an Insurrection there, 504.
defeated and taken Prisoner, going to put relief into Noyen* 506 Viscount de
Turenne obtains assistance of Queen Elizabeth of England, the Hollanders and
Protestant Princes of Germany, for Henry IV. 486. brings him German Supplies.
512 Union of the King of Navarre, Duke of Guise, and the Constable, called by
the Hugonots the Triumvirate, 52. opposed by Queen Catharine. 53 Holy Union, a
Decree so called, made to combine themselves for defense of Religion, 379. its
Council, consisting of forty of the chiefest persons of the League. 384
W.
WAR with Spain breaks out against Charles IX. his will, 178. between the
Catholics and the Hugonots, 288. against the League begun by the Duke of
Monpensier. 394 Civil War, the Incendiaries thereof are persons of desperate
fortunes. 59 Wolphangus of Bavaria aids the Hugonots with Fourteen thousand
men. 144 A Woman kills eighteen German Soldiers with a Knife. 328 A Writing set
forth by the Legate, to keep the League on foot. 630
Y.
YEar begun, is taken for the Year ended, in matters of favor. 90
Z.
ZEalots in Religion, and men disaffected to the Government, compose the
Catholic League. 251
FINIS.

