A SERMON Preached at the PARISH CHURCH OF St. Chad's in SHREWSBVRY, March
5.1694/5 BEING THE Funeral Day of our Most Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary.

By THOMAS DAWES. B. D Minister of the Church of St. MARY in the said Town.

LONDON: Printed by F. C. for Gabriel Rogers in Shrewsbury; and are to be Sold
by John Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1695.

To the Right Worshipful Samuel Adderton Esquire; Mayor, And other the Members of
the Corporation; Together with the Gentry, etc. of the Town of Shrewsbury.
WHen my Service was desired to assist on the much Lamented Occasion of our
Good Queens Funeral Day, I confess, I thought the Solemnity so agreeable to my
own particular respect and Duty, that as a Son of the Church, I could not well
refuse. But when afterward, your Requests proceeded so much farther than I had
reason to expect, and your Importunity would not easily admit of any Excuse; I
am more unwillingly forced thus a second time to Gratify you by appearing more
public than I intended; which I am sensible might as well have been spared,
were it not for your Serious Regard to the common Loss, in which I own a real
Concern, and, in so doing, am sure to approve my self more acceptably, as I am

Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, THO. DAWES.

2 Chronicles. Chap. 35. latter part of the 24 v. -- He Dyed, and was Buried in one
of the Sepulchers of his Fathers: and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah.
COuld our Grief be always hid, and modestly concealed, we Christians need no
stronger Antidote, than that of our Religion, as it teaches us Submission to
all Gods Providence, when they look unfavourably to our Temporal Interests.
Thus we have often in silence put our hands upon our mouths, and with
Reluctance stopped the eruption and clamor of many of our Sorrows, and would
have done so now, and stooped particularly under our Fate, which is our
pressure very sensible, but that our Loss is so confessedly great; and our
Passions, in their resentments, more than usually high, lavish, and indeed
ungovernable. All Afflictions, we find by woeful experience, are not equal, and
of the same size, and magnitude. It Is alas! more than once, we have lost a Dear
Friend, who living stood very nigh our tender heart, and when Dead, we could
not but Lament; but seldom so loud as now, when we are forced to exchange our
Patience for our Pious Sorrow; we Weep, and mean it so, as we think it is our
Religious Duty to bewail. -- I need not name The Occasion, when I see here all
Faces gather Blackness, and strive with concern zealously to augment the
serious Pomp of our Funeral Lamentation. We have lost; but could our Loss be
uttered! I am not able equally to express your Grief, who want Words, so many,
to express my own.

But here, this Day, when all the English Nation Mourns, as we do, and the vast
Deluge of our Tears swells so universally wide, that they waft a far of our
Sorrow, as they roal from shore to shore and drown our Neighbors too, as well
as we; how can we refrain! Let this day pass ever then for a Day of Sorrow. Yet
though I cannot possibly excuse your Mourning; give me leave to inquire a little
into the Nature of our Common Distress, thereby to justify our Grief; as
approveable to all Mankind; and to show how it is not only a violent, hasty
Tempest of our sensual Passion, but a calm, deliberate, sound resentment (if
our Sorrow be capable of so much Moderation) which has invited us hither to
Condole together the Death of our Good Queen.

To this end I have pitched upon one of the Greatest Instances in the History
of the Ancient Jewish Church, Josiah by name, famous for Goodness and Virtue,
with a real Zeal for the Worship and Honor of the true God; which is all
indeed, besides what is less ( Luster and Magnificence) which raises, and
supports the Throne of Majesty. We find here his Good Subjects of all sorts,
assembled, it is like, as well as we, all over the Land ( Town and Country) to
Mourn and Lament his Funeral. He Dyed, and was Buried (says the Text) in one of
the Sepulchers of his Fathers (i. e. in the Sepulchers of the Kings) and all
Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

The Royal Person here spoke of, and Lamented was a King of Judah, inclusive of
the Tribe of Benjamin: which were the only two, which remained whole of the
Twelve; all the rest (excepting some few persons) having gone off, generally
long before from the true Church of God, as then 'twas into Idolatry at the
fraudulent Instigation of a wicked King Jeroboam; who made Israel to sin: and
not long after, into remediless Captivity, under the Tyranny of the Heathen
their Neighbors. There had been some Good and many Bad Kings, 'till the
succession of Josiah, whose Government commenced about 385 years, after the
Death of King David the second in order, but yet the first of their Religious
Kings. Josiah was a Good Son, of a very Bad Father, Amon, who was the Son of
Manasseh. Manasseh went off, and apostatized from his Religion, and turned a
professed Idolater. He did evil after the Abominations of the Heathens, Built
High places and Altars to Baal, etc. made his Son to pass through the Fire, a
cruel bloody Sacrifice, or rather here a kind of Lustration, to the Idol
Molech; so prevalent is Superstition and Bigottry, even to the loosing the
strongest Bond of Natural affection. You Will see his History more at large here
( Cap. 33. and 2 Kings 21.) where it is said v. 20. He (Amon) did evil in the
sight of the Lord, as did Manasseh his Father. They were both ( Father and Son)
immediately descended of that Good King Hezekiah, who did much for the Worship
of the true God, and confiding in his Religious Integrity, and the favor, and
protection of the Almighty, he manfully withstood the Blasphemy of Sennacherib,
(here Cap. 32. and 2 Kings 18) There passed 56 years betwixt the Reign of
Hezekiah, and Josiah; all which time the Government was wretchedly Debauched
with Idolatry, and other grievous Abominations, for which Mannasseh is drove
out of his Kingdom, into a Foreign Land: From all which you will easily guess,
there was more than a little for our Religious Prince to do, when he came to
the Throne, and intended a Thro-Reformation; and the the truth is, He did not
Delay; but set presently about it, with all his power; which will better
appear, if we consider, how He came very young to the Crown (2 Kings 22. and
here Cap. 34.) but what he wanted in Age, He made up in Virtue. He was (says
Josephus) (...), of an excellent Disposition, and naturally inclined to Virtue,
and good Life, which is a mighty Character of a Young Prince, agreeable to what
the Ancient Scripture says of him, from whence the Antiquary took it.

When this Godly man was but 20 years old, He began to purge Judah and
Jerusalem ( Town, and Country, as I said) from the High Places of Idolatrous
Worship; he brake down the Altars of Baalam (in the plural) signifying the many
False Gods they Worshipped; and in the 26 year of his Life, and the 18 of his
Reign, He and Hilkiah the High Priest with other of his Friends and Servants,
whom he trusted; purges and repairs the Temple. It appears they had Built an
Heathen Altar there; as also many other in the Royal City, and Regions
adjoining (as you will read here in their story) which he visited personally
for the greatest part, and utterly Destroyed; not omitting the search even of
their private Houses, so to root out effectually all Heathen Abominations out
of the Land, the accursed object of God's otherwise implacable Hatred and
Displeasure.

Hilkiah, hy a special order from the King, searching into the Ruins of the
Temple, (not totally Destroyed till afterward, in Zedekiah's time, but too
sadly Decayed by the many Sacrilegious abuses of the Idol-Priests) he chances
to light upon an old Authentic Copy of the Law, which he found Buried in the
Rubbish, in some close part of the Building which was neglected; it is like,
that was the only true Copy they had left: probably all the rest being forced
out of their hands, and Burnt, (or otherwise effectually Destroyed) by a cruel
Inquisition; it being usual with the Heathen so to do, as since with a
Religion, as Heathenish for so much as they, though called Christian and
Catholic. 'Twas so before, and in the Empire of Julian the Apostate, when the
Holy Books were gathered with all imaginable Industry of the Heathen, and
Destroyed, to make room for the Lying Oracles of Apollo, and their Idol Gods.
But not so totally Destroyed then; nor here in Josiah's time, nowithstanding
the Dotage of Haman and Manasseh.

Hilkiah having thus found the Book, and showed it to the good King, He
entertains it with great Reverence; and causes it to be read in the ears of the
People, to teach 'em (what they had forgot, be sure in too great a measure) the
true Worship of God. By this, and other such his Religious pious Arts, he
brought back again the Holy Worship, and the People, the Worshippers to the
Temple; which they, with their Forefathers, had so long forsaken: having
already notoriously disgraced their Profane Altars, by Burning the Bones of
their Idolatrous Priests upon 'em; (some of 'em, that were Dead; all the rest,
but those he slew, having fled, and and made their escape ('it is like) upon this
signal Revolution: and left thus ingloriously their Temples, and their Gods,
all a Sacrifice to the Zeal of good Josiah; who put a fatal period to their
senseless, though cruel Devotion. Manasseh and Amon now dead; their great Patrons
(it having been till then the Kings Religion) behold! The Idol stoops, and
tamely resigned it is feigned Omnipotency, and owns a Conqueror.

Nor was this any sudden start, and heat of Passion in Josiah, (as Zeal is too
apt to extravagance in unwary hands) for we find here, after He had purged, and
restored the Temple, He deliberately, with the joint advise, and consent of his
People, who were by this time returned to their right Understandings, in the 18
year of his Happy Reign, (already named) Josiah sends, and proclaims a Passover
to the Lord; which he celebrates, on such a splendid manner, with so much
magnificence, in honor of the true God, that the Tale and number of the
Sacrifice is almost incredible, which made such an extraordinary solemn figure,
in the Worship of the Jews, that never was the like Festivity in such Glorious
Preparation, seen among them. It Is described at large here ( Cap. 35.) there
was never held such a Passover from the Days of the Judges, which judged
Israel, etc. i. e. never such an one before, since the Beginning of their
Government, which was a joyful sight (we may well think) at Jerusalem; where
'till that time, the Worship of the Temple had lain so long neglected* 'twas so
magnificent that (I observe) Josephus their Antiquary, seems somewhat concerned
at it; as though it reflected upon the Poverty of the Devotion of the Ancient
Church; and excuses it thus ( Lib. 10. c. 5. Ant.) the reason (says he) why
there was no such Festivity from the days of Samuel (mentioned here, 2 Chronicles.
35.18.) was because in those early Times, all things were performed in exact
compliance to Moses Ritual, and the Customs then on foot; though the Levitical
Law left place for Free-will-Offerings; and such (according to Josephus) was a
great part of this Celebrated Passover of Josiah. Which therefore is a singular
argument of this Good Kings more than ordinary Devotion: and his Zeal in
promoting the Worship and the Honor of God. And hence it is we read, (2 Kings
23.25.) And like unto him there was no King, before him, that turned to the
Lord with all his heart, etc. neither after him arose there any like him.

The truth is, Josiah was one, purposely raised up of God for this Noble
Design. It was Prophetically foretold 360 years, and more (says the Jew) in the
Reign of Jeroboam, that thus it should be: (1 Kings 13.2.) Behold a Child shall
be born to the House of David, Josiah by name, and upon Thee (i. e. the Altar
at Bethel, which the Son of Nehat had then newly set up) shall he offer the
Priests of the High Places, etc. and it fell out exactly (2 Kings 23.15, 16.)

You see then, how for this very end, in a long course of Providence, Josiah
was raised of God to Root out by his means, and to Destroy Idolatry from out of
Judah, and Israel, as much as was left of the foregoing Captivity. Such, and so
remarkable was this Pious Kings singular Devotion! and to the great joy and
satisfaction of all his Subjects, (but some, who had little or no Religion; and
others, that hanker'd after that He had Destroyed by the will of God) He
Reigned 31 years; and Lived in the whole 40 bating one, prosperous in Wealth
and Glory: and then very unfortunately, by the incessant Provocation of the
Crying sins of Judah, (as Huldah the Prophetess at that time foretold) God was
finally resolved to punish very grievously; as He did in the ensuing Captivity,
which lasted no less while than 70 long years, under the King of Babylon (as
Jeremy Prophesied* 22* years after Josiah's Death) unfortunately, I say. He
makes War against Necho the Egyptian King; who was upon his March against the
Assyrian, denies him passage thro^ his Country, imagining ('it is like) he was a
going up against Judah, when (it seems, as he signified by his Embassaders) He
intended no such thing. But Josiah listened not; and rashly opposes Himself upon
the Borders, in the Valley of Megiddon; where He is mortally wounded by an
Egyptian Archer, as He rode in his Chariot; thereupon carried back to
Jerusalem, where He Dies. This Good King, so necessary to the Happiness of his
People, which Dies together with Him. Their Dreadful Calamity was only Deferred
till his Death; inasmuch as his Heart was tender, and He humbled Himself before
God (here Cap. 34 27, 28.) He Dies at his Royal City, and was Buried in the
Sepulchers of the Kings, his Fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem (the whole
Kingdom) mourned for Josiah.

And, no doubt, a sad Mourning 'twas: The Loss of so Good a King, and at such a
time, when (we must think) the Eyes, and Hearts of all his People were upon Him!

Jeremiah, upon this sad occasion, Weep'd, and penned a Mournful Elogy;
emphatically a Black Book of Lamentation; in such a deep, natural, racy strein,
that it weeps yet afresh to every eye that reads it; see there ( Cap. 4.20.)
The Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their Pits,
of whom we said, under His shadow, we shall live among the Heathen.

And so famous was this Solemn Mourning of the Jews, that about an 100 years
after, where the Prophet Zechary foretells of the Coming of the Kingdom of the
Messiah, and the fearful Desolation, which should, at that time, befall the
Jews, in the Total Devastation of their Second Temple, and their City, with
their whole Government, by the Romans. He could not express their Sorrow to
greater advantage; than by this Deplorable instance of the Death of Good
Josiah. ( Cap. 12.11.) In that day (says he) There shall be a great Mourning in
Jerusalem, as the Mourning of Haddadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon: which is
the Mourning of the Text here.

And such was the Jews estimation of their Great Loss, and Misfortune; that
'twas not only a little time, which once they set apart to this their Mourning;
but they made it an Anniversary Fast, in their Generations, by an Ordinance for
ever, (in the v. next after the Text.) From whence it would seem, The Book of
Lamentations was the Form of their public yearly Humiliation, upon this
account. So great the Loss, and so great the Sorrow of this unhappy people!

And yet not so great, but in good sense of Resemblance, it may become a
Pattern of ours now. It Is confessed (Blessed be our Good God, who in Judgment
remembers Mercy) our Circumstances are not, in Prospect, so Deplorable, as
theirs were. The proud King of Babylon, has not yet set his foot upon our Land,
nor Burnt our Church, and made us his Captives; nor, we hope, ever will so long
as we have God, and a Good King our Protectors; who is (as Josiah was) an
implacable Adversary to his, our Church, and Nations Enemies. The Glorious
Champion of our Holy War; The Greatest Patron of all the Protestant Churches,
Born indeed the Son of War; whose Sword, (invincible as it is) glisters
astonishment in the Hearts of those, who are only great in this, that they have
the honor to fall under the resistless stroke of his Victorious Arms.

His Royal Great Soul, untaught to yield to any other Adversity (to show He had
an Heart of Flesh, and Affections tender as his Religion is) Wept over the
Royal Ashes of his Dearest Consort, our Good Queen Mary. Nor was this any
light, faint, transient stricture of his inward Sorrow. His indelible Piety, so
deeply rooted in his Breast, sunk him down low in this his Affliction; as low,
as it is possible Love and Virtue could. Behold here a Brave Glorious
Constellation of the greatest Fortitude, and the greatest Love! such an one
seldom, never shone before in our Hemisphere.

How then shall we Subjects Dispense with this Free Subsidy, yet naturally a
Debt of our Funeral Lamentation? unless we have in this Distance to Her much
Lamented Death, spent all our Stock already, and in so doing exhausted the
Fountain of our Tears! Alas! our cheap vulgar Weeping here, is not big enough
at lowdest to balance one single Sigh of our Josiah's Royal Grief.

We, who had so great a part and interest in her Princely Care, and Indulgence,
and might have had so still; but that our Ingratitude (that unpardonable sin,
for which we, and this poor English Nation have so often smarted) our hateful
Ingratitude rendered us by so many degrees unworthy of her longer Life. A
Blessing so infinitely desirable, as I believe you think; that I Despair of
adding any thing to your present Information.

I Will not therefore now touch upon any Preliminaries; as her Royal Birth, and
Descent; her Natural, and her Acquired Perfections, exceeding great; with her
truly Christian Education here, under the sacred influence of our Dear Mother
the Church of England. Which, in her, by plainest experiment, has taught us,
the most incomparable Temper of her wise Guardiancy, and Tuition, and would
make us all lovely, and beloved as She, for the inestimable Beauty of Virtuous
Christian Life; and would Teach our Docility not to shift so improvidently from
under her Heavenly Doctrine, and pious Discipline; when her Spiritual Gifts are
so many, and so highly advantageous, and would easily Blush, and shame all that
unreasonable Prejudice, which drives some of us foolishly away, and bewilders
us in a dark Superstitious Maze of a stubborn forgetfulness of our Duties, and
ourselves. See here, and wonder! an Angelical Mind framed by God, and perfected
into Bliss by true Religion!

This Noble Affectionate Theme wings the highest flights of our most grateful
Thoughts; I am too weak to support thus the Greatness of her Character; only
wish sincerely, that the radiant Honors of the English Crown may ever Descend
a portion to so Good Examples as 'twas in Royal Her, is now; and we pray, will
ever be.

Beloved, you know, how we were left before their Majesty's happy Arrival
jointly in the Throne. Left so, that we were at a Loss on both sides, how to
state probably the reasons of our public welfare. Behold! a Dreadful Enemy to
our English Nation, Popery on one hand, and Anarchy and Confusion on the other:
We could not be prevailed upon to change our Good Religion for a worse; and if
not, we must part with our Property, and Establishments. It Is true, these
things were not wrested yet quite out of our hands, but we were thoroughly
taught what we were to expect, by a costly sad Trial of another Neighboring
Kingdom before; as well as since, by one of our own; all this, over and above
to what was miserably endured in a former Reign, upon the same Name and
Principles; and however we are misrepresented, we stook close enough to our
Passive Obedience, to the visible Joy and Triumph of our Enemies, that hated
us: this so long, 'till He, that should have Governed us, left us, without our
fault; and what reason we should endure longer? must our Ancient Government
rot, and sink into Ruin upon its own Foundations? It must certainly have done
so, had not God sent us, and He came, the Defender of his own Rights, and
together with them, our Protestant Faith; William by the good Providence, and
Grace of God, with his Royal Consort, whose Death we now Lament.

This Latter is my Subject more especially now: Who when she Landed from abroad
upon the British shore, with inestimable Blessings in Her hands, to bestow upon
all but the unthankful, and the evil, (though upon them too) She found the Nation
tired out with Sorrow, a Leaning her weary, drooping Head on the Bosom of her
Dearest Prince, who surely then (if ever any one before) bad the fairest for
our most sincere Love and Fidelity. And she ( kind, virtuous Soul) as she ever
loved to do Good, was glad to be by at hand; an Assistant, a Counselor, and a
Witness of our Wonderful Restoration.

She found the Nation, and that She loved the most in it (the Church of
England) a' entering, in melancholy plight, the Plague of an Egyptian Darkness,
the Land, from one corner to another, a swarming with Popish Emissaries; and
(like the Locusts there) darkn'd the Sky; I mean the Nation full, and crowded
with 'em. But, though so full, emptied much faster than they filled in well nigh
six years before, in a very short time; as our day broke up again, when our
Guardian Angels in conjunction, at God's immediate Direction, appeared above
our Horizon, with Healing in their Wings.

I think, it is owned on all hands, that Popery (especially as it is of late
years refined by new Jesuitical Morals) is a Terror to all Protestant Kingdoms.
As for us, we are not half so much afraid of St. Peter's Keys* as St. Paul's
Sword; which of late (for some Centuries past) the New Church of Rome takes
indifferently into her hand, with the other. We need not go far to have the
footsteps of her Cruelty, which bleed so fresh in our own Annals; and though our
English Courage has been far ever from being thought contemptible, yet we have
always been very backward to Defend our Religion by such Material Weapons,
'till the time, we believed our Lives, as well as our Consciences were
assaulted; which, if any thing, will prove the Justice of our Arms; when
employed at the Command of our Lawful Governors.

As for the Truth of our Religion, we modestly conceive we have made it good,
with no small advantage; and have showed abundantly, that our Church is very
far from fearing any reasonable Engagement of that kind; having never been once
outpowr'd since our Reformation, only rudely oppressed, and Discountenanced
sometimes, by Brutish Cruelty, and Force of Arms.

When a Popish King (our late Dread Sovereign) was ready with a Numerous, well
appointed Army in the Field; and our Charters, and our Properties, for a great
part, Seized and construed into Forfeiture, and Prerogative; and a new, fine
Aequivalent offered us, in exchange for our most Ancient Franchise. Our Penal
Laws to be voted down, with our Protestant Test, by a choice prepared Assembly:
when a Conversion to Popery was a current Excuse to other Crimes and
Illegalities, it self the greatest. Execution of Good wholesome Laws generally
suspended; and a wide door set open (upon a Religious Design) to entertain all
the Debauchery, Licentiousness, and Atheism of a Wicked Age; and an unlimited
Liberty tacitly allowed to Men's Lusts and Passions (with a very small share of
Wit, and no Religion) to push on for Tumult and Confusion, as fast as they
could. Besides (what we don't love to remember, but cannot so soon forget) as
it supposed us much more Dull and Wretched than indeed we were) enjoin us to
Subscribe (publish I mean) a large Form of Declaration, virtually to the
overthrow of our Established Religion, and all whatever else is ours. We
blushed at this time, to think, being Innocent, how we had so ill-deserv'd of
our Governors, as to find so little Credit with 'em: We were (as many as
observed it) extremely sorry at this; and that we could now Obey no longer,
though threatened aloud with Penalty enough to our Temporal Undoing. We trusted in
the Mercy and Compassion of our Good God, who Delivered us then, with the
Rescue of those famous Confessors of our Sacred Hierarchy, Men of Renown.

The honest, good, peaceable, Loyal Subject, all this while, nothing in his
hand for his sustenance, but a Dry unsavory Morsel of Passive Duty; which he
had already chewed, and Lived so long upon, that he became every day more and
more naked of all other Refreshments, and thought he was a'shipping ready for
the stake of Martyrdom. When our Popish Governors were so impatient, though of
prudent Delays; and were all for making long steps hastily to our Overthrow.
And, alas! our Unfortunate Monarch so Bigoted, and plainly infatuated by
Jesuited Counsels, that nor the most humble modest Complaints, nor Tears of his
Faithful Subjects could prevail any thing. When Altars, and Popish Habits
appeared openly in the Imperial City, and Country; and began to Nest together
in Societies; and in the name of a Catholic King outbrav'd all, even the most
modest Pretenses and Privileges of a Different Religion; and would have
stifled, and suffocated all our Learning, and smothered our Profession, with an
heavy indigested Mass of their Exploded Forgeries, and Nonsense; which turned,
upon our judicious Desence, so much to their Shame and Decay, which indeed was
the greatest kindness they could do us, to give us opportunity thus to show our
strength, on this manner.

I would not be misunderstood all this while, as though, in what I have said, I
should seem the least inviduous, I am forced to mention a little; for that our
Public Blessings received, cannot be duly prized, without some competent sense
of our former Unhappiness; and undoubtedly we should deserve to be construed
more than Passive, could we so soon forget our own History, which is so plain,
and dates so close upon our Memories.

Briefly then, when our Reformed Religion, which we place ever before all other
our worldly Comforts, was in such unquestionable, apparent Danger, that upon
our most accurate Projections, all Humane means failed for our Deliverance; and
our Misfortunes too inspired, and backed by so potent an Enemy, a Tyrant
Neighbor; who upon his own single stake, for many years together has held
almost all Christendom in Play. In this Critical juncture, (by a strange
Miracle of the Divine Providence, say others what they will) came the Blessed
Pair, William and Mary to our seasonable rescue; which by the same indulgent
Providence they effected without one Drop of Blood; by a natural cheerful
Surrender of their own Rights into their hands; after the Royal Zealot was
gone; when He had so unkindly Refused a just Restitution of our Laws and
Liberties; then by a general Consent of the Desolate People (for how can any
Kingdom stand without an Head to Govern it)? They the next together, in
Succession, are both placed in the Throne.

And then, and just before the Pride of the New Catholic Religion, and it is
Empire utterly vanished; The Zealous Priests make haste away; and leave their
Devotion (as their Saints too of both Sexes) a'starving at their Shrines: The
Crafty Jesuit packs up with the first, and leaves the new Converts behind;
astonished at their Religion, suddenly grown so unfashionable; and some came
back to us again, ashamed now to think their Civility carried them so far,
beyond the reasons of their Faith. But though these Holy Men left their Converts
here, (too few by many to raise a Monument to their pretended Learning, and Art
of Persuasion) they forgot not to take their Riches with 'em, the vast Treasure
by their pious Frauds they had cheated the Nation of.

Thus we of this National Church are happily restored to our Religion, it is
free Profession; to our Properties; to our Laws; to our Liberties; to our
Lives. Rid of our urgent Fears and Jealousies, all but what the Sons of Trouble
studiously strive to nurse in their restless Bosoms. Our True Religion has
gained much honor, by the invincible Courage and Constancy of its true
Professors; which is God's Cause, as well as our own. Our Government is
reestablished upon its old, best Foundations; and all the slubber of our Grief
wiped off (till now) as we lay a long time a'weeping, under the Cross. Popery
in it is insulting Greatness for ever banished our Isles. Briefly, we have lost
nothing, but what we could not keep; and hope to live as contentedly as we can
without; and though at present engaged in an expensive Foreign War, we fight
Honorably in Defense of ourselves, and Confederates, thereby to lay (which
must be done with time) a sure stable foundation of our Security, and common
Prosperity, for the future.

And now, upon the foot of the Account, tell me seriously, ye Sons of Wisdom,
are not these I have named, Lovely great Advantages? which we owe, and confess
(as many as are impartial) next to the good Providence of God, to the Care and
Vigilance of our Governors: and to Her (tho not to Her alone) whose Obsequies
we this day Celebrate. She, who planted Religion both by Precept and Example in
the Court, the Head, and Fountain of our Government; and would have made it all
of one piece, i. e. Religious; took great pains in her Public and Private
Devotion; and by her excellent advice, and Illustrious Pattern taught others so
to do, if any other, certainly a Nursing Mother of this Church of England,
which we have reason to think is more indebted to two of our late Queens, than
well-nigh all the Kings we have had till now, since our Happy Reformation. Good
Edward lived but a while; and though He did as much, as 'twas possible for the
time, being young, yet 'twas the Rudimental Beginnings only of so great and
noble a Design; but what we wanted in his, was in some good measure compensated
by the shortness of the next Reign; and especially by the happy Length of that
which followed close upon it. She who did most, Queen Elizabeth of ever Blessed
Memory; the next a Peaceable Learned Prince, but came late to our Government;
succeeded by a Son Religious and Wise; who had our Civil Distractions suffered
him to Live, as 'twas probable otherwise He might, had raised, and beautified,
to it is best advantages, our Religious Communion, as established; but since He
could no longer stand, He chose to fall a Glorious Martyr with it; and when
upon our famous Restoration, our Regular Worship began again to smile upon us
(as we did cordially upon it) it flourished, more than a little whise, under a
Good natured King; 'till it was again too pitifully beclouded, in the last
Reign, which left it harassed, to the more happy Success and better Government
of our King and Queen; who had She longer lived, (as She did more than a
little, in such a narrow stint of time) so would have done wonderfully much
more for it is Beauty and Prosperity. But She is, alas! untimely Dead; not as to
Herself, but us; who promised (as we had great reason) every Day more and more
felicity to ourselves, under the shadow of Her Government. Who, as She came
with much unwillingness to the Throne; so She as willingly resigned at Gods
Command, the Burden of it, though by Her so easily born; and taught all Christian
Princes, by her Illustrious Example, how it is really practicable, and their
best Interest to be Good and Great at the same time.

I have excused my self already; give me leave but this once. Alas! Christians,
The Lovely Ornament of our Peace, The Beauty of our Regular Devotion, A Rare
Example of Virtuous Life, The Glory of Christian Princes, the Greatest of Her
Sex, the Darling of all Her Good People, The Dearest Pledge of God's good
Providence, our Glorious Princes is Dead, and gone. Let all our Judah, and
Jerusalem weep, and Mourn for our Good Queen; as they did righteously for
Josiah. It Is indifferent, whether we Lament Her, or our Religion; they were
inseparable in Her; and how then shall we distinguish 'em? I cannot blame the
profuseness of our Grief upon this extraordinary Subject, if there be any
Venial Sin we Christians can commit, surely this is it, the great extremity of
our present Sorrow; and though we reasonably conclude, this our great Concern
will touch the hardest heart, in the whole Nation; yet, if there be any, who
cannot weep for it, and us; I hope, without injury, we may take leave to weep
for ourselves and them. 'Twere well the reasons of our Sorrow were not real, as
we believe they are, upon impartial view. Though yet we are not in the least
unthankful; but know how to prize all the Blessings we have left behind; our
Good King, and Royal Family. But these all Mourn as well as we; and we humbly
think we have as great a cause as any; though all this we know is fruitless and
in vain. But how can tender hearts express themselves, and their passionate
resentments, in a milder way? not that we should seem fondly envy Her her
Happiness above, who stood ever the fairest Candidate for an Immortal Crown:
But we beg leave here thus to acknowledge, and confess our many obligations;
and to embalm, and preserve her Sacred Memory to perpetual Generations, with
the Dearest expressions of our most unfeigned Love.

I fear I have held you too long in this Melancholy Scene; I have done then;
only mind you very briefly of two things, to which our present Affliction seems
nighest allied. The reasons, I mean, that lie uppermost to our knowledge, and
are most Legible, in such an harsh Providence as this is.

1. Either by this sort of Discipline, God in his infinite wisdom, has a mind
to mean us, from an over fondness, we are too apt to create to ourselves of any
Humane Help, we think stands nighest our Temporal Happiness; and then 'twill
teach us Patience. Thus, we know, He exercised the People of the Jews, when
under the immediate Jurisdiction of his Theocracy in Egypt, in the Wilderness,
in Canaan, and after when they were embodied, and had Kings, as the other
Nations; depriving 'em of Success oftimes by many secret methods of his good
Providence; thereby to hold 'em the closer to himself in their Dependence, and
the Counsel of his own Divine Will; who has many more ways for our Succor, in
the unerring Conduct of his Eternal Wisdom, than we can imagine. Or,

2. God punishes us thus severely for our manifold abominable sins, as He did
the Jews oftimes; particularly here in the matter of Josiah; and then Mourning
is the least part of what we have to do, which concerns us most in a speedy
Reformation of our Wicked Lives; lest otherwise, upon our continued
provocations, our Judgment, as it proceeds from the Divine Justice should thus
conclude our Good King too, whom God long preserve, with the other Royal
Branches; this needs every good, sober Christians consideration.

Finally: If our Grief be real upon the sense of our great Loss, it supposes we
understand the worth of Good Princes; and consequently, (as we now Mourn for
Her, whose Funeral Day we celebrate, so) we, from henceforth, apply ourselves
with all dutiful, and Loyal Love, and Fidelity to Him who is now in the Throne;
and to this good end, shun and disencourage, the most we can, in ourselves and
others, all causeless Jealousies, and turbulent Counsels; which, in the effect,
should any way cool, and diminish from our cheerful Obedience; and learn to
submit ourselves Dutifully to our Governors, as well as to Pray for 'em; That
God would grant our King a long, and an happy Reign over us: and that we, and
all his Subjects (duly considering whose Authority he has) may faithfully
serve, honor, and humbly obey Him, according to God's Holy Word, and
Ordinance; and that He may ever study to Preserve thy People, committed to his
Charge, in Wealth, Peace, and Goodliness. Grant this, O Merciful Father, for
thy Dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

