A BRIEF MANIFESTATION OR The STATE and CASE of the Quakers presented to all
people, but especially to Merchants, Owners (and Masters) of Ships, and
Mariners; also to all Planters or Occupiers of Lands in the English and
Foreign Plantations.

Showing the (causless) Cause of their present and cruel Sufferings, from the
hands of their own Countrymen and Fellow-Citizens of London.

Hereby warning them all, not to join hands against the Innocent, nor willingly
suffer their Ships (to be employed) to Transport (nor to buy) any of them (for
Slaves) to the separating of Husband from Wife, Parents from Children, etc. to
the Ruin and Desolation of many Families, and to the provoking the Anger of
the Lord against you and your Families, and to smite the Land with a Curse.

But do ye unto all men as you would they should do unto you, etc. Written on
the behalf of the Suffering-People of God (called Quakers) and of the Testimony
which they hold.

The First day of the Eighth Month, 1664. T. D.

Printed at London, in the year 1664.

A Brief MANIFESTATION to Merchants, Seamen, and Planters, etc.
KNow ye then, that that God who created the Heavens and the Earth, the
Omipotent and Almighty JEHOVAH, and Lord of Hosts, whose all things are, and
for whose Service they were created; who gives breath and being to all, and in
whose hands and at whose dispose is your Life and the Lives of all Mankind; who
numbereth your days, which are as a span, and pass away swifter than a Weavers
shuttle, or as a Post that tarrieth not; who says to man, Return to thy dust,
and he is no more: And this is He we own to be our God, whom we serve and
worship in the Spirit of his Son, the Light of the World, to whom all Judgment
is committed, that men might honor the Son, as they honor the Father who is
God over all, blessed for evermore.

And this is he whom we have waited for, and his Light has shone into our
hearts, to give us the knowledge of the Light of the Gospel in the face of
Christ Jesus, and by believing in his Light we come to a true sight of our
states, and our hearts were ripped open, and our iniquities were made manifest
unto us, and the Books were opened, and the Earth disclosed, and the Dead
appeared, and the Judgment was set up, and we were then judged, every man
according to his works, and the things that were written in those Books; And
then we knew him to be dreadful indeed (in his just Judgments) against that
nature which had transgressed; and his flame was kindled in our hearts, and
began to take hold of that which was for the fire, and his Sword was drawn to
cut down that which stood in the way, and turned every way to keep the Tree of
Life; so that we in this unclean state could not come unto it, though fain
would we have lived here, and loath we were to part with that which was so near
and dear unto us, to wit, the wisdom, honor, and glory of this present world,
which was as so many deaths to us to part with, and we would fain have been
Heirs of two Kingdoms: but the Light let us see that we must deny our selves in
all that so nearly concerned us, and take up our Cross daily, and follow him
our Guide and Leader, though to the loss of all. O what thoughts of heart,
tumblings of mind, noise of wars and rumors of wars (which is not to be
expressed) was then in our hearts!

At last to the Light and Power of God our hearts did bow, and became obedient;
then a separation began to be made between the Good and the Evil, and we became
judged according to men in the flesh, that we might be saved according to God
in the Spirit.

Now the Separation being thus made, and the true Judgment set up in our
hearts, we could not, as in times past, run with the wicked into vanity and
excess, neither could we join with the Superstitious and Idolaters in their
false ways, worships and customs, but have been and are still made willing to
bear our Testimony publicly against them all, both by word and conversation,
etc.

And though we have been obedient to the Powers that have been (and to these
that now are) in all just and righteous things, keeping a good Conscience void
of offense both to God and man; and for this cause we labor diligently and
painfully in our Callings, that we may be serviceable in our Native Country,
where our God has placed us, having something (and being ready) to minister to
them that stand in need of our help, that thereby we might be a good savor to
all.

For which cause also, we pay Tribute to whom Tribute is due, and have so done
to all the Powers (since we were a People) declaring thereby our owning of
Magistracy, being willing to support it in all just and right things, though
some have aspersed and accused us of the contrary.

And thus in all things that pertain to Life and Godliness, we have endeavored
to live peaceably and honestly with all men; and this we declare unto you, that
neither the former Powers, nor these present in Power, neither could, nor can
they now, justly accuse us of plotting or contriving against them, neither of
any Sedition or seditious Practices toward any of them, as hereby we do call
to record the Lord God Almighty, to whom we appeal for Righteous Judgment in
the case between us. Notwithstanding we have so behaved our selves, and that
our Adversaries can lay nothing (justly) to our charge; yet behold and see how
we have been persecuted and cruelly entreated by them all, but especially at
this day: O how are we beaten in the streets and places of our Meetings! how is
our hair plucked off our heads! how are we kicked and pinched on the arms, and
some women pinched and smitten on their tender breasts, to their great harm! how
are we packed into close and nasty Prisons, near three hundred at one time in
one Prison! and how have some of our Friends been beaten, and Felons suffered
to abuse them there! how have some of us been taken forcibly from our Brethren,
where we have been met together in our Prisonhouse, and threatened, and put
into the Hole or Dungeon! how have some of us been taken out of one
Prison-room, and cast into deep and dismal Holes, where we have been in danger
of our lives, by reason of a corrupt unclean Prisoner who lay there, even worse
and more nauseous than any filthy Carrion or Excrement whatsoever, a place not
fit for Swine! O how are we prosecuted with violence at their Sessions, and the
Jurors and Peoples Understandings endeavored to be poisoned, and They incensed
against us, by Speeches made to render us even as the worst of men, as see the
Book entitled, The Innocence and Conscientiousness of the Quakers asserted and
cleared, in answer to Judge Keeling's Speech! How are the Jurors that served
for Felons and Murderers changed, and others impanelled which may serve for
their purpose! how are others brow-beaten and threatened, which cannot in good
conscience (the Evidence not being clear) answer that spirit of Cruelty in our
Persecutors, to bring us in Guilty! how are many of us, through unjust
proceedings, sentenced to Transportation and Exilement from our Native Country,
Wives, Children, and dearest Relations, into Foreign Parts and Places of the
World, there to seek our bread amongst strangers! Much more might we say of the
Cruelty and Oppressions we meet with from some fierce and forward spirits, who
are Ministers of the Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical (as they are called)
who summon us to their Courts for not coming to their Parish Worships, fining
and imprisoning us in many parts of this Nation, endeavoring thereby to vex us
and to weary us out, and force us to conform to that which our God has showed
us he abhors.

And now Friends, what is the cause of all this Cruelty that is thus daily
exercised upon us, even for no other cause but for keeping a good Conscience
toward God, who has loved and purchased us with a great price, even with his
own Blood, that we should be no longer our own, but the Lord's, who has
endeared us to him, and engaged our hearts to bow to and worship him, and in
whose Fear we cannot but meet together to wait upon him, and to seek his Face
more and more, whose Presence has so often refreshed and gladded our hearts in
our Assemblings and Meetings together: And by this our meeting together we bear
our Testimony for the Lord and his Truth, thereby declaring to all men that we
own him alone to be our Lawgiver, our King and Guide (in all matters that
concern his Worship) and he does and will come and save us.

And also, by this our meeting together we exhort one another, strengthen and
build up one another in our most holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost with all
prayers and supplications for Magistrates and for all men, that they with us
may come to know (and be obedient to) Christ Jesus the Light, that lightneth
every man that comes into the world, and by his Blood (which is his Life) may
come to receive remission of sins, and an Inheritance among the Saints in Light.

And likewise by this our meeting together, we find an Increase in the pure
Love (which thinks no evil) one to another, and to all men, yea to our very
enemies (desiring from the bottom of our hearts they may repent them of all
their Sins, and of all the Blood, Cruelties and Persecutions they have unjustly
committed upon and against us) of all which things we are justified of the
Lord, and have an assurance that it is well-pleasing and acceptable to him, as
we abide in the Fear of his most holy Name.

Which holy practice of meeting together was required of, and found in the
People of God of old, as in Mal. 3. 16. Then those that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of
Remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name. And so was the Apostle's Practice and Exhortation to the Saints,
Not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some
(then was, and now) is, but so much the more (to exhort one another) as you see
the Day approaching. Which holy Practices we own and do witness, and that as
the Day approaches (to wit) the Light arises, and draws nearer and nearer to
us by its heat, virtue and splendour, Even so much the more are we inclined and
engaged in our hearts to meet and assemble together, to wait upon the Lord,
till he causes it to arise, and shine, and overspread the whole Earth.

And for these Causes, as aforesaid, and for such holy Ends, do we meet
together, and for no other; God Almighty is our Record that we speak the truth
unfeignedly from our hearts, and not as we have been falsely accused and
reported of (by time-servers and men-pleasers) for meeting seditiously to plot,
or wickedly to contrive Insurrections, in contempt of the King and his Laws,
and to the breach of the Public Peace; and that we are an Obstinate People,
and will not be subject to Authority.

All these and many more the like slanders and false accusations do we daily
undergo, by some that are fierce and cruel in their spirits against us,
endeavoring to incense the King against us, and to procure Laws to be made to
destroy us, and that all people may even deliver us up to the spoil, as a
people not fit to live amongst them: But we believe the King has a Witness in
his Conscience, which (oft-times) speaks for us (viz.) that we are not such a
People as reported of; and he has not approved of some Cruelties that have
been of late exercised upon us. And as for the People which are our Neighbors,
and know us (with whom we do converse) will justify us, and say we are a very
diligent and peaceable People, and do much pity us; saying, We deserve no such
thing at their hands.

Yet notwithstanding all the Cruelties that are exercised upon us, if our own
persons were only concerned, we could hold our peace; but in as much as the
spreading of the Everlasting Truth, and honorable Name of the Lord God
Everlasting, is deeply concerned; and that the Blood-guiltiness of many cries
so loud for Vengeance (which is ready to be poured forth;) And also, that all
who have yet had no hand in such Cruelties, might hereby be warned; WE from
these deep and weighty Considerations, are moved in our hearts to lay these
things before you, that if it may be, a stop might be put to any further
exercise thereof; and that neither ye who are Merchants, or Mariners, or any
other, might have any hand in the execution thereof in any measure, either by
permitting your Ships, or Seamen, to be the Transporters of the Innocent, or
any other ways of Cruelty whatsoever.

Now Friends, having thus laid our Case before you, and opened our hearts thus
unto you concerning our Principles, Practices and Professions toward God, and
our Demeanours and Behaviors toward the King and his Government, with our
Deportment and Conversation toward all men; also something of our Sufferings,
and the Innocent Causes thereof, all which will certainly plead for us; and
therefore to God's Witness in all your Consciences do we appeal for true
Judgment in this case; that is to say, whether we have deserved such Cruelties
to be inflicted upon us, who are an Innocent People, and guilty of the breach
of no Just Law.

Neither are we guilty of the breach of this Act upon pretense of which we now
suffer; which Act is to suppress Seditious Conventicles, and therefore not
Innocent Meetings, and to prevent the growth of such Sectaries, who at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections, etc. as by the Title and Preamble (which is
the Reason or Key) thereof, appears; none of which things yet to this day have
been proved against us, nor the least show of any such thing, though it has
been put upon them to prove, and their VVitnesses have been asked what we were
doing in our Meetings, and whether they either saw or heard any thing tending
to Sedition? they have testified for us, and answered, Nay, we were peaceable,
and so could not be guilty of the breach of this very Act, under pretense of
which we now suffer. Yet notwithstanding, by the brow-beating and threatening
both of the Grand and Petty Jurors, some Jurors have been overawed, and have
bowed to their wills so far as to find the Bills against us, and others, to
find us guilty; though some other Jurors, that were more wise and valiant for
the Truth, not finding sufficient Evidence to prove their Indictments, and also
nothing appearing to them to make us Transgressors, by any thing we either did
or said in our Meetings that tended to Sedition or Insurrection (against which
the Act was only made) and false witness being also born, they could not in
good conscience find us guilty of the Indictment, though some of them therefore
received frowns and threats, and are bound over to give an account at the
King's Bench Bar the next Term: but some of the Prisoners not finding freedom in
themselves to answer their form of pleading, Guilty or not guilty, (their
Indictments being indirect) and questions being put to ensnare them, as also
some not being acquainted with their way of pleading) they readily pronounced
their unjust Sentence of Transportation against them, save only the Women that
have Husbands are committed to the House of Correction, some for the space of
eleven months, and others for twelve months. Now seeing their Actings are so
contrary to Justice and Right, and also to the late Act, for you or any of you
to put this Illegal and Unjust Sentence in Execution, by Transporting any of
us, would be very hard measure, and not safe for you, nor to the Kings honor.

And further, If any man amongst you, through a wicked covetousness should
transport any of us at his own charge, with intent to sell us for Slaves or
Laborers for his unrighteous gain, let such know that Gods wrath will smoke
against that person; for we are the Lords Freemen, and in his Fear and Dread
we tell that man, we cannot answer his spirit nor satisfy his lusts, in
stooping to that slavery he intends us for, many of us not being educated in
such a way of drudgery and slavery, so that his evil ends will be crossed, who
would think to make a gain of us by Servitude or Labor, who are God's
Freemen, to whom we have and shall commit our Cause, and the care of our
Bodies, as our Souls, whatever we may suffer from or by such wicked person,
assuredly knowing that our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, from this
Oppression and Bondage also; but if he does not, yet know, to that spirit we
cannot bow.

And of this our causless (though cruel) Sufferings (with our Resolution
herein) we do purpose to acquaint, and do hereby inform and acquaint all the
Plantations (where this may come) to the end they may be forewarned and thereby
fore-armed, and not to be surprised or deceived (as the late Master of a Ship
was in a case of transporting some of us) by buying any of us for their
Servants, which will not be for their profit; and we hope they will be advised
by us, especially seeing their own interest is so nearly concerned: And it is
the desire of our hearts they may consider our Case and Condition herein
declared, and be warned by us, who intend this our Manifestation for them as
well as for any others, in that wherein they may be concerned.

And so having in the uprightness and honesty of our hearts, as before the
Lord, cleared our selves, in thus clearly stating our Case, and the (causless)
Cause of our Sufferings, with our holy and firm Resolution to continue in our
duty to follow the Lord, and not (at all) to bow to the spirit of Wickedness,
Cruelty and Oppression in any whatsoever.

Our desires therefore are renewed unto you again, that you would seriously
weigh, ponder and consider what is here declared in this our Manifestation, and
be warned thereby not to join hands with Oppression under any color or
pretense whatsoever; for why should ye be found persecuting the Innocent, and
fighting against the Lord, who is too strong for you?

POSTSCRIPT.
And moreover, It will endanger the Lives of many tender people, to be
transported into other Countries beyond the Seas, from Relations, Families and
Native Country, besides the great sufferings that such a thing may bring upon
their tender Wives, Children and Families, who may outwardly be exposed to
Ruin, if their Husbands and Fathers should be thus forced from them, who would
have taken care to maintain them; and this is the way to make many Widows and
Fatherless, whose Cries will enter into the Ears of the Lord against this
Cruelty and Opprestion.

THE END.

