A Testimony against Hypocrites and Deceivers, in defense of the Truth.
OF all the Hypocrites and Deceivers I have seen or read of, from the beginning
of the World to this present time, you who term your selves the Ministers, and
set up your selves as Elders, and claim Authority over your Brethren, whom you
call a Visible Body; Church, and Society, and are called QVAKERS, are the most
shameless, brazen-faced, and stoutest Instruments of your Master, and have out
stripped all the rest of your Forefathers, as may be seen, read, heard, and
understood in two several Books of yours, the one Entitled the Spirit of
Alexander the Coppersmith the other Entitled Judas and the Jews, etc.

Coin the first born of the first Man Adam slew his Brother, but he stood not
in a long dispute when charged for it, though he at first Motion said, Am I my
Brothers keeper? yet presently he fell in his Argument, and made no large Reply
in defense of his Treachery. The Sons of Jacob sold Joseph their Brother, but
they did not stand to the Justification of the Fact, but sought to cover it as
long as they could: but when they came into distress, they confessed, and said,
That misery came upon them, because they pitied not their innocent Brother's
cry. The Centurion, and those that were with him watching, when they saw the
Wonders, the great Earth quake, that the Vail of the Temple was rent, etc. at
the giving up of the Ghost, feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of
God. Judas the Traitor did not stand for the justification of his wicked Act,
when he saw how he had betrayed the Innocent, but said, I have sinned, etc. The
persecuting Priests of late years, here in England, who stoned, whipped,
imprisoned, haled out of the Synagogues the poor Quakers at their first
appearance, would seek to make some coverings for to hide their wicked
Persecutions, and would not with such confused boldness stand in open
justification of lying Testimonies, after it should be openly published in
their faces, as you in your said Books have done. And for proving of this
Truth, let him that runs read.

First, you say, You are standered greatly, because it is said of you, that you
deny Liberty of Conscience, and you appeal to God's Holy Witness in all
Consciences for your proof.

I Answer; Let all People that do in any measure own a Witness in their
Consciences, consider, first, what you your selves confess, you never liked the
word Liberty of Conscience, and you seek to cover your selves, under pretense
that you did not mean it of outward, but of inward liberty.

Again, I Answer, You say you liked not the word as commonly used. Alex. the
Coppersm. p. 8. Is not the word Liberty of Conscience most commonly used by
Men, in requiring a liberty to exercise themselves in Matters of Religion and
Worship, according as the Spirit of the Lord makes manifest within in the
Conscience? And has not this Request been from time to time, in all Ages, made
by Professors of Religion unto Magistrates and Rulers, desiring their Liberty?
Was not this the Request of Moses and Aaron, when they were sent of the Lord to
appear before Pharaoh King of Egypt? And did they not say then unto Pharaoh,
that the Lord had sent them to require a Liberty for the People to go three
days journey into the Wilderness to worship their God? and was not this Request
for a Liberty to an outward exercise of God's Worship? Nay, did not Moses and
Aaron say, when Pharaoh said, they should go, but leave something behind them,
that they must bring all with them; because, say they, we must hold a Feast
unto the Lord? And is it not then about the outward exercise of God's Worship
that was the Message of Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh for Liberty? Yet
notwithstanding you reply and rejoin over and over, seeking to uphold
yourselves in this great Confusion: and whereas you appeal unto God's holy
Witness in all Consciences, if ever you so used any Conscientious Enquirers, as
to thrust them out of your Meetings, page 11. And you say, It is baseness to
suggest your ill-using of People in general, and none named. And thus when the
Truth in plainness of Speech is laid open against you, that you cannot in any
measure deny, but that the very words testify in plain terms against your
practice; yet with boldness you would make People believe, putting meanings
contrary to the sound of your own words, which your Forefathers the Professors
that went before you would not adventure so far: though they would put meanings
to the Scriptures, which was other Men's words; yet would not they be so
brazen-faced as to belie their own Expressions, by putting contrary meanings
thereunto.

Secondly; You say you are not fallen from the first Principle of Doctrine
first preached by the People called Quakers, though you uphold, maintain,
preach, declare, and publish in print, That putting off the Hat in Prayer, is
an innocent and a reverent practice, and comely order. And though you have also
declared and published in print, that you have your time for Public Prayer,
and that you have purchased parcels of the Earth on purpose to lay your dead
Bodies together from the People of distinct ways.

Now let all that will not be wilfully blind, consider how far this Doctrine
will concur and agree with the first Principle of the Quakers Doctrine and
Declarations, both in words and writings, when they came first forth, and went
into the Professors Meetings, and declared against all their outward Forms and
Observations, against all their Hour-glasses and Watches, limiting themselves
unto times for to pray or preach; yea, they stood with their Hats on in the
times of the then Professors Prayers, saying, That God must be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth, that is, before Time was, and will continue the same when
Time vanishes away and be no more. And when the Professors withstood them,
saying, the Apostle said, Every Man praying or prophesying with his Head
covered, dishonors his Head. They answered, That Christ was Head within
them, and that Christ was the same Son of God in Male and in Female; and
wherever the Son appeared to speak, whether in Male or in Female, he
discovered himself unto all that would receive and obey him. And the Quakers
Doctrine then was for the rising of the Witness in every Conscience; and that
all should cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and turn the mind
to within, and there to wait for Teachings; and that none should look out for
Teachings, but wait in silence, and be faithful to the measure, be it ever so
little, it is sufficient: It is the whorish Woman, whose Eyes gad abroad, whose
Feet abide not in her own House; and she that swept her House, found the lost
Groat in her own House. And the Wise Virgins had Oil in their own Lamps; the
Foolish Virgins were shut out whilst they went abroad for Oil: The Eye that
looks out unto others Conditions, and neglects his own, is the Eye that offends
and must be plucked out; that the pure Eye may be opened which offends not, and
the Beam must first be cast out of thy own Eye; and let all flesh keep silence
before the Lord; and let none speak his own Words, nor think his own Thoughts;
but let every Soul be subject to the Higher Power; all Power is of God, who is
from Eternity. And this Doctrine we still own and abide in, and your Time of
Public Prayer, and your imposition, putting off Hats (which the People called
Quakers at first, before your Visible Body was heard of, declared to be a
practice worse than a Heathenish Vanity) we deny, and will follow the Light in
our own Consciences, according to the first Doctrine; and will let the Dead
bury the Dead, and will not join with you in your Usurpation, who are not
ashamed to declare in print, that you denied them that contributed with you in
the purchasing of a piece of Ground for to lay their Dead in when they had need
of such a thing, and bid them go elsewhere for a burial place: and you say, It
is no usurping of their property, for they never desired their parts of the
Collection; and herein you say you are standered: If you cannot show me one
Instance of such shameless withstanding the Truth, and such boldness in the
maintaining your selves in gross Errors, after the discovery thereof, as you do
in these things in any People of any Profession whatever, let all sober-minded
People take notice, that you have surpassed all Usurpers that went before you:
for you acknowledge them to be joint-purchasers with you, that they contributed
with you in the Purchase thereof. And as for your saying, They desired not
their part of the Collection to be returned; You manifest your selves to all
that read your Testimony, to be Usurpers of their Property: For whatever it
was that they parted with toward the purchasing thereof, be it great or small,
they had no property therein, for that was become the property of him or them
that sold the Land. So that if your own Testimony be true, you did them
manifest wrong in denying them their just Right. Ahab offered Naboth, that he
would give him a better Vineyard than his own, or the worth of it in Money. Yet
Naboth refused it, though Ahab was King of Israel: and moreover, when Ahab went
to take possession of Naboth's Vineyard, he did not maintain his Argument
against the Prophet's Reproof, but fell therein, saying, Have thou found me, O
mine Enemy? And herein you exceed wicked Ahab, in upholding and maintaining
your confused Arguments. And herein is no suggestion, but plain Truth confessed
by your selves, and needs no other Name or Testimony but your own Confession
for proof against you. 1. That you liked not the word Liberty of Conscience, as
commonly used. 2. That you are found in another Doctrine and Practice than the
first Quakers in days past were found. 3. That you are not slandered in saying,
That you usurped the Property of others; and as for your saying it is baseness
to suggest your ill-using of People, and none named: I find that when they are
named, you are not at all more ashamed, but still wilfully and confusedly you
maintain and uphold that wicked persecuting practice, of haling and thrusting
out of your Assemblies: which practice is as contrary to the practice of the
people called Quakers about twenty years ago, as Light is to Darkness; for you
will not admit of any Inquirer to be conscientious, that will not submit to
your prescribed Orders: For the Doctrine and Practice of the people called
Quakers then was; If any thing be revealed unto him that stands by, let the
first hold his peace. And your Doctrine and Practice now is, If any Man speaks
in the Meeting that is not conformable unto your Orders, let such hold his
peace, or else be thrust out of the Meeting; yea, you will not admit such a one
to speak without the Door, but will thrust him forth into the Streets; and this
I can witness, and stand to my testimony in any of your Assemblies, if I am
called thereunto.

And whereas you say of the Author of that Letter to which your answer is
addressed, that his saying that every Member is equal, is false. I answer; your
saying is twofold false: For first, his saying is not that every Member is
equal, but that the Assemblies of the true Church are equal, having Christ the
Light equally present with them, and in them. See Spirit of the Hat, page 15.
Which saying is true, and not false, and herein you are found to be the
Perverters of true Words, and not only so, but denying the true Church, and
usurping Authority over the Consciences of your weak Brethren, declaring that
you have power to injoin the Consciences of Individuals; which is contrary to
the Doctrine of the People called Quakers at first, who admonished every
individual Person whatsoever that would hearken unto their Voice then, to
return unto the measure of God within in his own Conscience; and they did not
then, as you do now, challenge a Power over the Consciences of Individuals, nor
did they warn us to put off our Hats when they prayed to Almighty God, but they
then admonished us to wait in the Light, to be taught of the Light only, and
not to speak, act, or move unto any Exercise of Worship, unless we were truly
moved by our own Measures every one in particular: which Doctrine and Practice
is quite contrary to your Doctrine and Practice now, who claim Power over the
Conscience, and say that your Orders are Gospel: and herein we find you
bringing in another Doctrine, and preaching another Gospel, contrary unto that
Gospel preached by the Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ; who preached Christ
the Word which was in the beginning with God, which Word was God, to be the
true Light which lights every Man that comes into the World. And this Gospel
we own. And the Apostle preached Jesus Christ a Stumbling Block to the Jews,
and Foolishness to the Gentiles, but the Power of God to Salvation unto all
them that believe; and the Apostles called People to the Light, saying, you
have a Light shining, as a Candle in a dark place, to which you do well to give
beed unto, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts: And the
Apostle said, you have an Unction, the Anointing within you, and you need not
that any Man should teach you, but as the Anointing which you have received
teaches you, and it is Truth. That which is known of God is manifest in Man.
Know ye not that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? He that believes,
has the witness in himself. And this Doctrine also the People called Quakers,
at their first coming forth among us, brought unto us; and this Doctrine we
have received and believed, and we will not deny this Doctrine and this Gospel,
and turn again with the Dog to his Vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the
Mire, to Capping and Kneeling, to observations of Times, monthly, Weekly,
Quarterly, Yearly; a set time to Pray, and another to Preach; a time to serve
God, and a time to serve self.

As for your saying that we are followers of John Perrot, and his mark is the
Hat on in time of Prayer. I answer, that is not true: for we have seen several
of John Perrot's Books brought forth by you, relating of his Travel and
Sufferings for a long time after the dissension and difference did arise
amongst you about your corrupt rotten confused hypocritical dissembling
Ministries; and that you were drawn into parties, crying, as in the days of the
Apostles, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, I am of Christ: And so
you, the followers of James, the followers of George, the followers of John
Perrot. And it is not true, as you say, that the grand cause of that dissension
first began by John Perrot; and it is not the Truth of the matter as you affirm
it of his Spirit, for he was but a Creature, Manking, and as in that estate was
Dust, and to return to Dust again: and for his Spirit it was to return also to
its own place; and this shows your madness about Spirits. And as for the Hat it
is a dead Creature, and has no Spirit in it, and herein you make manifest that
you are led by a delusive lying and wicked Spirit, who say Hat-Spirit; for the
Hat has (as I said) no Spirit in it, and the Spirit of the Hat is a lying
Expression, given forth by the Devil and his Instruments, and it is the evil
Spirit that first invented such a Name: for the Devil is the Father of Lies:
and the Tree is known by its Fruit: herein your Fruit makes you manifest, who
call People Hat-Spirits; and we do not declare in the dark against your
secrets, but against the fruit of the Spirit that moves you to utter forth
these lying Expressions.

I was Imprisoned in the days of Oliver (the Protector so called) because I
could not acknowledge and declare that the Scripture was the Word of God, (as
some of you well know) to remain for three Months without Bail or Mainprise:
and yet I did and do own the Scripture, which was declared by the holy Men of
God, to be a true Declaration, and I do also own the Word that was in the
beginning, of which Word the Apostles did bear a true Testimony, to be the Word
of God, and the Light of God, and was before the Scripture was written, and
before time; and in that Word, and the Light of his Countenance, do we pray, do
we move, and have our Being. And we find that all the holy Men of God, recorded
in Scripture from Time to Time, received their Wisdom and Strength, to Speak
and to Write from that Word which was in the beginning. Moses prophesied of him
saying, The Lord will raise unto you a Prophet like unto me, Him shall you hear
in all things. Esaias prophesied of that Word and said, He should eat Butter and
Honey, until he should come to choose the Good, and refuse the evil. John said,
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
and the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw his Glory. To his
own he came, and his own did refuse him: but as many as received him, he gave
them Power to become the Sons of God. This Word we have received, and this Word
we will follow, and in this Word will we put our whole Trust and Confidence.
This is He, of whom we have received a Measure, and in that Measure do we wait
continually; our Measure is our Teacher, which teaches us as we abide faithful
unto Him, how to Pray, when to Pray, how to Speak, and when to Speak: unto that
measure did the People called Quakers at their first coming forth amongst us,
direct us to turn our Minds, and our Minds were turned accordingly, and we will
not leave that our Measure unto which our Minds are turned, and return again to
the observation of outward Traditions. And if any People come among us to spy
out our Liberty, we will not thrust them out of our Houses; and if they will
speak that which is not Truth, that hurts not us when we are waiting in the
Light: we do know that you are shut out from the knowledge of our Conditions, as
you do confess; and how we do build up one another in our most holy Faith: for
we do not complain against those that come in among us to wait with an evil
Eye: And I do challenge you to set forth what you can against my Words and
Actions ever since the time that I declared against your Formality: And we know
that there is no such jarring and jangling in the true Church, and the
Ministers of Jesus Christ never gave forth such large Testimonies in the Name
of the Lord in Writing, or in Print, and afterward recant and condemn those
Testimonies, and publish that they were given forth by the dark Spirit in an
hour of Temptation, and that their Testimonies were fit for the Fire, as you
have done; and with such confidence maintain such confused stuff, and with open
Faces stand in the Justification thereof, and jumble one thing with another, to
seek to blind Peoples Eyes, one while bearing a Testimony in the Name of the
Lord, that there was no such thing as was declared; and you said that five
great and manifest Lies meet together therein: See Alexander the Coppersmith,
etc. page 24. And in a while after quite contrary maintain and justify the
very thing before denied in your Book, Judas and the Jews, etc. page 49, 50.
With these unfruitful Works of darkness we cannot join. Thus we were used in
those days when we parted with the formal Traditions of those Professors, among
whom there were many tender hearted People, but their Pastors, Teachers and
Elders, preached unto the People the very same Doctrine as you now Preach, to
wit, that the Quakers came forth to disturb the Churches peace: and when a Man
would come in among them in a peaceable and quiet manner, and sit or stand
civilly and orderly in the Meeting, if he would but speak or ask a question in
sobriety, they would presently bestir themselves in such a disquiet manner that
the Meeting would be in an uproar, and for that cause thrust the poor Quaker
out of the House, saying, that he came to disturb their Peace. And as then it
was with those Professors, so it is now with you, who say that the Hat on in
Prayer disturbs the Churches peace; and herein we find you in the same
persecuting Doctrine as those persecuting Pastors and Elders were in, when at
first we left their outward Traditions, and betook our selves to follow the
Light. And as they then said that our Light was darkness, so say you now. And
as they then said unto us, have not you received some good among us in those
Ordinances? so say you, he dare not say that he enjoyed not comfort from those
Prayers that came through an uncovered Head. And although that you cannot with
all your wresting and twining in your Serpentine Wisdom, show no ill Fruit
brought forth, but still cry a dark Spirit, a Spirit of Envy and Malice, and
the like: and when we require you to prove your Assertions and Allegations, by
laying open what fruit of that evil Spirit is brought forth; you say, we keep
on our Hats when you Pray, and by that means we disturb the Churches Peace, and
this is all you can alledg against us; and for this cause are we called
Hat-men: and herein you have no matter of Fact to lay to our charge, for when
we come to the Meeting we come in a peaceable manner with our Hats upon our
Heads, and as we come, so we abide quiet, and in that there is no matter of
Fact done on our part; yet you complain that your Churches Peace is disturbed,
as those Pastors and Elders in those Days did, by us; and you thrust us out of
your Meeting for declaring Words in a peaceable manner, as those Professors did
in those days by us; and it is true, and no baseness in this: I will stand to
this Testimony when ever you please to call upon me. And the Apostle did not
command the Corinthians to put off their Hats, and observe Times for public
Prayers, as you would wrest his Words, which are Every Man Praying or
Prophesying with his Head covered, dishonors his Head: and moreover he said,
we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. And the Apostles did write
unto the Gentiles that believed, If they would abstain from Meats offered unto
Idols, and from Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication, they
would do well: and herein is no injunction laid upon the Consciences of
Individuals. And here we find you bringing in another Gospel, and preaching
another Doctrine, differing from the Doctrine of the Apostles, who preached
Christ the Power of God to Salvation in all them that believe; and differing
from the Doctrine of the People called Quakers at their first coming forth, who
preached the Light within every particular to be the true Teacher, and that in
the Light was power sufficient; and they did not preach the power that the
visible Body of Friends had in it self, as you do: and therefore we own the
Apostles Doctrine, and the Doctrine of the People called Quakers which they
first preached, and which we believed, and deny your Doctrine.

The Apostles Doctrine was, That the Wife is bound by the Law as long as her
Husband lives, but if her Husband be dead she is at liberty to be married to
whom she will, only in the Lord: and Isaac being gone to meditate in the Field,
Rebekah coming with her Damosel and Abraham's Servant, lighted off the Camel,
and Isaac brought her to his Mother Sarahs Tent, and Rebekah became his Wife:
here is a record of a Marriage in the old Testament. How did Abraham the Father
of the Faithful order his Servant to go for a Wife for his Son? and how did
Isaac (of whom the Lord said, For in Isaac shall thy Seeed be called) take his
Wife? and here is the Apostles Doctrine concerning Marriage, that when the
Husband is dead, the Woman is at liberty to marry whom she will, only let her
wait upon the Lord for counsel, and not run out to Men for advice, and let them
see in it, and show it to other Men, and that none go together but before a
dozen Friends: there was no such order prescribed, either by Abraham the Father
of the Faithful, nor by his Son Isaac who was promised unto Abraham, nor by the
Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ; neither did the People called Quakers bring
any such orders among us at their first coming forth, as many of you very well
know; and one of the eminentest of you acquainted me, how that a couple that
were come out of the North unto West-Chester, betook themselves in marriage
there. If you please to examine me further, I will give you further account.

We do own a true Marriage, and the Bed undefiled; and those that God joineth
together, we seek not to put asunder; neither do we busy our selves to lay
further injunctions upon People than the Holy Men of God of old times laid: for
we do very well know that all sober-minded Men and Women, whose Minds are
turned unto the Light in their Consciences, will, as they abide faithful and
obedient to the Light, behave themselves toward God, and toward one another,
in sobriety and meekness, as becomes honest People so to do; and as for
others, whether they be those that despise the Light, or those that pretend to
a wrong freedom, because they profess the Light, and so by their miscarriages
bring a scandal upon the Children of the Light, we do deny both, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful Works of darkness, neither do we pretend unto
any such outward Authority, as to meddle with those Exercises any further than
we are concerned; and our admonition unto all is, That every one do stand still
and wait upon the Lord in that measure, given him of God to profit withal for
Counsel, and not run out unto them that cry, Lo here, and lo there is Christ;
and in this we have not fallen from the Principle of Truth, nor from the
Doctrine of the Holy Men of old Times, recorded in the Old and New Testament,
nor from the true Doctrine first received of the People called Quakers. And I
can appear, and give in my Name, and stand unto this my Testimony at noon day.
And as for those filthy lewd Actions, which some of you have been charged with,
not fit to be mentioned amongst any manner of People that have any civility,
much less amongst Professors of Religion, and above all unfitting that those
that profess the Light, should have any such things justly charged upon them; I
do declare and testify, that I am ignorant of any such thing acted amongst
those of my Neighbors and Acquaintance, although we differ about the aforesaid
Orders: The Lord forbid that I should in any measure slander you, or any People
in the World, beyond my knowledge; nay rather I would be checked for concealing,
than that I should overrun my self in such things; and in all this I do not
flatter, I take God's Name for my Witness, who will reward every one in
Righteousness and true Judgment. In this therefore, let every Tub stand upon
its own bottom. And for your charging the said Author to be envious, malicious,
and a wicked Apostate Slanderer, in what is declared in his Letter against some
Particulars of you, I find you therein far differing from the Disciples of the
Lord Jesus, who when he told them that one of them was a Devil, immediately
made no more ado, but looked every one to himself, saying, Lord, is it I? They
went not about to clear the Matter, but believed it was true, and immediately
made a through search until the thing was brought forth openly; and afterward
they sought not to cover the Transgressor, but declared the Truth, and left it
upon Record, to be read by Ages to come: Neither did they seek to hide the
shameful sin of Peter, in cursing and swearing that he knew not the Lord;
neither did Paul seek to cover the hypocrisy of Peter when he found cause of
reproof; nor did he admonish others to let it fall, but published these things,
and they are upon Record: and the Prophet did not seek to hide the shameful
Adultery of David the King, one of the most eminent Kings in many respects that
ever appeared in the World, Jesus Christ excepted. And although the King made
no more ado, but confessed his sin; and although the Prophet upon the next words
said, Thy Sin is taken away; yet notwithstanding all this, there is no covering
or hiding, but it must be recorded; and King David did not bid the Prophet let
it fall, left bad Spirits should know of it, as you do; and herein you are
found out of the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

But some Objections may be put: 1. We only declare against the envy and malice
of the Author, and not against his Person. 2. We charge him to be a Liar, and a
false Accuser, and our Charge stands good and firm, because he dare not appear
and stand by his Testimony. And, 3. we declare against his treachery and
combination with our professed Enemies, and furnishing those Enemies of Truth
with such slanderous lying accusations against us, and hiding himself, not
daring to show his face.

Answer, 1. His malice and envy could do you no hurt; for it is worse to be the
bearer of malice and envy, than to them that it is born against; and therefore
it had better become you to have soberly cleared your selves from the things
charged, than to bear such Testimonies against Malice and Envy, which is an
inward Principle.

2. Seeing that in your Answer you justify most part of the substance of his
Charge, he is not to be judged a Liar, and a false Accuser, although that his
Name is not at his Charge; and moreover in his Letter it does not appear that
his Intention was to have it published, and therefore it savours more of Malice
and Envy in you, for it breaks forth and issues out of your Bottles against
them which you call Hat-men, without any distinction; but he makes a clear
distinction between what he declares against, and what he is for, and has not
jumbled all Good and Bad together, but in plainness of speech declares what it
is that he disowns and declares against amongst you: and you your selves
confess most part of the matter of Fact, only you seek to darken Counsel, and
would have People believe that your meanings are otherwise; and herein the Lie
and the false Accusation stands upon you: for, as I said, you accuse all the
Hat-men, as you call them; so that if his Charge had been altogether false; I
dare say there are hundreds of those which you call Hat-men that are innocent,
and do not know of those deboist filthy Actions which you slubberly seek to
hide and cover.

3. You in that Book also charge all Hat-men, as you term us, to be malicious
vagabond Apostates; and this upon the account of one private Letter written by
one which you your selves (if there is any truth in your Declarations) know not
who he is: which Letter was published by one that knew not the Author, as is
related in the Preface to the Reader: and in this you appear more like unto
Haman, than the Hat-men unto Judas: As it was too small a recompense in the
sight of Haman to have Mordecai himself punished, but he would have all the
People of the Jews destroyed; and the cause was no other, but that Mordecai
sitting in the Gate would not bow to Haman: and there is no other cause of all
your Sentences of Condemnation against the Hat-men, (as you call us) but
because we sit, as you say, upon our Briches when you pray to your God, and not
put off our Hats.

Another Objection. Do not thou pervert our Declarations concerning the Hat,
which was only the putting it off to Magistrates we declared against, and not
the putting it off to God in time of prayer?

Answer. Richard Hubberthorn, in his Testimony of the Zeal of Oxford, declares
these words, Doffing the Hat worse than a Heathenish Vanity. And Oxford, is a
place where Men send their Children to learn the Languages, for to be fitted,
as they say, to become Preachers of the Gospel, and a place that the Ministers
of the Church of England call, The Fountain of Learning; and will any Man judge
that this Testimony was a particular Testimony only against the Magistrates,
and not a general Testimony against the practice of Zealots of those Times,
which held it to be a decent and orderly practice, as you do; and more
especially in regard that there is no exception made throughout all his Book
for the reservation of that practice, and for the Observation of the time, as
you would have it to be. And herein Naaman the Syrian had a more clearer
defense for his bowing in the House of Rimmon, because that he reserved, that
when he declared that he would worship no other God but the God of Israel, only
when his Master went to worship at the House of Rimmon, and leaned upon his
shoulders, and when he boweth with his Master at the House of Rimmon, the
Prophet must forgive him. But after you have declared against a practice in
general terms, without any exceptions or reservations, you bring in your
exceptions after twenty years standing; and herein is your daubing with
untempered Mor^er, and your confusion appearing, far beyond that Man which was
one of the Gentiles.

As for the Author, he is as yet hidden, as he declares, and needs no Man to
take part with him, until the Lord be pleased to bring him to be seen; and as
for his Declaration, what you have denied in your first Answer, you have
confessed much of it in your Rejoinder, and have gone about to justify the
matter of Fact therein, and turned the other side outward, saying to the
Hat-men, You have been waiting many years with an evil Eye for our Failings,
and make Music of it, carrying it unto the wicked Professors; but we could
make a Book of your Failings.

And herein it is manifest that the Lord is not pleased with the hiding of
Wickedness and Transgression: for though Noah was the only Man that found
favor in the sight of God in the Old World, yet his Failings must not be
covered and hidden; and though Cain was one of his Sons, yet he must pronounce
a Curse against him; and herein you show your selves and your Declarations to
be contrary to the Declarations of the Holy Men of God of old, who allowed of
no Transgression to be hid and covered, but would bring all things to the
Light, that the Transgressors might not go free. But you, with your Elders and
Ministers, have covered your Failings as long as you could; and when the Lord
caused it in a special manner to be brought forth, you were like mad Men at
your weak Brethren, who from time to time were grieved in their minds to see
how you were fallen, and did use all lawful means upon all opportunities to
seek a reformation. And for your saying, you can make a Book of the Hat-mens
Failings: Why have you not made it? Seeing the Hat-men did not bow to your
Image, you ought to have declared the Truth, and bring the Transgression to the
Light; for I profess I never owned your written Orders, but upon all occasions
declared against them; and the backwardness of the Hat-men in not declaring
your Failings to the World for many years since, does not show that they were
too forward in discovering your nakedness; but on the contrary, if there be any
Error, it is on the other hand, in being too backward in declaring the Truth,
until such time as the Lord brought it forth in a wonderful manner, by those
that have no communion with the Hatmen, as you have declared in Judas and the
Jews, p. 126. Neither will the Hat-mens Failings serve you for a covering now
after such Declarations are published, and such plain confession of such gross
Errors found among you; which Confession is the most true Evidence as may be
had against any People in the World; for there is no further inquiry to be
made, when the Party charged confesses the Fact charged. And you say, Behold
the Hat-men! I say the same, Let all sober-minded People behold, and have
regard, and bring all things to the Light, there to be judged and tried; and as
for you, I challenge you in the fear of the Lord, to enlarge your Books as big
as you can, and let the Hat-mens Failings be no more hidden nor covered, but
bring all things to the Light: And if there be any other Objections to be made
against this Testimony; take no more pity, but let the Wound be thoroughly
searched, that all corruption may be purged, that if possible by that means the
Sore may be cured; and if there be any incurable Member, that that may be cut
off. And for taking the Authors part, I do declare and testify that I do not
know the Man; but knowing that a great part of the things declared in his
Letter is true; and finding that you in your Answer and Rejoinder have brought
other things to the Light against your selves, which things I knew not before,
seeing you so unreasonable in maintaining

(...)
