FREE THOUGHTS In Defense of a Future State, As discoverable by Natural Reason,
and stripped of all Superstitious Appendages.

Demonstrating against the Nominal Deists, that the Consideration of Future
Advantages is a just Motive to Virtue; of Future Loss and Misery, a powerful
and becoming Restraint of Vice.

With Occasional Remarks on a Book entitled, An Inquiry concerning Virtue.

And a Refutation of the revived Hylozoicism of Democritus and Leucippus.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and Andr. Bell at the Crosskeys and Bible in Cornhil. M. DCC.

ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE PUBLISHER.
THE Author of the following Sheets, being engaged to no Sect nor Party of Men,
nor biased by any particular System of Philosophy, has had no other aim, than
to serve the Interests of Virtue and Truth: but because there are so very few
that labor the same thing with so unprejudiced a Mind, he forgoes all the
pleasing hopes of having his Essay generally well accepted, and requests me to
publish a short word to save him from the Calumnies of some angry Brethren of
his, who engage their Faith to any thing rather than plain dry Reason; and
being blinded by a jealous Zeal, know not what is said for or against them. Let
the Reader take notice then, that our Author has not disputed from Scripture,
whence it is obvious to prove more than he has here asserted, not out of any
contempt of that Authority which he reverences as he ought, but only because
the Persons with whom he disputes, dare to call that Authority in question; the
Vindication of which the World now expects from the ablest Hands.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 5. put a comma after purpose. P. 16. l. 27. put a full stop after
Immoralities. l. 28. dele the semicolon. P. 71. l. 29. r. Galaxy. P. 76. l. 21.
dele not. P. 79. l. 22. r. Roscius. P. 91. l. 14. after they insert to. P. 96.
l. 15. r. (...), and for (...) r. (...). l. 23. r. (...).

Free Thoughts In defense of a Future State.
Honored Friend;
I Remember some parts of the Discourse which we had last Tuesday Night at Mr.
N's, and the next Night at your house. I am now minded to reconsider the same.
I will speak to Passages, as they occur to my Memory, without regard to Order
or Method; for I always suspect my Abilities, and fear that what I can offer,
will not be thought by any other Person worth the while for me to labor to
digest it regularly: besides, I have not time to digest my Thoughts so as to
please my self.

Among other things which the Ingenious and Learned Mr. J. A. was pleased to
assert, the Import of one was this: That no Action could be properly called
virtuous, which was done in prospect of advantage to be had in a future State.
In answer to this strange Assertion, I aimed to speak to this sense: He that
takes an honest Care of the Interests of his own Person, Family, Friends and
Country in this Life, according to his best Judgment of the Course in which
things are likely to run, must be acknowledged to act rationally and wisely: So
he that takes a diligent Care of his own Interests, and the Interests of others
in a future State (according to his Sense of that matter after serious
Deliberation) must be acknowledged to act rationally and wisely; and to act
rationally and wisely, is to act virtuously. The Prospect of worldly Advantage
to be gained by this or that honest Action, is so far from taking from that
Action the praise of Wisdom, that it rather is the chief Reason for which the
Action may be denominated wise: Wherefore why should the prospect of Advantage
in a future State, acquirable by wise, i. e. virtuous Actions, take from those
Actions the praise of Wisdom and Virtue? Some that are much in Mr. J. A's
Sentiments, are wont with Railery, and (as they think) Argument mixed together,
to plead, That to do those Actions which are accounted Virtues, in prospect of
Advantage to be gained by them, is mercenary and base. Let us examine this
Objection, which has an air of Wit, and see whether there is any solid Reason
underneath. Mercenary is an English Word made from a Latin, signifying Wages,
or Hire, payable for Labor or Work to be done. Militari mercede, is to fight
for Pay: and whosoever fights for Pay in a good Cause, works or labors for
Hire, Wages, in an honest way, deserves his Wages, Hire, Pay; nay farther,
ought rather to be commended than reproached for doing his Duty.

Mr. J. A. and some others seem to think, that because a mercenary Soldier
happens to be commonly esteemed a term of Reproach, that therefore Moral Virtue
must be utterly disgraced by the Epithet Mercenary. But we beg leave to examine
this matter thoroughly. The Reason why a Mercenary Soldier happens to be
commonly esteemed a term of Reproach, I take to be this: The Mercenary Soldier
is commonly hired by an ambitious Prince, to raise the Power of the Prince that
hires him, above Law, and oppress a free People: Whereas a Prince that is
contented to be just what the Choice of the People, and the Rule of the Law
makes him, knows that his People are best governed, and most safely defended by
the Militia of the Country. In the Case stated, the Militia-man is honorable,
and the Mercenary Soldier base. Nay in this Case, the more strenuously the
Mercenary Soldier fights, the worse Man he is: but when the Mercenary is
engaged where Honor and Conscience justifies him (which sometimes, tho but
rarely happens) his Valor, is true Virtue; his Pay, a reasonable Encouragement
of his Valor: and it would not be Valor, but Rashness for a martial Man,
whether of the Mercenary or the Militia Order, to offer himself to Dangers,
where he had no Advantage to make, nor Interest to defend. The Militia-Souldier
if he does not fight for pay, yet he does to defend the Country whereof he is a
Citizen, and in which he has a private Interest. The Security of his private
Interest in the defense of his Country, is the Merces, the Pay, the Hire, the
Wages for which he fights: and in the truth and reality of the thing, such a
Person is as much a Mercenary, as any Swiss, who with his Masters Consent is
hired abroad in a just War; or any poor Stroler at home, who having nothing
else to fight for, fights for Bread.

The short of this is, He is a base Mercenary that does an ill thing for Gain:
He is a worthy Mercenary that does a justifiable thing for Gain.

The prospect of Advantage in one kind or other, is the Motive of all the
deliberate Actions of a rational Man: and he that has no such thing in his eye,
is an unthinking Person; and therefore the prospect of advantage, whether in
this or a future State, cannot take from a moral Action the praise of Virtue. A
Friend of mine (inclined to the Sentiments which I labor to refute) is wont to
insist much on the glorious saying, That a good Man loves Virtue for its own
sake. When I press him to explain clearly what he means, he is wont to enlarge
elegantly and well upon the agreableness and fitness of Virtue; for instance,
of Justice, Charity and Mercy: and thus far he is very right; Justice, Charity
and Mercy are the most agreeable and fit things in the World for a rational Man
to practice. But now let me ask, What is it which makes these Virtues so
agreeable to human Nature, and so fit to be practiced by rational Man? or I am
strangely mistaken, or all that can be assigned, is, the natural Tendency which
they have to benefit Mankind, and to establish the Foundations of Society firm
and sure. If so, then I must observe, that every good Man who loves Virtue for
its own sake, i. e. for its agreableness to human Nature, i. e. for its
tendency to benefit Mankind, and establish the Foundations of Society; he loves
Virtue mercenarily, for he himself is a Member of the Society, and his private
Benefit is included in that of the public. But my Friend tells me, and I
believe him, that in Acts of Justice (which he always) in Acts of Charity and
Mercy (which he frequently performs) he has no regard to any advantage, upon
those accounts likely to accrue to him either in this present or a future State.

I answer, that to a Man in easy Circumstances, the practice of these Virtues
yields an immediate and a very great Pleasure; and they may be practiced by an
habitual good Man (such as I reckon my Friend) without any regard had to the
future Advantage and farther Pleasure which may accompany them. An habitual
good Man may be so taken up with the present Satisfaction of virtuous Deeds, as
that he shall be frequent in the practice of them, without giving himself time
to consider, whether he may not reasonably hope for a future Compensation. But
then it ought to be taken notice of, that a great part, perhaps much the
greatest part of Virtue, consists in doing good at the price of suffering Evil:
and few, very few (in my poor opinion) would practice Virtue under severe
present Discouragements, if they had no Hope beyond this Life. I am not
surpised to read in ancient Story that Men of the fairest Fame, as soon as
advanced under some Princes, have changed their Manners, and lost their
Reputation: For when there is no keeping an honest Reputation, and a gainful
Post of Honor both, it must be Hope in a future State, or nothing that can
persuade them to take care of the former, and let the latter go. I confess it
is easy for a Man to be good in easy Circumstances; to be just, when he is not
very poor; to be charitable, when he has more than a Competence; to be
merciful, when he is likely to gain Friends and Fame by it: but he that is
content that Virtue should never be practiced but in such Cases, is content
that the World should be much more wicked than it is, and every good Man more
uneasy and more unable to do the Good to which he is inclined.

In this place I think it proper to transcribe some Lines from Bishop Tailor in
his Ductor Dub. (not that I hope to gain my Point by his Authority, tho I cannot
but be pleased to find so wise a Man in my Sentiments, yet let the Reader only
weigh what is said) It is impossible a Man should do great things, or suffer
nobly, without consideration of a Reward; and since much of Virtue consists in
suffering evil things, Virtue it self is not a Happiness, but the way to one.
He does a thing like a Fool that does it for no end; and if he does not choose
a good one, he is worse: and Virtue it self would in many Instances be
unreasonable, if for no material Consideration we should undertake her
Drudgery. I omit his Quotation from St. Austin, and give his next words with
some little addition: Sensual Pleasures, those sensual Pleasures which trespass
on the Rights of others, are (while they can be made to consist with the safety
of our Persons, and the health of our Bodies) highly eligible, and all
difficult Virtue to be avoided, if in this Life only we have hope. The Author I
have quoted, assigns two Causes of Amability, and says there are no more, viz.
Perfection and Usefulness. I think there is but one Cause of Amability, and
that is Usefulness: for Perfections which do not relate to me, I may admire;
but nothing can attract my Love, and prompt my Desires, but that which I know
to be useful to me at present, or hope to find so hereafter. The Reason why a
thinking Person loves and desires to practice Virtue, is, because he tastes
Pleasure now, or expects it hereafter.

Perhaps the present Pleasure may effectually recommend some easier Instances
of Virtue in happy and blessed times to the practice of well-dispos'd Men: but
in most Cases, and to the Many, Virtue will ever need to be recommended by the
reasonable Hopes of a better Portion in a future State.

Let me put a Case, which I fancy does sometimes, tho but rarely happen: A
married Man loves his Wife; first for the sake of her Friends, or her Fortune,
or her agreeable Features, or his own solemn Vow; but afterward he loves her
for her own sake, finding her to be good-natured and fruitful, obedient and
wise. Now meaning no more than that he admires these great Perfections, that is
not, in strict speaking, loving them, or the Wife because she possesses them;
then only the Husband may be properly said to love these amiable Perfections,
and his Wife who is Mistress of them, when he considers that he is delighted
and pleased with the Perfections of his Wife, and made happy by her. In short,
let us speak strictly and properly, and then we must affirm that Love is
Relative. I may admire what I am never like to be the better for: but what I
love, I love because I find great Satisfaction in it at present, or hope to do
so hereafter. The present Pleasures of Virtue are not sufficient to recommend
it so much, as but a tolerable Condition of the World does necessarily require:
and if we endeavor to disprove the reasonableness of future Hopes, we open a
Flood-gate to a world of Iniquity more than abounds at present, and trouble our
own Enjoyments and Ease, as well as the Welfare of the Public. I would be glad
to be taught how Men may be persuaded to difficult Virtue; for instance, to do
their Country Service, to preserve it, or deliver it from Slavery, when they
are like to ruin themselves and their Families by it. Indeed I read of one
Codrus, who by his own death purchased a happy Victory to his People: But the
Historian says, Athens never had another King after him, because they never
expected another Codrus. I may say of Men, that dare be good whatever it cost
them, as Virgil concerning the scattered Trojans, Apparent rari nantes in
gurgite vasto; plainly there is so very few of them, that to keep the World in
no worse a condition, than that in which it now stands, it is necessary to take
in their Aid, who may be prompted to Virtue by future hopes. I will not here
dissemble what has bin sometimes objected to me by some Deists (to whom yet I
can hardly allow that name) They have asserted that the World is preserved in
that tolerable Order which we see, by sense of Honor, and fear of the Civil
Magistrates Vengeance: good Men are moved to be so by sense of Honor; and the
Wicked are restrained from that Wickedness from which they are restrained, by
fear of the Civil Magistrates Vengeance: so that there is no need of future
Hopes, or Fears for one thing or other; but they that pretend to be influenced
by them, are either Hypocrites, or deceived by not examining the Causes of
their Actions thoroughly. This Objection has several parts, which must be
answered one by one.

Good Men, they say, are moved to be so by sense of Honor. By sense of Honor
I suppose they do not mean so low a Motive, as the Esteem which accompanies
Virtue, the Reputation and Praise which good Men gain by the practice; tho this
is a very material thing, and not so airy as it is often represented: for whom
others highly esteem, to him upon occasion they are ready to be kind and
useful. But by Sense of Honor, I rather think they mean a Consciousness that
it is the most becoming and honorable thing in the World, for reasonable Men
to practice Virtue, because the Practice of Virtue is beneficial to Mankind in
general, and the chief support of Society.

By the way I take notice, that this very sense of Honor, this being virtuous
because Virtue is beneficial to Mankind, and the chief Support of Society, does
prove that the Expectance of Advantage does not take away from the Worth of a
virtuous Action, does not make a moral Action unfit to be called virtuous: for
every Man knows that by doing good to others, he not only contributes to the
ease of his own Mind, but also lays up a Reputation, that for ought he can
promise himself, he may live to need; and by contributing to the security of
the Body-politick, he contributes to the security of his private Interest. But
this only by the way, tho it serves to strengthen something I have before
answered: To my purpose it shall be allowed, that sense of Honor will carry
well-dispos'd Men a great way many times in the practice of Virtue; but for
want of Education, and by means of ill Education, and ill Examples, the bulk of
Mankind are always illdispos'd; and even of the well-dispos'd, but very few are
able to maintain their Character in a crooked and perverse Generation; and
fewer yet would do it, were it not for future Hopes. Further, it is too boldly
said, and can never be made out, that the generality of good Men are moved to
be so merely by sense of Honor secular, Honor which relates to this World
only: and as to future Happiness (be there any such thing or no) it is
notoriously unreasonable to conclude, that no Men are powerfully prompted to
Virtue by the Desires and Hopes of it, especially when they solemnly protest
both living and dying, that they are prompted to it by those Motives.

I would not leave any thing unanswered, which has fallen under my notice, by
Reading or Conversation, and may seem to have the face of good Argument, in
favor of the Sentiments of the Objectors; therefore I will here reply to a
Reflection which I lately met with in a private MS. The Anonymous Author says,
That to do good in hopes of Reward hereafter, increases the vicious Principle
of Selfishness. Before I answer directly, I will premise something concerning
this term Reward, of which the Adversary hopes to make some advantage.

There are some good Men, who are firmly persuaded that that thinking
Principle, which we call the Soul, shall after this Life exist again; and yet
believe that Rewards and Punishments are not the most proper Words to express
the different Portions in that Life. These Men observe that the Satisfactions
and Pleasures of Sense are not equal to the Satisfactions and Pleasures of the
Mind; the Satisfactions and Pleasures of the Mind are created by Virtue. To
have sober and temperate, just, charitable, merciful and holy Affections,
regular Passions, Love, Desire and Joy; Dislike, Hatred, Anger, fixed on proper
Objects, and exerted in due measure, according as best befits the several
Degrees of Goodness or Badness, which may happen to circumstantiate those
several Objects: This is to be virtuous, and this creates in the Mind greater
Satisfactions and Pleasures than the Satisfactions and Pleasures of Sense. It
were easy to demonstrate and illustrate this, but the Men I have to deal with
grant it. I hasten: The noblest Idea, Imagination, Conception, which we can
frame of future Happiness, is to have our good Affections improved and most
intense, our Passions most wisely directed, and most exactly regular: for, from
this most excellent Temper of Mind, must needs follow the highest Happiness,
such Happiness (as the Scripture phrases it) which has not entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive; i. e. we cannot conceive, as our Passions and
Affections are now, what will be the happy Consequences of their Improvements
to Perfection hereafter. On the other side, the Pains of the Mind which it
feels from Reflection, after it has bin engaged in Wickedness, are far more
cruciating, than the Pains which are caused by hurting the Organs of the Body,
according to that of the Scripture, A wounded Spirit who can bear? To have
horrid, monstrous, and unnatural Affections, Passions misplaced, irregular and
extravagant; this is to be very vicious, and this makes the vicious Man
miserable in this Life. The most dreadful Idea, Imagination, Conception, which
we can frame of future Misery, is to have our Affections in the highest degree
horrid, monstrous, and unnatural; our Passions in the highest degree misplaced,
irregular, and extravagant: for from this most wicked temper of Mind, must
needs follow the extremest Misery, which (if the Pains of the Body are less
cruciating, than the Pains of the Mind) Fire can but faintly emblem. Such
Happpiness and such Misery which I have now mentioned, some good Men, no
Skeptics as to our future Existence, think to be improperly denoted by the
terms Rewards and Punishments. But why should we contend about words? I think
they ought to allow us these Scriptureterms, when we do not condemn this their
Description of heavenly Happiness, and hellish Torments.

I have now made my way to the Anonymous Author's Reflection, who opposing the
belief of a future State, says, that to do good in hopes of Reward increases
the vicious Principle of Selfishness. My Reply is, 1. That Selfishness is a
Principle which all other living Creatures partake of in common with Man. Every
one has it implanted in his Nature, and cannot divest himself of it. Even they
that lay violent hands on themselves, are acted by this Principle of
Selfishness: for they put an end to their own Lives, because they hope that way
to retire from the Evils which they have not patience to endure. 2. This
Principle of Selfishness is not in its own nature vicious, but becomes so only
by being pursued irregularly. The Laws that are in all Nations made to
determine and ascertain Property, do plainly declare it to be the common Sense
of Mankind, that it is not only lawful, but natural and necessary for a Man to
be selfish, to take care of his own Rights: if so, then it can become vicious
only by undue Circumstances. Man, as he is a Member of Society* has given up
several of his natural Rights, for the better preservation and security of what
he has not given up. In this state he is, in many Instances by the express
Words of positive Law, and in more by Reason and Conscience, bound not to be
selfish at the hazard and detriment of the Public; not to pursue his private
Interest, when he cannot do so without visible prejudice to the Body-politick,
whereof he is but a single Member. Farther, A private Man, who has a Competence
for himself and Family, is bound in Reason and Conscience, not to pursue his
own Interest to the prejudice of another Person who has not a Competence, but
is in straits. No one must question this, who approves (which I hope we all do)
that excellent Rule which makes a part of Natural as well as Revealed Religion,
viz. Do as you would be done by. To be selfish farther than this excellent Rule
will allow, is a vicious Principle: but to be selfish as far as this Rule will
allow, that is, when neither the Public, nor any private Person is against
Reason damaged thereby, is natural, necessary and honest; and he that is not
selfish, that does not pursue his private Interest in such a Case as this, must
be* a Fool or a Madman.

The prospect of Reward, where neither the Public nor any private Person is,
against positive Law or right Reason, injured, is no Circumstance that can make
Selfishness vicious, but rather commends it: for a Man cannot do himself too
much good, if in doing himself good he does others no injury.

The next part of the Objection is, That the wicked are restrained from that
Wickedness from which they are restrained, by fear of the Civil Magistrates
Vengeance. That the fear of the Civil Magistrates Vengeance is a great
restraint of Wickedness, is what no Person will question; but that it should be
the only Restraint, and that Men ill-inclin'd, or dangerously tempted, are awed
by nothing else, is a bold Assertion, impossible to be made out, highly
improbable, and particularly unreasonable for the Objectors to assert. It is a
bold assertion, because it is impossible to be made out; it is impossible to be
made out, because it is impossible for the Objectors to know the Hearts of Men,
and discern by what Principles their Actions are governed: it is highly
improbable, for the Many have either had no Education, or so unhappy an one,
and have been engaged so much among the worst Examples, that their Minds are
oftener governed by weak and false Principles, than by sound and true: not that
I think the Apprehension of Misery, which in a future State will be the
Consequence of Wickedness with Impenitence, a weak or false Principle, but it
is so in the Opinion of the Objectors; and I argue, Supposing that it really
were so, yet the Apprehension we speak of, shall still have its Influence on
the Minds of the Many. It is particularly unreasonable for the Objectors to
assert, That Men ill-inclin'd, or dangerously tempted, are awed only by the
Civil Magistrates Vengeance, because these very Objectors do commonly impute
many of the foolish and wicked Practices of Men to their unhappy Education, to
the ill Company they frequent, and to their superstitious Principles. Possibly
the Objectors may be here ready to interpose and tell me, that a weak Argument
should not be made use of to an honest and noble Purpose. To admit this for the
present (tho I think there may be many cases, in which it is reasonable to use
an Argument likely to prevail, tho in its own nature weak) yet I judge the
Misery which will hereafter fall on the impenitent Wicked, to be a good
Argument for the restraint of Wickedness: but be it good or bad, it has its
Influence, and therefore the fear of the Magistrates Vengeance is not the only
Restraint of Wickedness: That it has its Influence, the Objectors ought not to
deny, because, as abovesaid, they know not the Hearts of Men, and cannot discern
by what Principles their Actions are governed; and because they do grant, that
the Many are as often governed by weak and false Principles, as by sound and
true. It Is not my business in this place to prove the Apprehensions of Misery,
threatening impenitent Wickedness in a future State, to be a sound Principle for
the restraint of Wickedness; but if it does restrain, then the Objectors are in
the wrong, who would put upon us, that the fear of the Civil Magistrates
Vengeance is the only Restraint. I have bin often studying to find out, what
should lead the Objectors to such a strange Assertion, as that, The fear of the
Civil Magistrates Vengeance is the only restraint of Wickedness: the only thing
that I can imagine is this; perhaps they observe that very many who profess to
believe a future State, wherein the impenitent Wicked shall exist miserable,
are yet, notwithstanding such their Profession, as much addicted to Wickedness
as any of the most ungracious Unbelievers, and make as little conscience at
least of some Immoralities, as any of them who are either downright Atheists,
or so reputed. Observing this, perhaps hence they conclude, that none of all
them who profess the same, are awed by that their Notion. But may not I as well
conclude, That no Men are awed by the penal Laws of the Land, because so great
numbers who have read or bin told, and are firmly persuaded, that the Law
condemns Petty-larcenary to the Whipping-post, Pillory, or hot Iron; Felony and
Treason to the Gallows and the Sled, do yet daily pilfer, cheat, and break
Houses, rob and murder, deface and counterfeit the King's Coin? It is as plain
that wicked men, who suffer under this Law, are not awed by it, as that wicked
Men, who are persuaded of the future danger of Immorality, are not awed by
that; and it is as good a Consequence, that the Knowledge of the Penaltys
annexed to human Laws, restrains no Wickedness, as that the persuasion of the
future danger of Wickedness does restrain none. So then by the same Argument
that the Objectors would prove, that the persuasion of the future danger of
Wickedness has no Influence on the Minds of Men, they prove that the Knowledge
of the Penalties annexed to human Laws has no Influence on them; and so there is
an end of all Laws whatsoever. By this Reasoning the Laws of God wrote in the
Hearts of Men, and the Laws of Men wrote in Books, are both made insignificant
and useless, good for nothing but to prove a Defect of Wisdom in their Authors.
But among those who question the future State, some there are who willingly
grant that the Fear of the Civil Magistrates Vengeance, and the fear of future
Misery, have both of them an influence to restrain Men from Sin; but to abstain
from Sin, out of fear of the one or the other, is, they say, servile and base.
To this I reply: It must be granted that the wise Heathens, who had formed
their Virtue on the noblest Principles, the love of God, and the joys of a
Conscience exercised in all manner of well-doing, have justly condemned that
abstinence from Vice, which is enforced merely by a dread of the Rods and Axes
of the Civil Magistrate, as servile and base: for he that keeps his hands from
stealing and striking, his Tongue from slandering and bearing false Witness,
merely that he may avoid the Penalty of human Laws, is not advanced the least
step toward Virtue: he has all the love of Iniquity still about him; and even
of that which he does not actually practice, must be deemed guilty in the
accounts of God and wise Men, because his desires are toward it. No manner of
Praise can be justly ascribed to him, who would transgress the Law, but that he
is afraid to purchase his Transgression at the price of a present severe
Penalty. This Man's Nature is wicked, while his Actions are under restraint.
This drew that saying from St. Paul, The Law (meaning the Law of the Civil
Magistrate) is not made for the Righteous but the Wicked. The Righteous abstain
from Sin because of the baseness thereof, the Wicked only for fear of the
Penalty; the fear of the Penalty keeps their Hands, but not their Hearts from
Mischief, therefore still they are wicked Men.

But there is another kind of Fear, some call it a Fear connate, born with us:
but that my Discourse may not lie exposed to Exceptions, I call it a Fear which
the exercise of Reason in meditating and reflecting begets; a Fear of doing
that which is odious in the sight of God and good Men, destructive of our own
greatest Happiness, and injurious to others. This Fear is a powerful restraint
of Sin, and a good advance in the Ways of Virtue. Human Nature is so framed by
the great God, that every thinking Man not habitually debauched, has an
aversion against all vile Immoralities in his first wicked Sallies; his Face is
covered with Shame, and his Heart shook with fear. In his first wicked Sallies
the Man is fearful for his present Reputation, and fearful of what may be the
fatal future Consequences. Now to be ashamed of being ill thought of, and to be
afraid of deserving a miserable Condition, these are degrees of Virtue; for
thus a Man takes an honest care of his own Interest, every Man owes this honest
care to himself, it is no little fault to neglect it: now the doing of that
which it were a great fault to neglect, cannot but deserve the name of Virtue.

It is true, that Fear which has for its Object only the Sword of the
Magistrate, is servile and base; and such a Man when he has the tempting Hopes
of concealing his breach of the Law, will be sure to break it: but a Fear of
doing that which is odious in the sight of the most holy Being, and of them who
are most like him, is mixed with some regard to Virtue in its very first
Original; a Fear of doing that which is destructive of our own Peace of Mind,
future Hopes, and also injurious to others, is mixed with a wise Care of our
own honest Interests, and a love of just and righteous dealing, and therefore
cannot justly be reproached as servile and base.

To return from this Digression: the next part of the Objection is, That
there is no need of future Hopes or Fears for one thing or other, i. e. to keep
Men innocent, or to make them virtuous. It is true, there were no need of them,
if they had no Influence on Men; but I think I have proved that they have, and
I will now essay to prove one thing more, viz. if a Man believe that after
Death he shall never more exist again, he is not like to become virtuous or
innocent either. The Schemes which some Christians frame to themselves of a
future State, are as extravagant and improbable as the Impostor Mahomet's
Paradise. I am far from thinking such Schemes necessary or useful to virtuous
ends and purposes: but I look upon the Doctrine of a future State, wherein it
will be well with the virtuous, and ill with vicious Men, as the only sure
Foundation, which can firmly bear the whole Superstructure of Morality, and
make it appear to be every Man's interest to be sober and chaste, just and
merciful, charitable and holy, in the worst of Times and most unhappy
Circumstances. It may seem perhaps to some, that my former Discourse
contradicts what I here advance: for I have admitted that the Pleasures of a
good Conscience, the Joys of a Mind reflecting on its own virtuous Disposition
and beneficial Actings, are far more pleasant and joyous than the Joys and
Pleasures of Sense; and that the Torments of a Mind reflecting on its own
criminal Disorders, irregular and unnatural Passions and Affections, are far
more punishing than the Pains of a wounded or diseased Body. Now judging at
first sight this may be mistaken for a good Argument, it is most probable that
the bulk of Mankind should be virtuous, because in this life there is most to be
got by Virtue, most to be lost and suffered by being vicious. But if this
matter be farther looked into and considered as it deserves, it will plainly
appear, that the Man who questions his Existence in a future State, is still
most likely to indulge his sensual Appetite, and prefer such Pleasures before
those of a good Conscience: For we are not Masters of the Power of Reasoning in
our first years; we are born indeed with a docility above all other Creatures
that we know of, with a Capacity of learning to reason; but we learn it by slow
degrees: a long while we live only the life of Sense, and then our Choice is
governed wholly by our sensual Appetites; and we have no regard to any but our
selves, except to them who gratify our Desires: nay, which is worse than all
this, they that have the most careful Education, do not miss the sight of many
vicious Examples. To prefer our selves before all others, and indulge our
sensual Appetites, can hardly fail of growing habitual to us, before we are
Masters of so much Reason, as to consider how much the practice of Virtue in
some denial of our selves and senses, tends to promote the comforts of this
life: and when we come to be able to consider this, and actually do consider
it, it is none of the easiest things imaginable to overcome an habitual contrary
Inclination.

They are far the lesser number who are ever won to wise Consideration and
virtuous Practice; but if the present Advantages of Virtue and Disadvantages of
Vice were all the Argument propounded, it is mighty probable that the sensual
Livers would be harder to be reclaimed than they now are; it is mighty probable
they would with strange accord tell their grave Advisers, they did not know but
Virtue might have many Charms, and Vice some immediate Troubles and imminent
dangers; but they could be content a while with the Pleasures of Sense, bear
the Troubles and venture the Dangers; 'twould be seasonable to be sober and
chaste, when they shall be grown impotent and old; to be good-natured and
obliging, when they shall want power to bear up their high Minds, and make
themselves revered: to be just and charitable when they shall abound. Will the
Opposers of a future State tell these Men, that if they indulge their sensual
Appetites till Nature begins to fail, it will be then out of their power to
shift their Course, and experience the Comforts which largely flow from
well-doing, because their vicious Inclinations will outlive their vicious
Powers? Alas! this will but tempt them to have a greater opinion of their Vice;
for they may reason thus: The thoughts of that thing can never be punishing to
them, from which they cannot withdraw their Affections; therefore except a very
painful Sickness, or a more than ordinary Misfortune befall an immoral Man, I
cannot see how any Argument drawn from the Nature of things in this Life can
possibly reclaim him: but it is possible that such a one may be reclaimed by
the Considerations of a future State; for this is an Argument, which if
adverted to, must needs at least disturb the Joys, the foolish and mischievous
Joys of the most prosperous Libertine. It is granted, that generally speaking,
Virtue is its own Reward, the virtuous Man meets many present Advantages by
being virtuous: but then there are some instances of Virtue, that sometimes
happen to engage Men in unwelcome Sufferings; now what shall persuade these
Persons to practice Virtue in such Circumstances, if they disbelieve the future
State? Again, it is granted, that generally speaking vicious Men are greatly
punished by their own Vices; but then we cannot deny but that with some men
some Vices agree better. Some know how to manage their Vices with a sort of
Discretion, and while they sooth their Senses, take care of their Health and
Fame also. Now what shall persuade these Men to quit those Vices which agree
well enough with them, if they fear no miserable Event in a future State? As I
said before, the Doctrine of a future State is the only sure Foundation which
can firmly bear the whole Superstructure of Morality, and make it appear to be
every Man's greatest Interest to be sober and chaste, just and merciful,
charitable and holy, in the worst of Times and most unhappy Circumstances.

The Author of the Inquiry concerning Virtue having advanced several Notions
(in my opinion) contrary as well to the Interests of Virtue, as to the short
Discourse of mine concerning the future Advantages of it, I purpose now to
write brief Notes on that Book, and hope at one and the same time to correct
his Mistakes, and justify my own Sentiments. By the way, the Inquiry concerning
Virtue is the Tract I have referred to, having formerly had a sight of the MS.
tho yet ignorant of the Author.

P. 3. Religion and Virtue are very rarely considered apart, or distinguished
from one another. I will not dispute this with our Author; but then since he
does consider them apart, I think it an omission that he has not particularly
and distinctly defined them: possibly the Definitions of them may be made out
from the Course of his Reasonings; but sure they ought some where or other to
have bin particularly and plainly set down, especially because he himself
professes, that the Subject he enters upon needs a very particular Explanation
of things, and more than ordinary clearness of Terms.

P. 4. We may do well to consider, what it is that we call Atheism, and what
Virtue, and afterward examine the Consistency of these two together. This is
very incautiously and offensively worded, but I will wait till he openly
declares what he calls Atheism, and what Virtue, before I pass my Censure.

P. 5. If every thing that exists, be according to a good Order, and for the
best, by being in the wisest and just est manner, then is there of necessity no
such thing as real Ill in the Universe, nothing ill with respect to the whole.

It shall be granted that there is nothing ill with respect to the whole, but
still there may be that which is ill, real ill, with respect to some great and
noble part of the whole, and no reproach to the wise and just Disposer of the
whole neither; because that which is real ill with respect to some great and
noble part of the whole, shall after some Revolutions of time, appear to have
contributed to the most wise and just disposal of the whole. Let thus much for
the present be said in general; when our Author speaks more particularly by
instance, I will come up more closely to him, and more particularly speak my
Mind.

P. 5. Whatsoever in the order of the World is called ill, supposes a
possibility in the Nature of the thing, to have bin otherwise contrived, or
ordered by some Wisdom or other. The whole might for all that we know have bin
otherwise contrived and ordered than it is, but we do not know how it could
have bin contrived and ordered better; nay indeed we do not know how the whole
is contrived and ordered, our Knowledge extends but to some parts of the whole,
and sees not through them neither: but that which I admit to be real ill, with
respect to some parts of the whole, being only so for a time, and with respect
to some parts only, is not real ill with respect to the whole.

P. 5. If the order of all things be such that nothing can be thought of or
imagined more wise, perfect, and just, then it is impossible but that there
must be Wisdom, Understanding and Design in the whole. I grant the Order of all
things with respect to the whole, to be most wise, perfect, and just; in the
whole there is Wisdom, Understanding and Design, and that in the perfectest and
highest manner and degree. But then from hence I argue thus: If there be
perfect Wisdom, Design, and Understanding in the whole, then there must be a
most wise, designing, and understanding Being, in which perfect Wisdom, Design,
and Understanding exists. Our Author's Words seem to incline to that old Pagan
Doctrine, that the Whole is God; that the whole System of Nature is the only
wise, understanding, and designing Being, which to me is perfect Nonsense: for,
the Wisdom, Understanding, and Design which our Author speaks of, as existing
in the whole, can be nothing but the Congruity and mutual Serviceableness of
the Parts; but the whole, the whole System of Nature cannot be properly said to
be the cause of the Congruity and mutual Serviceableness of the Parts which
compose the whole.

P. 6. If there be any thing ill in the Universe from Design, then that which
is the Cause of, or which disposes all things, is no one good designing
Principle. Tho there be nothing ill in the Universe, with respect to the
Universe, from design; yet there may be something temporarily ill in the Parts,
which after some Revolutions of time shall appear to have contributed to the
Perfection of the Universe; and therefore that Being from whom the Design came,
temporarily ill with respect to some part, may nevertheless be one good
designing Principle or Mind. I will give instance here, tho our Author speaks
only in general. If we consider only that part of the Universe which Mankind
makes, and that short time which Men live, it is ill, real ill, that the Man
who does good should suffer evil, and that the Man who does evil should not
suffer proportionably to the evil which he does: but if we consider this with
respect to that State which probably shall be hereafter, with respect to the
Advantages which the former shall then probably reap, and the loss which the
other shall then probably incur, then there appears no such thing as real Ill
in the Universe.

P. 7. Whatsoever is superior in any degree over the World, or that rules in
Nature with Discernment and a Mind, is that which we call God. I do not approve
of our Author's definition of God; I would rather, keeping as near to his
Phrase as I can, define thus: Whatsoever does exist, having supreme Power over
us and all things else, is that which we call God. Pagan Philosophers, the most
of them, as well as the Vulgar, paid religious Worship to many supposed
powerful inferior Gods; but most of the Vulgar, and all the Philosophers
almost to a Man, acknowledged one single supreme intelligent Being; for proof
of this I refer to Dr. Cudworth's Intellectual System.

P. 8. To believe no one supreme good designing Principle or Mind, but several,
is to be a Polytheist. This was not well considered by our Author: for if
nothing makes a Man a Polytheist, but to believe no one supreme good designing
Principle or Mind, but several, then there never was a Polytheist in the World.
He that understands the sense of the word Supreme, cannot but perceive, that it
is impossible there should be more than one such. The old Polytheists believed
and worshipped many superior Powers, but they nor did nor could imagine more
than one Supreme.

Sect. 2. p. 12. There is in every Creature a certain Interest or Good, which
is an end in that Creature; and to which end, if any thing either of his
Appetites, Passions, or Affections be not conducing, but the contrary; this is
ill to him, and in this manner he is ill, with respect to himself, as he is
said to be ill also with respect to others, when any such Appetites or Passions
make him injurious to them. Questionless the chief Good of every Creature, is
the chief End of every Creature; the End which he ought, and which he is
naturally disposed to pursue; and which when he does not pursue, his natural
Constitution is vitiated. To apply this to the rational Creature: If we allow
Free Will to Man (which I suppose our Author does, because else it is Nonsense
to talk of Virtue and Vice) then that Man is a good Man, and acts well and
wisely, who imploys his Thoughts, and directs his Practice for the attainment
of his own chief good. Farther, such is the Constitution and Frame of Man, and
such his chief End or Good, that his pursuing the same can never make him
injurious to other Men; but on the contrary, his pursuing his own chief End or
Good, tends very much to the promoting the chief End or Good of his Brethren.
What our Author discourses concerning the Animal System and Animal Nature,
whether it be accurate and exact, I shall not at present concern my self; but
the distinction I admit, and thus much I grant him, that no part of the
Universe is of it self complete, but every part has a relation to the whole,
whereof it is a part; and that there is no part but contributes to the
Perfection of the whole, tho considered with less general Respects, it may be
for a time ill to some other part, and also to it self.

P. 17. Nor do we say a Man is a good Man, when his Hands are tied, which
hinders him from doing the harm that he has a mind to do, or (which is near the
same) when he abstains from executing his ill Purpose, through a Fear of some
impending Punishment, or through an Allurement of some private Pleasure or
Advantage, which draws him from his ill Intention. Our Author here is making
his way to the main purpose of his Book, which being the introducing of a
Doctrine that I take to be not only erroneous, but also discouraging to Virtue
and destructive to Society, I shall therefore watch his Approaches, and make my
Remarks upon his specious artful Insinuations. To speak exactly, he that nor
does nor means harm, ought to be denominated innocent; and only he that does or
is ready to do good, virtuous. But by our Author's Favor, not to be able to do
the harm which one has a mind to do, and to abstain from executing an ill
purpose through fear of some impending Punishment, or through allurement of some
private Pleasure or Advantage, is not the same, nor near the same thing: for in
the one case, the ill-minded Man is wholly governed by his irregular Passions
and Affections, and restrained only by Force exterior from the evil Act; but in
the other he makes some use of his Reason, and by that use which he makes of
his Reason (tho not the best which might be made) he abstains from the evil Act.

I will grant our Author that the Man who abstains from executing his evil
purpose, only through fear of impending Punishment, or through allurement of some
private Pleasure or Advantage (meaning by Punishment, the Punishment which
human Laws threaten to evil Actions, and by Pleasure or Advantage, sensual
Pleasure and secular Advantage) has not well considered things, nor exercised
his Reason so far, as to form those true Notions in his mind which are
requisite to set a value upon his abstinence from evil; nor would I call such a
Man innocent. But then there are other Fears, and other Hopes to which Men may
owe their abstinence from some Evils, and no disparagement to their Innocence
neither: For instance, I presume it were an injurious evil thing, for a
Physician to try an Experiment upon a poor Patient, without the Knowledge and
Consent of his Patient, merely to improve his own Knowledge; but this a
Physician may have many Opportunities of doing, and that with all imaginable
safety to himself, so that not so much as his Skill shall be called in
question, tho the Experiment fails, and the Patient miscarries; for so Patients
every day do under the ablest Physicians, proceeding by common Methods: and yet
a Physician that has no fears from without to restrain him from trying an
Experiment, may be restrained by the fears of doing a base thing, by the fears
of that Uneasiness which his considering Mind, conscious to the evil Deed, may
create him: and whenever such Fears keep a Man free from the evil Act, his
Abstinence from it is praiseworthy, and he is of right to be deemed innocent.
Upon the same score, a due regard had to the Pleasures of a good Conscience,
has a great Influence to keep a Man, in such like Circumstances placed,
innocent, and does not depretiate the Innocence which it preserves. Our Author
should not talk in general of Punishments and Advantages, the Objects of our
Hopes and Fears, without specifying what kind of Punishments and Advantages he
means, when he lays down such and such Propositions.

I am of the mind, that when we act rationally, we are always influenced by
some one or other Hope or Fear: Indeed a Man may arrive at a habit of well or
ill-doing, and then not advert to the special Motive in every particular Act;
but all momentous Actions, and the Original of the good or ill Habit proceeds
from some Hope or Fear. What signifies the Decor facti so much talked of, the
comeliness and fitness of the Action called virtuous, but the advantageousness
thereof to one's Self, Country, Neighborhood, near Relation, Friend,
Acquaintance? From hence the Action has its Comeliness and Fitness, from hence
it is denominated virtuous; and he that does it, does it with this prospect.
What I would conclude hence is, That Hope and Fear, which are the Springs of
all Action, render an Action good or ill, according to the Nature of that thing
which is the Object of our Hope and Fear.

But our Author seems to lay a stress upon that distinguishing Epithet private,
private Pleasure or Advantage, which otherwhere he calls private Good,
Self-good; but in this matter he does not deal distinctly enough neither: for I
will grant him, that there are some kind of private Pleasure or Advantage,
private Good, Self-good, such as Profit, Pleasure, Honor, all secular
Satisfactions, which if they are the chief Designs and Purposes of the Agent,
they depreciate that Action which is really advantageous to the Public, and
perhaps to the Doer also, farther than he might hope; but a regard had to the
private chief Good of every Man, is that which sets the high value upon his
Actions, and gives them that Excellence, because of which they may fitly be
called virtuous. To speak my sense in every thing as plain as I can: A Man's
chief good I allow to consist in just and equal Affections, whereby he is
disposed to take a wise care of his Health, a duly proportioned regard of his
secular Interests, and to employ a constant study and labor to do good to all
Mankind, as far as his Abilities can reach, and in the order as this or that
Society or Person most reasonably calls for a prior regard. These just and
equal Affections create to a Man greater Happiness than can accrue to him from
secular Satisfactions. Now if the Mind of man shall exist again (as we think it
most probable, and mean to give our Reasons) it shall exist with these just and
equal Affections, in beneficent degrees still improving, more useful to others,
and more happy in it self (for even in this Life as a good Man increases in his
good Affections, so his Fervor and his Joys daily advance) A regard had to
this Hope is proper to regulate our Judgment and Affections, and dispose us to
Virtue more powerfully than the Consideration of the Happiness which Virtue
creates to us in this Life. Now no Man's chief private Good can be separated
from the Good of others, tho his secular private Good may: whatsoever is of
honest advantage to one's Acquaintance, Friend, Relation, Neighborhood,
Country, Mankind in general, has a tendency to one's own chief Advantage, and
many times to some inferior Advantages of one's own also; but no Man could at
all endeavor the advantage of others, if it tended to his own greatest loss.
There is implanted in Mankind a strong Principle of Self-love prior to all kind
respect toward others: we cannot but love our own honest secular Interest,
before the honest secular Interest of another Man; our private Self-good
future, more ardently than the private Self-good future of another Man. We do
ill only when we prefer a small secular Interest of our own before a weighty
Interest of another, whose condition is sad and piteable, or before a weighty
certain Interest of the Public, or before a probability that we may happen to
have in our hands of promoting the Interests of Virtue. And this I think is
speaking something more distinctly than our Author has done, and more according
to verity.

I said I would assign my Reasons why I thought it most probable that the Mind
of Man should exist again after Death, (at what time, as to me is most
probable, his regular or irregular Affections shall create his Happiness or
Misery) I will not defer the making good that promise; only let it be
considered it is high Probability, not sensible Demonstration that I pretend to,
tho I have a Temptation to pretend even to that, which Temptation I have from
the Reasoning of that noble Philosopher Mr. Lock, I quote it in the words of
Mr. Wynn's Abridgment, p. 200. The Idea of a Supreme Being, infinite in Power,
Goodness and Wisdom, whose Workmanship we are, and on whom we depend, and the
Idea of our selves as understanding rational Creatures, would, I suppose, if
duly considered, afford such Foundations of our Duty and Rules of Action, as
might place Morality among the Sciences capable of Demonstration; wherein I
doubt not but from Principles as incontestable as those of the Mathematics, by
necessary Consequences, the measure of right and wrong might be made out to any
one, that will apply himself with the same Indifferency and Attention to the
one, as he does to the other of these Sciences. But of what I have to say let
the Reader judge.

I will use the word Mind or Man promiscuously; for it is the reasoning
Principle which we call Mind, that does distinguish, and constitute us what we
are.

If in the Universe every thing is according to a good Order, and the most
agreeable to a general Interest that is possible, so that nothing could have bin
contrived more wisely, and with more advantage to the general interest of
Beings, or of the Universe (which our Author seems to admit, and affirms to be
perfect Theism, p. 7.) then Man or human Mind must exist again after this life
ended: for, that order of things in which Man's future Existence is not
supposed, is not the best order which we can imagine; but we have the Idea in
our Minds of a juster and wiser Contrivance. In defense of the Doctrine which I
now impugn, some have bin pleased to say, that every Sin meets with adequate
Punishment or Pain in this Life, and every good Deed with adequate Reward or
Advantage. Were this true, I must confess I could not pretend that any thing is
amiss in that order of things, in which Man's future Existence is not supposed.
But I hope to make the contrary appear to an impartial deliberate Considerer.
There are some Sins, which, as it often happens, do not meet with Punishment,
or Pain adequate in this Life; and the most difficult Instances of Virtue,
which ever and anon call for our Practice, do not create present Joys equal to
the Labors and Dangers thereof.

I do not expect to carry my point by my bare Assertion; nor do I allow any
thing to the Authority of my Adversaries, however in Learning my Superiors:
therefore I will offer Instance, and reason the matter with them as well as I
can. What a World of barbarous Injuries has a certain mighty Potentate caused
to be committed for the enlargement of his Dominions, and the increase of his
Glory? What wondrous Successes has he sometimes cunningly bought, sometimes
fraudulently surpised, and sometimes by over-powering numbers forced? With
what odious Insolence has he treated not only independent States and
Commonwealths, but also crowned Heads, in point of due Honor his Equals? How
has he slighted his holy Father, and made a mere Property of the Head, as they
call him, of the Catholic Church? How has he triumphed in all these
Iniquities, bribing blasphemous Panegyricks, and monumental proud Inscriptions
(the wit of hungry Priests, expense of servile Courtiers) to his immortal
Manship? He has bin for a long time flattered, if not beloved, by crouching
Slaves and conquered Nations, and feared by States inferior in their numbers,
or unequal through their own Divisions far and wide, which are the two things the
most agreeable to an ambitious Soul. He has never wanted Women witty, fair, and
easy to excite and answer his Lust; whatever his Appetite has coveted, or his
Health needed for its support, has bin ready for him upon all occasions. But
where is the adequate Punishment or Pain all this while? No such thing has as
yet befallen him; not but that he has met with Crosses and Disappointments in
his well-laid ill Designs, which may have given him an hour's vexation in his
Closet, but no long disquiet: for he never was long without taking new Measures
to retrieve the old Game, and those new Measures raised new Hopes, and those
new Hopes brought not more uneasiness than an ordinary Patience might well
enough undergo. But (it may be said) he has bin often compelled to re-deliver
his Rapine. Indeed much of this is true, and it could not but sit heavy on a
great Heart; but then he never re-deliver'd the whole, and by redelivering but
part, he gained something of a specious Title to what he retained: and then too
he assumed to himself the Glory of that Peace which himself most wanted, and
never condescended (as he loves to speak) to a Peace, but to get new Breath,
and divide his united Enemies; one point of which he was always sure of, and
seldom missed the other. Now all this while where is the adequate Punishment?
Hitherto all the Misfortunes he has met, have bin no more painful and
punishing, than just to give a better relish to his tyrannick Pride and
successful Depredations; if there be one single Sin of his that has bin
adequately punished, it must be his -- But I will not speak of lawless Love or
-- for some Men, beside that they count it no Sin, prefer the Pleasure to the
Pain. But it may be by way of Objection replied to me, Mark the end of this
Man, conclude not that he shall not, because he has not as yet, paid the price
of his Crimes. Well! I cannot promise my self to live so long as to mark his
end, but I will suppose it as much as can be to the disadvantage of my Cause,
tho no one can presume, but that it may be so honorable and so easy, as still
to mend my Argument. Suppose then that his Armies on all sides shall be
repulsed and beaten, his Asses grow weary of their Burden, and sick of their
Driver; his Domestics that eat of his Bread, forsake him: suppose that in the
midst of his distress, wandering, despised, and hated, no one shall love him so
well, or hate him so passionately, as to rid him of his wretched Life; but that
he must be beholden to his own right hand, or to the anguish of his disordered
Mind: who would call this adequate Pain or Punishment, for millions of Murders,
and remorseless Villainies; fruitful Countries laid waste, Temples thrown down,
and Sepulchers dug up; the bold breach of Faith sworn, all manner of Laws
and Rights, for a long Course of early, young, and of vigorous manly years,
insulted: does all this deserve no more than that a heavy Misfortune fall upon
the guilty Wretch in his old and decaying Age? I wonder how any Man can pretend
that this would be adequate Punishment, and yet it is a hundred to one but the
mighty Sinner goes off the Stage suffering little or nothing of all this.

It were not hard to give numerous Instances of vile Men, that have revell'd
long in all abominable, and cruel Lewdness and Injustice; who notwithstanding
have died without notable Misfortune, or tormenting Regret. I have selected one
that possibly has done the most Evil of any name, that is to be met in History,
and hitherto he has come off cheap; and if it appears, tho but in a single
instance, that all Sins are not adequately punished in this Life, I presume it
must follow, That that order of things in which Man's future Existence is not
supposed, is not the best and wisest order that can be imagined.

But farther to evince that all Sins are not adequately punished in this Life,
let it be considered, that many times, Persons whose Crimes are heinous, find
means to escape the Vengeance of the Magistrate, while they who are less
guilty, are very severely dealt with: nay and the former, so it often happens,
go on rejoicing in their Crimes, while the latter venture on evil Actions, not
without great trouble and anxiety of Mind. Now let my Adversaries call what
they will adequate Punishment, I am sure it is not the wisest order of things
imaginable, that the less guilty suffer most, and the most guilty least, or not
at all.

I will dismiss this Argument with the brief mention of an Instance or two from
ancient Story. Caesar was in many a Conspiracy against the Liberty of his
Country; at last he absolutely enslaved it to his own Arbitrary Will, and three
years enjoyed the success of his unrighteous Usurpation: At the end of that
term Brutus and Cassius, etc. dispatched him of a sudden.

If this was adequate Punishment, then subjugating a free People is a light
Injury. Orestes slew his Mother, and was all his lifetime troubled in
Conscience for it; suppose this now was adequate Punishment: But Nero slew his
Mother, by whose means he got the Empire, and never was troubled for the
matter: He dispatched also his Wife Octavia, and his Master Seneca; he spared
no Person that gave him offense: his end indeed was tragical, but it was sudden
and quick, no way adequate to his horrid Life.

I presume I have now made it appear to an impartial equal Considerer, that
there are some Sins, which (as it often happens) do not meet with Punishment,
or Pain adequate in this Life: I hope to make it appear as plainly, that the
most difficult Instances of Virtue, which ever and anon call for our Practice,
do not create present Joys equal to the Labors and Dangers thereof. Generally
speaking, such is the nature of Virtue, that it is fitted not only to promote
the good. (as our Author phrases it) of the private System, but also of the
public. Virtue naturally tends to the benefit of every particular Man, and
also of all Mankind united in Societies. Temperance conduces to the health of
the temperate Man, to the health of his Body, and to the health of his Mind
(from the health of both which arises the greatest good which he is capable of
at present) and also to the enrichment of the Public; for, the less is
consumed at home of any thing serviceable to Life, the more remains to be
exported abroad by way of Trade* Justice and Charity are immediately, visibly
beneficial to Society; and they purchase to the just and charitable Person, not
only the agreeable Comforts of a good Reputation, but great measures of Security
to be treated with Justice again, and reasonable hopes to find a return of
Charity in time of need. Now such being the nature of Virtue, so proportioned
and fitted to all the honest Desires and nobler Ends of Mankind in this state,
it would become a wise Man in some cases to practice it, even tho he were sure
there were no Reward, nothing to be got by it hereafter: but then there are
other cases in which Virtue (tho always serviceable to Society) may
accidentally happen to be unserviceable to a private Man, and wholly unable to
create him present Joys equal to the Labors and Dangers thereof. Nay, there
are cases, in which some Virtues, aiming at the Service of the Public, may
become effectual to the utter ruin of a Man's Fortunes, Friends, Health, Life.

Now if it is ever odds against a Man, that his Virtue shall not be successful
to the Public according to his desire, but on the contrary, prove an occasion
of ruin to his Fortunes, Family, Friends, Health, Life; how the Reflection on
his Virtue can create him Joy greater, or but equal to the Pain which these
Misfortunes will cause, while he believes no future State, I cannot divine.

If it should be objected, that I suppose a Case which ought not to be
supposed; I reply, that this very case has, within our memory, befallen several
worthy Persons in more than one Country, upon their opposing the Arbitrary
Designs of tyrannizing Princes. Their honest Endeavors to preserve their
Country from Poverty by loss of Trade, from Slavery, and its numerous attendant
Mischiefs, have cost several the loss of high Honors, and valuable Profits,
wasted their Estates, reduced their Families to Hardships, broke their Health
in close Prisons, and sometimes put an end to their days by ignominious
Punishments.

There is not one Instance of Virtue more widely beneficial, and more truly
glorious, than a wise and resolute use of all lawful likely means to preserve
to that Society whereof we are Members, the safe and secure enjoyment of their
Trade and Liberties. The satisfaction and pleasure of Mind in laboring this
thing, will not be denied to be as great, if not greater, than that which
proceeds from any other instance of Virtue: but to be (tho accidentally, and by
means of consulting the public Good) the occasion of great Misfortune, not
only to some Dependants, Acquaintance, and Friends, but to Wife and Children
also; to the ruin of ones own Health, and shortning ones days; this, in my
opinion, cannot but make the most virtuously disposed Man, who believes no
future State, very uneasy, and hinder him from relishing the Satisfactions
which otherwise his Virtue might create to him. I do now, only for Argument
sake, suppose a Man, who believes no future State, capable of serving his
Country at the price of these Difficulties and Sufferances; but, that being
supposed, I contend that these* Difficulties and Sufferances cannot be more
painful, than the consciousness of his Virtue can be joyous. And methinks this
may be made out even to a full and fair Demonstration. Unexpected
Disappointments, and Losses, the Falsness of an entrusted Servant, the
Ingratitude of an obliged Friend, want of many Necessaries, and undeserved
Reproach, these are heavy Weights, and no little power have they to disorder
the thoughts of the Mind; it must yet more sensibly touch a Man (especially
believing no future State) if his Concern and Labor to serve his Country
brings ruin on the Wife of his Bosom, and his Children, the pledges of their
mutual Love; and I question very much, whether ever any Man, who believes no
future State, did despise (the melancholy Prospect being before him) his dear
Wife and Children, and undauntedly practice the dangerous Virtue: but a Prison
has still a more afflicting Influence on the Mind of a welldispos'd Man; and by
that time Restraint and barbarous Usage has broke his Health, his Spirits must
fail, his Mind must needs languish together with his Body: and when a Man is in
continual Pain, tho he does not utterly lose the consciousness of his
Integrity, yet what comfort can he take in it, when he sees that it has undone,
not only his dearest Relatives, but himself also; and considers that himself
undone is dying, dying for ever, and never like to be the better for his Virtue
hereafter? I think our Preachers do not exact the words of Paul literally, when
he wished that Curse on himself for the sake of his Brethren the Jews: and in
my Judgment, as no Man can wish to be miserable hereafter, that others may be
happy hereafter; so no Man who looks upon this Life as the end of all things to
him, can be content to be miserable in this Life, in hopes to make others happy
in this Life. If any Adversary shall oppose his denial to what I have here
determined, then he must be forced to assert, that Man is a Creature in whose
Composition there is no such thing as Self-love, or Reason; but this is
extremely absurd, and therefore my Determination must be allowed. It may be
easily understood, how it is possible for a Man to give up all that is near and
dear to him, nay his very Life, for the Service of his Country, or for the sake
of a Friend more serviceable to his Country than himself, if he believes that
he shall exist again after Death, and then either receive a Recompense of
Reward, or find it in his increasing virtuous Affections: but to sacrifice
himself and his nearest and dearest Relations for the Service of his Country,
when he believes that both he himself, and they whom he sacrifices, shall exist
no more, is not possible to be done, in my judgment, by any but a humorous Man,
whose Fancy is overheated with metaphysical lofty unaccountable Extravagancies.
I remember, I confess, that Tully, in his Book of Offices, says, that to
contemn Life for the Interest of the Public, magni and excelsi animi est, is
the part of a great and gallant Mind: And I am told by them that have read
Tully with more care and heedful Observation than I pretend to, that Tully
never made that Notion of a future State an Argument to enforce the Practice of
Virtue: If so, then I may gather that Tully did not give any credit to that
Notion; and then it will follow, that his Doctrine, viz. To contemn Life for
the Interest of the Public, is the part of a great and gallant Mind, is
contrary to mine: but it is Reason I require, and not Authority. Yet I do not
grant that Tully never made the Notion of a future State an Argument to Virtue.
I will not forget to examine that Assertion before I finish these Papers. I am
much told also by some, who differ with me in these Speculations, as much as
they agree with me in Friendship, that it is most just, fitting, reasonable,
the Public should be preferred before the Private. But I desire these my
Friends to tell me, if they can give any reason why the Public should be
preferred before the Private, besides this which I now give, viz. Every private
Member of the Society has agreed to do it, and has an Interest in doing it. If
they can give me no other reason, which I am persuaded they cannot, then I
note, that when a private good Man has no Interest in the Public, he has no
obligation to the Public. I word it, that when a private good Man has, etc.
for I grant that a justly condemned Traitor, who has no longer an interest in
the Public, is yet in Conscience bound quietly to suffer the Penalty of the
Law by him broken; and not only so, but because he expressly or tacitly
consented to the Law by which he dies, he ought for the common good to discover
his traitorous Accomplices. I restrain my note to a good Man, whose Virtue,
through the Iniquity of the times, and the unrighteous Administration of the
Executive Power, might, by accident, fatally endanger him. Such a Man is not
bound to strive against the stream for his Country's good, to his own (in all
probability) utter ruin. I take this to be manifest, tho it is (before I was
aware) something more than the Position which I undertook to make good, obliged
me to meddle with; for I was only to prove, that there would be more Pain than
Pleasure in such a virtuous Labor, supposing it possible to be attempted, and
I think I have proved it: and if there be more Pain than Pleasure in some
virtuous Actions, then there is an end of the Excellence of those virtuous
Actions; then they have not that Worth, as that they should be loved for their
own sakes. Thus upon the supposition of no future State, it appears that it is
not reasonable to practice Virtue, whenever it is likely to rob us of our
Fortunes, Fame, Health, or Life: and on the contrary, if it be reasonable to
practice Virtue in such difficult cases, then it must be so on this ground,
because it is very probable that we shall exist again in a future State. Thus
have I expatiated upon one Reason why I think it most probable that the Mind of
Man shall exist again after Death.

I shall now assign another, and treat of it more succinctly, because what I
have insisted on already makes way for it, and helps to illustrate it.

That Belief, which is generally necessary for the tolerable well-being of the
human System, must needs be a Belief of things certainly true: and on the
contrary, that Belief which is apparently destructive of the tolerable
well-being of the human System, must needs be a Belief of things absolutely
false. But the belief of a future State, wherein the Virtuous shall be happy,
the Vicious unhappy, is generally necessary for the tolerable well-being of the
human System, and therefore it is a Belief of what must needs be true; and the
Belief, that after this Life ended Men shall exist no more, is apparently
destructive of the tolerable well-being of the human System, and therefore it
is a Belief of what must needs be false. To do our Author Justice, he does
grant, p. 63, 64. that the Belief of future Reward and Punishment is capable of
raising Men to Virtue, and of saving them from falling into a licentious and
vicious Practice; tho, I know not how, p. 68. he says something in abatement,
viz. the doing any thing on the consideration and foresight merely of Reward,
is no Virtue; nor can the endeavor after Virtue, the setting about to make
one's self virtuous on that score, be any Virtue. I look upon our Author to be
a Man of Virtue and Probity, but I am fully satisfied, that this latter Passage
does not at all serve the Cause of Virtue, nor the former so much as I could
wish: for I reckon, that I have proved, that the taking prudent care of a Man's
private Interest must needs be first in his thoughts, and is truly virtuous;
not to injure others, is Innocence; to do them all good, is the Perfection of
Virtue. I am pleased that our Author grants, that the belief of future Reward
and Punishment is capable of raising Men to Virtue; but I contend farther, and
now hope to make it appear, that the belief of a future State, wherein the
Virtuous shall be happy, the Vicious unhappy, is generally necessary for the
tolerable well-being of the human System. It is to this Belief we owe, that
those who are virtuous in difficult times and instances (how few or how many
soever they are) do not run with a multitude to do evil. It is to this Belief
we owe, that such Men do not sit still satisfied with their particular
unmolested Condition; but generously venture all their Secular Interests to
maintain the Cause of Virtue, to promote the Practice of moral Goodness, and to
redeem the Liberty and Welfare of their Country: And if there were not a
considerable number of these in all, as yet free Kingdoms, and Commonwealths,
long e're this there had been no such thing as Commonwealth or Kingdom free:
and if there were not some such as these in Kingdoms and Commonwealths
enslaved, the Administration there would be yet more tyrannic and mischievous
than it is; the People in those Commonwealths and Kingdoms much more abused and
wasted than they are. It is to this Belief we owe the generous Offices of
Humanity, of Love, and charitable Supports, which even in our late times we
have known dealt to many innocent Persons, when they were miserably harassed by
a Power that overbore the Law to ruin them. It is to this Belief we owe much,
perhaps the greatest part of the Honesty which is in Trade; for tho false
dealing is common, yet honest dealing is not so hard to be found neither as
some would persuade us, who both vilify Human Nature, and deny the future
State. By the way, it is not well done of them denying the future State, at one
time to speak of noble virtuous Tempers, that are such without regard to what
may be hereafter, at another time to insinuate, that all Men would be Rogues
and Knaves had they the secure opportunity, and agreeable temptation. I return.
Honest dealing, infrequent as it is, would be yet more infrequent, if some Men
were not influenced by future Hopes and Fears. Who would not use false Arts and
ways in Trade, at least so long till he had provided a Competence suitable to
his Desires, for himself and Family, if he believed that Death was the end of
all things? Indeed Reputation on the one hand, and the danger of Penal Laws on
the other, may prevent much fraud; but I now speak only of that Fraud which
might be secretly and securely practiced. No secure Opportunities of unjust
Gain would ever be let slip, by a Man of a Fortune but moderate, or low, if he
had no prospect of being the better for his Virtue hereafter: For tho we are
naturally disposed to help our Kind, yet I think not till we have first
provided what we judge we shall need for our selves. He that fares very hardly,
when he might accommodate himself better by a Fraud, which may chance to ly
both out of the reach of the Law, and out of the danger of discovery, can be
prompted to detest such a tempting Injustice, only by his Persuasion of future
Existence; at what time his patient enduring of Hardships, his Abstinence from
secure lucrous Injustice, his inexpugnable Virtue shall make him inconceiveable
amends. In short, if it were not for this belief of a future Existence, we
should seldom or never have any thing great and good, useful and praiseworthy
said or done: Suspicions, Jealousy, and Diffidence, would increase to such a
height, as to leave no possible room for Friendship, one of the greatest
Pleasures of Life; we should have nothing practiced among Men, but that Honesty
which they did not lose by, or could not avoid, with a little cheap and easy,
cold and cautious Civility thrown in upon occasion. I think I have now made it
appear, that the belief of a future State, wherein the Virtuous shall be happy,
the Vicious unhappy, is generally necessary for the tolerable well-being of the
human System: Now thence I gather, that it is a Belief which must needs be
true; and on the other side, the Belief, that after this Life ended, Men shall
exist no more, being destructive of the tolerable well-being of the human
System, it follows that it is a false Belief: For tho it may often happen in
particular Cases, that the leading a Man into the knowledge, and persuading him
of the truth of a thing, may prove detrimental to him, yet this is but by
accident, through some weakness and indisposition of the Mind, or pravity of the
Temper of the Person, who is persuaded and let into the knowledge of Truth:
Truth in its own nature has no unhappy detrimental Tendency, or to particular
Men, or to Mankind in general. Now the belief of what I have bin discoursing,
is of most wide, is of universal, most useful, and advantageous Influence to
all and every Man; and therefore I conclude, it must needs be a true Belief:
The contrary Belief is of most wide, is of universal, most pernicious, and
destructive Influence to all and every Man; and therefore I conclude, it must
needs be a false Belief. I am strongly persuaded, that hardly any man will dare
to say, that a Persuasion universally pernicious and destructive, may possibly
prove true; that a Belief universally useful and advantageous, may possibly
prove false: but I am sure our Author cannot say it, who, in the beginning of
his Book, affirms that all things in the Universe are according to a good
order, and that nothing could have bin contrived more wisely, with more
Advantage to the general Interest of Beings: for it is no good Order, but
diametrically contrary to the general Interest of Rational Beings, that Truth
should be, of its own nature, mischievous; Falsehood, of its own nature, useful
and advantageous. As I once said before, I look upon our Author as a Man of
Virtue and Probity; he grants much of what I have said concerning the
usefulness of the Belief abovementioned, and of the mischievousness of the
contrary: For by the belief of future Advantages to Virtue, he says, p. 75.
That a Man may keep himself virtuous, where an Atheist cannot. I advance
farther, and infer, from the Concession, the truth of that Belief, which is
able to keep a Man virtuous, where the Atheistical Belief cannot. And when any
Person shall show me the weakness of my Inference, I promise to revoke it. In
the mean time I cannot but wonder at what has fallen from our Author's Pen, p.
51. Religion (according to the kind it may be of) is capable of doing great
good, or great harm, and Atheism not any positive good or harm. I grant the
former part of this Assertion, Religion (according to the kind it may be of) is
capable of doing great good or great harm: But then I contend, that Atheism is
incapable of doing positive good, and capable of doing nothing but positive
harm. The Reason which our Author brings for his offensive Doctrine, is, For
however it (Atheism) may be indirectly an occasion of Men's losing a good and
sufficient sense of Right and Wrong; yet it will not, as Atheism merely, be the
occasion of setting up false Right and Wrong, which only fantastical Reasoning,
ill Custom, or ill Religion can do. To this I reply, that Atheism, as Atheism
merely, tho it tends not to any Religion at all, yet it does lead Men to ill
Custom, and fantastical Reasoning, which our Author admits likely to be the
occasion of setting up false Right and Wrong, and consequently of doing no
positive good, but much positive harm: For if the Atheist is capable of doing
any positive good, it must be only then, when his Circumstances in the World
are easy, and to his Hearts content; but at every other time, if he has an
inviting great probability of Success and Secrecy, he cannot restrain himself
from making his Circumstances easy, and to his Hearts content, by doing
positive harm. This I have proved in what went before; I only now add, that I
am strongly of the opinion, that were our Author to choose a Servant with whom
he must entrust a considerable Stewardship in the East or West Indies, where he
had no means narrowly to inspect his Management, or punish his Mismanagement,
he would rather choose a Servant of good Reputation in the belief of a future
State, than a Servant of good Reputation in the Atheistick Belief.

P. 53. It is possible for a Creature capable of using Reflection, to have a
liking or dislike of moral Actions, and consequently a sense of Right and
Wrong, before such time as he may have any Notion or Sense of God at all: this
is what will hardly be questioned.

By several Passages which follow, I cannot but allow, that our Author has no
ill meaning in this; but then it has so untoward an Air, and is liable to so
obvious and unhappy Misconstruction, that I think fit to descant upon it; but
this I shall do with all candor.

That a Creature capable of using Reflection, may have a Dislike of moral
Actions, before he has any Notion or Sense of God at all; thus much of the
Remark is by me wholly granted to our Author: For, nothing can contribute more
to a Dislike of moral Actions, than the utter want of all Notion or Sense of
God. But what degree of liking of moral Actions, what measure of sense
concerning right and wrong, a Creature capable of using Reflection may have,
before he has any Notion or Sense of God at all, ought to be carefully examined
and distinctly weighed, before any deduction be made or intimated from such a
Remark as this.

With our Author's leave thus much I will presume to determine and make good,
viz. It will not only be questioned, but absolutely denied by the generality of
thinking Men, that a Creature capable of using Reflection, can have so just a
liking of moral Actions, and so true a sense of Right and Wrong, before he has
the notion and sense of God, as he ought to have, and cannot but have, using
Reflection, when he has once learned the Notion, and becomes affected with the
sense of a God.

Indeed moral Actions are altogether agreeable to a rational Nature, or (as our
Author phrases it) to a Creature using Reflection: but the Exercise of his
Reason, or his using Reflection will lead him to the Notion of a God, and that
Notion will make his Sense of right or wrong more correct, and give it a larger
Scope, give it a wider field to exercise it self in; that Notion heedfully
adverted to, will raise his liking of moral Actions far above what it could
arrive at without it. And this our Author seems to grant, p. 59. If there be a
Being conceived All-intelligent and All-seeing, of infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, the Belief of such a Being must of necessity be highly effectual to
the creating or farthering of good Affections, and to the removing of contrary
ones, by rendering every thing that is of Virtue more lovely, splendid, and
attractive; and every thing that is of Vice, more ignominious and deformed. But
without the Notion of a Being All-intelligent, All-seeing, of infinite Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, the rational or reflecting Creature's liking of moral
Actions, will show it self only in some cheap and easy Instances, and be very
apt to be diverted or abated by the secular Interest of the private System. In
few and plain words, this matter may be thus sum'd up: A Man that has no Notion
nor Sense of a God may possibly like and practice moral Actions, when he has no
beloved Lust to gratify, nor dreaded Danger to avoid, the one of which may be
easily gratified, and the other securely avoided by Actions immoral: but when
he has a beloved Lust to gratify, which may be easily gratified, or a dreaded
Danger to avoid, which may be securely avoided, and no Notion nor Sense of God
at all to influence him, he will at that time be sure to gratify his Lust, and
do what he can to avoid his danger, tho the means to be used for such ends be
never so immoral: the reason of this is, because in all Creatures, especially
the rational, Self-love is the predominant Principle. A rational Creature who
believes a God, and expects a future Existence, may generously prefer the noble
Interests of Society before Wealth and Health, and even his Life it self, if
the Case so require, because he expects hereafter to find an inconceivable
Advantage in so doing: but there is no Argument in Nature, no Reason, nor
shadow of a Reason to persuade a rational Man who knows nothing of God, and
expects no future Existence, to venture the loss of his Life, or but of his
Estate (without which he cannot provide Necessaries for his Wife and Children)
for the Service of his Country, when the Laws and Liberties thereof are in
danger either from crafty Priests imposing gainful Doctrines for necessary
Faith, or arbitrary Princes dispensing with the Laws which they swore to
maintain.

P. 81. It will appear that one who has not the opinion or belief of an
intelligent Principle, or God, may, tho very difficultly, and at a great
hazard, be capable of Virtue, so as to have an Honesty, a Faith, a Justice,
perhaps of great Note and Worth; may have many generous and good Passions, and
possibly that of love to Virtue for its own sake, as well as for being believed
advantageous.

I am not willing to quit the respect which I have, and think I ought to have
for our Author; yet I cannot but declare that he has here made a very erroneous
and pernicious Conclusion, which neither does appear from the Reasons by him
offered, nor can it be made to appear from any thing which the Wit of Man can
offer: indeed he has cautiously worded his Conclusion, and wisely guarded
himself. He has wisely guarded himself in this Prefatory Induction -- If the
Reasons I have offered be found of any weight. I am glad that he is not
confident of having proved so erroneous and pernicious a Doctrine. He has
worded it very cautiously, viz. in these Phrases and Terms of abatement, may,
tho with great difficulty, and at a great hazard, -- may perhaps, -- may
possibly. But contrary to what he has thus concluded, I have already proved,
and shall now essay farther to confirm it, that one who has not the Opinion or
Belief of an intelligent Principle or God, can by no means be capable of such a
Virtue, as to have an Honesty, a Faith, a Justice of great weight and worth. I
take my rise for what I have now in my thoughts, from a Passage of our Author,
according to him, p. 59. The word God imports no less than a Being
all-intelligent, all-seeing, of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness. The Belief
of such a Being (he says) must of necessity be highly effectual to the creating
or farthering of good Affections, and to the removing of contrary ones, by
rendering every thing that is of Virtue more lovely, splendid and attractive;
and every thing that is of Vice, more ignominious and deformed. Now the
Loveliness of Virtue consists wholly in its Advantageousness, Advantageousness
of one sort or other, or else it is an empty Phrase, mere insignificant Cant.
Such as the Advantageousness of Virtue is, such, and no other, is its
Loveliness: and on the other side, answerable to the Disadvantageousness of
Vice, is its Ignominy and Deformity. By the belief of a Being all-intelligent,
all-seeing, of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, a rational Creature becomes
persuaded of a greater Advantageousness in Virtue, Disadvantageousness in Vice,
than he could possibly be persuaded of without it. The belief of a Being with
the abovementioned Perfections makes Man's future Existence credible; for, I
have already proved that all things are not according to a good order, if Man
shall not exist again. I add now, if Man's future Existence be necessary to
justify God's Wisdom, it is not hard to be conceived how the same is as
necessary to justify his Goodness: For, the worldly Prosperity of free Agents,
who make the worst use of their free Will, and the worldly Adversity of free
Agents, who make right use of it, are as unanswerable Arguments against the
Goodness, as against the Wisdom of God, if free Agents must not exist again. I
need not make words to show, how the Omnipotence, and Omniscience of God join
with his infinite Wisdom and Goodness to ascertain us of our future Existence.
Now if there be a God, who is (as our Author allows the word to signify) a
Being allintelligent, all-seeing, of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness; then
we shall exist again, and after this Life receive Rewards, or (to speak with
them whose nicer Philosophy excepts against that term Rewards) we shall become
inconceivably happy by our Virtue, and unexpressible Losers by our Vice. And
this Persuasion is evidently powerful to engage Men to the practice of the most
difficult Virtue, and to restrain them from the most pleasing, secret, and
secure Vice. Such a Man as this may have, nay, using Reflection, cannot but
have Honesty, Faith, and Justice of the greatest note and worth, cannot but
have many generous and good Passions, not without a love to Virtue for its own
sake: But he that has not the Opinion or Belief of an intelligent Principle or
God, may perhaps be capable of some cheap and easy Virtue, such as suits best
with his natural Temper, and does not much trouble the Condition of his
Affairs; but is certainly incapable of that more noble, and more difficult
Virtue, which threatens ruin to his Fortunes, or an untimely end to his Life.

I determine thus, because there is in every Creature (to use our Author's
Phrase) a certain Interest or Good, which is as an end in that Creature, to
which God or Nature designed him. That certain Interest or Good, to which God
or Nature designed his rational Creature Man, Man is bound in duty to pursue:
to this end, if his Passions and Affections are wisely, primarily directed, it
is his duty, it is that which he ought to do, and for which he ought to be
commended.

If there be any such thing as God, or Virtue, then there must be a future
State: this Consequence I have in some measure already proved, and mean to
confirm it further, but I will take no advantage of it now.

If there be any such thing as a future State, then it is the Duty and Virtue
of a rational Man primarily to direct his Passions and Affections for the
securing his Interest in that State, because his Interest in that State
(supposing such a thing) is immensly more considerable than his Interest in
this: but if there be no future State, then the certain Interest, or Good, or
chief End of Man, is such as his Nature is capable of in this Life; and his
pursuing that is what he ought to do, is his Virtue, or else Virtue is but a
Name, of which no body knows what to make.

If Man's chief Interest, Good, or End be in a future State, then he ought not,
cannot dispense with his Care to purchase that, for the sake of any Interest of
any others. If Man's chief Interest, Good or End, be in this present Life, then
he ought not, cannot dispense with his preferring that before any Interest of
any others; and thence it will undeniably follow, that he is utterly incapable
of practicing any instance of noble and difficult Virtue, which happens to
threaten ruin to his Fortunes, and an untimely end to his Life. But I will
search into this matter yet more nicely, that I may take from my Adversaries
all subtle specious pretense of Reply.

The chief Interest, Good or End of Man in this Life is either corporeal, or
mental; if the Mind be a Principle distinct from Body, then this distinction is
just, and ought to be admitted, and may be thus desin'd, or described: Mental
Interest is the Pleasure which the Mind receives by reflecting on its Virtue;
Corporeal Interest is the Pleasure which the Mind tastes by mediation of the
Senses. If the Mind is not a Principle distinct from Body, then all our
Interest in this Life is only Corporeal, and all Pleasure no other than bodily
Pleasure; and then a Man ought to prefer his bodily Pleasure before any
Interest of any others, because if there be no future Existence, bodily
Pleasure is his chief Interest, Good or End.

But perhaps some Friends of our Author, tho they admit nothing but Body in
Nature, and esteem Thinking, and Arguing to be the effects only of Matter and
Motion, may yet distinguish as I have done, and make the Pleasure which Human
Nature is capable of, twofold; the Pleasure which is tasted by means of the
Senses, and the Pleasure which is tasted by Reflection. Hereupon perhaps they
may say, that the Pleasure which is tasted by Reflection (which they will call
too, the Pleasure of the Mind) is the chief Interest, Good, or End of Man; and
then conclude, that tho the Pleasure of the Mind, which is tasted by
Reflection, cannot but be preferred by a reasonable Man before all other
Considerations whatsoever, that may happen to come in competition with it; yet
Corporeal Pleasure, the Pleasure which is tasted by mediation of the Senses, is
a meaner Interest and End, which a reasonable Man ought not to pursue before
the Interests of Society, tho there be no Life after this. These Gentlemen (and
I think our Author accords with them throout his second Book) determine that
the present mental Satisfaction, which good Men receive by reflecting on their
virtuous Actions, is sufficient to persuade all considering Persons to the
practice of Virtue, tho there be no Life after this. I reply, it may be
sufficient to persuade the most considering Persons in most cases, but in all
cases it is not so. I have given some instances, I am able to give many more,
and shall if that be stood upon; but, thinking it may not by impartial Readers,
I choose to argue closely, and carry on my Reply: That Consideration which is
not sufficient to prompt thinking Persons to Virtue in all cases, does in
effect, if there be no other to be offered, betray the Cause of Virtue; for if
the necessity of Virtue be not in all cases as well as in some, in the most
difficult cases as well as in the most common and easy, provided for, the Cause
of Virtue is as good as given up: For, who shall draw the Line, and measure
Distances, set out the exact Bounds, and nicely determine, that if
Circumstances be so and so discouraging, Dangers so and so pressing, a good Man
need not hazard his Fortunes or his Life, to serve his Friend, the starving
Mobility, or the Liberty and Property of the Freeholders of his Country; but in
all cases one moment less discouraging, less pressing and hazardous, it becomes
him to be resolutely virtuous, honest and good. It Is precarious Impertinence
for any Man to pretend any thing of this nature; for, the reasonableness of
being true to one's Friend, just to all Persons, charitable to the Necessitous,
and bold in the defense of Liberty and Property, is not at all altered by the
different Circumstances of Times, Things or Places, but remains always one and
the same, be they more or less discouraging, pressing and hazardous, without
any alteration, unless that it greatly becomes a virtuous, honest and good Man,
when his Duty happens to be more difficult and dangerous, to exert himself so
much the more. And to do this, he shall never want Motive sufficiently
powerful, if he be throly convinced of the certainty of a future State: but if
he be not, a cheaper, easier Virtue shall content him. Now to prevent an
Objection which I suspect, and to take away all ansa of Cavil, I own, that now
and then an eminent Person may in an odd humor, and in an unthinking heat,
venture on a glorious Action, that not only looks well, but is also highly
useful, and beneficial to the Public, which may cost him his honorable
Station in the Commonwealth, the loss of his Fortunes, and perhaps of his Life,
tho he believes no future State: but I positively affirm, that this can be done
by no Man who disbelieves a future State, when he acts deliberately; and I defy
all my Adversaries round, together with the Author of the Inquiry, and his
Favorers, to assign a Reason sufficient to prompt a deliberate thinking Man to
do it. I have discoursed with some of them, Men of as singular Learning, and of
as acute Parts perhaps as any that now live; and nothing could I ever hear from
them as an Argument for Virtue, the future State not being supposed, but that
Virtue was its own present sufficient Reward, which, as I have shown, holds but
in common cases. I have also shown to how little purpose they affect the use of
that famed saying, Virtue is its own Reward, and to be loved for its own sake.
To love Virtue for its own sake, as the brave Heathen Philosophers used to
speak, and to love God for his own sake, as we now commonly word it, signifies
nothing but to love God without low secular Regards: to love Virtue, when it is
discountenanced, when it is the Enemy of a Man's temporal Ends and
Prosperities; this he only can constantly do who believes a future State. But I
am amazed to hear our Author expose his own Argumentation as he does in the
close of the Passage by me last cited. A Man (says he) who has not the Belief
of a God, may possibly love Virtue for its own sake, as well as for being
believed advantageous.

Can any thing deserve to be loved for its own sake which is not advantageous?
If so, then our Author will incur this gross Absurdity, that a thing may
deserve to be loved for its own sake, which is not at all lovely. Certainly
this is the oddest distinction that ever was coined by a Man of Letters and
good Sense, which every one that reads our Author's Inquiry concerning Virtue,
must grant him to be. If Advantageousness be not that which makes Virtue
deserve to be loved for its own sake, then, for ought I know, Vice may deserve
to be loved for its own sake, in which there is nothing truly advantageous. But
I leave it to our Author's second thoughts, whether he will forgo this
Distinction, or explain it; for my part, I know not what to make of it as it
lies. Just at this moment, a Gentleman, that knows what Subject I am writing
upon, and has seen some of my Papers, is pleased to tell me, that I have
imitated an absurd Practice of the Papists, proving one Doctrine by another
that needs proof. The Papists (says this Gentleman) having a gainful Interest
in the Doctrine of praying to Saints, and thereupon a great inclination to
believe it, did defend the same, when the Protestants objected that the Saints
could not hear Prayers, by this Invention. The Saints understood all things,
viewing them in the mirror of Divinity; or as others are pleased to phrase it,
in speculo Trinitatis, in the Looking-glass of the Trinity: So I having an
inclination to believe a future State, and not being able to demonstrate it by
direct proof, endeavor to make it good by this fetch, There must be a future
State, or there can be no such thing as Virtue. Now by the favor of this
Gentleman, whose singular Learning I highly honor, I shall show that there is
no manner of similitude between the Practice of the Papists in the Instance
before us, and mine in managing the Argument I have attempted. There might be a
similitude perhaps, if he would put it thus: The Papists prove that Saints
ought to be prayed to, because else there is no such thing as a Mirror of the
Divinity, or Looking-glass of the Trinity, wherein all things are visible to
them: And I prove the truth of a future State, because else there is no
necessity of Virtue. But then I desire this Gentleman to consider that both he
and I laugh at the Mirror of the Divinity, or Speculum Trinitatis, as much as
at the Doctrine of praying to Saints; whereas tho he questions the future
State, yet we both admit the necessity of Virtue: therefore if I show that
there is no Argument sufficient to prompt Men to Virtue, and restrain them from
Vice in the most difficult Times and Places, but the Belief of a future State,
I appeal to all impartial Judges, whether I don't gain my point.

One of my Friends, who is, as I am, fully persuaded that we shall exist again
in a more blessed or sad State, according as we frame our Spirits, and demean
our selves in this Life, did once let me know that he had some Meditations in
hand, whereby he thinks he shall demonstrate the Immortality of the Soul: But
what he has farther than such moral Demonstration as I have offered,
Demonstration from the generally received Idea of God, and from the Concessions
of all Men of Sense, who are not such Enemies to Virtue, as in some Cases to
free Mankind from the Obligation; also what he has farther than high
Probabilities from Topics Philosophical, with regard to which Men of Sense are
in Prudence bound to act, I cannot conceive: and to speak ingenuously, I do not
think it agreeable to the infinite Wisdom, which we acknowledge in God, to have
made the Notions of a future State, and the Immortality of the Soul, so clear,
obvious, and certain, as to put them beyond dispute. For where Notions are but
high Probabilities, or such moral Demonstrations as require Thought and Labor
to make out; Attention and quitting all Prejudices before they can be admitted,
there is room for the exercise of Consideration, Prudence, and Industry: But
were all bright Demonstration concerning the Notions of future State, and the
Soul's Immortality, the matter is so vastly, so immensly momentous, that we
should be irresistibly carried to secure our chief Interest, without reasoning
and considering upon it; and then our Happiness would be our Fate, not the
Attainment or Reward of our wise Meditation, and virtuous rational Choices. If
it be agreeable to the infinite Wisdom of God to create a Creature with the
Powers of considering, thinking, and reflecting, and to leave him much in the
hands of his own Free Will, so that he may consider, think, reflect, and act
wisely, or let it alone; then to me it seems necessary, that the Notions of
future State and Immortality of the Soul, should be no clearer, nor more
obvious, nor more certain than they are, i. e. but demonstrably certain upon
the supposition that all Men are obliged to be morally honest in all Times,
Circumstances, and Places; and also but highly probable from Philosophical
Arguments. The Use that I make of this, is, That I hope my Adversaries will not
deny, but that all Men are obliged to be morally honest in all Times, and
Circumstances, and Places; and that it becomes wise Men to consider, think, and
reflect; and that where they are not governed by the greatest Probabilities,
there they are not wise: and if they can give me a cogent Argument, which shall
oblige Men to Virtue, and restrain them from Vice, in all Times, Circumstances,
and Places, a future State not being supposed, I promise to discard it.

Our Author in the 2 d part of his Book professedly proposes to show what
Obligation there is to Virtue, and how any one may have reason to embrace
Virtue, and shun Vice. In this part he ingenuously and appositely to this
Design expatiates upon many useful Notices, which have no small Influence to
persuade to Virtue, and restrain from Vice, but offers at no Reason which comes
up so high; as to persuade Men to the one, and restrain them from the other, in
those difficult Cases which I have stated. Now tho I think that I have
sufficiently secured my Discourse already, from what might be objected out of
this Author (for his 2 d Book has no new Notions in abatement of what I have
advanced concerning a future State) yet I purpose to look into this second
part, that I may not seem knowingly to have overlooked any Obligation to
Virtue, which might perhaps be thought powerful enough to influence considering
Persons in all Times, Circumstances, and Places, without the intervention of a
future State.

P. 83. His Preface, in short, runs thus: To be virtuous, is for a rational
Creature, in the use of good Understanding and Judgment, to have the
disposition and temper of his Mind suitable and agreeing with the good of his
Kind. A rational Creature, whose Affections are suitable and agreeing to the
good of his Kind, has also other Affections toward the private Nature or
Self-system; and in following the first of these, the Creature must often
contradict and go against the latter: it may seem therefore that the pursuing
the common Interest or good of his Kind, is a hindrance to the attainment of
private Good. I do here, and shall abridg, keeping very close to his Phrase,
not in the least varying his Sense. P. 85. Affections to the good of the
Public do often expose to Hardships and Hazards, by overruling their
Opposites, the Self-preservative Passions, and by necessitating the Creature to
Self-denial, and, as it were, Self-desertion. Well! the Truth of this we
subscribe to, but now we want to know what that is, setting aside the Notion of
a future State, which has a force of sound Reason powerful enough to persuade
considering Men to cherish their good Affections to the Public, when the doing
so exposes them to Hardships and Hazards, and forces them to deny themselves,
and quit their self-preservative Passions (which, by the way, is Self-desertion
with a witness, Self-desertion, without the abatement in that Phrase, As it
were.)

To solve this Difficulty, after some Amusements, our Author addresses himself
thus: P. 90, 91. The natural Affections toward the private System, or Self,
may be in a too great, and therefore vicious degree; they may also be too weak,
in a degree too low and vicious that way. He makes this out by several
Instances; but I need not trouble my self with his Instances, for I admit the
Notion: Natural Affections to the private or Self-system, may be too strong, or
too weak, and then are vicious. This being laid down, I was expecting how he
would manage it, in proof of this difficult Proposition which lies upon his
hands, viz. That a Man was obliged to cherish good Affections toward the
Public, when the doing so would expose him to Hardships and Hazards, force him
to deny himself, and quit his self-preservative Passions; but instead of this,
all that our Author proposes to himself to prove, is, p. 101. That to have
excellent Affections (such as have bin mentioned, just Affections both to
public and private) is to have the chief enjoyment of life. 2. To have the
Self-passions excessive, and beyond a just degree, is injurious to the
Creature, and of Self-ill. 3. To have no Affections toward the Kind, nor
self-ones, is prejudicial to the Creature.

Now let all these Propositions be granted him, I do not see that he has made
the least step toward solving the Difficulty which he had raised: he offers
not one word to prove, that a Man ought to cherish good Affections to the
public, when the doing so will expose him to Hardships and Hazards, and make
him quit his self-preservative Passions: All that I can collect from the whole
course of his Reasonings in what follows, is, That a Man's Affection to private
good, is too high, or too low, and thereby irregular and vicious, when his
serving and taking care of himself takes off his Affection from the Public; i.
e. in short, according to our Author, whenever public and private Good come in
competition with one another, a Man is in Duty bound to undergo Hardships and
Hazards, to deny, to desert himself, to quit his self-preservative Passions,
and labor the good of the public. Now I may take up the words of the rich Man
in the Gospel to our Lord Christ, who had recommended to him a Doctrine of
self-denial, tho not of quitting his self-preservative Passions: This is a hard
saying, and who can bear it? Wise Lawgivers use to enforce their Precepts with
Promises and Threats; so our Lord: and in the Old Testament this is the
Language of the Law, Do this and live: But who ever heard of such a Law-giving
Language as this, Do this and die? Quit your self-preservative Passions, and
consult the good of the Public, tho you lose your Fortunes, Health, and Life
by it; when the good of the Public is in danger, let the private System be
sacrificed; it is a Man's duty then to die, and there is an end of him.

As the Apostle spoke of himself and Fellow Christians, so I of such as cherish
good Affections to the Public, If in this Life only they have hope, they are
of all Men the most miserable. But who shall persuade Men to submit to the
Miseries of which we have spoke, if there be no hope beyond this Life? Our
Author must not undertake it, for I find he is furnished with no Arguments to
that purpose. His Arguments prompt to Virtue only in common Cases. One that has
no other nor better, can have (to use our Author's Phrase and Reasoning, p.
116.) only a partial Affection to Virtue, an Affection only to some
Particulars, which is an Inconsistency and Contradiction; this partial
Affection has no Foundation or Establishment in Reason, but depends solely on
Capriciousness and Humor.

I might dismiss our Author now, and think of concluding this (such as it is)
defense of the Notion of a future State. But I must confess I am persuaded that
several of the most speciously said things which are behind, are so unhappily
worded and disposed, that they tempt, or at least leave room for Opinions
inconsistent with the universal necessity of Virtue; I therefore think it meet
not to pass them over altogether without animadversion: it looks well what he
says, P. 106. To have the natural Affections, such as are founded in Love,
Complacency, good Will, and in a sympathy with the Kind or Species, is to have
the chief Enjoyment of Life. But as far as I can perceive, he takes it for
granted, that a Man who disbelieves a future State, may yet have the natural
Affections, such as are founded in Love, Complacency, good Will, and in a
sympathy with the Kind or Species, in as high a degree as any one else, and by
that means be happy in the chief Enjoyment of Life. Now this I find fault with:
for tho I grant, that a Man who questions the future State, and has his natural
Affections beneficently disposed to the good of his Kind, partakes largely of
the chief Enjoyments of life; yet I have already proved that such a one cannot
in all difficult Circumstances so effectually exert his beneficent Affections,
as he that believes a future State: and now I farther add, that the Man who
cannot in all difficult Circumstances so effectually exert his beneficent
Affections, cannot have that high degree of inward Satisfaction and Joy as the
other: for, the wider the Extent, and the higher the Degree of Virtue is, the
more satisfying and joyous are the reflexive Thoughts in the Mind of a virtuous
Man; and what is still more, the bare consciousness of meriting and possessing
the Esteem and Love of others, cannot possibly be so satisfying and joyous, as
when it is joined with the comfortable assurance of having done that which is
well-pleasing to God, and with the expectance of being the better for it, not
in this Life only, but also in the Life to come.

It looks very well what he says, p. 139. That to want the natural Affections
(the abovementioned beneficent Affections) is to be chiefly miserable. And
upon this Head he very truly and pathetically describes the Disorders and
Mischiefs of excessive, irregular, selfish Passions, the Torments of unnatural
and horrid Affections; the Pain, Anxiety, Misery which are consequent to vain
Fear, fierce Anger, Luxury and Lust, Pride and Ambition; Envy, Hatred and
Malice, Revenge, Cruelty, and Tyranny: but all this while he forgets to take
notice of what I have already mentioned, viz. that tho generally speaking
vicious Men are greatly punished by their own Vices, yet some Vices at some
Opportunities agree better with them; some vicious Men know how to manage their
Vices with a sort of Discretion, and while they sooth their Senses, and wrong
their Neighbor, take care of their Health and Fame. Now nothing can make this
sort of Men uneasy, but the Consideration of what may be hereafter. Now this
Topic our Author has not insisted upon, I cannot say he has not touched it,
but he has touched it at such a rate, that without doing him injury, I may
venture to say he does not seem over-earnestly concerned to have it believed
that the Man whose Affections are vicious, ought to fear what may befall him in
a future State. Let the Reader judge. P. 193. What enjoyment, or what rest is
there for him, who is not conscious of the merited Affection or Love of any
human Soul, but on the contrary is conscious of merited Hatred, not only from
every Fellow Creature, but from every thing in the universal Nature? What
ground of Horror and Despair? What foundation of Fear, and continual
Apprehension from Mankind, and from superior Powers, whenever any such are
credited, or but suspected? Upon this Passage I shall make no worse reflection
than this: Tho the thoughts of an ill Man reflecting on his criminal Actions,
do naturally create him much Misery; yet that Discourser, who treating upon
this Argument, leaves him room to doubt of a future State, does, against the
Interests of Society and Government, ease him of too much of the Burden: For,
whatever cause he has to be troubled in Mind, it is a great abatement to think,
that when he dies there is an end of it. Fear and Shame are the only restraints
of an evil Inclination; but set aside the Notion of a future State, and from
some Persons in some Cases you remove these restraints: For, some Persons are
too big for Laws, and no Man, at least no Infidel to that Notion, blushes in
the dark. A Standing Army and the Inquiry concerning Virtue, will complete a
Tyrant by freeing him from the fear of God and Man; the latter alone will
finish a Libertine. This may seem too severely said, because I have
acknowledged, that the Inquiry offers many excellent Arguments for Virtue, and
against Vice. But since those excellent Arguments are partial, of force only in
particular, and not serving in all difficult Cases; since no turpitude, no
dangers are mentioned, causing Fear or Shame to the Vicious, but what are of no
longer duration than this short Life; the mighty and the wary Sinner are really
tempted to indulge their irregular Passions and Affections.

I dismiss our Author; and now it comes into my mind to talk, as I promised,
with that very learned Acquaintance, who would bear me down that Tully never
made the Notion of a future State an Argument for Virtue. My reading has been
narrow, and my Memory such, as to have little of what I have read at command;
but examining it at leisure, I remember something in Tully's Tract wrote to
Pomponius Atticus, titled Cato Major, de Senectute, which, if I am not greatly
mistaken, disproves his Assertion.

The Discourse is Dialogue; but what is said under the Person of Cato was the
sense of Tully, as is plain from these words of his: Ipsius Catonis sermo
explicabit nostram omnem de senectute sententiam; Cato's Discourse will declare
my whole sense concerning old Age. Now not to take advantage of the dying
Speech put into the mouth of Cyrus by Xenophon, which Tully under the person of
Cato recites with approbation, let the Reader judge of this Passage, so
remarkable, that it has been almost as much cited as any Text in the Bible. O
praeclarum diem, cum ad illud divinum animorum concilium, coetumque
proficiscar, cumque ex hac turba, and colluvione discedam! Proficiscar enim non
ad eos solum viros, de quibus ante dixi; sed etiam ad Catonem meum, quo nemo
vir melior natus est, neque pietate praestantior! O blessed Day, when I shall
arrive at the Divine Assembly of Souls, when I shall leave this vile Crowd and
Earth behind; for there I shall meet not only those [noble Romans] whom I just
now mentioned, but also my Cato, than whom a more worthy and pious Man the
World has not known! Now that which gave Tully the confidence of expecting to
be happy after Death in the company of those gallant Men, who, as he, had
deserved well of the Age they lived in, was this: he was not ashamed of the
Life he had led, but was conscious to his own Merit. Non me vixisse poenitet,
quoniam ita vixi, ut non me frustra natum existimem. Toward the end of this
Book he adds, Quod si in hoc erro, quod animos hominum immortales esse credam,
lubenter erro: nec mihi hunc errorem, quo delector, dum vivo, extorqueri volo.
If I mistake in thinking the Souls of Men to be immortal, I mistake with
delight; nor would I have this Mistake, with which I am pleased, torn from me
as long as I live.

I had almost overseen the smart Reflection which follows: Sin mortuus (ut
quidam minuti Philosophi censent) nihil sentiam, non vereor ne hunc errorem
meum mortui Philosophi irrideant. But if, when I am dead, I become nothing but
senseless Matter (as some silly Philosophers think) those silly Philosophers
will become senseless Matter too, and so there will be no danger of their
hitting me in the teeth with this my Mistake.

By this it appears to me, that this Prince of Philosophers, and true Father of
his Country, this venerable Master of righteous Morals, now with his dear Cato,
the noble Scipio's, his friendly Fannius, Laelius, and Scaevola, sustained his
honest Mind under all the Labors and Difficulties of Virtue, by contemplating
the infinite Advantages he should reap in a future State: And surely while he
acquaints others with what Expectations he was influenced, he may justly be
looked upon as one that seriously endeavored to influence them by the same. It
is true, he does not speak of the Immortality of the Soul, and the Blessedness
which waits the Virtuous, with that confidence which is peculiar to Christians;
but he speaks of it as of a thing so very probable, that he thought it highly
became him to express his regard to it, by a Virtue so settled and firm, as no
Adversity could shake.

One thing more I desire of my Acquaintance (whose singular Parts and Learning
make me that I cannot argue against him, without fear and suspicion of my self;
tho let me do what I can, I am not able to complement him with submitting my
Understanding) i. e. that he would a little consider the Design and Purpose of
Tully in that Golden Fragment of his sixth Book, Somnium Scipionis, the only
valuable Remain of six Books de Republica; the loss of which I should
infinitely regret now, as Men of Sense and Probity have done formerly, were it
not for the incomparable Discourses concerning Government, which that Wise,
Learned and truly Noble Gentleman Algernon Sidney has left us.

Tully's Dream in the Person of Scipio is so fine a Piece, I can hardly forbear
translating the whole: The Reader I hope will forgive me, if I take it from the
beginning, and go as far as the Passage I shall chiefly insist on.

When I came into Afric, Colonel (as you know) of the fourth Legion under
Marcus Manilius, I made it my business to meet Masanissa, a King, who for very
good reasons was much a friend to our Family: I no sooner came to him, but the
aged Prince took me in his Arms, and wept; a while after recovering from his
Transport, he lifts up his Eyes to Heaven, and breaks out into this
Exclamation: O thou great God, the Sun! and you the rest Inhabitants Celestial!
I bless and praise you all, that once before I die, I have the happiness to
behold within my own Dominions, and under this Roof, P. Cornelius Scipio, whose
very Name I love to hear; so dear, and so well fixed in my Mind is the memory
of that most excellent and invincible Man. Then I asked him some Questions
concerning his Kingdom; he me some concerning our Commonwealth. This kind of
Discourse took up the whole day; in the Evening we were royally entertained,
and continued our Discourse till midnight. He dwelt upon the name of Africanus,
and talked much of the great things done and said by him: After this we
withdrew to Rest. Traveling and sitting up late laid me in a profound sleep.
And here (for it often comes to pass, that the Thoughts and Discourse of the
Day produce in sleep something like that which Ennius writes of Homer, whom he
read and studied so long till he dreamed that himself was Homer) Africanus
appeared to me in that form, with which, not the remembrance of his Person, but
the Idea of his Statue made me acquainted. I knew 'twas he, and stood amazed:
but he bid me quit my fear, and, with a presence of Mind, heed what he should
say to me. See you that City (showing me Carthage from a high starry radiant
place) which I taught to obey the Romans; she the old War renews, and has not
the wit to be quiet. You come now to fight against this City, tho hardly of Age
to command; two years hence you shall be Consul, and take it, and so deserve
the honorable Surname, which by Adoption you inherit: but when you have rased
Carthage, and triumphed; when you have discharged the high Office of Censor,
and gone Ambassador over Egypt, Syria, Asia, Greece, you shall be again, tho
absent, chosen Consul, finish a long War, and destroy Numantia. But when in
your triumphal Chariot you shall be carried up to the Capitol, you will find the
State in Confusion by the seditious management of my Nephew Tiberius. And now
Africanus, Inheritor of my Name and Virtue, you must stand by your Country with
all your Wisdom and Courage: and doubtful at this juncture will your own Fate
seem; for, when your Age has measured eight times seven annual courses of the
Sun (both which numbers are full and mysterious) a momentous critical Period to
you, the Eyes of the Senate, and all good Men of our Confederates, and all that
own the Latin Name will be set on you alone, their Hearts all turned toward
you; you are the Man on whom the Safety of the City then relies, and you being
Dictator (if so be you luckily escape the Treachery of your impious Kinsmen)
shall preserve and settle it safe. Here Laelius and the rest surpised, showed
their Concern; but Scipio gently smiling said, Let me dream on, and all will be
well; listen then to what follows. That you, Africanus, may be more vigorous in
defense of the Government, know of a certain, that for all them, who have saved
their Country from ruin, signally served its Interests, amplified and bettered
the condition thereof, there is a determinate Seat in Heaven allotted, where
they shall enjoy an everlasting Age of Bliss.

Without going any farther, I cannot but conclude, that this waking Dream of
Tully under the Person of Scipio, speaks the sense which Tully had of a future
State, as plainly as it shows his Wit and Judgment. It is to me an amazement,
that any Men should think, as I am told some do, that Tully is in jest here,
and devised this ingenious Dream, not to give the Romans a true account of the
real sense of his Mind, but only to cozen them into a Zeal for their Country,
whenever it should be dangerous to appear in defense of its Interests; into a
love of Justice, and moral Honesty, when the Practice was like to be
detrimental to a Man's Affairs in the World. Indeed this great Man had not the
very same sense of a future State, with respect to all Circumstances, as
perhaps the Jews of old had, or some Christians since his time: tho by the way,
it is not very plain in the Old Testament, that the Jews had any notion at all
of a future State; I deny not but that they did believe it, for they might
gather it from the same Principles of Reason which we do: but it does not
appear to me in those Books, that their Prophets plainly taught it them. The
most learned among Christian Doctors freely grant that the Promises and
Threatenings in the Old Testament look not beyond this Life, tho (they say)
relatively considered, they denote more, and serve as Types of
Gospel-Revelations. As for some Christians, they have drawn a Scheme of future
State, not only without, but directly contrary to the lines of the Gospel: What
the Gospel says of this matter, if rightly understood, is not contrary to
Reason: But Tully had not that Light, yet his Reason led him to the knowledge of
a future State, wherein good and bad Men meet with duly proportioned Fruits of
their good and bad way of living, tho he incumbers the Notion with
Philosophical Fables. But if it could be made out that Tully did not believe
this Notion, which in his Dream he makes an Argument for the most difficult
Virtue, viz. that of serving one's Country in a time of imminent danger; yet
thus much I shall incontestably gain, viz. that in Tully's opinion there was no
Argument but this of force to persuade Men in that case: And then he is with me
thus far, that a general reception of this Notion is necessary for the
tolerable well-being of Society.

But I will not yet dismiss this fictitious Dream, dreamed by a wise Man, when
his Eyes were open, his Mind present with it self, studious and serious; it may
be worth our while to translate a little of Macrobius's elegant Exposition upon
it. Between the Books of Plato and Tully concerning Government, this difference
appears at first sight: Plato describes that Form which was most necessary for
the Ends of Government; Tully that which was anciently instituted among the
Romans. Plato, by means of a quick and piercing Genius, seeing through the nature
and reason of things, perceived that all his Discourse concerning Government
was to no purpose, unless the Minds of Men were possessed with a love of
Virtue; without which, not only a great Commonwealth, but every lesser Society,
and indeed every private House is obnoxious to the most destructive Disorders.
To possess Men with the love of Virtue, so necessary to the well-being of all
Societies in general, he saw that nothing would conduce so much, as the making
it appear that the advantages of Virtue were not terminated with the short Life
of Man: this prompted him to essay the proof of the Immortality of the Soul.
Having proved that (by such Arguments as in those days went for Apodictic) he
looked upon it as a necessary Consequence, to assign to Souls, freed from the
Prison of the Body, diverse Habitations, with respect to their good or ill
deserving, in the future State: this he has done in his Phaedo, and in his
Gorgias, sweetning his graver Morals with the pleasantry of the wise Socrates;
but this he has done more especially in those Volumes in which he formed his
Scheme of a Commonwealth: and this order and method, so wisely designed by
Plato, Tully with no less Judgment has imitated. To this purpose Macrobius in
his first Chapter. The Title of the fourth is, What may be the purpose and
scope of this Dream, where he speaks thus: Toward the end of the sixth Book,
when Laelius wondered that no Statues were erected to Scipio Nasica, as a
Reward of his public Service in slaying one of the seditious Gracchi; Scipio
replied, Tho the Consciousness of their worthy Deeds be the highest Reward of
Virtue, yet that divine Virtue (viz. of slaying Tiberius Gracchus, who troubled
the Peace of the State, and affected Tyrannick Power) covets no erected
Statues, nor Triumphs with fading Laurel crowned, but some more stable and
flourishing Rewards. Laelius asks, What are those? Scipio replies, Suffer me to
pursue what I have to say farther, and so falls into the Story of his Dream,
showing that those were more stable, and flourishing Rewards which were laid up
in Heaven for the Defenders of their Country; as appears from these words, Quo
sis, Africane, alaerior, etc. That you, Africanus, may be more vigorous in
defense of the Government, know of a certain, that for all them who have saved
their Country from ruin, signally served its Interests, amplified and bettered
the condition thereof, there is a determinate Seat in Heaven allotted, where
they shall enjoy an everlasting Age of Bliss. And a little after, declaring
what sort of Seat that was, he says: And so, Scipio, after the example of your
Grandfather, and of me who begat you, live justly and piously. It is a piece of
Justice and Piety to be useful to Parents and Relations: but to be useful to
one's Country, that is the greatest Justice and Piety, that is the way to Heaven,
and the company of those Worthies who have finished their course, and now
inhabit that place which you see, pointing to the Gallery.

There is another beautiful place in the Dream, which confirms me, both that
Tully did really believe a future State, and thought it the only Argument for
difficult Virtue. Igitur alte spectare si voles, etc. Therefore if you will
lift up your Eyes and Thoughts toward this eternal Seat, seek not the Applause
of the Vulgar, nor place all your hope on those Rewards which Men bestow on
Men. You must be won by the Charms of Virtue alone; as to what others talk of
you, let them look to that, but talk of you they will. The Opinion of the World
concerning us is bounded within the compass of these Countries which we know:
no one's Fame can be everlasting, it lessens by the death of succeeding
Generations, till with late Posterity it is buried. He had no sooner finished
this Admonition, but I replied: Well Africanus! if Heaven is open to those who
deserve well of their Country, I shall now, tho I always trod in my Father's
and your steps, and never degenerated; I shall now, having an Eye to the Reward
before me, contend more earnestly to obtain it. Upon this he urged: Be sure you
do so, and reckon that it is not you who are mortal, but only your Body; for,
it is not the Form and Figure that appears, which constitutes a Man what he is,
but it is the Mind which is the Man: know then that thou art a God, at least,
if that be a God which lives, and has sense, which remembers, and takes care of
things to come, which rules, commands, and moves the Body over which it is set,
as the great God moves, commands and rules the World.

Just at this period I am told, that from this very Dream it may be made
appear, that Tully did not believe the future State: I have now read it over
again and again, and am amazed at the strangeness of the assertion. Indeed
Tully says, that Souls do move themselves by an interior motion of their own;
and thence he concludes that they had no beginning, but ever did exist, and
ever shall. But then it is plain he holds, that they have existed in another
state before this, and shall exist in another after this. And that the State
after this, was a State wherein all Souls were not like to be in the same
condition, he sufficiently intimates, by putting those words into Africanus's
Mouth: Hanc tu exerce, etc. exercise this your immortal Soul in the best Works:
the best are, an endeavor to serve your Country, with which your Soul is
exercised, and thereby shall sooner ascend to this happy Dwelling. I shall move
no more words concerning Tully's Sense of this matter, which might be farther
confirmed from Multitudes of Passages in his Works. Yet let me refer my Reader
to what the Author of the Letter to the Deist, p. 105. has taken notice of as
quoted by my Lord Herbert of Cherbury, in his Treatise de Religione Gentilium.

I mean now to cast my Eye on those places in Tully, wherein some have told me,
he directly denies the future State.

Let the Reader allow me to introduce the first Passage objected against me,
with a short prefatory Account of the Occasion and Subject of the Oration,
where it is to be found. Clodius a wild young noble Roman in love with Pompeia
the Wife of Caesar, found means to get into Cesar's House in Woman's Habit, on a
solemn Festival, when the Ladies were celebrating a secret Service (at which
Men were never present) to the Goddess Ceres. He carried his Disguise so
aukwardly, that it was discovered: the Story taking air, he was accused by one
of the Tribunes for profaning the Lady's Religion. He pleaded for himself, that
he was absent from Rome on the Day the Fact was charged: Tully strengthened the
Evidence against him, deposing that on that very day Clodius had bin at his
House. This notwithstanding, Clodius, bribing his Judges, was acquitted, but
never forgave Cicero his Deposition. By the same means he gained his
Absolution, he soon after procured himself to be chose Tribune, and by the help
of the Consuls Gabinius and Piso, he persuaded the People to banish Cicero,
then demolished his Country seats, burned his House in the City, and on the
ground built a Temple to Liberty. But Clodius his insolence increasing, Pompey
found it his Interest to have Cicero recalled; the People unanimously voted it,
and ordered his Houses to be rebuilt at the common Charge. When Clodius could
not stem this Tide by bold force, he labored to give his prevailing Adversary
what trouble he could under the color of Religion; it was impossible, he
pleaded, for Cicero to be reinstated in his City Dwelling, because on the very
ground, on which the same stood, a Temple had bin built to Liberty. Cicero
pleads his right, and overthrows the cheating Pretense of Religion, in his
Oration pro domo sua ad Pontifices. He lays open the Craft of the Ministers of
Religion, and exposes Clodius farther, in his Oration de Haruspicum Responsis;
and there having recounted the many Villainies, and odious Lewdness of his
Adversary, he proves him to be miserable, tho his corrupt Judges had absolved
him: for he stood condemned in his own Mind, and in the opinion of all good
Men, the Consciousness of which was the most severe of Punishments. He
flourishes upon this Topic thus: Tu cum furiales in concionibus voces mittis,
cum domos Civium evertis, cum lapidibus optimos viros foro pellis, cum ardentes
faces in vicinorum tecta jactas, cum aedes sacras inflammas, cum servos
concitas, cum sacra ludosque conturbas, cum uxorem sororemque non discernis;
cum quod ineas cubile non sentis; cum baccharis, cum furis, tum das eas poenas,
quae sunt solae hominum sceleri a Diis immortalibus constitutae. When you
harangue the People with malicious Eloquence, when you demolish the Houses of
Citizens, when with Stones you pelt and drive the most worthy Senators from the
Forum, when set fire to common Dwellings, and sacred Temples; when you stir up
Slaves to Sedition, and disturb the Celebration of religious Ordinances; when
you know no difference between your Wife and your Sister, and matter not whose
Bed you defile; when you lewdly revel, and outragiously debosh, then you suffer
those Pains, which are the only that the Gods have ordained to punish the
Wickedness of Men. Now this is one of the places represented to me, as a plain
Declaration of Tully's Opinion against a future State; and the Representer is
in doubt whether he shall look upon me as dull of understanding, because I do
not conceive it to be so, or obstinate for not acknowledging it. Well! I cannot
help what any Man thinks of me: nay, tho I am really desirous to be well
thought of, and would give something for the Representer's good word; yet in
this case I cannot think, as he would have me, because in truth the matter
appears otherwise to me than it does to him. I am indeed convinced from this
place, that Tully believed none of the Snakes and burning Torches of the
infernal Furies, so much talked of by the Poets; none of the material Fire,
scorching Flame, and stifling Smoke, which some of the more ignorant Christians
take into their Description of Hell: but as I conceive, he might for all that
he has here said, really believe a future State, where the Punishment of evil
deeds shall be the same in substance, tho not in degree, as it is here. Tully's
business in this Oration was to paint out Clodius in his true Colors, to let
People see into the hands of what an ill Man they had given the Power of a
Tribune, to let his Judges see what a guilty wretch they had absolved; to
convince his whole Audience, that a Villain absolved by corrupt Judges could
not yet but be miserable, through the irregularity of his Passions and Affections,
and the consciousness of his Misdeeds: pursuant to this purpose it was proper
for him to distinguish between the Punishments exacted by Men, which were
sometimes bought off, and those inflicted by the Gods, which were never to be
avoided; the one reaching Body and Goods, the other the Mind. The Gods
interpose not in what concerns the former, their Inflictions are laid on the
Mind.

Self-consciousness and Reflection are the Ministers of their Vengeance, they
make use of no other to punish Wickedness. This is all that Tully says; and
many good Men, as well Christians as Deists, who believe the future State, will
say upon the matter the same thing. But tho according to Tully the Gods have
ordained only Self-consciousness and Reflection to punish Wickedness in this
Life; may they not have ordained this also, tho this only, to punish it
hereafter? I say not everlastingly, for Tully had other Notions of the Gods
than that comes to; but so long at least, till the Punishment shall work a
change of Mind in the Sufferer, and then the Punishment cannot but cease. I
interest not my self in the case, but take it for granted that Tully could not
make the Gods Authors of no Punishments, but what were designed for the
amendment of the Sufferer, and the instruction of the Beholder.

But farther, Tully was a Man that knew how to praise and dispraise, none
better; when he pleads for Archias the Poet, Ligarius, or Milo, his Decorations
have all the Life and Force that Wit and Friendship can give them; and when he
accuses Catiline or Clodius, Piso and Gabinius, his Accusations have all the
Weight and bitter Vehemence that Wit and Anger can give them. His Talent was to
move the Affections of his Hearers, in order to which he did not so much
consider what was nicely true, as what was proper to be said for the end he
aimed at. Now if he had not believed a word of a future State, he would not yet
in this Oration have denied it, because it was improper, and very contrary to
the end which he aimed at to do so. When the Orator with flowing merciless
Eloquence was exaggerating the Torments which Clodius could not but suffer, tho
his Judges had absolved him, through his sense of the Odium which he had
incurred from all true Lovers of their Country, and conscious Reflection on his
Demerits; was it not, I appeal to the Reader, was it not very improper for him
to tell his Auditors that the vile Man would be tormented by his evil
Conscience while he lived, and no longer? Could Tully be so weak, when he
labored to persuade the Citizens that Clodius was very miserable, tho not
condemned and punished according to the Laws of his Country, as to profess that
after a little while he must pass into the same State of eternal Forgetfulness,
as the worthiest Senator of 'em all? They must have a mean Conceit of the
Orator that put this upon him; but however, I am sure his words will not bear
it.

Yet one Remark farther: Tully was not like to deny the future State in his
Invective against Clodius, because whatever his Rhetoric might be able to
persuade the People, that Clodius suffered by his consciousness of his
Villainies, yet it did not appear that Clodius had suffered more vexation of
Spirit than Tully who declaimed against him. Tully was witness against Clodius
in the matter of his trespass on the Lady's Religion, moved to do it by his
imperious Wife Terentia, who hated Clodius, because her Husband was to have
married his Sister: hence began the difference between them, for before they
had bin Friends. By Bribery and popular Arts Clodius became a Tribune; Cicero
feared his Power, was cheated by his seeming Reconciliation, forsook his
advantage of commanding under Caesar, meanly solicited his own Cause in
mourning Habit with long neglected Hair, attended by 20000 Gentlemen, enough to
have defended him, had not the Mind of their Leader bin full of Confusion and
Fear. Clodius insulted him till he fled, pursued him with the Votes of the
People, opposed his return with armed Force, and after that boldly stood his
ground, till he fell by the hands of Milo, a Tribune of as great Resolution as
himself. Now an equal Considerer of this Story will be apt to suspect that the
honest Man had more trouble and vexation of Spirit, during the Contention, than
the violent, lewd and unjust Tribune. Indeed when the stream was turned, and
the Favor of the People again came about to Tully, he bore hard upon Clodius
with the best Weapon he had, his eloquent Tongue; but he could not get his
public Acts rescinded, even Cato opposed that, nor his Person condemned; this
disturbed his Thoughts, and heated him into that satirical Harangue which
labors to prove the Man to be miserable, tho he had escaped his revenge. But
when all is done, Cicero that was concerned to have it believed that Clodius
was severely punished by his guilty Conscience, was not so weak as to add, he
was not like to be punished by the same hereafter. I will add but one note by
the way, and I have done with my Reply to this Objection: Disorders and trouble
of Mind are commonly consequent to those vile Deeds which Clodius committed,
but they are not always so, nor does it plainly appear that Clodius suffered
those Torments; more likely it is, that his Mind was lifted up with the
thoughts of having pretty well weathered the Storm: but if wicked Men are to
suffer nothing after this life, a great many will go off, as Clodius did, with
suffering little or nothing at all.

Another Passage objected against me, to prove that Tully was an absolute
Infidel to a future State, is this, in his Oration against Calpurnius Piso: I
will briefly recite, and reply.

Me tamen fugerat Deorum immortalium has esse in impios and consceleratos
poenas certissimas constitutas. Nolite enim putare, P. C. ut in scena videtis
homines consceleratos, impulsu Deorum, terreri furiarum taedis ardentibus; sua
quemque fraus, suum facinus, suum scelus, sua audacia de sanitate ac mente
deturbat; hae sunt impiorum furiae, hae flammae, hae faces.

I did not consider, that these (speaking of the torments of a guilty Mind)
were the certain Punishments awarded by the Gods against vile and profligate
Men: For I would not have you think, O Conscript Fathers, that wicked Men, as
sometimes on a Stage, are by the impulse of the Gods, terrified with the
burning Torches of the Furies; every ones own Fraud, his own Wickedness, his
own Villainy, his own desperate Boldness, puts him beside himself, and disorders
his Thoughts; these are the Furies that torment the wicked, these the Flames,
and these the Torches.

A very like Passage to this occurs in his Oration for Ruscius; and if this had
not bin objected against me, I might have bin apt to have quoted it in proof of
Tully's Belief of a future State: For Furies, flaming Torches, and all that,
were in those days part of the description of future Punishments. Now Tully
here seems to admit the Notion of future Punishments, only he corrects a
popular Mistake concerning the nature of them. Furies and Flames are Metaphors
of real Evils; and Devils are no such idle Stories, unless Fools and Knaves
have the painting them. They now range up and down the World (for ours is not
the Age in which any of them are to be chained up) seeking whom they may
devour. There Is the Devil of Pride, the Devil of Cruelty, the Devil of Bigotry,
and that grand Devil the Father of these, the Devil of ill nature, Noonday
Devils most an end, so far are they from flying when the early Dawn breaks: but
there is the Devil of Envy, the Devil of Treachery, the Devil of Fraud, and the
Devil of Lust, sneeking Devils, that choose rather to walk in Darkness; Legion
may well be their common name, for there is no counting their number; and vast
havoc do they make, both in Church and State, perhaps they know not that
distinction; but it is certain they never mind it: nay they pursue all vile
Wretches into the other World also, such is their implacable Malice; and all
they who carry irregular Passion, and base Affections with them out of this
life, carry these Devils with them into the next; and till they recover an
honest mind, by them they are like to be tormented. I know nothing that Tully
has advanced against these Notions, but I am much mistaken if right Reason does
not favor them: Yes, and Revelation also; else what mean those words of the
Apostle St. James, God tempts no Man, but every Man is tempted, when he is
drawn away of his own Heart's Lust and enticed. All Temptations come from some
Devil or other, who takes up his seat in the Heart of a vile Man; but whatever
Devils there are in the Heart, this is a Comfort, it is possible they may be
exorcis'd, sometimes by the rational Discourses of a virtuous Monitor,
sometimes by the woeful experience of the possessed; and he must have a very
unreasonable Prejudice against Scripture, that thinks none of them can be
ejected nor by Prayer, nor by Fasting.

Tully somewhere has these words, Qui requirunt, quid quaque de re ipsi
sentiamus, curiosius id faciunt, quam necesse est. They who search what is our
particular Opinion about every thing are more curious than is necessary. He
means, I suppose, that in many Points his particular Sentiments are not easy to
be discovered; but if they be harder to be discovered in one place than
another, I take them to be so in his Orations, for there he ever exerts all the
mighty Powers of his commanding Eloquence, and says all that can be said to
serve his Friend and plague his Enemy, without tying himself up to the strict
Rules of Truth, or keeping an exact constant agreement with his own
Philosophical Notions. He was of the mind as the well-spoken Men of his
Profession still are, viz. that the Cause, whose Patronage they undertake,
ought not to suffer for want of speaking up for it: But in his Divine (I had
almost said inspired) Books of Offices (they are inspired with a Spirit of
Honesty and Goodness, with a Spirit of Wisdom and Truth) in those Books wrote
when Civil Broils had thrust him out of all public Business; in his Discourses
concerning the nature of the Gods, and in his Tusculan Questions; in these
Pieces or no where we may expect to find the Heart and Soul of the Man. But
even in these a learned Acquaintance would bear me down that Tully discovers
his disbelief of a future State: I press him to cite some Passage to that
purpose; he offers me these words, Me vero delectat (animae credere
immortalitatem) idque primum ita esse velim, deinde etiamsi non sit, mihi tamen
persuaderi velim. Cicero in Tuscul. Quaest. 1.

Paulo inferius.

Feci mehercule (Platonis sc. evolvi librum de anima) and quidem saepius, sed
nescio quomodo, dum lego, assentior cum deposui librum, and mecum ipse de
immortalitate animorum coepi cogitare, assensus omnis illa elabitur.

It delights me (viz. to believe the Immortality of the Soul) and first I
wish it may be true, and then should it not be true, I wish I may be persuaded
that it is.

A little after.

I have done it often (i. e. I have often read Plato's Book of the Soul) but it
happens, I know not how, that while I read him I assent to what he says; but
when I have laid the Book aside, and begin to consider with my self concerning
the Immortality of the Soul, all that Assent vanishes.

I am very glad of this Objection, 1. Because I take it to be as good as any he
can produce in favor of this Assertion, that Tully did not believe the
Immortality of the Soul, nor consequently a future State. 2. Because (tho I am
far from being convinced by it, and dare hardly hope to convince him) the
examining of this Passage will, in my opinion, utterly shame his Assertion
before all impartial Considerers. In order to do this fairly and fully, first,
I call to mind, that I have heard him sometimes reprove the Ignorance or
Prevarication of sundry Writers who quote for Tully's Sayings those words which
he speaks, not of himself, but only puts into the mouth of a third Person
against whom he disputes. Now I must observe to my Acquaintance, that these two
Passages which he has quoted, as Testimonies that Tully disbeliev'd the
Immortality of the Soul, and consequently a future State, are not spoken by
Tully as from himself, but are the words which he puts into the Mouth of a
third Person against whom he disputes, which I prove thus: Tully makes his way
to the first of his Tusculan Questions concerning the contempt of Death, by
giving an account how he came to exercise himself in weighty Philosophical
Questions; then he tells his Friend Brutus, to whom he writes, that this was
the method which he took, Ponere jubebam de quo quis audire vellet, and id aut
sedens, aut ambulans disputabam, itaque dierum quinque Scholas ut Graeci
appellant, in totidem libros contuli; fiebat autem ita, ut cum is, qui audire
vellet, dixisset quid sibi videretur, tum ego contradicerem. I bid him (i. e.
the Person with whom he conferred) to set down that Point or Question,
concerning which he would gladly hear; and then sitting, or as I walked, I
discussed the same: So the Schola's, as the Greeks call them, the Conferences
of five days I disposed into five Books; and thus were the Conferences managed,
when he that desired to hear the Question discussed had said what he thought
good, then I on the other side spoke my Mind. From these words in the Preface
to the first Dialogue, it is beyond controversy plain, that the words spoken by
Atticus, or the Hearer (as are those objected against me) represent not the
Mind of Tully, but what Marcus (the other fictitious Name in the Dialogue)
replies; that, and that only can fairly be charged on him: which being very
material, I crave leave to set before the Reader some remarkable Portions of
it. N. 27. Vnum illud erat insitum priscis illis, quos Cascos appellat Ennius,
esse in morte sensum, neque excessu vitae sic deleri hominem, ut funditus
interiret: idque cum multis aliis rebus, tum e pontificio jure, and ceremoniis
sepulchrorum intelligi licet: quas maximis ingeniis praediti, nec tanta cura
coluissent, nec violatas tam inexpiabili religione sanxissent, nisi haesisset
in eorum mentibus, mortem non interitum esse omnia tollentem atque delentem,
sed quandam quasi migrationem commutationemque vitae, quae in claris viris and
foeminis, Dux in coelum soleret esse: in caeteris humi retineretur, and
permaneret tamen.

It was with those Ancients whom Ennius calls Casci, as a natural Sentiment,
that Death did not bereave a Man of all Sense, nor make an utter end of him:
which, among other things, appears from Pontifical Laws, and from Sepulchral
Rites, which Men of the best sense had never so carefully observed, nor
enforced with so fatal Penalty, but that it was a settled Principle with them,
That Death was not the end of all things, but a certain removal as it were, and
change of one Life for another, by means of which famous Men and Women were
translated into Heaven, others left below, but still left in Existence.

N. 30. Firmissimum hoc afferri videtur cur Deos esse credamus, quod nulla gens
tam fera, nemo omnium tam sit immanis, cujus mentem non imbuerit Deorum opinio.
Multi de Diis prava sentiunt: omnes tamen esse vim and naturam divinam
arbitrantur. Nec vero id collocutio hominum, auc consensus efficit, non
institutis opinio est confirmata, non legibus. Omni autem in re, consensio
omnium gentium lex Naturae putanda est. This seems a strong Argument why we
should believe the Being of Gods, because there is no Nation so wild, no Man so
savage, whose Mind is not endued with an Opinion of Gods. Many Men have an
unworthy Opinion of Gods, but all judge that there is a Nature and Power Divine;
and this is not the effect of Conference and friendly Agreement, it is not
owing to Customs or Laws: but that thing, whatever it is, which has the consent
of all Nations, is to be deemed a Law of Nature.

N. 31. Maximum vero argumentum est, naturam ipsam de immortalitate animorum
tacitam judicare, quod omnibus curae sunt, and maxim quidem, quae post mortem
futura sunt.

But it is a very great Argument that Nature it self gives a silent Verdict for
the Immortality of the Soul, because all Men are concerned, most highly
concerned about what shall be hereafter.

N. 33. Nemo unquam sine magna spe immortalitatis, se pro patria offerret ad
mortem. Licuit esse otioso Themistocli, licuit Epaminondae, licuit (ne and
vetera and externa quaeram) mihi, sed nescio quomodo inhaeret in mentibus,
quasi saeculorum quoddam augurium futurorum, idque in maximis ingeniis,
altissimisque animis, and existit maxim, and apparet facillime; quo quidem
dempto, quis tam esset amens qui semper in laboribus, and periculis viveret?

None ever without a strong hope of Immortality, would venture his Life to save
his Country. Themistocles might have lived at ease, so might Epaminondas, and
(not to hunt after old and foreign Examples) so might I my self, but that I
know now not how, there is inherent in our Minds, a certain foreboding of a
Life to come; and that same foreboding is most busy, and does most plainly
appear in Men of the best Wits, and most discerning Minds; which Notion being
set aside, Who would be so mad as to live in continual Labors and Dangers? He
pursues this point by taking notice what respect several Orders of Men, Poets,
Mechanics, Philosophers, have to this Notion; and then has these words: Sed ut
Deos esse natura opinamur, qualesque sint ratione cognoscimus; sic permanere
animos arbitramur consensu nationum omnium: qua in sede maneant, qualesque sint
ratione discendum est, cujus ignoratio finxit inferos, easabque; formidines,
quas tu contemnere non sine causa videbare.

But as by nature we are inclined to think that there are Gods, and by reason
learn what to think of them: So by the consent of all Nations we are moved to
believe that Souls remain after Death: in what place they remain, and what
nature they are of, it is Reason must teach us; the ignorance of which thing
(viz. the nature of the Soul) invented the Inferi, and those Bugbears, which
you not without cause seem to despise.

Here again Tully owning his Belief of a future State, discovers that his
Thoughts concerning it were widely different from the Fancies of Poets, and
dreams of Priests; but tho he was free from the Errors which they had
introduced into natural Religion, and above the imaginary Fears which, he says,
were wont to afright Women and Children, especially when a pale Ghost was
brought on the Stage, with a dreadful Verse of Homer in his Mouth, whose hollow
Noise proclaimed I know not what about Fell Acheron, gloomy Caves, cragged
impending Rocks, and pitchy Darkness; yet he is far from setting aside that
great restraint of secret dishonesty, the apprehension of being in a worse
State for it hereafter. Of this we have a manifest Testimony in what follows.
Our excellent Author having run over several philosophical Arguments for the
Immortality of the Soul, seeks to credit his Discourse by a very remarkable
account of the Words and Actions of dying Socrates -- His and talibus adductus
Socrates, nec Patronum quaesivit ad judicium Capitis, nec judicibus supplex
fuit, adhibuitque liberam contumaciam a magnitudine animi duetam, non a
superbia: and supremo Vitae die de hoc ipso multa disseruit; and paucis ante
diebus, cum facile possit educi ex custodia, noluit: and cum pent in manu jam
mortiferum illud teneret poculum, lo^utut ita est, ut non ad mortem trudi,
verum in eoelum videretur ascendere. Ita enim censebat, itaque disseruit duas
esse vias, duplicesque cursus animorum ^ corpore excedentium: nam qui se
humanis vitiis contaminassent, and se totos libidinibus dedissent, quibus
caecati velut domesticis vitiis, atque flagitiis se inquinassent, vel in
Rempublicam violandam frandes inexpiabiles concepissent, iis devium quoddam
iter esse, seclusum a Concilio Deorum: qui autem se integros castosque
servassent, quibusque fuisset minima cum corporibus contagio, seseque ab his
semper sevocassent, essentque in corporibus humanis vitam imitati Deorum, his
ad illos a quibus essent profecti reditum facilem patere.

Socrates, by these and the like Arguments persuaded, neither demanded to have
Council allowed him, when his Life was so nearly concerned, nor with humble
deference courted the favor of his Judges, but used a free and undaunted
Boldness before them, which proceeded not from Vanity and Pride, but from the
just greatness of his Mind. Also he discoursed of this very thing (viz. the
immortality of the Soul) on the day he died. And a few days before, when he
might easily have bin conveyed out of Prison by his Friends, he refused. When
he was just ready to take the deadly Hemloc-potion in his hand, it appeared by
his Discourse, that he did not look upon himself as a Criminal going to suffer
a violent Death, but as a just Man ascending up to Heaven. Such was his
Persuasion, and therefore he declared that when Souls depart out of the Body,
there lay two ways before them; they who defiled themselves with Vices common
to Men, who gave themselves wholly up to lustful Passions and Affections, by
which being blinded, Dishonesty became familiar and habitual to them, or who by
conspiring against the Laws and Liberties of their Country had contracted an
inexpiable Guilt, all of this sort took a by way secluded, and fenced off from
the happy Assembly of the Gods: but they whose wiser care had preserved
themselves pure and virtuous, whose Minds were never poisoned with corporeal
Pleasures, but always restrained their Affections from such Objects, and, while
in the Body, lived the Life of Gods, all they after Death took the road leading
to the good Gods whence they came.

By this it plainly appears that Tully believed a future State, such a future
State in which there was a good and a bad, that to be enjoyed, this to be
suffered by Men, according to what they do in the Body: so little is the
difference between this honest Pagan Theist, and a sober Christian; and perhaps
if things were equally weighed, it might appear much one and the same thing to
all the Purposes of Virtue, whether wicked Men shall hereafter find a Hell to
punish their Misdeeds, or carry it with them. But if I should leave my last
Citation thus, and pass on to something else, I doubt not but one or other of
my Adversaries (who are now and then kindly visiting, and freely objecting
against me) would tax me of disingenuity, and dissembling, of designedly
over-looking that which makes against me, and I know nothing is got to a good
Cause by such a Conduct; therefore I will read on, and consider what may be
made of those words, which seem not of a piece with the rest.

Itaque commemorat, ut Cygni, qui non sine causa Apollini dicati sunt, sed quod
ab eo divinationem habere videantur, qua providentes quid in morte boni sit,
cum cantu, and voluptate moriantur; sic omnibus and bonis and doctis esse
faciendum: nec vero de hoc quisquam dubitare possit, nisi idem nobis accideret
diligenter de animo cogitantibus, quod iis saepe usu venit, qui acriter oculis
deficientem solemn intuerentur, ut aspectum omnino amitterent. Sic mentis acies
seipsam intuens, nonnunquam hebescit: ob eamque causam contemplandi diligentiam
amittimus. Itaque dubitans, circumspectans, haesitans, multa adversa revertens,
tanquam ratis in mari immenso nostra vehitur Oration.

Therefore He (Socrates) remarks that as Swans, not without reason sacred to
Apollo, from whom they have the Gift of Divination, foreseeing the good there
is in death, die with Joy and Singing: So should the Virtuous and the Wise, Men
of good Sense and Learning do; of this there is no doubt to be made, unless
that should befall us thoughtfully considering the nature of the Soul, which
commonly happens to them who gaze on the Sun in Eclipse, till they can see no
longer; for so the Sight of the Mind, turned upon it self, and intently
examining its own Nature, grows dim, by which means we lose all the expected
fruit of our diligent Contemplation: So while I my self doubt, and look round
the thing in question, while I demur, and consider once and again what may be
said pro and con, my Discourse is like a floating Vessel tossed to and fro in the
wide Sea.

I must confess, that from this Passage one might be apt to imagine, that
Tully, even in the most serious matter, was a little addicted to the Academic
wanton Rhetorical Way of talking all that came into his thoughts, what side
soever of the Question was served or prejudiced by it: he had given occasion to
be suspected of this Vanity once before. N. 49. Praeclarum autem nescio quid
adepti sunt, qui didicerunt, se, cum tempus mortis venisset, totos esse
perituros; quod ut ita sit (nihil enim pugno) quid habet ista res aut laetabile
aut gloriosum?

They have discovered a worthy Secret indeed, who have learned, that when they
die, they must wholly perish and be no more; which to suppose it true (for I
dispute not against it) what have they rejoice at, and be proud of?

But now I answer; 1 st, That perhaps there is more of a Rhetorical Apophasis,
than Academic Skepticism in both these Passages. Tully delights much in this
Figure Apophasis, which promises not to mention those things which are most
industriously mentioned and offered to the Hearers consideration. In the latter
of these Passages he says, that he would not dispute against them who pretended
to have discovered that Death was the end of all things, and yet in the very
next words he does dispute against them, and that sufficiently to the
declaration of his own Opinion upon the Question, if not to the conviction of
his Adversaries. N. 49. Nec tamen mihi sane quicquam occurrit, cur non
Pythagorae sit and Platonis vera sententia. And yet I know no reason but that
the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato may be true; which was for the Immortality
of the Soul. And a little after, Neque aliud est quidquam, cur incredibilis his
animorum videatur aeternitas, nisi quod nequeunt qualis animus sit vacans
corpore, intelligere, and cogitatione comprehendere. Nor is there any thing
else in the case, why they (his Adversaries) could not believe the Immortality
of the Soul, but because they cannot conceive how the Soul can subsist without
the Body, and think, and by thinking understand; and yet they understand
nothing of the nature of the Soul in the Body. Much more to the same purpose
follows.

2 dly, As to that Reflection which Tully makes, after the account which he had
given of Socrates, viz. That his Discourse was like a floating Vessel tossed to
and fro in the wide Sea: I answer, That notwithstanding this Comparison,
supposed to savor so much of the old academic Uncertainty, he continues his
Discourse, persuading to the practice of Virtue, and to the contempt of Death,
because of the Advantages which good Men should find thereby hereafter. And 3
dly, What is still more, He always brings in Atticus, the other Person in the
Dialogue, as convinced by what he offers, and fully satisfied concerning the
Truth of the Immortality of the Soul: by which the Orator enforces what he says
concerning the Contempt of Death, and the Practice of Virtue. 4 ly. To put this
matter out of controversy, and make it incontestably manifest, that Tully was
not such a Skeptic in the Question concerning the Immortality of the Soul, as
one or two of my Acquaintance contend; at the latter end of a set Speech which
Plato puts into the Mouth of dying Socrates.

N. 99. Sed tempus est jam hinc abire me, vos ut vitam agatis: Vtrum autem sit
melius, Dii immortales sciunt, hominem quidem scire arbitror neminem.

But it is now time that I go hence and die, do you my Friends live on: but
which of the two is best, that only the Gods know; I am of the mind that no Man
living does. Upon these words the Orator has this Reflection. Etsi, quod
praeter Deos negat scire quenquam, id scit ipse, utrum melius; nam dixit ante;
sed suum illud, nihil ut affirmet, tenet ad extremum. Tho, that which he says
none but the Gods know, he himself knows well, he knows which is better; he had
before declared which is better; but that way of his (that way afterward
called Academic) of determining nothing, he holds to the end. Here Tully
plainly reproves that foolish Philosophical Humor, which obtained so much, of
talking off and on, in matters of moment; and declares it as his opinion, that
however Socrates in his last words did seem to play fast and loose, yet he was
in his own mind sufficiently convinced of the Immortality of the Soul, and the
future State, on which account it was better for injured good Men to die than
to live.

I hope this labor, to prove that Tully did not disbelieve the Immortality of
the Soul, consequently nor a future State, may not seem to the Reader tedious,
or impertinent: for if it could be made out, that the wisest of the Heathens
rejected these Notions, and never used them as Arguments to encourage Virtue,
and restrain Vice, it would be a prejudice against my Discourse, who have
endeavored to gain some Credibility to these Notions from the Principles of
natural Reason. It would be a prejudice, I say, against, not an utter
subversion of my Discourse; for my Adversaries must show where I have argued
wrong, and not tell me of great Authorities against me, if they mean utterly to
subvert it. But if, when they object great Authorities against me (which I
acknowledge to be a Prejudice, for how can I hope to see farther than such a Man
as Tully?) I give a fair Answer, and make it appear, that the Citations which
are objected against me are by my Adversaries mistaken, and misapplied; and
that the same, if rightly considered, are so far from contradicting, that they
favor the Doctrines which I defend, by the acknowledged Principles of natural
Reason; then, I think, I have been all this while strengthening those Doctrines,
not spending my time in an impertinent Labor. I have this to say further for
my self, I have not only answered the Objections which have been offered by my
learned Acquaintances, but I have also accounted for those Difficulties which I
my self chanced to meet with while I read those Tracts of the great Orator,
whence their Objections were taken. For, I will never contend for any Opinion,
against which I know of an Objection, which appears so considerable, that it is
the interest of the Opinion to have the Objection passed over, without any
notice taken of it. If I could not have solved those Difficulties, which I my
self chanced to meet with, I would have given up the Authority of Tully, tho
the Objections of my Adversaries were not of strength sufficient to oblige me
to it. In pleading a Cause at the Bar in our Courts of Judicature, the Lawyer
will answer what he can, but to be sure start no Objection against his Client,
which is not easily answered; and possibly sometimes he may win the day by
taking no notice of some Circumstances which the Adversary oversees: but in our
Disputes concerning Philosophical Truths, a Man must leave no Objection without
Reply; for these Causes are tried over and over again every day, and he that
takes no notice of a considerable Objection, will be found out by one or other,
and supposed to have silently passed it by, as being conscious of the weakness
of his Cause, and unable to answer it.

Again, in answering I have answered fairly; I have not by a cheating
Translation or otherwise, misrepresented the Author to serve the ends of my
Discourse, which is a method but too frequent with them who dispute for
Religious Opinions, but thereby they do their Cause, be it good or bad, a great
disservice: for a bad Cause by dissembling Artifices is rendered more odious in
the eyes of all prudent Men who search diligently into the nature of things;
and a good Cause by such poor methods is brought under deserved suspicion. I
will give one instance of this, which shall not be an invidious one, from a
Writer now living, nor shall it be off from our purpose. Mr. Stanley in his
Life of Socrates, represents that renowned Philosopher (very truly in my
opinion) as a Man persuaded of the Immortality of the Soul, and of a future
State: but he overdoes the thing by dissembling Artifice, in a prevaricating
Translation of a Passage from Plato, as if the truth of the Immortality of the
Soul, and the future State were in danger of finding no acceptance among
thinking Men, unless Socrates spoke up to these Notions with as full Assurance,
and in as plain and positive words, as any Christian whatsoever. The Passage in
Plato is this:

Pla. Phaed. (...).

For a Translation of this Paragraph Mr. Stanley was pleased to give his
Readers these words:

Truly did I not believe I should go to just Gods, and to Men better than any
living, I were inexcusable for contemning Death; but I am sure to go to the
Gods, very good Masters, and hope to meet with good Men, and am of good
Courage, hoping that something of Man subsists after Death, and that it is then
much better with the good than the bad. But this is not a fair rendering of this
Passage which Plato ascribes to Socrates.

If there be nothing altered nor left out, this Speech (which Plato relates as
the Speech of Socrates, or makes for him, agreeable to the Sentiments he
supposed Socrates to entertain) in plain English sounds thus:

For did I not think to go, O Simmias and Cebes, first to other Gods wise and
good, in the next place to Men deceased better than those here among the
living, I should offend in being so willing to die. But now well you know that
I hope to go to good Men, tho of this I have not all the Confidence imaginable:
but that I shall go to the Gods very good Masters, of this you well know that I
have as strong a confidence, as of any such like thing; so that for this cause
I am not so much troubled to die, but I have hope concerning the Dead; and as
it was said of old, it shall go better with the good than the bad.

This is the Picture which Plato draws of Socrates; the bolder strokes which
Mr. Stanley gives to it, may perhaps grace it, but then they misrepresent it.
According to Plato, Socrates did think the Soul was immortal, Socrates was
persuaded that there was a future State. He hoped it should go well with him
after Death, nay he had a Confidence of these things; not indeed all the
Confidence imaginable, not such a Confidence as Men have of a mathematical
demonstration; but yet such a Confidence as was sufficient to make him content
to die rather than do a base or a mean thing to save his Life.

After all that I have now said and answered, both to the Author of the Inquiry
concerning Virtue, and to the occasional Objections of others, in justification
of that grand Motive to Virtue, the Hopes of future Advantage, and in proof of
the immortality of the Soul, and the certainty of a future State, I do freely
confess that if any Person has thrown off a conscientious Sense of the
necessary Obligation which lies upon all rational Men to be virtuous in
private, as well as public; in the most difficult, as well as the most easy
Circumstances, then have I said nothing which can much affect him: but then I
please my self to think, that if a Man does not look upon himself as freed from
such Obligation, if he does not own himself a dangerous Member of Society,
unworthy to be loved as a Friend, unfit to be trusted in any matter of moment,
where he may be tempted to be false, with probable hopes of concealing the
Crime, he will hardly be able to get rid of the moral Demonstrations which I
have made out, evincing the Immortality of the Soul, the certainty of a future
State, and the Wisdom of living so in this World, as Men that expect to receive
hereafter endless advantage by their Virtue.

But what, it may be said, if a Man positively denies the Immortality of the
Soul, and esteems the future State as a Fable; if he looks upon Virtue as
obligatory, only while it serves the Necessities and Comforts of this Life
present, have we no Arguments to evince the erroneousness of that mischievous
Opinion? Yes surely; but in order to do it, we must consider what particular
System of universal Nature those Men frame to themselves against whom we
dispute. The very learned Dr. Cudworth in his Intellectual System, for a fuller
Confutation of Atheism, pretends to examine, and refute all the various forms
thereof: Now tho I would not subscribe to all which that most highly deserving
Author urges against the several Forms of Atheism; yet I am persuaded most of
his Materials are proper and serviceable, only I am inclined to think, they are
capable of still farther Improvement.

The Democritic and Epicurean Atomic Hypotheses; also the Anaximandrian or
Hylopathian, and that wild fancy of corrupted Stoicism, which supposes the
World to be one huge Plant or Vegetable, having a plastic Nature, orderly
disposing the whole without Mind or Understanding; these the Doctor thinks are
by sagacious Moderns laid aside as indefensible: but the boldest and most
dangerous Hypothesis which is now revived, is that of Strato Lampsacenus, which
he calls the Hylozoic Hypothesis, that ascribes to Matter, Life and Perception.
The Moderns who take up with this Scheme, assert that the whole Mass of
boundless Mattter has existed from all Eternity, moved, as now, from all
Eternity, and by its various, natural, and necessary Motions has produced and
will produce all that ever has bin, and that ever shall be produced; that human
Cogitation is nothing but local Motion, yet all Motion not Cogitation, but only
Motion so circumstanc'd, in Bodies so modified. Against this bold and
precarious Hypothesis, the Doctor disputes in the close of his 3 d Chap. and
partly in the 5 th. But without wrong to him, I may venture to affirm that he
has not said all which may be said; and one thing I wish unsaid, viz. that the
Hylozoic Philosophers are not fit to be disputed with any more than a Machine
is, p. 846. l. 5. For, this has the face of an ingenious Reflection; but then
it is also liable to be suspected, as an Artifice of a Disputant that is at a
nonplus, and has no convincing Argument to offer against his subtle Adversary.
Yet this may be pleaded for the learned Doctor, that he did not turn the
Hylozoics off so, whatever he contemptuously and angrily replied, when he was
surpised with the thoughts of their strange and precarious Assertion, which
makes Cogitation to be nothing but local Motion: for in the abovecited place,
and elsewhere, he disputes against this Assertion.

One thing he observes very well, viz. That which inclines the Hylozoics to
their Hylozoicism, is, Because they are sensible, that if there were any other
Action beside local Motion, there must needs be some other Substance beside
Body, p. 845. It is one good step toward the cure of a Disease, rightly to
understand the Nature of it, the Causes whence it sprang, and the Fuel with
which it is fed; but after that, a particular Skill is necessary to work the
Cure. The learned Doctor in his Preface, where he gives an account of his Book,
affirms that it is as certain to him as any thing in all Geometry, that
Cogitation and Understanding can never possibly result out of Magnitudes,
Figures, Sights, and local Motions. I am as much persuaded as he, that
Cogitation and Understanding cannot result from these Principles; but I wish he
had pointed his Finger to the place where he has made this as certain as any
thing in all Geometry. But yet I will not say that a Geometrical Certainty of
this Truth is not to be had; what one Man has not demonstrated, another may.
Mr. Abbadie among a great deal of Lumber, Abbadie of the Truth of Christian
Religion.
has some excellent Materials; I will select what I judge most conclusive, and
not scruple to alter what I hope to dispose to better advantage. Matter
acquires not Thought by Motion, because in Motion there are but three things
which can be considered: the Thing moved; the Place from whence it is moved; the
Place to which it comes. Now Thought is none of all this. If it be said that
Thought is the effect of some particular Motion, then it will follow, that that
Effect is nobler than its Cause; and not only so, but likewise that it is an
Effect quite of another nature than its Cause.

Bare Motion does not produce Thought, because all Matter does not think.
Different kinds of Motion do not produce Thought, because that which makes
Motion different is only slowness or swiftness, directness and obliquity, with
which Thought has no more affinity, than with Motion considered abstractly.

It is not barely Matter which acts when we think, because the parts of Matter
may act, and be reflected on upon another; but it is impossible that any of them
should act or be reflected on themselves; whereas that thinking Principle which
is in us reflects on it self, on its own Actions, Thoughts; and on the manner
of its actings and thinking.

Matter and Motion act only on Objects present and contiguous: but Thought
flies over the wide Ocean, pervades the Earth, and reaches the Stars; reviews
past things, and makes useful Conjectures at Futurities; reflects, provides
against Accidents that may or may not happen.

By Diseases Men sometimes have their Heads so disordered, that their
Imaginations are confused, and things appear to them otherwise than they really
are, while their Understandings remain clear, and they argue justly upon those
false appearances, being very sensible that their Diseases occasion those false
appearances of things; thence it seems natural to conclude that their Reasoning
Principle, which is not so easily hindered in its Office by Diseases, is
something distinct from Matter.

These are the most considerable Philosophic Arguments, which I remember to
have read against the Hylozoics: I hope I have not spoiled them in my recital;
but the Reader may consult the French Author translated by Lussan.

I have nor Health, nor Time, nor yet Learning enough to make the most of a
philosophic Argument drawn from the acknowledged Principles, Laws, and Powers
of Matter against these Hylozoics: but I beg leave to offer one or two
Thoughts, such as they are, against these bold and precarious Philosophers.

The first shall be Argument ad hominem: If I should assert, that the Table on
which I now write, does understand and think, the Hylozoics could no more
demonstrate the contrary, than I can demonstrate that Matter, however moved, is
incapable of thinking. But,

2. This seems to me Demonstration: If Thought be nothing but Matter moved, it
is impossible for us to conceive a thought of a thing which is not Matter.
Again, if Matter of itself does not think but as it is moved, then it is Motion,
not Matter, which is Thought, or the Cause of Thought: but how extravagant and
contradictious is it to affirm, that an Accident which relates to Matter is a
real thing, or the cause of a real Effect, which is of another nature, and more
noble than Matter?

3. There can be no such thing as Free Will in Man, if there be nothing but
Matter in the World: For, the Laws of Matter are constant, one and the same
without variation; and if there be no such thing as Free Will in Man, then
there is no such thing as Virtue or Vice. Now I am of the Mind, that he who
without prejudice seriously considers this Argument, will be abundantly
satisfied that Matter, however moved, is incapable of thinking, tho he has not
a Geometrical Certainty, or intuitive Knowledge of the same.

If I had a good Benefice instead of a lean Vicarage, I could be content with a
Parliamentary Right to the Tithes of my Parish, and let the Jure Divino Right
go: So I think, an honest good Man may be satisfied, safely satisfied, that
Matter, however moved, cannot think; because if there be no free Mind able to
alter the natural and necessary motions of Matter, then there is no such thing
as right and wrong; and to talk of regular and irregular Passions and
Affections, is a Jest. But I leave the prosecution of this Subject to the abler
Pen of a worthy Friend, whose Meditations I long to see. But I hope the Reader
will allow me to have sufficiently proved what I first undertook, viz. That the
prospect of future Advantage does not take off from the praise of Virtue: also
that he who believes there is no God, or who calls the immense Body of
universal Matter, God; that he who denies the Immortality of the Soul, and
expects no future State, does thereby disown the most powerful Obligations to
Virtue, makes himself unfit to be loved entirely, or trusted confidently: for
Men of common Sense will ever choose to love and trust him, who looks upon
himself under the highest Obligations and most forcible Motives to be grateful
and faithful; and be apt to neglect him, whatever Virtue he professes, or is by
Nature and Education inclined to, who owns no Obligations nor Motives to
Virtue, besides present usefulness, which in some Cases it has not, and no
restraint of pleasing Vice but human Laws, which reach not a world of Cases.

POSTSCRIPT to a Friend, who dissuaded the printing of the foregoing Sheets.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to allow the Strength of my Argument through this whole
Discourse, but you would not have me publish my Papers, because you can see
little in them, beside what you met with some years since in a judicious and
solid small Tract, entitled, A Letter to the Deists.

This is very friendly, and I own the Obligation; but I were unworthy of your
Friendship, if I should subscribe to your Judgment, because you are my Friend:
and I were still unworthy, if denying to be governed by you, I should refuse to
give my Reasons.

I am not of the Comic Poet's mind, from whom we have the Proverb, Nullum est
jam dictum, quod non dictum fuit prius. I rather fancy, since the Universe has
no bounds, that there may be eternal Progressions in Reasonings, eternal
advances in Knowledge: so that if perhaps I have wrote nothing but what has bin
wrote before, yet there is no cause to imagine the Subject to have bin so
copiously and clearly handled already, that nothing of moment can be added by
the study of them who come after. Upon which account I had reason on my side,
thus far at least, viz. That I endeavored to give some new accession of
strength to those Foundations of natural Religion, without which I don't see
how difficult Virtue can subsist. Let me digress so far as here to call in a
few words, which should have bin inserted in my Dissertation, being part of a
Letter wrote to me, by one that uses me kindly as you do. It seems plain, that
no Man loves Misery, no nor Labor to no purpose; and he that thinks he shall
cease to be after this Life, must think he shall cease to exercise Virtue, his
chief Delight, or his All: so he has no Motive to die for the sake of his
Country, or on any noble account whatsoever; and at last will come to this
Result, that Self-preservation is the truest Virtue, tho on the meanest Terms.

But to return, that I have troubled the Press with nothing but what the Letter
to the Deist made public some years past: This I think I may, without
departing from the Rules of Modesty, positively deny. But not to offend the
Reader with a Crambe bis cocta, I shall only note, that it must be granted me,
I did not borrow from that Letter all which I have offered in defense of this
Doctrine, that the hope of future Reward is not a base mercenary, but a
reasonable and just Motive to Virtue. 2. Nor thence have I borrowed what I have
answered to the Objections of nominal Deists drawn from the Writings of moral
Heathens: for I met those Objections in Conversation, not Books. 3. What I have
opposed to the Author of the Inquiry concerning Virtue, could not be borrowed
from the Letter to the Deist, which was wrote before it, but must needs be as
new as the Inquiry: And if the Inquiry be an ingenious, subtle, erroneous, and
dangerous Book, then it will be farther granted, that a solid good answer comes
seasonably and usefully: whether my Answer be such, the Reader must judge; but
for your part, Sir, you have approved it, and therefore if you agree with your
self, you must not blame my printing.

Now as to those particular Arguments, the Substance of which I confess my self
to have in common with the Letter to the Deist; I will not say as Hierom's
Master Donatus commenting on the above cited Verse from Terence, Pereant qui
ante nos nostra dixerunt; Confounded be all they who said the things which I
have said, before I said them: no, I had rather go into that better natured
Defense; Non quicquid cum antiquis convenit, ex antiquis sumptum: Upon which
Lemma, Paschasius has this witty Epigram, tho he points it with a little of
Donatus's assuming waggish Self-love.

Plurima me veterum sensa expressisse fatebor,
Ne fatear, fursim, vel furiosus ego.
Multa sed ex aliis falso sumpsisse putabis,
Quae mea percupiam dicier, and mea sunt.
Convenient tamen haec antiquis: Di male perdant
Antiquos, mea qui praeripuere mihi.
I gave these Lines to be translated to my second Son, the Boy you took such a
fancy to.

Often on ancient Fancies have I hit,
And for this Luck must I be called a Cheat?
They err who say I steal the Ancients Fame;
For I no more than what is my own do claim:
In mine, and theirs, if you no difference see,
Blame the Ancients for their stealing mine from me.
Now my hand is in to you, it comes into my mind, that you once acquainted me,
that some of my learned Acquaintance disliked this Essay: But this I am far
from putting off with that old hypocritical Saw, No Man can have a meaner
Opinion of my performance than I have my self; because their dislike, whereof I
have bin all along conscious, prompted me to consider the matter again and
again; and that repeated Consideration has confirmed me in my Sentiments, and
made me in love with them: so that if these Acquaintances can still be my
Friends notwithstanding their Dislike, I will thank them for their Dislike, as
well as for their Friendship.

This notwithstanding, I am not so vain as to reckon that I have, borrowing or
not borrowing, exhausted the Argument; or said half which their singular Parts
and Seize might have helped me to have said: no, for even my present
mediocrity could and would have added some method, and farther strength to it;
but my much Business, and many Infirmities made me willing to put such an end
to it as you see.

I have now one Favor to beg of you, and I take leave: pray thank my
Adversaries in my Name for their opposing the Sentiments in this Dissertation
defended; thank them heartily. I really hold it a very singular good Office to
have my Sentiments seriously and strenuously opposed: for, no longer than I can
defend, will I retain them. Old as I am, I am not so afraid of altering my
Opinions, as not to listen to Reason whoever offers it: he that convinces my
Understanding, shall, while I live, lead my Affections; but if what is offered
has not evidence enough to convince me, they use me very hardly who will not
admit me into their Friendship, because I am not their Proselyte. I am pleased
to be seriously and strenuously opposed by them who best can do it, even tho
they go for Heretics, that so I may go upon the surer ground.

And for this cause I much wonder, that the best Reformed Church should have
any of her Sons desirous to put a Restraint on the Press: for all Truths, the
more they are impugn'd, the surer they are established; and the more the Press
is restrained, the more our Articles will be suspected, whether there be any
other just cause of suspicion or no. There Is ten thousand to one against a Man
who takes Doctrines upon trust, and assents to this or that Scheme with Faith
implicit; but that which he suffers to be examined, to be sifted, and which he
himself considers over and over again, in that it is impossible he should be
deceived, unless it be a matter wherein he may be mistaken innocently, and
without prejudice to his future hopes.

I thought I had done, but one thing more comes in my way. You once let me know
that I was suspected to favor heretical Opinions. To this I answer, I hope it
is no fault not to run from the converse of Men of Learning and Probity; but
from the Persons you named I do assure you I differ, and that in all points
that can be insimulated of Heresy: particularly I think the Socinians in the
wrong, and never was of their Congregation; I do not know the names of three
Socinians, nor the Persons of any two such; but I confess I look upon them as
Men of Learning and Probity. Allow me but to have Charity for all honest Men
however differently persuaded, and you will have no cause to deny me being a
not unworthy Member of the Church of England. And pray observe one thing more,
their Conversation is very narrow, who are persuaded altogether as the Men they
converse with. I take it, that a free Conversation is the most useful thing in
the World, and that their Company is worth nothing who will not endure
Contradiction. They whom I converse with, know, and are not angry with my
Church-Sentiments; I know, and will never persecute their dissent: For, Non
eadem sentire bonis, de rebus iisdem,
Incolumi licuit semper amicitia.


FINIS.

