Truth shut out of doors: BEING A BRIEF DISCOVERY Of The partial and unjust
proceedings OF Some formal professors, Members of a Church at Rumney in Kent,
AGAINST JOHN DAY, The Publisher hereof.

Isai. 5. 7. -- And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry.

Isai. 59. 14. 15. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands
afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. Yea truth
fails; and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey: and the Lord
saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the west end
of Paul's. 1653.

To the impartial Readers, who have not the faith of our L^^^ Christ, the Lord
of glory, (...) of persons.
IT may seem strange to many hearts, that such an illiterate man as I am in
Tongues of the Learned, should encounter with so many who have the learned one
to say for them. And truly I should have born it, if the Truth were much
regarded by them, were it against my person only, though it wound my
reputation and livelihood; but they smite me, and take away my veil from me,
and veil, me with reproach and lying Pamphlets, only to render me odious
through my native County. If they had been my professed enemies, I should have
born it; but being seeming friends, yet proved not only enemies, but wolves to
me in sheeps clothing: therefore what sentence soever man's judgment pass on
me, it shall not hinder me from declaring the truth of the proceedings which
were between us: truth makes not shamed; it is stronger then Wine, Kings, or
Women: therefore Christian reader, I beseech thee be not troubled, but read and
judge impartially, and then thou shall find it is the Lords doing, and that he
is shaking not the earth only, but the heaven also, that that which cannot be
shaken may remain. What if the Lord came to send fire on the earth, and has
already kindled it? he came not to send peace, but a sword of the spirit, to
cause division, that the word of God might be fulfilled; five in one house,
three against two, and two against three: and it is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes: seeing therefore that by the mouth of babes and
sucklings he will perfect his praises, I shall endeavor to give you a perfect
veiw of my charging them with partiality, and their unjust proceedings against
me, and leave the success to God. My Brethren that hated me, cast me out,
saying, Let God be glorified: but he has appeared to my joy and comfort, and I
hope they will be ashamed: although they have judged me born in sin, and must
not teach them, yet my integrity shall carry me forth, until the Lord raise me
from among the pots, with such a beauty or honor as it pleases him.

Truth shut out of doors, etc.
I Having had sad experience, for these seven years and more, of the tyranny
which those that bear rule do execute upon their poor brethren in Congregations
of professed Saints as not only tything of mint, annise, and cummin*
neglecting the weighty matters of mercy and judgment, and non-respect of
persons: contrariwise, they have laid heavy burdens upon others* which they
themselves would not willingly bear; taking all advantage against those they
affect not, to take them by the throat, and will be paid the uttermost farthing
though they owe them nothing but love: which on the sufferers part, has passed
by many of their infirmities: yet still they make them offenders for a word, or
hearing any they affect not, and suchlike trifles; straining at gnats* and
beholding of motes in others, and are so far from beholding the beam in their
own, that they swallow a Camel of the Scribes and Pharisees hypocrisy;
outwardly appearing to men to be righteous, when within they are full of all
iniquity and filthiness. And finding Partiality to be the root of all other
branches in Congregations, I have labored with my best strength to fight
against it: And in walking with a people in Rumney and Lidd, and thereabouts,
finding it predominate in many of them in several particulars, I informed them
of it: but they slighted and envied me yet the more.

And first of all, a poor woman of the Congregation being sick, desired me that
intercession might be made to God for her. Which being done, and publicly
known in the Church, I lodging in the house, beholding the sick not visited by
them, and sometimes in want of both spiritual and temporal relief. I discharged
my duty in encouraging her in the faith of Jesus, and suchlike, as I had
opportunity: and she being desirous, I prayed with and for her: but they came
not at her: had not two or three of the National Church (Samaritane-like)
relieved her, she would have had little comfort or company; for none of the
brethren came to visit her: which was the first cause of my charging them with
Partiality, in slighting the poor, and honoring and visiting the rich often,
as James says, despising the poor. After reproving them, a worthy Deacon,
which can neither read nor preach, sent her a little portion; but came not at
her himself, because he had so many sheep of his own, that did hinder him from
visiting Christ's. And not only he, but generally they all neglected visiting
of Christ in his poor member. But if a rich man's head does but ache; O what
haste they make to visit him. And this is the first particular I charged them
with.

Secondly, they making me an offender for a word speaking, in calling one fool,
and another knave, for belying of me; which charge of theirs I proved false:
but they questioned them not for belying me, but publicly admonished me, and I
gave all satisfaction in confessing my fault. Although I reproved their evil,
yet they partially passed by others belying of me. Several weeks after, I
informed them again of their neglect, and told them they were partial, because
they did not as well reprove them for wronging of me, as openly reprove me for
mis-placing a word in reproving their untruth. Judge me, O my friend,
impartially. At which time being not able to clear themselves from partiality,
they were silent. Then Satan appeared in an old man, like one of Susanna's
accusing Elders, with a lie of inveterate envy, as follows; which was this,
That he should ask the forementioned woman if I were not a comfort to her; and
she answered, No, but in calling her devil when she was sick. He affirming
this, I absolutely denied it to be true, that I called her so when she was
sick; but I denied not but I had called her devil before, in reproving Satan in
her often: and she has and will again bear me record, that it was in love, and
not in hatred. He thus accusing me, I desired some of the Congregation speedily
to enquire of the woman the truth concerning it: and two Members going that way
by chance, met with an Elder there, and desired him to ask the truth of it in
their hearing: and they heard her tell him that she never said so to him. For
all this, the Elder bearing a prejudice against me, willingly smothering his
lie, brought it not to the Congregation. I being acquainted with it by one of
those that heard her tell the business, yet remained silent many weeks: and
knowing it to be their duty to endeavor to find out the truth of the matter,
or his to declare it, and not to let his brother lie under sin; but he
partially willingly neglected the matter, as did the rest of them: at last,
being weary of their partial Babylonish carriage, I plainly told them they were
partial concerning me, in not clearing me, and admonishing my accusers, when
especially one of the chief Elders knew of it many weeks before. And when the
matter was declared by me, after my charging them, and proving him a liar, they
reproved him for wronging me; but they would not confess themselves in a fault
being partial, and so far from acknowledging their own, that they took his part
that was chiefest guilty, he being a rich man outwardly in worldly goods or an
Elder and Mayor Governor of Rumney the year before, could not forget to bear
rule in the Church the year after; nor by any means would they hinder him, but
bear him out in excusing him in his evils: as first, when I proved them
partially negligent, in not bringing my guilty accuser to acknowledgement of
the wrong he did me, he answered, he had not been with the Congregation many
weeks before: which I proved false to his face, before them all; yet they did
not blame him for that neglect, but they, to please him and their proud flesh,
would deal with me contrary to the Law of God and man; and only they that I
accused were my Judges, and many of them would not proceed to cast me out for
charging them with partiality: but the Bishop whom I charged replied he would
lay down his office, and act no more in it with them, and further, that they
should cast me or him out. So, to satisfy his mind, some have took upon them
the whole power into their hands, and would not be satisfied, unless I would
acknowledge my self to be faulty in charging them with Partiality. To whom I
replied, I would never be sorry for speaking the truth, seeing I had evidently
made it appear to many of the said Congregation: and those whom I chiefly
accused being judges in their own cause, I did beseech them in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, that they would admit my trial of charging them to the
judgment of some other Congregation* and that I might not be judged and
condemned by those persons only which I justly accused; but beseeched them
that they would be pleased to grant me the favor that I might choose two or
three of some other Congregation, and they to choose whom they pleased, although
it were the heads of those I accused. But this reasonable request of mine would
not be granted, but they replied they would make use of their power themselves,
and deal with me, and not give way to the judgment of others: which power,
whence they had it, from heaven or hell, I know not well; but I leave it to the
judgment of others. I beseech you, Christian friends, consider whether ever
there were such a thing heard of, that a man must be judged and condemned by
those whom he justly accused. Was it ever heard in the Church of the Saints in
the Primitive times? And if this be Canonical Scripture Churchorder, root out
the Covenant of Separation* and expound me old Jesus the son of Sirach's
Apocrypha, in his 13 Chap. as follows: If a rich man fall into an error, he
has many helpers; he speaks proud words, and yet men justify him: but if a
poor man go wrong, he is punished; yoa, though he speak wisely, yet'can it have
no place. When the rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue: and look
what he says, they praise it unto the clouds: but if the poor man speak, they
says what fellow is this? and if he do amiss, they shall destroy him. Riches
are good unto him that has no sin in his conscience, and poverty is a wicked
thing in the mouth of the ungodly. Seeing by sad experience toward my self and
others, I can discover their partial dealings, to parallel or really fulfill
these Scriptures to be a true prophecy concerning themselves and many others
in these times, as well as formerly, therefore I desire to be excused for
quoting them, for because when the said Bishop or Elder whom I chiefly accused,
declared he would lay down his office in case they cast me not out; they
telling him he spoke rashly, and that he must be humbled for it, but after I
informed them of it, and charged them with wilful partiality in the act; they
not before reproved him: and there, in the audience of the people, he said he
would never be sorry for his wilful rash speeches; which thing was smothered by
them, and he justified. Which when I saw they walked not uprightly, and they
hated reproof from me, and became persecuting enemies to me for telling of them
the truth; so perceiveing their intent to root me out, though they could bring
nothing for matter of fact against my person; but their wills their laws to
proceed against me; being void of hopes, after a long time forbearing this
unjust carriage, and knowing their speedy intentions, I took an occasion to
discharge my conscience, to show them in an Exercise* how the poor Saints of
Christ were crucified as well as others by false brethren: But the foresaid
Bishop, with his Lordly words, would have silenced me, to whom I replied, My
message was the mind and will of God, and I would declare it. Which when he
saw, he strived to cause the people to withdraw, but they stood not in so much
in awe of him: but when he saw they followed him not, he stood to hear what
fell to his lot; but patience from murmuring he had not: But when I had ended,
some objections he had got; which before the people I answered: But when he
could say no more, he complained of me before them all, for not doffing my hat*
I told him the reason was* my hands were both full, with a Lock* Key, and Pot*
and therefore desired to be excused for than Satisfaction being given, the Lord
opened the mouth of a worthy Gentelman, though one of the world, to reprove the
folly or madness of the Elder or Prophet. The next first day following, the
Pastor of the said Congregation was exceeding earnest, beyond the truth, in
rendering me odious unto the people there present; and could prove nothing for
matter of fact against me: but I did acknowledge unto them that I was subject
to many infirmities* and for what they could desire in matter of satisfaction
according to the Scripture, I would lay my self down at their feet: and I did
demand often, beseeching them to name any thing they had against me for matter
of fact, and I would acknowledge my self before them all; but they proved
nothing but that only which I freely acknowledged, and gave them all
satisfaction in namely* jesting, which is my natural infirmity: but this would
not satisfy; but the Pastor would proceed to deal with me for charging them
with partiality; but an Elder whose tender conscience being more unseared,
would not consent unto it, nor very few of those that I had* charged: but he
being resolved to proceed, as I perceived, I took my leave of him, saying, I
would obey God in my conscience, rather then man; and so I came away. So the
week following they appointed to meet privately at the Pastors house,
pretending a full Church-meeting, when most of the people were gone that day
before they appointed; only some half a score, or not so many, were at this
consultation: and having some private advantage, as they supposed, against me,
sent to me to meet them there, but made me not acquainted with it, until I
came to the place where they appointed to deal with me: which was as
follows; That I should tell a member in case the said Elder should not bring
the forementioned business to light, concerning my accuser which he knew had
falsely accused me, I would kindle a fire among them: Which words, as they
judged carnally, made a mountain, and they would know whether I would be
humbled for them: I answered, I should never, my intention being real for the
glory of God. But they were so far from demanding a reason of me, that the
Pastor replied to the rest of the Soliciters, We have heard, what need we any
further witness? So they put their names to fignifie their minds one to
another; and some few of that small company would not consent unto it, but
withdrew: so eleven or twelve at the most passed vote upon me, whereas there
was above threescore persons at that time members of that Congregation; yet
these few took all the power in their own hands; and the Pastor, to please
them, as shall be proved, gave them the next first day such an afternoons
drinking, as pleased their Herodias daughter-like hearts: But I shall leave
this, and hasten to reply an answer to their Libellous letters throughout.

And first, they judged me a superfluous branch, and rotten member; but
wherefore, I know not, except it be for discovering their rotten Principles,
and corrupt dealing and carriage to their poor brethren that believe not
implicitly with them: yet they say, Not only for my evil carriage, and
charging them with partiality; yet proves nothing as to the particular case of
my charging them; which I shall leave to impartial judgments, and not only call
heaven and earth to witness, and my own conscience and theirs, but several
witnesses which are yet members of the Congregation, to justify the truth of
my writing, and their partiallity toward me, before the sentence of
non-communion with me: I shall pass by their censure of rendering me odious in
pride and ambition, though they ought to have bin silent, seeing I did satisfy
them with confession and replied to their mentioned particulars: as first, that
I have falsely accused the Church; secondly, that I apprehended a Brother in a
fault through forgetfulness, not only through neglect, but through an evil
intent: They say, I did not mind that Brother of his forgetfulness, but say I
straightly charged another that he should not mind him of it, and did declare to
the same Brother that I would set a fire among them; the which they say has
appeared, by causing a division. Thirdly, They say, I have often disturbed the
Church on the first day, and many days, and thereby caused much division; so
that when I begun to dispute, they could enjoy no more teaching among them that
day, and many days, and thereby caused much division among them, to the making
a rent in the Church; and but a few in the Church, save those persons that side
with me, are worthy of any better terms from me then Devils, or Calves, or
Alexanders. Fourthly, They say I justify my self in a lie: and when two
Elders came to admonish me, I should say they came to entrap me; and by that
time they should speak twenty words, I should tell them that they had told a
hundred lies: and also they say I am both in exercise and in common discourse,
and in reasoning about the things of God, exceedingly given to jeering and
mocking: And this is the whole sum of their charging me: which things I briefly
reply unto.

As first, for my false accusing of the Church, they should have done well to
have mentioned wherefore or in what I accused the Church, and not to require me
to be humbled for I know not what.

And as for the Second particular, you here discover your selves plainly, that
you are partial, because you judge me before the time, and excuse him with
forgetfulness; which is more then you know, and I through an evil intent: alas
poor hearts, you are fitter to be Lawyers then impartial Judges in Churches:
but I would have you know, that my conscience is clear in that matter, for not
minding him of that you say he forgot: it is strange he should forget the
weightiest matters of the Church, and remember very trifles: but being an
Elder, he ought to have more care of his charge then fo. A bad excuse* some say
is better then none. And for my telling him of it* if you knew what you wrote,
it lay on their parts that heard him made acquainted with it; on yours to
enquire after it, you being not ignorant of the business, and not for me to be
troubled to bring my own cause before you: not should I now, if the truth
suffered not as well as my person by you. For my straightly charging another* you
speak false; but I told him the Elder did know my accuser had belyed me: and in
case he did not bring it to light, I should kindle fire among them: but their
carnal hearts discerned not what fire I meant: but had there been evil in it,
and I had charged him; was not he more to blame to keep it so many months, and
the last day that I was at the meeting not to speak of it, when I demanded
several times before his face* and above forty more, which will justify that I
demanded often of them all, he being present what they had against me? yet not
mentioned by him, but privately consulted together that evening: but had they
done justly* they should have dealt with him for hiding it from them, and not
to send Libells up and down the Country of me. If it be as you say it has
appeared; if it be the fire that Christ came to send, it is that I did
endeavor to set, to the burning the hay and stubble partial works among them.

And as for the Third particular, my disturbing of them on the first day, it is
false, except you mean in objecting, when things appear to me to be false that
you teach: and that you enjoyed no more teaching that day and many days, it is
a very lie; except you were free to dispute as well as I. But indeed you would
feign have people believe as you say* and no more, and none to question what
you preach, as your Canons you ordered maintain; and this is one; That no
Brother should object till your whole days-work were ended, or most people
gone. If I made a division, or did cause a rent* it were better for people to
be broken to pieces, then established upon your carnal legal Principles: But
how or for what I caused a rent* you write not. It is well you grant that some
of those which side not with me are worthy of better terms from me: but there
are two lies in your three terms; for Calves I called Alexander not, nor
Alexanders in the plural number; but only the Smith, one of the inditers or
writers of that letter, I called Alexander because he did me much evil: nor
called I any Devils so often as my most intimate friends; and that never but in
love, when they reasoned fleshly or carnally from the spirit of Satan.

For the Fourth particular, for my justifying my self in a lie and for the
Elders admonishing me privately for charging them with partiality, which I
publicly proved: for their disorderly admonishing me in private; I told them
it was disorderly* and they came to entrap me: which thing appeared by that
odious untruth, that they spoke but twenty words; they spoke above half an
hour* and were not silent: and spoke above five hundred words, and at least
twenty false; and that was all I charged them with: But they hear with their
harvest-ears too soon: but when the great harvest is come, I fear they will be
sound some of them to be Apostles in show, but proved liars: in the mean time I
leave them to God.

And for this Last, I shall acknowledge that some times and in some cases, I
cannot but with the Saints of old closely check them for their carnal reason:
but for Exercising and reasoning about the things of God, they do me wrong, and
are more exceedingly given to judge me and others* and dote more upon our
motes, then behold the beams in their own eyes: although I must confess I am
too guilty of it, yet I shall entreat them to bear with me a little for this
time; and further, I shall entreat them to leave subscribing their names that
appoint them not; neither give consent as they have done in their Letter: as
for instance the last Elder mentioned in the Letter* never subscribed to it;
but on the contrary* told several friends they did it contrary to hi* will; and
also if he could see his name in the Letter he would blot it out. These things
an I prove by several witnesses of the Church to their faces. Now judge, I
beseech you, all that fear God* whether this be just* to subscribe* men's names
against me throughout the Country that consent not unto it. Also* in the second
place they subscribed the Elders name which I proved chiefly guilty: and I
suppose he would not discover his folly so much, as to subscribe his own name;
seeing it was to please his wilful and unjust mind, they cast me out.

To the Pastor of the said Congregation.
Most learned Apollo,
I Beseech you not to despise the instruction of a poor Tradesman, but in love
and self-denial examine your heart, and receive counsel from an inferior. I
have been informed of your late danger you were in in Smithfield, or
thereabout; which I am sorry for: but your call you had to it, is best known to
God and your self. You were a great Idol to many hearts before, and since I
fear you are more. That which I have to say unto you, is this: I advise you to
have a special care you be not listed high in your mind, and so become an Idol
to your self. I am the more jealous of you, because the more you are looked
upon, the more you are tempted to look upon your self. Examine your heart, and
answer me these sew Queries at your leisure.

As first, Whether those several score pounds gathered for you by the foresaid
Elder and another, were not a great cause of your doing that you did to please
him.

Secondly, Whether you did not object against and oppose my doctrine, rather
for fear your own would not be so much exalted as formerly it has been, then
any just ground you could bring from Scripture, seeing you confessed the truth
of it in dispute.

Thirdly, Whether you did not sin against the light of your conscience, in
passing sentence against me to please others; because when you were demanded by
a faithful brother whether you did it not with abundance of passion? you
replied, with tears, that you did; and that you should not have proceeded
against me so soon, if at all, but others provoked you to do it before you went
to London.

Of this I was informed by faithful members of the Church.

The Lord open your heart: for it is not impossible for you, as well as
Ephraim, to have here and there gray hairs, and see it not. So farewell.

Let all Christian friends that shall read this Treatise, consider this
following discourse.

When Israel of old went out of his Maker, God, to live upon objects of his own
self-righteousness, he sacrificed unto Baal, and burnt Incense unto graven
Images; but when he was a child, the Lord loved him; and because Ephraim made
many altars to sin, altars were unto him to sin: and that was the reason the
Lord accepted them not, but remembered their iniquities, and visited their sins
with their return into Egypt. The reason why is rendered* Hos. 8. the last
verse: For Israel has forgot his Maker, and has built temples, and multiplied
fenced cities: but I (faith the (...) send a fire upon his cities, and it shall
devour the (...) thereof. Now I consider Israel of old to be a real Type of the
professed Church of God outwardly; and as they were not all Israel that were of
Israel then; so (as the Apostle says) they are not now, but those that are
circumcised in heart, and love mercy, and do justly, and walk humbly with God,
and not with Ephraim build temples, or Judah multiply fenced cities of their
own righteousness; nor with the last mentioned seed of theirs in Matthew. 23.
from verse. 27. to 31. where the woe is pronounced to men outwardly appearing
righteous, but inwardly are full of violence; and build the Tombs of the
Prophets Religion, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say* If
they had lived in those days, they would not have done that which their
consciences were witnesses to themselves they did. These later are the fleshly
formal Israel now, as well as then: but the spiritual Israel is the
forementioned ones: And the Lord is kindling a fire, as I conceive, with the
sword of the Spirit to divide the mixed multitude, that be the pro^essed Israel,
that those that be approved may be made manifest. If I mistake not in the
understanding God has given me, the Lord is not a shaking the earth only, but
the heavens also, that that which cannot be shaken may remain; I mean, the
Churches of the professed Saints, which are with Peter building tabernacles of
contentedness in their minds with that light or knowledge they have already,
or glory which they see of Christ; which causes many to differ* because there
is a longing in some to be clothed upon with their house which is from heaven*
more then others. And because of the Tie of Conformity which is in Churches to
implicit lights, the Lord may justly break them to pieces: for I conceive that
by the kingdom spoken of by our Savior to be divided against it self* is not
meant only an earthly kingdom but may have reference to the visible Church, or
children of the kingdom of Christ; and that fulfilled spoken by the Spirit, If
ye bite and devour one another* ye shall be devoured one of another. And I
suppose the Lord does set the pure Israel free: he will destroy speedily, or
ere long, the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent, that those that the Son has made free, may be free indeed, and the
Lord that is the Spirit may give them the perfect law of liberty which he (...)
the oppressed members, and letting the captive free, (...) lain a long time
under the bondage of their Brethrend yoke (...) Spirit of Christ is now calling
them to take his Yoke only, (...) is eafie and light: and be weary in their
mind of their old capti^^ty; and joyfully embrace the rest and peace he gives
them: yea, I say, he is breaking Congregations to pieces; calling his out from
among then, commanding them to touch no unclean thing of men's traditions, or
Pharisaical self-righteousness, having nothing to do any more with Idols: and
I, says Christ, will reign you, and will be a Father to you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. The Lord Jesus Christ is now a
destroying of Churches merely formal, and will gather the spiritual to himself
having therefore the aforesaid Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of fleshly self-righteousness, and spiritual wickedness in high
places of the flesh, and perfect holiness in the self denial*fear and real love
of God; so shall we rejoice in the Lord always and again, I say rejoice.

FINIS.

