THE Essexian Triumviri: OR, A DISCOURSE BETWEEN Three Colchester-GENTLEMEN
Disguised in Masquerade, AND TITUS OTES, Concerning the present GOVERNMENT Both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, And the Election of Members to Sit in the House of
Commons Whenever it shall please His MAJESTY to call a PARLIAMENT.

LONDON: Printed for James Norris, at the Sign of the Kings-Arms without
Temple Bar. 1684.

TO THE Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of the County OF ESSEX.
AN Epistolar Address prefixed to any Treatise, is so Modish, that a Discourse
looks somewhat unornamental without it: yet in this Dialogue between the
Essexian Triumviri and T. Otes, there is somewhat more then a Custom or Fashion
to be pleaded by way of Apology; for indeed there is reason the Reader should
understand the bare design, without any specious Masque or Veil; which in short
is this: The very words, or the genuine sense of them, between the three
Colchester-Gentlemen and Otes, in any part of the Discourse or Dialogue, are
really true, and will be attested upon Oath, if required. What else is added,
as to the substance, will be aver'd and maintained by persons of Loyalty and
Integrity. What is additional, by way of Amplication, is the Latitude which the
Amanuensis assumed to himself, and is as willing to undergo the Test, as any
other person whatsoever, upon a strict Examination. All this tends only by the
three Loyal Colchester-Gentlemen, to advise all persons in the County of Essex,
to be as unanimous in the Election of Loyal and Serviceable Members, for the
service of their King and Country, as Otes and his Party are industrious to
promote those of the Dissenting Faction, to bring all (provided other Counties
should follow his Example) to a detestable Anarchie and Confusion; which it is
reasonably supposed all His Majesty's Liege Subjects will religiously
deprecate, and venture their Lives and Fortunes to prevent, in vindication of
Monarchy and the best of Governments, Ecclesiastical and Civil, as now by Law
established, against all Traitorous and villainous opposers.

Your Servant B. D.

THE ESSEXIAN TRIUMVIRI: OR, A Discourse between Three Colchester-Gentlemen in
Masquerade, and T. OTES, etc.
THE Ancients, though learned, were so fondly Superstitious, that the crossing
of a Hare, or the ominous noise of a Raven, would deter them from Visits or
Business that day; nor was it in the power of Rhetoric to dissuade them from
such weak and groundless Resolutions: what would they have said, had they been
deputed for this Visit, when as Three Essexian Gentlemen, who in Masquerade
designedly attempted it, to understand Otes his inclinations to the Government
as now established by Law? In the first Rencounter, after some knocking at the
door, there appears a lusty Fellow, the Servant of T. Otes, a strong Hatch
spik'd with Iron, (as a wall of Separation between them) and after some
discourse that being opened, a Chain cross the door: these are terrifying
objects, fit for the Emblem of Hell; a Prison, and the Devil Master of the
Appartment. But why this walking Monument of Villainy should be thus guarded;
why this T. O. that has no Wit, Wealth, nor Honesty, should be thus barricaded
up for security, is a gravelling Question; nor can I think of any ready answer,
but his inward regret for Profligate Actions, and a guilt of Conscience, ever
expecting the reward of them, punishment condign by the hand of every thing
that appears capable of being the Executioner of Revenge. But to the purpose:
after some tedious and impertinent (if a Man dare say so, for fear of being
thr^st into the Plot by neck and shoulders) they had admission, being first
asked who they were, and somewhat more strictly examined, they being at a door,
answer was made, that they were all Three Essex-Gentlemen, and the Doctors very
good Friends, they being men of interest in that County, and disguised in a
kind of a Riding Garb; and so disguised, only to know of this Patron of
Dissenters his Sentiments, and particularly who they were that the Factions
intended to put up for Members the next Election, when His Majesty should be
graciously pleased to issue out Writs for a Parliament. Being thus, not without
great difficulty introduced, they were accosted and received with all
imaginable Caresses by the Doctor in Pontificalibus; though it is the
astonishment of Modest Men, that he could ever have so much impudence as to
assume the Gown, Scarf, and Title of Doctor, which Degree he says he took in
the Academie of Salamanca, the very Padua of Spain; and a Nursery for
Physicians for the Body, and not for those of the Soul, as he pretends to be;
but it is pardonable upon his account, old Men and Travelers may Lie by
authority (and he that can Swear damnably, may a fortieri Lie most impudently)
for he that has been so notoriously forsworn himself about Persons and Places,
these little Peceadillo's, as the Spaniard calls them, may be Venial and pass
uncensur'd as humane frailties with some pity and commiseration, which others
turn into hatred and execration; and truly, give the Devil his due, I am
satisfied he has had more Curses thrown upon him, than there ever were
mentioned in the Ash Wednesday Commination; and some concisely wish, that all
the Plagues of Egypt Epitomized in one, might inevitably light upon him; how
deservedly, I leave it to the Reader to judge.

But now as to the condition of this Reverend, I know not by what Name or Title
to distinguish him, (for dignifying he never will deserve) Fop, Baptist,
Scaramouchi of the Gown, Buffoon of the Pulpit, the Sq^^^king Bag-pipe of
little or no Divinity, or what you please; it seems was found in a dismal and
painful condition, occasioned by some Paroxysms of a racking Gout; but what
Gout, since there are so many sorts, and these so dangerous, (I had almost said
scandalous) I shall leave it to conjecture. Notwithstanding this tormenting
indisposition, he could smile upon the Triumviri his Visitants, imagining that
they were persons would be as forward and vigorous to promote his Rebellious
Designs, and those of his Party, as they were capable of making an interest in
that County. After much loose Discourse about the Politic Affairs of the
Nation, (some particulars most material you shall have an account of in what
follows) he, according to the laudable custom of England, Do nothing rashly,
first let us drink, before we come to particulars, with no very audible or
laudable, but a squeaking whining tone, like a slavish Irishman, he was so
generous as to call his Man Tom, commanding him to bring them a Bottle of
Claret, and another of Sider, to Treat his Worthy Friends with, though the
Gentlemen proffered to send for Wine to treat the Doctor in his own Apartment;
but that being denied with a kind of Spanish pride, (I dare not say gravity)
they past it about one to the other, without remembering His Majesty or Royal
Highness, I presume'd but T. O. would not, durst not drink, by reason of the
affliction of the Toe; nor was it his custom abroad, as he said. But as to
that, before I proceed, I must interrupt the series of this Discourse with a
true and convincing Argument of his abstemiousness in Potables of this nature;
and that not only every night in the week, but on Sundays likewise: now Mr.
Marshal, both by Name and Office, can give you the best account of his
Sabbatical diversions, at the sign of Fifteen Shillings on the black-side of
the Royal Exchange, till he was routed out of the House on those days, and at
present keeps his Phanatical Nocturnal Cabal no longer there, where he sat as
Chairman of that unlawful Assembly, shaking his Noddle like an empty bottle,
till he drowned his little Wit and Brains in Claret; and then would about the
Noon of the night reel down the stairs like Boys down a hill, and his attendant
Janissaries were forced to gather up the inebriated Pollicionello. These are his
holy diversions, these his Religious Practices, Meritorious Works, for which
the Gown-man deserves Canonization, to be enrolled as the leading man of all
Factions, the prime promoter of Sedition, the Kid thwacker of the Nation; but
'twas a wonder that rain Action had not stirred up the Old Man in the rugged
Millenarian, who some years since, with the rest of that Rebellious Crew, was
so precipitate and villainous, as to Alarm our Metropolis, and endeavor to
subvert the Government, upon the fond and groundless conceit of a
Fifth-Monarchy of a thousand years duration here upon earth: that he should be
so Crest-fallen, and turned so great a Craven, as to suffer himself to be
Cudgelled by a Titular Soulless Doctor, a Nominal Parson, in his own house, in
a public room, before a pack of profligate Caballists, and all for the lucre
of a dish of Coffee. Monstrum, horrendum --

If the Aggressor had had so much courage as to write Man, (for I Am sure he
cannot Christian) somewhat might have been said by way of Apology; but to be
banged by an Urchin, is a piece of Tameness (not to say worse) unexampled.
Herein this I must aver for Orlando Furioso, that herein, and herein only, he
declared himself to be one of the Church Militant, the Don Quixot of Chivalry,
the Sancho Pancho of thwacking Achievements, the Blustering Don of Knight
Errantry, and the Millenarian Kill-Cow of the Nation. O Valiant Doctor! if I
may so call thee without a Solecism. But we will now proceed to some of the
rest of his virtuous qualifications, and give his true Portraict in some other
of his Actions, for the benefit of these Kingdoms, and the promotion of Loyal
Members to serve the King and Country in the Senate of England; in order to
which, the Essexian Triumviri desired to understand his Sentiments of a
Parliament; to which he replied secundum solitum, with a starcht formal
gravity, that there might be a Parliament suddenly called; but he thought fit
(a worthy Statist indeed to sit at helm, and steer the Ship of the Kingdom) --
Mildmay and -- Luther, or rather in his opinion, -- Mildmay and -- Eldred
should be Elected to stand for the County of Essex. But as for Mr. Honywood,
being asked what he thought of him, he said, There would be no use for him; for
in truth he did not know what to make of him. It seems he was not approved by
the Judicious Doctor to be a person qualified for the promotion of Traitorous
Designs, and therefore he must be raced out of the List of Parliament Men, and
not be admitted into the House upon any terms whatsoever. But proceeding
farther in their discourse, the Gentlemen desired to know what he thought of
Mildmay, lying under the dangerous circumstances of an Information, much
discourst of about the Town, for high Misdemeanors; and whether he was a Man
capable of Election upon that account. To which the Doctor made answer, Push!
that will be (...) obstacle at all, he might be Elected for all those ^^^inary
circumstances; and farther added, The Loyal Party have a design to put up Six
to be chosen Members; and upon that consideration, We (a rampant style in the
Plural number, for a Saucy, Malapert, Diminutive Doctor) do not question to
have the day; for that very thing would no ways tend to their interest. Thus
you may see how vigilant and active this Mushrom-Machiavilian is ready to
appear in Plotting and contriving any thing that may countenance Rebellion, and
promote the Hellish Designs of his Lord and Master, the prince of darkness, in
opposition to the good of the Nation, and the Interest of our Sovereign Lord
the King, (whom God preserve from the Damned Machinations of such Hellish
Boutefeux, such accursed Incendiaries as the Doctor and his Caballing Party.)
But to proceed: after he had thus learnedly harangu'd them for some time, The
Three Gentlemen in Masquerade farther said, seemingly to ingratiate themselves
with him, but really to sift the thoughts of his heart, (if those of a false
heart can be dived into or discovered) that at the last Electon, when he
Jehu-like came driving down furiously to Colchester in a Carosse with six
horses, (a fine piece of State for a pitiful Puny Fellow, whose Indigence and
Impudence conten^ for priority, and still sub Judice lis est which of these two
will bear away the Bell) he was so thronged after by those of that Country,
that they could not, without an unpardonable interruption, pay their due
respects to him, he being there so much concerned in point of interest, that a
person of great quality sent for him at Twelve of the clock at night, to have
some discourse with him about the Election of Members to sit in Parliament for
that County, and told him, that Sir Harbottle Grimston, Master of the Rolls,
desired to be excused from standing as Candidate in their nomination for a
Member of the House of Commons; to which Otes made no reply at the present
before him, but embraced a more fit opportunity to promote his designs among
the Phanatick Faction, (and a very fit place too, all things considered) which
was on a Bowling-green, where he frankly declared, like a Worthy and Learned
Gentleman of the Long Robe, (who could never write his Name right, if he ever
had one) till he was taught to spell it by the industrious and sagacious
Observator) that his intention in Coaching it down to Colchester, was not to
oppose the Election of Sir Harbottle Grimston, beforementioned, but only to
use the interest of their Party against the choice of Sir Walter Clarges; so
that it seems if he and his Abettors can rule the roast, there shall be no
person set up that has one grain of Loyalty in him, but only those persons, who
when assembled, may take such measures as they did in 1641. and all this must
be done in the fear of the Lord, for the repromotion of the Good Old Cause, the
settling of the Government, the advancement of Religion, the good and emolument
of the King and Country; which in plain English is no more than Protestantism
in Masquerade, and the blackest of Crimes, Rebellion, against as Clement and
Merciful a Monarch as ever swayed the Scepter, or wore an Imperial Crown, and
the subversion of the best Government in the Universe, as now settled and
established in these Kingdoms; and all this under the specious Vizard of
Religion, the common veil of all Horrid and Satanical Designs; so that we may
well cry out with the Prince of Poets, Tantum Relligio potuit snadere malorum?
Must Religion be still the Cloak of Villainy? Must the Masque of Divinity veil
the ugly Visage of Impiety? Shall Reformation in Church and State be ever
Synonymous to Rebellion and Subversion of the Government? Is there no other
rule or method in modern Polity to dethrone Kings, but by the specious
pretense of settling Religion and Government? These are a kind of Political
Brutes, that dare unman themselves to Unking their Lawful Prince and Monarch.
But to go on with the remainder of this Discourse: Otes farther acquainted the
Gentlemen, That one Sir (...) Shame would be put up to stand the next Election
in Colchester; but withal added, That would do no good at all, their designs he
must it seems have frustrated; and as for the County-Election, he did not at
all question but that those Friends beforementioned, viz. Mildmay and Eldred,
would he Elected Parliament Men, by reason of the Dissension between the
Gentlemen of the County, in endeavoring to set up Six to stand as Candidates
at the next Election.

Thus you have a short but true Narrative of Otes's designs, and those of his
Factious Party. A fit person indeed to be the staggering guide of the unsettled
and Whirlegig Faction; who has been since this Interview spied by a diligent
and honest Observator, to reel out of one Tavern into another at Twelve of the
Clock at night, (a proper gesture, and fit hour for a pretended Priest, who is
the very Stigma and Scandal of the Gown) laden with Wine, and empty of Wit,
like an innated Sop fit to be swallowed in a Mornings draught by the Infernal
Garagantua. The aerie Monsieur has a Proverb, Le vin n'a point de chausses; Wine
wears no breeches, but disgracefully exposes every man's nakedness to public
view, lays open his Imbecilities and Imperfections to the whole world: not that
he had any need to do that, since he has sufficiently satisfied all men of
Sense and Reason, what a person of Integrity and Wisdom he has manifested
himself to be in all his versatile and contradictory Speeches and Actions; (to
say no worse of them) but certainly the Devil (as we usually say) owes him a
shame, and will be sure to pay him before he swings out of this world, and
drops into Styx off the Triple-tree, if Justice has not stored up a more
exemplary punishment for his Worship.

One thing I cannot omit, which I was very credibly informed, by an honest
well-meaning Torie, which is this: Otes (for I will follow the Modern way of
Spelling his Name) being one day at a Coffee-house, (the Receptacle and Nursery
of Profligate Phanaticks and Dissenters) chanced to fall upon an unpleasant
Argument to all persons of integrity, concerning some nominal distinctions of
Factions and Parties; where he was heard publicly to lay this down as a
Maxim, That a Christian Turk was far better principled than a Papist, (a
worthy Tenet of a Protestant Black-Coat!) which did strike some of the hearers
with so much horror, who came out of mere curiosity to see and hear this
prating Savior of the Nation, and particularly one Country-Gentleman then
present, a person both of Honesty and Courage, that he replied immediately, Say
you so, Doctor, is that your Religious opinion? then take this Turkish reward
for your pains; and threw a dish of hot Coffee in his face, which bedewed the
Doctor with that warm liquor, that bears a complexion as black almost as his
dark and fable Actions: but the peevish Doctor took it then very patiently,
without verbal or actual resistance; his courage it seems was not then
heightened with Wine, so as to make him fly to his ultimum refugium, reviling
language, and his Argumentum baculinum, as he did to the Millenarian
beforementioned. This is the highest and most notorious passage of his signal
patience, that I ever heard or read of; and God grant him more of that tame
meekness, and all Gentlemen equal resolution and courage to baffle such
pracling and ill-principled Dissenters. But before I take leave of him, give me
leave to tell you with what Caresses and Ceremonies he intended to dismiss his
Ternary of Visitants: the three Gentlemen having drained him as far as they
thought at that present convenient, left he might discover their vizarded
designs, by putting him upon any farther Interrugatories, being ready to
depart, the Gowty Don made a shift to raise himself, and say, Gentlemen, I must
kiss your hands, after the -- Manca-mode, though with more Spanish pride than
gravity, (for he had gained a habit of the Spaniards Vice, though not so much
as a smatch of their Virtue) proffered very obligingly to give them all three a
Bezo las manos, as Albrici^s for the good news of their real inclinations (as
he vainly conceived) to himself and his Party; which they very modesty refused,
and so departed with some usual Complements, very affectionately expressed, and
passed between them, to the great content of the Doctor, and the sufficient
satisfaction of the Colehester-Gentlemen, who had really effected what they had
designed, under the vail of a rural Disguize, whereby Otes was frustrated of
that imaginary service he had done the Factious Party; and may all his and
their designs be for ever thus blasted in the bud, and crushed in the very egg,
before they come to maturity and perfection: and as this is mine, so I question
not but it is the cordial Prayer, and fervent Ejaculation of all true
Christians and Loyal Subjects.

It Is voiced or noised about the City, that his Doctorship intends to leave the
Tumultuous Town, and retire himself to a Country-Apartment not far off, to
enjoy himself in his rural recess with the greater privacie, and less
interruption, to practice his old Vices in a Monastic retirement, and hatch
his mischievous and pernicious Plots to a higher and more undiscovered
perfection than hitherto he has done; and in order thereunto, (as I am
informed) shows himself abroad without any Attendant, his Three Bum-Bilboa
Blades being discarded, whether for want of Money or Pride, is the question;
though it is thought the former and not the latter is the occasion of it: for
the Factious begin to open their eyes, and seem to retrench their former
Pensions to this Bully-Rock of Dissension, and check their profuse liberality
with a close-fisted forbearance of their allowance to maintain this idle and
Seditious Drone; and at last, it is hoped will drive him like industrious Bees
out of the Hive of this City, and put the Doctor to his shifts, and try how his
Wit and Ambition will supply him with Necessaries to support him with Life and
Health, and make him the more able to wade through that Abyss of misery that
certainly waits upon him.

But, on the other hand, some are of opinion, that if the Dissente^s do not
open their pur^estrings, and make him sensible of their orient mercy, he will
like a Blood-hound, open his Jaws to their confusion, and then Plot upon Plot
will be discovered, if any one is so much a Solifidian as to believe him; but
his credit (if ever he had any) is now at the last gasp, and he himself not far
from it.

This is no Prognostic, but a hearty wish, and so sans Adieu, as the
Frenchman says; for I cannot, dare not bid you farewell, whilst you are
contriving such disloyal and underhand wicked practices; but shake hands with
you, not as a Worthy Man, but a Man Worthy -- the Ellipsis I leave to be
supplied by your own party, who are very well versed in such nice and modern
distinctions, according to your new Systematical Rhetoric, But because so
leading an Arch-Patriot of his Country ought not to pass without his deserved
Character, take what follows, as a Corollarie to the preceding Dialogue.

This is the Man, read him who list,
A Trojan true as ever pist.
H^dibras for that, with little variation. This is Hugh Peter's redivivus, the
Pulpit-Buffoon of this Nation, the squeaking Cushion-cuffer of Dissenters, who
to do him right, seldom troubles the suggestum, and the less the better; the
crested Bell-weather of the Good Old Cause, the (...) and shame of the
Ministerial Function, the stain and disgrace of the Gown and Scarf, the Trumpet
of Sedition, the Ringleader of Faction, the Kirk-Dragoon, the Demicaster
Divine, the Vngedoopt Mensche, as the Boorish Hollander styles an Unbaptiz'd or
undipt person, in plain English a Heathen; Oats to day, and Otes to morrow; a
Papist, a Calvinist, the Jesuits Letter-carrier, a Lay-Brother at St. Omers in
Artois, a Petty Curate in England, a Doctor without a Degree, Diploma, or
Mandamus, and yet now, sometimes he appears in a Canonical Robe, then again
swadled up in a long black Coat, the very Proteus of Religion, the Boutefeu of
the Nation, the Massinello of the Rabble, the Machiavil of ill-principled
Politics, the bad Genius of his Country, the detestation of all Loyal
Subjects, the Darling of the Giddy and Factious Mobile, the Byblow of Nature,
the Disgrace of Mankind, the Beelzebub of Dissension, the roaring Boanerges of
the expiring Old-Cause, the Geneva-Bull of Presbytery, the Propugnator of
Independency, Patron and Pattern of Anabaptism, the Renegado (...) in propria
persona, the Pantopola, or Jack of all Trades in Religion, and the only Scourge
of the Millenarians, of which Kid is most feelingly sensible; every thing that
is bad, nothing that is good, unless it be what is good for on-thing.

This I presume may serve for his Character in part, till opportunity gives my
pen farther occasion to expatiate upon his merited Encomium; but no doubt we
shall at one time or other have a larger field to discourse in his
commendation, if we diligently observe his future designs, and pry into his
Actions. Well! go on Doctor, if I may so call him; if not, pardon the
expression, it is his own haughty Title, which he will still have the impudence
('it is too great a favor to call it Confidence) to assume; till he is both
Unscarfed and Ungowned, and receives a reward in a more suitable Garb to his
condition and desert. And Hey then up goes he, and his empty Cranium is raised
a Pole higher than his Shoulders, and exposed as a spectacle of villainy by the
hand of Justice to the Antimonarchical Multitude, from whom possibly he may
with some pity receive a Nod from every Factious Noddle, lamenting his sad
Catastrophe, and from others a sign of joy at his deserved Fate, intermixed with
some affliction that it hapn'd no sooner; and so bestow this Distich on him,
which began the Epitaph of almost (I dare not say altogether) as versatile and
pretended a Religionist, Untimely, 'cause so late, and late, because
To prevent mischief, it no sooner was.


And let it come and welcome, for it will prove as glorious a day as e're did
shine in our Hemisphere, as noted an Epoch as e're was Registered in the Rolls
of time; the year of our Christian Jubilee in these Three Kingdoms, and a happy
deliverance from so pestilent and Irreligious a Caitif, who designed to involve
this Nation in Rebellion, as sufficiently appears by all his sham-Plots and
Contrivances.

And here I cannot pass by the story of an exquisite Artist (the Vulcan of his
time) Perillus by name, who to gratify the Sanguinary humor of the bloody
Tyrant Phalaris, first invented a Brazen Bull, and he presented it to that
Tyrant, which Malefactors should be put into, being first made glowing hot;
insomuch that by their crying (through the barbarousness of the Torment) a
noise would issue forth like the bellowing of a Bull; on whom the Tyrant did
this signal piece of Justice, to enclose him first therein, as a reward of his
invention of other men's mischiefs, and so he proved experimentally the
excellency of his work, with the loss of his own life, most unpittiedly
miserable.

-- Nec Lex est justior ulla,
Quam Necis Artificis art perire sua.
It is the justest Law, that all,
Who a new death invent, by that should fall.
I will not trouble the Reader with any farther discourse concerning Otes, but
only this ensuing Relation, which came to my knowledge since I set pen to paper
upon this account (though some time since acted) to procure his veracity when
he was in his Sacerdotal Grandeur, (if I may say so without offense to the
Loyal and Learned Clergy) and in great imaginary reputation with the vulgar.

The story runs thus: Some deserving Gentlemen of great esteem and fortune,
meeting accidentally with T.O. as he fancied, though on their part, to be
better acquainted with his integrity, told him, that there was a person who
lived in Grace-Church street, who had Traveled into several Foreign parts,
(having first related to him their design) desiring Otes to take cognizance of
him when he should appear; upon which he was sent for immediately, and upon his
admission into their Society, after some Complements past between them, T. O.
having asked the question, Whither he ever had been Beyond Sea, and he no way
denied it; the Salamanca arose up, veiled his Bonnet to him, and with his usual
fleering countenance, said, Sir, now your presence recollects my memory, I
think indeed I have seen you there; but after several meetings, Otes by his
discourse seeming to discover his good intentions to this unknown person,
insomuch that he was forced at last to unmask the design, and appear with the
infallible badge of his Profession, (a Blew Apron) before the unerring and
Popular Doctor, for fear of being drawn into the Plot, to his scandal and
disgrace, being both innocent and Loyal; upon which, the whole contrivance was
blasted, the Doctor Ridiculed for his notorious Swearing Faculty, to their
great, but (I presume) his own small satisfaction.

In fine, as it was said of the Jesuits, (the spawn of the deceased Loyola)
when they had embroyled the best part of Christendom with their pernicious
Tenets, and destructive Practices, Quis illis Funem, quem meruere, dabit?
-- But who (I trow)
The diserved H^^t^r will on them bestow?


So may I without doubt examine O. and his Accomplices with the same
Interrogatory, and if the question be put here in this case, in promptu
responsio est, there needs no study for an answer, it so naturally follows;
Ketch will soon give them a dispatch, when their Impieties are grown to so
prodigious a height, as to be lopt off with their Lives according to Justice by
the hand of the common Hangman: and it is great pity, in my opinion, that he and
they who have made such a combustion and disturbance in our British Isles,
while living, should creep ^ut of the world sneakingly and silently; therefore
I will close all with this Epitaph; (nor is it fit that the pen of any Poet but
a Mars, should compose one for the Coryphaus of Faction and his Party) only
with the alteration of a single word, and that a most significant and material
one too.

Per varios Casus, and tot discrivina rerum,
Tendinius in L^^neum --
Through various fates, and many a different thing,
At last we are necklac't with a Hempen string.
Thus Exit the Reverend Dr. Otes and his Abettors; the Curtain's drawn, the
Farce is ended, and I am secure of a Plandita from the Essexian Triumviri.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of New Books Printed for and Sold by James Norris, at the
Kings-Arms without Temple Bar. 1684.
1. MAscinella: or, a Satyr against the Association and Guild Hall Riot, 4o.

2. Erom^^^: or, the Noble Stranger; a curious Novel, 8o.

3. A Tract against the Absolute Decree of Reprobation, in Latin, 8o.

4. An Idea of Happiness, in a Letter to a Friend, enquiring wherein the
greatest happiness attainable by Man in this life does consist, 4o.

5. A Murnival of Knaves: or, Whiggism plainly displayed; and if not grown
shameless* Burlesqu'd out of countenance, 4o.

6. The Accomplished Lady: or, Deserving Gentlewoman, being a Vindication of
innoc^^^ and harmless Females, from the aspersions of malicious men: wherein
are contained many eminent examples of their Constancy, Chastity, Prudence,
Policy, Valor, Learning, etc. wherein they have not only equaled, but
excelled many of the other Sex, 12o.

7. Patriae parricida: or, the History of the Horrid Conspiracy of Cataline
against the Government

(...)
