The Power of Congregational Churches Assert^d and Vindicated, In Answer to a
TREATISE OF Mr. J. PAGET, ENTITLED The Defense of Church Government exercised
in Classes and Synods.

By JOHN DAVENPORT; B. of D. and Pastor to the Church in Newhaven in
New England.

Isa. 1.26. I will restore thy Judges, as at the first, and thy Counselors, as
at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called, The City of Righteousness,
the faithful City.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Chiswell, and to be sold by John Usher of Boston in
New England, 1672.

TO THE READER.
TEe disposals of GOD in his Providence with reference to the travels of Truth,
and bringing forth of Light, are much to be observed, and have much to be read
in them. There (...) ^t been a great and overruling hand ^ted, and that very
conspicuously, about (...) present Treatise. The Reverend and ^earned and
eminently accomplished Author ^^rst finished a Tractate with this Title, and
(...) his Subject, near thirty years ago: But ^od's time was not yet come for
its publish^ng: it perished therefore in the rude Waves of the vast Ocean, with
some other excel^ent Manuscripts and precious Christians. Nevertheless, some
seven years aft^^, God se^ him about it again, and then he finished what is now
(after twenty years more) thus made public. Thus comes this short an^ nervous
Treatise to have had a double, and so a more through digestion in the heart o^
so judicious and holy a Servant of Christ^ Nor are the principles and grounds
her^ proceeded on such as our Author suddenly or lately took up. He was of too
serious (...) weighty, and advised a spirit, ^lightly to take up, or suddenly
to vent any singular apprehensions in the things of God. It would be too long
to relate, (though I could from his own hand) how he was first staggered in his
conformity, and afterward fully taken off by set Conferences and Debates, with
himself and sundry other Ministers obtained with Mr. John Cotton then driven
from Boston on account of Nonconformity. Nor am I willin^ t^ revive the Memory
of what Afflictions (...) Author afterward underwent, because (...) could not
be satisfied in Conscience in tho^ two Points; viz. a particular Churches being
subjected to a Classis, and Baptizing in that latitude which was then
practiced, and i^ still in that Church, to which he had an earnest Call, and
with which the Lord gave him a very general and great acceptance. But certain
it is, the Principles held forth in this Treatise, cost the Reverend Author,
not only many sufferings, but also many, very many sad searchings, and much
reading, and study on set purpose, accompanied with manifold prayers and cries
to the Father of Lights for light therein. After all which he was more and more
confirmed in them, and attained to such comfortable clearness therein, as hoar
him up with much inward peace and satisfaction under all his afflictions on the
account of his persuasion in these Points. And so persuaded, lived, and so died
this grave and serious spirited man. The Reader will find in it (which is a
rare conjunction) much succinctness, with much Scripture clearness. Light
contracted, like the Sunbeams in a Burning-glass, is the stronger, and would
be the more grateful too, if it could possibly meet with an Eye able to receive
it. There are that think, and as they conceive from Scripture grounds too, that
the glory of the Saints in Heaven receives additions, and increases daily, as
their holy walk, and faithful service when here on Earth, does after they are
gone, bring forth Fruit to the praise of God amongst those that are left behind
them. If so, they that ever had any value and affection for this Eminent
Servant of Christ, (and there were, yea yet are many in whose hearts a precious
remembrance of him lives, and will live for ever) are engaged to read and
improve this Excellent Work of his for their instruction, and establishment in
the Truths of Christ. It was for several Months since sent over from New-
England, with desire that it might be Printed. The wise and all-disposing
Providence of God allotted this as the season for it, and in his season all
things have a peculiar beauty; and it may be presumed that the hearts of God's
people are more generally prepared for a ready entertainment of light held out
to them, and that the Lord will please to fulfill that good word of Promise upon
all his faithful and humbled people, Ezekiel. 43.11. [And if they be ashamed of
all they have done, etc.]

There are two things run through this whole discourse, and are ligible even in
every line of it.

1. That the power of Churches is confined to their Res Propria, their own
proper matters.

2. That there is not any Spiritual Church Power, to which they are by any
Institution of Christ subjected. Two grand and Pillar-Principles of the
Congregational-way, both of them abundantly cleared from mistakes, and
established upon Scripture-foundations.

Now the blessing of Heaven go with it, to lead the Reader into the truth of
Christ in these Points, and to take off from the minds of such of our Rulers,
into whose hands this Book may fall, all those prejudices against the
Congregational-way, which it may have been unjustly mis represented under. For
as in all the main matters of Faith and Doctrine we differ not from the
established public Profession of the Kingdom, yea are much more tenacious
thereof than many of our zealous adversaries, so in those things, which seem to
be our most singular Opinions (and wherein we differ most from the public
Profession, and for which we have suffered, and are ready by the grace of
Christ still to suffer even worser matters, if the will of God be so concerning
us) this Book, after many others, which speak the same Language, may render it
plain and evident to impartial and understanding Readers, the Principles and
practices of the Congregational-way, are not in truth so incompatible with the
power of the Supreme Magistrate in matters of Religion, as some would
represent, nor such as may render them suspected to Civil powers, and that
therefore we may not for these our Principles be accounted unworthy to enjoy a
peaceable dwelling in our native Land, the weal whereof is more dear to us than
our lives, or all our private earthly enjoyments in it.

M. N.
May 28. 1672.
Tertull de praescr. adv. Haeret. Cap. 21.
COnstat omnem Doctrinam, quae cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis matricibus and
originalibus fidei conspiret, veritati deputandam, id sine dubio tenentem quod
Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit: reliquam
vero omnem Doct^inam de mendacio praejudicandam, quae sapiat contra veritatem
Ecclesiarum, and Apostolorum, and Christi, and Dei.

Aug. de venit. Eccl. Cap. 3. Tom. 7.
Sunt certe libri Dominici, quorum Authoritati utrique consentimus, utrique
credimus, utrique servimus: ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam
nostram.

Hieron. Epist. ad Minerium and Alexandrum.
Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete -- estote probati nummularij, ut si quis
nummus adulter est, and figuram Caesaris non habet, nec signatus est moneta
publica, reprobetur, qui autem Christi faciem claro praefert Iumine, in cordis
nostri marsupium recondatur.

The Churches Charter. Containing Two Parts, 1. The Constitution of particular
visible Churches. 2. The Privileges and Power given to such Churches.

BEfore I proceed to examine Mr. Pagets arguing for the Ecclesistical Juridical
Power of Classes, I shall positively declare what power is given by Christ to
particular Churches, after I have described their constitution according to
Christ his appointment. In every of which particulars I shall principally
insist in the metaphor of a Corporation or body politic, such as that of the
chiefest and most perfect Cities is: because I find, that it pleases the Holy
Ghost in Scripture, frequently to express this matter under this similitude.
Ps. 48.1^ 2. and 87.3. Isa. 26.1. and 60.14. Ezekiel. 40.2. and 4^.35 Rev. 3.^^
and ^0.^ 21. (...) 22. (...) Luc. 1^ ^^.
But I shall not venture to apply it any further than the light of Truth in
Scripture will direct and warrant: There we find the grand Charter it self,
and the ancient Presidents of the first Christian Churches planted by the
Apostles. According to these Records I shall endeavor to declare the mind of
Christ, whom God the Father commands us to hear, Mat. 3.17 and 17.5.
in all things whatsoever he says unto us, and that under a dreadful penalty,
Acts 3.22, 23. Cypr. ad Coecil. lib. 2. ep. 3. Si solus Christus audiendus est,
non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid, qui
ante omnis est, Christus prior fecerit, and faciendum statuerit. Neque enim
hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem, cum per Isaiam
Prophetam Deus loquatur and dicat, etc.
Whence Cyprian does well infer, If only Christ is to be heard, we ought not to
attend what any before us thought should be done, but what Christ, who is
before all, has done, and appointed to be done. For we ought not to follow the
custom of men, but the truth of God, seeing the Lord says by the Prophet
Isaiah, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. The Charter, according to which particular Churches are to be constituted,
and their power, in re propria, is to be stated; we find in Mat. 16.18, 19. In
the opening and explaining whereof, I purpose, with Christ's assistance, to
proceed in this method; 1st, handling the constitution of a particular visible
Church; 2ly, clearing the power of it.

The words in Mat. 16.18, hold forth a perfect Rule for the constituting of a
visible Church, of its causes, of which we shall speak severally, and
distinctly; and the more largely, that the strength of such objections as
occurr, in each particular, may be duly weighed; and in handling them, I shall
observe this order.

1. I shall propound, what I conceive to be the truth, in certain doctrinal
Conclusions. 2. Explicate and confirm them. 3. Deduce thence such Consectaries
or Inferences as freely flow from them.

CHAP. I.
1. THe principal efficient cause is noted in this clause, I will build my
Church.] I? who is that? even he, whom Peter had confessed in these words, Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God. That is, Jesus our Mediator. 1. He
speaks in the first Person, not in the second: For though he uses men as his
instruments, yet himself, by his Spirit, builds his Church, Zach. 4.6.
Therefore it is called, his Building, 1 Cor. 3.9. 2. He speaks not in the
preter, or present tense, but in the future [I will build.] For though Christ
was yesterday, is to day, and shall be ever, the builder of his Church; yet he
thus speaks in a particular respect to the Christian Churches under the
New Testament, which should be built (after his Ascension) of Jews and Gentiles
joined into one body, upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the Cornerstone, etc. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. The Conclusion hence
is,

Heb. 3.3, 4, 5. 2. Particularly, by Induction, thus; 1. He is the Door, by
whom they that are orderly admitted, must enter, Joh. 10.9. 2. He sets the
Members, every one of them, in that place and rank which they have in the Body,
1 Cor. 12.18. and gifteth them accordingly, Ephesians. 4.7. 3. He compacteth the
whole Body, Ephesians. 4.16. and firmly knits the materials together in this
Spiritual building, 1 Pet. 2.5. 4. He gives the several Offices and Officers,
Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.8, 11. 5.
He appoints the visible Seals, Baptism, Col. 2.10, 11, 12. and the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11, 23, etc. 6. He is the Lawgiver to his Church, Jam. 4.12. 7.
He is the Lord of all Church- Admininistrations, 1 Cor. 12.3. 8. The Censures
have their power and efficacy from him, Rev. 3.7. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 9. The
blessing of all the Ordinances is from his Institution of them, and effectual
presence with his Church and Ministers dispensing them, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Psalm. 2.7, 8. John 3.35. and 5.22, 23. 2. From the Redemption of his Church,
Act. 20.28. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. 3. From his conquest over
the powers of darkness, from whence he has delivered them, and translated them
into his Kingdom, Col. 1.13.

In all these respects, and many more, Jesus Christ, our Mediator, has right
to institute particular Christian Churches, and to cast them into what mould he
pleases.

From this Conclusion, thus proved, I infer, as follows.

1. Consect. Then Jesus Christ is the only Lord, and Head of such Churches as
himself has instituted. Thus from Christ's building his House, follows his
being over the House, Hebrews 3.3, 6. And he is over it, as the Lord of it,
Acts 2.36. And as the only Political Head of it, in three respects, 1. Of
Pre-eminence, as having the Spirit in a greater measure than all his Members,
Col. 1.18. John 3.34. 2. In respect of Government, Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. 3. In
respect of Influence, Joh. 15.5. and that, not only in respect of common Gifts,
whereof Hypocrites partake, which, if they be joined to Christ's visible Body,
the Church, are but dead Members, whom, as dead Branches in the Vine, God will
take away, and cast forth, Joh. 15.2, 6. but also in resect of quickening Grace,
whence they are called, (...), 1. Pet. 2.5. Hence they grow up in all things
into him which is the Head, Christ; and are edifying and edified Members in the
Body, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.

Nor is Christ the Head only of the Catholic Church, but also of every
particular Church instituted by him, which is therefore frequently by Christ
himself called, the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven, the King whereof is Christ;
his Subjects are visible Believers, professing their Faith in him, and their
subjection to his Laws, and Ordinances, 2 Cor. 9.13. This Sovereign power is so
properly Christ's, that it is not communicable to any Creature; nor can any man
be his Substitute or Vicar herein. For neither does Christ, or his Church need
such a Vicar, or visible Head of the Church, seeing the Church is complete in
Christ alone, Col. 2.10. Nor is any Creature capable of discharging the Office
of an Head unto the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23.

2. Consect. Then it is not in the power of Earthly Kings or States, or Civil
Courts, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, or to invent and impose any Rites or Forms
of Worship upon Churches, according to Principles of State Policy, or Humane
Prudence. Though Moses was, as well a great Prophet, as a great Prince, yet God
left no part of the building of the Tabernacle to his prudence, but limited him
in all things to the pattern in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. Nor might Solomon,
though the wisest of mere men, act by his own wisdom in building the Temple, ^
Chon. 28.11, 12, 13.
but he was guided therein by the perfect pattern, which David gave him from
the Spirit. So concerning Christian Churches, Christ has given his People a
perfect pattern, which he requires the Ministers to hold forth distinctly in
every point of it, to his people; according to that Prophecy in Ezekiel. 43.10,
11. That they may keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof,
and do them; which also Christ expressly requires in Matthew. 28.19, 20.

3. Consect. Then every particular visible Church must exalt Christ and his
Institutions alone, in their whole Church Order, and in all their
Admistrations. This is their visible receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, and
walking in him, Col. 2.5, 6. The Church is Christ's House; and it is equal,
according to Natural light, and civil prudence, that every man should bear Rule
in his own House, Esth. 1.22. Much more Christ, who is God and Man. Artaxerxes
shall rise up in judgment with all such as incroach upon Christ's Right, in
ordering Churches by their policies, and condemn them; for he, fearing the
jealousy and wrath of God, if men should take such liberty to themselves,
provided against it, by a strict Decree, saying, Whatsoever is commanded by the
God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for the House of the God of Heaven;
for why should there be wrath against the Realm? etc. Esth. 7.23.

Nor is the wrath of Christ less formidable to us, or his jealousy less
incensed against those, that, either add to, or take from, or alter his
Institutions now, than in times past; but rather more, Hebr. 12.25. to the end.

So much shall serve touching the Efficient Cause and Institutor of particular
visible Churches.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Material Cause.
THe Materials whereof this Spiritual Building must consist, are employed, when
Christ says, Upon this Rock will I build, etc. together with Peter's
confession, in ver. 16. and Christ's approbation of it, ver. 17. which gave
occasion to this Speech of Christ, Upon this Rock, etc. For the Rock is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. But how considered? not simply, and in an abstract sense;
but, 1. As Preached by the Ministry of the Gospel, Ephesians. 2.20. 2. As believed
on with a Faith made visible by public confession, according to Romans 10.9, 10.
Christ believed on, is the Foundation, or Rock, of the Catholic invisible
Church: But Christ believed on and confessed, is the Rock whereupon a
particular visible Church is built. In this Exposition, sundry of the Ancient
Writers, Basil. Tract. de poenit. Gre. Naz. de Comp. disserendi ratione. Theod.
in Psalm. 47. Ambr. in Ephesians. 2.20. Aug. in lib. 1. Retract. c. 21.
and the Orthodox Modern, generally consent.

The Doctrinal conclusion, which these words of the Charter afford us,
concerning the materials of particular visible Churches, is, that,

2. Conclusion. It is the will and appointment of Christ, that all and only
such grown persons be admitted Members of particular Churches, who make such a
public profession of their Faith, as the Church may, in charitable discretion,
conceive, has blessedness annexed to it, and is such as flesh and blood has
not revealed to a man, but our Heavenly Father.] 1. That Christ here meant a
particular visible Church, and not only the Catholic Church, we have partly
evinced already, and shall more fully hereafter. 2. That persons meant by
Christ here, are adulti, grown persons, appears by his questions to the
Apostles, Whom do men say? and, whom do ye say, that I am? and, by Peter's
answer. As for Infants, they are indeed Members of the Church, and, as such,
Baptized; yet it is so, only as they are included in their Parents, by virtue
of the Covenant, wherein they are wrapped with their Parents, Genesis 17.7. Acts
2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.14. 3. That such adulti, or grown persons, must make a
public confession of Faith before the Lord and his people.] So Christ required
Peter to do here, and, when he had so done, said Christ, Upon this Rock I will
build my Church, viz. in after times. For no particular Christian Church was
actually constituted, at this time, nor till after the Ascension of Christ, in
Act. 1. q. d. Then take this course, and ever after, all the World over, if you
will have a particular Church to be acknowledged by me to be my building. 4.
That their Confession of Faith must be so made, as that the Church may, in
charitable discretion conceive it to have blessedness annexed, etc. For seeing
it pleases Christ to use Men as his Instruments in building his Church, Zach.
6.15. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He is content that they improve the judgment which they
have. Christ's judgment concerning Peter was infallible; for he knew what was
in man, John 2.25. But the Officers and Members of the Church are but men, who
judge by the outward appearance, 1 Samuel 16.7. Therefore their judgment is
fallible, and has been deceived; as we see in the judgment of the Apostles
and the Church at Jerusalem concerning Ananias and Sapphira; and in that of
Philip, and the Church in Samaria concerning Simon Magus, etc. Their duty is to
proceed as far as men may, by Rule, with due moderation and gentleness, to try
them, who offer themselves to fellowship, whether they be Believers, or not;
refusing known Hypocrites; though when they have done all they can, close
Hypocrites will creep in. 5. That all they who hold forth such a profession of
Faith, as the Church may, in charitable discretion, conceive to be true, are to
be received.] Though some of them have been formerly scandalous, yet now
holding forth repentance, they are to be received, 1 Cor. 6.11. and though some
are at present, weak in Faith, yet, if we may conceive that the Lord has
received them, the Church must receive them, Romans 14.1, 3. For Christ appro^^d
this confession of Peter, though he was at present but weak in Faith, as the
following Story in this Chapter, v. 22, 23. clearly shows. 6. That none but
such be admitted into Church Fellowship. For this Chapter limits the Church, to
accept only such. Upon this Rock will I build my Church. i. e. Christ believed
on, and publicly confessed. A mere verbal confession is not that Rock. For the
Devils made such a confession of Christ, yet were not built on him, Luke 4.34.
But this confession of Peter was such as held forth his Faith in him; as
appears by Christ's threefold Elogy, or praise of it. 1. From its effect.
Blessed art thou, etc, as, Joh. 17.3. 2. From the procreant cause of it: Not
flesh and blood, but my Father has revealed it, as Mat. 11.25, 26. 3. From the
title (...), or Peter, before promised, John 1.42. and now confirmed to him,
signifying a Stone; whereby Christ, not only acknowledges his faith, and that
he was thereby a living Stone, and fit to have a principal place in this
Spiritual Building, (in which sense, Peter applies a like title to other
Believers, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. who yet were inferior in degree to himself) but also
gives him this Prerogative and Honor, that he should be the first Planter of
the Christian Church, both amongst the Jews, Act. 2. and the Gentiles, Act.
15.7.

The Conclusion may be confirmed by two Arguments in the Text.

1. From the name whereby he calls this holy Society, (...) ((...)) a Church;
i. e. a company called out. Whence? see Joh. 15.19. To what? See 1 Cor. 1.2.
How? Not only by active vocation, by man's ministry, exhorting them to repent
and believe: So sundry are called, who are not, in the least, wrought upon to
answer that call, but put it off (as they who were invited to the great Supper,
Luke 14.18.) with excuse. Such are called, but no Church. Therefore more is
required to qualify for membership of a visible Church, viz. passive vocation,
whereby they are wrought upon to answer Gods call, by submission thereunto, at
least, in outward profession, though some do it but feinedly, Ps. 18.44.
Saints, by internal and invisible calling, are such, as answer Gods call
inwardly and spiritually. Saints, by external and visible calling, are subdued
to yield obedience to the Word in visible profession. Thus, all that were
called into the Vineyard, had so much efficacy of the Spirit in them, that they
all came into the Vineyard, and labored in it, though not with like sincerity.
Mat. 20. According to this clause of the Chapter, the Churches planted by the
Apostles, were constituted, for the materials of them; else the Apostles could
not have given both the 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.2.
members and 1 These. 1.1 1 Cor. 12.27 2 Cor. 11.2 and 6.16. 1 Timothy 3.15
Churches such high titles, as they did. Nor did they by these titles describe
the invisible Church only, but visible Churches. For to such, Paul wrote his
Epistles: and the like expressions are applied, in other texts, manifestly to
visible Churches. Nor do these titles describe particular Churches only
according to the better sort of members, but such they did, in the judgment of
christian charity, conceive all their members to be, as Paul told the
Philippians, Phil. 1.6, 7. which he could not have said if he had not known the
care of the Church, in admitting persons into membership with them, to be
according to the conclusion noted by us.

[my Church] q. d. I own any Church thus built by my self to be my Church;
according to that in Act. 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved. The Lord added them. How? Not only by giving them saving
faith, and so adding them to the invisible Church, but also by his inclining
their hearts to offer themselves unto the fellowship of the visible Church, and
to profess their faith before them: and by bowing the hearts of the Apostles
(...) Brethren to receive them into visible ^munion of visible Ordinances; as
appears, v. 41, 42. Thus he added them, daily to the Church; which cleares it
to be an act of the Lords ordinary dispensation, and therefore presidential to
the Churches in their ordinary practice. They, who were thus added, are said to
be such as should be saved. That is; they were such, either in the judgment of
the Lord, which is infallible; or in the judgment of the Church, which is
fallible. The Church looked at them, according to their fruits, viz. their
profession of faith, and their Christian conversation, observing so much in
both, that they saw reason, in charity guided by rule, to conceive them to be
in a state of Salvation. Such were the three thousand spoken of in v. 41. as
appeared by their affectionate and submissive inquiring of the Apostles, whom
they mocked before, what they should do to be saved, being pricked in their
hearts. v. 37. and afterward, by their gladly receiving the Word; both of
promise, for themselves and their Children, with faith; and of precept, to
repent and be baptized, and to save themselves from that froward generation,
with obedience. True it is, that they could not in one day make so large
accounts of Gods work upon them, as are commonly held forth in our Churches:
nor do we effect too large narrations, but wish such passages, as are
superfluous, left out: And at that time, less was needful to be expressed, than
necessity calls for among us, ordinarily. For the Apostles had a more quick
Spiritual discerning, than ordinary Officers and Churches have. And concerning
the three thousand, Act. 2. the manner of their offering themselves to
Church Fellowship, visibly at such a time, when such visible confession of
Christ was with manifest hazard to their lives, gave good ground to the
Apostles and the Brethren, of conceiving charitably, that they were all of them
in a state of Salvation, and such as the Lord himself added to the Church. In
these places and times, where Church Fellowship is an honor, and draws after
it sundry outward and worldly advantages, it will be necessary, that the Church
be satisfied, as by sufficient testimony concerning their good conversation, so
by their holding forth their confession of faith, both quae creditur, and qua
creditur, of the Doctrine of Faith, and of the Gift of Faith, how it was
wrought, and how it works in them. As Mr. Rogers, in his Treatise of Faith,
says it may be known of men by those trials. And this care suits the nature of
Church Power, which is delegate and stewardly. For, as the faithfulness of a
Steward binds him to receive none into his Lords family, but according to his
Lords mind and appointment; so the faithfulness of the Church unto Christ
obliges them to receive such into this holy fellowship, as they may, in
charitable discretion, conceive, the Lord receives and adds thereunto.

Against what has been said, two objections are made,

Christ received Judas, whom he knew to be a hypocrite, into fellowship of the
twelve.

Answ. 1. Not into a particular visible Church; for no such was then gathered.
2. Christ had a peculiar reason for it, which does not concern Churches, Joh.
13.18.

Christ himself compares visible Churches, to a Field, wherein are Tares; to a
Draw-N^t, which gathers good and bad Fishes; to ten Virgins, of which five were
foolish; and the Churches planted by the Apostles had in them sundry
Hypocrites, and scandalous persons.

Answ. Such places show, 1. That in visible Churches sometimes Hypocrites are
mixed, either by the sleepiness, and fault of those that should ^^^vent it:
Thence the Tares: or by the wyliness of Hypocrites, who creep in unawares, Jude
4. as the bad Fish came into the net under water: or they pretend saving gifts,
as the five foolish Virgins; so, false Brethren, Gal. 2.4. 2. The purest
Churches may be blemished with scandals, till they can orderly proceed against
them; but then they must be cast out. Therefore they knew not that they were
such before.

From this 2d conclusion, thus explained and confirmed, we may infer as
follows.

Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. Who have a form of Godliness, denying the power of it,
concerning whom the Apostle's charge is, from such turn away, v. 5. If in
ordinary converse, the People of God must not exercise needless familiarity
with such: much less may they receive them into spiritual fellowship and
fraternity. If such, being Members, must be cast out, certainly, being out of
Church Fellowship, they may not be received in, whilst they continue such.

Pet. 2.4, 5. nor the praises given unto Peter so confessing Christ, that
Christ said, Upon this Rock I will build my Church. 2. They are to see, that
they profess their Faith and Holiness in a good conversation, Phil. 1.27. Jam.
3.12, 13. For they that profess they know God, but in their works deny him, are
abominable, Tit. 1.16. 3. And in a public confession of their faith before the
Church, as Peter did here before Christ and the Apostles, etc. Only, because
the Church cannot see the heart immediately, as Christ did Peter's, the
confession of faith made to men must hold forth the gift of faith, as well as
the doctrine of faith. So Calvin understood those words, Sanctify the Lord God
in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1 Pet. 3.15. Calvin's note upon it, is
this; Ejus, quae in vobis est, spei.] Spes hic, per synechdochen, pro fide
capitur. Expendi debet sedulo quod dicit. Significat n. eam dem^ confession^
probari Deo, quae ex cord emanat; quia, nisi intus resideat fides, fr^^^^a
gar^^^ ^^gua. Ergo radices in nobis agat, ut deinde proferat Conf^ssionis
fructum. Calv. in 1 Pet. 3.15.
Hope, here, is, by a Synechdoche, put for faith. What he says, ought to be
diligently weighed. For it signifies, that God approves only that confession,
which proceeds out of the heart: because unless faith reside within, the tongue
will babble in vain. Therefore faith must be rooted in us, that afterward it
may bring forth the fruit of confession. And, when all this is done, the
Brethren are to consent in receiving them, and herein to show forth the
gentleness of Christ (who will not break a bruised reed, nor quench smoking
flax) in giving due encouragement to the weak in faith, if they see cause to
conceive, by rightly ordered charity, that the root of the matter is in them.
But, if they see just cause to doubt of that, they have warrant to suspend
their acceptance, till better satisfaction be given, from the primitive
pattern, in Act. 9.26. However, the Officers must propound it to the Brethren,
to declare, whether they are so far satisfied with what they have heard, that
they do consent that such shall be received into their fellowship; as Peter put
a like question to the Brethren that went with him from Joppa, concerning the
Baptizing of Cornelius and those with him, upon whom the Holy Ghost fell
visibly, Act. 10.44, 45, 46. etc.

Cons. If upon this Rock [Christ believed on, and publicly confessed, by grown
persons] the Church of Christ is to be built; then the Children of the Church,
who were Baptized in their infancy, when they come to be of ripe age, must hold
forth publicly their personal confession of Faith, that they may be admitted
to the Lords Table, and fellowship in Voting and in Elections and Censures, in
their own personal right. But, if they be found grossly ignorant, or profane,
or professing a false faith, or denying the true Faith, or contemners of
Church Fellowship, and the Ordinances of Christ, or do not, according to this
clause of the Charter, publicly profess their faith, and crave
Church Fellowship, they may not be owned for Members, by their admission unto
the Lord's Table, and unto other privileges of Church Communion, in their own
right, but are to be declared non-members. In Jacobs posterity, when the Lord
brought them to Canaan, that standing Ordinance of presenting unto the Lord,
before the Priest, their first fruits, every year, with such a solemn
confession made by all grown Israelites, as is appointed in Deuteronomy. 26.2 to 16.
was a visible profession of their Faith and Obedience, suited to the condition
of that Church and time, in performance whereof, they avouched the Lord to be
their God, and to walk in his ways, and keep his Statutes, and his
Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken unto his Voice: and the Lord
avouched them to be his peculiar People, etc. v. 16, 17, 18. And the like, if
not greater, care was had of the profession and conversation of the Sons of
strangers, the Children of such Proselytes, as were admitted into the Church of
Israel, Isa. 56.6, 7. John Baptist also required of all, whom he admitted unto
his Baptism, a repenting-confession of their sins, and that they should
believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus, Act.
19.4. warning them, not to rest in this, that Abraham was their Father, Mat.
3.9. Answerably, the Primitive Churches required of all grown persons, 1.
Visible Repentance, in case of open scandals, Act. 19.18. 2. to join therewith
a public profession of their Faith in Christ, Act. 2.39. 3. A profession of
their subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. And after the Apostles
days, the ancient Churches, they had their Poenitentes, such as held forth
their Repentance publicly; and their Catechumeni, who were of two sorts, 1.
Such as had been Pagans, and were instructed by being catechized in the
Christian Faith, that they might crave Baptism when they should be found fit,
and then were called Competentes: In the interim, they were called Audientes,
or, Auditores. Tertull. l. de poenit. c. 6. and praescr. advers. Haeret. c. 4.
Cypr. l. 3. ep. 17.
2. Such as having been Baptized in their Infancy, when they did nonnihil
adolescere, were Catechized, and being found to be Believers, were confirmed by
imposition of Hands, and admitted unto the Lords Table, and unto the full
fruition of all Church Priviledges. These, Clemens calls Incipientes and
Novitios, and so do others, from 1 Timothy 3.6. As the Mystery of Iniquity wrought
higher and more effectually to adva^ce Papal usurpation, by the spoils of
Churches, this custom, in the right use of it, ceased; and Popery retained only
the name of Confirmation, but corrupted the thing, and turned it into a
Sacrament, limiting the Administration of it to Diocesan Praelats. This corrupt
custom was continued in England, after they renounced the Pope. But, as Luther
in Germany, sought to introduce the right use of it into the Churches there; So
did Cranmer, under that Godly King Edward the 6th, endeavor in England, and
committed the perusal and censure of the Common Prayer Book, to that godly,
learned and moderate Theologue, Bucer; who examining the Book, found, among
sundry other things, That those which were to be confirmed, Censura M. Buceri
super lib. Ordinat. Eccles. cap. 17.
must say the Apostles Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and
answer the Questions of the short Catechism. Bucer's censure upon it is thus:
This requires diligent ponderation. If they think it sufficient, that the words
of this Confession be recited, God abhors such as confess him in words, and
their heart is far from him. Nor is Catechizing instituted to this end, that
they should answer in words only, That they believe in God, and will keep his
Commandments. The Lord says, Teach them to observe and do, and not only to
speak; and he requires such Worshippers, as worship him in spirit and in
truth. But, if a true Confession of Faith, and profession of Obedience, such as
should be required of adulti, grown persons, unto Baptism, be meant; such a
Confession of Faith must be required, as may be judged, not to be born in the
mouth, or gotten only by humane teaching, but also it must have those signs in
the life and manners, that it ought to be received of the Churches, as coming
from an heart truly believing the Gospel, and the Doctrine of the holy Spirit.
For though the Church cannot look into the hearts of men, yet they ought to
judge of trees by their fruits: which fruits, afterward, he declares at large.
But I hasten to the next point, having been the larger in this, because it is a
subject of no less importance than dispute, in reference to the question under
so much agitation.

CHAP. III. Concerning the formal Cause.
THe formal cause, or that which gives essential being to this Church, is here
held forth in a Metaphor, taken from houses. For, (...), properly signifies, to
build an house of materials, fitly joined and compacted together: but Christ
does not here speak of the structure of a material house, but of the
constituting of that holy Society, which he calls his Church, under the
metaphor of building an house, which every way suits the matter he speaks of.
For, as a material house (suppose, of stones) is built by orderly placing and
strongly cementing them together, which before were either scattered stones, or
a confused and loose heap, but not an house, till they were thus framed and
compacted together: so this holy Society, the Church of Christ, arises from
the coadunition, or knitting together of many Saints into one, by an holy
Covenant, whereby they, as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual House, 1
Pet. 2.4, 5. And as the natural body of a man is built, by an orderly joining
and firmly knitting the parts together: So is the Church of Christ built by the
mutual Covenanting of the Saints, the Members of the Church, which is called
the Body of Christ, where the Members of it are thus orderly and firmly knit to
the Head, and one to another. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. The same holds in Cities and
Families, which are thus built also; and therefore the Apostle speaks of this
matter, under the same matephor, in Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. The conclusion from
hence is, that



Though all men seem to grant, that every Church of Christ has its being from
a Covenant (for which cause, they that want an explicit Covenant, do yet plead
their implicit Covenant to maintain the truth of their Church State) yet such
disputes are raised against the Church Covenant, that I am compelled to handle
this point also the more largely, that the truth concerning it, may be the
better cleared and settled. I shall therefore, with the help of Christ, show, 1.
To what end it serves; 2. what it imports; 3. prove it to be the Ordinance of
Christ; 4. draw some consectaries from the Conclusion.

1. The next end of their confederating is, to engage themselves to submit one
to another in the Lord, and to cleave to Christ and his Rules, and to one
another in him, mutually, and to walk together, accordingly, in the use of all
means sanctified and appointed by him for attaining the ends of
Church Communion.

2. The Covenant it self imports two things, 1. On the Lords part, it implies,
(1.) the Lords giving them his Covenant for themselves and their seed, Genesis
17.7. (2.) His giving them hearts to take hold of his Covenant, accordingly,
Isa. 56.4, 5, 6, 7. where you see, the Eunuch's and the son of the stranger's
taking hold of the Covenant, is foretold, as that which should be previous to
the Lord's giving them a place in his house, and bringing them into his holy
Mountain (that is, joining them to his visible Churches under the New
Testament) when the Church shall be called, an house of prayer to all Nations,
v. 7. 2. On the Saints part; their covenanting for themselves, and for their
seed, to be the Lord's People, and to walk in his ways, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.
and to cleave firmly one to another, viz. to their Officers and Brethren, Deuteronomy.
12.19. Neh. 10.29. with mutual watchfulness one over another, Lev. 19.17. Deuteronomy.
29.18. with Heb. 12.15, 16. and with mutual submission to Christ, and to one
another, in him. 2 Cor. 9.13.

3. Such Covenanting is Christ's Ordinance unto the Churches under the New
Testament; this is proved,

Churches before the coming of Christ and since, in all essentials of a Church.
For in the essential state and form of a Church, there is par ratio omnium
Ecclesiarum. Before the coming of Christ, the People of God were joined
together into Church Fellowship by confederation; Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints
together unto me; those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice. So did
Adam, and all the holy Patriarchs, unto Abraham: and so did the posterity of
Jacob, at Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.5, 6. and 24.8. and from thence were called,
the Church in the Wilderness, with which Moses was joined. Act. 7.38. And so,
the Lord there tells them, it should be in point of the Covenant, though not of
Sacrifices, with the Church under the New Testament, v. 14, 15, 16. In Abraham's
family, God built his Church by a Covenant, without sacrifice; but first, the
Lord changed his name, and called him Abraham, to show, that he now treated
with him, not as a single person, but as a Father of many nations, and as a
multitude vertually, Genesis 17.5. Then he gave him his Covenant, to be a God to
him, and his seed, Genesis 17.7. and, to show that it was a Church Covenant, he
gave him Circumcision for the visible sign and seal of it. Genesis 17.10-15. Thus
far went the Covenant on God's part. 2. On Abraham's part; he first accepted
both the Covenant and the confirmation of it, with Faith and holy reverence,
declared by his rejoicing, John. 8.56. and humble prostration of himself before
the Lord, v. 17. and by real performance of it, after, both in his own person,
being circumcised when he was ninty nine years old, v. 24. and, as a Prophet
and Ruler, instructing his family, concerning the Covenant and Circumcision,
and their duty to accept the one, and submit to the other, which they did
accordingly, v. 23, 27. and thereby professed their subjection to the Lord and
to his Ordinances. Hence the posterity of Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob, became
the Lord's People, Exodus 3.7. yea his first born, Exodus 4.22, 23. and had
Circumcision as a seal of this Covenant, whereby they were distinguished from
all other People, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. But they, like men, transgressed and broke
the Covenant, both in Egpyt, and in the Wilderness: yet the Lord, being
faithful in his Covenant unto their forefathers, did not cast them off, but
called them to repentance, and renewed his Covenant, in a more Evangelical
manner, in the plains of Moab, that he might establish them to be his People,
and their little ones, and the strangers, Deuteronomy. 29.10-14. which Covenant they
took hold of, for themselves and their seed, and for them that were not there
with them, that day, v. 15. that they would admit none unto Church Fellowship
with them, but such as should separate themselves from the polutions of the
Heathen, and enter into the common engagement with them, to cleave to the Lord,
and to one another, with member-like love, watchfulness and submission
mutually. Hence it was, that the sin of one Achan became the sin and punishment
of all Israel, Josh. 7.11, 12.



Against this assertion, some object, that in the planting of the Church at
Samaria, in Cornelius his house, at Phillippi, Corinth, Ephesus, Thessalonica,
etc. they find no mention of such a Covenant as the Doctrine intends, only
that they believed, professed, and were Baptized, but no mention of an express
vocal Covenant.

Mat. 28.19. where, to make Disciples, is as much as to gather and plant
Churches, by visible bringing men into Christ's school, with engagement, by
those of years, for themselves and their seed, to submit unto Christ's teaching
and government therein. This school of Christ is the Church of God, whence the
members of Christian Churches are called, Disciples, in Act. 15.10. So then,
they were in Church Fellowship, before they were baptized.

2. From the Phrases, which imply covenanting to be that, whereby they became
visible members of the Church. I shall instance in two. The first is used in
Act. 2.41. (...), were added; and v. 47. (...), the Lord added: and chap. 5.14.
(...), were the more added. The word imports such an adding as did visibly and
firmly knit them together. Calvin in Act 2.41. adjuncti Christi discipulis, vel
in idem corpus insiti.
Calvin says, they were joined to Christ's Disciples, or ingrafted into the
same body. That which thus visibly ingrafted them, was not Gods working Faith
in their hearts, or their visible profession of it: for it is said, Believers,
were added. v. 14. which is of the same import with, those that gladly received
the Word, in Act. 2.41. Therefore this adding was by something else; and what
could that be, but their visible taking hold of the Covenant with that
particular Christian Congregation, whereunto they now joined themselves
notwithstanding their former state in the National Church of the Jews? And
that they were thus added to the Church, Luke confirms two ways. 1. by the
effect of this engagement, in Act. 2.42. (...), they were strongly and
constantly knit together (viz. by virtue of their former mutual engagement) in
the Apostles Doctrine, Hearing, Believing, Professing, Obeying it constantly;
and in fellowship, i. e. in Church Communion, into which they were combined and
compacted before, having solemnly given up themselves, first to the Lord, and
then to the Apostles and Church, by the will of God, as Paul expounds it, in
2 Cor. 8.5. 2. Luke confirms the same sense of their being added to the
Church, by expressing the manner of it to be so, as of the rest durst no man
join himself to them, in Act. 5.13. yet they did magnify them, i. e. they
approved their doctrine and way, and confessed the truth and goodness of it.
All which was not sufficient to add them so to the Church, as believers were
added, viz. by public voluntary engagement with the Church, mutually. And this
to be the meaning, Luke confirms, by using another word, synonomous with
this, which more plainly expresses the manner of their being added to the
Church, (...), to be glewed: which word, though it sometimes signifies
joining, in a more common and lax sense, yet not in matters of this nature.
Therefore, according to Tertullian's rule, Deligendus est sensus e materia
dicti: and then we know, that all joining unto a Corporation, must be done by
Covenant, as it is in Marriage, and voluntary services, to both which relations
the same Verb is applied; to Marriage, in Mat. 19.5. to voluntary service, in
Luke 15.15. both which are by voluntary covenant. This is the strong knitting
glue whereby persons are joined together in all such voluntary relations. So
much may serve for explication of the phrase.

3. The third proof is from the similitudes used in the New Testament, to
express their covenanting together. The Church is compared to a House, to the
Body-natural, to a Body-corporate, to a Wife.

1. To an House, 1 Timothy 3.15. the whole society is called, the household of
Faith, Gal. 6.10. every member of it is said to be, of the Household of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. Whether you speak of an House, in an Architectonical sense, the
materials must be cemented together; now, in the Church, that cement is the
Covenant; or, in an oeconomical sense, the Members that are voluntarily added,
as voluntary Servants to the Family, are joined with the rest by Covenant; so
it must be in the Church, Ephesians. 2.21.

2. To the Natural-body, in man; the Head of it is Jesus Christ, the Members
are Beleivers, the whole is made up essentially, when they are harmonically
joined, and strongly compacted together by mutual engagement to submit one to
another in the Lord, whereby they fall, as it were into joints; as the Thigh
falls into the Knee, and the Shoulder into the Shoulder Blade, by shooting it
self into the hollow of it, and is firmly knit to it, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.

3. To a Body-Corporate. Hence the Church is called the holy City, Rev. 11.2.
and Church Members, Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. That whereby the
Church is as a City compacted together, is the Covenant. For as all Citizens
are admitted into jus Civitatis, and become free Denizens, by voluntary
entering into the common engagement and covenant, whereby they become a
Political-body; so it is in the Church.

4. To a Wife, whether espoused or married. All espousals and marriages, are by
a voluntary mutual Covenant, Prove. 2.17. Mal. 2.14. So it is in the Church of
God, Isa. 62.5. Hence Paul styles the particular Church at Corinth, a Virgin
espoused, 2 Cor. 11.2. To show that all the members were joined, as one Virgin,
into one body, and that Virgin-Church, into a Covenant of espousals with Jesus
Christ, as their Head and Husband, in all his Offices, and one with another, in
him, mutually. Thus, we see, the phrases and similitudes, in the New Testament,
do strongly confirm this truth, That the first Christian Churches planted by
the Apostles, were constituted, in respect of their essential form, in one body
among themselves severally and respectively, by an holy Covenant. If any
demand, why the Apostles did not expressly mention the word, Covenant. Two
reasons are given for that; 1. That it was not necessary; seeing it had been so
clearly and fully expressed in the old Testament, as that which gives essential
being to the Church. And it is usual in Scripture, that duties, which are
grounded upon a natural, or moral, and common reason and equity, and have been
largely expressed in the old Testament, are but briefly and implicitly pointed
at in the New: as the Baptizing of Infants, the Christian Sabbath, and the
manner of sanctifying it; so this of the Church Covenant. Yet concerning all
these, sufficient light is held forth in the New Testament, for manifesting the
mind of God unto his People.

2. That it was not seasonable and safe for the Churches, then living under
Heathen Princes and Rulers, enemies to Christ, unto whose jealousies the name
of Covenant, and Covenanters might render them obnoxious, and might seem
dangerous to the civil peace. Therefore Christ and his Apostles chose rather to
forbear mentioning the name, yet established the thing under such similitudes
and parables, as might hide it from others, and yet reveal it to the Saints.

professed subjectio^ to the Gospel of Christ. Nor can any inhabitant expect
memberlike watchfulness and helpfulness from the Church, unless, upon his
offering himself to enter into the common engagement, they receive him, and
take upon them that care over him. 3. Their constant fellowship in
Church Priviledges, arises from this mutual engagement by Covenant. For none
can be admitted unto them, without consent of the body: nor can the body admit
them thereunto, without their taking hold of the Covenant: for, till then, they
are not under the power of the whole; as it has been proved.

There seems to be no need of Church-Covenants, seeing the Covenant of Grace
conveigheth to Beleivers all Spiritual blessings, and binds them to all
Christian duties.

viz. Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, etc. together with the blessed
right unto all the outward good things of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. and a remote
or mediate right unto Church Priviledges. These, all Believers have from Christ
by the Covenant of Grace, as they are Believers in sincerity and truth, in the
sight of God. 2. External, viz. Church Fellowship, and power of the Keys, etc.
These, visible Believers have from Christ, through the Covenant of Grace, as
they are confederates, and joined with the Church by taking hold of the
Covenant. This difference is between them; The former are limited to the
persons of true Believers in the sight of God, Hab. 2.4. The latter are given
to a society of true Believers, in the account of the Church, and are extended
to their seed also, Exodus 20.6.

2. Though the Covenant of Grace received by us, binds us to all Christian
duties required in the Gospel, yet it binds us also to do them in the due
order: for God is the God of ^rder, and not of confusion. Therefore such duties
as issue from voluntary relations, must be done only by those who stand in such
relations. Will any Man or Woman infer from his or her being in the Covenant of
Grace, that therefore there is no need or use of a conjugal Covenant, but that
he has right to all Women, and she to all Men, to perform conjugal duties with
them, where ever they come, though they are not joined to any of them by a
conjugal Covenant? The like reason is of all other duties which are founded in
other voluntary relations; as between Masters and Servants, Pastor and People,
Corporations and the Members of them, particular Churches and their Members.
Therefore the Covenant of Grace binds all Believers to such mutual covenanting
together, as is necessary for the orderly discharge of the several duties that
are to be performed by virtue of such a state and relation. Thus the conclusion
is proved.

Jerusalem, Act. 5.13. And of that Heathen Corinthian, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 3. All
these may be found in an excommunicate.

the Church. 1. Not Baptism; 1. because the form must be before the formatum,
not after it: but the Congregational-Church is before Baptism. For, 1. Baptism
cannot ordinarily be orderly administered, but by a Minister called unto Office
by the Church. 2. Because Baptism seals the Covenant, and incorporation of a
Believer and his seed into the visible Church. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Therefore Baptism
is not before, but after the Church: Because where the form is, there the
formatum must be also. But visible Church Membership may cease by
excommunication or desertion, or by the dissolution of a Church; yet Baptism
remains.

2. Not profession of the Doctrine of Faith, though accompanied with freedom
from scandalous sins. For general profession cannot appropriate a man
particularly to any one Church, without particular engagement to that
particular body. 2. Nor does it bring any one under the power of this or that
Church, which it has over its own Members, and other Churches have not. 3. If
that were sufficient; a man should become a member of any particular Church
whether it will or no.

is not, thereby, a Member of all visible Congregations on earth. For, though a
Church Covenant be common to all Churches, in its general nature; yet there is
a special combination, which gives a peculiar being to one
Congregational-Church and its members, distinct from all others. Else, how
could one Church have that power over its own Members, which another has not?
And in all voluntary covenants, the only difference between them is, the
peculiar interest which one has in another, by a particular engagement that
passes between party and party. Covenants of Corporations, of Marriages, of
Service, and the like, are, in general, common to all that are in those and the
like relations; Yet, in particular appropriation, bind them only to this or
that individual. No man can claim a memberlike right in all Corporations,
because he is in covenant with one, upon this plea, that Corporation-covenants
are common to all Societies: nor can an Husband plead, that he has a conjugal
right in all Wives, because conjugal-covenant is common to all married persons.
The same holds in Churches, which are distinguished one from another by their
respective Covenants. Other absurdities that proceed from this Tenet, I shall
pretermit.

non recipit magis et minus; that argues only, that one of the confederates is
no more engaged to the other, than the other to him: But otherwise, in
Confederacies, some are allowed greater liberties than others be, according to
the diversity of the subjects, and their capacities. So it is in Civil
Societies and Corporations; the Child of the freeman of London, has all the
benefit of a free-mans Child, under age; he may trade for himself with and
under his Father, in his Fathers right: But being of years, he may not set up
shop, nor trade in his own right, till he first take up his freedom, and, by
oath, voluntarily submit himself to all the orders of that Society, and duty of
a Citizen. Some think, that the Children of Confederates are so complete
members, that they should be excommunicated, in case of demerit. I cannot
easily assent thereunto: for that would imply, that they have an immediate
right in all Church Priviledges, which I do not grant, nor believe; but that,
as the Church looks upon them tanquam in lumbis parentum; so also, if the grown
Members of the Church observe vicious qualities and practices in them, they do
not deal with them immediately in those steps of proceeding, required in Mat.
18. to bring matters to the Church, but they deal with their Parents to
discharge their duty, in educating their Children according to the rule, in
Ephesians. 6.4. To this sense Dr. Ames applies that text, in 1 Cor. 7.14. Ames.
medulla Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 32. art. 12, 13.
Infantes tamen non adeo perfecta sunt membra Ecclesiae, ut possint actus
Communionis exercere, aut admitti ad omnia ejus privilegia participanda, nisi
prius incrementum fidei appareat: ab iis vero, quae pertinent ad initium fidei,
et ingressum in Ecclesiam, non sunt excludendi. 2. Nor may their Children be
baptized, till themselves have taken hold of the Covenant with the Church, in
their own right. For, the Children of Church Members, when they come to age,
for not taking hold of the Covenant with the Church, do become non-members, and
are to be so looked at by the Church, if they desert Church Fellowship (either
departing from them in place, as Esau into mount Seir, or withdrawing from
their communion;) or if the Church withdraw from them. In such cases, they are
not so much as implicitly members. Therefore their Children may not be
baptized. For the right that Infants have unto Baptism, is in their next and
immediate Parents. 1. Because the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 7.14. does so limit it. 2.
Because the Apostasy of the next Parents takes off the federal holiness of
their Seed; as we see in the posterity of Ismael and Esau. 3. Because if
Infants should have this right in their Grandfathers, where shall we stop?
shall it be extended to a thousand Generations, as some mis-apply that promise
in Exodus 20.6. That cannot be true: for then the Children of the Jews; and
Turks, and Heathen, all the world over, have a right to Bapism, in some of
their Ancestors within that time, contrary to Romans 11.17.

Mat. 11.29, 30. he will make it easy. Depend upon his faithfulness, as Surety
of the Covenant of Grace, for ability to be faithful in your discharge of your
Covenant with the Church. 2. It is not a yoke of bondage, but of precious
liberties; whereby you have right in all the outward privileges of the Gospel.
3. Nor is Church Fellowship a prison, but, if God call, they must consent to
your remove from them, and follow you with their prayers. It is, indeed, a
strong but sweet engagement of all upright-hearted Christians to please Christ,
and to be to his honor, in that state. So does the Marriage-covenant oblige
those that are in that state, 1 Cor. 7.34. and 11.7. From whence, the Apostle
argues for the like care in particular Churches, and the Members of them,
Ephesians. 5.24. 2 Cor. 8.23. which also was a special end and use of the Covenant,
wherein Abraham and the Church of the Jews stood bound unto God, Genesis 17.1, 2.
and 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. and the contrary discovered the insincerity and
hypocrisy of others, Psalm. 78.37. In like manner it binds the Members of the
Church to all the duties of their Church-relation mutually, both Officers and
People, and quickneth them thereunto, through the influence and assistance of
Christ the head of the Church, by his Spirit in them all; Ephesians. 4.15, 16. 1
Cor. 12. to 28. And therefore I cannot but wonder, that some, who do approve
and plead for all other Covenants, viz. National, Conjugal, Social Covenants,
should yet dislike, and oppose Church-Covenants.



CHAP. IV. Concerning the quantity and compass of a Christian Church.
THE Church, which Christ calls his Church, he tells Peter, that he will
build it; Upon this Rock (Mat. 16.18.) I will build my Church. Where, the verb
is in the first person, and in the future tense. 1. He speaks in the first
Person, not in the second, to show, that though he will use men, as his
instruments, in this work, yet it is his presence and blessing that causes the
work to prosper in their hands, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 3.9. It is by the Spirit
of the Lord that Church-work is carried on succesfully, Zech. 4.6. 2. See Mr.
Bradf. Answ. to the Arch. B. of York in Mr. Fox his Act and Mon. in a
Conference between them and the Bishop of Chichester in the Compter in
Breadstreet.
He speaks in the future tense, not in the praeter, or present; for, though
Christ was in all ages the builder of the Church, yet he thus speaks of the
Church under the New Testament, because it was to be constituted after his
Death, Resurrection and Ascension, when the Gospel should shine forth so
clearly, that it should obscure the light of former ages, as the Sun rising in
its strength, does the light of the Stars: and it should appear, Tit. 2.11.
bringing Salvation to all men, even to the Gentiles, and they should be
gathered and joined unto Christ, that one Head, (...). Ephesians. 1.10. (...). Ephesians.
3.6. and 2.13, 14
and become Members of his Body, together with the believing Jews, in
Church Communion visibly, the partition Wall being broken down. And, because
all Nations could not be joined together in one visible Church (as the Nation
of the Jews might be, and was) to have their solemn set meetings together, to
worship God thrice a year, or once in an age; the Lord Jesus instituted a
Congregational-Church among Christians, and invested every such Church with
sufficient Church Power within it self, for attainment of all the ends of
Church Communion. This is the Church, which Christ says, he will build, and
appropriates it to himself, My Church, 1. Because it is his Institution. 2.
Because his Name is called and put upon it. The Members of it are, not Moses
his disciples, but Christ's, and therefore were, of old, called Christians, Act.
11.26.

This title of Church, though it be given some times to a civil Assembly, Act.
19.41. yet so it is not taken in this place. For Christ no where calls a
civil Assembly, his Church. Therefore it must signify an holy Society. And in
that sense, the Scripture applies this title sundry ways. 1. To Godly
Families, Romans 16.5. Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. where the Church, in such an house, is
distinguished from the Congregational Church. For Paul writes to the
Congregational Assembly to salute Aquila and Priscilla, and the Church in their
house. Their house, it seems, consisted (all) of Godly persons, in Paul's
judgment; else, he would have said, Salute them of such an house, who are in
the Lord: and it was an exemplary Family, and a seminary of the Church, yet not
such a Church as was capable of all Church Officers, and power, as this, meant
in the text, has by the gift of Christ. 2. Sometimes it signifies the
Catholic visible Church, Heb, 12.23. but that has been from the beginning,
and does not, nor can meet in one place, on earth to worship God. Therefore it
is not meant here. 3. Most commonly, it signifies a Congregational Church, or,
an holy Society joined together by an holy Covenant, in one Congregation, to
walk together according to all the Ordinances and Laws given by Christ to his
Church. And so sometimes it signifies a definite particular Congregation,
meeting together in one place, for the public worship of God, and their mutual
edification: as that at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20. and 14.23. And in that
acceptance, it notes, sometimes the Brethren, as distinguished from the
Elders; Act. 15.22. Sometimes the Elders and Brethren assembled together, as in
1 Cor. 11.20. but never, the Elders meeting apart from the Brethren. But, in
this place it does not signify a particular definite Church. For there is no
particular Christian Church built by Christ more, or rather, than other. It
remains, that Christ speaks of a particular Congregational Church here, in an
indefinite sense. And so, the word Church is applied in the New Testament, when
Paul says, he persecuted the Church, Phil. 3.6. Not, that at Jerusalem only,
or Damascus, but all the Churches in Judea, Gal.. 1.22, 23. In this sense,
Christ calls every Christian Congregational Church, thus built, his Church.

From the words thus opened, this doctrinal conclusion is to be collect^d viz.
That it is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, that the Christian Church,
under the New Testament, be, in respect of its quantity and compass,
Congregational.

Cor. 11.16. and 14.33. Yea, in one and the same Country, as Galatia, Gal, 1.2.
Judea, v. 22. Macedonia. 2 Cor. 8.1. Yea in Corinth, where God had much people,
Act. 18.10. yet the Church there was but one Congregation, 1 Cor. 14. and,
though Cenchrea was a Port near unto Corinth, yet it had a Church distinct from
Corinth; Romans 16.1. The Church also in Jerusalem, though a greater number of
Believers was declared to be there, than we read of in other Cities, yet it was
but one Congregation; Act. 2.41, 44, 47. and 6.2, 15. The same holds
concerning other great Cities; the Church, in every one of them, was
Congregational: and, if the number of Believers grew too great for one
Congregation, doubtless more Churches were gathered in such a place and case:
and if several parts of the Church met in times of Persecution, now and then,
here and there, as they might; yet they continued one Congregation, having the
same Officers, in common, for any thing appears in Scripture to the contrary.
Now let us see, why the Christian Church must be Congregational.

Let all things be done unto edification, 1. Cor. 14.26. but how can this be
attained, unless they so meet together, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted. v. 13? Hence all the Members of the Church are exhorted, not to
forsake their assembling together, Heb. 10.25. which was the praise of the
primitive Church in Jerusalem, Act. 2.42, 44. Therefore a particular visible
Church is compared to a flock, which are fed together, Act. 20.28; and to an
House or Family, the members whereof enjoy the same Family-priviledges in
common, under the same family-order; 1 Timothy 3.15.

Mat. 18.17, 18. which implies two things. 1. That the Church must consist of
more than two or three: for though two or three may watch over one another,
admonish one another; and, in case of obstinancy, withdraw from a convicted
delinquent: and, though two or three praying together, may expect the presence
and blessing of Christ, as v. 19, 20. upon their admonition; yet two or three
cannot issue the matter completely, in way of Church-censure, but must tell the
Church: Therefore the Church must necessarily consist of a greater number.
Again, how can two or three choose the four sorts of Officers amongst
themselves, which are described by four living creatures, in Rev. 4.6, 7. viz.
Pastor, Teacher, Ruling Elder, and Deacon? 2. That they must not exceed the
quantity and compass of one Congregation. For the Church must meet ordinarily
together with their Officers, for these purposes. Therefore the Scripture
shows that the whole Church did meet together to choose and ordain Officers,
as Deacons, Act. 6.2, 3, 5. Elders; Act. 14.23. to receive and admit Members,
Act. 9.26. for Prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.23. for the Seals, 1 Cor. 11.20. and for
Censures, 1 Cor. 5.4. and to release from censures. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7. So much for
proof of the point. The Con^^ctaries are these.

Rev. 11.1, 2. But that Members so qualified as Christ requires, and so
confederating, should ordinarily meet togather in one Congregation, for the
solemn worship of God, and their mutual edification, is the Ordinance of
Christ, and according to the measure of the golden Reed, whereby the City and
Gates, and the dimensions of the New-Jerusalem are measured, Rev. 21.15. that
they shall not be so few, as to cut off Church-jurisdiction within themselves;
nor so many, but that all may hear and be edified, and be governed by the
Power, which Christ has given to the Church to preserve the purity of his
Worship, and of their fellowship within themselves.

ordinarily meet together, to Church-ends; it is the mind of Christ, that they
should be distributed into sundry Congregational Churches. For, though many
thousands of Israel met together in the court of the Temple at Jerusalem to
offer Sacrifice; because they might stand in so large a place together and see
the Sacrifices burnt; yet that will not prove, that such multitudes should be
Members of a Christian Church, where more communion is required, then in seeing
some one Ordinance performed.

Exodus 20.24. Mat. 28.20. and if they persist in that neglect, they can hardly
be accounted Believers truly seeking the Kingdom of God, what profession of
Religion soever they make otherwise, Mat. 6.33. and they sin against their
posterity also, to whom God promises mercy, upon their parents worshipping him
according to his Institutions: If the Lord does good to the posterity of such,
it is merely from his own good pleasure, but not from their Parents Covenant,
Ezekiel. 16.61.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Churches impregnable stability.
TO the Church built by Christ upon this Rock, he has promised and given this
great privilege, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.] (...),
in the Scripture, signifies, not Hell, but the state of the dead, or the
Grave, (...) are enemies vanquished by Christ for his Church, 1 Cor. 15.26, 55.
and shall be cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20.14. (...) are the gates of
Death, in Job. 38.17. Psalm. 107.18. and the gates of the Grave, Isa. 38.10. i.
e. the power of Death and the Grave, which seizes on them, as a Sergeant,
Psalm. 116.3. The sum is; Let the Church be brought to the lowest, that it seems
to be dead, as those two Witnesses, Rev. 11.8, 9. and buried, as Christ's
natural body was, for a time; yet neither Death, nor the Grave shall prevail
against it. Yet we must not limit the sense of these words, only to the power of
Death and the Grave, but it must be extended to all Satan's plots and assaults
against the Church, against which if Christ did not help them, Death and the
Grave would prevail against them, to their eternal destruction. We conclude
therefore, that, in this Text, by the gates of Hell, are meant, all the
machinations of Satan, and temptations whatsoever, whereby he labors to
hinder the building of Christ's Church, to draw those from Christ, who are built
upon him. The prevailing of them signifies their effectual working unto the
attainment of those ends. The sum is, a promise that the Devil, with all his
policies and powers, shall neither hinder the building of Christ's Church, nor
cause the Church thus built to apostatize from Christ. And that this is the
true sense and meaning of the words, whatsoever Socinians, or Arminians say to
the contrary, may thus be evinced: 1. Because the thing promised, is the
disabling of what ever opposes the building of the Church upon this Rock, or
its constant adhering to Christ, from prevailing to those ends: but so do
Satan's temptations; Therefore they are meant by the gates of Hell. 2. Because
whatsoever goes forth out of the gates of Hell, or has its beginning from
thence, is meant in this phrase: but the Temptations and Machinations of Satan,
by himself and his instruments, Heretics and Tyrants, go forth thence;
Therefore they are meant in this phraise. 3. Because Peter, to whom Christ
spoke these words, describes unbelievers, the adversaries of this building, as
belonging to the gates of Hell; 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. 4. Because the proportion, which
Christ implies, in these words, requires that they be so understood. The
proportion is between two Cities, that of Heaven, which has its gates, and
keys, in v. 19. and the other of Hell, which has its gates; whence it
endeavors the ruin and overthrow of that, but shall not prevail. Seeing
therefore City is opposed to City, and Gates to Gates, and one ( viz. the
Church) is considered in the state of present building; it is most suitable that
the other be also looked at, as it opposes that, in the present, whilst it is
militant upon earth. But from hence, that Christ promises that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against his Church thus built, some infer, that Christ
means only the invisible Catholic Church: For that only, say they, is bulilt
on this Rock, and only that shall not fail. Answ. 1. It is true, that the
Catholic invisible Church is built upon Christ, by effectual and unfeigned
Faith, and that shall not fail: For that is the general Assembly, and Church of
the fist-born, which are enrolled in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. And all the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against those that are written in Heaven. 2. But it is not
true, that these only are built on this Rock. The Apostle Paul tells us, that a
particular visible Church, rightly constituted, as that at Corinth, is built
upon this Rock, or Rocky-foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. and being so built, is
under the special protection of God in Christ; in respect whereof the Lord
promises any such Church, as well among the Gentiles, as the Jews, Whosoever
shall gather himself against thee, shall fall, Isa. 54.15. and all the weapons
that are made against thee shall not prosper, verse. 17. And it is clear, that
Christ, in this place, speaks of such a Church as is built upon the confession
of Faith, such as Peter made, visibly and publicly; whereupon, not the
invisible Catholic Church, but visible particular Churches are built:
Therefore these only are meant here.



Therefore if any object, that the gates of Hell have prevailed against the
Greek-Churches, those golden Candlesticks in Asia, and against Rome, whose
Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World, and against sundry other
particular Churches?

Answer, 1. Though it be true, that the gates of Hell have prevailed against
this or that particular Church; yet not against a particular Church,
indefinitly considered, or (which is the same) against the Church, in general,
existing in its particulars. In this sense, the visible Church does not fail.
For, (1.) Christ ever had, and will have some or other visible Church on Earth,
wherein the general nature of a visible Church is preserved, as the Genus is in
its Species, and the nature of man in this or that individual; as when the Lord
preserved Noah and his Family, in the Ark, mankind was preserved in them,
though multitudes of men were destroyed in the Deluge. (2.) Christ will show,
that he makes a difference between Churches, wherein are some true Believers
mixed with many Hypocrites, and other Societies. Therefore he will not suffer
such visible Churches to be totally destroyed, as he does his open enemies,
Hos. 11.8, 9. Isa. 1.8, 9. and 6.13. 2. Though it be true, that the Churches of
Asia and Rome have been prevailed against by the gates of Hell, yet not, as
they were built by Christ, or planted by the Apolstes, but their degenerate
Posterity and Successors, who were not built on this Rock, but on an outward
Form, and neglected the means appointed by Christ for their safety. The Apostle
Paul forewarned the Romans to beware of Apostasy, by the example of the Jews,
Romans 11.12. They, nevertheless, in succeeding generations, did degenerate from
the Faith and Profession of their Predecessors, and so fell into the gulf of
Antichristian Apostasy. But, as when God took his visible Kingdom from the
Jews, for their obstinacy in unbelief, he did not destroy his visible Kingdom
totally from the face of the Earth, but gave it to a Nation bringing forth the
fruits thereof, Mat. 21.43. So, though, in his righteous judgment against
Apostates, he may destroy this, or that particular Congregational Church; yet
the gates of Hell shall not prevail wholly against the Church State, but it
shall be preserved. He does but translate the Candlestick, not break it all to
pieces; he does but remove it out of one place into another, Rev. 2.5. and
still preserves it, in some particular Congregation, or other. 3. Though the
gates of Hell have sometime, and in some degree, prevailed against this or that
particular visible Church, holding fast the profession of their Faith without
wavering; yet they have not prevailed according to the meaning of these words.
They have prevailed (...), only in some respect; as, 1. in Temporals, to
impoverish them, Heb. 10.34. to bring them under bondage, as Pharaoh did the
Israelites; to establish a decree for their destruction, as Haman did against
the Jews; to put multitudes of them to death, as the ten persecuting Emperors
did the Christians, and as the high Priest and the Jews dealt with Christ. 2.
In Spirituals, 1. to scatter the Members of the Church; so far the gates of
Hell prevailed against them, upon occasion of Stephen, Act. 8.1. and to cause
the Woman to fly into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 2. To assault them with
temptations; as Christ told Peter, that Satan had desired to winnow him like
Wheat.

But they could not prevail against the Church, absolutely and totally. 1. Not
against all of them in Smyrna, by outward calamities, Rev. 2.10. Nor against
all in Sardis, by temptation, Rev. 3.4. 2. Nor totally against the whole
Church. For God did raise up unexpected helps; for the Woman fled into the
Wilderness, Rev. 12.6, 14, 16. to that part of them, which remains on earth;
and, for the other part of them, God will receive his people, when outward
subsistence fails, into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. And, when the gates
of Hell prevail, to the dispersion of a particular Church built on this Rock,
yet that is not to their destruction, but tends to the multiplication, and
enlargement of particular Churches. The dispersion of the Church at Jerusalem,
was like the dispersion of Seed into the Field, which brings forth a more
plentiful Harvest; so, their dispersion prevailed against the gates of Hell, to
the propagating of sundry Churches, Act. 11.19, 21. Thus the Lord turned the
Policies of the gates of Hell against themselves, according to that promise,
Zach. 12.3. Thus we see the impregnable stability of Christ his Church built
upon this Rock.

We shall now prove by Reason, that it must be so.

Cor. 12.27. And he will not suffer the sound Members of his Body to be plucked
and torn from it by the gates of Hell. He is the builder of his Chuch, Heb.
3.3, 4. and therefore will establish it. When the Ark was built by Noah, as
Gods Instrument, according to God's appointment, it stood against all the power
of the Deluge. He is the Foundation, as he is belived, and publicly confessed,
whereupon he builds his Church. Against an House so built, the Winds and
Waves cannot prevail, Matthew. 7.24, 25.

Isa. 4.5, 6. where be prophesies concerning the Church of Christ under the
New Testament, and describes Gods protection over them, by a twofold allusion;
1. By the Pillar of Cloud and Fire that protected the people of Israel, at the
Red Sea, from Pharaoh and his Host. 2. By the covering of the Tabernacle, and
the holy things in it from all injuries of weather, Exodus 26.14. Rev. 7.16. And
his power is engaged to perform his promise, Joh. 10.28, 29. And his Providence
will order all issues and events thereunto, Isa. 54.16, 17. Mat. 28.18, 20.
2ly. For victory, Romans 16.20. If the Lord will tread Satan under their feet, he
will see to it that Satan shall not tread them under his feet.

Psalm. 89.35, 36. To confirm our Faith herein, he calls the Sun and Moon to be
witnesses, verse. 37. The Sun may be clouded sometimes, and Moon is sometimes in
the Full, sometimes in the Wane, but still it is in the Heaven: So it is with
the Church on Earth. Dr. Whitt. ad Rat. Camp. Resp. p. 56.
Semper and fuisse in terris, and futuram deinceps Ecclesiam, non dubitamus:
quanquam ejus aspectum aliquando illustrem ut conspici ab omnibus possit,
aliquando tanta caligine, ut vix agnoscas, obscuratam esse fateamur.

And it belongs to Christ, to break the Serpent's Head; who can proceed no
further than to bruise his h^el, Genesis 3.15. He is that little stone that brake
the Image to pieces, which represented the Monarchies and Powers, whereby the
gates of Hell sought to prevail against Christ and his Church, Dan. 2.45.
Christ's Church is called an House of prayer to all Nations, Isa. 56.7. The
Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. in allusion to the change of Jacobs name, who by
prayer obtained victory and protection against Esau, Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.2, 3.
So shall the Church of Christ, by prayer, obtain deliverance from the gates of
Hell, that they shall not prevail against them.

Genesis 12.3. I will curse them that curse thee, therefore they shall not prosper
in their interprizes against the Church of Christ. 2. They were conquered, and
captivated, and triumphed over by Christ, before he did build his Church,
Ephesians. 4.8, 12. Therefore shall not hinder the building of it, nor destroy it
being built. 3. They are enemies unto Christ's Kingdom: Therefore shall not
prevail. Ps. 2.2, 3, 4. and, 110.1, 2. Let us briefly note some Corollaries
hence.

Then in vain boasts that Roman Synagogue, of the infallibility of their
Popes, as Peter's successors, and of the indeficiency of their Church, as built
upon Peter; when as, neither had Peter himself any such privilege, as to be
infallible. The next story in this 16th of Matthew evinceth the contrary, v.
23. Nor, by the Rock, whereupon Christ builds his Church, is meant the person
of Peter, or Peter's confession personally, as it had relation to him, but as
it is considered really in it self, and is common to all the Disciples, and to
all visible Believers, which may be thus confirmed: 1. Because Peter's
confession must have relation to the matter which he confessed. But Peter
confessed not himself, but Christ, saying, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God; Therefore his confession had relation to Christ, not to himself. 2.
Because Peter confessed no more than that which he knew the other Disciples
believed before he speak: For Christ's question being general, What say ye?
Peter answered, as the mouth of the rest: but the Apostles, before he speak,
believed Christ confessed, and not Peter confessing. 3. Because, this Rock, is
that confession whereupon Christ says he will build his Church: But whosoever
shall truly believe that which Peter confessed, viz. Christ the Son of the
living God, and confess or profess it, in due order, is accordingly built on
this Rock, though he had never heard of Peter's name. Therefore the confession,
rightly understood, had relation unto Christ, and not to the person of Peter.
4. Because the Rock signifies that which is immovable and impregnable, such
as is Christ and his truth: But Peter's confession was movable and shaken, at
one time, thrice denying this confession of his Lord. Therefore this
confession, which Christ calls the Rock, had not relation to Peter, but only to
Christ.

Ex quo patet, quod Ecclesia, non consistit in hominibus, ratione potestatis
vel dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel saecularis etc. sed in illis personis, in
quibus est notitia vera, and confessio fidei and veritatis. Lyra in loc.
That the materials, of which it consists, be such, as believe and profess
their Faith in Christ publicly before the Lord, and his People. 3. That they
be firmly joined together, in one Congregation, by an holy Covenant of
subjection and submission to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to one another in him,
and accordingly walk together in obedience to Christ, and his Rules, resisting
Satan in all his Temptations and Machinations, through Christ strengthening
them, without whom they can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. and that they improve
carefully and faithfully the power, which Christ has given them, viz. the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, in opening and shutting, binding and loosing,
according to Christ his appointment, for the preserving of his Church safe in
the purity of their Faith and Order, against the gates of Hell, which is the
next thing to be handled.

The Second Part.
CHAP. VI. Concerning the power given of Christ unto such a Church, as the
first and proper subject of it.
THe second branch or part of the Charter, is, concerning the Power given by
Christ unto such Churches, to have and use all the means appointed by him for
their establishment against the the gates of Hell, Mat. 16.19. And I will give
unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. These words contain, 1. A grant of Power. 2. A
ratification of that Grant. We shall speak to them distinctly. 1. To Christ his
grant of Power; and therein, 1. Explicate the terms, by showing, what is meant,
1 by the Kingdom of Heaven; 2. by the Keys of it. 3 What this appropriation, or
application of them imports, To thee I will give.

1. By the Kingdom of Heaven] is meant, both the Kingdom of Grace and Glory;
and that the Kingdom of Glory is also meant, the following words show, when he
says, What you bind on Earth, is bound in Heaven, etc. 2. By the Keys (which
are a sign of Power, and are put, by a Metonimy, for the Subject, the Power it
self) is meant, Church Power; which is either Supreme, and Sovereign, in Christ
only, as Lord and Head of his Church, who alone has the Key of David, which
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens; in Rev. 3.7. or
subordinate and delegate, such as is in Christ's Stewards. This is noted, by
Keys, in the Plural number, in this place, which signify all power delegated
from Christ, to dispense and administer all the holy things of his House,
according to Christ's will, and in the order prescribed by him to that end. For
all power, wherewith the Lord Jesus betrusteth his Church, aims at this which
is here expressed, to open, and shut, to bind, and loose. 3. To thee I will
give] The Application of this Grant is to Peter, in the name of the Church,
which Christ promised to build upon himself, believed on, and publicly
professed, as Peter did before him, and his fellow-Disciples in Christ's School,
at this time. And the promise is more fitly given to Peter, in the name of the
Church, than to the Church by name, because it was not the Church that made
this confession, but Peter in the name of the Church. But here we must make a
little stand, to examine the sundry claims which have been made to this Right,
upon several pretenses from this Text. 1. Some, looking at Peter, as
representing the Catholic visible-Church, conceive that a general Council
(which, they say, is the Catholic Church, representatively) is the Church here
meant, to which Christ gives the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. But that cannot
be. For particular visible Churches, in the Apostles days, had, and exercised,
the Keys completely within themselves; yet was there no general Council, till
the time of Constantine, which was three hundred years after Christ. 2. Others
look at this Grant, as peculiar to Peter, considered, as the Prince and chief
of the Apostles, and to the Popes of Rome, as his successors. But this Papal
usurpation, the Councils of Constance and Basil strongly and justly opposed,
showing, that the Keys, which are here given to Peter, are, in Joh. 20.21, 22,
23. given to all the Apostles, and that Peter himself is enjoined in Mat. 18.
to tell the Church. 3. Others think, that the Catholic Church, considered, not
representatively, but in it self, is the first subject of the Keys: Yet these
differ among themselves. For some affirm it of the invisible, others of the
visible Catholic Church. As for the terms; we know, that visible and
invisible, do not note distinct species or kinds of Churches, but are only
several adjuncts of the same Church, which is called invisible, in respect of
the inward and invisible union, which Members have with Christ the Head, by the
Spirit and Faith; and visible, in respect of their outward Profession of their
Faith, which is visible to men. But in neither of these senses, is the
Catholic Church the first subject of the Keys. 1. Not as invisible; for that
is not built by a visible profession, such as Peter's was; nor are the
Ordinances dispensed or administered visibly in it, to, or by men in visible
fellowship. Add hereunto, that the Keys here given to Peter, can shut out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, even the same persons, to whom they have opened the door
before; which cannot befall Believers in the visible Church.

2. Not as visible. For the Scripture does not acknowledge a Catholic visible
Church. The Catholic Church is not visible, as a Church, and the Church that
is visible is not Catholic. Though the Catholic Church may be visible in its
singular Members; yet so, they are not a Church: or, though it may be visible
in particular Congregations; See Mr. Cott. Defense of the way of Congreg.
Churches, par. 2. p. 56
yet none of them is Catholic: or, though all of them, if they could meet
together, may be called a Catholic Church, or general Assembly; yet so, it
cannot be the first subject of the Keys, i. e. of all Ecclesiastical power: for
such Assemblies, See Mr. Hooker '^ Survey, part 1. chapter 14 and 15.
if possible, are extraordinary: and extraordinary Assemblies are not fit
Judicatories, to hear and censure ordinary offenses, or to administer the
ordinary acts of Church Power. 2. If the visible Catholic Church be
considered, as totum integrale, which is such a whole as arises out of the
aggregation of all particular Churches (as an Army is made up of all the
several Regiments and Troops, or a Kingdom of all the Cities and Counties
within it) it cannot be the first subject of the Keys, i. e. of all
Church Power. For, 1. particular Churches are the Members, which give the
essential causes, whence the integrity of this whole is made up; and therefore,
in nature, before it, as the cause is before its effect. 2. Church Officers,
with their Offices, are set ordinarily, by Christ's Institution, only in such a
Church, where they are called the Chosen; but that is a particular Church; Act.
14.23. Tit. 1.5. For that choice and calling is the foundation of the relation
between Pastors and People, and of the duties both of the Rulers, and of the
Ruled, mutually, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17. 3. If a Catholic integral
Church arises from all particular Churches, as Members of it, joined together;
then it must be distinct from them all, as the whole Body is a thing distinct
from its several Members, then also there must be some Officer, and Ordinance,
and Act belonging to it, which does not appertain to particular Churches; as
there is a General over an Army, besides the Captains and Officers of the
several Regiments; and a Supreme Monarch in a Kingdom, besides the Governors in
the several Corporations, and Counties: But no such Catholick-Church, distinct
from all particular Churches, can be shown, nor Officers, or acts of it,
besides those which are exercised in particular Churches. 4. Diocesan Bishops
look at these words, as giving the Keys to them, as the Successors of the
Apostles, whence they assume the power of Ordinathon and Jurisdiction, as
belonging to them, jure divino. A claim, which King James, whether out of his
policy (which he called his King-craft) or out of his insight into the
Scripture, would not suffer them to pretend, in his time. Nor indeed is there
any warrant for it in Scripture, as it has been abundantly proved by sundry
witnesses against that usurpation. We read of Bishops in the New Testament, but
what? Not one Bishop over many Churches, but many Bishops over one Church; not
Diocesan, but Congregational Bishops. Phil. 1.1. Those whom Luke calls Elders,
in Act. 20.17. Paul calls Bishops, in v. 28. The Bishops which the Apostles
acknowledge to be Christ's Ordinance, to continue in the Christian Church, are
Congregational Elders, 1 Timothy 3.1-8. Tit. 1.5, 7. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and all the
Teaching-Elders are (...), fellow-Elders, coequal in authority, above whom Paul
acknowledges no Rulers in the Church, but rather sets these above all, 1 Timothy
5.17. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 43. Cypr. Ep. l. 3. Ep. 10 and l. 1. ep. 3.
And, when, after the Apostles time, one of the Pastors was called Bishop, by
way of eminency, for orders sake; yet, for many years, he did no act of power,
but, 1. with consent of the Presbytery; 2. with consent, Dr. Cudw. on the
Postscript to Galat.
and in the presence, of the People. What is pleaded from Titus his ordaining,
Tit. 1.5. helps not their cause: for he did it, as an Evangelist, not as a
Diocesan Prelate; and the Office of Evangelists, together with the Apostles,
cease. The Postscript of the second Epistle to Timothy, where he is called,
the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians; and of that to Titus, where he
is called, the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, are Apocryphal (as
the rest are) and the first consists not with 2 Timothy 4.5. where Timothy is
called an Evangelist, and therefore, not tied to personal residence, to abide
in one place (as Bishops and Pastors are) but the Evangelists were to go from
place to place, to set things in order, and confirm the Churches planted by the
Apostles. The same may be said of Titus. Nor is the Postscript of that Epistle
of more credit than the former, where the Scribe says, it was written from
Nicopolis. Hiperius justly disliketh the ground of that opinion in the Scribe,
which, he says, was from Tit. 3.12. Because Paul bade Titus come to him to
Nicopolis, for he determined to winter there: whereas, if he were there at that
time, he would have said, I purpose to winter here, not there; as Beza notes.

5. Others conclude from this Text, that the power of the Keys. i. e. the power
of Ordination and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is given in Peter, to
Church Officers only, especially to Pastors and Teachers. And that such only,
or principally, are meant in this Grant, they endeavor to prove by five
reasons, especially. We will examine them severally, and briefly.

1. Reas. Because the Keys are given to Stewards by Office. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor.
4.5. 1 Timothy 3.15. Isa. 22.12.]

Answ. 1. The three former Texts speak of the Apostles and Evangelists Office,
and in them, of Pastors and Teachers, not of Ruling-Elders. But, I suppose they
will not deny the Ruling-Elders to have a Key of Office also. The last Text
proves only, that the Key sometimes signifies Office-power given to a Steward,
which none deny. But this touches not this Text, Mat. 16. which means not only
Office-Power, but all Power, which serves to shut and open the House or City of
God; not power of the Steward only, but the power of the Spouse and Wife of
this great King, to whom the Lord Christ, as her Husband, being gone into a far
Country, even to Heaven, has given power to admit into the Family, and reject,
as occasion shall require, and for those ends, to judge also; because such acts
require judgment, and to call the Steward to his place, and to put him into it,
and to put a Key of Office, by Election, into his hand: and therefore, though
all power be not formally in her, yet it comes originally from her.

Reas. 2. Because, Christ here gives the Keys only to those, to whom he gives
Official Warrant and Authority, for the actual exercise thereof, in opening and
shutting, binding and loosing, i. e. only to Teachers and Elders.] Answ. 1.
Though it is true, that Official Warrant and Authority is given only to
Teachers and Elders, only Teaching and Ruling Elders have that formally; Yet,
2. The power of the Keys is far larger than Office-power, viz. to admit,
reject, etc. 3. They have their Office from the Church, and their Office-power,
by the Church, originally: Therefore there was power in the Church, before
Office-power, which did communicate and conveigh Office-power to its Officers.

3. Reas. To bind and loose, are acts of the Office-power of Pastors, Rulers,
Feeders by public and pastoral preaching, which does not belong to Believers.]

Answ. Binding and loosing, taken in the largest sense, as in this Text,
comprehend the exercise of all the acts of the Keys, or Church Power: and these
acts are not only by public and pastoral preaching (for then, the Ruling-Elder
should have no Key to bind or loose); but also by Admonitions,
Excommunications, Admissions, which issue from a power of judging, not proper
to the Pastors only, but common to the People with them. 2. Though the Keys be
given to the Church; yet she may not exercise any act proper to Office-Power,
without Officers, whom she does and must call to that end, and submit to them
in the due exercise thereof.

4. Reas. If this place give not warrant and authority to Officers, what
warrant have they for their Office-Power?]

Answ. 1. This place gives warrant for the People to choose their Officers,
according to Christ's appointment, and the Church does accordingly call them to
that place, and invest them with Office, with voluntary professed subjection to
them, in the right exercise of that power of Office, which belongs unto them in
the Lord. 2. The several acts of Office-power to be exercised by them, are
abundantly warranted in other places of Scripture.

5. Reas. They to whom the Keys are here given, do authoritatively forgive and
retain sins, and their Acts are valid in Heaven: but the Church of Believers,
wanting Officers, cannot by any warrant of Scripture, authoritatively forgive
and retain sins.]

Answ. The word, Authority, sometimes is taken more generally, for Power,
sometimes more strictly and properly, for Ruling and Office-Power. In the first
sense, the Church has power to foregive judicially, in 2 Cor. 2.10. in
reference to their former censure. The Officers forgive authoritatively, in the
second sense. We proceed to the last interpretation.

6. Others look at the Keys as given to Peter here, in the name of a particular
visible Church, indefinitely taken; not of this or that particular definite
Church, that all other Churches should receive the Keys from them, or be
subject to the power of the Keys in their hands: For that will not stand with
the parity of Churches among themselves: for, par in parem non habet imperium.
Therefore the Church, here intended, must be taken generally, and indefinitely,
as comprehending in it any particular visible Church, one as well as another,
or the general Church as existing its particulars. If it be objected against
this, that Peter was not a Member of such a Christian Congregation, when Christ
spoke these words unto him. I answer, It is true: for no such Church was then
constituted. No more was there a Presbytery then constituted, when Christ
directed Peter and the rest, in case of private offense obstinatly persisted
in, after proceeding in the first and second step, to tell the Church, in Mat.
18. which yet they hold, but not truly, to be the Presbytery, as we shall
evince hereafter, with the assistance of Christ. But, in the mean time, all
grant that that Rule serves to order Members, how to proceed in such cases,
when particular Churches should be constituted. And the same reason is of force
in this Text also. Some have thought that Christ gives the Keys in this Text,
not to the Church of Believers, of which he spoke in the former verse, but to
the Elders; because he alters the form of his speech: for, having spoken, in
the former verse, of the Church, in the third person, saying, Upon this Rock I
will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; he
says not, in this verse, and I will give unto it the Keys, but varying the
person, he turns his speech to Peter, saying, and unto thee I will give the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: but this is a mistake. Here is no changing of
person, nor turning of speech, in Christ's giving the promise of the Keys; but,
as Christ began, so he continues his speech to Peter, upon occasion of his
confession. In v. 17. Christ pronounces Peter blessed, from the cause of his
confession. In v. 18. he gives a promise of reward to Peter's confession, that,
upon this, as upon a Rock, he will build his Church, and establish it, as
impregnable against the gates of Hell. In v. 19. he gives unto Peter, upon
occasion of his public confession in the name of the Church, a promise of the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore this promise is given to the Church,
in Peter, in such sort, as, though the use of the Keys be various, according to
the variety of callings in the Church, yet the power it self of the Keys, is
here originally and primarily committed to the Toti Ecclesiae dedit Christus
claves, sed ita, ut in Ecclesia certi essent qui clavibus utantur ad salutem
Ecclesiae, honoremque Dei. Zanc. in praec. 4. quaest. 3. Vid. Park. de Polit.
Eccles. l. 3 c. 3.
Church in general, existing in particular Churches. I might produce sundry
Writers, both ancient and modern, of other Countries, and our own, if need
required, to confirm this Exposition (yea, of the Authors quoted by Mr. P. not
a few consenting herein;) but I shall only mention Cyprian and Augustine, who,
in sundry places, speak the same with us. And these two I the rather name,
because I find in approved Histories, that sundry Martyrs, being confirmed in
this Truth, by their Testimonies, have sealed it with their blood. Hieronimus
Savanarola, a Godly learned Preacher in Florence, a man endued with a
Prophetical Spirit, Illyr. Catal. Test. verit. cont. Papam. p. 565.
was there burnt, for denying the primacy of the Pope, teaching, that the Keys
were given, Ecclesiae toti, non uni Petro, to the whole Church; and that the
Communion should be administered sub utraque specie, and against humane
Traditions, and the Popes indulgencies, and the wicked lives of the Cardinals
and Priests; and for preaching free Justification by Faith in Christ, and that
the Pope is Antichrist. This was about the year, 1499. In our own Land, John
Lambert, in the year, Fox Martyrol. in the Reign of Hen. 8th.
1538, was burnt to death, by the sentence of King Henry the 8th, himself
sitting in judgment upon him, with all his Nobles and Bishops, by the wicked
counsel of Stephen Gardener, upon 45 Articles, whereof this was the 43d
Article, Whether he believed the Pope was Christ's Vicar, and had power on earth
to bind and loose? He denied that the Pope was Christ's Vicar, and affirmed,
that the Keys were given to Peter, not for himself alone, but in the name of
the Church, and proved it out of Cyprian, Idem, ibid.
de simplicitate Clericorum, and Aug. de Agone Christiano. Also Sir John
Borthwick, a Scottish Knight, in the year 1540, was condemned by the Arch
Bishop of St. Andrews, then Cardinal of Scotland, and the Popes Legate, with
sundry Popish Bishops, upon ten Articles, of which this was the first, touching
the Popes Supremacy, grounded upon Mat. 16. To thee will I give the Keys: which
he, from that place, confuted, affirming that the Keys were given to the Church
in Peter, which name was given him upon his confession of Christ, in the name
of the whole Church; and confirmed his assertion, out of Cyprian and Augustine.
So that this is no new, nor singular exposition of these words, or practice
taken up by some few of late. Not new; for Cyprian wrote about the year 250
after Christ; and Augustine, about the year 410; the last of them about 1200
years since, and the first above 1400 years past. I shall add hereunto, that,
before Cyprian, Tertullian, about the year 200, shows us, that Church Censures
were then performed by one particular Church within it self, and not in any
combination of Churches; Tertull. Apolog. Cap. 39. Nor singular; for sundry
sorts of Writers, in several Ages and Countries, have consented therein. I will
not enter into that question, (about which there seems to be some difference in
apprehensions between some Godly learned Brethren) Whether the Keys are given
to Peter under several considerations, as an Apostle, and as an Elder, and as a
professing Believer, all being taken jointly together? or to a single Society,
or condition of men, under some special Relation, which share alike in the
equality of this Power promised unto them? For in the substance of the matter
they agree, 1. That the Keys are promised to Peter, in the name of a
Congregational-Church. 2. That this power of the Keys cannot be given to one
single Society formally, in all the kinds of it; because it requires several
sorts of subjects formally different, viz. some Ruling, some Ruled, some
Teaching, etc. 3. That, til a Congregational-Church be organized, and
completed with all its Officers, it cannot completely exercise the Keys
committed to it. 4. That, nevertheless, before it be completed, it has power
of the Keys, and is the first subject of them, either formally, or virtually,
whereby all the Ordinances are administered, or administrable among them. I
shall issue this point into one Doctrinal Conclusion.

6. Concl.
The subordinate ordinary Power of acting Church Affairs, in the Order appointed
by Jesus Christ, for attainment of the ends of Church Communion, is given by
Christ to a visible Congregation of confederate Believers, as the first and
proper subject of it.

In the handling of this point, I shall note somethings, 1. For Explication. 2.
Confirmation of it. 3. Draw some Consectaries.

1. For explication of it, I shall endeavor to clear five particulars.

1. What I mean by Subordinate Power.] Subordinate Power is that which wholly
depends on Christ's Ordinance and Institution, who is the Supreme and only
Monarch and Head of the Church; and therefore his revealed Will must be
attended in all Church-Administations, as the only Rule, from which they may
not swerve to the right hand, or to the left, for any humane policies, or
pretenses whatsoever, by adding ought thereto, or taking any thing therefrom.
To this Christ limited his Apostles, who were the highest Officers in the
Church, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And, accordingly, Paul strictly charged Timothy,
and, in him, all the Churches and Church Officers, to keep this Commandment,
without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14, 15. They must assume to themselves only that power, which he
has allotted them, and not exercise it any otherwise than he has allowed them.

2. Why I add ordinary, to subordinate.] It is added, to difference that Power,
which resideth in the Church for continual use in ordinary dispensations, from
that which was in the Apostles for a time, by the gift of Christ. Both
Apostolical-Power, and Church Power agree in this, that they are received
immediately from Christ. For, as he said to the Apostles, whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted, etc. Joh. 20.23. So he said to the Church, both here, in
Peter, and in Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind, or loose on earth, etc. So
that, neither did the Apostles receive their Power from the Church, nor does
the Church receive its power from the Apostles, but both immediately from
Christ: and therefore, as the Apostles had their Power, before visible
Christian-Churches were constituted; so such Churches have and hold their
Power, when Apostles cease to be on earth. But herein these two Powers differ;
1. That Apostolical Power was centred in one single Person, and extended it
self to the circumference of all Churches. Each Apostle had the Power of the
whole Church, and of all the Officers of the Church; when he was absent from
the Churches, he could administer Seals and Censures, as if he had the presence
and concurrence of the Church: and, if he was present in any Church that wanted
Officers, an Apostle had power to execute every Office, for the Church. And
this their Power extended it self as much to all Churches, as to any one. Their
Line went out into all the World, Psalm. 19.4. with Romans 10.18. Mat. 28.19. For
as the Father sent Christ the Mediator, with fullness of Soveragin Power; so
Christ sent his Apostles with fullness of Ministerial Power, Joh. 20.21. But
Church Power is not in one man, but in a Society, and to be exercised variously
by several persons in that society, according to variety of callings. Are all
Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.29. Hence, 2. That was extraordinary, and to last but for a
time: but this is ordinary, and to continue to the end. Rev. 4.1.

3. What the Church Affairs are, and what the acting them imports.] The
Church Affairs are the Ordinances of Christ, called here the Keys, in a
large-sense, the word of the Covenant, and the seals of the Covenant, and the
Censures. These the Church may be said to act, by opening and shutting. 1. They
open the doors of the Church subordinately, when they admit only such, and all
such, to fellowship, whom Christ receives, Romans 14.1, 3. 2. The doors of
office in the Church they do open in the Church subordinately, when they elect
and ordain such unto Offices, as Christ has prepared and called thereunto,
according to the rule in 1 Timothy 3.1-14. and then only to such Offices as Christ
has set in his Church: which are only four, Rev. 4.6, 7, 8. For Widows are
included in Deacons. These are reduced to two general heads, in Phil. 1.1. and
so are their functions, in Romans 12.6, 7. and yield unto them all, and only that
power which Christ has annexed to their Office, and particularly unto Teaching
and Ruling Officers, that subjection and honor which the word calls for, Heb.
13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 3. They shut the Doors of the Church, and bind men
from Church -- Ordinances, and Privileges; 1. By not admitting those to
Church Fellowship, against whom they have just exceptions, Act. 9.26. 2. By
judging and censuring scandlaous members, whether Brethren or Officers,
according to Christ's Rules, Mat. 18.17, 18. and 1 Cor. 5. 3. By holding them
under censure, without release, till their repentance be to satisfaction,
according to Christ's Rules, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.

4. What the order is, wherein Christ will have these Church Affairs to be
acted?] The order is this. First, a company of Believers, being satisfied
concerning the spiritual state of one another, and their fitness for
Church Fellowship, and thereupon confederating together, to walk together in
all the Ordinances of Christ, with mutual watchfulness and submission one to
another in the Lord, become a Congregational-Church. They have now the
essentials of a Church. 2. Being such, they must look out from among themselves
for such Officers as Christ has given to his Church; these they must choose and
ordain, professing their voluntary submission to their Office-Rule, and
Authority, in the Lord. Till this be done, they cannot completely act all
Church Affairs, in due order. Till they have Teaching-Elders, though there be
gifted-Brethren among them that may Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. yet they have none to
give themselves continually to Prayer (according to the necessities and
occasions of the Church) and to the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6.4. Such
attendance being proper to Officers; Romans 12.7. Nor, 3. to preach the word with
authority, as an Officer must. Tit. 2.15. Nor, 4. to administer the Seals,
which Christ has annexed to the official preaching of the Word, Mat. 28.19,
20. Without Ruling-Elders, who shall call the Church together, as the Apostles
did, on special weighty occasions, Act. 6.2? Who shall prepare matters for the
Church, 1. By examining Officers or Members, before they be received of the
Church, Rev. 2.2. 2. By stating and clearing the question and proofs, and
trying, whether matters have been carried according to Rule, privately, in the
first and second step, before any offense be presented to the Church, which was
secret at first, according to Mat. 18.17. 3. By directing those that are to
give satisfaction to the Church, in case of offense conceived against them, how
to carry themselves, according to rule, to remove it, as the Apostles and
Elders, being met at the House of James, did to Paul, Act. 21.18. To these
heads, other like cases are to be referred. Who shall moderate debates in the
Church Assembly, and order speaking and silence in the Church, according to
Rules of order, and edification? 1 Cor. 14.26, 40. Who shall hold forth light
from the Rule, to guide the apprehensions and judgment of the Brethren, in
difficult cases? according to Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. Lastly, who shall dismiss the
Church Authoritatively, with a Blessing, in the name of the Lord? Numb.
6.23-26. and Heb. 7.7. And who shall take care of the humane affairs of the
Church, if Deacons be not chosen and ordained? This Office-Power the Church
indeed has not formally in it self; yet it has it virtually, and originally.
As the stock of a Tree has not immediate power to bring forth fruit, yet it
has power to produce branches which do bring forth fruit; so the Church of
Believers, though it has not immediate power to act an Office, in the things
proper thereunto, yet it has power to make such Officers as may perform the
same in Christ's order.

5. Why this Power is said to be given to a visible Congregation of confederate
Believers, as the first and proper subject of it?] This expression serves to
show three particulars. 1. That I speak of a Congregational-Church,
indefinitely, or the Church in its general nature, as it exists in particular
Congregations, to each of which it communicates its whole nature, and with it
all its privileges and power to them all, being species of it, firstly and
equally; so that each particular Church has all Church Power, that is seated
in the general nature of the Church, as completely conveyed to it, as any
other: as this particular man, John, or Peter, or James has all the nature of
man equally communicated to them, and can put forth the operations of that
nature, fully of themselves, and without the help of any other. 2. That this
Power is given to the Church to be acted, in Admissions, Elections, and
Censures, only by such in whose name Peter made this confession, viz. a
Community of Disciples walking in the profession of the Faith, with consent;
that is, to a Society of believing men: for Women, though Believers, are
excepted by the Rule, 1 Timothy 2.12-14. 2. Professing Believers; therefore
Children and distracted persons are not capable of this power, being unfit to
judge, 1 Cor. 5.12. and so are they that are Deaf and Dumb. 3. Such as walk in
the profession of the Faith, with consent. Therefore such as are under public
censure for scandals in Life or Doctrine, are disabled, as having, for the
time, lost their privilege and power. Lastly, if the Church it self be
generally corrupted or divided among themselves, as it were into two equal
parts, it cannot act this power, nor claim an interest in this promise, which
is given to a Church assembly in Christ's Name, with competent agreement among
themselves. Mat. 18.17, 18, 19, 20. 3. That this Power is given to such a
Church, not only objectively for their good, but subjectively and firstly, so
that the Church is the first recipient subject of it. For Officers are given to
the Church, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. not as mere adjuncts are given to a subject, but as
integral parts, for completing the integrity and perfection of the whole body
of the Church: and, if they be so given to the Church, the Church is the
recipient subject of them: and though the Church cannot by it self exercise the
Teaching and Ruling-Elders Office; yet they may by their Officers; as the body,
though it cannot see by it self, yet it may by the eyes which are given to it
for that end.

2. The Confirmation, or proof, that such a Church is the first and proper
subject of this power; shall be double. 1. By Scripture. 2. By Reasons.

1. By Scripture, it may be proved from sundry Texts. 1. This in hand clearly
confirms it, if that good ancient rule of expounding Scripture be received,
Dictorum intelligentia ex causis dictorum sumenda est. For Christ's question to
the Disciples, which was the cause of Peter's confession here, was only
concerning the Faith common to the Church. Whom say ye that I am? Hereupon
Peter, in the name of the Disciples, made this confession of Faith. Quia
Christus Petra, Petrus populus Christianus. August. in Matthew. de verbis Domini,
Ser. 13.
Christ testified his approbation of it, by calling him Peter, not so much in
respect of his Office, as of his Faith thus publicly professed, whence also
visible Believers are called lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. and Christ added to
this praise of Peter a twofold promise. 1. Of edifying and stablishing the
Church, upon this Rock. 2. Of affording it sufficient means for the attainment
of those ends, viz. the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Where the Kingdom
of Heaven, or visible Church of Christ on earth, is compared to a City, or
House, the Door or Gate whereof is Christ; the Keys are all instituted means,
whereby an entrance into Christ and his Kingdom, visibly, is opened and shut,
the subordinate power whereof is here given to the Church immediately.

The second Text is in Mat. 18.17, 18. Tell the Church, and, if he hear not the
Church, let him be as an Heathen and a Publican. For what you shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. This cannot be meant of Elders assembling
together, and acting apart from the Brethren. For no such assembly is called
the Church, in the New Testament, much less is this power given to them: for,
in case of scandal given by them, they are under the power of the whole Church,
as well as other Members, to be censured by them; though, when they keep the
Rule, they are as Elders, Rulers in the Church. It must therefore be meant of a
Congregational-Church. The third Text is in 1 Cor. 5. where Paul exhorted the
Church at Corinth, to exercise this their power, which he calls the power of
the Lord Jesus, v. 4. whereby they were to deliver unto Satan that incestuous
person; v. 5. and were to purge out the old leaven; v. 7. and were to judge
those that are within; v. 12. and to put away that wicked person from among
them; v. 13. and this Paul calls a punishment inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6.
Thus he establishes their power to bind, and teaches them how to use it; and,
in like manner, he exhorts them, upon the man's repentance, to turn the Key,
and to open the Door of Christian liberties to him, and to loose him from the
former censure, by forgiving him, in a legal or judicial sense, 2 Cor. 2.7, 10.
And that this Church at Corinth was a mere Congregational-Church, it may be
evinced from hence, that the whole Church was no larger, then was wont to meet
together in one place, 1 Cor. 14.23. for the ordinary worship of God.

2. By Reasons.

1. Because in such a Congregational-Church are all the causes of this power.
1. Efficient; the Institution and Ordinance of Christ, who delegateth this
subordinate power, to whom it pleases him, by his own appointment. 2. The
material cause; visible Believers. 3. The formal cause; Covenanting together to
walk in all the Ordinances of Christ, and to submit mutually one to another in
the Lord; to be reclaimed, if they err from the rules; or to be censured by the
power of the whole, if they be found obstinate.

2. Because there is no former subject of this power, from whence a
Congregational-Church might derive it, but it is communicated, by means of the
Church, to all that partake of it, and it remains in the Church, when others
are removed. They choose their own Elders: therefore they had this power
virtually in them before they had Elders, and so could not derive it from them.
2. All particular Churches are of equal power within themselves, not one of
them subordinate to another. Therefore they derive it not from other particular
Churches. 3. Synods, both lesser and larger, are made up of the Elders and
Messengers sent from particular Churches, and have their being from them; nor
do they send them to them, to borrow any Church Power, but only light from
them; as the Church at Antioch did from the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 15.
Therefore they derive no Church Power from them. Again, when the Elders of
particular Churches are dead, or censured, or rejected by the power of the
whole for obstinacy in scandalous evils, the Church still retains its power
to choose others; as a Corporation has its full power still, though the
Magistrates be dead, or cast out. The same holds in Churches in Islands, by
their own confession, when they cannot have the help of Synods. Thus we prove
Fire to be the first subject of heat, because, if it be in other things, as in
Water, or Wood; it is there by the means of Fire, and, when they are removed,
yet still it remains in Fire. The like reason holds in this, as you see, to
prove such a Church, as this of which we speak, to be the first subject of
Church Power, or of the Keys.

3. Because all the acts done immediately by the Church, in opening and
shutting, in binding and loosing, flow from this power of the Keys given them
by Christ, and hold it forth.

1. Their admitting Members is an act of this Power, and holds it forth: for,
till the Brethren be satisfied, and approve ones fitness, he cannot be received
into their fellowship; Act. 9.26. and 10.47.

2. Their choosing Officers is an act of this Power, which the Apostles would
not violate, in adding Deacons, Act. 6.3, 5. and Ruling-Elders to the Church,
Act. 14.23. and the same holds much more concerning Pastors and Teachers. This
power Cyprian acknowledged to be in the Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis
and Deum metuens, ipsa maxim habet potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes
vel indignos recusandi.

Quod and ipsum videmus de Divina authoritate descendere. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 4.


People principally, to accept or refuse Ministers, as they judged them worthy
or unworthy.

3. Their Ordination of Officers, by deputing some chosen out of their own Body
thereunto (in the want of Officers) is an act of this Power of the Keys
residing in them. For, though the Offices of Elders in general, and the
Authority of their Office, as they are Rulers, is from Christ immediately; yet
the investing of this or that elect person with this Office and Authority, in
relation to this or that Church, by application of it to him in particular,
rather than to another, this is by the Church.

Ubi est vera Ecclesia, ibi esse necesse est jus eligendi, et ordi^ndi
Ministros. Melanct. de potest. Episcop. Arg. 2.
4. Their Expostulating with any Member, in case of supposed offense, is an act
of this Power, whereunto Peter submitted, though an Apostle, in the Church at
Jerusalem. Act. 11.2, 3, 4.

5. Their public Admonishing offenders, is an act of this Power, whether they
be offending Brethren, or offending Officers, Mat. 18.18. Col. 4.17. Let him
hear the Church, etc. Say to Archippus, Fulfill, etc.

6. Their Excommunicating obstinate and scandalous sinners, whether a Brother,
Mat. 18.18. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. or an Officer, Gal. 5.12* is an act of this power in
the Church.

7. Their receiving again, or releasing from censure, those that have been
under censure, upon their repentance, according to the Rule, 2 Cor. 2.7, 10. is
an act of this ^ower. This also Cyprian acknowledged to be in the Vix plebi
persuadeo, imo extorqueo, ut tales patiantur admitti. Et justior factus est
fraternitatis dolor, exeo, quod unus atque alius, obnitente plebe and
contradicente, mea tamen facilitate suscepti, priores extiterunt, quam prius
fuerant, nec fidem poenitentiae servare potuerunt, quia nec cum vera
poenitentia venerant. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3.
People, or fraternity, who, though they gladly received such as returned with
repentance, yet he could hardly persuade them, yea, extort it from them, to
receive such, in whom pride and obstinacy appeared, and he justified them
herein, blaming himself for too much facility.

1. Corollarie.
Then the Church is before its Officers, that is, it is a true Church,
essentially, and has all Church Power, either formally, or virtually, before
it has Officers, and when the Officers are removed from it, by Death or
Censure. For, 1. as a man is a true man, who is a living creature endued with a
reasonable soul, because the definition of a man agrees to him, though he
wants some bodily Members; so a Church is a true Church, which consists of a
Soc^^ of visible Believers confederated together in one Congregation, to walk
together in all the Ordinances of Christ, with mutual submission one to
another, in the Lord; because the definition of a Church agrees to it, though
it wants Officers. 2. Such a Church can call their Officers, and thereby make
them Officers to themselves: Therefore it must be before them, as the cause is
before its effect. A Corporation has its being and power of a Corporation
within it self, before it has Magistrates; because it can choose Magistrates,
and, when they are dead, or put out, can put others into their stead and place.
So it is with the Church.

2. Corollary.
Then though the Church has its essential being and power, without Officers;
yet it is defective two ways. 1. In respect of Members, it has not its
complete integrity of Members, without them. Bartimeus was a true man, without
his eyes, but not perfect, with the integrity of his parts and members: so is
the Church defective and mained without Officers. 2. As it is defective in its
members, so also, in its operations, if it want Officers. For some Ordinances
cannot be at all administered in the Churches, without Pastors or Teachers as
the outward Seals, or Sacraments, which are annexed, by the Ordinance of
Christ, to the Word of the Covenant, and the administration of them is by him
limited unto Preachers of the Word by Office, Mat. 28.19. and some acts of
Rule, as, in ordering speech in public, in Church-debates, according to rules
of order and edification, and the like, cannot be done without Ruling-Elders.
The same may be said of Official watching, to prevent or remove private
disorders in conversation among the Members. 3. Some cannot be so done by
others, as by Officers. 1. Not with that attendance to them, as the need and
good of the Church requires. He that has an Office is bound to wait on it,
Romans 12.7. to give himself to the duties of it continually, Act. 6.4. to be in
it, 1 Timothy 4.15. and therefore must be freed by the Church from other
distracting cares, which would disable him to it, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 2. Not with
Authority, which belongs to Ruling Officers in the Church, as in preaching
the Word with Authority, Heb. 13.17. so in other acts, which be properly
Official and Authoritative. Hence arises a difference between Officers and
private Members, in their seve^^^ manner of acting in things common to both. A
Church wanting Officers, may appoint some of their Members to declare the mind
of the Church, touching the admission of such into the fellowship of the
Covenant, and Membership with the Church, in whose fitness thereunto the Church
is satisfied; and in ordaining Officers, chosen by the Church, by imposition of
hands and Prayer; and in gathering the suffrages of the fraternity; and in
declaring the judgment of the Church in Censures: but these things they do,
only at the appointment of the Church, pro hac vel illa vice. The same things
are done by Teaching and Ruling-Elders in another manner, viz. by virtue of
their Office, without particular leave of the Church: for, it belongs to them,
as Officers, to attend unto their Work, not only to hold forth the Covenant,
and to receive into Fellowship, in the name of the Church, those whom the
Church approves, but also to try the fitness of those that offer themselves
unto Fellowship, before they propound them to the Church. The same holds in
Officers to be called; and when the Church has chosen them, and agreed to
ordain them, the Eldership impose hands upon them, in the presence of the
Church, by virtue of the^^ Office. When offenses are brought to the Church in
the third step, as the Elders do propound the case, so it must first be
notified to them, that they may try whether the Rule has been attended in the
two former steps, and that they may clear all difficulties, and then propound
the case, when it is found to be fit for public cognizance, according to Rule.
And being so, if they neglect to bring it to the Church, or assume any undue
power to themselves, they that are offended may complain to the Church; and, as
need may require, they are to hold forth light from Scripture, to guide the
Church in judging: and, in the close, to propound the sentence (wherein the
Church consents, and they concur with them) authoritatively.

3. Corollary.
Then the proper acts of Church Power, and of ordinary Office-power, are
limited, by the Ordinance of Christ, to be put forth by the Church, and
Officers respectively, within that Body, or particular Congregation, to which
they have a particular memberly or official Relation. The members of one Church
cannot act in admitting the Members, choosing the Officers, nor censuring
Offenders of another Church* Nor may the Officers of one Church, administer the
Seals, or ordain Officers, or perform other proper Acts of official Authority,
out of their own body, in another Church. The Church may, by communion of
Churches, upon orderly, recommendation, receive the members of other Churches
unto fellowship of such Ordinances, as are for the comfort and strengthening of
the Saints, as the Seals are, and the Officers may administer them to such,
being accepted by the body: for we have a warrant for so much, from the Rule,
Romans 16.1. 3 John 9. but not to act in judgment. For, the Church has this
privilege proper to be judged by, and to judge, only those that are within, 1
Cor. 5.12. whereas I alleged this Text against Mr. Paget, to prove, that
Church-Ordinances belong only to the Members of some particular Church, Mr.
Rutterf. meeting with that expression, says, Mr. D. will have Pastors so far
strangers to all Congregations, save their own, that (he says) other Churches
are without, and have nothing to do to judge them, and alleges for this, 1
Cor. 5.12. But by those that are without, Paul means, not those that were not
of the Congregation, but he means Infidels and Heathen, as in other
Scriptures. For Paul judged and excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy
1.20. who were without the Church at Corinth.] Had Mr. Rutt. been pleased to
cast his eye upon my own defense of that passage, In my Apolog. Reply, page
312, 313.
printed sundry years before he put pen to paper in these disputes about Church
affairs, he might have found that written by me, touching the sense, and my
application of that Text, which might have prevented his exagitating that
matter. Nor does he with any congruity argue from Paul's Excommunicating
Hymeneus and Alexander, who, he says, were without the Church at Corinth, to
prove that Pastors have any thing to do, to judge judicially, or excommunicate
the members of other Congregations. For Paul was an Apostle, an extraordinary
Officer, had an illimited commission, and a fullness of delegated power both in
every Church, and to administer Church-Ordinances, without the fellowship of a
particular Church, when it could not be had; and to execute all Offices in any
Church, where Officers were wanting: But Pastors are ordinary Officers, have a
limited commission, to do only the acts of the Pastoral Office, and those only
to that particular Church by which they are called unto Office; Act. 20.28. 1
Pet. 5.2. Therefore, though Paul might excommunicate one that was not of that
particular Church at Corinth, yet the Pastor to the Church at Corinth might
not. Yet Paul could not excommunicate one that was no member of any Church, but
without, as Infidels and Heathen are: For that implies a contradiction. To
conclude. The Apostle does so appropriate Church-judgment, to those that are
within that particular Church, 1 Cor. 5.12. Ye judge them that are within; that
he exempts from it in a due proportion, all that are not members of that
Congregation; though there are degrees of being without, some being totally
without all Church Communion, as Infidels and Heathen: others, though in
Church Communion elsewhere, yet not in communion of membership of that Church,
to whom he wrote to put away from them; not one that was a member of another
Church, but him that was a member of that Church. And, in this sense, Mr. Rutt.
says, Hymeneus and Alexander were without the Church at Corinth, though
members of some other Church: for which cause, the Church at Corinth could not
excommunicate them, yet Paul might, and did, by his Apostolical Power Thus, by
his own confession, some are without a particular Church, who yet are not
Heathen or Infidels. To conclude, one may be said to be without this or that
particular Church, two ways. 1. Simply and absolutely; so, Infidels and Heathen
that are of no Church. 2. Comparatively, so the Members of other Churches,
compared with those that are of this Body.

4. Corollary.
Then Churches gathered, and Officers ordained, in these days, without
Apostles, are true Churches, and true Church Officers, according to Christ; and
Churches thus Organized, according to the Rules of the Word, are true, and
entire Churches, and the first subject of all Church Power, as well as those
Primitive Churches planted by the Apostles. For the concurrence of the Apostles
is not put into this Charter, whereof we speak, as a conditional Clause; which
might not have been omitted, if Christ had intended, that it should be always
necessary. He does not say, upon this Rock my Apostles shall build my Church,
and to my Church built by them I will give the Keys of the Kingdom; but, upon
this Rock I will build my Church ( viz. by such Instruments as Christ will
raise, and use, and bless in that work, in every Age;) and to this Church, thus
built, he gives the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Object. But Christ gave the
Commission of gathering Churches to his Apostles, in Matthew. 28.18, 19. And,
when he ascended up on high, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12. Answ. Those and the like Texts of Scripture do indeed show,
that God used Apostles principally in this work, but not only: For as to Teach
and Baptize is common to other Teaching-Officers, as well as Apostles; so the
gathering of Churches, by making men Disciples of Christ, was done by others,
besides Apostles, even in the Apostles days, Act. 11.20, 21. The dispersed
Disciples planted the Church at Antioch, the Members whereof were first called
Christians, a Church whose planting Barnabas approved, ver. 23. 2. They show,
that God would use Apostles herein, for a time, but not always; which I prove,
1. From the proper work committed, to them, which was to make the first Models
and Patterns of planting and gathering Churches, which ordinary Instrumentts
are bound to attend in the gathering and constituting of Churches, 1 Cor. 3.6,
10. and, in that sense, their work continues to the end of the World, though
their manner of working. viz. from an immediate Call, Inspiration, and
Infallible assistance, proper to Apostles, in making those Patterns, was
extraordinary, and ended with their Office, in the first Age, since when, there
never have been Apostles in the World. For, though Matthias succeeded in the
place of Judas, by Gods Election, Act. 1.26. yet after James was beheaded, no
Apostle was chosen to succeed him, though the Apostles lived long after. 2. The
Apostle John, who lived longest of the Apostles, describes, by Revelation from
Christ, all the Officers that should be, by Gods Ordinance, in Christian
Churches, after that Age, under four sorts of living Creatures, which note the
four sorts of ordinary Officers to continue in the Church after that Age, viz.
Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons, Revel. 4.1, 6, 7.

Verse. 19. And whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven:
Whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
THese words hold forth the Ratification of Christ's grant of the Keys unto a
Congregational-Church, with the chiefty of power, under Christ, to manage the
same within themselves, for the attainment of the ends of Church Communion; And
that this is spoken to Peter, in the name of such a Church, and, that Christ
intended to establish, by this promise, the complete exercise of this power in
such a Church, being completed with all it^ Officers, is clear from Matthew.
18.18. where the same promise is given, by name to such a Church. The words
therefore, in sum, hold forth a grant from Christ to his Church of an
indispensable power of Church Censures, within themselves: which may be thus
evinced. The censure that is established in Heaven cannot be dispensed with,
nor reversed by any power on Earth: But the censure, that is administered by a
Congregational-Church, is established in Heaven: Therefore it cannot be
dispensed withal, nor reversed by any power on Earth. The Proposition, a man
would think might pass without opposition, but I find this Objection made
against it. Obj. The sentence of an inferior Judge or Court proceeding
rightly, is established in Heaven; yet we may appeal from it; Why will not the
same hold in Church Censures also? Answ. 1. Because the promise of binding in
Heaven, is not given by Christ to the censures of Civil Courts: For it is not a
Civil, but a Spiritual binding that is here meant. 2. Because there is not par
ratio between them. The reason why appeals may be made from the sentence of
inferior Civil Courts and Judges, is, because there is a Supreme Court in
being, to which the appeal may be brought, and there prosecuted, and thereby
determined (as the inferior Courts in Israel stood under the highest
Synedrion;) but there is no such Supreme Court ordained by Christ over
particular Churches. The Assumption, That the censure that is administered by a
Congregational-Church is established in Heaven, is expressly in the Text, as it
has been expounded. True, say some, what a particular Church binds on Earth,
clave non errante, is bound in Heaven, but the Church may err in Judgment,
therefore appeal may be made, and then their binding power is gone. Answ. 1. If
possibility of erring in Judgment be a warrantable ground of appealing from
particular Churches; then the appeal must be made to such a Tribunal and Judge,
as cannot err, which is to be found only in Heaven. 2. On this ground, the
universal Church represented in a general Council (much more, inferior Synods
and Classes) should not have power to bind, without appeals. For a general
Council may err, and has erred; not seldom, but often; not in small matters
only, but in those of the greatest moment; yea they may be as much inclined to
err, as particular Churches: For the greatest part of visible Churches in the
World are for the most part corrupt. If it be said, There are more eyes, and
plus vident oculi quam oculus? I answer; True, caeteris paribus, viz. if they
are equally near the mark; but their sight is hindered more than particular
Churches are in their proper concernments, as they are further from the mark,
in such cases, than particular Churches. And if particular Churches have not
full power of Excommunication, because they may err, be corrupt, be partial, be
divided; upon the same ground, neither Classical, National, not Ecumenical
Assemblies have any such power; for they may err, be corrupt, be partial, be
divided also. 3. Christ, who well knew what is in man, and what is best for the
good of his people, has given unto his particular Churches, notwithstanding
their possibility of erring, an indispensable power of judgment, in their own
matters, within themselves. The Doctrinal Conclusion to be insisted upon, is
this:

A Congregational Church of Christ, 7. Conclu.
being completed with Officers, has, by the gift of Christ, within it self,
complete subordinate Church Power in all Church Affairs proper to it self. When
I say, 1. It has complete, or sufficient Church-power] Thereby I mean, 1. That
it needs not the influence of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of any other
Church or Churches, or Classes, or Synods, to supply unto it any power that it
wants, in its own matters; and 2. That it stands not in subjection under
any other Superior Ecclesiastical Judicatory, so as that thereby the judicial
Acts of a particular Church may be hindered, or made void. In a word, Potestas
uniuscujusque particularis Ecclesiae, in re propria, summa est. The power of
such a Church is Chief, in things proper to it self. 2. I add, that this
chiefty of power, in a particular Church, is subordinate] To show, that the
absolute Supremacy of power is in Christ; that which the Church has, is only
delegated from Christ. When a particular Church is completed with all its
Officers, the Government of it, in respect of Christ the Head, is perfectly
Monarchical; in respect of the Elders, acting their Authoririty, or
Office-power, it is Aristocratical; and in respect of the Fraternity, acting
its Chuch-power in Judgment, it is Democratical; and, in the concurrence of all
the Members, both Officers and Brethren, acting according to their several
interests, it is Aristocratico-Democratical; above which, Christ has not set
any higher Ecclesiastical Judicatory on Earth, subjecting particular Churches
thereunto, in re propria. A clear proof of such power, as that which has been
described, you may see in the Church at Corinth excommunicating that incestuous
person, in 1 Cor. 5.1-5. Say not, as some do, That was not an act of Judicial
power in that Church, but of subjection to the Apostle who decreed it, and
judged him before, and committed no more to the Church, but the publishing of
the sentence; for, (...), 1 Cor. 5.3.
though Paul, as an Apostle, judged that he should be excommunicated, yet he so
judged only dogmatically, by teaching the Church what they ought to do in that
case, not judicially, by his own sentence, delivering him to Satan; and
ac^ordingly the Church cast him out, by their own sufficiency of Church Power,
within themselves, though in a way of subjection to the command of Christ
delivered by Paul. For, 1. They delivered him to Satan, in the Name, and with
the Power of the Lord Jesus, v. 4. and that is the highest Power. 2. The end
and use of it was, for the destruction of the flesh, that his Spirit might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, v. 5. which argues, that it proceeds
from a power of binding in Heaven, as well as on Earth. 3. When God blessed
this sentence, by making it effectual to work Repentance in him, Paul exhorts
the whole Church to release and forgive him, 2 Cor. 2.6-10. and does not claim
the Power over them of a Superior Judge, to absolve him by his own sentence,
without them: Nor did he write to the Elders of sundry Churches, but only to
that particular Church, both Elders and Brethren, and thereby acknowledges the
Power of Ecclesiastical Judgment to be so fully in them, that, As their not
putting it into act retarded the sentence before, and their putting of it into
act was a Judicial Act in them all, ye judge them that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12.
So, their forgiving him would be a Legal and Judicial acquitting him from tha^
sentence, 2 Cor. 2. This Church is our pattern, and its practice in this is
presidential to all particular Churches of Christ.

Paul applied this Reproof to the whole Church, Brethren as well as Officers,
for their slowness to excommunicate that man, 1 Cor. 5.2. And in like manner,
Christ reproves the Angel, and Church, both of Pergamus, Rev. 2.14, 15. and of
Thyatira, ver. 20. If these Churches had not sufficient power within themselves
to purge out such Leaven, why are they blamed for tolerating the same? And why
are not other Churches, or the Classes, blamed for neglect of exercising their
power of Ecclesiastical Judicature over them, if they stood under any such? And
what the Spirit speaks to them, he says to other Churches also, to beware of
the like Remisness. Which Admonition all particular Churches are bound to
attend; lest else the gates of Hell prevail against them, through their neglect
of exercising that power which Christ has given them, severally, and
respectively, to preserve their Members and whole fellowship in Spiritual
purity and safety, Heb. 12.15.

Thucidides says have three privileges, viz. to use, 1. Their own Laws. 2.
Magistrates. 3. Judgments, (whence he calls every such City, (...)) other Cities
were not accounted entire and perfect Cities of themselves, but less worthy
Members of those great and perfect Cities, Grot. de jure bell and pac. l. 1. c.
3. p. 4, 5, 7.
under whose Jurisdiction they were. The summa potestas of those great and
perfect Cities, is that, cujus actus alterius juri non subsunt, ita ut alterius
voluntatis humanae arbitrio irriti possunt reddi. Now every particular Church
of Christ, being completed with its Officers, is a most perfect and free City,
the City of God, Psalm. 48.1. The City of the great King, ver. 2. the visible
Kingdom of the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. and therefore it must necessarily have sufficient and
complete power within it self to manage the Keys, without dependence on
Classes, etc. in its own concernments. Yet herein is a difference between such
perfect Cities and the Churches of Christ, That such Cities may part with their
Liberty, in some cases, Live. Dec. 1. l. 1. Idem. Ibid. l. 7. Populum Campanum,
urbemque delubra Deum, divina, humanaque omnia in vestra^, P.C. ditio^em
dedimus.
as being overmatched by a Potent Enemy. In this case, the Collatives yielded
up themselves, and their City and Liberties to Tarquinius Priscus King of the
Romans; or when they are in extreme danger by an Enemy, whom they would not
have to rule over them, and cannot defend themselves by any other means, which
was the case of Campani distressed by the Samnites, which forced them to yield
up themselves, and all they had, with all their Liberties, unto the Romans;
which when they had done, they were said to be facti alienae potestatis. Yet it
was presupposed that they had power in themselves thus to do, as appears by
that question, Estne populus Collatinus in sua potestate? But Churches have not
power to alienate from themselves their Church-Liberties, which Christ has
purchased for them with his Blood, and commanded them to stand fast in them,
Gal. 5.1. and, to whom they must give an account, how they have kept and
managed the same, Luke 16.2.

The power of Classes, and Syn. p. 33. ad Calcem.
Mr. Page acknowledges that if a particular Church of God should sojourn among
the Indians, or among Heretics, where it could not obtain fellowship with
other Churches out of it self: Or, if by violence, or other unavoidable
inconveniences, any Church should be hindered from enjoying this benefit of
combination with other Churches in Classical Government, yet notwithstanding
this want, this Church should subsist still, and be reputed a true Church.]
Others say the same of a Church in an Island, and add, Mr. Herle Indep. p. 2
that, in such cases a single Congregation must not be denied intireness of
Jurisdiction. Mr. Rutterf. adds, that when Churches cannot enjoy the society of
neighboring Churches with that comfort and convenience as their occasions may
require, among them Ordination, and so Excommunication, may be performed by the
Congregation.] From this Concession it will follow, that,

1. A Congregational Church of Christ, qua talis, has a lawful right in an
intireness of Church Government, within it self, by the gift of Christ, yea,
that the Church Power, Natively and Naturally, lies in the Congregation, for
such cases are ordinary; and the first Synod, which is looked at as
presidential to all Synods, was a concurrence of two Churches, which were two
hundred miles distant.

2. The other Churches, or Classes, or Synods, have no right to take away this
power from it. For none may put asunder what God has joined, as well in this
case, as in that noted in Mat. 19.7. God has joined intireness of
Jurisdiction, in re propria, to a particular Church, who then shall sunder it
from such a Church, to place it in Classes, as Superior Judicatories, where God
never put it?

3. If the first Church in a Continent had this complete power within it self,
before other Churches were gathered, and the rising up of other Churches there
long after, should deprive them of it, by setting up a Classis, as a Superior
Judicatory, over them; then the neighborhood of Churches should not be a
benefit, but a disadvantage to them, and would give them cause to complain unto
God, Thou have multiplied the Nation, Pow. of Class. and Syn. p. 33. Idem. p 34.
but not increased our joy. But they hold, that every Church is bound to seek
this dependency and union with other Churches, as God shall give opportunity
and means, and cannot, without sin, neglect the same. And, lest we should think
it but a matter Arbitrary, at best; they tell us, it is of the same necessity,
for a Church to combine unto Classe^, and Synods, for their Spiritual
Government, if they have opportunity, as to join a man's self, as a Member, to a
particular Church, if he has means and opportunity to do it; and conclude, all
that neglect to do it, sin against the Communion of Saints, and walk not as
becomes the Body of Christ, Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.15. Ephesians. 4.16.

Answ. 1. The Proofs alleged do show, that the Communion of Saints ought to
be preserved and exercised in Church Communion by Believers, joining to a
particular Congregation, and walking in a Memberlike affection and fellowship
with their Brethren, unto mutual edification; but they speak nothing for the
subjection of particular Churches to Classes and Synods, in re propria, but
rather intimate the contrary: For the Apostle, by comparing a
Congregational-Church completed with its Officers, unto the Body of a man
entire in all its Members, shows, that as the Body of a man, being entire and
sound, has complete power within it self, for all bodily actions; so a
particular Church, being organized, and governed by Christ, the Head, from whom
the whole Body fitly joined and compacted together, by Joints of supply,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
without the influence of any Jurisdiction out of it self, to supply a Superior
Church Power, which was wanting in this Body of Chirist, a
Congregational-Church; and as the Body Natural, being sound and of a good
constitution, has sufficient ability in it self, to purge out of it self
Malignant Humors; so such a Church has sufficient power in it self, to cast
out vicious and hurtful Members, without the intervention of Classical
Jurisdiction over them.

2. It is a sin against the second Commandment in such, as having means and
opportunity, neglect to join, as Members in a particular Congregation, because
it is God's Ordinance, and revealed Will, 2 Cor. 8.5. But Classical
Jurisdiction over particular Churches, and their subjection thereunto, is no
Ordinance of Christ, and therefore it is so far from being necessary, that it
is not lawful; but against the second Commandment, which forbids men's
inventions in God's worship, that it may establish only God's Ordinances
therein. Others argue thus: As, though a Town or Family, being alone, may
govern, as a complete Body; yet, when it stands in a Commonwealth, it may not
be so independent, but must submit to Combinations: So, though when a
particular Congregation is alone, it may govern as complete, yet not so, when
it is among other Churches.

Answ. 1. There is not a like reason of Churches, and of Towns or Families in
this respect. For civil Societies are more left to Rules of Humane prudence, by
the great Ru^^^ of the World, than Churches are. Therefore civil Societies may
be of several constitutions, have different Laws and Privileges, and admit
various forms of Government; provided that they be not against Moral Rules and
the good of the People. But in this Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, men may not
alter the kind or Form of Church, which Christ has Instituted, but must
preserve inviolate the Laws, Administrations, Privileges, and
Church Government ordained by him, without Addition, Diminution, or alteration.
Hence a particular Church may not alienate from it self, in whole, or part, any
Right, Power or Privilege given it by Christ.

2. If such a Town or Family has complete power and Officers within it self,
it is not bound to submit to such Combinations in a Commonwealth, except it be
under a Superior Power that can command the same. Abraham, having a complete
Family, was not bound to combine with the Governments he dwelt amongst, nor did
he; though he joined in a League of amity, and for mutual help, with Aner,
Eschol, and Mamre, yet not to submit to their Government: So neither is a
particular Organical Church bound to submit to such Classical Combinations,
till it can be proved by Scripture, that a Superior Power of other Churches can
command the same.

3. Though several Families, not having complete Government within themselves,
must combine in a Commonwealth, yet not to yield up their Family-Government
over their Wives, Children, and Servants, respectively, to rule them in common
with other Masters of Families. Much less may several Congregational-Churches
give up the Government of themselves to Pastors of sundry Churches, combined in
a Classis, to govern them in their proper Affairs, such as Admission of
Members, Election and Ordination of Officers, Administration of Seals and
Censures.

1. Corollary.
Then the censure of Excommunication is not a light matter, but to be looked
at, as very weighty and formidable. You see,

1. That it is the Sovereign Remedy prescribde by Christ against the many
Diseases, whereunto the Body is subject; the great preservative of the Churches
peace, and safety against the gates of Hell.

2. That it is such a Power given by Christ to his Church, as proves
Church-Societies to be the visible Suburbs of Heaven, yea, the Kingdom of
Heaven begun on Earth, seeing such an Heavenly Power is committed to them. This
is a greater work than Elijah did, when he shut up Heaven, that it rained not,
Jam. 5.17. For that was but an outward and temporal Judgment, for three years
and six months: But this is Spiritual, and for ever, upon impenitent persons.
It is greater than Earthly Kings and Magistrates can do; they can bind a
Malefactor hand and foot, and deliver him to the Jailer, and sentence him to
banishment out of their Dominions: but this Censure binds the Soul and
Conscience, delivers them to Satan, and excludes obstinate impenitent sinners
from the Kingdom of God; that when this Censure is applied by the Church
according to Scripture-Rules, Jesus Christ is with them, to ratify his Censure
according to this Promise, What you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and to bless it to the attainment of its end, the destruction of the
flesh, that the Spirit may be saved. This is a singular Privilege of
Church Members. If they that are out of Church Fellowship, bless themselves in
their Liberty, because they cannot be touched with Church Censures, they show
their extreme folly therein; for they are left to the Sword of the Magistrate,
or to the immediate judgment of God, as forlorn Creatures, excluded from
Spiritual helps suitable to their needs. They are as Sheep whom no man takes
up, or cares for, in a Spiritual way, Isa. 3.13, 14. It is therefore a special
privilege of Church Members, and much for the furtherance of their eternal
Salvation, if they improve it aright, to the mortifying of those corruptions in
them which could not be purged out and healed by easier means. And this is the
proper end of it, that, seeing themselves, as Adam, driven from the Tree of
Life, by the flaming Sword of a Cherubim; or, as Cain, cast out from Gods face;
or, as the Leper, shut out from the fellowship of God's people; or, as that
Incestuous Corinthian, delivered up to Satan, they may be ashamed, humbled, and
effectually brought to Repentance, and to hold it forth according to God's
Rules. If it work not this effect, the fault is their own: Yet it will not be
without effect. For as the Gospel is the savor of Death unto Death, when it is
not the savor of Life unto Life; so this Gospel-Ordinance shall not be in
vain, but shall work, one way, or the other, either the destruction of the
impenitent, or the salvation of those that repent. That therefore it may be
effectual for their eternal good, it is their duty, when the sentence proceeds,
either according to the eighteenth of Matthew, upon their not hearing the
Church, in less heinous offenses; or, according to 1 Cor. 5. and Rev. 22.15.
upon the heinous nature of scandals given by them against common light, to
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt them in due
time, 1 Pet. 5.6. and to cry mightily to him, to add efficacy to his Ordinance,
by his Spirit, that their spirits may be duly and truly humbled, their
corruptions powerfully mortified, and their souls eternally saved. Be sure,
that you take not part with your sin against the Ordinance, but take part with
the Ordinance against your sin; and account it your honor, to honor God, and
exalt his Rules; and let others learn hereby to fear, not joining with the
Church, but persisting obstinately in sin.

2. Corollary.
Then a Congregational Church (such as has been described) is the highest
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, under Christ, in its own matters. This was revealed to
John, as that frame of Church Government which should continue, from the
Apostles time, unto the end of the World; when he saw a Throne set in Heaven,
the Trinity sitting upon it, and the four living Creatures between it, and the
four and twenty Elders who sat round about the Throne, Rev. 4.1,-9. Thither
appeals must be made according to Christ his Ordinance, by an offended Brother,
after the first and second step; or by any Member that finds himself
over-rigorously deal^ with by his Brethren in these steps; Matthew. 18.17, 18.
that there the Cause may be scanned, and Sentence proceed according to Christ.
If the Church want sufficient light, or consent, for the sentence, they are to
seek help from others by their Light and Counsel, but still preserving the
power of Censure entirely in the Church, where Christ has placed it. The
wisdom of Christ, the good of the Church, and of every Member, and the nature
of the thing require, that there be some chief Tribunal in the exerci^^ of
Church Government, unto which Appeals must be last made, Juridically, and from
which no Appeal may be granted and expected. 2. That this chief Tribunal must
have no Ecclesiastical Power above it; and 3. That it may not be judially
censured by any Power of the same kind. All the question is, which is the chief
Tribunal? That, say some, must be the Classes, under which such Churches stand,
and the Synods under which the Classes are subordinate; and they give this
Reason: Because the end, for which the Keys are given to the Church, is, that
all offenses may be removed, Mat. 18.15, 16, etc. Which, they say, cannot be
done, if you put the chief Power of Judgment into a Congregational Church. For,
what if an Elder? what if the whole Edership? yea, what if the whole Church
offend? The Church cannot censure their Elders; for that were to rule their
Rulers, and to judge their Judges; nor will they censure themselves. But a
Classis or Synod of many Elders may, and will, reform all, by judicially
censuring all.

Answ. 1. This Argument is built upon a mistake or error in the foundation of
it. For the Rule prescribed in Matthew. 18. is ^^t for removal of all offenses,
but of such private and less heinous offenses as grow public and notorious,
only by the obstinacy of the Delinquent. For, if offenses be public and
heinous in themselves, the Apostle does not direct Churches to proceed by those
steps, 1 Cor. 5.11. Rev. 22.15.

2. Nor does it make the People Rulers of their Rulers, or Judges of their
Judges, when we say, that the Church has a power over them, in case of
Delinquency. For Excommunication is not an act of the highest Rule, or
Authority, but of the highest Judgment; and therefore the Power of it may well
be in the whole Church, as their Privilege, without any intrenchment upon the
Rule and Authority of Elders, wherein, as Officers, they are above the
Brethren, whilst they act according to Rule: But, if they become Delinquents,
then as Members, they are under the Power of the whole. The Church must submit
to them, as Rulers, whilst they rightly exercise the Authority of their
Office, in Preaching, Administering the Seals, holding forth light from
Scripture to guide them in censure, ordering Speech and Silence according to
Rules of Order and Edification, and in other Official Acts: But they must
submit to the Church, questioning, or proceeding to censure them with good
advice of Neighbour-Churches and Elders; (who as they concurred in giving them
the right hand of fellowship in their Ordination, so they should concur in
approving this Censure, as justly inflicted by the Church, from parity of
reason.) The Mayor in a free City, or Corporation, is, in the right
Administration of his Office, above the Court, none but he can perform the Acts
peculiar to his place; yet, if he corrupt the People, pervert Justice, or be,
any way, grossly and scandalously delinquent, the Court can censure and despose
him. For the whole has Power over any Member, to preserve its purity, and
peace, and safety against any in the Body, that would corrupt, disturb or
destroy the same. And the Covenant binds every Member, to be subject to the
Power of the whole, either to be reformed, or removed from communion of it
thereby.

3. Their Plaster is not suitable to heal the Sores of the Church, but it is
either too broad, when offenses of Brethren may be healed by Church-censure,
within themselves, or, it is too narrow.

For, 1. Those Assemblies are too seldom, and cannot sit together long enough
to remove the many offenses that fall out frequently in Churches.

2. Non can they Excommunicate a Church, nor any Officer or Member of a
particular Chuch by warrant from Christ.

3. Classes, and Synods, and general Councils may be under just offenses, as
well as Churches; and who shall censure them?

4. This Plaster hinders the healing of the Sores of Churches. For, Appellatio
est jus, per quod prima sententia tantisper extinguitur, donec de causae
cognitione ad superiorem devoluta, fuerit pronunciatum.
if a Delinquent, disliking the Churches proceeding, appeals from the sentence
of the Church to the Classis, and, for the same reason, from the sentence of
the Classis to a Provincial Synod, then, to a National Synod, then to an
Ecumenical Council, which may not assemble in an Age; while the Appeal
depends, he shall stand as uncensured. For this is the Law of Appeals. Now, how
can that heal which is cross to the prescription of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
only wise Physician? He says, Tell the Church; and if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen and Publican. But he who appeals
from the Church, does not hear the Church. Therefore he that so does, deserves
to be cut off, by the sentence of Christ, which this Tradition of Appeals from
Churches, in re propria, to Superior Ecclesiastical Judicatories,
contradicts, and so, makes the Commandment of Christ void, and of none
effect. It remains therefore, that the Church of a particular Congregation is
the highest Tribunal under Christ, in such things as are proper to it self.

3. Corollary.
Then intireness of Church Government, in a particular Church completed with
its Officers, in re propria, will well consist with that communion of Churches
which the Scripture establishes. The reason is, because both are the
Ordinances of Christ, and Christ's Ordinances do not interfere. As the Communion
of Neighbour-Families does not cross the complete Government of several
Families within themselves, respectively, in things properly Domestical. And as
communion among Kingdoms and Commonwealths, hinders not the intireness of
Jurisdiction in each Kingdom and Commonwealth within it self, in its proper
concernments; So it is in the communion of Churches. Therefore Church Communion
must be only, in a way of Brotherly association, for mutual helpfulness, in
matters of this nature, but not in way of subordination, or subjection of one
Church to the Ecclesiastical Government, whether of another Church, or of the
Elders of several Churches assembled in Classes or Synods. The Communion of
Churches, in the former way, is exercised according to Rule, in sundry cases,
as 1. In mutual care. 2. In recommendation of Members. 3. In participation of
such Ordinances as are for comfort and strengthening the Members of other
Churches occasionally. 4. In relieving and succouring one another. 5. In
countenancing, by giving the right hand of fellowship unto a Church in its
first gathering, and unto Elders at their Ordination. 6. In consulting one with
another, when we have occasion to require the Judgment and Counsel of other
Churches, concerning any Person or Cause, See these particulars proved, in the
Platform of Church Discipline published-by the Synod at Cambridge in
New England, Anno. 1649. the eighth month, Chap. 15. and 16.
wherewith they may be better acquainted than our selves. 7. In admonishing one
another, in case of public scandal. All these (and if withdrawing fellowship
upon just causes, be added to them) are no more than one Apostle may do to
another, without exercising Church Government over them. Communion of Churches
in the latter way, of subordination or subjection to other Churches or Synods,
in re propria, the Scripture no where approves. Not of one Church to another;
for there is a parity among Churches, and par in parem non habet imperium. Nor
of one Church to a Synod made up of the Elders of sundry Neighbour-Churches.
The Assembly in Act. 15. Is a pattern they say of such a Synod. Let us see how
their Classical Assemblies answer it.

1. That was no set meeting, monthly, or quarterly, but merely occasional,
Act. 15.1, 2.

2. If was not an Assembly of Elders meeting apart from the Brethren of the
Church where they assembled, Verse. 22, 23.

3. It was but a meeting of two Churches, that of Antioch sending their
Messengers, with Paul and Barnabas, and that at Jerusalem, the Apostles (whose
residence, for the present, was there) joining with them, Verse. 4, 6.

4. That assembly gave their judgment, both of the Doctrine taught at Antioch,
and of the persons that taught it, as troublesome and subverters, Verse. 24. but
did neither Excommunicate them, nor command the Church to Excommunicate them.

5. They directed and charged the Church from the Word, what they should do,
Verse. 28, 29. but they did not do their Acts of Power for them.

6. Nor did this Assembly exercise Church Government over that Church at
Antioch, or any other Church or Churches, in admission of their Members, or in
Ordination of their Officers, or in Administration of the Seals, or in
Excommunicating, or in reversing or nullifying the censure inflicted by the
Church. For these were res propria to every particular Church within it self.
Yet, because I study peace, and consent with godly Brethren, so far as it may
stand with Truth, I willingly grant, that other Churches, and Synods rightly
gathered and ordered, have so much Power and Authority, even in these matters,
as I can find any warrant for in Scripture; being willing also to yield further
if it can be cleared from Scripture, that more is due unto them. There are two
Cases, wherein the res propria of a particular Church, may fall under the
cognizance and determination of other Churches or Synods.

1. When they want sufficient light, or competent consent among themselves,
which was the case of the Church at Antioch; provided, that they have liberty
to choose such a Church or Churches, for this purpose, as themselves approve to
be fittest for attainment of their end, in seeking light, as the Church at
Antioch agreed to send to that at Jerusalem, though two hundred miles distant
from them. But, if they have sufficient light within themselves, and hold it
forth convictingly from Scripture, the Elders and Principal Members of the
Church, and major part of the Brethren by far consenting therein, no Rule
requires or allows, that, for the wilfulness of a Delinquent, who will not
hear the Church, or of two or three Brethren, who side with him, and refuse to
join with the Church in censuring him, the Church should be hindered from
proceeding, till other Churches or Elders have been consulted. For if this be
granted, 1. It will disturb all Church-Proceedings. 2. And if it be brought to
a Classis, it must issue there by the Vote of the major part, if as many Elders
in that Assembly dissent, as Brethren did before in the Church-meeting, so that
nothing is gained thereby. And if the Delinquent, for the same reason, appeal
to a Synod, there may be the same issue, and so appeals may be drawn further,
till a Delinquent wrest himself at last from all power of censure. The second
Case is, when that which is res propria, in the thing done, simply considered,
becomes res communis in the Cause or ground of proceeding. For though receiving
of Members, Election, and Ordination of Officers, and Administration of Seals
and Censures, be Acts of the power given by Christ to particular Churches; yet
it never was the mind of Christ, to establish, by that Grant, an absolute power
in such Churches, to corrupt the Faith and Worship of God, in themselves, and
in other Churches. If therefore a Church, that was planted a noble Vine, wholly
a a right Seed, shall turn into the degenerate Plants of a strange Vine unto
God, and become Heretical, or Schismatical, or scandalously corrupt, and
therefore receive into their fellowship known Heretics, and Schismatics, and
choose such into Office, and refuse to admit into fellowship or Office, such as
are sound in the Faith, because they are sound in the Faith and Order of the
Gospel, and cast out from their fellowship such as testify, according to Rule,
against these evils, and refuse to consent with them therein; etc. the
Neighbor Church, or Churches, or Elders, and Brethren Assembled in a Synod (if
the evil spread to the disturbing, corrupting, or scandalizing of many
Churches) have power, and it is their duty, 1. To consider of this Matter, Act.
15.6. 2. To argue, debate, and determine according to the Word, Verse. 7.-23. 3.
To publish the same to the Church or Churches whom it concerns, verse. 23. to
bear witness against their corruptions in Doctrine or Manners, and to give
directions from the Word, for the Reformation thereof, verse. 24, 28, 29. 4.
Such Determinations, and Directions being found consonant to the Word of God in
Scripture, the Church to whom they are sent, are to receive them with due
reverence and submission, as to the Ordinance of God. Or, 5. In case of
obstinate persistance of such a Church or Churches in their scandalous evils
against light convictingly held forth, the Churches so offended, or scandalized
by them, are to withdraw from them the right hand of fellowship and
Church Communion, till they repent and reform. This follows, in proportion,
from the contrary, Gal. 2.9. and a pari, 2 These. 3.6, 14. there being a like
reason of Churches and Persons, in this respect. Yet such offended Churches and
Synods, are not to exercise Church Censures, in way of Discipline, nor any
other Act of Church Government, as neither did that Assembly, in Act. 15.29.

Here I shall crave leave to join with my Brethren in adding some caution
touching the Communion and Consociation of Churches, To see that this
Consociation of Churches be not perverted, Mr. Cotton of the Keys, p. 57.
either to the oppression, or diminution of the just Liberty and Authority of
each particular Church within it self, who being well supplied with a faithful
and expert Presbytery of their own, do walk in their integrity, according to
the Truth and Peace of the Gospel. Let Synods have their just Authority in all
Churches, how pure soever, in determining such (...), as are requisite for the
edification of all Churches, acording to God: but in the Election and
Ordination of Officers, and censure of offenders, let it suffice the Churches
Consociate to assist one another with their Counsel, and right hand of
fellowship, when they see a particular Church to use their Liberty and Power
aright. But let them not put forth the Power of their Community, either to take
such Church Acts out of their hands, or to hinder them in their lawful course,
unless they see them thro^^^ ignorance or weakness, to abuse their Liberty and
Authority in the Gospel. All the Liberties of the Churches were purchased to
them by the precious Blood of the Lord Jesus, and therefore may not the
Churches give them away, nor many Churches take them out of the hands of one.
Mr. Shepheard's and Mr. Allen's Defense of the 9 Positions, in answ. to Mr.
Ball.


Others express their apprehensions, in way of Caution, touching this matter,
thus.

Association of diverse particular Churches, we hold needful, as well as the
combination of Members into one Church; yet so, as there be no Schism of one
from another, nor usurpation of one over another; that either one should
deprive the rest of peace, by Schism, or many should deprive any one of its
power by usurpation. Hence a Fraternal Consociation we acknowledge.
Consociation; for mutual Counsel and help, to prevent, or remove, Sin, or
Schism: Yet Fraternal only, to to preserve each others Power. Consociation of
Churches we would have cumulative (not in words, but in deed) to strengthen the
power of particular Churches: Not privative, to take away any power, which they
had from the gift of Christ before. For, as on the one side, it may seem
strange, that one Church offending should have no means of Cure by the
conceived power of many; so, on the other side, the danger may appear as great,
and frequently falls out, that, when many Churches are scandalous, one innocent
Church may be hurt by the Usurpation of all. And hence we see not, but that
Fraternal Consociation is the best Medicine to heal the Wounds of both.

Hereunto I shall add, that, as these godly Learned Brethren speak nothing for
the Classical Power of Elders, for which the Presbyterians contend, tanquam pro
aris and focis; so in that Communion of Churches, which I with them look at as
the Ordinance of Christ, due moderation must be exercised by Neighbor
Churches, that their exercising brotherly Communion in testifying against such
Acts in a particular Church, as they conceive to be aberrations from the Rule,
be according to Scripture Light, with Humility; and that,

1. Held forth by them, they looking at themselves, though as Elders, yet not
as Apostles, nor as infallibly assisted, or carried by the Spirit, above all
possibility of erring, in their Determinations and Counsels, and therefore do
not in a Masterly way impose their Determinations and Counsels upon others, but
propound them in the fear of God, to be examined by the Scripture, and received
only so far, as they shall be found to agree therewith. And, if that Church
hold forth Reasons of their contrary apprehensions, let them be duly weighed,
and answered convictingly; or let that Church be left at liberty, to walk
according to their own light, in re propria, without offense, or disturbance.

2. Godly Wisdom is to be exercised in such proceedings, in making difference
between Cause and Cause; which will not suffer Churches to connive at grosser
scandals, nor to withdraw the righthand of fellowship from any Church upon
small differences in Judgment or Practice, much less, for Censuring, and
holding under Censure impenitent persons, when the scandalous obstinacy of
delinquents is res propria to that Church, though some other Churches (being
misled by their Guides, who possibly may side, more than they ought, with the
delinquent, out of some secret grutch against the Elders of that Church)
declare it to be their Judgment, that the party should not have been laid
under that Censure, or should now be released from it. To withdraw the
right hand of fellowship from a Church for such a cause, is contrary to Rules
of true Wisdom. If a Church be found in the Faith and Order of the Gospel,
greater matters than this will cause no breach of Communion between Churches,
where brotherly Communion is exercised with true Humility and godly Wisdom. See
the moderation of that Affrican Synod, whereof Cyprian wrote thus to Stephanus.
Caeterum scimus quosdam, quod semel imbiberint, Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 1.
nolle deponere, nec propositum suum facile mutare, sed salvo inter collegas
pacis and concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria, quae apud se semel sint
usurpata, retinere. Qua in re, nec nos cuiquam facimus aut legem damus, cum
habeat in Ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum
unusquisque praepositus, rationem actus sui Domino redditurus. Yet these proper
practices of some Churches, differed from the Decree of that Synod, which was
established, as he says, Consensu and authoritate communi. Nor will there ever
be end of breaches among Churches, unless due moderation, in such Cases, be
exercised, that love among Churches may be maintained.

3. Unto these let it be added, that as the Foundation of the Communion of
Churches is brotherly love, so all the Churches should show to any one Church,
and before other Churches, the proof of their love, in not easily receiving
suggestions against the proceedings of it, though from some Elder or Pastor, or
Teacher of another Church, who may possibly speak against them out of envy, or
ill will; much more, in not countenancing a censured Delinquent, complaining
against the Church and Elders, by whom he was censured, in a disorderly
tumultuous manner, as desirous to beget reproach and trouble to that Church,
and Contentions and Divisions among the Churches and Elders, Cyprian. lib. 1.
Ep. 3.
from an evil spirit of revenge. The Affrican Pastors were careful hereof, as
Cyprian notes. Cum statutum sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter ac
justum, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est crimen admissum, and
singulis pastoribus portio egregis sit ascripta; quam regat unusquisque and
gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino rediturus, oportet utique eos quibus
praesumus, non circumcurdare, nec Episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem sua
subdola and fallaci temeritate, collidere, sed agere illic causam suam, ubi,
and accusatores habere, and testes sui criminis, possint.

Lastly, If the Elders and Messengers of Churches assembled in a Synod, shall
determine any thing contrary to the Rule, and prejudicial to the intireness of
the Churches Power, within it self, the Church may, and ought, to refuse such
Sanctions, as not being sancited by the Lord. The Communion of Churches being
rightly ordered, according to what has been said, is a sufficient Spiritual
Remedy against all those inconveniences, which some think cannot be redressed,
unless Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over particular Churches be established in
Classes and Synods: As, if a Church fall into two Factions and Oppositions
within it self, or, if there be scandalous contention between two Churches, or
between the Eldership and Brotherhood of the same Church; or, if a whole
Church be under scandalous Delinquencies: I say, these and the like
inconveniences will be better redressed, in this way, than in that of
Classical Government. For, this way is grounded upon Divine Institution, so is
not that: And the blessing of Christ follows and accompanies his own
Institutions, not men's devices. If Vzzah put forth his hand to stay the Ark,
his good intention could not justify his action, but his not acting according
to Gods order was his death. The Prelates had as plausible a plea for their
Jurisdiction over Churches, and taking the Keys out of their hands, viz. for
Unity, Peace, and Conformity; yet the vanity of it is now manifested unto all
men. Lastly, The same inconveniences may befall Classical and Synodal
Assemblies, yea, and Ecumenical Councils, and what remedy is there for them?
Not so much, as this way of Communion of Churches affords to particular
Churches.

Corollary 4.
Then intireness of Church Government in a particular Congregation, in re
propria, ought to be thankfully received, rightly improved, and faithfully
preserved, without violation of it, both by the Members of particular Churches,
and by other Churches, and their Officers.

1. It must be thankfully received, as a blessing promised of God unto his
people, whose hearts are engaged to approach unto him, Jer. 30.21. The grant by
Charter, of intireness of Government within themselves, unto Cities and
Corporations, has ever been highly esteemed, as an Act of special grace from
the Sovereign Power. It was for the enjoyment of this Privilege, with the
consequents of it, that the chief Captain, in Acts 22.25, 26, 28. purchased his
freedom in Rome with a great sum of money. This grant to particular Churches
is advantageous to the Members of them, sundry ways. 1. For their ease, in
having their Causes heard, examined and issued, at home, without chargeable,
tiresome journeys to the Classical or Synodal Assembly, to have their matters
determined there. 2. For encouragement and liberty of the spirit and speech of
him that is to answer before his Brethen and the Elders, who have a Member-like
and Pastoral care and respect of him, whereas the presence of sundry strange
faces of persons of superior Rank and Quality, would not a little daunt him,
which might occasion his falling in his Cause. 3. For their satisfaction
concerning the Churches proceeding, where, as all circumstances can be best
cleared, so more moderation may rationally be expected from their own Officers
and Brethren, than from strangers, comparatively, and from such as are subject
to the same censures, and the same either has been, or may be, their own case,
they know not how soon, (which are strong inducements to moderation, Exodus
23.9. Gal. 6.1.) than from a Judicatory of constant Judges, who think
themselves out of that danger. 4. For common edification in the Congregational
way, all may hear and be edified by their presence in Church-proceedings, Acts
5.11. This they loose, in the Presbyterial way, Classical Assemblies
consisting only of Elders meeting and acting apart.

2. It must be rightly improved, which is then done, when Church-proceedings
are orderly carried according to Christ's Rules, both by the Eldership and
Fraternity, acting the Power which Christ has delegated to them, respectively,
according to their several interests, in the due order, and with mutual
consent, according to God.

3. It must be faithfully preserved without violation. 1. By the Members of
particular Churches, submitting to the Ordinance of Christ, whereby the Church,
acting according to Rule, is made under Christ, the highest Ecclesiastical
Tribunal, in its own matters, 2 Cor. 8.5. without appealing to other
Ecclesiastical Judicatories, who have no power from Christ to dispense
Church Censures, or to release men from them, Matthew. 18.18.

Object. What if the Brother be not satisfied in the equity of the Churches
proceeding? Ans. The Elders having declared the mind of Christ from Scripture
to guide their proceedings, and the Brethren either (...), or the major part, by
far, judging accordingly, let him suspect his own apprehensions, fearing that
Satan's temptations, and his own corruptions, Pride, and self-flattery may
darken and harden him, Prove. 28.14. 2. Let him attend seriously to the light
held forth from Scripture, for his conviction, 2 Cor. 2.6. praying the Lord to
make it effectual in him. 3. Let him thankfully close with the light that does
shine unto him, and answerably judge and condemn in himself the evil, which
that light reproves, and follow on to know the whole mind of Christ concerning
the nature and compass of his guilt, seeking unto the Elders for further help,
with a self-denying spirit, that he may come up fully to the Rule. 4. If he
cannot show convictingly to the Church some errors in the Elders expounding or
applying the Rule to the Case, whereupon the Censure proceeded, let him fall
under the Rule, or look at it as his great sin, and violation of his Covenant,
which bound him to submit unto the judgment of the Church, if he find that,
through sinful prejudice, he cannot receive the light held forth, when he has
no objection of weight against it.

2. Other Churches and the Elders of them ought to preserve the intireness of
Power of every particular Church, in re propria, inviolate. The Law of Love and
Righteousness binds every man hereunto. One Corporation must uphold the just
Rights, Liberties, and Power of another. If a man see his brothers Ox or Sheep
go astray, he must in any case bring them again unto his brother, Deuteronomy. 22.1.
much more if he see a Sheep of Christ go astray by sinful prejudice against the
Church, he must in any case convince him of his error, and bring him again to
the Church, as the Angel returned Hagar to Sarah her Mistress, Genesis 16.8, 9.
For this purpose, 1. They must not receive an accusation against an Elder (much
less, against the Church and Eldership) under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy
5.19. therefore much less, from a Delinquent under public censure, and that in
his one cause. 2. If more join with him attesting what he says; they must see,
1 Whether they do it, in a way of faction, siding with a censured Delinquent
against the Church, or no. If yea; they must testify against their way, as
contrary to Rule, and avoid them, as disturbers of the peace of the Church,
Romans 16.17. If not; they must inquire, 1, whether they have pleaded with the
Church it self, Hos. 2.2. in such manner as becomes such as would approve
themselves to love the Truth and Peace, Zach. 8.21. before they become accusers
of the Brethren unto others. 2 Whether they proceed peaceably, or tumultuously?
and tumultuosly they do act, if they seek nor Light in the use of Means, first,
at home, but refuse help that way, when it is offered them, that they may make
trouble and disturbance to the Church, by spreading their complaints abroad,
and those, not to some one Church, without whose help the question cannot be
ended, as the Church at Antioch sent to the Church at Jerusalem, but to eight
or nine Churches, some nearer, some far distant from the Church, some 40, 50,
100, 150 miles off, and that without giving notice of their purpose to the
Church, or having their consent thereunto, or so much as to the stating of the
question. If so, they may clearly see an evil spirit working in the business,
with which, others should have no fellowship, 2 Cor. 12.20. 3 Whether they do
positively justify the Delinquent in that, for which he was censured, and upon
what grounds; or only declare their good Opinion of the Delinquent in some
respects, and that they are not clear concerning the equity of the censure. If
the latter, it is the duty of those to whom they thus speak, to convince them
of the error of their way. 4 Whether they come only in a backbiting way, or
are willing to speak the same things publicly before the Church, which they
accuse privately. If not, they must be convinced of their sinning against
common equity, Act. 25.16. 5 What the end is which they propound unto
themselves in taking this course? whether it be for light only? or, for the
nullifying of the censure by the power of others? If the former; they cannot
safely conclude any thing, altera part inaudita, remembering what Solomon
says, Prove. 18.17. If the latter, they must profess, that they have no such
Power, but all that they can do, is, to inform themselves from the Church,
whether their report be true, or not, and to give such advise from Scripture,
as the case requires, according to their judgment, exhorting them in the mean
space, to attend the Rule in Memberlike submission to the Power of their
Church, according to God.

Quest. But suppose that the party censured think he can prove that he is
wronged; is there no course to be taken for the freeing of him from a sentence
that is unjust in his apprehension?

Answ. If he has held forth convincing light (as he conceives) to the Church,
to prove that he is wronged, and has waited patiently for redress, but can
find none, and therefore desires to join with some other Church; he may remove
his dwelling, if no other Church be in the same place, or, without that, if
there be, and he may offer himself to their fellowship, making known to them
his case. If, in other respects, they approve him, as one, whose fellowship
with them would be helpful, or comfortable to them; they will acquaint the
Church, whence he came, with his desire, and crave their advice, which will
draw from that Church a full Narrative of his Case: Upon examination whereof
these, who desire his fellowship, will labor with him, to further his
repentance, and his holding it forth to the satisfaction of that offended
Church, according to Rule; which being done, the Church that was offended will
be reconciled to him, and forgive him, and confirm their love to him, in the
Lord, and recommend him to that fellowship where he desires to settle. But, if
they will not; the Church that has thus far labored in the business, will
acquaint other neighbour-Churches with the matter, and crave their advice, who
finding, either that the Church did err in judgment, or that the Delinquent
has satisfied the Rule of Repentance, will signify their apprehensions to
both the Churches, and accordingly the party is, either released by the one, or
received by the other, each of them preserving its Church Power in re propria,
according to their light, maintaining still Church Communion, notwithstanding
their different apprehensions touching this matter.

2. If the case be reducible to what is noted in the third Corollary, there you
may find a sufficient Remedy prescribed, according to Congregational
Principles, without his remove.

3. In some Cases, a mischief is to be chosen, before an inconvenience, as
Lawyers speak. Better it is that the Church want a Remedy for a Case that may
not happen in a man's life, than to be under the continual droppings of
Classical Jurisdiction over them in all Cases.

4. We have formerly proved, that Classical Jurisdiction is so far from being
helpful to Churches, that it frustrates Christ's grant of Power to particular
Churches in re propria.

FINIS.

