POLITICAL AND MILITARY OBSERVATIONS. A NEW COLLECTION. By J. D. of Kidwelly.

LONDON. Printed for H. Cox next Castle-yard in Holborne: and H. Bonwick in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

POLITICAL, AND MILITARY OBSERVATIONS.
I.
IT is the common humor of Mankind, principally to fear the danger which is
next at hand, and to be more carefully concerned for things present, than is
requisite; and on the contrary, to make less account than they ought of those
things which are to come, and at a distance; and this out of a certain
presumption, that Time and the contingency of humane accidents may afford some
remedy for the latter.

II.
IT happens many times that the wisdom which is overcurious, and too too
considerative, may be blameworthy; inasmuch as the affairs of the World are
subject to so many and so great a diversity of occurrences and disappointments,
that that seldom happens, which wise men imagined would come to pass. That
person therefore who quits the present good, out of a fear of the future
danger, (it being presupposed that the danger is not inevitable and too near at
hand) finds, to his sorrow, that he has let slip the occasion which presented
it self to him of gaining honor or advantage, merely out of a fear of the
danger, which is afterward found to have been vain.

III.
WHen the prudent man finds himself induced to give way to some just cause of
discontent (from what occasion soever it may proceed) he ought to moderate it,
what lies in his power, with a mature judgment; out of this motive, that he is
not so much to mind his own private interest, as that of the public; since it
is not unlikely, but that his discontent may be prejudicial to the welfare of
the State.

IV.
A Great power, and that united in one person, is more to be dreaded than that
which is divided amongst several parties; which latter, as it has a diversity
of motives, so has it also a diversity and discordancy of operations, and those
promoting a diversity of designs.

V.
THere is this observable in Republics, that they are not governed according
to the inclinations of a single person, but by the joint deliberations and
consent of many; and thence it comes, that commonly they are thought to carry
on their consultations with more moderation and respect.

VI.
SUch as the Prince is in point of Morality, such is the government of affairs.
If the Prince himself be a person of no great esteem, those are in a condition
tending to ruin; is he be a person of conduct, and virtuous, they flourish.

VII.
NEw Conquests, if they be not not well regulated, nor prudently governed, do
rather burden the person who has made them, than render him more potent and
considerable. For it is not to be expected that he should be the occasion of
any good or happiness to a Government, which he has acquired by indirect means.

VIII.
ASwe find in the ordering of man's body, that it is not sufficient the Head be
free from all indisposition, but it is withal requisite that the other Members
exercise their several functions: So neither is it sufficient in the Government
of a State, that the Prince himself be unchargeable with any default in the
management of affairs, if there be not a correspondency of diligence and
virtuous action in his Officers.

IX.
THe Prince and the Republic are seriously to consider, what difference there
is between being the first Aggressors in a war against another, and expecting
the other to be the first beginner thereof; between treating about the dividing
of another State, and expecting till their own be in danger thereof: and
lastly, whether it be better to have one only Assistant, or to engage alone
against several joint Adversaries; and after such consideration made to
deliberate about what is likely to prove most conducive to their particular
interest.

X.
IT is a thing of singular prudence and great repute in a great Prince, when he
so demeans himself in his affairs, as that they who are inferior to him, have
no occasion to suspect, that he does any thing out of dissimulation, or by way
of personation, or out of any other design that is not good and justifiable.

XI.
WHen Princes enter into leagues, in order to the reducing of interests to a
certain equality, there easily arise disgusts and jealousies among them; whence
it often happens, that enterprises begun with a great opinion of success, meet
with many difficulties, and in fine come to nothing.

XII.
FOr a man to be a King may sometimes be the effect of success; but to exercise
that sacred and royal function, which proposes to it self for its last end, the
good and welfare of his people, depends wholly on the person himself, and the
virtue which ought to be attendant on him.

XIII.
IN difficult and intricate deliberations, the Prince ought to approve those
for easy and desirable which are necessary, or at least those which in
comparison of others, seem to imply less difficulty, and less danger.

XIV.
THe greater and more powerful a King is, the more honorable it is for him to
employ his grandeur in the maintenance and administration of justice, and the
public faith; there being not any thing more unbecoming a Prince or Republic,
than to be defective in the observance of public obligations.

XV.
IN things that are doubtful, the Prince ought to continue in suspense, and to
reserve to himself, as much as lies in his power, the means of taking and
fixing upon that resolution, which he shall find by the general course of
affairs likely to prove most beneficial and expedient.

XVI.
THe prudential Captain is he, who to obtain a victory with greater security,
would rather do it with great protraction of time, much hardship endured, and
cautious adventuring forward, with sufficient provision for all accidents, than
to overcome with ease and expedition, merely to acquire glory to himself by
putting all to an immediate hazard.

XVII.
IT commonly happens through the corrupt judgment of mankind, that prodigality
is more recommended in a King, though in some measure attended with rapine,
than frugality, though accompanied by an abstinence from encroaching upon that
which is another.

XVIII.
ALL the things, for which men are so industrious and concerned in this world,
are reducible to two points, to wit, profit and honor; under that of profit is
comprehended whatever concerns the Body, under that of honor, whatever
concerns the mind.

XIX.
THE Prince ought to be grave, by a regular stayedness of demeanor, governing
himself with moderation in all his affairs, performing the promises he has
made, and standing more in fear of doing that which is evil, than that any ill
should be done to him; and all this with a continual remembrance, that he being
but a man, has received from God a power almost divine; but to this end, that
he might be a furtherer and advancer of things just, and of good report, in his
Government.

XX.
THE Citizen who begins to concern himself in the management of the public
affairs, ought to live according to the usual course of the other Citizens, and
accommodate himself to their humor, and with all the dexterity and prudence he
can, promote those things, wherewith the populace are more satisfied, and by
which they are ordinarily kept in a good humor. By these compliances he will
come into repute and credit, and acquire authority.

XXI.
THey who are entrusted with the management of the affairs of a free State,
ought to be always mindful of two precepts of Plato. One is, that they
principally promote the advantage of the Citizens, and make all their
endeavors subservient to that end, not regarding their own private interests.
The other is, that they have an eye on the whole body of the Republic, so as
that though they incline to one party, yet they must notdesert another. The
reason of it is, that the Commonwealth ought to be governed as a Guardianship*
is, to wit, for the good and advantage of those who are received under the
charge thereof, and not altogether for theirs, to whom it is committed.

XXII.
IT is the peculiar charge of the Magistrate, to be careful, that he represent
the person of the City, and that he maintain the order and dignity thereof,
observe the Laws, and be mindful of the things committed to his trust, and make
provision not only for what is done, but also for what ought to be done; it
being his business, that the Commonwealth be as well regulated after his death,
as it was, while he lived.

XXIII.
THat War is just which is necessary, and that is a pious* recourse to Arms,
when there remains no hopes otherwise than in Arms; and that war is just which
a Prince enters into* either to recover what is lost, or to prevent the wrong
intended him.

XXIV.
THis ought to be heeded by Governors, that when they pardon a small number of
delinquent persons, they disoblige all the good; in regard that these latter
perceiving that mischief is pardoned, cannot promise themselves that good will
be requited by the Governors; and thereupon* persuading themselves that there
is more to be gotten among the wicked, they are easily diverted from well doing.

XXV.
IT is always observed, that in Cities, they who are necessitous envy the good,
and have an esteem for the wicked; they quarrel at things of ancient
establishment, and are forward to promote novelties; and out of the aversion
they have for the wealthier sort, they study tumult and seditions, imagining
that their poverty and multitude will indemnify them from the punishments, due
to the disorders, whereof they are the occasions and abettors.

XXVI.
WHen persons of a mean and despicable condition are guilty of any miscarriage,
it is known but to few persons, and the noise of their actions reaches no
further than their conditions will bear. But the acts and demeanor of those
who are of great quality, and owners of great Estates, are remarkable to all,
and so become more highly censureable.

XXVII.
IT is seldom seen that a virtuous man loses his Liberty, but he withal in some
respect loses his Life; in regard it is a thing notorious to all, and of great
difficulty to those who have been educated and enured to freedom, to be reduced
to a servile life, inasmuch as of all things in the world Liberty is the best
and most desirable, the very name whereof is a character of virtue, as
servitude is a mark of misfortune.

XXVIII.
WHen a person of noble extraction degenerates from his Ancestors by the doing
of things that are not virtuous, he ought to remember, that by how much the
more illustrious the Lives of his Progenitors were, in their times, so much the
more scandalous and reproachable will his appear: inasmuch as the luster and
reputation of Ancestors is as it were a light to their Descendents, which
discovers, to the eyes of others, the virtue or vice which is remarkable in
them.

XXIX.
IT IS an humor highly commendable in a victorious Prince, when he is so far
mindful of himself, as to endeavor rather to do what is consistent with the
rules of generosity, than to impose conditions too insupportable upon his
conquered enemies.

XXX.
HE who is of an humor inclined to peace, will not be diverted from the
concluding of it by the great difficulties which present themselves in the
negotiation thereof; inasmuch as the difficulties occurrent therein, are
removed either by the force of downright justice, or by retaliating injustice
with injustice, and counterpoising reason with reason, or by the enduring of a
lesser prejudice, or by a mutual deference of several parties in abating
somewhat of their right; as shall seem most convenient to prudent persons,
according to the importance of the thing in dispute.

XXXI.
IT is the property of a well established and well regulated Commonwealth, that
all Affairs, or the greatest part thereof, as far as it is possible, be
managed, and decided by the Laws, rather than left to the decision and
discretion of a Judge; inasmuch as there are few of so great abilities and
sound understanding, as to be sufficiently skilled in the Laws, and withal of
unquestioned integrity, to give right judgment in a doubtful case; whereas the
Laws themselves, by long experience of affairs, and by mature consideration,
are reduced to perfection: but the judgment of man according to his natural
bent to love or a version is wrested and corrupted without the support of the
Law.

XXXII.
AMong those of the popular rank, discords arise from the disparity of Estates,
in regard those of the lower rate are desirous to be equal to those of the
higher; but among the Nobility, they proceed from grandeurs, inasmuch as they
who are equal are desirous to aggrandize themselves.

XXXIII.
WHen men are come near that disaster or inconvenience into which they are
fatally designed to fall, it is then that they are principally deprived of those
advantages of circumspection and prudence, with the assistance whereof they
might, in all likelihood, have avoided the inconvenience which threatened them.

XXXIV.
WHen matters of great importance are under debate, there is not any thing more
necessary on the one side, nor more dangerous on the other, than to take advice
thereupon; and no doubt the prudent person stands less in need of counsel than
the imprudent, and accordingly the former derives greater advantages from
taking counsel than the other, because he has so great a stock of prudence, as
to be able to consider and weigh things of himself, and amongst the reasons
that are offered, to discern those which make most for his interest. But what
assurance can the imprudent person have, in asking counsel, that the
advertisements he receives are good and faithful? For if the person who gives
counsel be not highly faithful and well affected to him who desires it, but is
inducible to be otherwise, out of some notorious concern of his own, or out of
some motive of advantage, or flender satisfaction, he will frame his advice so
as that it may be most beneficial to himself. And that intention of his being
for the most part unknown to the party consulting, he makes no discovery, if he
be not a prudent person, of the perfidiousness of the Counsel that is given him.

XXXV.
HE who is desirous to balance things between Princes, and to observe a
punctual neutrality, must, with the greatest circumspection he can, abstain not
only from all acts, but also from any discovery, which may raise a suspicion of
his being inclined to one side more than the other.

XXXVI.
YOuth, as it is that part of Man's Age which is most greedy of honor, and
looks upon disgrace with the greatest indignation, so is it also the most
capable of enduring the inconveniences, difficulties, and hardships, which
necessarily attend War. The difference there is between men or nations is not
to be measured by years, but by ingenuity, vivacity, and soundness of judgment,
study, industry, and the particular exercises of virtue.

XXXVII.
IF a great person has done thee an injury, dissemble thy reception thereof,
and smother thy resentments; for it is a pure extravagance to be disgusted
against a person, whom thou dare not call to account, and whom it were
imprudence in thee further to exasperate.

XXXVIII.
THere happens an infinite variety of turns and changes in military affairs;
therefore ought not a man to grow too confident upon new advantages, nor be too
much depressed, upon the contrary: inasmuch as ever and anon, there comes some
alteration, whereby this lesson may be learnt, that when opportunity presents
it self, it should not be neglected, because it lasts but for a short time.

XXXIX.
WHen matters come first under deliberation, it is most seriously to be
considered, what the issue thereof may be; and then ought men to be cautious
how they assent to uncivil and pernicious demands. For some have found by
experience, that when such as they are treating withal have obtained what they
desired, it has proved only an encouragement to them to make a further progress
in their demands.

XL.
THe more sudden and unexpected accidents are, the greater discomposure and
astonishment do they cause to those to whom they happen. It is therefore the
part of a prudent person, to make that provision beforehand, which may prevent
his being surpised or disturbed; or if it so happen that it cannot be avoided,
let him endeavor, from the present state of things, to foresee what may come
to pass, using all the precautious remedies, which his experience and prudence
can suggest, and not suffering things to grow worse and worse.

XLI.
IT always happens, in civil conversation, that, whether a vicious act be
chastis'd, or a virtuous act recompensed, the whole body of the Citizens
receives a good thereby; nor was there ever any expedient more contributory to
the preservation of Cities in a happy and flourishing state, than that
counterballancing of punishment and reward, justly applied according to desert.

XLII.
ALL the assurances that can be had of an Enemy whether by oath, parole,
engagement to friends, promises, or whatever other way can be imagined, are
good; but by reason of the corruption of persons, the depravation of Morality,
and the vicissitude of times and accidents, the best expedient is for a man to
take such order in his affairs, as that the Enemy may not be in a capacity to
annoy him.

XLIII.
THE present method of carrying on a War is much different from that of the
Ancients, who did not their work by Assassinations, and surprises, but
discovered to the Enemy, if any base contrivance were in hand against him, and
all out of a confidence that they should be able to overcome him by Virtue.

XLIV.
WHen a man is advanced to some great charge; it is soon discovered whether he
be a person of great abilities, or not; but above all, by the augmentation of
his worldly concerns, and the advantages he may have by his Office, the
affections of his heart are discovered, together with his disposition; inasmuch
as, the greater person he is, so much the less cautious will he be, in
suffering himself to be carried away with the current of his own natural humor.

XLV.
BE it thy continual care, that thy Superior conceive no ill opinion of thee,
and be not over-confident of the leading an unblameable course of life, but
endeavor to be such an one as that thou may not be much afraid to fall into
his hands; inasmuch as there is an infinite number of unforeseen occasions,
wherein thou may stand in need of him, and be glad to insinuate into his
favor.

XLVI.
THE Governor ought rather to fix his consideration upon the substance and
reality of the thing, than upon the appearance of it, measuring it rather by
prudence, than by his own will, and being always distrustful of himself; in
regard it is a great reproach to a State, when imprudence is attended by danger.

XLVII.
THE grand mystery of War consists rather in obedience, than a curiosity of
knowing the reason of the General's orders; and that Army is well fitted and
prepared for danger, which, before it is set on work, is the most exactly kept
under discipline.

XLVIII.
ALL those who are concerned, or commissionated to deliberate and treat of
Affairs of great importance, ought to consider with themselves, whether that
they undertake will prove beneficial to the Commonwealth, honorable to
themselves, and may be compassed without any great difficulty.

XLIX.
IN the carrying on of Enterprises, it is to be observed, whether he who gives
the advice, is also willing to expose his person to danger; and when the
enterprise has taken effect it is to be considered, to whom the honor thereof
is principally to be attributed.

L.
IN the times of public disturbances and seditions, they always have the
greatest power and credit, who of all are the most wicked; but in times of
peace and tranquillity, they are most in esteem who are the most remarkable for
their conduct, and observance of discipline.

LI.
MEN would not be so violently addicted to mischief, were it not for the
advantages or satisfaction they reap thereby. This gave occasion to wise Law
givers to make punishments and rewards the groundwork and support of their
Governments, not so much out of a design to afflict their subjects, as to
divert them from those things wherein they are apt to follow their own corrupt
inclinations.

LII.
AS Discord divides one City and makes it two, or more, and gives occasion to
those who have their eye upon it to advance and carry on their designs with
greater success against it; so Union restrains and cements the Counsels of
many, and reduces them into one body, and by that means keeps the government
closely compacted together, and uncorrupted.

LIII.
AS it happens in a structure of importance, that there is more danger of the
falling of one Stone toward the foundation, than if a hundred Tiles fall down
from the roof of it: so is it a much greater fault in point of policy, to
disobey justice, than to commit many slight faults against the particular
devoir between man and man; since it has been observed, that many times great
scandals have been raised in the Commonwealth, which were occasioned at first
by some small disobedience.

LIVE.
IT would be a good and wholesome Law, if those persons, who observe no
regularity in their lives, who are negligent in the managery of their domestic
concerns, who order not their affairs as they ought to do, and discover no
observance of discipline in their own families, but live in perpetual jarring
and contention with their Neighbors, should be put under the tuition of
Guardians, who might treat them and keep them in, as distracted and extravagant
persons, to prevent the communicating their extravagance to others; inasmuch as
the Commonwealth is never more likely to fall into disturbance, than it is by
their means who observe no rule in their private demeanor.

LV.
THere is not any thing more common or more pernicious among men, than that
deceitful imagination of one man's condition being better than another. And this
proceeds hence, that men's eyes are so blinded with malice and envy, that they
would rather with much trouble grasp at what belongs to another, than quietly
enjoy their own. The condition of Princes is really good, if they make a good
use thereof. In like manner, the popular state is good, if men acquit
themselves therein as they ought to do. The condition of the wealthy is good,
if they use it with moderation; and so is that of the poor, if it be attended
with patience, which is of such a sovereign virtue, as to make that good which
is generally accounted otherwise.

LVI.
IF Subjects knew what a hard task the Prince has in commanding, or if the
Prince knew how sweet a thing it is to live in tranquillity, the meaner sort
would have a great compassion on the Grandees, and the Grandees would envy
those of a mean condition; inasmuch as the divertisements which the Prince
enjoies, amount to little in comparison of the discontents he is forced to
endure. But as the station of the Prince is the highest of all, as he can do
more than all, as his worth exceeds that of all the rest, as he endures more
than all, and surpasses all in government; so is it necessary, that the Court,
the person, and life of the Prince be better regulated than those of all the
rest, inasmuch as it is the rule, measure, and standard thereof.

LVII.
THere is not any thing whereof a wise Prince should be more selfsatisfy'd,
than that he has about him some persons eminent for their valor and conduct,
to carry on the military concerns, and others signal for their prudence and
integrity, to manage the civil.

LVIII.
IT is a very remarkable observation, that men eminent for their valor and
good fortune in Military affairs are born and flourish much more in one time
than they do in another. For if a valiant person rise up in the time of a
daring Prince, he shall be in great esteem, and employed upon extraordinary
designs; but if he live under a timorous and distrustful Prince, such a Prince
shall make greater account of those who study how to improve and advance his
Revenues, than he will do of him who shall return crowned with Laurels from the
Wars.

LIX.
THey who are desirous of the reputation of good Princes, ought to propose to
themselves the examples of such as have been such in their several ages: for to
that end are the Lives and Actions of illustrious persons, by faithful
Historians, transmitted to Posterity; that Princes and Grandees may have such
Exemplars set before them as they ought to imitate.

LX.
THE greatest care a Governor ought to take, is to find out the person who
shall advise him to govern well, and to maintain his Estate with Justice. And
that is not done with harsh words, but with a meekness that gains men's hearts,
and acts of good example; for a generous Soul is easily drawn in to obey, when
the person who imposes the command is of good repute and example.

LXI.
THere happens one thing in the world which is worthy our serious observance;
to wit, that as among the good, there is some one, transcendently good, so in
like manner, among the bad, there is one transcendently such. But the
misfortune is, that the good person does not gain so much honor by his virtue,
as the lewd person does reputation by his lewdness; in regard virtue renders a
man naturally inclined to retirement, whereas the vicious person never thinks
better of himself, than when he appears upon the Stage.

LXII.
PRinces ought not to betray their surprise and astonishment at any thing, even
when things seem to go most against them; but they should obstinately stand
upon the defense of their own, expecting their neighbor Princes will find it
their own interest to keep them up in their former station, to prevent the
overgrowth of some ambitious Pretender.

LXIII.
THE person o'repress'd with calamities and disasters is always harkening after
some change of fortune, whereas he who is at his ease does not so much as think
of any alteration; the litter is sufficiently satisfied with the present
posture of his affairs, and the other looks on Vicissitude as the only means to
cause some amendment in his condition.

LXIV.
SOme wise men affirm, that when the Commonwealth is upon the choice of a
Governor, they should be sure to pitch upon a person who has been at least ten
years in the wars; in regard that he alone is most likely to be the best
preserver of a desired peace, who has been experimentally acquainted with the
miseries and calamities consequent to War.

LXV.
NO doubt but that Prince does most wisely, who regulates his affairs
answerably to his Revenues; in regard that if he do not, and his Territories be
but small, he must either run the hazard of losing what he is possessed of, or,
to keep himself up, do those things that are burthensom to his Subjects, and so
his Government must degenerate into Tyranny.

LXVI.
IT is the greatest commendation that can be of the supreme Magistrate, to be
conversant and familiar with the good, (since that familiarity is the greatest
incentive and encouragement that can be to goodness;) to be liberal of his
estate in doing of good works, (it being notorious, that he who values his
reputation, makes but little account of money;) to extirpate Tyranny (inasmuch
as the concent and harmony of the Princes Government consists in the
chastisement of the bad, and the rewarding of the good;) and to show his
munificence upon all occasions; in regard there is not any thing more endears
the Majesty of the Prince, than when he makes all the demonstrations he can of
his grandeur, in relieving others, and not expecting that he should derive
great advantage from others.

LXVII.
TWO things render a City secure, and highly contribute to the commendation and
honor of its Governors; the one, when it is guarded by those whose Estates
are the most considerable, and is well provided with all things relating to the
defensive part; the other, when there is a fair correspondence between its
Governors and their Neighbors; without which there cannot be a free
intercourse of commerce, and mutual supplies of all necessary provisions.

LXVIII.
A Sovereign Lord, who would be obeyed, will do well, in the first place to
conclude it necessary, that when he commands, he should make some discovery of
his own personal observance thereof, in regard that no Lord is to propose that
sovereignty to himself, as to be exempted from the acts and exercises of
Virtue; especially since that the Prince, being the mirror of others, is
obliged so evidently and actually to apply himself thereto, as that he himself
should give example to those that are under his Government.

LXIX.
TO meet with some unexpected misfortune, is a thing, of its own nature, not
good; yet may it accidentally contribute to the advantage of a person of sound
understanding; in as much as it may be an occasion to him of standing more
strictly upon his guard, in case the like accident may happen another time,
there being few who truly believe what evil is, till they have had some
experience thereof. Whence it comes, that all persons not well versed in
affairs proceed ordinarily either with too much negligence, or too much
presumption; whereas he who has once weathered out a disastrous chance, becomes
thereby so much the more cautious and considerate.

LXX.
PRinces will do well, so to converse with their Subjects, as that they may be
induced to serve them rather out of a readiness of inclination, than out of
hopes of reward; in regard that the less respect men have for money, the less it
implies of servitude. For he who loves another sincerely and generously, does
not become arrogant in prosperity, nor flinches from him in adversity; does not
bemoan himself upon the consideration of poverty, nor is cast down and
disgusted at his not being much in favor, nor recoyles in the time of
persecution. In short, there is a correspondence between Life and Love to the
last gasp.

LXXI.
EVery State ought so to desire Peace, as to be nevertheless diligent in the
making of all Military preparations; for peace without Arms is weak and
indefensive. Thence it came, that the Heathens represented even the Goddess of
Arts and sciences armed; and so, to be desirous of peace and to carry on the
preparatives of war, are not things simply contradictory.

LXXII.
HE truly understands the tender and transcendent concern of Friendship, who
obliges his friend before he be required to do it. For in so doing, he is not
only generous in the disposal of his kindnesses, but also causes them to be
received with a greater sense of obligation, by disburthening his friend of
that bashfulness and fear of repulse, which commonly attends asking.

LXXIII.
THat Prince does well who makes it his business to be well supplied with
prudent Commanders and persons eminent for their valor for the management of
War: But no doubt, he does better, whose Court flourishes with wise
Counselors, and Statesmen; in regard that the gaining of battles consists in
the prowess and valorous deportment of many, but it happens sometimes, that the
government of the Commonwealth is committed to the management of one particular
person.

LXXIV.
OF all employments the worst is that which is concerned in the chastisement of
other men's miscarriages; and thence is it that a welladvis'd person does what
lies in his power, to avoid them; in regard that the reprehension of Vices does
more commonly beget an aversion for the reprover, than it does amendment in
those that are reproved.

LXXV.
EVery fault, what excuse soever there may be for it, is however condemnable;
inasmuch as if it be committed out of a sudden sally of passion, it is already
a great miscarriage, but if out of forethought and deliberation, the mischief
is so much the greater.

LXXVI.
IT IS well done for a man to endeavor to manage all his concerns with reason,
and to carry on every enterprise by order; but in the doing of it, there is
much difficulty. And yet considerate persons, to compass what they have
designed, will use such diligence and precaution, as may prevent those
inconveniences; which, for want thereof, might otherwise ensue.

LXXVII.
IT is but reasonable, that the Citizen, who, while he continued in the quality
of a private person, was affable and familiar with his friends, should demean
himself with an equal degree of affability and humanity toward them, when he
has put on the Robe of Magistracy. For as it is the character of a mean spirit
to be arrogant upon the honors successively acquired by valorous
achievements; so when a man grows proud upon his advancement to an Office,
whereof he must within a short time after be divested, he betrays his indigence
of modesty and virtue, and little reflects, that if men's exaltation to honors
must change their manners, humors, and deportment, it ought to change them for
the better, and not for the worse.

LXXVIII.
WHen persons of understanding propose to themselves the obtaining of somewhat
which is not to be obtained without some difficulty, they bethink themselves of
the proper means to compass their ends. Many things are obtained, by the
dextrous and insinuating applications of those employed therein; as appears
frequently by the Negotiations of Ambassadors, and other public persons.

LXXIX.
THE chief Commander of an Army, besides his skill and experience in military
affairs, ought to be magnanimous, of a sedate temper, valiant, liberal, and
prudent. It is expected from him, that he should stand upon his authority in
the management of affairs, that he should be grave in discourse, and a punctual
observer of his promises. When affairs of importance come into debate, he ought
to use all imaginable circumspection, to deliberate with a mature judgment,
and then put things in execution with great diligence. His demeanor and
countenance toward his Soldiers ought to be cheerful, serene, and obliging to
all, yet with a remembrance of his quality, and the distance there is between
them; that so he may not, by his excessive familiarity, give his Army occasion
to be disobedient and undisciplined; nor disgust it, by being too morose and
severe. And whereas the good affections of the Soldiery is the most certain
hope he has for the obtaining of a victory, it ought to be his constant
endeavor not only that they should bear him the reverence and respect due to
his character, but also that they should have a mutual kindness one for
another, and be sensible of their being members of the same body; rewarding
those who merit it, and disgracing and punishing the neglectors of their duty.

LXXX.
THE power of Fortune (by that name did the Heathens call the secret and not
ordinarily perceptible disposition of the extraordinary works of God) is of
wonderful consequence in humane accidents, but especially in the case of War
and Arms. So that a Command not rightly understood, an Order not well
executed, some temerarious action, or the voice of an ordinary Soldier, does
many times transfer the victory to those who before seemed vanquished. And that
causes of a sudden an infinite number of accidents, which it is impossible to
foresee, or remedy.

LXXXI.
MEN are never more easily deceived, than they are by those who have the
reputation of being most sincere, that is, at the greatest distance from
deceiving.

LXXXII.
THE greater and more important things are, the more apt are men to discourse
of them, never minding how closely they keep to the truth, or how far they
receed from it. There are some who believe, and hold to be most certain, what
they have heard, not regarding whether it be true or false. Others, though a
thing be ever so true, relate it otherwise than it is, and afterward Time
making some additionals to the story, the thing is much augmented beyond what
was reported at the first.

LXXXIII.
TO come into favor and authority, one while by ostentation and munificence,
another while by industry and vigilance, are two ways equally prejudicial and
pernicious, when they are practiced subtly in order to a man's advancement to
Government. Thence came it that wise men have affirmed, that the tracks leading
to principality are steepy and difficult, but when once men are gotten into
them, every thing helps and sets them forward.

LXXXIV.
IT cannot be easily imagined, whence it comes that Princes are so favorable
to some, and so cross and inflexible to others; to wit, whether there be in
that some secret of nature, or that it lies in our power to keep our selves in
a mean, so as that we may not too obstinately oppose the inclinations of him
who governs, and yet withal, that we forbear precipitating our selves into a
scandalous adulation, and a kind of servile deportment, but that we observe
such a moderation as neither to crouch to ambition, nor be over desirous of
honor, and by that means pass our lives with more security, and less danger.

LXXXV.
THere are but few that can by prudent advertisements distinguish between good
and evil, between what is profitable, and what is prejudicial, but follow the
ordinary road of growing better, and more cautious, by the knowledge which they
derive from the common events of things.

LXXXVI.
THose things that are foreseen prove much less hurtful, than those whereof we
have no preapprehension at all. He therefore may be accounted a person of a
sound understanding and excellent temper, who has the government of himelf, and
as with an unstartled spirit, entertains the arrival of sudden and unexpected
accidents.

LXXXVII.
THough the particular thoughts and imaginations of every one be known only to
God himself, yet the natural inclinations of a people or a Province is a thing
obvious and easy to be known; inasmuch as their actions being public, they
must needs thereby discover their intentions and affections; from which prudent
men will be able to give a character of them accordingly.

LXXXVIII.
SUbjects are much more satisfied to have their Prince near them, than at a
great distance from them; inasmuch as there accrue thence two considerable
advantages; one, that the truly loyal, and well affected, being more
immediately under his protection, are so much the more engaged to his service;
the other, that the pernicious designs of turbulent persons are the more
easily prevented.

LXXXIX.
A Commander in chief ought to to acquire reputation, not by the hardships and
dangers of others (as many do) but by the sweat and hazard of his own person,
and by the interposition of his own virtue. And whereas it is no less
honorable to terminate a War by Counsel, than to put a period thereto by Arms,
he ought to use both means, and should principally reflect, that the first
successes are those which rendor him most dreadful to the Enemy, or, on the
contrary, despicable and of little repute; in regard that, for the most part,
such as the beginning is, such is the issue.

XC.
AS it is a thing unquestionably certain, that Victories are gained by
preventions and diversions, so is it withal certain, that he is at a great
distance from good counsel, who, without evident necessity, transfers the War,
which another had been first engaged in, to himself.

XCI.
A Person of comprehensive parts, who can husband time well, has no reason to
complain that his life is too short; for he who makes advantage of the infinite
occasions that present themselves to him does anticipate Time it self.

XCII.
LIberty is a thing makes a great noise in the world, yet few truly understand
wherein it consists. But of all kinds of Liberty, that of Persuasion is the
most desired by all, in so much that to gain it, some would rather be
transplanted to people Solitudes, than smother their discontents to live in
well-governed Societies.

XCIII.
HE who desires to be in favor with his Superior ought to make all the
discoveries he can of the respect and reverence he bears him; for if there be
once a failure in that, the endearing correspondence between Superiors and
Inferiors is immediately dissolved.

XCIV.
HE who is entrusted with the custody of a City which expects a Siege, ought
above all things, to be think himself of all the remedies which may protract
time, and to cut off all opportunities, though ever so small, from the Enemy,
inasmuch as many times one day, nay one hour, produces some accident which may
occasion the relief of it.

XCV.
HE is easily deceived who relies on the first advertisement he receives of
some accident that has happened, in regard that commonly the effects are not
aswerable to the first advices that come. He therefore who is not forced by
necessity to do otherwise, ought to expect several confirmations thereof, ere
he takes up his final resolution, what he ought to do.

XCVI.
IT is a dangerous thing to be governed by examples, if there be not a
concurrence in the general, and also in all the particulars of the same reasons
to be considered. The same may be said, if things be not regulated by the same
prudential motives and reflections; and withal, if there be not a combination
of all the other inducements, and the accidents and success consequent thereto.

XCVII.
AS it is a servile act for any man to be a slave to his affections; so, to
subdue anger, the great disturber of counsel; to be moderate in Victory, which,
of its own nature, is insolent and haughty; to be absolute master of ones self,
which is the devoir of a well tempered and generous soul; to exercise humanity,
meekness, and liberality toward an Enemy, is a thing truly royal, divine, and
worthy of eternal memory.

XCVIII.
THere is not any thing more becoming or more necessary to a Prince, than to be
just, liberal, and benevolent; inasmuch as it is the inseparable; attribute of
Grandeur and Power to relieve the oppressed, and to alleviate the calamities of
others; and this especially in Kings, who, by such acts, approach so much the
nearer the Divinity, whose living images they are, upon the score of their
supereminent rank.

XCIX.
PErsons of lewd inclinations have always some opportunity of doing evil, and
though they do it not, yet is it not so great a satisfaction to others, to see
that they do not commit those enormities which they might, as it is an
affliction, to think that it is in their power to commit them.

C.
THat Commonwealth wherein there is justice duly administered for the poor,
chastisement for such as are insolent and tyrannically inclined, an exact
observance of weights and measures, as to those things which concern the
sustentation of humane life, discipline and exercise for the younger sort, and
as little avarice as may be in those that are advanced in age, must needs be an
excellent constitution of Government.

CI.
LET not any Prince think that the choice of a Tutor for his Son is a thing of
small importance. For in that case, his diligence and circumspection ought to
be the greater, in that he is not to do in this, as in other Offices which are
bestowed either upon the mediation of others, or by corruption, or importunity
or friendship, or for a reward of some services already done: in regard that
though some one of his Courtiers has managed an Embassy with good success, or
been General of an Army, or some great Officer about the Prince's person, or
relating to his Household, yet does it not follow that such a person is fit to
teach his Son. The reason is, that for a man to be an Ambassador, or General,
it requires only in the former a good stock of dexterity and dissimulation, and
in the latter, that he have valor and good fortune; but to be Governor to a
Prince, it is requisite, that he have all the accomplishments, and
qualifications, suitable to the education of a person of that transcendent
dignity.

CII.
IN the disastrous accidents of our life, wherein our own industry and strength
are of little account, the only remedy we have, is to look on the worst of
misfortunes as things not incompatible with the condition of humanity, and to
be so far prudent, as to smother our resentments thereof.

CIII.
BEtween two Princes, the one addicted to the exercises of virtue, the other
complying with the suggestions of vice, there is this difference, that the
latter is only obeyed, but the former is both obeyed and beloved. Besides, the
good and virtuous Prince makes the most difficult enterprises seem light, and
on the contrary, the Tyrant makes the lightest seem most heavy. Happy therefore
is he who is obeyed, but much more happy he who is both obeyed and beloved; for
the body grows weary of obeying, but the mind is never wearied nor cloyed with
loving.

CIV.
THere is one thing which a wise Prince will always be mindful of, to wit,
that, in the management of the public affairs, his Governors and Judges never
permit the abrogation of ancient Customs, nor the introduction of new ones; in
regard the Populace is commonly so humorous and extravagant, that they would
every day have new Princes, and new Laws.

CV.
IT is an easy matter to design what a man would have done by another person,
and by what means it is most likely to be brought to effect; but to command the
execution thereof is no slight thing, inasmuch as between those two there are
many things which obstruct, retard, and disturb such executions.

CVI.
IT IS a thing out of all dispute, as Aristotle affirms in his Rhetoric, that
Riches do often render those persons, that are possessed thereof, proud and
insolent: but he who shall wisely consider it, will say with Seneca, that none
is more worthy, none makes greater approaches to the Divinity, than he who
makes no account of riches; which, says he, I am far from affirming that thou
should not be possessed of, but I would have thee possessed thereof without
any fear, distraction, or disturbance. Which happiness thou art not to acquire,
but by this only expedient, to wit, by a firm persuasion, that thou can live
happily without them, and that thou should always look on them, as if they
were taking their flight away from thee.

CVII.
WHat presumption soever a man may have of his own abilities, yet ought he not
so to rely on his own counsel, as that sometimes it may not be more safe for
him to submit to that of others; in regard that he who is ashamed of
consulting, and defies the conduct and directions of another, may assure
himself, for the most part, that he has a fool to his Guide, and consequently
that he must needs be guilty of many miscarriages.

CVIII.
IT is not prudence to judge of Counsels by the event of things, in regard that
many times good Counsels have not an issue answerable thereto, and on the
contrary, evil Counsels may prove fortunate. But when evil Counsels are
applauded, upon the score of their being successful, it is a secret
encouragement for men to do those things that are unjust, which may prove
highly prejudicial to the Commonwealth, inasmuch as evil Counsels are not
always fortunate; and there is also another fault in blaming and censuring the
more prudent Party, whose advertisements have not had the success which was
expected, in regard that such a procedure disheartens the Citizens from giving
their opinions freely, when the public concerns of their City requires it.

CIX.
WHen it happens that there is a necessity of denying some person his request,
it is but requisite, to keep the said person from being disgusted, and to
assure him of the good will they bear him, and to make some other overture to
him, so that he may thereby perceive that they have a respect for him, and
would gladly oblige him. Upon this demeanor, the other, if he have any
sentiment of humanity, will be as much, if not more, satisfied, than if his
request had been granted: So great an influence have kind words and an obliging
carriage over the minds of good natured persons.

CX.
IN public affairs it is requisite that men be extremely careful and
considerate at the beginning of what they design; in regard it will not be
afterward in their power without dishonor and danger, to receed from the
deliberation once fixed upon, and in which they have for some time persisted.

CXI.
WHat is wished by the greater number does not often succeed in regard that for
the most part the events of humane actions depend on the wills of few; and the
intentions of these latter being in a manner always different from those of the
greater number, things seldom happen otherwise than according to the intention
of those from whose directions they derive their first motion.

CXII.
NEutrality is most commendable in the Wars wherein other parties are engaged,
in regard that many inconveniences and great charges are thereby avoided; and
it may be time enough to be concerned for either party, when success seems to
intimate which side is most likely to prevail.

CXIII.
THE clemency of Princes has always gained them good will and reputation; and,
on the contrary, rigor, (if there be not some extraordinary necessity for it)
has always produced the contrary effects, and instead of removing the obstacles
and difficulties, which lay in their way, it has made some additionals thereto.

CXIV.
IT is more wisely done for a man to court his friendship who is unwilling to
become his Enemy, than to curry favor with him, who one time or other cannot
be his Friend.

CXV.
THere are three principal considerations to be minded in the carrying on of
all Enterprises, to wit, the justice of the Cause, the facility of the Victory
to be obtained, and the conveniences and advantages accruing thereby.

CXVI.
THere is not any thing so shortliv'd as the remembrance of a Benefit, and many
times, the greater it is, the more likely it is to be repaid with ingratitude.
For, he who is not willing to take off the obligation, by retaliation or
remuneration, often endeavors to do the same thing in another sense,
persuading himself, that the good turn was not so great; and they who are
ashamed of their having been reduced to the necessity of desiring a kindness,
are vexed and tormented in their minds that they have received it. So that the
remembrance of the necessity into which they were fallen makes a greater
impression upon them, than that of the Obligation which had been laid upon them.

CXVII.
MAny are the inconveniences that happen in the Armies of confederated parties;
while they are concerting their designs, the opportunity of entering into
action slips away, their preparatives are delayed, interrupted, and diverted,
according to the forces, aims, and counsels of the Princes concerned, so that
it must needs prove a hard matter to make a firm union, where there is so much
disorder and distrust, and withal so great a diversity of inclinations, and
courages, and varieties of conditions.

CXVIII.
IT IS the natural humor of the Populace to be always desirous of novelties,
and to be easily filled with false and vain persuasions, lightly hurried away
with the insinuations of those who have once set them on work, as the waves of
the Sea are stirred by the blowing of the wind.

CXIX.
SO extravagant is the nature of mankind, that when they are forced out of one
extreme, wherein they have been violently detained, they ride in full speed to
the other extreme, without ever making the least halt in the mean.

CXX.
THere is one thing highly considerable in military concerns, and that is the
Reputation of the chief Commanders. As Soon as this begins once to decline, the
soldiery is immediately discouraged; the loyalty of the Nations concerned is
shaken; there follow distraction and distrust in Counsels, and want of a hearty
and cheerful concurrence in Action; the provision for the Army's subsistence is
interrupted; and on the contrary the Enemy is heartned, those who were content
to observe a Neutrality, are apt to incline to the successful party, and all
difficulties grow greater and greater.

CXXI.
IN human Actions men ought for the most part to make their Counsels complyant
with the present Necessity, and not, out of an overearnestness to overcome that
which is too difficult, and as it were impossible, to expose the generality to
a manifest danger and inconvenience.

CXXII.
WE find many times by experience, that those things which at the first
prospect present themselves as highly dreadful, appear by degrees so much the
less considerable, that, if the former error be not renewed by some additional
accident, all the terror in process of time vanishes, and we are induced to
laugh and wonder at our former astonishment.

CXXIII.
HE who finds that there is no account made of him, gives way to disgust, and
that inspires him with thoughts of revenge, and inclines him to attempt
dangerous things, which sometimes meet with their designed effect; especially
when the person who is become so daring is of any authority, or remarkable for
some extraordinary qualification.

CXXIV.
ALL subjection is burdensome, all restriction is insupportable to him who
would live as he pleases himself. A person of that humor can find but little
quiet under a regular Government, in regard that there is a necessity either of
his compliance which the Prince, or of his ruin by him.

CXXV.
IT is commonly observed, that a resolution taken either too hastily, or with
too much affection comes off with a slur. For the much celerity of the resolver
does not allow him the leisure to reflect on those things which ought to be
considered, before the resolution be taken; and the excessive affection so
prepossesses the mind, that it does not take notice of any thing but what is
most pressing in such or such a point. To these two examples may be added two
others, to wit, in these cases, when there is time enough to deliberate, and
the person deliberating is unprepossess'd with any particular affection, yet
out of a certain natural incapacity, or through an insuperable kind of
remisness or debility of spirit, remarkable through all their actions, they
never do any thing that holds water.

CXXVI.
WHen affairs are reduced to the extremity, as that there remains nothing for
hope to rely upon but the pure Providence of God, the prosecution of the
adventure in such a case must be looked on as the result of reason and
prudence, insomuch that we ought to attempt the danger, not minding how little
ground there presents it self to humane prudence. For God many times takes a
certain delight in sending a spirit of infatuation upon the counsels and
designs of some people, and making those calamities which they intended to
bring on others to recoyle upon themselves.

CXXVII.
THE greater a man's credit and reputation is amongst the generality of the
People, the more dangerous it is to support and advance him. As therefore it is
an easy matter at the beginning to oppose the disorders which may ensue
thereupon, so when they are come to any growth, it will be so much the more
difficult to remedy them.

CXXVIII.
THE exercise of Arms, the observance of the Laws, and the frequent
celebration of Divine Service, in a well regulated City cannot ordinarily be
separated, without the destruction of them all. So that there is a
correspondence between them and the state of the Soul, wherein there are the
vegetative part, the sensitive, and the intellectual; which parts yet do not
make three Souls, but one only distinguished by the operations of the three
faculties: So the establishment of the State requires a reciprocal aid and
correspondence.

CXXIX.
WHere ever there is servitude, there is also fear; and the greater the former
is, the greater also is the latter. But though servitude implies Tyranny, yet
has the Tyrant as great a share of the fear, as they over whom he tyrannizes,
inasmuch as he who commands Slaves, is not himself free; Now the Tyrant being
such, it follows that he himself is servile as well as his people, and so as
there is force and indignity on both sides, so is there a continual
augmentation of fear.

CXXX.
IN matter of War, Valor and Artifice are highly recommended; but the
perfection of Arms consists in knowing the true use of the moral Virtues, a
right understanding of political affairs, and treading in the Steps of ancient
and eminent Commanders.

CXXXI.
IN Military affairs, when there is some great design in hand, the absolute
Authority of ordering all is to be conferred on one single person who
transcends all the rest in point of merit; yet so as that he be obliged to have
always about him such as are well skilled in Counsel, with whom he may confer,
and to whom he may communicate all concerns of importance.

CXXXII.
MEN are glad of advertisements and directions in things that are doubtful, not
in the certain; in things subject to hazard, and not to prudence: it were
therefore but requisite to consider what is the principal concern in the matter
whereof we are to deliberate. For in deliberations, when any one is not
constrained by necessity, he sets himself on work according to the unconfined
plenitude of his own will, which is in all things and every where free, and
then his thoughts are wholly taken up with the success of the Enterprise, to
wit, whether his fears or hopes outweigh one the other; and thereupon he
resolves to forbear attempting any thing when hazard has the principal part,
and is most likely to carry it; or on the contrary he will attempt the
execution of his design, when prudence tells him that it will prove
advantageous.

CXXXIII.
WHen Commonwealths are well governed, the prosecutions of envious persons turn
to the advantage of those against whom they are intended, for innocence being
cleared by truth, their endeavors prove like the strokes given to the ball,
which the harder it is struck, the higher it rebounds; so the calumniations of
the envious instead of eclipsing, add more luster to those against whom they
are directed.

CXXXIV.
COntinual severity must needs exasperate those over whom it is exercised. But
as the excessive indulgence of Parents makes their Children apt to lead an
irregular and disobedient course of life; so the remisness of a Prince, who
suffers his authority to be slighted, renders the Citizen dissolute, and the
Soldier undisciplined and licentious, and proves withal the occasion of greater
mischief, when persons of quality are concerned. For the insolence of these
last is more dangerous than that of a multitude, it being not so difficult to
discover the designs wherein many are engaged, as it is to pump out the secret
plottings of one particular person.

CXXXV.
WHen the Prince is solicited by a Grandee in some concern of great
importance, and that he is unwilling to grant his request, he ought to consider
two points, one relating to the necessary circumstances, as the cause from
whence the discontent proceeds, the person disgusted, and the present
conjuncture of time; the other, how requisite it may be, to counterballance the
refusal, by conferring some other boon on the Petitioner.

CXXXVI.
THE good Soldier may be likened to polished Steel, which while it is handled
preserves its luster and brightness, and on the contrary, for want of being
used, grows rusty, and that rust consumes it, and in time makes it contagious;
So the good Soldier, who is good only while he is handling his Arms, in the
time of War, is prejudiced in himself, and may prove dangerous to others, when
he is out of his proper element and employment.

CXXXVII.
IN the competitions that happen between two several parties, that which is
excluded will be rather inclined to close with a third party, than comply with
that, between whom and it the precedent competition was.

CXXXVIII.
THere is not any thing so prejudicial to mankind as a transcendent prosperity;
for the effects of it, are, licentiousness, luxury, confidence to do mischief,
an irreclaimable inclination to disturb the public by some novelty, and all
the inconveniences consequent to satiety.

CXXXIX.
THE infamy of being temerarious is more prejudicial to a Military Commander,
than the honor of a Victory is advantageous to him; inasmuch as when he is
chargeable with temerity, the blame is wholly attributed to him alone, but the
honor of the victory, and the prosperous management of affairs (at least
according to the opinion of many) is communicable also to others.

CXL.
SInce there is frequent necessity of changing orders and deliberations, in the
time of War, according to the variety of accidents, it should be the principal
consideration of a chief Commander, so to accommodate all things at the
beginning, as if he had, as much as may be, foreseen all events, and all
counsels; in regard that, as the prosperous successes engage the respects and
affections of the Army toward their General, so the contrary makes a
proportionable abatement of the same respects and affections, and consequently
there is not that sympathetical correspondence which ought to be between them.

CXLI.
THE prudent person ought not to entertain any suspicion that men distrust his
integrity, and if he does suspect it, he should demean himself so as that the
wicked may not be sensible of his having any suspicion of them, lest that upon
that occasion fear may augment their licentiousness, and that, as to others,
there may not be an abatement of their diligence and promptitude.

CXLII.
IT IS prudence in a man to make as if he knew nothing of uncertain news, or at
least to keep it so secret, as not to betray any confirmation thereof; in
regard that many times, either it is absolutely false, or the credit to be
given thereto admits of a considerable diminution.

CXLIII.
THey who are induced to commit some act in the night time proceed commonly
upon some sinful motive, presuming that the night covers in them what the day
would discover, to wit, their fear and shame.

CXLIV.
FOR this reason has God entrusted Princes with the Government of their
Dominions, that their Subjects may, in order to the obtaining of their right,
appeal from that Law which is dumb, and as it were dead, and without force in
it self, to the living Law which ought to be the Magistrate.

CXLV.
THE principal commendation of military Discipline consists in not opposing
danger without necessity, by industry, patience and policy to defeat and elude
the enterprises of the Enemy, rather than by destroying them in a cruel and
bloody engagement.

CXLVI.
A Benefit conferred upon one who is persuaded that he has received an injury
counterballanceable thereto, is not sufficient to remove out of his disaffected
mind the memory of the offense; especially when the benefit comes at such a
time, as that it seems rather occasioned by necessity, than to proceed from
good will.

CXLVII.
THE Counsels and secret designs of Princes are most commonly divulged after a
manner much different from that which is true in effect; and this they do
purposely to amuse the Generality, that they may busy themselves in discoursing
of one thing, while another of different nature is in agitation.

CXLVIII.
PEace is desirable and holy, when it smothers all distrusts and jealousies,
when it gives a check to all dangers, and when men are exonerated from all
charges, and may repose themselves without the least fear of disturbance. But
when it hatches the contrary effects, it is a pernicious War, under the
counterfeit title of peace, and a pestilent poison under the name of a good
Medicine.

CXLIX.
AMbassadors are the Eyes and Ears of States, and the other public Ministers
are the Spectacles of the respective Princes by whom they are employed.

CL.
Men's favors are to be measured by the real effects, and not by the external
demonstrations thereof* and yet it can hardly be imagined how great a
satisfaction it is to a man, to be treated with the ceremonious part of
courtesy and humanity* The reason of it may possibly be this, that every one is
apt to think, that he deserves more than he receives, and consequently is
disgusted when he perceives there is not that account made of him which he
thinks due to him.

CLI.
SUbjects cannot be well governed without the exercise of some severity at
certain times, yet is there a necessity that it should be seasoned with a
dextrous insinuation of its being not so much the inclination of the Prince to
be severe, as that it is requisite for the public good, that the reformation
of some should be occasioned by the punishments inflicted upon others.

CLII.
A Man should endeavor to refrain from whatever may cause the least
dissatisfaction or prejudice to another. It is consequent therefore, that he
should never say any thing either in a man's presence, or his absence, which may
displease him, unless there be some necessity of his so doing; in regard it is
the greatest extravagance in the world, for a man to make a needless creation
of Enemies to himself.

CLIII.
HE who runs himself into a danger without ever considering, of what concern it
is likely to be, may be accounted a person of a bestial humor. But he who
knows the importance of it, and yet freely exposes himself thereto, either upon
the necessity there is of so doing, or upon some honorable account, must a
person of great courage, and truly magnanimous.

CLIV.
IT is a vulgar error to affirm, that Learning and Study are prejudicial to
the Brain; though peradventure it might be truly said of some one, who has a
weak Brain, and is of an infirm constitution; but where there is a conjunction
of a good constitution, and the accidental good of Learning, it makes a most
accomplished person, and of an excellent Temperament.

CLV.
THat glory is to be accounted vain which is purchased with any injury done to
another; but the true, solid, and immortal glory is that which consists not in
the ruining of Nations, and destruction of Cities, but rather in the
consolidation of Kingdoms, the association of Provinces, the settlement of
public tranquillity, the establishment of Commerce, and the deliverance of
people out of the miseries and calamities attending humane nature.

CLVI.
ALL the fruit and advantage of having obtained a victory consists in knowing
how to use it, and it is a greater infamy not to know how to use it, than not
to have gained it; in regard it is more ignominious for us to be deceived in
those things that are within our power, than in those that are not.

CLVII.
INconsiderate and doubtful deliberations are not excusable in any but those
whose concerns are in a distracted and unfortunate posture, or in a person
whose thoughts are wholly bent upon Ambition, and one who being desirous by all
the ways imaginable to get himself a greater name, is afraid he has not time
enough to do it in.

CLVIII.
ALL humane actions are subject to many dangers; but this is the advantage of
wise men, that they know that what ever may happen does not always come to
pass, but that upon some occasion or other many dangers become none at all,
many are stav'd off by prudence and industry; and many are weathered out by
patience and equanimity.

CLIX.
HE who is more apprehensive of the future than he ought to be, must not expect
to be accounted a wise man, nor yet they who presuppose for certain the dangers
that are but doubtful, and accordingly regulate all their deliberations, as if
the danger were inevitable. But it argues a certain magnanimity in that person,
who knowing and thoroughly considering the dangers, yet discovers how that many
times, either by some unexpected chance, or by the assistance of Virtue, men
extricate themselves out of great difficulties and inconveniences.

CLX.
IT happens sometimes, that when a Prince assumes thoughts of aggrandizing
himself, or grows jealous of losing his Dominions, he takes occasion to forget
what obligations may ly upon him for benefits received. A remarkable instance
of this kind of demeanor we find in Lewis Sforza, who instead of expressing his
gratitude to Charles VIII. of France, for the kindnesses he had received from
him, contributed his assistance for the driving of him out of Italy, and sided
with his enemies, and all only to preserve his own Concerns, and out of the
apprehension he had of the greatness of Charles.

CLXI.
IN the giving and receiving of advice there are many things to be considered,
but principally two, to wit, prudence in him who is to receive the advice, and
fidelity in him who is to give it. For counsel being nothing else but a
discourse considered and weighed by reason, in order to a discovery whether a
thing ought to be done or not, if the person who is to receive the advice be
not prudent, he will not accept of that which is given him for the best, but
will follow that, which, according to his apprehension, seems most convenient;
in as much as not being prudent, he will be apt to fancy those things that are
most inconvenient, and so will never set himself seriously to work as he should
do. On the other side, he who gives the advice, it he be not faithful, will
find so many ways to disguise the truth, that many times that is put in
execution, which is more beneficial to the Consultee, than to the Consultor.

CLXII.
HE who intends to engage in a war ought to be always prepared, and to have
his mind fortified against whatever event may happen, and to be ready to
entertain all occurrences; and he should principally bethink himself not to
enter into a war unjustly, and consider well against what Potentate he is to be
concerned, what allyances and combinations may be made against him, and lastly
examine his own forces and those of his Adversary, and what confederates either
party may have.

CLXIII.
THE ambition of a General often proves pernicious to the State by which he is
employed. For it is the ordinary humor of such persons to be backward in
putting a period to the War, even when they may do it with honor and
advantage, that they may continue longer in their charges, and by that
continuance they gain the affections of the Soldiery, and so are in a fair way
to their assumption of Sovereignty. He who has a powerful Army at his devotion
has the command of all as far as that can extend its Quarters.

CLXIV.
ARE men desirous of coming into great repute and esteem? Let them be always
careful of doing those things which are commendable and of good report;
inasmuch as virtuous actions are not the effects of honor, but honor is the
effect and recompense of virtuous actions.

CLXV.
IT is generally acknowledged by all, that the Government of a Country by one
single person, when he is but tolerably good, is better than that of a greater
number, though it be granted that they also are good. And it may be withal
rationally concluded, that in a greater number of Governors there may be a
greater likelihood of degeneration from the principles of Government, and a
greater combination of Tyranny, than there can be in one individual person.

CLXVI.
TO frame instructions for the particular benefit of every one, is a very
difficult task; but it is much more difficult to put such a project in
execution; in regard that men know well enough what they ought to do, but they
are extremely backward in applying themselves to the performance thereof. Let
him therefore who thinks that application incumbent upon him, endeavor to
offer a certain violence to his own disposition, and make that habitual which
yet admits of no greater perfection than that of desire; by which means, he
will easily attain whatever shall be taught him, and will voluntarily do any
thing, according as reason shall command him, or experience direct him.

CLXVII.
THE acquisition of a great Estate or Honor is a thing commendable, provided
it be done without fraud or any indirect means; yet so great is the corruption
of mankind, that men commonly are ambitious of high titles, and magistracy, as
if they were illustious and magnificent of themselves, and did not derive their
true value and esteem, from the virtue of those who are deservedly advanced
thereto.

CLXVIII.
A Military Commander ought so to mind all things as if he had not charged any
person with the care thereof; and this, not only out of the distrust he should
have that his commands may not be punctually executed, but also out of this
consideration, that his Soldiers will be more forward to execute his orders,
when they shall find him so laborious and vigilant himself.

CLXIX.
HE who would prognosticate what will be the effects of another man's
deliberation, ought, to avoid being deceived, to consider seriously, not only
what a prudent person would be inclined to do upon the like emergency, but also
to measure the abilities and disposition of the deliberator.

CLXX.
A Physician who undertakes to cure the infirmity of some particular member, is
very careful that the medicine he applies does not prejudice any other member:
so ought that privy Councellor, who is to advise his Prince, to be so his
remembrancer of the concerns of the Commonwealth, as that he is withal mindful
of the honor and preservation of the Prince.

CLXXI.
THere is not any man of so weak abilities, but that he may manifestly perceive
the difference there is between actions proceeding from fear and error, and
those which proceed from fraud and an evil intention.

CLXXII.
HE who knows in himself what is advantageous, and for the good of the
Commonwealth, and yet forbears communicating it to others, is an insignificant
member of that Body.

CLXXIII.
A Commander may make a retreat upon two occasions, either out of timorousness,
or prudence; the former whereof is reproachable, the other deserves
commendation, in regard it seems to wave the hazarding of what is not
sufficiently secured. That victory is the most advantageous and most glorious,
which is gained with the least loss and effusion of the Soldiers blood.

CLXXIV.
AS the Soul, which ordinarily ought to be the Governess of the Body, becomes a
Tyrant, when, regarding only her own excellency, in comparison of the Body, she
so thinks of her self, as not to allow any part of time for the service of the
body, whereby the latter is weakened, and rendered incapable of performing its
offices: So, on the contrary, they who make the Body Lord over the Soul, and
employ their whole time in satisfying the appetites thereof, without reserving
some part for the other, can never become virtuous, nor have any valor in
themselves.

CLXXV.
AVarice is, no doubt, much more blameable in a Prince, than in a private
person; not only upon this score, that the Prince having more to distribute,
frustrates men of the benefits they expect from him, but also in regard, that
whatever the private person has, he may dispose thereof without any others
being much concerned in it. But whatever the Prince has, he has chiefly for the
benefit of others; what therefore he retains to himself is so much deducted out
of what men should receive from him.

CLXXVI.
PRinces have cause to be more distrustful than other persons, not only in
regard they are many times flattered, but also that many doubtful
advertisements are proposed to them, and that it is a difficult matter for them
to follow those that are most advantageous to their concerns.

CLXXVII.
THat Prince who has the most obliging way to gain the affections of his
People, makes a great discovery of an excellent good nature, and withal gives a
certain demonstration of his being unchargeable with the vice of Pride, which
brings an odium upon the virtues themselves.

CLXXVIII.
WHen any of the Enemies forces fall off from him, and come into thy service,
it is no small happiness if they prove faithful to thee; inasmuch as the forces
of the enemy are much more weakened, by the defection of those who desert him,
than by the loss of those who are killed, though the name of turncoat, or
fugitive be suspicious in new-raised men, and odious in old Soldiers.

CLXXIX.
IN military concerns; the prosperous success of the victorious Prince proceeds
for the most part from the want of Counsel and Conduct in the Enemy. And thence
it comes, that it is a difficult task to subdue him who knows the extent of his
own forces and those of his Enemy. Besides, the performances of the Soldiery
are to be attributed more to their gallantry than to their multitude, and
sometimes the advancement they make depends more on the advantages of the
place, where the engagement happens, than upon their personal valor.

CLXXX.
MEN, Arms, Money, and Provisions are the sinews of War; but of these four, the
two former are the most necessary, in regard that resolute men, well Armed,
will make a shift to find money and provisions; but those two last will not so
easily find Men and Arms.

CLXXXI.
WHen the Prince is surrounded by his familiar friends in a time that requires
nothing of action, he communicates his favors to those who are most acceptable
to him, and most complyant with his humor. But when he has some great design
to carry on, he knows how to make a distinction between those who are purely
favorites, and such as may be more serviceable to him.

CLXXXII.
A Person reputed to be of great conduct and well experienced in the management
of affairs, who can maintain ten thousand men, is more to be feared and
esteemed than ten others confederated together with each of them five thousand
men; in regard they are tedious and dilatory in the concerting of their
designs, and much time is commonly lost ere they can be unanimously brought to
resolve upon the same end.

CLXXXIII.
THat person who is desirous to be entertained into the service of some
Grandee, should rather pitch upon one of some repute for his prudence, than one
notorious for his ignorance: in regard that if his dependence be on a wise man,
he will find means to ingratiate himself into his favor; but with an ignorant
man, his applications will in all likelihood prove ineffectual, by reason of
the want of apprehension in the person to whom they are made.

CLXXXIV.
THE affairs of this world are in a perpetual flux of uncertainty and
instability; yet are they always in a progressive course toward the end to
which they ought to tend according to their nature. But this progress meets
with greater obstructions than we imagine, in regard that we measure their
motion according to our life, which is of no great duration, and not according
to their continuance, which seems long to us in respect of our selves. And
thence it comes, that the judgments which we make of them are commonly false
and defective.

CLXXXV.
IN things of importance, he who does not take into his consideration all the
particulars relating thereto, cannot frame a right judgment of them; in regard
that any single circumstance, how inconsiderable soever it be, may change the
whole face of the thing which is to be judged. Yet true it is, that many times,
a man may frame a good judgment thereof, though he have the knowledge but of
the affair, only in general; and on the contrary, he who knows the particulars
may be guilty of a greater miscarriage; in regard that if his head be not
clear, and disengaged from passion, his attention to the particular part will
confound and disturb his apprehension of the whole matter under consideration.

CLXXXVI.
IT is a great felicity for a man to see his Enemy cast down and lying at his
mercy; but the greater his happiness is, to whom that happens, the greater
reason he has to make a commendable use of that victory, by expressing his
clemency and readiness to forgive, it being the particular mark and property of
a great and generous soul.

CLXXXVII.
AN inferior Prince ought not to hazard all he has in one fight; for if he get
the better, he only gains the more glory; if he miscarries, he is ruined to all
intents and purposes.

CLXXXVIII.
WE find that in the ordinary differences which happen between men upon the
civil account, and in the diseases whereto men are subject, the Judges and
Physicians have recourse to the judgments of those who have been anciently
eminent in those several Professions; The same may be said of affairs of State
and Policy, that it were expedient the present Statesmen consulted the
directions of the Ancients, who have been eminent for the good Government and
civilization of such as were subject to them.

CLXXXIX.
THere are many who seem to be highly diligent in the reading of ancient
Histories, and to take a particular divertisement therein, by reason of the
remarkable variety of accidents which occur; but few apply themselves to the
imitation thereof; and that with the greater reproach to themselves, in that
they think it a thing not only difficult, but also indeed impossible; as if the
Heavens, the Sun, and the Elements had changed their motions, order and
influences, in comparison of what they were heretofore.

CXC.
THE Friendship there is between persons of quality, of a private condition,
proceeds from the mutual correspondence of their minds, and the consonancy of
their humors and dispositions. But among Princes, this correspondence of
humors does not always beget amity, but sometimes, out of a certain judgment
which they frame to themselves, of the advantages accrueing by the contraction
of such Friendships, and sometimes their confederations are the effects of the
present exigences forcing them thereto.

CXCI.
ADversity is the Touch stone which distinguishes between those who are friends
out of design, and those who are really such. It makes a full discovery of the
fidelity and constancy of some, and how slight and superfluous others may be.
So that a man has this benefit by adversity, that there are driven from him,
without the help of a Staff, all that throng of persons whose souls are
mercenary and of no value, full of avarice and ingratitude, and there remain
behind only those minds which are fortune proof, and such as cannot be
surmounted by Adversity.

CXCII.
HE who founds a Commonwealth, and establishes Laws for the government thereof,
ought to have presupposed that men are inclined to wickedness, and will make a
discovery of that inclination, upon any occasion that shall offer it self. And
when the malignity lies concealed for some time, it proceeds from some secret
cause, which, for want of having seen the experience of the contrary, was not
observed; but it is afterward discovered by time, which brings all things to
light.

CXCIII.
NEutrality, of its own nature, is full of danger, in as much as it gives
offense, on the one side, to the stronger party, who expected to be sided
withal upon the score of his grandeur, and on the other to the weaker, who
takes it unkindly, and thinks it an injury that he is not assisted and
relieved. So that the neutral party is neither secured against an enemy, on the
one side, nor preserves a firiend, on the other.

CXCIV.
AS long as a Prince continues in a neutral condition, every one endeavors to
caress him, and to draw him to his party, and consequently he is honored, and
not only enjoys his neutrality in quietness, but also makes an advantage of it
by the presents he receives from those who would lure him into their Alliance;
whereas if he has once declared himself, he has lost the satisfaction of being
a spectator of the difference, and one of the contending parties must look upon
him as an enemy, though the reasons and motives he had to appear against him be
never so plausible.

CXCV.
IT is a hard question to decide, whether be the more ambitious person, he who
is desirous to keep what he is possessed of, or he who endeavors to make new
Conquests. For many times great alterations are caused by him who is peaceably
possessed, in regard the fear of losing begets in such persons the same
inclinations, which they have who would conquer. Nay sometimes, he who is
possessed does not think himself secure, if he be not always in a readiness to
make new acquests, and to do that, there is a necessity of having forces, and
those must be in action, answerably to the ambitious desires of those by whom
they are maintained.

CXCVI.
THose who are entrusted with the administration of public offices, or the
government of Provinces ought to have these three conditions; to wit, That they
have ^ tenderness and affection for those who are under their jurisdiction;
that they be invested with sufficient authority to constrain, where it is
requisite; and that they be persons remarkable for their justice and valor.
But with this precaution into the bargain, that they who are advanced to the
Government of others be such as have been in their younger days governed and
directed by others.

CXCVII.
IN all the resolutions of this world, there is an intermixture of good and
evil; God having so ordered it, that men might be the more sensible of the
imperfection of their present state. But it is the part of a prudent person to
counterballance the good and evil, and to embrace that resolution wherein he
finds either less evil, or more good.

CXCVIII.
SInce man is to look on his own good and preservation as his main concern, he
ought not in reason to be taxed with any inconstancy, when upon the vicissitude
of human affairs, he also admits some change in his designs and procedure, yet
continuing constant and resolute as to the end he had proposed to himself. And
this is but to follow the example of good Pilots, who being bound for such a
Port, yet upon alteration of wind and weather seem to change their course, but
still in the midst of the tempest they mind the prosecution of their voyage,
and the preservation of the Vessel.

CXCIX.
GOod Soldiers require a good Captain, he being the guide of all, and the
success or miscarriage of a design depending on his action and conduct. Thence
came the Greek Proverb, that an Army of Deer having a Lion in the head of it,
is more terrible than an Army of Lions headed by a Deer. But it is however
requisite, that both Commanders and Soldiers should be good, that it may not
happen as Caesar said going against Pompey, that he went against a Captain
without Soldiers; and afterward going against Afranius that he was to en^gage
an Army without a Captain.

CC.
THere are four sorts of men who are always mentioned with honor. First, they
who have been highly successeful in the establishment and promotion of true
Religion. Secondly, those who have been the founders of States and Kingdoms,
and settled the Government thereof by good Laws. Thirdly, they who have been
Successors to the last mentioned, and have made great dilatations of the
Empires which they found so established. And lastly, persons who have been
great Promotors of Literature, and Patrons of learned men. On the contrary, the
teachers of a false Religion or destroyers of the true, the disturbers of
Government, and the enemies of Learning and Virtue, have been, through all
ages, infamous and detestable.

CCI.
A People which has been accustomed to live in servitude, being left to their
own liberty, may be likened to a Beast that has been kept in a Park, which
having once got out of it, will be continually mischievous, till at last it be
either destroyed or brought into its former restraint.

CCII.
WE ought to be very moderate and cautious in the commendations of persons. For
as it is natural for any one, to resent his being disparaged, so, on the
contrary, excessive, commendation (besides the hazard it implies of his
judgment who commends, and the greatness of his merit who is commended) is
many times offensive to him who hears it. That portion of self love, which
every one has, even though he is not sensible of it, makes us immediately apply
to our selves the commendations and discommendations which we hear given to
others, and confequently we imagine our selves concerned therein, though they
are not purposely directed to us.

CCIII.
WHen the Prince has fortified himself with the allyances of excellent
Captains, valiant Soldiers, Arms, Money, and strong places, his next work must
be to weaken the Forces, and to defeat the designs of the Enemy; and that is
done more slowly or with greater expedition, according as occasion offers it
self, which is the source of every great and transcendent action.

CCIV.
IT seldom happens, that a virtuous man will be ambitious of sovereignty by
indirect ways, though his aim therein may be good; and that a wicked person
being once become great, will ever use that authority well, which he has
attained by evil courses.

CCV.
THough a Successor in Government be not fully so remarkable for his virtue as
the person whom he succeds, yet may he maintain the state in the same grandeur
he found it, by the virtue of his Predecessor, and make his advantage of the
others labors. But if it happen that he does not live long, and that he be
again succeeded by one that does not follow the footsteps of the former, such a
State must needs degenerate. So, on the contrary, if two persons, both eminent
for the greatness of their virtue, happen to be immediate Governors of the
same Province, they commonly do great things, and give a smart stroke to the
firm establishment of their Government.

CCVI.
II is a thing out of all controversy, that if there be not Soldiers where
there are men enough, it proceeds from some defect in the Prince, and not from
that of Nature, or the situation of the Country, or genius of the Inhabitants.
And thence it comes, that wise Princes keep up the exercise of War even in the
times of peace.

CCVII.
IN a well-regulated Commonwealth, the good Services and merits of Citizens
shall make no plea for their Crimes, if they be of any importance. For rewards
being appointed for well doing, and punishment for miscarriages, it is an
aggravation of their lapses who have done well, that they have done so, and
therefore if they do amiss, there is no account made of their former virtuous
demeanor.

CCVIII.
HE who would reform. a City, to the general satisfaction of all its
Inhabitants, should endeavor what he can to retain the ancient Customs, and
that course of life which the people was traditionally inclined to, that it may
not seem to the Generality, that there is any alteration in the Government,
though really there be, and that the constitution thereof is a quite different
thing from what it was before. For it is the humor of the Populace, to be
contented and laid asleep with that which seems, as much as with that which
really is; and many times there are greater disturbances occasioned by that
which seems to be, than there are by that which really is.

CCIX.
THE vice of Ingratitude proceeds either from avarice, or distrust. When
therefore a Prince or State sends out a General upon some important expedition,
and the other grows highly into repute thereby; such a Prince or State is
obliged to acknowledge and recompense the service done them. But if, on the
contrary, they dishonor or affront him, avatice prompts him to commit some
inexcusable fault, and so he brings himself into perpetual infamy.

CCX.
AMbition has so great an influence over the heart of man, that it keeps a
perpetual possession thereof. The reason of it is, that man's disposition being
naturally inclined to desire all things, and his desires always excessively
surmounting the means of obtaining them, proves a continual occasion of
discontent and repining. Thence proceeds the variety of men's conditions,
inasmuch as their laboring to augment, and the fear of losing what they are
possessed of, occasions Quarrels, Animosities, and Wars, and those are the
forerunners of the ruin of one Province, and the aggrandization of another.

CCXI.
THat Prince who would keep up his Estate in a flourishing condition, will not
only be careful in the removing of present scandals, but also use his utmost
industry in providing against such as may happen. In regard that if he make
timely provision against them, they are easily reformed; whereas if the evil be
grown up to a head, the remedy comes too late.

CCXII.
IT is not to be admired, that those Princes who are very powerful and have a
numerous issue should have their thoughts much bent upon War; and that, either
out of a motive of honor, or to make provision for their progeny, by Military
Employments, or foreign Governments, if they have Colonies in remote parts of
the world; or lastly to prevent the disturbances which may be occasioned by the
different pretensions of younger Brothers.

CCXIII.
THE wise servant ought to imitate the excellent Physician, and foresee what he
should hope or fear, neither hoping nor fearing more or less than is
convenient, so that he may always know whether his hope be in its augmentation,
or at its full height, or in its declining state, and accordingly prognosticate
what he is to expect. Being thus precaution'd, he will have his Judgment as it
were in his hand, not suffering it to be heightened by hope, or to be depressed
by fear: and so he will prudently manage the Affairs of his Master, whose
advantage. he minds equally with his own repute, in the Negotiation wherein he
is employed.

CCXIV.
PLato would have the devoir of a good Citizen to consist in these four things;
to wit, that he should be prudent in diserning well what is most conducive to
the common good, as well as to things present, as to come; that he be just, in
distributing to every one what is due to him; that he be virtuous, in
surmounting the fear which commonly obstructs he exercises of virtue; and
lastly, that he have an absolute sovereignty over his affections.

CCXV.
THE shortest and surest way for Princes to make a mutual discovery of their
different designs, is that of Ambassadors, especially if they be persons of
great repute either upon the score of the Grandeur of their Masters, or that of
their own Virtue. For it being their business to treat always with great
persons, and diligently to weigh the actions, deportment, words, and advices of
those with whom they negotiate, and also those of the Prince himself, they from
the present conjuncture of affairs infer what is most likely to come to pass
afterward.

CCXVI.
WHen men propose to themselves the doing of some thing of great importance,
they ought, with all the industry they can, prepare themselves for it, that
when opportunity offers it self, they may be ready to put their design in
execution. When therefore all the preparatives are cautiouslly made, there
should be no discovery made thereof till the opportunity of action does it; and
then if there be a neglect in the execution, it argues that the persons
concerned therein were not sufficiently prepared, or wanted courage to carry it
on.

CCXVII.
DIstributive Justice in a political Government ought to be regulated according
to Geometrical proportion, to wit, according to the quality of persons:
otherwise, it is not justice: as we see, that infamy to a person of mean
extraction amounts to little, but to one nobly descended, it is the most
indigestible punishment. That Magistrate therefore who proceeds to the
cognizance of merits and miscarriages, favors and disgraces, by the same
measure, not considering the diversity there may be between some persons and
others, according to their several qualifications, is defective in the
understanding of his duty; in regard, that persons of noble birth are
discouraged by the ignominy of being reduced to an equal rank with their
inferiors, and those, of the meaner sort, finding themselves treated as
persons of better extraction, grow thereby the more insolent and insupportable.

CCXVIII.
WHen the Forces of a Prince are regulated by prudence and conduct, they do
admirable things, securing his own concerns, and those of his friends, causing
confusion and astonishment to his enemies.

CCXIX.
IT may easily be observed by a person who shall examine things present with a
reflection on the past, how that in all Cities, and among all Nations, there
are now the same inclinations, and the same humors, as were heretofore. So
that it is no hard matter, for such an Examiner, from the things past, to
foresee what may happen in any Commonwealth, and consequently that Prudence
advises the practicing of the same remedies which were used by the Ancients.
But in regard those considerations have either been neglected, or not fully
comprehended by such as read, or if they have been read, they have not been
understood by those who govern, it follows, that the same scandals and
misgovernments happen at all times.

CCXX.
THE only way to make a City flourish is to use all possible endeavors to
supply it with Inhabitants; and that is done either by love or force. It Is done
by the former, when the ways to it are free and secure to strangers who are
desirous to make their habitations there; by the latter, when the neighboring
places are destroyed, and the Inhabitants thereof obliged to transplant
themselves thither.

CCXXI.
A Small Republic cannot safely be possessed of a City that is stronger and
greater than it self. For otherwise its case would be like that of a Tree,
whose branches being too weighty for its boal, weaken it so that the first
blast of wind lays it on the ground.

CCXXII.
A Prince or Republic should submit to any terms rather than have recourse to
that Nation from which it has assistance. For there cannot be a more plausible
occasion for a Prince or Republic to possess themselves of a City or Province,
than when they send their Forces for the defense thereof.

CCXXIII.
OF all Estates that is the most miserable, whether it be the case of a Prince
or Republic, when they are reduced to such extremities, that they can neither
accept of a Peace, nor carry on a War. Such is the condition of those who on
the one side are over-crush'd by the conditions that are proffered them of a
peace, and on the other being obliged to continue the War, are forced to become
a prey either to those who are their Auxiliaries, or to their Enemies.

CCXXIV.
THE welfare of a Government consists in this that the subjects be so kept in,
as that they have not the power, nor any reason to make a disturbance. And this
is done, either by making all secure in depriving them of the means of doing
evil, or gratifying them so well, as that they may not have any plausible
reason to desire a change of Government.

CCXXV.
THE Prince who is set upon by another greater than himself, can hardly commit
a greater error than to refuse all overtures of accommodation, especially when
they are offered him; in regard that what is proffered cannot be so
inconsiderable but that some advantage accrewes to him who accepts of it, and
is considered as part of a victory obtained by him.

CCXXVI.
AMong the marks whereby it may be known what condition a State is in, we are
to consider the correspondence there is between it and its neighbors. For when
it is so governed, as that its Neighbors to gain its friendship become its
Pensionaries, it is a certain argument that such a State is in a flourishing
condition: but when the neighbors that are inferior to it, are as so many
Suckers thereto, perpetually draining its Exchequer, it is a great sign of
weakness or want of conduct, or corruption in the Government.

CCXXVII.
MEN in their actions, especially those of importance, ought to consider, what
is most convenient to be done, and to accommodate themselves to the present
conjuncture; for they who either through an unfortunate election, or out of a
mutinous humor can admit of no acquiescence with the present time, live for
the most part in a wretched condition, ever repining, and vainly expecting a
change of affairs.

CCXXVIII.
THat some men are successful in their undertakings, and others not, it is to
be attributed to their compliance or discomplyance with the time proper for the
execution thereof. Thence is it that we say some men proceed in their actions
inconsiderately, and as if they were surprised, while others do nothing without
a previous circumspection and scrutiny into all the particulars that may occur
in their deportment.

CCXXIX.
THat Commander who would have a City obstinately defend it self, or an Army
once engaged to fight it out to the last man, ought above all things to
insinuate into them a persuasion of the necessity there is of fighting.

CCXXX.
THE wise Chieftain who proposes to himself the conquest of a Country or
Province, ought to measure the difficulties he may meet withal, by considering
the Necessity, which may force the Inhabitants of the Country to defend
themselves, answerably to the greatness of the necessity in those who are to
defend themselves against him, to make account that his expedition will be more
or less difficult.

CCXXXI.
AMong other points of Military Discipline, a wise Captain ought to be
especially careful, what persons they are who take the word from him; and to
take order that his Soldiers believe not any but their own Officers, who are
not likely to say any thing to them but what they are entrusted withal. For
want of a punctual observance of this point, incredible disorders have many
times happened.

CCXXXII.
IN a Military expedition, it is much better to send one single person, though
endu'd but with ordinary prudence, than two together, though very valiant
persons, invested with equal authority.

CXXXIII.
SOme Cities and Provinces, which have held out against all extremities of War,
have been reduced by some extraordinay example of generosity, humanity, or
chastity. Of this there are many examples in the Roman Histories.

CCXXXIV.
HE who is over-earnestly desirous of being loved, if he exceed ever so little
in the artifices of insinuating himself, becomes contemptible; and, on the
contrary, he who is over desirous to be feared, if he exceeds the true measure,
becomes odious. He who can observe a mean in these procedures must be a person
of a great and exemplary virtue.

CCXXXV.
THE only way to avoid the infamy or danger which is consequent to the giving
of counsel, is, to take things moderately, to give advice without passion, and
to defend it with modesty; So that the Prince or City, who receives and follows
the advice may do it voluntarily, and not seem to be over-sway'd by the
importunity of him who is consulted.

CCXXXVI.
THE wise Captain who has to do with a new Enemy, whose reputation is great,
should make a previous trial of his Soldiers, by small engagements with the
Enemy, before he comes to the hazard of a pitched Battle, to the end that by
such prelusory skirmishes there may be an abatement made of that terror, which
the noise and reputation of such an Enemy might have raised in them.

CCXXXVII.
TO use Stratagems and circumventions upon all other occasions, raises a
dislike of the person using it; but in Military concerns it is otherwise, in so
much, that he who subdues his enemy by a stratagem, is as highly commended, as
he that does it by force.

CCXXXVIII.
A Resolution taken up with too much precipitancy, or an over earnest
affection, proves for the most part unfortunate. The former allows not the
time to ruminate on the things which are to be considered; the latter takes up
the mind so, that it heeds not any thing but what immediately press upon it.

CCXXXIX.
A Man is much more concerned at a pleasure or dipleasure newly done him, than
he is at a signal kindness, which he had received some considerable time
before. Thus a man's immediate exigences make a much greater impression upon
him, than either the remembrance of that which is past, or the foresight of
that which is to come.

CCXL.
BEsides many other misfortunes which must attend a Prince who is neligent in
the affairs of War, these two are most obvious, to wit, that he cannot be
respected by the Soldiery, nor repose any trust in them. To remedy this, there
are two expedients; one relating to the Body, the other to the Mind. The former
requires the following of the noblest and most generous sort of exercises, such
as hunting, whereby his person is enured to the supporting of all
inconveniences, and he is enabled to observe the advantages and situation of
places. The latter consists in the reading of Histories, and, in them,
reflecting on the actions of excellent men, and how they demeaned themselves in
their wars, examining the occasions of their Victories, or losses, and above
all, in imitating those whose great Characters Time has transmitted to us.

CCXLI.
IT is greater wisdom for a man to be accounted poor, though some shame be
consequent thereto, provided he do not incurhatred or contempt, than to gain
the title of a liberal person by rapine and injustice, which are ever attended
by infamy and aversion.

CCXLII.
HE who thinks to advance himself by his dependence on a great Person, and is
desirous to be employed by him, ought to keep as much as he can possibly in his
presence. For ever and anon, there happen occasions, wherein he recommends some
affair to him who is next at hand, which he would not do, if the other were to
seek: and he who misses the beginning of his advancement does many times
forfeit his access to great things.

CCXLIII.
IN the particular accidents of War, Chance (which is commonly known by the
name of Fortune) has a greater influence than in other humane actions. For the
different situation of places, the advantages of encamping, the diversity of
the air, diseases, want of money, scarcity of provisions, spies, guides, false
intelligence, the contrivances of public Ministers, and diverse other things
occasion an infinite variety in the occurrences of War.

CCXLIV.
IT is more probable, that an experienced Sea Commander, who has been accustomed
to fight against winds, waves, and men, should make a good Captain at Land,
where he has only men to deal withal, than that a Land-Captain should make a
good Commander at Sea.

CCXLV.
THose very persons, who attribute most to Virtue or Prudence, only that they
might exclude what is attributed to Fortune, cannot deny but that it is an
extraordinary chance, for any man to live and flourish at such time, when those
Virtues are in esteem for which he is most recommendable, or to be concerned in
such an occasion, as where they are most necessarily to be practiced.

CCXLVI.
THE Ministers and Favorites of Princes, if they are wise, ought to procure
all the fair correspondence that may be between them and their neighboring
Princes, and withal to raise in them a tenderness and affection for their
subjects.

CCXLVII.
IT being every man's case at some time or other to stand in need of another
assistance, where there is no precedent obligation upon the score of benefits
received, nor any consideration of intimate friendship, or alliance, the person
soliciting ought, for this reason, to make it appear, that such his request is
of great advantage, or at least not any way prejudicial to him whom he expects
liberally to grant his desire; then he is to make him sensible, how
transcendently he will be obliged to him. And where he cannot urge any thing of
this nature, he ought not to be disgusted, if he does not obtain what he
desires.

CCXLVIII.
IN all affairs, it is requisite first to use reason, and afterward force. In
military designs therefore, it is of greater concern to set ambushes for the
Enemy, than only to avoid his. The more a man governs himself by reason in any
affair, the more he advantages himself.

CCXLIX.
A Man makes a greater complaint when an injury is done him contrary to reason,
than when a violence is done him by force: for an injury has place between
those who are otherwise equal in condition; but force is a mark, that he who
uses it is more powerful, than he on whom it is used.

CCL.
WHen we prepare our selves to go against our Enemies, we should make account,
that the preparatives on their side are as great as those on ours, not
promising our selves any more success for the faults which we imagine they have
committed, but rather presuposing, that having their senses, and judgment about
them, they have provided for their affairs, as well as we have done for ours.

CCLI.
A Wise man ought not to conceal the advantageous advice which he has to give
his Country, merely out of the uncertainty there is of its being put in
execution; for time will discover the integrity and prudence of him that gave
the advice, and withal the temerity and extravagance of those who rejected it.

CCLII.
THough the act of Clemency should prove beneficial to the person by whom it is
exercised, yet does it sometimes tend to his prejudice. But this happens
according to the subject on which it is exercised. For when it is done to a
multitude, it proves so much the more beneficial, the more the obligation
conferred thereby is multiplied, it being in a manner impossible, that a
numerous party having received a benefit, should conspire together to be
ungrateful to so great a Benefactor; whereas one or few particular persons may
be of so malignant a disposition, as to fall, immediately after the reception of
a great kindness, into that horrid vice of ingratitude.

CCLIII.
THE best way for a Captain to inspire his Soldiers with an obstinate
resolution of fighting, is, to put them out of all hopes of safety, otherwise
than by fighting. And that resolution is augmented in them by the confidence
they have of their Comanders experience, and the love they bear their Country.
Diverse other inducements may concur, but the most pressing consideration is
that which forces them either to conquer, or die.

CCLIV.
THE accomplishment of every enterprise is much more difficult than the
beginning of it; since the latter may be the effect of some lucky accident, but
the former requires resolution, experience, and conduct. Thus a Vessel may
weather out a Tempest at Sea, but when it comes near the Port, the Pilot shows
the utmost of his skill by reason of the narrow passage into it.

CCLV.
IT is a great presumption, in any person, how much so ever he may imagine
himself in favor with his Prince, to be over-forward in giving him advice. For
the reflectons of Sovereigns being many times fixed upon things of a nature
transcending the capacities of such as are about them, it happens, that they
are secretly dissatisfied when they seem in some measure pleased. It is
therefore the prudence of a Courtier, to be always so cautious, in offering
his advice, as that there may be a presumptive probability, of its not becoming
prejudicial to the Offerer.

CCLVI.
WHen a person, who thinks himself in savor, is of a sudden discountenanced,
he should not give the least admission to murmuring, disgust, or animosity;
but, reflecting on what might be applicable to him, upon the score of
miscarriage, endeavor, by the arts of insinuation, and complaisance, to
recover himself into his former station, in the Princes affections.

CCLVII.
THere are two eminent requisites, in those, who are concerned abroad, as
public Ministers. For, if they do not give evident proofs of their vigilance,
sedulity, and sufficiency, in managing the Negotiations wherein they are
entrusted, as also of their perspicacity, in foreseeing what influence they may
have on posterity, there is a great deficiency in the discharge of the trust
reposed in them.

CCLVIII.
THE main design of Government is prudentiallity carried on, and advanced, when
there is an unanimity of counsels amongst those who have the administration of
public affairs. But when they are divided amongst themselves, and promote
different interests, it argues a dangerous crisis.

CCLIX.
GReat are the calamities consequent to War. The Treasury of the Prince is
exhausted: Commerce is obstructed: and the devastations, committed in a short
time, are not repaired, without a subsequent Peace, of many years continuance.
And such must needs be the condition of the many Countries, now the seat of the
present War.

FINIS.

