THE PHOENIX, SEPULCHER and CRADLE, IN THE HOLY DEATH OF THE Right Honorable
Isabella, Theresa, Lucy; Marchioness of WINCHESTER.

By J. D.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCI.

A SERMON UPON The Death of the Right Honorable Isabella, Teresa, Lucy,
Marchioness of Winchester.
JOB XXIX. xviij. In Nidulo meo moriar, and sicut Palma multiplicabo Dies

I will die in my little Nest, and I will multiply my Days as the Palm Tree; or
the Phoenix; as some translate it, both from the Hebrew, (...) and the Greek,
(...).


PREFACE.
STrange Expression! Illustrious Lords and Ladies; wherein Job joins Death with
Life, the Cradle with the Sepulcher, and Dust with Immortality; to teach us,
That as the Palm Tree lives again in its Branches, and the Phoenix is born
again of her Ashes; so shall the Just arise again from Death, and multiply
their Days as the Sand of the Sea: In Nidulo moriar, and sicut Palma
multiplicabo Dies. I made choice of this Noble Expression, to allay, in some
sort, the Sorrow which I perceive in your Countenances, for the common Loss of
the Right Noble Lady, Isabella, Theresa, Lucy Stafford, Dowager to the most
Noble John, Marquis of Winchester.

But, as Painting is never more at a Loss, than when it goes about to represent
the Sun; for, though the Works of Painting outdo those of Nature, and that
with the delightful mixture of Colors, it represents the Enamel of the
Meadows, and the Beauty of the Fields, all its Art seems to fail, when it goes
about to express the least Beam of that glorious Planet. Eloquence, in like
manner never shows it self more deficient, than when it attempts to set forth
the shining Virtues which Crown the Just,

None then, I hope will wonder, if I make Use of the Comparison of the Phoenix,
to give a general Notion of the holy Departure out of this Life of the
Illustrious Isabella. This heavenly Bird, that never touches the Earth, (such
love it has for Heaven,) is a perfect Representation of the Change which the
Resurrection shall cause in our Bodies: For, according both to Sacred and
Profane Writers, she builds to her self a Sepulcher or Cradle, since she dies
therein, and is there born again. Tumulum mortui, vel Incunabulum resurgentis
dixeris; Ambr. Lib. V. Hexam 23. De Fide Resurrectionis. Then setting Fire to
this Funeral Pile, made up all of Aromatic Wood, she burns her self in the
Flames, and is born out of her own Ashes, and rises again; and recovering new
Vigor, soars as formerly, in the Plains of the Air, (an unparalleled Object
of Admiration,) with the Oars of her Wings.

Behold an Emblem of what happened to our Noble Isabella: She died in a
Sepulcher of Incense and Myrrh; that is, of Love and Pain; and born again of
this Cradle, she, with the Phoenix, re-assumes a new Life; In Nidulo meo
moriar, and sicut Palma multiplicabo dies. O happy Death! But, O more happy
Resurrection! O wonderful Metamorphosis! O divine Transformation, which makes
this most Christian Lady die to old Adam, and die to her self, that she may
live to Christ, and say with the Apostle, I live, not I; but Christ lives in
me, Gal. 2.20.

The Division.
But give me leave to break off from this Comparison of the Phoenix, to come
directly to the Two Christian Virtues which make up the proper Character of our
Noble Marchioness, provided I can but Pencil them out.

1. Her profound Humility in her Greatness. 2. Her heroic Constancy in her
Afflictions.
But, as we cannot see the Sun without Light, neither can we view the shining
Virtues of the Just without the Light of Grace; which that we may more
effectually obtain, let us interpose the Intercession of that Blessed Virgin
who was filled therewith, when the Angel said to her, Ave Maria.

PART I. Her profound Humility in her Greatness.
GReatness is the Proper and true Character of God, and is so natural to him,
that even in humbling himself, he cannot divest himself thereof. He is so
great, that he neither can have a Companion, nor Equal, as earthly Princes, who
share their Power and Greatness with their Children, or their Favorites:
Wherefore, when the Prophet would praise him, he is contented to say, Our Lord
is great, and his Greatness has no Bound!, Psalm. 144.3. And in this, the Great
Ones of the Land are the Noble Representations of God.

The right Honorable and most Noble Lady, Isabella, the Marchioness of
Winchester, was Great in all the Conditions of her Life. First, She was Great
in her Birth, as being born of Two the most Illustrious Families of Great
Britain: For, She being Daughter to the right Honorable William, Viscount
Stafford, lineally descended from the Great, Noble, and large-spreading Family
of the Howards, and consequently of the High and Mighty Princes, the Dukes of
Norfolk, Earls of Surrey, those Lords High Admirals and Marshals of England,
the Conquerors and Thunderers of Scotland.

Great she was also by her Mother's Side: For, being Daughter to the right
Honorable Mary, Baroness by Descent, sole Heir and Countess of Stafford, she
is again lineally descended from the right Ancient, most Noble, Wealthy, and
ever Pious Family of the Staffords, flourishing formerly in the highest Rank
and Degrees of Honor in this Nation; and whereof Robert Stafford, Baron of
Stafford, was Lord High Steward of the Household to King Edward the Confessor.
This Robert's Posterity grew up yet more Illustrious, not only by being
ingrafted into the House of Lancaster, and into that of the Famous Godfrey of
Bullen; but also by a long Succession of Signal Heroes, both in the Church and
State; such as Ralph, the first and renowned Earl of Stafford, with his
Glorious Posterity, the Henry's, Dukes of Buckingham, whom we may style, The
Maker of Kings. And from such a bright Constellation of Soldiers, Statesmen,
Earls, Dukes, Admirals, High Chancellors, Archbishops, and High-Constables of
England, is lineally descended the Highborn Isabella, Theresa, Lucy Stafford,
the Mournful Object of our present Grief.

Great she was again, by her noble and holy Marriage; being ingrafted into the
Ancient and Noble Family of the Paulets, and espoused to the right Noble John,
Marquis of Winchester, and first Marquis of England. Now Marriage being a
communication of all Rights both Humane and Divine, Wives are in the same
degree of Honor and Greatness as their Husbands; so that she was the first
Marchioness of England. For it is a constant Maxim in the Law, Vxores coruscant
Radiis Maritorum.

Great she was also in her Personal Perfections, both of Body and Mind. Great
for her Beauty, hereditary in the Two Illustrious Families of the Staffords and
Howards, till her Piety found ways to impair it by Penance and Mortification.
Great in her Wit; which was sharp, quick, solid, and capable of managing the
greatest Affairs; as it was soon perceived by all that had the Honor to
converse with her. Nor was this Divine Spark of her Soul ever guilty of those
Two common Errors, incident to most witty Persons; namely, to censure the most
innocent Actions, or to ridicule the gravest things; but it only served either
to make her Conversation cheerful, easy, and obliging; or to cover and excuse
the Imperfections of others.

All this Greatness crowded up in the Breast of our Noble Isabella, was a great
Temptation to Vanity: For, the most dangerous Tentation which the Devil
presents to just Souls, is, that when they have overcome sensual Delights, and
spurned Riches, his last Assault to undo them, is Vanity. 'Twas by this
Artifice that he triumphed over the Sanctity of Adam, in seducing him by the
proposal of impossible Greatness: Ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3.5.

One would have thought he might also have overcome our Marchioness by this
Attempt, and have puffed her up with Pride, in the consideration of her
Greatness. For, next to Crowned Heads, nothing is greater in England, than the
Nobility; and it is not to flatter them, when we say, That they are, in a manner
only one Degree lower than the King or Queen: And I may safely add, That
amongst all the Nobility of Europe, none enjoy more valuable Prerogatives, than
the Nobility of England; and that amongst our Nobility scarce any have been
more Illustrious. I am sure, few or none of more ancient Origin, than the Noble
Family of the Staffords.

Nevertheless, all this Greatness hindered her not from being one of the
humblest of the Nobility, and an excellent Example to all her Sex: For, never
had Person of Honor more esteem for Humility, than the Series of her Actions
spoke her to have. Nay, her whole Life seems to have been spent in the exercise
of this so singular a Virtue. And first, she was humble in her Attire; always
appearing in a Dress so plain, that her very Clothing was a Condemnation of
the vain Ostentation which most Women place in their Apparel.

Garments are the Reproaches of our Sin, as well as Remedies against Shame and
Pain. Whilst Man was innocent, he had no other Clothing, but Original Justice;
and as it was able to resist all sort of Weather, it fenced him as well against
Cold, as Heat; but when he lost Innocence, he was ashamed of himself, and not
being able to bear the Rebellion of his Body against the Mind, he was forced to
cloth himself, not to behold, says St. Austin, an impudent Novelty, which was
the just punishment of his Rebellion.

That War which Creatures wage against Man, to revenge their Creator, gave him
likewise new occasion to cloth himself: For as the Elements disorder
themselves, to punish him, and the Seasons become intolerable, by the excess
either of Heat or Cold, he was forced to have recourse to Garments, as Remedies
to the violence of these two intolerable Evils. Nevertheless, as if we had
forgot, that the Use of Clothing is a Punishment of our Sin, we turn it into
an Ornament; we make our Clothes instrumental to our Pride, and, as it were, to
insult over Divine Justice, we make up thereof our most subtle Vanity.

The Nobility and Gentry enhaunce therewith the Pomp of their Greatness; they
distinguish themselves from the Commons, by the Lavishness of their Clothing;
they reserve to themselves Scarlet, Furrs, and Coronets, as infallible Marks of
Nobility, and in great Ceremonies they endeavor to raise admiration and
respect in the Minds of the People, by the Pearls and Diamonds which cover
their Robes: But our humble Marchioness, who had learned from Christian
Religion, that Clothing is but a Supply of lost Innocence, never put on, but
what was mean, thereby to honor the Divine Justice: She chose plain Stuffs,
instead of rich Silks; being more concerned to appear like a Penitent in the
sight of God, than like a Peeress in the eyes of Men.

As she was humble in her Clothing, so she was no less in her Actions; since
the chief Employment of this great Lady was, either to converse with Persons of
Piety, for the improvement of her Soul; or with the poor and meaner Condition,
for the relief of their Need. Though the Poor are the most holy Representations
of Christ's Person; yet they have something that alienates the Mind, and which
mortifies our Vanity. Christ indeed excites an awful Reverence in us in his
other Types and Figures: And, as he has stamped upon them his Power or Glory,
they have Charms, that make us either reverence or love them. Thus, there are
few Christians, who honor not Christ in his chief Ministers, and, who
remembering these Words, He that despises you, despises me, Luke 10.16. fear
not, lest the Disrepect they show to Priests, may reflect upon him, who
ordained them to be in the Church.

But notwithstanding all the Care Religion takes, to persuade us, that Christ
lives in the Poor, that he accounts done to himself the Service done to them;
we find great difficulty to overcome that natural Abhorrence we have for their
Condition. We cannot abide them near us; their Prayers are troublesome, alas,
to us! And that Poverty which overwhelms them, instead of raising Pity, breeds
in us either Horror or Contempt. We must call in Faith to our assistance, to
overcome that aversness; and no little Struggle have we with our proud
Thoughts, to persuade our selves, that Christ full of Glory, is hid in the
person of these Wretches.

But our humble Isabella, who judged not of Things by Appearances, who followed
not the Suggestions of Nature, but those of Grace, and who complied more with
the Rules of the Gospel, than with those of the World, often conversed with the
Poor; she adored Christ in those slighted Members; she penetrated with the
Light of Faith, through the Meanness of their Condition, through the humility
of their Clothes, and under these Clouds did she contractedly see the
Brightness and Majesty of Christ glorious.

3. But our Christian Phoenix's Humility was not confined only to the Practice
of her Life; but Triumphed also after her Death. She was not content to
converse with the Poor whilst living; but would also rank her self with them,
when dead: For, the strict Order and Direction she gave for her Burial, was, to
be laid in the Churchyard, which is the common Dormitory of the meanest
Persons. And that she might not be distinguished in any kind from them, she
forbid any Monument to be erected, or Stone to be laid on her Grave. She knew
that Monuments are Marks of Honor, and that the Intent of them, is to proclaim
it to the World, after that we have left to be a part of it. Hence it is, that
Persons of Quality are so curious to purchase this Honor after their Death,
and to rear up stately Tombs, to serve, as Scripture says, for everlasting
Abodes to their Ashes. Sepulchra eorum, Domus eorum in aeternum, Psalm. 48.12.

But Experience and Religion taught our Illustrious Marchioness, That Burial is
the last State of Christian Penance; That Tombs are the Chambers of
Forgetfulness; as Scripture styles them, Terra Oblivionis, Psalm. 87. And
accordingly they steal out of remembrance those they cover, and draw a black
Line over the Glory of Mortal Men. For Death having spoiled them of their Life,
takes still delight to plunder their Reputation She then being truly dead to
the World, tanquam mortuus a cord, Psalm. 30. held, That, as a Christian is
intombed, so ought he also to be forgotten.

Holy Soul! You served a King who is too just to let your Humility pass
unrewarded. And since you are so ingenious, to conceal your self from the Eyes
of Men, God will take care to make you known to Angels. Since you withstood the
Allurements of wordly Greatness and Honor, he will stamp upon you true
heavenly Glory. And, since you reconciled Greatness with Humility, the lower
you humbled your self, the higher you shall be exalted.

This first Victory, Christians, is a Pledge of the second she shall win: For,
we cannot doubt, that the Right Honorable Isabella of Winchester, who was
humble in Greatness, will be constant also in Afflictions: That if it, which I
am to show you in my next, and last Part.

PART II. Her Constancy in Afflictions.
THough all Virtues have their Attractives to Good, and sufficient Charms to
make them appear amiable even to those that practice them not: Yet Constancy,
or Fortitude, like Saul among the People, appears super-eminently graceful.
Justice indeed is cried up, even by its Persecutors; Prudence is adored by
Politicians; and Temperance is admired by all Men: But, all these Virtues hide
their Heads, when Constancy displays its Beauties: These Stars vanish when this
Sun appears; and People cease from looking upon Justice in Princes, Prudence in
Politicians, and Temperance in Philosophers, when they consider the Courage of
a Person unfortunate, yet innocent.

If we will believe the Philosopher Seneca, there is nothing on Earth more
worthy of God's looking on, than a Person who withstands Sorrow and Misfortune:
Ecce Spectaculum dignum! ad quod respiciat intentus operi suo Deus. Sen de
Prove. cap. 2. God despises all that Glory which dazels our Eyes; he looks upon
the Magnificence of our Palaces, but as the Spoils of Quarries and Forests; he
looks upon the Pyramids, which add to the wonders of the World, but as Marks at
which his Thunderbolts are often levelled. And those great Armies, which make
whole Provinces groan, either by reason of their Numbers, or Disorders; he
looks upon these great Bodies, I say, as Swarms of Bees, that decide their
Quarrels by fighting.

But God delights to look upon a noble-minded Soul, that grapples with Sorrow,
who beholds her Father born away in the manner, as it is known to all, without
any agitation of Mind, and, who in the loss of Honor, Life and Liberty,
preserves still her Courage undaunted. This is a Spectacle that ravisheth the
very Eyes of God, that makes the Angels to emulate her Glory; This is an Act of
Constancy not to be laureated on Earth; all under Heaven is too small a Reward.

This, Christians, is the true Character of our Spiritual Phoenix, Isabella of
Winchester, who in one Circumstance, methinks passes even the Constancy of
Job. For, her Noble Family, in losing their Fathers Life and Goods, forfeited
also their Honor. What Hardship, what Shame! I appeal to you, Lords and
Ladies, for a Person descended for so many Ages, from a long and glorious
Succession of Heroes, to lose in a moment the Flower and Glory of her Family?
To be debarred the Entry of the House of Lords, and to be banished from the
Noblest Company in the World! This Punishment of the Loss of Honor, was held
so sharp, that it perverted great Number of the Primitive Christians, says
Tertullian, who yielded sooner to Shame, and Loss of Honor, than to Pain, or
Loss of Life; ante Pudori, quam Dolori cessinius, Tertul. de Scorp.

Nevertheless, our Heroic Lady, drawing strength from her Misfortune, blessed,
like holy Job, God's Justice, who tried her; his Providence, which exercised
her; and his Mercy, which sanctified her: She said with Job, Our Lord gave it,
our Lord has taken it away, Job 1.21. And she behaved her self in that
Misfortune with so much Constancy, Resignation, and Patience, that we may
safely say of her, what Scripture said of him, In all this Isabella sinned not
in her Lips, Job 1.22.

2. But as she gave signal Proofs of her Constancy, in the Loss of her Noble
Father; so she gave no less Marks of her generous Mind, in all her languishing
Sickness,

If we may judge of a Thing by its contrary, we must acknowledge, That of all
Natural Goods, there is none more sweet nor dear, than Health: It Is a Harmony of
the Elements and Humors; it is a Representation of Peace; it is a Pledge of
future Bliss: And, to declare it in a Word, with St. Bernard, it is a Benefit
that comprehends all the Goods of the Body. Omnia Bona Corporis Sanitas; Bern.
Sermon. De triplici genere Bonorum, Therefore, the Just, who make a Present to
God of their Health, and who restore it to him, when required, show no small
Mark, either of Humility, or Constancy, That was the last Trial of Job's
Patience: And when the Devil had ravished away both his Goods and Children, he
questioned not to triumph over his Patience, by depriving him of his Health.

Pain then and Sickness was the Trial of our humble Isabella. An Hectic
Fever, by its secret Burnings, kindled a Fire in her Breast, with all the
Indispositions that attend that Distemper; for, the Fire which burnt her,
consumed her. But though Fire is of a quick Nature; yet do not you think,
Illustrious Auditors, that it soon consumed her, or that her Sufferings were
but short, nor that the same Month, saw either the beginning, or the end
thereof? No, her Sufferings lasted almost Three Years, whilst the end of one
Pain was the beginning of another, according to the Tragedian's Expression;
Finis alterius Mali, gradus est futuri. Diseases seemed to agree together, to
exercise the Patience of her Soul, and contrary to the Laws of Nature, set all
together upon that innocent Patient.

Divine Savior of Isabella, why did thou abandon her to such a lingering
Pain? Why did thou not succor her, who did so often succor thee, in the
Person of the Poor? Why did not thou strengthen those Hands which have been
so fruitful in good Works? Why did thou not relieve that oppressed Breast
which was so tender to the Miseries of others? Why did thou not refresh that
parched Mouth, which has so often blessed thy holy Name? Finally, Why did
not thou give Breath to those shrivelled Lungs, that always panted and breathed
after thee?

O Christians! God knows how to treat his Friends most to their Advantage. And
therefore our heavenly instructed Phoenix, left to God the Care of her Life,
knowing well, that Sickness is the Daughter of Sin, and Mother of Death.
Valuing then more God's Glory, than her own Interest, she found Content in her
Pain; She knew that God's Justice is satisfied by our Sicknesses, that his
Power appears in our Infirmities; that his Mercy is seen in our Recoveries.
Besides, Sickness does wean us from the Earth, and (bereaving us of the Use of
Pleasure,) prepares us for a holy Death; which was welcome to our courageous
Heroine, even under any shape whatsoever, under the most horrid Forms, whether
shameful, cruel, or lingering.

3. Hence, Though Death is as frightful as unavoidable; yet this most Christian
Lady esteemed Death rather a Favor, than a Punishment. And though this may
seem a strange Paradox to those that have their Hearts wholly wedded to this
Life; yet is it a Maxim approved of by Christians, and embraced by all that are
of the Faithful. If Death is frightful, because it is the punishment of Sin,
it is also pleasing to good Souls, because it is now the Child of the Cross.
Death has changed Nature, since it was consecrated in the Person of Christ, who
overcame that Monster by dying, defeated it with the Cross, and triumphed over
it, when Death seemed to triumph over him: Mortuus ille, Mortis Interfector,
says St, Austin.

Death has now forgone those dreadful Names, which caused Terror to assume
those pleasing ones of Sleep, from which we shall awake refreshed; of Passage
to eternal Bliss; of Sacrifice, which God requires of us, adds St. Austin, and
whereby his Justice is appeased, Mors quae in Lege Naturae erat Poena Peccati
facta est in Lege Gratiae HOSTIA pro Pecoato. So that what was formerly a
Torment, is now become a Favor; and what was formerly the Cause of our Fear,
is now become the Subject of our Hope. No wonder then, if our Pious Lady, who
knew these Truths, was free from the Fear of Death. Nay, looking upon Death as
rather the end of her Sins, than of her Life, she had Courage enough, even to
desire it.

If there is any occasion, where Christians have the Advantage over Profane
Philosophers, it is chiefly in that which concerns Death. For, not only they
fear it not, but they even desire it: One would think, that the same Virtue
which makes them faithful, makes them courageous. Wherefore Tertullian,
defining what Christians are, says, It Is a sort of Men distinct from all
others, by their readiness to die; Genus Hominum Morti expeditum. Tert. in
Apolog. Never more content than when nearer their Death: They have always this
Thought imprinted in their Minds, and this Desire engraved in their Hearts.
Maids, adds St. Ambrose, who are naturally timorous desire Death amongst us;
and the Theclas, Agnes and Pelagia's ran to Martyrdom, as the others ran to a
Ball, or Comedy: Apud nos, and Puella de Mortis appetentia, usque ad Coelum
erexere Virtutum gradus, Ambr. Lib. 2. Ep. 7.

Our incomparable Marchioness was of the same Mind. Her Love for Christ, caused
in her a Desire of Death, and to leave her Body, to go and enjoy her God: And
thus, as the Phoenix, springing out of her Ashes, she may multiply her Days,
and never see the End of her Happiness. Sicut Phoenix multiplic tbo Dies.

The Close.
SInce then this Bird of Paradise, the Illustrious Isabella, Theresa, Lucy
Stafford, Marchioness of Winchester, was humble in her Greatness, constant in
her Afflictions, let all Christians profit by so rare an Example: For, as a
Heathen said formerly, The Great Ones are born to give good Example: Magni nati
sunt in Exemplum; Vell. Paterculus. Let us learn from this Noble Lady, not only
not to fear Death; but even to desire it. It Is but little, Christians, not to
fear Death, since the very Philosopers overcame that Fear. We must grow
familiar with this Monster, which amazeth those that never beheld it. We must
learn to die whilst we live. Nay, since we are Christians, let us change our
Fear into Desire, our Hatred into Love. And being Heirs of God made Man, who
changed the Punishment of our Crime, into a Sacrifice of Piety; lets desire
what he desired; let us love what he loved; and lets give him, in dying, Marks
of our Obedience: Non terreant Crucifixi haeredes Mortis Supplicia. Cypr. Sermon.
De Coena Domini.

But as for you; of the Noble Family of the Staffords, give me leave to tell
you, That you are bound not only to honor her, as a Person of Signal Piety;
but also to love her, as your Sister and Relation; being united by the
strictest Bands of Friendship in the world; because you are Children of the
same right Honorable Father, and of the same Illustrious Mother; because you
were bred up together in the same Family; because you are all Members of the
same Body, quickened with the same Spirit, and inflamed with the same Love. And
though I hope she is now among the number of Blessed Spirits; yet she that was
formerly a tender Sister, slights you not now: But, as Joseph in his Greatness,
still preserved Love for his Brethren, though unworthy thereof; she still
retains Love for you, who so justly deserve it.

But join Imitation with your Love: For, it is in vain you love her, if you
resemble her not. Homage, without Imitation, is injurious to those that receive
it. You are more bound to imitate your Ancestors, than others; because, being
your Domestic Patterns, their Condition takes away all Excuse, and their
Actions ought rather to be your Laws, than Examples. Order then your Lives
according to hers; make use of that good Example she has left you, in becoming
like her, humble in your Greatness, (and constant) in your Afflictions; to the
end, that being partakers of her Virtues on Earth, you may pretend to the
Glory, which we hope she enjoys in Heaven, and like this Spiritual Phoenix,
multiply your Days of Happiness, for all Eternity. Amen.

She Departed this Life, Sept. 2. 1691.
FINIS.

