A SERMON PREACHED at the FUNERAL OF Mr. John Bigg.

To which is added, Another SERMON upon the same Subject.

ALSO, A NARRATIVE of Mr. BIGG's CONVERSION, etc.

By R. DAVIS, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for ROBERT PONDER. MDCXCI.

TO THE READER.
INstead of an Epistle Dedicatory, I shall only briefly acquaint thee with the
Reasons that induced me to print these Sermons: and why they came forth so long
after they were preached. I have sometimes ceased to be a Friend to the Press,
and never intended to print them at all, though often put upon to do it: But
the Lord, the Redeemer, whose Blessing and Power made Clay and Spittle to open
the Eyes of the Blind, was pleased to own these so, as to make them of great
use to several. Their Entreaty, with diverse others, prevailed with the Widow
of the Deceased, to importune me further, so that her Importunity joined with
theirs obtained upon me, at least to redeem (when I could) now and then a
little time from the great Work of Christ, that is upon my Hands to set them in
order, and so venture them into the World. There fell in also another cogent
Motive, viz. The Consideration of the false and lying Stories scattered through
City and Country concerning me and the Doctrines I preach, made me willing to
let all know (if they please to read) what those Doctrines are, and so they may
make a better Judgment afterward. And I do assure thee these Sermons contain
the chief Substance of what I preached here in the Country: Therefore I have
made some Additions hereunto, and Alterations suitable to my main Scope in
preaching this Year past. Had the Men of the World only cast Dirt, it would
have been more tolerable. Better could not have been expected from them, but to
act according to their Nature. But this has been piercing, that the Truths of
Jesus have been wounded in the House of Friends. Here a sufficient Occasion is
given for a pathetick Lamentation; But tell it not in Gath, and publish it not
in Askelon, etc. Whatever Blows some aim at one another, they all fall upon
their holy Profession. whilst a too eager Vindication is persued of our good
Names and Reputation from undue and unjust Calumnies, The Name of Jesus and his
Gospel may be exposed to greater Reproach. This made me choose to lie still
with a Gag in my Mouth, whilst I was, and am still clothed with Sambanettoes,
than use the Methods I might to assert my wronged Innocence, leaving it to God,
the Judge of all, to vindicate his Name and Gospel in his due time, and in his
own way (which I am certain he will.) And as for me, let my Name lie in the
Dust, provided it may make for the Honor of Christ, and the Furtherance of his
Gospel. I am endeavourring to learn this Lesson, to rejoice in Reproaches (from
whatever Tongues they come) as well as in Infirmities for Christ's Sake; and I
would press after that meek Spirit of the Gospel; that being defamed to
entreat, viz. To entreat Christ on the Behalf of my Defamers, and entreat them
in the Bowels of Mercy to lay aside their Enmity against the Lord Jesus his
Truths and VVays.

Reader, I shall add no more, but commend thee to God and the Word of his
Grace, which is not only able to translate thee out of Darkness into the
Kingdom of his dear Son; but also build thee up therein, and give thee an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified. And now the God of Peace, that
brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep,
through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make thee perfect in every good
Work to do his Will, working in thee that, that is well-pleasing in his Sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. BIGG, Gent.
1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. 55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory?

56. The Sting of Death is Sin; and the Strength of Sin is the Law.

57. But Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.


OUR Great Apostle in this Epistle of his, having answered several Cases of
Conscience to the Church at Corinth, in this Chapter, refutes that dangerous
Error, that denied the Resurrection of the Dead.

HE founds his Argument for the overthrow of the Error, and the Establishing
the contrary Truth, chiefly upon the Resurrection of a buried Jesus. Having
prosecuted this from v. 12. with the Intermixture of other Mediums; and also
exhortatory Inferences to v. 35. he there states the Adversary's Objection in
these Words, With what body do they come again?

THIS Objection he answers shaving rebuked the Objector with the Title of a
Fool, v. 26.) from the Nature of Grain thrown by the Sower into the Ground,
rising into a Crop of beautiful Corn, pleasant to the eye and useful for food:
Further, showing and explaining the difference between human Bodies and the
Flesh of Beasts, Birds and Fish, and the difference of their Glory from the
Terrestrial and Celestial Bodies, even the difference between Celestial
Bodies themselves in Glory.

HAVING managed this, from v. 36, to 42* he there applies it to the case in
hand, showing in v. 42, 43, 44. That the Bodies of the Saints are sown in
Corruption but raised in Incorruption. Sown in Honor, but raised in Glory,
etc. This he repeats, varying his Phrase, v. 53, 54. And draws in this
Inference in the Close of the 54 v. Death is swallowed up in Victory; which
Inference he confirms in a way of triumph, in the Words of my Text.

O Death, where is thy Sting? etc.

IN which words you have the Apostle triumphing in the Person of every dying
Believer, wherein are contained these Parts.

1. THE Apostles Triumph, in v. 55.

2. THE Cause of it. 1st. laid down negatively, v. 56. The Sting of the
Believer's Death being pulled out by the Abolishing of Sin, which is Death's
Sting; and the Reign of the Law over him, which is the Strength of Sin,
positively laid down in v. 57. viz. A Victory being obtained over Death,
through our Lord Jesus Christ; which the Apostle mentions with Thanksgiving to
the Almighty.

IN handling these Words, I shall only insist on the Triumph or Ovation in v.
55. and the rather because the Prosecution of the Truth that shall arise from
that Verse, will reach and take in the chief Matter contained in the following
Verses.

IN these words, you have, as was aforementioned, the Believer's Triumph over
Death, and that in a twofold Respect. 1. In respect of his Soul. O Death, where
is thy Sting? 2. In respect of his Body. O Grave, where is thy Victory? Without
spending further time in opening the Words; they afford us this Doctrinal
Observation.

Doct. THAT every true Believer, in the Moment of his Death, can Triumph over
Death, and the Grave both in reference to his Soul and Body.

I shall divide this general Doctrine into Two Branches, and speak to each
part. The First is this.

THAT a Believer in the Moment of his Death can Triumph over Death in reference
to his Soul.

FIRST (as the Lord shall enable me) I will prove this Truth, and then explain
and illustrate it.

FOR Proof, I shall only at present give you two places of Scripture.

Rev. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write; Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: yea says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow them. Where First
you have the Truth plainly asserted, -- Blessed are the dead, that die in the
Lord, or in dying in the Lord. 2ly, The Reasons of it. 1. They rest from their
Labors. 2. Their Works follow them, i. e. They will meet with their Prayers
and Duties entered on the File for their review as an additional to their
eternal Delights. 3. You have here insinuated the Certainty and Importance of
this Truth. 1. The Commandment to write, they are weighty things usually
committed to Ink and Paper, and that for duration also. -- Littera Scripta
manet. 2. The Commander, the Spirit. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying write,
etc.

THE second place is, Heb. 4:19. There remains therefore a Rest to the People
of God. Their rest is not in this World but in another; and they enter upon it
in the moment of Death; therefore they have then ground of triumphing.

I shall add to these the Experiences of Three Worthies. The first was David's,
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: For this is all my
Salvation and all my Desire; although he make it not to grow. David was now on the
brink of Eternity, taking a view of the past and present Disorders of his House
and Heart, yet rejoices and triumphs in the view of the Covenant of Grace, and
his Interest in it, and the influence it had on the Eternity he was entering
into. The second was that of faithful Stephen, that glorious Proto-Martyr; who
when the Stones that dashed out his Brains and Life, flew about his Ears, cried
out triumphantly, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, Acts 7.59.

THE last I shall mention, is the Experience of the blessed Apostle Paul, Phil.
1.23. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better. But very pat and pertinent to the purpose, 2
Cor. 5.1, etc. He being harrassed with Labors, Perils and Sufferings, at the
apprehension of the time of his departure being at hand, triumphs thus, v. 1.
For we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens:

HAVING thus, from the Holy Scriptures of Truth, proved the Doctrine, I shall
proceed to the explication of it.

IT IS undeniable, That Contraries do the better illustrate one another, as
black Spots make a white Skin shine the brighter, and a Black-a-Moor, is a Foil
to set off an European: Therefore I shall illustrate this Truth, by another
Contrary, that I might the more emphatically explain it; which is this: The
triumph of Death over an Unbeliever, and thus lay down the Doctrine to be
explained.

DEATH in Death triumphs over the Unbeliever, and the Believer triumphs over
Death in dying.

I shall begin with the first Branch, viz. Death in Death triumphs over the
Unbeliever; and (as the Spirit of the Lord shall assist me) show you in what
respects.

1. DEATH triumphs over the Unbeliever's sensual Pleasures. Where are now (says
Death) your vain Pleasures that you wantonly rolled your self in, in your life
time? What are become of those jolly, merry frolicksom hours, that you lavished
away with your frothy Companions? Where are now your drunken Cups and Glasses,
and your riotous Feasts, with which you so often drowned and glutted your
sensual Appetite? What do they profit you now? What pleasure do you find now
from your former repeated acts of Lusts and Beastliness? What relish now from
those brutish tickling of swinish Delights? What does all your vain Merriment
avail you now? What fruit have you from those Things, that formerly you
reckoned your Heaven and Happiness? Instead of Pleasures, you now shall have
your belly full of everlasting Torments. Now your merry Moments are turned into
an eternity of Sorrows. Now, instead of swimming in Wine, and luxuriously
feeding on Dainties, you shall swim, world without end, in fiery Streams of
burning Brimstone. You shall drink your Tears, and feed on your own tortured
Flesh in endless and never-ceasing Misery. Now, the flame of your Lust is
succeeded by a hotter flame, even the flame of divine Vengeance. Now, instead
of your frothy Spirit and vain Laughter, you shall have enough of howling,
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Nay, you shall carry with you all your Lusts and
Corruptions to Hell, not to please you, but to pain you. The same Water that
the Fish swims in with delight, if beated over the Fire, will be the Fish's
torment.

THE Sins you acted with pleasure in the World, you shall act the same in great
measure in Hell, but to your eternal torturing: You shall there act your
Revenges, but wound none with its poisoned Arrows, but your own Soul. You shall
there have your covetous Desires enlarged, as wide as the Hell you are in; but
it will only be your pain and punishment: Your own Lusts there shall be the
Flames that will scorch you. Come thou, trembling Wretch, will Death say, to
the place of sinning and the place of punishment; and thy very sinning shall be
thy punishment. Oh! then will Death insult in the words of the Wiseman,
Whatsoever thine Eyes desired, thou keptest not from them: Thou withheldest not
thy Heart from any Joy, Eccles. 2.10. And now all will be Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit to thee, part of v. 11. And also in those Words as are written, Luke
12.19. Thou have long said to thy Soul; Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink and
be m^rry, -- But, thou Fool, I am come this Night to require thy Soul of thee,
part of v. 20. And to add no more, Death will only change the Moods and Tenses
in that portion of holy Writ, Eccles. 11.9. insulting thus; Thou have rejoiced,
Oh! Young Man, in thy youth; and thy Heart has cheered thee in the days of thy
youth; Thou have walked in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes; but know thou now, thou trembling Wretch, that for these things, I am
sent by the God of Justice, to bring thee into Judgment.

CONSIDER this, thou voluptuous sensual Wretch, thou Drunkard, thou Bellyslave,
thou unclean Beast, thou Blasphemer, thou Swearer, thou Reveller and
Persecuter, consider this, and ponder it in thy Heart, thou must 'ere long come
upon a Deathbed; this greisly King of Terrors will stare thee in the Face. The
Sting, that now at a distance thou see not, when he comes near thee with open
mouth, thou will then see and be dismally affrighted at that fatal Fork. Death
and thee must meet 'ere long, and thou know not but this dismal meeting may
be 'ere a week roles about, and how will thou like such an horrid greeting,
such a black welcome, such a terrible language, and bitter insultings as you
have heard. How do you relish and savor thus being triumphed over in a dying
moment. Oh! consider this, and look out after the Remedy.

2. DEATH triumphs over the Pride of the Soul. The Pride of the Soul is either
a Glorying before God, or a Glorying before Men. As it is a Glorying before
God, I shall reserve that to speak to under it is proper Head, which is to
follow. The Soul before Man prides in its Endowments, either outward or inward,
Death will then thus Glory over their Glory. Where are now your aerie Honor and
bubble Dignities? What is become of your State and Grandeur? Where are now your
Crowns, O Kings, your Scepters, O Princes, I have tumbled them in the Dust, and
my Spade has levelled them with the Earth. Could not your Purple, or your
Fures, your Swords and Maces and Magistrates, defend you from my Arrest? What
signified all your Guards, your Officers and Attendance who would not protect
you from me? What a bussel and fluster have you made? How have you set all in a
Flame about you, and waded through blood and slaughter, cruelty and oppression,
and all manner of villainy to attain such a Degree of Honor, and where is it
now? My breath has blown it all away. Where is now O Spluttering Monarch, that
great Conduct, that deep Policy, wherewith you conquered other Nations and
enslaved your own? What could you use none of it to avoid my Attacks? Where is
that imperial frown that used to overawe the gaping, cringing crowd; I have
divested it of all Majesty, and made it now meaner and simpler than the look of
an Idiot, so says, the wiseman. A Living Dog is better than a Dead Lion, Eccl.
9.4. Thou cunning admired Politician in thy Neighborhood; that made all thy
Neighbors tremble at thy fraudulent Wit; that studied'st only how to
overreach, cheat and impoverish, that thoughtest to hook in all to thy self?
Why usest thou not some of thy cunningness to deceive me too? Why did not
thou play the Politician with me also? What do all thy Tricks and Artifices now
advantage thee? Thou now perceivest that one event happens to the Wise, and
to the Fool, Eccl. 2.14, 15. As it happens to the Fool, so it happens to
the Wise. Go now and try what all thy wisdom and cunning will do in Hell?
Consider this you, that are Great and Honorable in the Earth. You that are
cunning to deceive in your Neighborhood, that admire and flatter your self,
that you can overreach your Neighbors in bargaining. There will come an hour
of Death; that will efface and tarnish all the Glory of your Honors,
Dignities, Wisdom and Policies. There is no overreaching Death. There is no
such thing as being too cunning for the Grave. Death will soon tumble down all
the pageantry of your own Dignities and Abilities, that you have set upon your
own Conceit. The Fire of God's wrath will soon burn up your Cobweb Policy: For
this your Wisdom is your folly. Methinks this should be as cold Water upon all
burning Pride, and a check and rebuke to all your glorying, that very few of
your Class and complexion are chosen out to eternal Life. Your very Wisdom,
Parts and Dignities for the most part, mark you out for eternal Misery. This is
the Sum of what the Apostle Discourses, 1 Cor. 26.27, 28, 29. For you see your
calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh: not many mighty,
not many noble are called, etc. read that portion of the Holy Spirit of Truth,
consider it seriously and tremble.

3. DEATH triumphs over the Riches and Possessions of a Man in such
Heart-rendring words as these. O where are now, Man, all thy vast Possessions?
What signify thy Heaps of Gold and Silver? Had thee amassed together all the
Treasures of the Indies; they could not bribe me or buy me off. Eccles. 4.8.
Thine eye has not been satisfied with riches in all thy life time. Now thou
must carry none with thee to the Grave. Naked came thou out of thy Mothers
Womb, and naked shall thou return thither. -- Job. 1.21. Instead of thy many
Fields, Farms and Tenements now thou must be content with so much Ground as thy
Body can measure out. Now instead of thy many Bags of Gold and Silver thou must
rest satisfied, to be wrapped up in grosser Clay. Now farewell, gilded Coaches,
fair Palaces, splendid and well Furnished Rooms, stately-Beds, and all other
costly Furniture: Now for all the Numerous Troop of cringing attendants; thou
shall be surrounded with an Host of Vermin, and for the very same end with the
former attendants, to feed upon thee too. What is become of all thy Glory and
Excellency now? it is all laid in the Dust. Job. 20.6, 7, 8, 9. Though thy
excellency did mount up to the Heavens, and thy Head reach unto the Clouds.
Yet, thou shall perish for ever, like thine own Dung: they which have seen
thee, shall say; where is he? Thou shall fly away as a Dream, and shall not be
found: Yea, thou shall be chased away, as a Vision of the Night. The Eye also
which saw thee shall see thee no more; neither shall thy place any more behold
thee, and v. 11. Thy Bones are full of the Sins of thy Youth, which shall lie
down with thee in the Dust. Thus will Death then triumph.

CONSIDER this, thou that forgetest God in the midst of thy plenty and
abundance, that notwithstanding thy Pleasures and Treasures and great
Possessions, thou must enter to eternity, poor and wretched, miserable and
naked, unless thou art clothed with that Royal Robe of Christ's Righteousness.
No riches then will suffice to enrich thee, but the Gold tried in the Fire, i.
e. an interest in Jesus; who was made the perfect Captain of Salvation through
sufferings. No Raiment will then so cover thee, as to hinder the Appearance of
the shame of thy nakedness like that white Raiment, viz. the Righteousness of
God, which is of Faith. And without that Wedding Garment, thou will stand
speechless at the Bar of God, and then shall be bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness; where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22.13.

4. DEATH triumphs over a Man's own Righteousness. Men are apt through the
Horrid Pride of their Natures, to trust to their own doings for Salvation; and
it is but too too common for Sinners in a State of Nature to apply Plasters of
their own making to the Smarting Wounds of their Consciences, and to usurp
Christ's Royal Prerogative of speaking Peace to their Souls; whereas, thus says
the Lord, Isa. 57.19. I create the Fruit of the Lips Peace; I speak Peace to
them, that are a afar off, viz. in a Natural State, and to them that are nigh,
viz. them that are made, Ephesians. 2.13. nigh to my Father by my Blood. But over all
such white washed, painted Pharisees, will insulting Death Glory thus. Thou
Pharisaical Fool, thou refusedst Fire from God's Altar, viz. the Lord Jesus,
Joh. 5.40. Thou would not come to him, that thou might have Life; but thou
have kindled a Fire of thine own; nay like Nadab and Abihu have brought strange
Fire. Isa. 50.11. Thou have compassed thy self about with sparks. Thou have
walked in the Light of thy Fire, and of the Sparks that thou have Kindled. This
thou shall have now at God's Hand by my Dart to lie down in a Bed of Eternal
Sorrows. Thou were for digging to thy self a Way to Heaven; and have refused
the, Heb. 10.2. New and living way, that the God and Father of Christ had
consecrated; that is to say the Flesh of Jesus, or his suffering raised,
glorified, human nature; and though, Isa. 57.10. Thou wast wearied in the
greatness of thine own way; and have often tried in vain with thine own Doings
and Works of the Law, and could not; but in spite of thy Teeth, the Fire of
Hell that was in thy Conscience, would be often blazng-out, yet saidest thou
not, there is no hope; but would be still hoping for Life from the Dead;
unprofitable Works of the Law; Thus thou did sind the Life of thine hands;
therefore thou wast not then grieved; but still did stifle all thy
convictions: But now thou shall grieve, and eternally grieve without
intermission; now thou will not be able to stifle thy convictions, but they
will tend and tear thy Soul with unspeakable horrors for ever and ever.

NOW Psa. 16.4. Thy Sorrous shall be multipled, that did hasten after other
Gods, and other Idol Righteousnesses. Thou leftest no stone unturned, no way of
working unessaied to procure warmth and life to thy Soul, Isa. 57.5. Thou did
inflame thy self with Idols under every Green-Tree, and did let thy Heart run
out for Holiness and Salvation upon every Branch of, in it self beautiful
morality. Isa. 57.6. Among the smooth Stones of the Stream was thy Portion,
they were thy lot, even to them thou have procured a Drink Offering, etc. i. e.
Thou have set up thy Duties for Saviors, have trusted in them, and so fallen
down and Worshipped them. Isa. 57.7. Upon a Lofty and High Mountain have thou
set thy Bed: Even thither wentest thou up to offer Sacrifice. i. e. Thou did
confide in thy splendid towering Profession, and did make a God and Savior
thereof, The 10. v. of this Chapter, is a Key to open the the rest of the
Chapter.
by laying the whole stress of thy Soul upon thy outward Profession, without
Faith in Jesus. Isa. 57.8. Behind the Doors also and the Posts have thou set
thy rememberance, i. e. And have set up a Record within thy self for the
Goodness of thy Estate from thy Family, and Closet Prayers; things good in
themselves, but become Idols of Indignation, when advanced into the Room, and
Throne of the Mediator. Isa. 57.8. Thou have discovered thy self to others,
then to Christ, and art gone up; but thou would not come to Jesus, that thou
might have Life: What are now become of thy Doings, thy Works, and thy
Righteousness? Isa. 57.12. I will declare thy Righteousness and thy Works: for
now they shall not profit thee. Cry now to thy Morality and Reformation; lift
up thy suppliant hands to thy Duties and Profession. Cry aloud to thy Prayers
and Tears; thy convictions and thy terrors of Conscience: Fall prostrate to thy
wishings, and to thy wouldings, and thy desires to desire to have thy Sin
inwardly mortified under the obstinate refusals of Christ and his
righteousness. And try these thy Idol Saviors whether they will now hear thee.
Isa. 57.13. When thou cryest, let thy companies of Saviors deliver thee; but
the wind now carries them all away, and vanity takes them. Had thou trusted
in the Lord Jesus Christ, thou should now have, Isa. 57.13. possessed the
Land, and should have inherited his holy Mountain, even the everlasting
Hills in the Highest Heavens. But now thy Mountains of self righteousnesses,
which thou wentest up to, to offer Sacrifice to set thy Bed, and to build thy
Nests upon; and, which thou thoughtest eternally strong, I thrash them to dust,
and my breath blows them away like chass. All thy Pharisaical Doings, do now
leave thee; and nothing of them goes with thee to Hell, but the unpleasant
rememberance thereof to torment thee, that thou wast such a Madman to set up
these instead of Christ the only Savior; as if thy good Duties, good
Professions, good Frames, and good Privileges had undertook for thee from
eternity had obeyed the Law for thee with a God-like Obedience, and suffered
the cursed death of the Cross for thee, were raised up again, and by the
Fathers right hand were exalted to be Princes and Saviors to give repentance
and remission of sins, and were now ever living at the Fathers right hand to
make intercession for thee. Why call thou these good Saviors? There is none
good in that sense; but he that is God. Thus I say will Death then insult in
the dying moment, and glory over, and tread under foot like Dogs-meat, all the
ragged Righteousnesses of Men and Women.

THEN consider it seriously, thou, that with the Pharisee in the Gospel,
gloryest before the Lord, that thou art not as other Men, an Extortioner,
Unjust, an Adulterer, or even as the Publicans and Sinners, and layest hold on
this for eternal Life. Thy Conscience is not purged, but choked and bribed with
false Counters, of outward Reformation. The unclean Spirit of Debauchery may be
has been cast out, and thou think that enough; but the Spirit of the Lord,
the Gospel-sanctifier has not been there at work; for he walked through dry
places. The Rest and Peace of Conscience thou have obtained are not right; for
it is written, he sought for rest, and found none. The House, i. e. Thy Person
has been swept by Reformation, and garnished with a fine Profession: But it is
but the strong-hold of wicked Spirits still. It Is empty of the Spirit of the
Lord. The Holy Ghost has had no in-dwelling there at all; therefore the unclean
debauched Spirit transformed into an Angel of Light, with seven other Spirits
more wicked than himself (not more unclean than himself, but more wicked) a
complete Number of evil Spirits, i. e. the Devil of unbelief and spiritual
Pride, two great Legions have returned and entered into thee; and if the Lord
does not pity thee, and discover the rotteness of thine Estate to thee, Thy
last state will be worse than the first. Ah! deluded Soul: Thou would heal
thy Conscience with thine own Medicines, thou would cover thy self with thine
own Righteousness, thou would lay thy self down on thine own Bed of eternal
Happiness; thou would climb up to Heaven by thine own Methods, and find out a
way for thy self to eternal Glory. But thou will find in Death, thy Plasters
will not stick, Isa. 28.20. Thy covering will be too narrow for thy Soul to
wrap it self in. Thy Bed too short for it to stretch it self upon; thy Ladder,
unlike Jacobs, will not reach to Heaven. Thy own way to Glory, how fair soever
a Prospect it may have at first, does so wind and turn, that at last it will
lead directly, down to the Chambers of eternal Death.

I should have improved this Branch in several uses; but having done somewhat
of that under every Head, I shall only now answer a Question, which I suppose
some, if not many, may be ready to ask under the Conviction of their miserable
and lost Estate by Nature. May be some, now under present awakenings, are
enquiring,

Q. WHAT shall I do to be saved?

Ans. I answer in the Words of the Apostles, Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, etc.

Obj. WHAT, nothing else but believe on Christ? That I do already, and did it
ever since I was born, and so do all, that are not Turks and Pagans.

Ans. I answer. First, They that say, they believed ever since they were born;
never yet believed at all.

Rea. FOR Faith grows not in Nature's Garden, neither is it born with us, But
it is the Gift of God, Ehp. 2.8. and it is written, Phil. 1.29. For unto you it
is given on the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, etc. Whence
observe, that to believe on the Lord Jesus, must be given from above: Therefore
it is not born with us.

Ans. THEY that think Believing an easy thing, I dare engage never yet
believed. FOR,

Reas. Nothing less than the Almighty Power of God in Christ, can work this
Faith in us; even the same Power that created the World, must be put forth to
an Act of Faith: 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, viz. in the Creation of the World, Genesis 1.3. has shined in our
Hearts, to give the light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. Whence observe, That to believe is to have a view of the Glory of
the Eternal Godhead, especially of the Glory of the Father's Grace and
Goodness, shining through Jesus of Nazareth. 2. That this Divine Beam of
eternal Light, is infused into the Soul by the same powerful Command, that sent
down the creating Light to inform the dark Chaos: God who commanded Light to
shine out of Darkness, etc. Nay, a greater Power must be put forth to an Act of
Faith, than to the World's Creation; because in the World's Creation there was
no Opposition, though there was Indisposition; but in the sinful Soul where
Faith is wrought, there is Indisposition and Opposition too.

Ans. 3. They that do not painfully feel the Evil of indwelling Unbelief, never
knew what Faith meant. John 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. there when the Spirit is said
to convince of Judgment and of Righteousness, he is said to convince of
Unbelief too: And wherever Faith is, the contrary Principle of Unbelief rises
always to oppose it, Romans 7.15, to the end; Gal. 4.22, to the end, chiefly v.
29. where though the Apostle speaks chiefly in both places of the contrary
effects of the working Law and the working Gospel, in the same enlightened
Conscience, yet the mutual opposition and warring of Faith and Unbelief, is
also especially included. I apprehend that to be a typical instance of this,
spoke of to Rebeccas, Genesis 25.23. Two Nations are in thy Womb, etc. This is
evident, That no sooner a grain of saving Faith is sown in the Soul, but
Unbelief, that before lurked undiscovered in the Soul, rises instantly in Arms
to war against it.

Ans. 4. They that are under no influence of the indwelling Spirit, have no
Faith; Romans 8.9. Now if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his; and he that is not in Christ, has not a dram of Faith. They that have
the Spirit, walk after the Spirit, v. 1. and are led by the Spirit, v. 14. they
mind the things of the Spirit, v. 5. and their mortal Bodies are quickened,
because of the Spirit of Christ that dwells in them, v. 11. Now they that are
never spiritually, but carnally minded, that know nothing what the indwelling
of the Spirit means, nor his blessed Influences and Operations; but are so far
from knowing all these, that they reproach and blaspheme his blessed Person and
Operations, as Whimsies, heat of Brain, Fanaticism, Enthusiasm, and the like;
how can it be said, That such Enemies of the Spirit have the Spirit? And if
they have not the Spirit, they are not only wholly ignorant of, but utter
Enemies to the Grace of Faith.

Ans. 5. Dare the Drunkard, the Swearer, the Blasphemer, the Sabbath-breaker,
the profane, ignorant, carnal, vile Person say he has Faith? His prophanity,
enmity and wickedness always give him the Lie to his teeth, and his sinful
practice is an undoubted Test of the badness of his Faith, and that he
professes a Lie, when he professes Faith in Jesus. Show me, says the Apostle,
Jam. 2.18. thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my
Works. The Heart is purified by Faith, Acts 15.9. Nay, Faith sanctifies
throughout, Acts 26.18. Faith purifies the Conversation: It Is this Grace of
God, this great Grace of Faith that teaches us, That denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, reghteously, nnd godly in this present
World, Tit. 2.11, 12. Nay, let me tell you, that such have no more Faith in
Christ, than Turks or Heathens: They have no more of Christ and his
Righteousness, than the chiming of Words in their Heads, and the sound of
Phrases rolling in their Memories: They have heard of one Jesus Christ, and
that is all; but they know him not. As to any Soul, Bellef and Conscience,
Persuasion, concerning him, his pardoning Grace and his Righteousness, they
have as little as the very Heathens, that never heard of his Name: But they are
worse than the Heathens, because they abuse his holy Name, to patronize their
Lust and wickedness.

Object. 2. BUT I can show my Faith by my Works: I reform, hear, pray,
meditate, weep, mourn for Sin, and profess: And have not I Faith then?

Ans. THOU may do all these, very commendable in themselves, yet not growing
on the root of Faith; and as trusted in, they are an abomination to the Lord.
There is a vast difference between the Fruits of Holiness flowing from Faith,
and good Works set up instead of Christ the Object of Faith. Thou may do all
these, and much more, and yet make Saviors of them, and so be void of saving
Faith, that looks to Jesus, and him alone at God's Right Hand for Salvation;
and at last be damned for idolizing thy good Works, as well as others are for
wallowing in their Lusts: For all equally refuse the Lord Jesus, and will have
none of him for Life and Salvation, but tread with, like scorn and contempt,
the offered Son of God under-foot: There Is not a Dram of Gospel-Holiness, nor
one Evangelical good Work, but what flows from Faith in the Person and
Righteousness of the once-crucified, but now ascended, Jesus at the Father's
Right Hand.

Object. 3. BUT for all my Reformation, Duties and Profession, I seek to Christ
too.

Ans. THAT is perhaps as the common Proverb runs, You will set the Cart before
the Horse. Your Duties and Righteousness shall lead the Van, and Christ and his
Righteousness shall bring up the Rear. You will put him to no other use, than
to carry the Train of your ragged Robes of Righteousness, to patch up your
Rags, and make up what is wanting in your Duties: But the Garment of Christ is
seamless, and cannot be divided; but if it could be, that his new Cloth could
be pieced to your old, the rent in yours would be the worse, Mat. 9.16. Perhaps
you are sensible of your inability to do, therefore ye look to him for
assistance to help you to do for Life: But what says the Lord, The Just shall
live by Faith, Romans 1.17. You would have him be King over you, to subdue your
Iniquities, that for your subdued Iniquities you may get to Heaven. But you
must look to him by Faith to be saved, and then mortification of Sin, and
Holiness shall be given in unto you. The High Priest under the Law had his
Mitre and Crown on his Head, and his Urim and Thummim on his Breast, to typifie
that the Lord Jesus executes his Kingly and Prophetical Office, by his Priestly
Office; and all whom he instructs and subdues, he does it by shedding in the
Faith and Hope, either more or less, of their pardoned estate through his Blood
into their Consciences* Again, Do not you seek Christ because of your
Reformation, Duties and Tears? If so, you bring your own Money in your Hands to
buy Christ; and that is quite contrary to the Proclamation the Lord makes of
Heaven's Market, Isa 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts; that is, after the
Things of the World, or their own Righteousness; for it is such thirsting as v.
2. calls spending Money for that which is not Bread, and labor for that which
satisfies not. These are summoned here to come to the Fair of the Almighty,
where glorious Commodities are put to sale, Waters, Wine and Milk. But what
price must the Buyers bring? No price at all. They that would speed in Heavens
Market, must come without Money and without price, Heb. 12.13. Esau sought to
buy Repentance with Tears, but he found no place for it. All buying in the
meaning of Christ, is but accepting, and he gives the power to do that too:
Therefore come to Christ as poor, blind, miserable, naked, vile, ungodly
Wretches, and and he will be Riches to the Poor, Eyes to the Blind, Happiness
to the Miserable, Clothing to the Naked, and Sanctification to the Vile and
Ungodly. The voice of the Gospel is for the present time, 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is
the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation. Heb. 3.15. To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your Hearts. The Gospel does not say, Go home
now, and pray, and mourn, and weep, and come to morrow, or next week, or next
month, after you have prepared and qualified your self with so much praying,
mourning, weeping, repenting and reformation, then come to Christ; but come
now; now is the accepted time, now is the day and hour of Salvation. But,
further, some may be ready to ask me,

Quest. WHAT is believing in Christ, or Faith in him?

Ans. IT would be too tedious now to answer the Question as it ought to be; I
shall only briefly thus define it, and then make good my Definition. Faith, as
strictly and properly taken, is a powerful Conscience-Perswasion wrought by
God, concerning Christ and his Things, their excellency and suitableness to the
Soul, and more or less concerning the Souls Interest in them, according to the
Word of God. Faith, in the Original, is (...), from (...) to persuade, and
really signifies a persuading. It Is phrased in Old Testament-language, in
Noah's Prophecy concerning his Children, Genesis 9.17. God shall persuade Japheth,
and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. And to the same purport it is phrased
in the New Testament; it is said to be, 2 Cor. 4.6. A light shining into a dark
Heart; which is a persuasive Knowledge. Called Romans 1.17. the Righteousness of
God in the Gospel, revealed from Faith to Faith. It Is named, Romans 3.21. a
manifestation without the Law of the Righteousness of God, v. 25. styled a
declaration of his Righteousness for the remission of Sins; and defined to be,
Heb. 11.1. The evidence of Things not seen, which are Christ and his
Righteousness, which are wholly without us, not seen by our bodily Eyes, or
natural Reason or Understanding. The Spirit in working Faith, is said to take
of Christ and his Things, and show them to the Soul, John 11.14, 15. God the
Father, as the Worker of it, so is said to reveal his Son in the Soul, Gal.
1.16. Which Expressions evidently import a persuasive Knowledge. 2dly, This
Persuasion is an inward Conscience-Perswasion, and not only an Head Knowledge,
or notional Persuasion, Gal. 1.15. but when it pleased God, etc. v. 16. to
reveal his Son in me, etc. 1 John 5.10. He that believes has the witness in
himself; i. e. a Conscience-Testimony. 3dly, This Conscience-Perswasion is very
powerful, for it instantly works a great change on the whole Man, Heart, Lip
and Life: It Is a creating Power, 2 Cor. 4.6. an exceeding great Power, Ephesians.
1.19. and it is the Declaration of the King of Heaven to the Conscience; and
where the Word of the King is, there is Power, Eccles. 8.4, etc. And (as
Divines say) in this the Soul is wholly passive, like a dark Room, that has
light let into it from without. The object of this Faith is Christ, and the
Things of Christ, as in that fore mentioned place, John 16.14. He shall
glorify me, for ^he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you, v. 15. All
things that the Father has are mine; therefore said I, that he shall take of
mine, and show it unto you. The Rule of Faith is the written Word of God, 2
Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. And this I take to be and Concomitants of this inward
revelation of Jesus, which are also called believing, which is the Souls
accepting of this manifested Jesus, and his Righteousness, venturing it self
upon him, and committing it self to him; which Acts are set forth in Scripture
by various phrases; as, Looking unto him, Isa. 45.22. Coming unto him, John
6.37. Casting our selves and burden upon him, Isa. 55.22. Staying upon him,
Isa. 5.10. Leaning upon him, Cant. 8.3. Trusting in him, and many more. And
thus I have answered this Question with all the brevity and perspecuity I
could, as the Lord has enabled me, and as time would give leave. And now,
methinks, some are ready to ask in the words of the blind Man, whom Christ had
restored to his Sight.

Quest. BUT who is he that I might believe on him, John 9.36. You say he must
be seen and ventured on; pray then who is he?

Answ. I shall answer you from the Sermons of the Apostles, preached by them
after they were endued with Power from on high. And first the Apostle Peter
tells you who he is, Acts 2.22, 23. Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God;
him being delivered by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and stain, comp. with 32. This
Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all Witnesses. 33. Therefore being by
the right Hand of God exalted, has received of the Father the Promise of the
Holy Ghost. Once more, Acts. 5.30. The God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus,
whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree, 31. Him has God exalted with his right Hand
to be a Prinee and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and remission
of sins. Add to these, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, who for the joy set before him [in the saving of Sinners] enduring
the Cross, despising the shame, and is now set down at the right Hand of God.
In short, he that was made of the Seed of David according to the Flesh (Romans
3.) who yet is God over all blessed for ever, Romans 10.5. That mighty glorious
God-Man, who was born of a Virgin, that lived and preached in Judea, Rom 8.38.
that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of
God, who also ever lives to make intercession (Col. 1.18.) the first born from
the dead (Col. 1.15.) and the first born of every Creature, the despised Jesus
of Nazareth (1 Col. 2.9.) in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily: And
all the Glory, Excellency, Beauty and Majesty that shines on Jesus of Nazareth.
is the Glory, Excellency, etc. of the Godhead. This is he, that blessed Object
of your Faith; this is he whom you must believe in. When he lived on Earth, the
Faith of his Children was more dark about his Godhead than his human Nature,
but now he is in Heaven, their Faith is more at a loss about his human Nature,
and it is to be lamented that the glorified human Nature, even Jesus of
Nazareth, is so little in the Preaching, Profession, Faith and Experience of
Gods own Children. But yet this is the Lord, whom we, through Grace, have seen
and tasted to be gracious: Will not you too, O Sinners! come and taste and see
how gracious he is? Cant. 5.16. This is our Friend, this is our Beloved, O
Daughters of Jerusalem. He is altogether lovely, Cant. 5.10. He is the chiefest
among ten thousand. He is able Heb. 7.27. to save you to the uttermost. O come
therefore and venture your Souls upon him, commit them to him; O that you would
but try him! you have tried his Patience to the utmost by your Rebellion and
Obstinacy in Wickedness. O that you would but try his boundless Grace, by
casting your selves into the Ocean of it! You must venture on his Grace, or you
must be damned. Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved, he that believes
not shall be damned. If you accept not of this offered Jesus, you despise this
only Sacrifice, and there remains no more Sacrifice for sin but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversary, Heb. 10.26.

I am now come to the second Branch, the Believers triumphing over Death.

AND 1. the Believer triumphs over the Sting of Death, and what else does
concur to make it.

2. THE Believer triumphs over every thing else in Death that is formidable.

First. THE Believer triumphs over the Sting of Death. He then can rejoycingly
cry out, O Death, I fear thee not! thou art very harmless unto me. Thou come
indeed like a Dragon, with open Mouth; but where is thy Sting? I dread not that
open Mouth, or that wide Throat. I with Joy am swallowed up of it, and pass
through it up to the highest Heavens into my Redeemers Arms. Here at this dark
Portal, I undress my self of this mortal Flesh, and fly with holy Confidence to
the Presence of the Lamb upon the Throne, and the Presence of God the Father in
him, and the bright innumerable Company above in this full Assurance, that I
shall not be found naked. Welcome Death, to dissolve and pull down this
earthly House of my Tabernacle, that so I may go to my House, not made with
Hands, the Building of God, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.2. Welcome sweet
Messenger, that come to fetch me home from this mad, confused, wicked,
raging, tottering World, into my Fathers House. I thank thee, O grim Porter!
who openest the Gates to eternal Happiness. It Is true, the News of thy Approach
did terrify me, as the Report of the Coming of rough blustering Esau, with his
armed Men, did Jacob, Genesis 32. But yet now thou art come to me, I can say as he
did, I behold thy black and grisly Face, as the Face of the Angel of God, or
the Messenger of the Lord Jesus Christ. For in thy black Face I see Beauty, in
thy grisly Terrors great Glory, In thy Dragons Mouth no Sting at all. O Death!
where is thy Sting? Thus the Believer in dying triumphs over the Sting of Death.

2. THE Believer in dying triumphs over those things that go to make up the
Sting of Death. And

1. OVER Sin. The Sting of Death is Sin, says the Words of my Text. And 1. In
its Guilt. 2. in its Pollution. And

1. OVER the Guilt of Sin. Thus the Believer in dying glories over it: O Guilt
of Sin! who in my Lifetime, since my Conversion, notwithstanding I was washed
with the Blood of Jesus, and he had obtained an eternal Redemption for me,
did often use to sting my Conscience, and thereby to fill me with Dread and
Horror, and so did weaken my Faith and Confidence in the Lord Jesus; did
strengthen the Hands of my Unbelief, in making me depart from the living God:
Did make me often come in Prayer to God as my angry Judge, and not as to my
Father, reconciled to me in Christ. And thereby did bind up my Soul, fetter
my Spirits, so that I had no freedom of Access to God through Christ: Thou
did often deal with me as the Man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho; did
wound me and strip me, and leave me half dead: Did often force me to
entertain hard, murmuring and outrageous Thoughts against my dear Lord and
Master Jesus, and my reconciled God and Father in him: Did often make me add
Iniquity to my Sin, and a carnal, loose, vain Conversation to my inward
Deadness and Enmity; and when Death approached to bring me to a State of
perfection in Glory, did represent him to me as a dreadful King of Terrors.
But now Death is come, and has executed his Office, I welcome him, and laugh
thee to Scorn. Free Grace has disarmed him of the Sting that thou would have
given him against me. I shall now no more be perplexed with thy Gripes: I shall
now plainly see my Redemption eternal, and always the same, without as much as
a Cloud as big as a Man's Hand to interpose. I shall never look off the Lord, my
Righteousness, my Sanctification and Covering, but always behold my Fathers
reconciled Face in the Face of my beloved Jesus: I shall never depart from him
any more: I shall now have perpetual Freedom and Enlargement of Soul before
him: I shall never have an hard Thought of him any more, nor ever sin the least
sin against him any more. Farewell eternally, O Guilt of sin! thou can not
enter into Heaven, where I am going. Thus I spurn thee now, mounting up into
everlasting Glory.

DEATH triumphs over the Pollution of sin, and makes a full End of Corruption
and Iniquity. Then may the Believer cry, O filthy sink of Sin! thou shall
defile me no more. How often, even since Conversion, have thou ravished my
Virgin Soul? How oftentimes a day have thou scattered thy Filth in my
Conscience, and left an envenomed Taint there? How often, when I was going to
approach an holy God, did thou appear in my Soul in thy ugly Colors, to
terrify me, and to turn me aside from the living God? Yea, and though I often
saw the Righteousness of Christ covering me, yet thou often filledst my
Conscience with such a Cloud of Filth and Stench, that that glorious Covering
was hid from mine Eyes; but now thou shall blind mine Eyes no more: I shall now
have perfect uninterrupted Visions of that spotless beauteous Garment wrapping
me round, and that to all Eternity. Not the least speck of thee shall enter
into Heaven; in my Father's House, I am entering into, there is nothing but
complete Purity and Holiness: There is not the least Atom of Dirt in the
Streets of the Jerusalem above. Here, thou filthy Load, I finally part with
thee, I shall never be defiled any more with thee. Hallelujah, Amen. And thus
the Believer triumphs over Sin; that is the Substance of the Sting of Death.

Thirdly, THE Believer triumphs over the Law, which the Words of my Text call
the strength of Sin; and the Law, or the Covenant of Works, is the strength of
sin (though it be in it self holy, just and good) in a twofold Respect. 1. It
condemns the Soul, and tortures the Conscience; so drives the Soul farther from
God, and increases the Enmity against him, and thereby puts the Soul more under
the Power of sin, enlarging and strengthening sins Dominion over it, Romans 6.16.
Sin shall not have Dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under
Grace. Where it is evidently implied to be under the Power of the Law, is to be
under sins Dominion; and this is exemplified and proved plainly and clearly in
the former Part of the seventh of the Romans, which I cannot now stay to open.
2. The Law judicially delivers the Soul up to the Will and Power of sin by way
of Punishment. Thus the Son of God is said to come in the Likeness of sinful
Flesh, and for sin, or sinning, to condemn sin in the Flesh. Sin, by the
condemning Law, has assigned it penally, as Executioner, a Power of sinning in
the Soul; from which Sentence, only a crucified Jesus can free the Soul. The
Law therefore as it is the strength of sin is a sore Exercise to the Believer,
and the strength of the old Man, or the Body of Death in his Soul all his life
time; but in his Death he may thus glory over it. Thou Covenant of Works, thou
Killing Letter in my Conscience, though I was much freed from thee by the Law
of Righteousness, which is of Faith, yet thou did still work there, Gendring
unto Bondage, opposing the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, Gal.
4.29. Thou that wast born after the Flesh, did persecute that that was born
after the Spirit, Gal. 4.30. But now the Bondwoman and her Son shall be quite
cast out. Thou did all my Life time endeavor all ways to keep up Guilt in my
Conscience, and if at any time removed, to do it away by Obedience to thee, by
legal Sorrow and Contrition, by Resolutions to amend, and greater Watchfulness
for the future. Whilst I was thereby diverted from making first Applications to
the Blood of sprinkling, so that my sin was rather oftentimes compounded for,
than in Faith washed away, in that Fountain that is opened for Sin and for
Uncleanness. Whence I was not only diverted from continual Believing into a
bleeding Jesus, but had my Conscience rather stupefied than healed, my sin made
little, harmless and familiar, and rather encouraged, than a real dying unto
it, and hence oftentimes my Soul cast into a deep Lethargy. But now I am
absolutely freed from that Yoke of Bondage Mount Sinai in my Conscience, and
shall be made for ever, to Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in that Liberty, wherewith the
Son has made me free indeed, John 8.36. Thus will the Believer in Death,
triumph over the Law as it is the Strength of sin.

Fourthly, THE Believer in Death may glory over the Justice of God, as it is
armed with Vengeance against Sinners. Though Believers are fully delivered in
their life time from the stroke of Divine Justice, yet they do often times not so
fully apprehend it: But after Death, the Believer shall see as he is seen,
apprehend as he is apprehended; and then be enabled to rejoice thus. Divine
Justice, whilst I lived, though thou wast my Friend in Jesus, yet many times I
dreaded thee as mine Enemy; but now I plainly see thou art my Friend indeed,
and that it is just with thee to justify me in the Lord, my Righteousness. Thy
Sword that was pointed at my Breast, and should have now thrust me down to
Hell, was received by my crucified Lord into his own Bowels, and I am now made
for ever to escape, Being made more than a Conqueror through him that loved me.
My dying Savior in Falling, wrested thy Weapon out of thy Hand, and made his
blessed Body a Grove, planted from thy poisonous Quiver, so that there is not
an Arrow now left to spend upon me. I now come, O Justice, in the Right of my
Lord, to sit for ever down in his heavenly Mansions; to sing Hallelujahs to
that righteous and true God for ever and ever.

Fifthly, THE Believer in Death may triumph over Satan. Satan, though a Soul is
Translated out of his Kingdom, yet through his restless Enmity, is always
seeking to devour. He has Wiles Methods, and cunning Devices of Temptations to
ensnare; imperious Suggestions, fierce Assaults, and fiery Darts to terrify:
with these several ways of Attacks is the poor Believer harrassed as long as he
lives; but in Death he can insult over all. Thus then can the Believer vaunt
it: Satan, thou have long tortured me with throwing in wicked and blasphemous
Suggestions, and then perswadedst me, to my great Terror, I had sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Thou shall no longer be able to throw in any more of
thy fiery Insinuations. I am now beyond the reach of any of thy Darts. Thou
have always endeavored to tempt me to sin, and then to make me question my
Interest: But now I shall sin no more, nor question my Interest any longer. I
shall not now be tempted any more to Despair on the one hand, nor presume on
the other. Thou dare not appear where I am going. Thou vile Satan, I shall be
disturbed with thee no longer. I shall have no further Concerns with thee, till
I come with my Lord to sit in Judgment upon thee at the great Day.

Sixthly, and lastly, THE Believer can thus triumph over the World, which is
the last thing that goes to make up the Sting of Death. Thou empty confused
World, that did use to terrify me with thy Threats, I defy thee and them now;
and wast wont to allure me with thy Flatteries: I am above their Undermining
now. I scorn thy Rattles, and thy painted Beads, and thy airy Bubbles. I dread
not now thy haggard Face; nor shall I any more be moved with thine
Enchantments. It will add to my Pleasure in my Mansions of Glory, to see thee
burnt for thy Witchcraft; I shall no more dread thy mighty Hunters, nor be awed
with thy grim Tyrants, nor be enslaved in Body, nor Conscience, by thy bloody
Laws, now be harrased with brutish Executioners. There are no oppressing
Magistrates, no Catch-poles, nor Informers in the place I now enter to. Nay,
now I tread under foot all in thee, that is enticing; I set Health, Wealth,
Pleasures, Honors, Friends, Relations and all in one Scale, and my dear
Forerunner in the other, and that Scale weighs down now to the Ground. I now
go to the heavenly Jerusalem, and that better Country, where I shall have
better Riches, and more durable Substance, better Honors, better Pleasures,
and far better Relations. Thus will the Believer then triumph over Death, and
whatsoever goes to make up the Sting of it.

BUT Secondly, The Believer can triumph over every thing else in Death, that is
formidable. To instance in one for many, Nature abhors a Dissolution, and the
Soul, though it has but a bad Lodging, does not care to be turned out of Doors.
Its tenement of Clay it cares not to be dislodged of, though its all over
tattered, and needs Repairs. It shrinks back at entering into a new way of
acting separate from the Body, when it has all the while been accustomed to act
only by such an Organ. It has been used to such a poor Garment, yet as sorry as
it is, it knows not how to be undressed of it, and made naked. Whereas now in
the Moment of Death, that is over to the Believer: It can cry then like his
Master giving up the Ghost, All is finished. It sees a better House to go to,
upon its being dispossessed of this, even the Fathers House, that has many
Mansions. And a better Garment to be clothed with, even his elder Brother's
glorious Robe of curious Embroidery: And can triumph in the Words of the
Apostle, varying a little the Form of speaking, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. etc. I now see
that my earthly House of this Tabernacle being dissolved, I have a Building of
God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. In this I have
groaned, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with my House which is from
Heaven. I am sure, being so clothed, I shall not be found naked. For I, that
in this Tabernacle did groan, being burdened, not for that I would be
uncloathed, but clothed upon. And now Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life.

THUS the Believer triumphs over this Terror of Death, and every thing else in
Death that is terrible. And thus I have finished the first Branch of my
Doctrine, viz. That the Believer, in Death, triumphs over Death, in reference
to his Soul. I should pass away now to various Uses, but time will not permit;
I shall therefore wind up this Branch with one Word of Exhortation to poor
Sinners.

O you poor perishing Sinners, over whom my Bowels yearn! In my Master's Name I
beg, that you would suffer a Word of Exhortation. You must needs be all
persuaded firmly of this, that you must once die, and you know not how soon:
You may perhaps go to bed well, and never see Morning. Would you then in that
instant of time avoid being insulted over by Death, and triumph over that cruel
Dragon, Death and his fatal Sting; then look up to that brazen Serpent, the
blessed Jesus, erected on the Pole of Gods Word, the only Hope, set before you
in the Gospel. O fly to it for Refuge! Would you glory over that King of
Terrors, and all his Dread, 2 Timothy 2.1. Be strong in the Grace that is in
Christ Jesus. Would you die the Death of the Righteous; then you must live the
Life of the Righteous; and we are told what that is, Romans 1.17. The Just shall
live by Faith. Believe in the Lord Jesus, the exalted Prince and Savior, and
his God-like Righteousness; and earnestly beg of the Lord for the Revelation of
the Righteousness of God to you from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. That so when
that Faith is going to be swallowed up of Vision, you may triumph over Death
and all its Terrors, in respect of your precious and immortal Soul.

The Second SERMON.
1 Cor. 15.55. O Grave! Where is thy Victory.
SOME of you may remember, that from the Words opened and Explained, I raised
this general Observation.

THAT every true Believer, in the Moment of his Death, can triumph over Death
and the Grave, as well in reference to his Soul as to his Body.

I divided it into two Branches; the first whereof was this. That a Believer in
the Moment of his Death, can triumph over Death in respect of his Soul, which I
have dispatched, and now proceed to handle the second, viz.

THAT a Believer in Death can triumph over the Grave, in respect of his Body.

I judge it most convenient to use the same Method in the Prosecution of this
Branch, as I did in the former, viz. to illustrate it by its contrary; and
therefore lay it down thus to be spoken to.

THE Grave can triumph over the Unbelievers Body; but the Believer can triumph
over the Grave in respect of his Body.

SINNERS are apt to make Gods of their Bodies, honoring them excessively with
Food, Raiment, Lodging, and the like; and to glory in the Health, Beauty and
Strength of their Bodies; but the Grave will trample upon all these. Instead of
delicious Wine, and choice Dainties, the Grave will fill their Mouths and
Bellies with Dust: Their Silks, and Laces, and abominable impudent whorish Head
dresses, their proud and lofty Crests shall be exchanged for stinking
Rottenness, odious Filth, and crawling Maggots. And instead of their stately
Houses and Down Beds, they must be content to take up with a dark Hole, and a
cold Bed of Clay. The most vigorous Health then is vanished; a little pitiful
Vermin can there deal with the stoutest Hector, and the strongest Sampson. The
fairest Face will soon prove as dismal there as the foulest Monster. The most
exquisite Beauty look as squallid, and as horrid as the ugliest Blackamoor; and
none shall be able to see any Difference between the rotten Skull of the one
and the other. But having spoken somewhat to these things already, and being
desirous to hasten to other Matter, I shall here put a Conclusion to this, and
only add three or four things to be considered in. Death, wherein Death and the
Grave triumphs over a Sinners Body, but the Believer triumps over Death and the
Grave, etc. I shall speak to both the Contraries together by way of Antithesis.

1. NATURAL Death to the Wicked is an entrance to eternal Death, Heb. 9.27. And
it is appointed to Men once to die, but after this, the Judgment. The Righteous
Law of God has so ordered it for Sinners, that Death, as a Sergeant shall
arrest and cast their Bodies to the Grave as to a Dungeon, there to be reserved
in Deaths Chains to the Judgment of the great Day. But natural Death to the
Godly is a Passage to eternal Glory: and Death, like a skilful Chemist, takes
their Bodies and puts them into the Alembick of the Grave, and there distills
them into pure spiritual and glorious Bodies against the great Day; but more of
this hereafter.

2. NATURAL Death to the Wicked, is a part of the penal Sentence of the Law,
Genesis 2.17. -- For in the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
The Law threatened a threefold Death, spiritual, temporal and eternal. The
Hebraism in the Original is emphatical to the Purpose, dying thou shall die. To
me having this Force dying in thy Body, thou shall die eternally in thy Soul.
It Is evident, that to the Ungodly, natural Death is a part of that punishment
inflicted by the righteous Law of God; and what Death is, the Grave is the
same. If one be the Laws Jailer to the Body, the other is the Laws Prison. But
to the Godly it is far otherwise: For as Death has lost his Sting to them, so
has the Grave: It Is not to them penal, but purely natural; the putting off the
old Adam, that the second Adam may take possession of the whole Body. The
Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. discoursing of the Necessity of the natural Death of
Believers, argues thus, That the old Adam had first took possession of the
Elect Vessels Bodies. V. 46. That what of the old Adam is there, is earthly,
and tends to Earth and Dissolution. V. 47. It being the proper Nature thereof.
V. 48. Concludes thus, that the Image of the old Adam on the Body must be
wholly laid aside, and that by Death; so that the Image of the second might
take sole and full Possession. V. 49. As we have born the Image of the Earthy,
we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly.

3. NATURAL Death is a separation of the Body from all Life; and thus it is to
the Wicked: Their Dust dwell alone in the Grave, united to nothing, only there
reserved by an Almighty Power of God, in an extraordinary way, for the Glory of
his Justice hereafter. But the Dust of the Godly in their Graves, are united to
the Body of Christ now in Heaven, and there is held still a secret
Correspondence between their scattered Dust and the Life of Jesus, who in this
sense, is the Resurrection and the Life. To make this more evident, it is to be
considered, 1. That the Person of the Believer, both Body and Soul, in the
first act of Faith, is united to the Person of Christ; yea, joined to the Body
of Christ, Romans 7.4. 2. That by virtue of this Union, the second Adam takes
Possession of the Body as well as the Soul, as proved before from 1 Cor. 15.45,
to 50. especially 46. Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual; but that
which is natural, and afterward spiritual. Observe that the Apostles Discourse
must be here confined to the Bodies of the Saints, for it is the Resurrection
of their Bodies he is a proving. 3. The Believer holds his natural Life upon
another tenure than he did formerly, even from the second Adam, by virtue of
his Implantation into him. The great Apostle Paul, in the 2 Cor. 4. declaring
how his Body had been supported in the Work of Christ, under all Perils, Pains,
Watchings, Labors, Imprisonments, etc. almost insupportable, declares the
Cause V. 10. That it was from the Life of Jesus made manifest in his Body,
repeating the same in the last Clause of the 11th. Verse, only instead of Body,
there he writes mortal Flesh: All which thus explained, does evidently prove,
that the Bodies of the Saints derive now their natural Life in great measure
from another Root. 4. As an undeniable Consequence of this, that that Life the
Body holds from Christ, does not quite vanish, as that of the first Adam does;
but is gathered up into Christ, and retreats back to him the Root, as the Sap
of Trees in Winter Time falls down from the Branches to the Root. And I take
that to be the Meaning of that place of holy Writ; or at least I may allude to
it, Col. 3.3. Your Life is hid with Christ in God, especially because of the
following Verse, when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in Glory; which Glory respects the Body as well as the Soul.
It Is to me plain that there is a secret Commerce between the Living glorious
Body of an exalted Jesus, and the Dust of a deceased Believer, which may be
further proved from Mat. 22.31, 32. The Argument Christ himself uses to prove
the Resurrection of the Dead, and the force of his Argument I apprehend to lie
here: That God calls himself the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, though dead:
That God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living, therefore, that though
Abraham, Isaac, etc. were dead, yet they were still united to the living God,
and by Virtue of those secret Beams of Life from him (the inseparable Effects
of that Union) that still corresponded and preserved their mouldered Bodies in
the Grave, they should be raised up at the last Day. This sense of the Place
seems to be confirmed from the Answer of our Lord Jesus to Martha's Objection
against the present Resurrection of her Brother, John 11.34. Martha says unto
him, I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last day. John
35. Jesus says unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, etc. As if he
should have said, thou grantest that I can raise him up at the last Day; but
how? Is it not by Virtue of that Union that is between his dead Body, and my
living Body? If then I will be his Life, and therefore his Resurrection. I am
now his Life, and consequently can be now his Resurrection. I shall add that
Argument, the Lord, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Life abides and dwells in a
Believer for ever, in his Body as well as his Soul. 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye
not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, etc. If it
be granted then, that he does still indwell in the separate Soul of the
Believer, why not in a sense in the separate Body too? He brooded formerly over
the Chaos till it was formed into a beautiful Creation; and why not in like
manner over the Dust, till the appointed time of actual Life by the Father
comes? but,

4. NATURAL Death tends to an utter Abolition. Natural Death in it self, tends
to an utter Consumption of the Body, and that by Steps retrograde to the
Methods of the first Creation. First, There was a Chaos created, and then that
disposed and disgested into a very beautiful and lovely Frame; but Death deals
thus with Man, the Epitome of the Creation, reduces the fair Structure to a
Chaos, or Heap of Dust, and then commits it to the Grave to annihilate it. And
so would the Bodies of Sinners be annihilated, especially in the universal
Conflagration; but that, as has been before mentioned, the God of Nature by his
infinite Power preserves and sits them to be Vessels of Wrath for Destruction,
and at last raises them, that they might be for ever miserable Companions to
their miserable Souls, on which he might make the Power of his Vengeance known
to all Eternity. That as the Body has been a a Companion to the Soul in
sinning, so it shall be World without end, in suffering. But as to the Bodies
of the Saints, it is otherwise. Death only sows their Bodies into the Ground,
that they might be quickened again into more glorious Bodies, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37.
compare with 42, 43. etc. And pulls down the old tottering House, that it may
be built up a more glorious Fabric in the Day of Resurrection, and they shall
arise then from the refining Alembick of the Grave, with several wonderful
Advantages; especially these five,

1. THEN Corruptibility shall put on Incorruptibility, 1 Cor. 15.53. For this
Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and when thrown into the Grave
corruptible Bodies then shall be raised incorruptible -- V. 42. Sown in
Corruption, raised in Incorruption. The Bodies of the Saints shall have no
tendency to decay any more; no more shall the Bodies of the Wicked: but here
will be the Difference; the Bodies of the Saints will be unpassible, and will
not be capable of suffering Pains; but the Bodies of the Wicked, though not apt
to decay, yet will be the Seat of eternal Pains and Torments.

2. Then Immortal shall put on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54. And the Bodies of
the Saints sown mortal, shall rise immortal. There will be no dying in the new
Jerusalem above, nor decaying, nor fading; but Bodies as well as the Spirits of
the Just being made perfect, shall endure the same in that glorious State to
all Eternity. It Is true, the Bodies of Unbelievers shall never die more; but
their Living and Continuing will be a constant Dying. They will be dying to all
eternity, but never absolutely die; and happy would it be for them, if they
could altogether cease to be. But on the Bodies of Believers, the second Death
can have no Power at all. As for instance, The last Enemy that Christ will
destroy for them, will be Death, 1 Cor. 15.26. And then Death will be swallowed
up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54.

3. THEN natural Flesh will put on Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.44. It is sown a natural
Body, it is raised a spiritual Body. There is a natural Body, and there is a
spiritual Body. Not that these natural Bodies in the Saints shall be turned
into the very Essence of Spirits; but they shall come as near their Natures as
it is possible, for corporeal Substances to come. So says our Lord himself, in
answer to the Sadduces Cavil, Mat: 22.30. For in the Resurrection, they neither
marry, nor are given in Marriage; but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. i. e.
They shall be as near to the Nature of Angels as is possible. They will be of a
purer and more incompound Substance, than the purest Elements of Fire: They
will be endued then with wonderful agility and celerity, and their motion
surpassing swift; probably they will fly then as swift as Thoughts: We
experience that our Thoughts now speed in an instant to the farthermost Regions
of the Earth, whilst the heavy Log of a Body stays behind, and can go no faster
than its Legs can carry it, or some more artificial means. But doubtless then
our Bodies, that believe will be fitted to keep pace with our glorified Souls,
in all their Motions, for the Glory of God in Christ, not hindered by Sicknesses
and Ails, nor made slow with any weakness, imperfection, or mutilation. The Sun
is swift in his race; but what is his race compared to that of the glorified
Bodies of the Saints then!

Fourthly, DISHONOR then will put on Honor, and that that is sown in
Dishonor will be raised in Glory, 1 Cor. 15.43. Then they will be in part
clothed with the Glory that is upon the Body of an exalted Jesus. It Is true,
there will be difference in degrees, though not in kind: For as there is one
Glory of the Sun, another Glory of the Moon; and another Glory of the Stars:
For one Star differs from another Star in Glory. 1 Cor. 15.41. So the Glory
on the Body of Christ, will be as the Glory of the Sun; and the Glory of the
Bodies of his Children like the Glory of the Stars, all shining in Brightness,
Splendor and Majesty, though not equally alike. When Christ appeared with
Moses and Elias in the Transfiguration on the Mount, the Glory then on his Body
is set forth, as in a Glass: His Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was
white as the Light, Mat. 17.2. So will the risen Bodies of the Saints be,
shining brighter than the Sun, whiter than the purest Light. That, that is sown
in Dishonor, as before hinted, will be raised in Glory. They that are laid in
the Earth little Infants, will be raised in full growth and perfect stature^;
they that be entombed decrepit, old and deformed, shall rise again well-shaped,
vigorous and beautiful. They that drop to the Grave poor, tattered, Servants
and Slaves, shall come out from thence rich, free and illustrious, greater than
Kings and Emperors: Then indeed in a literal sense the Eyes of the Blind shall
be opened, the Ears of the Deaf be unloosned, the Lame shall leap as an Heart,
and the Tongue of the Dumb shall sing for Joy, Isai. 56, etc. For the bodies of
the risen believers that are now wrapped up in Dishonor, shall be then clothed
with the highest Honor.

Fifthly, THEN Weakness shall put on Strength; and that that is sown in
weakness, shall be raised in power, 1 Cor. 15.43. Then the Coward shall be
valiant, and the Feeble exceeding strong; their Strength and Courage will be
very near Angelick then. We read, that an Angel destroyed an hundred thousand
in one Night; and how great, ineffably great, will be the Strength and Power of
the spiritual Bodies of the risen Saints in that day! But having spoke of this
dispersedly before under other Heads, I shall now add no more thereunto; nor
mention several other Advantages that the Bodies of the Saints shall arise
with, that I might insist on: For these are sufficient to evince, that
Believers can triumph over the Grave in respect of their Bodies.

THUS having dispatchd the Doctrinal part. I now proceed to the Application,
which I briefly intend to finish in three or four Inferences: The two first
will particularly relate to the last branch of the Doctrine: The two last will
respect the whole Doctrine in general.

1. Infer. THE first Inference is, for the Comfort of Believers against Death.
If it be so that their dead Bodies can thus triumph over the Grave, what else
is there in their Death that seems terrible? As for their Souls, they are then
instantly lodged in the Mansions prepared for them above: But if their Bodies
are thus also excellently provided for, every thing in Death is to be
contemned. Nor need we shrink at the Pangs that usually attend Death; they are
but the Cracks of a tattered House, blown up in order to be rebuilt a stately
Edifice: or rather a Groan or two at farewell, between two parting Friends that
have been long loving Companions together, but now must be separated for a
great season, that they might meet again to the greater advantage of both, and
these are the Body and the Soul. And Death is no less to be scorned coming by
his terrible Messengers, Fire, Sword, Gibbets, Poison, or the like: When he
uses Instruments, he is generally more courteous and gentle in his Dealings,
and quicker of dispatch. A torrid malignant Fever, or a Torture of several
Weeks or Months by the Stone, Gout, or Strangury, have dealt more cruelly with
a Body in dissolving it, than the Spanish Rack or Parisian Wheel have done. So
that consider Death in all its affrighting Circumstances, it need not be at all
frightful to the dying Believer.

2. Infer. THE second Inference is, for the Comfort of Believers, against the
tiresome fatigue of Pains, Sicknesses and Infirmities. The comfortable
Consideration is this: That all Pains and Maladies prepare and hasten the Body
for the place of refining; as they are Nature's Sufferings, so they are the
effect of Grace mellowing the whole Man for Glory: They in whom Grace shines
most, are commonly most infirm in their Bodies; for the Souls that are most on
the Wing for God, whose Graces are most vigorous in their Exercise, eat out
soonest the Tenement of Clay. As the painful feeling of the Body of Death
within, is the nailing of the old Man to the Cross by the new Creature, and
Corruption painfully felt and odiously seen, is Corruption a mortifying; proved
by the Apostle, Romans 6.5. where he calls the Mortification of Sin, a being
planted into the likeness of the Death of Christ; which was a painful and
shameful, as well as a cursed Death: v. 6. he calls it the crucifixion of the
old Man, and the destruction of the Body of Sin; that of Galat. 2.20, being
added thereunto, and compared with Romans 7. from the 15 verse. to the end,
particularly verse. 24. compared with verse. 25. From all which places, it is
evident, that the painful feeling of Unbelief, and the Body of Death within is
Unbelief and the Body of Death crucified, and the dying Tiger roaring in the
Soul. The inward Blows of that Nature we feel, are Stabs at Heart given to
inbred Corruption by the second Adam: So the pains Believers feel in their
Bodies are but as so many Blows the second Adam gives there to the first, in
order to drive him out, and take up the whole Room for himself. Comfort thy
self then with these words, thou sick Believer, under thy tedious malady and
sore pains, or with such arguings as these: These Pangs indeed are sharp, but
they will after yield peaceable and blessed fruits, for it is in order that that
which is earthly may be done away; that that which is spiritual may fill up all
in all; it is for the refining of Flesh and Blood; for Flesh and Blood, as now
circumstanced, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither Corruption inherit
Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. I will be patient under my greatest pains then,
since their tendency is to eat out Corruption in my Body, so that it might
inherit eternal Glory, together with my Soul, in incorruption.

THE other remaining Inferences relate to the whole Doctrine, as laid down in
the first Sermon.

1. Infer. THAT the Doctrine is a cogent motive to Holiness in Life and
powerful Godliness in Conversation. If so be that a Believer can triumph over
Death and the Grave, in reference to his Soul and Body, then the unspeakably
free, rich, glorious Grace of God in Christ manifested in him, and believed
into, must needs oblige the Man or Woman to all manner of holy Conversation.
When Men have said all they can, against the Doctrine of Free Grace, impiously
branding it with the Names of Antinomianism and Licentiousness; yet this is
undeniable from the experience of the most Godly, as well as from the Word of
the Lord, that nothing constrains to all manner of holy Obedience, like the
Love of Christ revealed to the Conscience, and the Love of the Father in his
Love. All that are most godly, can say what is said of the Woman in the Gospel;
they weep much, and do much, as she, Luke 7.44, 47. because they love much; and
they love much, because much is frankly forgiven them. This is certain, that
the inherent Holiness of the Soul, is the Strength of the Soul, and the
Strength or inward Sanctification of the Soul, depends upon looking to, by
Faith, that Grace that is in Christ. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong within,
[(...)] 2 Timothy 2.1, 5. in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, viz. at God's
right hand. It Is not said, Be strong in the Grace that is in your selves, for
that is to seek the living among the dead, a living Christ in our dead Frames,
when he is never to be found there, for he is risen, and ever lives at the
Father's right Hand, to make intercession for his Children, and a constant
steady looking to him there, always interceding, and still full of Grace and
Truth; it is that will carry on the Work of Sanctification in the Soul. The
spiritual Life of a Believer is from Faith, and maintained by Faith. It is
written, The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.38. Faith
is said to purify the Heart, Acts 15.9. to sanctify, viz. the whole Man, Acts
26.18. and Faith always respects Christ and his Grace. The Blood of Christ, i.
e. pardoning Grace in the Blood of Christ, received into the Conscience by
believing, is affirmed to purge the Conscience from dead Works to serve the
living God, Heb. 9.14. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, and has
appeared to all Men in the Gospel, but as revealed unto the Consciences of them
that believe, teaches them, that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, they
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.11,
12. And the GOD of all Grace in manifesting his Grace to the Soul, that he has
called it to eternal Glory by JESUS CHRIST does go on to make perfect,
establish, strengthen and settle the Soul: Which Expressions, comprehend all
the Work of Sanctification, in its several parts and degrees, till it arrives
to the fullness of the stature of a perfect Man in Christ Jesus. It Is apparent
from these and several other places of the holy Scriptures, that the Grace that
is in us, proportionably rises and falls to the believing Views we have of the
Grace that is in the Heart of Christ toward us, and in the Hand of Christ to
give us. To draw toward a close in this matter: This is it I am at, that our
inherent Righteousness within us, is begun and carried on by Faith in the
imputed Righteousness of Christ without us: These two are every way distinct,
yet so as the former still flows from the latter. The All-wise GOD has so
ordered it in the dispensation of his Grace, that his free Grace shall be
magnified, and the Righteousness of his Son highly valued and advanced. Were
the only use of Christ's Righteousness (and indeed that is a great use of it)
to secure eternal Glory for us, we should be tempted to have little recourse to
it by Faith; for that being once done, and our state secured, corrupt Nature
would be apt to insinuate to us there would be no great need of such frequent
viewing that God-like Righteousness without us, wherein we stand, it being that
that is so contrary to Flesh and blood. But now our Holiness in every step of
it depending upon the Righteousness of Christ being apprehended by the Soul in
believing; it must, or it ought, to necessitate us to have constant recourse,
by continued Acts of believing to this glorious Righteousness all the day long.
Since it is thus, that every dram of true Gospel-Holiness flows into the Soul
only this way: The Apostle affirms it three times, That now the just shall live
by Faith; which Life, it is evident, he means to be a Life spiritual, or Life of
Holiness here. And it is necessary that the Work of Holiness be carried on
continually and constantly; and therefore that we believe in Christ and his
Righteousness always. The reason of all is this: The Lord will have the
Righteousness which is of Faith, the imputed Righteousness of his Son always
viewed, believed in, and admired by us. So that hence you may believe the
Doctrine of Free Grace does not tend to Licentiousness (as Satan in various
Instruments clamours against it) but the quite contrary. Such undeserved
superabounding Grace to pardoned Sinners, being the main motive unto Holiness
of Heart, Lip and Life. The Apostle plainly affirms, Romans 6.14. That the Souls
being brought under Grace, breaks Sin's Dominion therein, i. e. the Soul being
brought in believing under the powerful influence of that Grace that Reigns
through Righteousness unto eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.21.

2. Infer. The second and last use is, for the encouragement of Sinners; yea,
the chiefest, worst and vilest to come to Christ from the glorious Grace that
is held forth in the Doctrine. The Believers, that thus have, and can, triumph
over Death and the Grave, were once Sinners as you; may be some of them as vile
as the vilest of you. Come you, therefore, and taste and see how gracious our
Lord the Redeemer is, Come you and join with us in a perpetual Covenant to
serve the Lord. Accept of the peace of the Gospel, and make a venture upon an
offered Jesus: Oh come you, the worst of you, and live the Life of Faith like
the Just, and you shall die the Death of the Righteous, to triumph over all in
Death. Whatever your Objections can be, this astonishing Free Grace can answer
them all. Infinite Wisdom has permitted all along prodigious Mountains of
Opposition to rise in the way of Grace, on purpose that that Grace of God may
declare it self boundless by triumphing over all. Thus though it was designed
from all Eternity, that Free Grace should have all the Honor in making the
Elect happy: Yet a Law for Life was set up, that through the Breaches thereof,
Sin might be suffered to enter; Sin, that odious thing that was such an Affront
to the whole Godhead, and brought so great an eclipse on his manifestative
Glory, was suffered, I say, to enter, that electing Grace might be magnified in
mounting above it. And the Law entered once again on Mount Sinai, that so Sin
might abound, on purpose that Free Grace might super-abound, and reign and
triumph over all. Free Grace and electing Love does not only, like Jordan,
overflow all its Banks, but, like the mighty Deluge, cover the tops of the
highest Mountains of Opposition in the World. Therefore what Objections, O
Sinners, can you have against bowing down to the Grace offered in the Gospel. O
harden not your Hearts, but now hear ye his Voice? Know assuredly this, That
objecting against your acceptance of the Grace of Christ (be your Objections
never so specious) is no other but a gainsaying of Christ. O do not rebel and
gainsay against the wide-opened and stretcht-forth Arms of eternal Mercy and
Compassion that now is extended to you. Be thou the vilest on the face of the
Earth, yet as vile as thou has obtained Mercy. There are on Record instances of
Sovereign Grace, greater than any of you can be: What think you of Adam? I
durst almost engage to answer all thine Objections thou vilest Sinner, from
that single Precedent. You say you are the greatest of Sinners; you cannot be
greater than he, who was the Arch-Rebel and Traitor, who led his whole Race
into an horrid Rebellion against GOD, yet he found Mercy. Ay, but your Sins are
great; not greater than his, who, in one Sin, was guilty of the highest
Ingratitude, the most monstrous Unbelief, and the most devilish Pride and
Discontent, etc. besides his breaking the whole Moral Law in that one Sin. Yet
you may say, My Sins are many. I answer, That first Sin of his was a pregnant
Monster, millions of Legions in it. But you will reply, I sinned against
Knowledge: So did he, against the most perfect Knowledge of God and his Will;
yes, and against the most perfect enjoyment of God too; that is more than you
can do. But you will object, I have sinned grievously. I reply, Adam was
reeking hot in his deep-dyed Iniquity, when Mercy stepped in. True, say you,
but I have shunned Mercy: So did he, when he fled to hide himself in the
Garden. But you may again object, I have extenuated mine heinous Sins, instead
of abhorring my self for them. Indeed you have done ill; yet though thou have
done as evil as thou could, yet do not let that discourage thee from
accepting of offered Mercy; which to refuse is the greatest Sin of all: So did
he, and charged God with it too. The Woman thou gave me, etc. yet he found
Mercy; and why not you? Many other things of this nature might be added, but
that I am now bound to the greatest brevity. What shall I add, the case of
Paul, who was an injurious Person, a Persecuter and a Blasphemer, yet he
obtained Mercy; or the case of Mary Magdalene, who had seven Devils; of the
Woman of Canaan, and the Woman mentioned Luke 7. etc. who were all three
notorious Sinners, yet Sovereign Grace was extended to them. Let me add but one
instance more, and that is fresh in your Memories; the case of Mr. Bigg, whose
late decease gives the occasion to this Discourse, and the present Solemnity.
His Deathbed attended with the manifestation of such Sovereignty of Grace and
Power from above, has allarmed the Neighborhood. And you seem all to be in a
surprise, and at a gaze about the things you have seen and heard relating
thereunto: I shall therefore give as an exact account of the whole as has come
into my Hands, that though he be dead, he may yet speak to you. And though in
the Account I shall give, it will be necessary to touch upon his former Life,
yet it shall be done with a favorable hand, only so much as may tend to the
advancement of that glorious Free Grace manifested toward him: But ere I
begin, I must antidote my Hearers with this Caution; Because it pleased the
Lord to magnify his glorious Grace toward him on his Deathbed, that none of
you dare to presume from thence to put of your coming to Christ till a
Deathbed season. The voice of this mighty Providence is, Turn now the worst of
you, and live, It Is not, Defer Believing till a dying time. I durst almost
venture to say, That whoever encourage themselves to continue in ways of
Impenitency from this example, have breaking forth upon them the black Marks
and Tokens of final Rejection. It was well observed by one, One Thief on the
Cross, in his dying Moments, obtained Grace, that none might despair; and but
one, that none might presume: So but one Mr. Bigg perhaps in an Age, that none
may think when they have lived all their Lifetime to Sin, they shall with
ease, and at pleasure, die to Christ. Thus having given this Caution, I now
proceed to my Narrative.

A NARRATIVE OF Mr. BIGG's CONVERSION, etc.
MR. Bigg, when married to worthy Mr. Browning's Daughter, was very sober and
well inclined, and by some, thought to be Godly. But it appeared in some time
after, the Work was but outward; for being led aside by vain Company, and being
at first (as it was thought, and he expressed it to some) filled with dreadful
Horrors for it, he fell into a woeful Security, and continued hardened in Sin,
especially that of Company-keeping for several Years. At last he was surprised
with a lingering Distemper, that brought him nigh to the Gates of Death; during
which time, he continued stupid and unconcerned about his Soul; but it pleased
the Lord that then he recovered, and continued well for about two years or
above; but then fell into a dangerous Relapse, and then there appeared, pretty
early in him, some Concernment about his Soul, though he kept it very secret,
as indeed he was by Nature reserved, close, and of few Words, except he was
amongst his Company, and distempered in his Head. The first time he was seen to
be apparently concerned, was upon this following Occasion. It has pleased the
allwise God, whose ways are in the Deep, and whose Judgments are past finding
out, to lay his heavy Hand upon a Child of his of twelve years of age (who is
known to be very gracious) in that strange and unusual Distemper that has
seized many others; which Dispensation of God toward us, makes us to be taken
up into the Mouths of Talkers, and to be gazed and wondered at by many, who pass
their Censures variously, as they are disposed. Though we desire humbly to
acquiess in the Will of the Lord, waiting for his Salvation, not in the least
questioning, but he will eminently glorify himself in the Issue, as he has
already in some Measure, blessed be his Name, and then they that have
reproached us, shall see, and hear, and be ashamed. The Distemper afflicting
the Child with Light-headedness (the first Effect of it in that kind, as was
observed on her) she talked of diverse things, and amongst the rest, of what
good People there were in the Neighborhood that she loved, and amongst the
rest, she said her Mother was good and would go to Heaven; but being asked
concerning her Father, whether she thought her Father would go to Heaven; she
replied, she desired he might: Hereupon Mr. Bigg being called, and she again in
his Presence asked, what she said of her Father? Nothing, says the Child, very
gravely and awfully, but that I wish his eternal Good? which Words fell upon
him with such Power and Weight, that it cast him into great Passion of Weeping
for some time. About that time, being very restless in the Night, said to his
dear Relation, he needed to have something: It was answered (supposing he meant
Physic) that nothing would do him more good than a little Sleep. He replied,
yes, a little Hope would do me more good. It was told him, True! a little good
Hope through Grace, would do you more good indeed. Remember that Place of
Scripture, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be saved, all the ends of the Earth?
For I am God, and there is none else. He presently answered, That was not so
easily done, and then continued, These Words have run in my Mind of late to
terrify me: Because I have called, and you have refused, etc. And many
dreadful Scriptures altogether. Then he was told, That Christ was able to save
to the uttermost. Yes, said he, and able to destroy to the uttermost too. Then
he ended (speaking nothing of Soul Matters, but what the Force of Terror one
while, and Joy another while made him. Some time after he was again
complaining; which, whilst he was doing, he was acquainted, That his Condition
was hopeful though painful: It being added, Time was, when you have been under
God's Hand, and in great Danger, and to my Apprehension, was stupid and
Sottish. He answered, Yes, it was so. Then being asked, if he had not some
Hope, he replied, that sometimes he was ready to think, that if God had had a
Purpose to destroy him, he would have done it before now. Not long after, as he
was going to Bed one Night, he asked one, what she thought of him, as to his
Living? she answered, she did not know what the Lord would do with him: As to
Sense, you are not like to be long in this World (he then being very weak.) And
must I die then? said he: Oh, I dare not die! I dare not die! Oh! it is an awful
thing to die, etc. Some short time after, whilst he was in his bitter
Complaints, several Scriptures were laid before him to encourage his Believing
into Christ. He said, right! if it had been in time; but it is too late now. He
was answered, it was not too late, seeing the Lord had opened his Eyes on this
side of the Grave, and made him see his Need of Christ. He said, yes, it is too
late; for I have had the proffer of Christ, and the same Tenders of Salvation
with others: And I would not have Christ then, and therefore it is just with
God to deny him to me now. But one added, you can justify God under all. Oh!
Ay, said he: Oh! Ay. He that has born so many years Provocations at my Hands
-- I will speak well of him (...) long as I live, however he deals with me.
Another time he desired that Scripture might be turned to, Phil. 3.12. That I
may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ. Methinks, said
he, it bears this Sense: That Christ must first take hold of the Soul, before
the Soul can take hold of Christ. A little before he kept his Bed, he said to
his Wife: Dear, What must I do? There is no way for me but to close with Jesus
Christ, and I cannot do it, I cannot do it. I do not know either whether I am
willing to be saved by Christ or no. May be, if I should recover, things would
wear off. Oh! I dread the Thoughts of it. If I may but live till I have
obtained Mercy, I shall think I have lived long enough. But Oh! the Thoughts
how few find Mercy at last, would make any ones Heart to ache. It being on the
Heart of his dear Relation to send to the Church of Christ at Rothwell, to pray
for him, acquainted him with it; asking him, if it was not his Desire also. He
answered, he thought of it some Days before, but durst not be so bold as to
mention such a thing; but did desire they should seek the Lord for him, that he
might close saveingly with Jesus Christ, and have a true Godly Sorrow and
Repentance, never to be repented of. Now we are drawing toward the Close of
his Life. The Friday before he departed, he could scarce rise, being exceeding
weak; but he began to be very earnest about his Soul. He spoke thus to Mrs.
Bigg, The Prayers of God's People are a great support to me; I always had a
great Esteem of the Prayers of God's People. That Night he was confined to his
Bed; when he was laid in it, he said very awfully, I shall rise no more till
the Trumpet sounds. When in Bed, he was complaining of the greatness of his
Sins; he was taken up by one, saying, Whether he thought his Sins so great, as
that there was not enough in Christ to pardon? No, says he, I will not reflect
such Dishonor on the Blood of Christ, as to think so. I know there is an
effectual Plaster prepared; but if not applied, what then? A little after he
brake forth into this Expression: As there is a fullness of sin in me, so there
is much more Fullness in Christ to pardon. However that Night he continued very
restless, his Distress being such, he could scarcely lay his Eyes together: And
in the Morning (which was Saturday) he spoke in great Agony, I must die, and
have not the least bit of Hope. Being then advised to venture on Christ, and
cast himself upon him, as one able to save to the uttermost: He with a
Countenance, that witnessed huge inward Grief, replied, it was too late. His
dear Relation answered him thus, It is not too late. God has opened your Eyes
on this side the Grave, and made you see your need of Christ; therefore it is
not too late; but he calls you now. He presently spoke thus, Shall I venture
then upon Christ? It was answered him, He must. Then having paused, his
Countenance more composed and cheary, he spoke resolvedly, I can but perish --
then stopped. Then his dear Wife observing his Words and countenance, said,
Hope is a Dawning. He quickly replied, I hope it is, and soon after burst forth
into high Acclamations and Expressions of spiritual Joy, and Admirations of the
free Grace of God as Strength would permit. But he was much afflicted, that he
had not Strength nor Breath to speak of God's free Grace to him, that the World
might know what God had done for him. Notwithstanding he spoke somewhat to this
effect: It troubles me that God should loose his Glory, who has not, I hope,
suffered me to loose my Soul. Oh, that I had Breath to speak of Christ!
Methinks I could speak of Christ till Night! I think I could speak of Christ a
Year together! And indeed all that Day, when he had strength to speak, it was
excellently of Christ: And once fetching his Breath with much Difficulty, he
said, I shall breath out my last Breath with a blessed be God for Jesus Christ;
and little afterward he would complain, that he could love Christ no more.
That day there came a young Gentleman, an Acquantance of his, to visit him, who
found him very weak; but when he had recovered a little Strength, he addressed
himself to him thus: All that we have to do for God and our Souls Salvation, is
to be done here: There is nothing to be done in the Grave, and it is my Advice,
and my dying Counsel to all young Men, that they labor to make sure of Christ
in a time of Health, and not put off so great a Work as I have done.

The following Day, which was the Lords Day, he was exceeding weak, and pained
in his Body, and variously exercised in his Soul, as appears by several
Expressions that dropped from him at times. Whilst he was complaining of his
Illness, he was told, that however it was, yet God is good, He answered, You
shall never hear me say otherwise, sink or swim, saved or damned, I will
justify him. A little after, being exercised in his Soul, he cried out, How
hard a thing it is to crowd through the Throng of Sin and Guilt to Jesus
Christ: Sure Christ will not accept of such a filthy thing as I: But, said he
again, God's End in pardoning and saving Sinners, is to glorify his own free
Grace; and then why not toward me as well as another? What a wonderful Word is
that? A Man may die with that Word in his Mouth, The free Gift is of many
Offenses unto Justification. Then added, And though my Flesh and my Heart
fails, God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever. Another
time, being somewhat clouded, and speaking of the Grace of God, I cannot demand
it, nor have I deserved it: But being asked, if he would not accept of it: Yes,
replied he, very thankfully. Toward Night he grew more distressed, for several
Friends being gathered about him he looked upon them dolefully, and said, Oh, I
tremble! being asked at what? he answered, at the possibility of Perishing. One
then sitting by, that knew how it was with him, told him, it was impossible, he
being helped through Grace to commit his Soul into such Hands. It was said
further, None can pull you out of his Hands. He speaks a little after, Poor
Hearts, you are willing to hope the best; I wish you are not mistaken. You
know, said he, to his Wife, Dear, oppressed Nature will cry out for Relief; but
being answered, that oppressed Nature could not rest on Christ for Salvation;
or to this Effect, he was silent. Next Morning he was much complaining that he
was to die, and do Christ no Service in the World. He cried out, Oh, that I
might live but one Year! but may be if I should, I would be wicked: But yet,
said he, I think verily, if I know my Heart, I am willing to embrace Christ on
his own Terms; I think verily, if I was to live the strictest Life as ever
Saint lived, yet I think I could embrace none but Christ. A little after, being
full of Complaints as to his Soul, it was told him, Yesterday you could say,
though my Heart and my Flesh fails, etc. He answered, But I cannot say so to
day. Some time after, his Faith began to mount up, and being melted under the
Sense (...) God's Grace to him, he said, If I had strength, I would soon make
my Confession Town-Talk. I need not tell the Town what my Life has been; they
know that very well: But I would have them know the difference between them
that have Grace, and them that have none. Monday about Noon Mr. Bear came to
visit him, and asked him, What, art thee going now to Christ? He answered,
Better now than ever. But he was so weak, and labored with such Difficulty of
Breathing, that he could scarce speak; which he expressed himself, saying, That
if it were to save his Life, he could not speak; yet desired Mr. Bear, that he
would wrestle and strive with God in Prayer for him, that he might be helped
sincerely to close with Christ. A little after, finding his Weakness increase
upon him, he spoke thus, I am brought to the Dust of Death. That Night, which
was the Night before he departed, about nine a Clock, he grew weaker and
weaker, and fetched his Breath shorter and shorter: Being a little lifted up on
his Pillow, he lifted up his Hands, and bad all farewell. After which, he drew
his Breath as one just departing; being (as 'twas thought) past speaking, was
spoke to by a Friend thus, putting him in mind of his own Expression, Blessed
be God for Jesus Christ; whereat he was heard to say softly, Amen. Then his
dear Relation added, Christ the Forerunner is for thee entered: Then he, with a
pleasant Countenance, nodded his Head, being not able to speak. And now Death
indeed was in his Face in all its Symptoms, and all concluded him just a dying;
when, all of a sudden, his Blood returned into his Face, Vigor and liveliness
into his opened Eyes, and with a Voice exceeding loud, as if he had rose from
the Dead on purpose to give in his dying Testimony for free Grace, he thus
spoke triumphantly. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that with these Eyes I
shall see him, and not another: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: These Words he spoke with
such Vehemence, that he made the whole House to echo, when before he could
scarce be heard if one laid his Ear to his Mouth, and then continued thus with
no less Accent and Affection, I am no more afraid to die, than I am to shut my
Eyes: I am no more afraid to die, than I am to go to sleep. God loves me
dearly, and I love God dearly: I am sure he will do me no hurt. Lord, strike
the Blow, and the Work is done, I long to be gone, I long to see Jesus Christ.
O that all the Town might ring of God's free Grace to me! What, at the last
Hour too? Who would have thought of this a few Weeks ago? Nothing less than
Eternity is sufficient to admire free Grace: This is blessed Work indeed: This
is Dying indeed. Thy Father, said he, turning to his Wife, will wonder to see
me in Heaven: He little thinks I am so near him. His Wife asked him, if he
thought she should ever come where he was a going. He answered, I do not
question it; thou, nor the poor Children neither. Through God's Grace, his
dying Prophecy is in a likely way to be accomplished in all of them.) You will
not be long after me. Come, one Bosom will hold us all: He that has begun the
good Work in them (meaning his Children) will carry it on till the Day of Jesus
Christ. A Friend hearing him speak so heartily, said, Sir, I hope you may live
still. He replied. Oh do not tell me so! I do not love to hear of that Ear: I
would not come back again for thousands of Gold and Silver; but what the Lord
will, I am wholly swallowed up in Gods Sovereign will. After he was spent with
speaking, he said, I can speak no more; I hope you are all satisfied. Fare you
well, expecting (as it seems) he should have gone immediately to Heaven. But it
pleased the Lord to order it otherwise, and to continue him till the next
Night, though under some Regret, for he presently added, Oh! I thought I had
been going so sweetly, but I am here still; and next Morning, hearing some
Friends discoursing about the Distress he had been in, he said to them, but the
Lord has now fully satisfied me. Yet by reason his Dissolution was delayed, it
occasioned further Temptation, and a black Cloud arose upon his Soul after all
this glorious Sunshine. He burst out into such bitter Expressions as these:
God has forsaken me, and I am afraid it is a sore Judgment of God upon me, that
I lie in such a Condition. I am afraid, least I have deceived my self with
false Hopes. Some time after the beginning of his Distress, there appeared on
him Convulsive Fits; whereupon he said to his Wife, I have Fits. She answered,
I am afraid you have. He added, I am almost frighted out of my Wits. Being
asked at what: He replied, At the Awfulness of Death. This Conflict lasted for
some time; but the Lord was pleased to return again, as was perceived; for his
Soul was composed and still. His Fits ceased, though his Strength was gone,
that he could speak but litttle. However, this for Satisfaction was had from
him a little before he departed. He said, would I was up! His Wife answered,
That would be a pleasant Sight indeed to see thee up again, to tell us what
thou have seen on this sick Bed. He answered, I have seen that here, which has
made my Heart, and the Hearts of many more glad. It was then told him, you may
see now what Satan's Temptations are, when God permits him, he will rob a Child
of God of his Comforts; but that is all he can do. And it is a great All too,
said he, it was that which made my Life a Burden to me. Being asked, if he did
not believe he should have Comfort again. He answered, Yes, but did not know
when. But it was not long before he had it to the full; for now he fell into a
sweet Sleep, the best he had for many Days; in which Sleep, he quietly slept in
Jesus.

Thus I have given you an Account of some of his Death bed Experiences, in
whom; though now dead, he yet speaks to you the Living, and invites you all
to partake of the same Grace with him, that you may enter into the same Glory
^e now is in. Have a care, as I cautioned you before, to suck Poison to the
Ruin of your own Souls out of this Instance of God's Free, Rich, and Glorious
Grace; but make this Improvement of it, to stir you up now to accept of, and
venture on the boundless Grace of God in Christ Jesus. Consider what has been
said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all things.

His EPITAPH.
Here lies interred
The Body of Mr. John Bigg;
Who departed this Mortal Life,
When he had seen his thirty seventh Year,
On the twenty eighth Day of January,
Anno Domini, 1689.
Cropped in his full blown Age, if we by Grace
His time compute, he lived but five Weeks space.
Dead whilst alive, in dying Life begins.
Short Race of Life! But what a Crown he wins!
In Sin him Death attacks; but Grace steps in,
And makes him Triumph over Death and Sin.
Thus by Christ's Death, in death he is made to cry;
Death, where is thy Sting? Grave, where is thy Victory?
Now to the only wise God be Glory and Dominion World without end, Amen.

FINIS.

