THE DAY OF THE LORD, OR, ISRAEL'S RETVRN, With an humble presentation of the
Divine Characters whereby this Wonderful Day may seem very near approaching.

Watch therefore and be sober. For Sions sake I would not hold my peace.
LONDON, Printed by T. W. for J. Crook, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

THE PREFACE.
HAd the fate which attended the Millenaries doctrine, been but as propitious
as the Arguments were reasonable, it had doubtless been received with a more
civil courtship through every age, than those contemptuous spittings and
unhandsome purgings at the mouth, which now for so many years have entertained
it. To wipe off all the soil from those Spectacles through which it has so often
been misrepresented, would no way suit with the streight-lac'd precincts of a
sheet or two, lest I spend more paper in Apologies than proofs. One thing,
however, will deserve a peculiar reflection, to consider that this Now-dejected
Matron carried formerly so well-favour'd an aspect, that the first three
Centuries (by her very Adversaries acknowledgments) paid a constant homage to
her Reverence. Let the eminent Doctor Fern assure us in the name of the rest
(though a professed enemy at the giving in this verdict) in his preface against
Champney. Of all that wrote (says he) for three hundred years, even down to
Lactantius inclusively, most of them a vouch it, not one of them (as he could
find) contradicting or writing against it. I will not conceal, that through
the wantonness of some sensual Gospellers (the Gnostics probably, that scandal
to the name of man) this beauteous flowr of Spirituality was early distorted
into misshapen apprehensions, of most hideous carnality, and warp't from its
original purity by the gross conceptions of earthheaded Cerinthus, and such
like bemir'd Flesh-potts, whose minds were more dirty than the materials of
their bodies: so that I must confess the expectation according to their unclean
fancies, was but somewhat the more modest dress of a Mahumetical Paradise. Nor
can I much wonder at the prejudice of my dissenting Brethren, while I remember
in how unseemely a portraiture they are wont to behold it. Can any soul that
dare lay claim to Christendom encourage the least (...) in his b^e^^^ of a
Roy^^^ (...) the Blessed Jesus bene^th a sense ^^lestial? In a word. Thi^ (...)
in the Scripture view is the first Act of Heaven to reunited spirits (...) The
incompara^^^e ^^r^o^^ of m^^^ ^ede^p^ion; The Mysterious ^^^riage of the
All-glorious Lamb to his then lovely Spouse, the restored Jew, and the
completed Gentile; The Divine uniwisting of all the holy Prophets riddles; The
New Jerusalem in her robes of Innocence; Our Redeemers final triumph over Sin,
Death, and Hell; and (with sobriety) Eden in her Sabbath-day-garments, where as
many as are allowed the royal favor of that admirable Communion (for the rest
are abandoned to the burning Lake) shall converse in their original principles
of spiritual integrity, after an inconceivable manner with beatified Saints and
Angels; Briefly, An estate spiritual, purely sublimed from sinful and carnal
feculencyes, and altogether heavenly, though on earth. I will forbear to
stretch the preface any wider, lest the City run out at the gates, and only
advertise the Reader, how it has been the Devils master-stratageme, through
all times, to accoutre this glory in Antic disguises, by the opportunity of
which Legerdemain, as he cheated the Ancient Jews out of the true Christ, even
while he was among them so he cleanly conveyed in Antichrist upon the
inadvertent Christians. Now venture on me Reader through these inducements,
(with the encouragement of brevity into the bargain) and unless the premises
be made firm before I part, throw me out too for Cerinthus his Antimask.

CHAP. I.
Demonstrating, that the state described in the 21. of the Revel: is the same
with that portraied in Jsaiah 60. and other places of the Prophets, of
Restoring the Jews, and fullness of the Gentiles, to be fullfilld on earth.

THere is nothing has proov'd more injurious to this truth, than that some
have rashly undertaken to descend too daringly into its sacred recesses, and
(by the liberty of their own fancies) to describe particulars about it
unwarranted by Scripture. Thus well-meaning M. Archer has formerly beplum'd it
with many unsuitable Ideas, rendering himself ridiculous, and the opinion
questionable; upon this stock he drew on his head that Reverend, and most
Religious Combatant Bishop Hall, an Adversary of so approved abilities that his
very appearance in the cause easily everted the rocking foundations of so
tottering a fabric. It must needs be held for an insobriety scarcely
excusable, not to rest contended with general speculations of such a glory,
which is no less than a ray of that transcendent brightness of which the 1
Cor. 2.^.
Apostle has advised us that it is not possible for the heart of man to frame
conceptions. My method therefore shall be to present the groundwork of this
excellency from the sacred Bible, and neither adventure my self, nor encourage
others, to raise any private superstructures. Go we on then in the Name of God
to make good the proposals of the Chapter. It Is evident our Translators
themselves referr the 23.24. and 25. verses of Rev. 21. to the 19.3. and 11.
verses of Jsaiah 60. And in these already instanced we meet with one passage as
unlikely to be fullfil'd on earth as any in the whole bible, viz. The City had
no need of the Sun, etc. Which notwithstanding its parallel in Jsaiah, to him
that weighs the Chapter prooves undeniably to be meant no where else. The 26. v.
of Rev. 21. belongs to the 5. and following verses of Jsaiah 60. And the last
v. in Rev. to the one and twentieth v. of that in Jsaiah, Thy people shall be
all righteous, compared with Jsaiah 52.1.

But let us take the Chapter in order. The first ver. of Rev. 21. is exactly
correspondent with Jsaiah 65.17. which place in the Prophet, if any suspect not
to be accomplished on earth, let him take level by the 21. v. They shall build
houses, etc. with many other pertinencies of the context. The 2. v. in the Rev.
of the New Jerusalem prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, answers
Jsaiah 62.2.3. Thou shall be called by a New Jerusalem.
New name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shall be a Crown of
glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal New Jesalem adorned.
diadem in the hand of thy God. And 4. and 5. v. of Jsaiah 62. Where Jesus is
called New Jerusalem prepared as a Bride.
Beulah, i. e. married, as the margent tells you, and God compared to the
Bridegroom. All which most evidently concerns that condition of Jerusalem when
the Gentiles shall come into her light, as appears by the 2. v. there, And the
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, etc. Our own Translators constantly
presume these passages of the prophets to be meant on earth, as is evident by
the contents they prefix. Vid. Jsaiah 54. and Jsaiah 62. But if they point at
the Jews calling, as I fear not to make thee confess before I close, then will
(sure) none imagine any other scene than the earth.
Ergo to be effected on earth. See the like evidence in Jsaiah 54.5. For thy
maker is thine husband. Stated also on the same time v. 3. Thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles. Compare the third v. in Rev. 21. with Ezekiel 37.27. The
tabernacle of God is with men, and shall dwell with them. For the word [He] is
not in the Greek, which is therefore odly thrust in by our Translators,
purposely to referr the sense of [dwelling] to [God] and not to [Tabernacle]
whereas both in the genuine meaning, as also in the Greek it plainly belongs to
[Tabernacle;] so in Ezekiel. My Tabernacle also shall be with them, yea I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, directly as in the Rev. The Tabernacle
of God is with men, They shall be his people, and God will be their God. Now it
must needs be granted, that Ezekiel. in that place treates of the forementioned
glory of Jsraels restoration to be performed on earth. Examine the whole
Chapter dear Reader, and use thine own judgment, for thou must be tried by it:
And that by the Tabernacle of God in this instance is meant Christ in his
humane nature, I am half persuaded that upon examination I shall not pass for
arrogant, in undertaking ere I leave thee (by Gods blessing) to demonstrate.
Compare the 4. v. of Rev. 21. with Jsaiah 65.19. treating of the New heavens,
etc. The voice of weeping shall no more be heard, nor the voice of Crying. Nay
more, Of him that wonders at the possibility of this, I require, how in case
Adam had not sinnd should one generation have made room for another, for it is
evident death entered in by sin, as also that the world could never have
contained all generat together, so that diverse acknowledge we should have been
removed by Translation, as were Enoch and Elias. Why then should that
difficulty molest any in this glory, which (according to the judgment of the
best age) restores us to the happiness of that condition we lost in paradise?
And peradventure, if the nature of Redemption be well examined, it may be
acknowledged an honor very suitable to the nobleness of the undertaker, to set
the body also in its primitive state by the worth of his price. This I am sure,
(Besides the whole mystery in which the Rev. ^uns parallel with the prophet to
this purpose) St. Paul can never be understood without it Romans
8.19.20.21.22.23. Though I will not deny but the was of vain men may puzzle ^t
with very tough intricacies, if any be so head strong to argue against what the
scripture generally commends to u^ for a mystery, vid. Rev. 10.7. The mystery
of God, etc. vid. Romans 11.25. The return of J^r. is a mystery. Now if the
apprehension of mystery may check our w^ntonness, I desire to commend S. Paul's
phrase into Consideration, Romans 8.23. the Redemption of our Body, etc.
Death it self also is taken away as well in Jsaiah Chap. 25.8. (handling the
same performance too) as in the Apocalypse. He will swallow up death in victory.
Mark well the whole scope in the 6. and 7. v. In this mountain will the Lord
make to his people a feast of fat things, He will destroy the veil spread over
all Nations, and take away the rebuke of his people from off all the earth,
etc. Tell me, were thou left to thine own liberty, could thou possibly
interpret these things otherwise than of the restitution of the Jews, and
enlargement of the Gentiles? And that St. Paul applies the text to the
Resurrection, it is no otherwise than what thou remembrest I promised in the
Title; nor do I fear (by the assistance of my Savior) to make appear before I
conclude, that the space of this mystery is the very day of judgment. As to the
royal magnificence of this New- Jerusalems buildings, from the 11. v. in the
Rev. downwards, conferr with Js. 60.10.13.17. and precisely with Js. 54.11.12.
etc: I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations with saphirs.
Thy windows will I make of Agates, Thy Gates of Carbuncles, And all thy borders
of pleasant stones, etc. Which description, both the words preceding at v. 3.5.
Thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, Thy maker is thy husband, etc. and its
exact correspondency to other passages relating to this matter, evince
unanswerably that it holds forth the forenam'd excellency, and to be
accomplished on earth. Compare Js. 54.11. with Js. 60.15. I will now go fancy
as many evasions as can possibly (to my apprehension) be found out for the
subversion of this parallel, and annex them as so many several labells to this
Chapter, lest the continuance of its length discourage any Reader (in a Truth
so obnoxious to explosion) who peradventure may be invitted by the briefness
and variety of partitions.

Doubts satisfied. First, Whether these passages be not already accomplished.
But you will tell me that this state described in the Prophets is daily
fulfilled in Gospel-inlargments expressed in Jewish resemblances, The Church being
all this while the Spouse, to which Christ is the Bridegroom and King. Nor are
our Teachers wont to expound it otherwise than of the Lord Jesus his spiritual
government over our Consciences.

Chiliasts have been long traduced, in being presumed either to dream Christ's
royalty to be somewhat other than spiritual, or that it has not been hitherto
exercised in his Church. As to any charge toward a carnal or earthly
conception, my preface I hope may clear me; And who ever suspects us to mean as
if Christ had not constantly reigned, is grossly mistaken in the Notion of his
Kingdom presented in the 2. Chapter of Holy Daniels prophecy, where we find it
protrayed in its twofold state, Lege. the one which has been, and is now, etc.
The one, what has been, and is, now in agitation, under the type of a stone;
The other, what is expected, (but on earth too, v. 35.) under the figure of a
Mountain. The one to be set up In the days of the These (Doubtless) St. Luke
calls the times of the Gentiles Chapter 21.24.
Gentile Monarchies resembled by the Image v. 44. But the other viz. Regnum
Montis, that of the Mountain, not to be erected till the Image i. e. the
Monarchies were Answerably to Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are etc.
pounded into dust, and dispersed by the wind v. 35. Ergo of Necessity yet to be
effected On earth. By this may easily be explicated how much of these heavenly
Thus is the marriage in St. Mat. 22. of p^esen^t action.
Espousals is in present celebration, so much namely as belongs to Regnum
Lapidis, the state of the stone: But that there is a more plenteous hope (to
which these prophecies referr) If Blessed Daniel can not convince, me thinks
St. Paul should, who expressly makes use of a passage of that prophecy to which
the 60. Chapter of Jsaiah Both the sense and mark which our Int^^preters affix
to the 20. v. of Js. 59. assure us, that the glor. prophecy continued in the
60. Chap. begins at that place. But (especially) St. Paul warrants it.
clee^ly belongs, to ratify a future ingrafting of the Jews, and fullness of
the Gentiles; See Jsaiah 59.20. Romans 11.25.26. The force of these allegations
from the Prophets, is, I know, usually refracted by applying them (as they
sp^ak^^ to Gospel-inla gment, allegoriz'd under Jewish representments, but with
how great oversight, shall be the employment of another paragraph briefly to
discover.

That the forementioned quotations must be verified explicitly of the Jews.
I shall wonder if any impartial surveyer of the 36. Chapter of Ezekiel. from the
16. to the end, can imagine the contents to belong to any other than to very
Jsrael, since it is the design of that place to illustrate this incomparable
condition of her beauty (When brought into their own land, cleans'd from all
their Idols, given a heart of flesh, etc. v. 24.25.26.) by opposing it to the
Loathsome estate of their defilement v. 17. So that if the Characters of the
17. and 19. v. ( Of defiling their own land, when they dwelt in it, Being
scattered among the heathen, etc.) must needs be appropriated to the Jews in
special, how is it imaginable but the other passages of her cleansing, and
restitution (through this and the whole following Chapter) must of necessity
belong to them in letter? There may be diverse instances to this advantage,
though I will use but one more, very remarkable indeed to the discovery of the
Bride, namely Hosea 2.15.16. She that came up out of the land of Egypt, and
called him Remember who they were that worshipped Baalim. 1 Kings 18.18.
Baali, The same she shall at that Day, call him Ishi i. e. My husband.
Certainly Jsrael in kind, and no way deducible to the present Gospel-condition.
Nor can the pressure of such texts be eluded by construing them of the Gentiles
as a succedaneous, or succenturiated Jsrael; for St. Paul (you heard) affords
us Romans 11.25.
warrant to give verdict for the Jew in propria persona.

Thus far I am sure we are right, provided these promises be not fullfild in
the Jews former deliverances; To him that thinks they are, it ought to seem but
reasonable that he should acquaint us with that time in which Jerusalem was
cleansed from all her filthiness, A heart of flesh given her, and her stony one
taken away, as is promised Ezekiel. 36.26. the passage so lately urged. And it is
worth the knowing, when Judah and Jsrael ever lived together (since their
revolt from Rehoboam) and were one Nation, not two any more: for so they must,
Ezekiel. 37.22. etc. free from Idolatry and all abominations, Nay, and so planted
in their own land as never to be plucked out more, therefore of necessity yet to
be effected. Vid. Amos 9.15.
secure from the molestation and dominion of their enemies, brought with so
remarkable renown from all the borders of their captivity, that other
deliverances shall be silenced at the glory of this, Jer. 23.7.8. Yea and all
this to happen to them in the days of David's righteous branch, The Lord our
righteousness; whereas in our Lord Christ's last abode amongst them, They
neither dwelt together as one Nation, (for I hope we have not forgot the then
deadly fewd betwixt the Jew, and Samaritan,) nor free from subjection to their
Domineering Enemies the Romans, Ezekiel. 34.28. much less were they void of
transgressions, Ezekiel. 37.23. but guilty of the highest Treason that ever the
sun behe^d. In a word, if this state (in the Prophets) be that of New- Jer. in
Rev. as the next paragraph will assert, we may I hope rest secure till we
arrive at the second Chapter, where 'twill be proved that the Magnalia there
mentioned begin at Christ's second coming.

But how after all this, if these instances from the Prophets aim at one thing,
and that in the Rev. another, the former pointing at a Glory on earth, the
later, in heaven? Affinity in words, I must needs grant, is no conviction that
the matter should be the same; though truly it might be much wondered at, that
so exact an agreement should thread the passages of both places, and yet the
things be several; but I presume this following answer may remoove the scruple;
That since we are assured by Rev. 10.7. that there is a May it not be probable
that the Mystery here signifies the Jews conversion, since St. Paul also calls
it a mystery, Romans 11.25?
mystery declared to the Prophets, to receive accomplishment under the 7.
Trumpet, And that this we have here treated on is declared through the whole
stream of prophecy, and to commence also at the 7. Trumpet, as the next Chapter
shall justify, I can no way imagine but that the glory now insisted on, is
that mystery foretold by the Prophets. This in the mean time is very
reasonable, that what is declared to the Prophets should be sought after in the
Prophets. In case therefore the Excellency be in both instances the same, and
that the replanting the Jews (as the Apostle seems to avouch) we may be bold to
conclude (for who ever supposed the contrary) that the scene of its performance
must be on earth, and not in heaven.

One thing is much to be taken notice of. Besides the scoffing at this conceit
2 Epist. of St. Peter, 3 Chapter, 3. and 4. v. (of which anon) It Is frequently
predicted in the old Testament as a thing scarcely to be submitted to by Flesh
and Blood, for that I am persuaded you will grant may be intimated by that
Epiphonema at the end of this very description, Ezekiel. 36.36. I the Lord have
spoken it, and I will make it good. But notable is Ezekiel. 37.14. to this
purpose, where the Lord convinces humane incredulity, by a miracle as great as
the change, and very analogous to it, viz. Of gathering the dry bones into a
living army By continuing that Chapter with the precedent one, 'twill appear
that the aim of the prophecy points at the Jews conversion most directly,
remembering what was formerly observed from the Characters of Ezekiel. 36.
. See the whole Chapter, for it wonderfully illustrates this noble
Atcheivement, being collated with the other prophets forecited. Lay together
Ezekiel. 36.35. and Ezekiel. 37.21. with Isaiah 60.15. (the Chapter to which so much
of Rev. 21. refers) and tell me whether any man can judge them to point at
several things.

I will wind up all the attextures to this Chapter with a brief reflection on
the meaning of Rev. 21.3. The Tabernacle of God. That by it is understood
Christ as to his humanity, who would deny? that considers, First, The
Tabernacle in its principal part, e. g. The Mercy-seat, was the Type of Christ,
whom therefore St. Paul calls (...) Romans 3.25. Which our Translation renders a
Propitiation, but it is the very word used Heb. 9.5. and there translated
Mercy-seat. Secondly, Christ is Rev. 13.6.
expressly called Gods Tabernacle, by the exposition of the best Interpreters,
meaning thereby the Humane Nature of Christ, which the Beast (The Papacy)
blasphemes by his opinion of Transsubstantiation, which shows forth a piece of
Bread for the real Body of our Lord, and worships it for his natural Flesh, In
this very notion is that of St. Joh. Chapter 1.14. The word was made Flesh and
dwelt amongst us (...) i. e. Tabernacled, the very word in the Rev. So Joh.
2.19.21. Destroy this Temple, etc. i. e. The temple of his body. As also in
express terms, Heb. 9.11. Add to all this, That by tabernacle of God in this
place must necessarily be understood either the Lord Christ, or his Church, (I
know the objectors will pretend to no other signification) But let them
remember, that it is far enough from their sense to allow the Church a
continuance The Tabernacle of God is with men, and shall dwell with them, etc.
amongst men ( i. e. on earth) at the day of judgment, the time, at which (in
the next Chapter) I shall prove these things to expect their truth. vid. v.
Quaere If the words there [The lamb is the Temple] tend not to the sense I
lately applied [Gods Tabernacle] to.
22. in Rev. 21.

CHAP. II.
Proving, that new Jerusalem, that is the I dare appeal to any unbiast mind
that expects the Jews call, (as most I think do) since there appears not to
this day the least step set forwards toward so great a work, and yet that
terrible catastrophe accounted as at the door by many of very different
principles from me, whether it be not most suitable to Reason, that this must
be the manner and time of that grand transaction; for as much as the known
means of conversion (through Gospel Ordinances,) must necessarily require more
time to a nation so dispust, and under so diverse languages (we may add several
Religions to, if we remember the concomitant fullness of the Gentiles,) than I
am confident most men's opinions can allow them to the end of the world.
conversion of the Jew, and fullness of the Gentile, begins at Christ's coming
to judgment.

AS in the former Argument was made appear, that the 21. Chapter of the Rev.
(compared with the Prophets) describes a glory to be fullfilld on earth, viz.
The instauration of the Jews, and enlargement of the Gentiles, so will I now
endeavor to demonstrate, that the term a quo or commencement of all that
excellency is our Blessed Lord Jesus's next coming in the clouds to judge the
world. The matter is easily decided to an Ingenuous Adversary, by Rev. 19.2.7.
where the Triumphals over the final destruction of the The Church generally
teaches from 2 These. 2.8. that the Man of sin, i. e. Dan. little Horn, is to
be destroyed at the day of judgment.
whore, proclaim the marriage of the Lamb to begin from that conquest. Now the
Bride (the Lambs wife) is apparently the New- Jerus. Rev. 21.9, 10. This truth
also appears by Rev. 10.7. Where this mystery declared to the Prophets is
promised its accomplishment under the 7. Trumpet, which is most expressly the
sound to judgment. Rev. 11.18. Another proof of this very date (answerable to
the Angels oath Rev. 10.7.) is from Rev. 11.15. where the Heavenly voices utter
(at the 7. trumpet) The Kingdoms of this world etc: This world, mark that. But
how I pray can the Kingdoms of this Justly answering Dan. 2.35.
World be entitled on him otherwise than by this mysterious transaction to be
finished on earth? Again, Compare Rev. 9.14. where the sixth Trumpet consists in
loosing the Angels bound in Euphrates etc. with Rev. 16.12. where To assure us
that this passage is rightly interpreted, see the wonderful accor'd it carries
with Ezekiel. 39. treating of Gods judgment on God, and Magog, (most probably the
Turk too) upon which follows Jsraels restitution. verses 9.22.25. And that all
this is to be effected at the time here specified, see the 8. v. This is the
day etc. Where (...), It is done, is a sure badge of the final day compared
with Rev. 16.17. at the 7. vial. (...), It is done, and Rev. 21.6. (...).
Compare also the proclamation to the fowls, etc: at the 17. v. in Ezekiel. with
Rev. 19.17, 18. Certainly, one and the same conquest over the Churches Enemies,
Antichrist. Gog, Magog, etc.
Euphrates is dried up, id est, The sixth trumpet ended. For if the matter of
the trumpet were the letting loose the Angels, or overflowing of Euphrates
(probably the Turks) then the drying up of Euphrates must needs be the
concluding of the Trumpet, so much is evident. Now the end of the sixth must
needs be the entrance of the 7. Therefore the Remember the glorious royalty of
this business, every where through the Prophets, judge if it be possible that
Kings of the East can reflect upon any other.
Kings of the East (without doubt the Jews to impartial Readers) enter at the
beginning of the 7. for to that very end is Euphrates dried up that a way may
be prepared for the Kings of the East. Compare Rev. 1.7. with Zach. 12.10. and
St. Matthew. 24.30. From all which (mutually reflecting on each other, as the
margent informs you) it results by a powerful consent, that the time of the
Jews seeing and mourning after him they have peirced, is his coming in the
clouds. That Chapter of Zach. cannot be denied to be a description of Jer.
restoring from the 6. v. to the end, so that the 10. v. (now quoted) to which
the 9. leads us by the Emphasis of That day, must be granted to treat of their
conversion. It will therefore be but equal that we either yield that day here
pointed at to be the same with what the two parallel texts referr to, or else
produce from the scriptures some other in which they shall see and mourn after
him, whom they have peirced. Besides, It Is observable, the word in both these
texts of the New testament is the very same (though others might have supplied
it) with that which the 70. use in (...). It Is admirable to take notice that in
all the several expressions of that direful Woe, by weeping, wayling, gnashing
of teeth, howling etc. in the New Testament, this word is never used, (though
in these three texts never alterd,) as if the Blessed Spirit had peculiarly
guarded this phrase, lest the meaning should be clouded by any such stain upon
the word.
Zach. and were it not strange if the sense should be diverse? may we not
rather think that it has pleased the sweetness of the Spirit to choose the same
word, purposely to guide us into the same expectation. For unless this sight
of him were intended as an extent of mercy to them that pierced him, ( viz That
Nation,) it had not (sure) been expressed by Mourning but howling. Tell me now
does not, the Christian Church constantly understand his coming to judgment by
his coming in the clouds? for so Holy Daniel has taught us to speak (for from
thence is the phrase borrowed) Da. 7.13. which very place (for the Rev. and
other parts of the New testament concentre as perfectly with the Prophets about
this Date of the atcheivement, as about the thing it self) in the 14.22. and
27. verses, as it apparently describes this royalty, so it pitcheth it at his
coming (in the clouds) to judgment, and overthrowing the proud horn, which is
most assuredly The controversy about Antichrist has no way been more obscured
than by applying to St. Paul's man of sin, and the Apocalyptical whore, that
which is spoke of Antichrist in St. John's Epistles. That by the Man of sin,
and whore, is meant the Romanist, I dare say is demonstrated, by that most
incomparable light of our Nation Mr. Mede, to unprejudiced minds. As for the
Name Antichrist it is never used either in the Rev. or St. Paul, so that it is
the liberty of the Churches speaking (not scripture appellation) that imposes
the term Antichrist on the whore, and while we strive to square St. John's
Epist. that way too, we entangle the case. For Rome denies not the father, and
the son, 1 Epist. St. John 2.22. It Is most clear therefore that S. John refers
to the false Christ's predicted by our Savior for the immediate Antecedents of
Jer. ruin, S. Matt. 24.11.23. S. Mark 13.21, 22. An abominable false Prophet,
of which sort being then in the world, and of great Note, viz. Simon Magus,
besides Cerinthus, and the cursed Gnostics, etc. for there were many such
Antichrists says S. Joh. 1.2.18. This to be his meaning appears by these
following Characters from the context. First it is propounded by him at that 18.
v. by way of citation, and reference to some other scripture. As ye have
heard, etc. But it is no where else to be heard than from the Evangelists so
treating of the warning pieces to Jer. destruction. The words Antichrist and
false Christ never occurring in the whole Bible but in the Gospels and his
Epist. Secondly It Is instanced by S. Joh. as formerly presaged by some other
scripture, and now used in way of Argument by himself for an immediate
forrunner of some last hour (for so the Greek speaks) and as a plain
manifestation that that last hour was then a running, forasmuch as the Badge of
it ( viz. Antichrist) was so visible. All which things were most exactly
verified (both as forespoken to such a premonition by the Evangel. as also
fulfilled in the lewd Deceivers of that Age) at the time of St. John's writing
these Epist. being hard upon the fatal accomplishment of these truths, in that
remarkable calamity which shortly after came upon Jer. Now after all this, will
not the intimation (I pray) of last hour be more naturally appliable to that
desolation (then at hand) than to any thing yet to be expected, it being above
1600. years since this was spoken? For though the last times (in regard to Dan.
fourth Monarchy) are spoke of us, yet sure the last hour (so long ago
mentioned) is more happily applied to a matter already past.
Antichrist (for all our Synod annotations) as every sensible Reader may judge
by comparing his description with that of the beast, Rev. 13. So that here you
see where St. Paul learnt (before the Rev. was extant) that Antichrist should
be destroyed at our Lords coming, 2 These. 2.8. I will subjoyn other Arguments
by way of appendence, purposely not to tire the Reader with too continued a
length of any Chapter without taking respite.

As St. Paul was formerly our warrant, for applying those admirable glories,
mentioned by the Prophets, to the Jews reinfranchment, so he seems full as
clear in ranking its accomplishment under the contemporaries of the 7: Trumpet.
I know not how it may appear to others, but I must confess I cannot so
undervalue the Holy Apostles Logic, as to judge that he should fetch a Medium
from a prophecy of the Jews restitution, to prove the day of judgment by, and
yet not intend to lay the date of that Restitution, at the time of judgment,
look Romans 14.11. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ; For it
is written, As I live says the Lord every knee shall bow to me, etc. But where
is it written? save Js. 45.23, being a piece that belongs most assuredly to
this matter from the 14. v. to the end of the Chap. Compare I pray that 14. v.
There shall come over to thee in Chains etc. with Js. 60.14. and give your
judgment if they mean not the same thing, for so I am sure the Can any
impartial Reason despise the strength of universal Tradition amongst the Jews
(whilst yet the True and only Church of God) as is evident This truth
flourisht by, in their Ages; And yet so much magnify the same sort of Argument
in our Christian ^ases?
Jews always expound it; And however we through mistake are wont to affix a
mark at the 20. v. of the 45. Chap. intimating a different argument, yet that
the whole sequel naturally appertains to the same discourse, let any impartial
peruser judge by the genuine characters emergent from the context, especially
the very last verse, (being doubtless, not an abrupt parcel of a changed
theme, but the united member of a continued one) In the Lord shall all the seed
of Israel be justified, and shall glory; Nor is this the only text where the
Apostle pitcheth the Epoch of this admirable royalty at the coming to
judgment. What less can amount from 2 Timothy 4.1? I charge thee before the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearance, and his
kingdom. See, A kingdom joined with his appearance to judge the world, and yet
not the final kingdom for ever in the Heavens, for after the universal
resurrection, our Savior resigns up the kingdom to the father, that he may be
all in, all 1 Cor. 15, 24, 28. That kingdom therefore which is neither before
his appearance, not yet after the last resurrection, must necessarily be
concluded between them.

Who can but wonder that this Truth should be so boggled at, which is so
harmoniously accorded to through all the Prophets? Jer. 23.5.6. etc. In his
days etc. Ezekiel. 34.23. etc. Ezekiel. 37.22, 23, 24, etc. Zach. 6.12, 13, etc.
Zach. 14. from the 16. to the end? All which express a Glory to It being
formerly cleared that these things are spoke of Jer. in person.
Jer. (evidently to be meant on earth) to be established In the Days of their
Messiah, or David their Prince; ( David being dead long before these things
were spoken) The Lord our Righteousness is his name. But it can not be
pretended that these things were fullfill'd in the Messiahs first coming, for
then Judah and Israel did not We well know when they were separated, but it is
hard to say when they met, unless we make the sending of a single priest to
instruct the Pagans planted in Samaria, to be the return of the 10. Tribes from
their captivity 2 Kings 17.27. 'Twill prove but a very pinched Synechdoche to
cramp 10. Tribes in one person.
dwell together. I am sure they did not dwell as one Nation, Ezekiel. 37.22. The
Samaritan woman is a competent witness, Joh. 4.9. Much less did they dwell
safely without molestation from their enemies, Ezekiel. 34.28. Therefore these of
necessity (as the Jews, and the old Christians expected) are to receive
performance at the Messiah's second coming. You will not I am sure deny but
the same thing is promised in this place of Ezekiel. (and its accomplices) as in Js.
60. for that appears by comparing Ezekiel. 37.21. with Js. 60.14, 15. Besides, the
whole description matcheth in each place.

The forecited Chap. of Holy Daniel is worthy of a second survey, being
questionless the sacred store I use from whence the description of the day of
judgment is derived in so many correspondencies of the New Testament, viz. That
the The ground on which the New Testament calls our Savior the son of man is
(most certainly) taken from this place in Dan.
son of man shall come in the clouds; In the Glory of his father, with his Holy
Angels, in reference to the 10. and 13. v. That Antichrist shall be destroyed
with the brightness of his coming, as Daniel had foretold of the little Horn.
v. 26. That the Destruction should be by fire, it being said v. 9, 10. His
throne was a fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream
issued and came forth from before him, etc. And why (I would fain know) may we
not bring hither St. John's parallel from Rev. 20.4? I saw thrones, and they
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them, answering Daniel 7.9, 10. I
beheld till the thrones were pitched down, and the judgment was set, and ( v.
22.) judgment was given to the saints of the most high. What difference (I
pray) betwixt St. John's [and the saints lived and reigned with Christ] and
Daniels [The Saints possessed the kingdom] viz. with the son of man who came in
the clouds? Think other men as they please, I cannot for my own part be
persuaded (considering the wonderful twist of agreement running through the
whole scripture) but that this kingdom of the son of man, when the saints shall
reign with him, and all people, nations, and languages shall serve him v. Vid.
Rev. 7.9. All nations, kindred, people, and tongues, a description of the same
kingdom as the context and citations justis^e.
14. is the very same with what has been so unanimously inculcated from the
rest of the Prophets, concerning the Jews conversion, and the Gentiles
enlargement. One thing, In the mean time, I think will scarce be questioned,
that Daniels date seems to be the day of judgment, agreeably to Js.
66.10.12.15.16.19.20.22. Where mention is made of the fiery indignation to be
powered forth; The Glory of Jerusalems restoration, and the Gentiles fulness,
with New Heavens, etc. in one and the same particular Prophecy.

By this time we may I hope make a shift to sift out St. Peter's meaning, in
referring his Readers to the Prophets, about the same glory, and the same
commencement, viz. New Heavens, and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,
to be founded at his coming, 2. Epist. 3. Chap. 2.4.13. v. etc. From which
Chapter though some busy heads may possibly frame objections to frustrate the
expectation, raised namely from the conflagration, and dissolution here
mentioned, yet let them know that by the same industry, they must disappoint
St. Peter's meaning too, who notwithstanding such dissolution teaches us to
expect the accomplishment of that mystery mentioned by the Prophets of New
Heavens, etc. By which, if after recourse to the Prophets, we find any thing
else that can be meant consonant to the other scriptures, than what I have
hitherto instanced, I shall willingly retract all this for the advantage of so
desiderable a satisfaction. Till then may these following considerations be
accepted as neither impertinent, nor tedious.

First, Whether St. Peter, since he sends us to the Prophets v. 2. had not
(probably) an eye amongst other Prophecies to Js. 65. from the 17. to the end,
and Js. 60. through the whole Chapter, but especially v. 21? The which
allegations who ever shall decline from affixing them on the consolation of Js.
let him weigh maturely before he speak, lest his praecipitancy impeach See
before, what was observed from Romans 11. 25, 26.
St. Paul as an accessory to his rashness. Secondly, Whether it be not
rational to conclude that the Apostle at the 8. v. had respect to the common
saying of the Jews (to whom Vid. his entrance to his first Epist. To the
strangers scattered, etc. i. e. Jews dispersed, etc.
he writ) whose formal words of the Day of judgment, were wont to be, One day
with the Lord is as a thousand years; rather than to the 90. Ps. where the
words One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, are not, though the latter
part of the sentence [A thousand years as one day] may allude thither? And who
should not sooner judge that the same form of speaking, quoted by Justin
Martyr, and Irenaeus (two renowned primitive witnesses to this truth) was taken
from this Epist. of St. Peter, than from the forementioned Ps. Forasmuch as
they likewise use it (as the Jewish Doctors did) for the day of judgment?
Justin Martyr distinctly alleging in these terms, treating of that day, [we
know that that saying. The day of the Lord is as a thousand years, points
hither. Thirdly, Whether the fiery devastation here described be any greater
rubb to this hope of Israel, than the same intimation in Holy Dan. Chap. 7. and
Js. 66. (where also the fiery vengeance is mentioned, and yet the Jews
restoring most pregnantly avouched,) or than the tenor of the whole Bible,
which constantly ranketh this glory under the 7. Trumpet? Fourthly, Whether
this wonderful concordance of St. Peter with the rest of the scripture ought
not to persuade us that the coming of our Lord here mentioned ( v. 4.) at which
he By comparing the 4. v. Where is the promise of his coming, with 13. v.
According to his promise, appears plainly that the Promise is fixed at his
coming.
pitcheth this stately change, is his expected personal coming to judgment at
the 7. trumpet, and not his former vindictive appearance in fury at the
desolation of Ier. by the Romans, to which the incomparably learned Dr. Hammond
is wont to referr many passages of the New Testament, which (my thinks) in this
present text, the Analogy to other places were sufficient to distinguish?
Lastly, Whether the scoffing here intimated v. 3. can be at any thing else The
time hits it well. In the last days, The primitive days being for it.
than this very opinion, since the Opponent, i. e. the Scoffer, disputes
directly against it, but the Respondent, viz. the Apostle, pleads expressly
for it? See all this made good. The Question in controversy is about the
Promise of Christ's coming, which the Millenary affirms to consist in an
unexpressible restitution. Against this the It would be inquired, since the
scoffers are supposed to be Christians, in what other sense (than which I have
named) can they be said to scoff at our Lords coming, for as to his coming to
judgment (in the general notion) I think never any Christians did or will deny
it; Nor can any imagine the Apostle should bend his aim against speculative
Atheists, such as Lucian, Diagords etc. For who ever heard of can think that
such toothless Barkers as those Dogs are, may be of any dangerous influence to
well-grounded Christians? so that upon that score there had not needed such
carnest incitement to remembrance and caution, as the Apostle here uses, which
certainly must necessarily import the scoffing party not only to be Christian
but very considerable too. As for the practical Atheist and loose-liv'd wretch
this text meddles not with that capacity in chief, For this scoffer deals with
arguments.
Scoffer objects (so much light the particle [For] will afford us, it being a
causal Conjunction naturally leading into an argument.) e. g. Where is this
promise of his coming in such a restitution as you Chiliasts dreath of, what
appearance see ye in the least measure toward any such mutation? For since the
Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were; Tempestuous wars still,
angry commotions, abominable lives, dissolute manners, Rebellions, Treasons,
All things as they were; What hopes then of any such change? I should be
unwilling to prevaricate one jot, but have I hope presented the Argument in its
natural colors, being (for the sum of it) such an one as (really) I my self
have heard from an ancient minister. But on the other side, The Apostle seems
to me most confidently to assert it v. 13. Add to this text of St. Peter Act.
3.21. spoken also by S. Peter upon the same affidavit of the Prophets, and on
the same pitch of time When the heavens disclose him.
Nevertheless etc. q. d. Say the scoffers what they please, We according to his
promise look, for By observing the speech in, Js. 51.15.16. of Js. deliverance
from Egypt, it may (peradventure) be gathered what the New Heaven and New Earth
may imply. I am thy God who divided the Sea ( viz. the Red Sea) And I put my
words in thy mouth, (i. e. I gave thee my law) and covered thee with the
shadow of Mine hand, that I might plant the Heavens, and lay the foundation of
the Earth, ( viz. Make thee a Kingdom or Commonwealth in the Land of promise)
for in that notion Heaven and Earth are frequently taken in the Prophets. So
here, New Heaven and New Earth. i. e. a New Kingdom, or New manner of
Government.
new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Shall we after all this be difficult to grant that this admirable circle of
mysteries, (I mean this renowned Chiliad) is that which the scriptures call the
Day of judgment? I will add but a word or two to what is already said, but (I
think) from such evidences as will hardly be evaded from particularizing the
day of judgment, though they also determine this expectation of Israel to that
very day. Examine we first that famous judging of the Heathen in the valley of
Iehosophat, Joel. 3. from the 9. to the end, which many of our Divines, (far
enough from my opinion in this business) interpret literally of that Terrible
day, forasmuch as the 13. v. speaks the same thing with Rev. 14.15. But that
the Rev. in that text speaks of the very time of judgment, none will sure deny
that views one like the son of man coming in a cloud v. 14. Read now on in
Joel, from v. 16. to the end, and tell me if this great good thing to Israel be
not at the 18. v. affixed to that very day. I know thou will shift me by the
mark Pleading (I wisse) to a distinct argument. But I ask thee who made that
mark? did not they who allwaies misunderstood the Prophecy? For that it is of
the same contents with the 16. and 17. v. (where no such mark appears, nay,
where the Characters point directly to the judgment too) let our own reason
(unless we have a mind to forfet it,) inform us; The Lord shall roar out of
Sion, etc. The Heavens and the Earth shall shake, etc. Surely that Dreadful
day. But the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
Children of Is. etc. See Js. 60.21. which Chapter assures us of a performance
for these things on ^arth.
Then shall Jerusalem be holy, etc. We are wont to think Then and that Day
aequipollents. Lord! That an unadvised scratch with a pen should be able to
divert so clear, and so powerful a Truth. Another full as pregnant
illustration of this sense may be fetched from Zach. 14. Where also is the
description of that wonderful day, v. 4, 5, 6, etc. The Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee, v. 5. will certainly evince so much,
collated with Daniels [Thousand Thousands,] Chap. 7.10. and St. Paul's [All that
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him] 1 These. 4.14. as also Consider whether
the mutual accord of scripture be not sufficient to particularize the day of
Christ, 2 These. 2.2. to the judgment, though I confess the Authority of the
Admirable Dr. Hammond sways much to the contrary, see the former Chapter in
verses 7.8.9.10.
2 These. 1.7. [Revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels.] But what follows?
In that day ( v. 8.) shall living waters go forth from Ierus. etc. to the end
of the Chap. Manifestly describing that unmatchable glory and Indulgence to
Ierus. where, yet, Holiness on the horse belles, v. 20. is I trow legible
enough to intimate the state to be performed on earth, and not in Heaven, vid.
sup.

The Ancient Jews kept constantly up to this tenet, never understanding by the
Great day of judgment (so frequent in their Rabbines, and derived from thence
by our Savior and his Ap.) less than a time of many years, yea, some (strange
to tell) punctually a If the Jews be not restored till our Savior comes (as is
formerly proov'd) who ever imagind their continuance in this glorious state of
their restitution to bean action of a few days?
thousand years continuance, in which term they conceive those tremenda
Magnalia, through all the Prophets to be achieved by the Messiah. Whence even
at this day they look not for him, until the Great day of judgment; So that
every Thunderclap sollicits them to this expectation. Under this notion was
the famed Millennium, beheld in the first three centuries, looking on this
whole space as the Day of judgment, and the mysterious sabbath in which the
saints should reign with Christ the Lord. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and
Lactantius, are (assuredly) worthy to be reported after, amongst whom the
Zealous Martyr, in his dialogue with the Jew could in no wise forbear from
fastening the impeachment of Atheism and Heresy, upon the dissenting Christians,
positively concluding, that who ever were See dr. Fernes testimony in the
preface.
in all points Orthodox, embraced this contemplation.

After all these premises take I pray another short view of that lofty portray
in Rev. 21. and another parallel reference of the New Testament. Unless the
performance there described of the marriage of the lamb, and its appendant
royalties, were the very day of judgment, how comes it (not only to be a The
spirit uses transitions into distinct visions, evidently importing variety,
e.g. After these things, Chap. 7.1. after this Chap. 7 9. etc. But in this
place no such thing.
continued vision to the 20. Chap. but,) to abandon the unbeleeving, and
abominable, to the lake of fire and brimstone, v. 8? Questionless Joels great
and terrible day of the Lord, yet attended with that incomprehensible solemnity
of the marriage, answerable to the records of the Holy Prophets. How suitable
to all this is the parable in St. Matthew. 25. representing Christ's coming to
judgment by a Marriage, v. 10. And they that were ready went in with him, etc.
This is that very wedding to which the Jews were bidden so long ago, S. Matthew.
22. but then like rude shavelings they kicked at the favor, so that the
Gentiles were surrogated to the first part of the entertainment. For be assuted
(dear Reader) that it enters not into my thoughts to deny these Nuptials to be
coaetaneous with Religion; but that the Jsr. must be admitted one day to call
him Jshi. if it were she that called him ^a^li ut supra Hos. 2.16.
royal banquet is not yet served in, and that the latter part of the festivity
is the same with that in the Rev. there is one notable circumstance in the
context which strongly evinceth, viz. a casting forth one of the Abominable
guests (according to Rev. 21.8.) into the Lake of darkness, where there is
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. v. 13. How facil might the way be into diverse
obscurities of Scripture by the dexterity of this Key, were it once approov'd
of! I have not endeavored to heap together what ever might be collected to
this illustration, for truly the sacred writings every where ab^und with such
testimonies, so that I might quickly outstrip my design of briefness. It
suffices, if the constant harmony of both the Testaments may imprint on our
spirits this notion of the Day of judgment, viz. a considerable duration in
which the mystery of God declared to the Prophets shall be established on
Besides what is above asserted, twere not amiss to weigh the phrases here in
Rev. 21. if they can possibly mean otherwhere than on earth. Coming down, from
God, out of Heaven. v. 2. ought it not rather to be (if signifying in Heaven,
going up to God, from the earth. So v. 3. Tabernacle of God is with men, and
shall dwell with them, not, Men are with the Tabernacle of God, and shall dwell
with him, viz. in Heaven.
earth. But why should we mince it all this while, and not rather speak out,
since the time is expressly declared by the word, and believed by the first
three Ages to be 1000. years?

The Thousand years of Satan's being bound ( Rev. ^0.2.) if they should be
allowed still to come, our ^^terpreters are so sensible the result will then be
that ^here is a definite Millennium yet to be run over in, which our Lord is to
be invested with some distinct manner of royalty, that they generally bend
their forces (though upon several persuasions) to make this ligation already
past. The usual dates from whence they (diversely) reckon his binding are The
mistake of them who judge the binding to be already past arises by thinking
Satan's binding (Chap. 20.) the same with Michaels conquering him Chap. 12.
whereas it is one thing to be beaten from Heaven. i. e his soverainty in the
Roman empire which then worshipped him in heathenism, another to be bound, cast
into the bottomless pit, shut up, and sealed. Besides, the ^inding the strong
man is reck^n'd in Scripture as the trophie of Chr. only, but Michael was not
Chr. as appears Dan. 10 where Chr ( viz. the man in linen v. 5.6. with Rev.
1.13, 14, 15.) speaks of Michael as ^^ne diverse from him, See Dan. 10.21. But
especially the place distinguishes them Rev. 12.12. Woe to the Inhabie. etc.
Whereas (Chap. 20.3.) he is so bound and sealed as not able to deceive or hurt
the nations etc. He is (truly) too too much wedded to his own opinion that will
not take the spirits comment on the action.
either our Saviors Nativity, or his Passion (about what times it is likely
some Oracles did cease) or the destruction of Jerusalem, or lastly from
Constantine. So liberal may we be to all these mistakes, as to proffer them
their choice, and yet use but one weapon to overthrow them all; For which
soever of these be pitched on, the entrance of the ten-horned and the
two-horned beasts in Rev. 13. commonly expounded (even by these accountants) of
the papacy, and the arising of the Locusts from the bottomless pit, at the
fifth Trumpet, understood (probably) of Mahumedism, must necessarily be included
within the limits of ligation; The former as appearing in the fourth or fifth
century, the latter at the seventh. But can any reasonable man yield that Satan
(during these times) was, not only bound, and shut up, but sealed too, (mark
that) that he might deceive the nations no more; while he was both loose, and
active in conveying into the world two the grandest impostures that ever the
Christian ages knew? And that his obstetrication was assistant to both these
births let the Spirit decide the controversy, who (as to the ascent of Locusts
Chap. 9.) attributes the opening the pit to the starr which fell from Heaven,
v. 1, 2. But what I pray can this starr be but Satan? and that in a double
capacity, first as a lapsed Angel, secondly as lately beat down from heaven by
Holy Michael, Chap. 12.7, 9. Again, These Locusts had a King, the Angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name is Abaddon, i. e. a Destroyer; which elogies who
ever shall attribute to any other, he must beg leave either to interpret the
bottomless pit of somewhat else besides Hell, or the Destroyer belonging to
that pit of some one else than the Devil. Nor is our evidence less clear for
his energy (far beyond the nature of ligation and sealing) at the nativity of
the Beast Rev. 13. of whom it is expressly delivered v. 3. that the Dragon
gave him power, and his seat, and great authority. If either of these instances
may speak him bound, I think the only difficulty will be to produce a villainy
of so aggravated a malice, whereby ever to assert his liberty.

But examine we them somewhat more distinctly. The first three Epochaes (yet
that way takes the very learned Primate of Ireland) besides what is already
objected, implie the Devil to be bound for that whole space in which Blessed
Michael conflicted with him, Rev. 12. Surely the bitter throws by which
Christianity wrung in, and the warm blood of so many constant Martyrs, were
arguments sufficient to make appear that Michael had not to deal with a bounden
Adversary. Again. If he were then bound, the little season of his loosing Chap.
20.3. runs on apace to finish a seventh centurie, and has (Seemingly) much
overshot the proportional limits of (...) being far more than half the
intervall of his binding. Seriously, I am far from aiming to blast any
reverend Authorities, but doubtless the Holy Jesus requires more exact
enucleations of his sacred messages, than either of these faint resolutions can
amount to. Into such intanglements are those men falln who have once Slipped the
clue of Truth! In a word. Can it consist with Satan in a cage, and cooped up
from abusing the world, that he should be able to impose upon the the young
Christians so To these fe^^s of the D^agon (doubtless,) (and not to Garnets
straws,) the Ap. points in 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. [by ly^ng miracles, after the working
of Satan] forasmuch as, I am persuaded) there is no opinion in which they
differ from us, but (if well searched after) was either introduced, or is
maintained by such collusion.
rank a piece of Legerdemane, as by making show of miraculous cures, wrought (I
wiss) by the relics o^ Martyrs, to cheat the cred^lous world into the
establishment of Saint-worship, upon the mistaken ground (so grossly were they
abused) of Revel. 20. which prerogative of the Martyrs reigning with Christ
1000. years, they expounded of this * Idolatrous Royalty, into which the
Dragon had thus gulled them by the occasion of those wonders, which they
presumed to be the festques of providence as intended to point them to such
expositions. Truly if it can be prooved that Satan was all this while in his
dungeon, I shall be the apter to think that he spoke from his hole (through a
Trunk) into Dunstan's crucifix, at a Council in Canterbury, Anno Domini 972.
(which falls within his binding, begin the account where you please,) uttering
an audible voice to this purpose [Dunstan's opinion is the right], he at that
time being a most ardent Proctour against the allowance of Marriage to the
Clergy.

What should now deter us from making this deduction, That this very Millennium
is that space which the sacred writ has defined The Millon. of ligation is
confessedly tempus definitum. For after must he be loosed a little season, Ergo
that of Christ's Kingdom is so too; Since one and the same space is meant.
for these mysteries? Hear an express from the Spirit, Revel. 20.4. I saw the
** souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Judge whether I ly by
these words of an early commentator upon the Apoc. c. 20.4. Me. ito cum Ch^^sto
and vixerunt, and regnarunt. Quemadmodum videmus etiam sub fidelibus Regibus
a^que principibus, dum adoran^ur, contra omnem etiam corporis infirmita^em, ac
Daemonum energiam ostendunt dat^^ sibi a Deo gratiam.
If any court me over critical ^n^streining the Emphasis of ((...)) in the
Text, their partiality ought not to make them forget with what zeal the same
obse^vation is pursu^d ^n the dispute of (...).
Sure this expression will no way comply with their exposition who interpret
the first resu^rect^on of ^he life of grace, that notion being d^sag^eeable to
separated souls, or if it were no^, yet could not the rest of the dead, after
the thousand years (suppo^'d to be the wicked) ever live that life, viz. of
grace. But if we give way that the same word [ Live in the space of one line,
may be appliable to two so diffe^ent senses, as to import the life of Grace to
the one sort, and life in its p^oper sense to the other, we open such a g^p of
license to perverse Cavillers, that by the opportunity of such f^eedom of
acceptions they may distort these Holy Embassies into what ever compliances may
best suit with their designs.
Jesus -- And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, which that
we may rest assured to be the very same thousand in which the Devil is bound,
the Greek affords an unavoidable evidence, for having expressed the time of
Satan's binding ( verse. 2.) without an article, it delivers the same measure of
Christ's Kingdom with the article as emphatically reflecting upon the foresaid
thousand, verse. 4. (...). Where doubtless we should not have injured the idiome
(considering the want of ((...)) in the second verse,) to have Englisht it
those thousand years. Now say in good earnest, Is it not more than likely that
St. Peter intended the same thing, remembering, 'twas the Jewish paraphrase (as
you heard) of the Day of Judgment, [One day with the Lord is as a thousand
yeers] to which St. Peter (Iure) alluded? I shall not need to tell you of the
extant tradition of old Elias, (a Jew that lived under the second Temple) to
this sense. 'Twere handsomer for us to remember (with some reverence) that the
most enlightened, the most pious ages, and the most fruitful of Zealous Martyrs
through all the Christian times, were of this mind too. And peradventure, it
might do us no injury to reflect that in the thirteen following Centuries
(which opposed it) Antichrist both gained and kept his footing by the advantage
of that oversight. Rev. 10.7. Romans 11.25.


Give sentence now impartially if this Incomparable beauty of Israel commence
not at our Lords next coming, and if the commensuration of these
Transcendencies be not (in the sacred language) the day of Judgment. What now
though some objections may interfeer? not readily to be resolved * Mystery (my
thinks) might easily stop such The Socinians and Arians, etc. have too sadly
warned us that wanton wits may entangle any Truth with very perplexed
intrica^ies.
gaping mouths. But for reconciling the difficulties emergent from this Tenet,
I hope hereafter (as the Lord shall Lend me assistance and time) to appear to
the World with more ample satisfaction; Till then give me leave succinctly to
propose a few suggestions, to abate, at least, the vigor of reluctancies. If
any (in the first place) conceit that this larger duration than they have
hitherto imagined leads into too gross conceptions of that divine Assize, as if
causes before the Searcher of Spirits required so slow a discussion, as before
our earthly Tribunals; Let such objectors know, that scruples of this kind
proceed merely from the mistaken notion which themselves have framed of that
Terrible Day; presuming it to consist one^y in some shorter hearing and
deciding the deeds of the World, whereas in truth (by Scripture-assurance) it
conteines that noble chein of miracles, within which period his Judgment and
righteousness shall in an inconceivable way be manifested over the whole earth,
and the world presented with a Legible Comment upon that Text, [He will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy] Then shall the Sea Ezekiel. 39 21. All the
Heathen shall see my Judgment, etc. The Prophet speaking (from God) about the
restaurat on of Jer. at the confusion of Gog and Magog. And that we may
conclude it to po^nt at the day of Judgment, the Spirit says verse. 8. This is
the Day whereof I have spoken, where [(...)] (It is done) is a firm token of
the final Day; as in Revel. 16, 7. at the seventh v^al. And Rev. 21.6. ut
supra. de Euphraie.
Heathen know that he is the Lord, when he shall be sanctified before their
eyes, It being his own holy names sake (not Israel's) for which he does these
things. Ezekiel. 36.22, 23.

But time shall then be no longer, Revel, 10. All duration being swallowed up
in eternity, and no more measuring by Thousand years. I will not here discuss
the Philosophical quirk of Tempus, aevum, and aeternitas, though from thence (I
think) was this objection hatched, (and this is not the first point in Divinity
that has been injured, by laying it too close to the Philosophy- Meet-Wand.)
Nor shall I need to detect the shallowness of that conceit, which foundeth the
nature of Time on the motion of the Orbs, as if a year were not 52. Weeks
though there were no Sun in the firmament, nor an hour the twelfth part of a
day, though we knew not how to bound it by the shadow. To side-slip such toys
as these, Let any one judge of this following sense, if it be not clear and
round. The Lord It Is the Lord (who is here called the Angel that stood on the
Sea) as evidently appears by his majestic description verse the first.
Christ swears (and his Oath sure is worth the heeding) That upon the expiring
of the Time, Times, and half a Time, or the 1260 Days, (being the limited
cycle of the beast and his contemporals in the Revel.) there shall be no
Suitably to Is. 60.22. (speaking of this mystery) I the Lord will hasten it in
his time.
longer time, but this mystery shall be fulfilled, nothing else shall intervene,
but the seventh Trumpet shall sound. That I have not miscommented upon this
sacred Oath read the sixth and seventh verses together, and try if thou can
find any other meaning. Again, examine the 5, 6, and 7. verses of this Chapter
in the Revel. by Dan. 12. and 7. The As in the Revel. so in Dan. he that takes
this oath is Christ himself, being [the Man clothed in linnen] of whom see Dan.
10.5, 6. with Rev. 1.23, 14, 15.
person in both places standing upon the waters, lifting up his hand to heaven,
and swearing by him that lives for ever, but in holy Daniel particularly
expressing the Time, Times, and half a Time. Lord! that men with eyes in their
heads should stumble in so plain a way, and rather expound this in Daniel of
Antiochus Epiphanes (be their account [by Days] never so uneven) than allow it
(in its genuine cleerness) to afford any light toward so despised a truth. One
thing I am sure of, that the countre-interpretations to this opinion, are
forced, haled and per dures, but such as run with it facil and natural, it
being (without question) an incomparable advantage to the extricating many
Knots in the Bible, could we but once conquer that piece of pride (which we
know who is so chid for) in esteeming our selves more infallible than the first
three hundred years.

It Is often ask't how can these things consist, since the notion of Judgment
imports a distribution of Justice according to every ones works, allowing no
capacity for conversion? so that if the Jews return be not till our Lord
appears in the clouds, how is it that they perish not amongst the enemies of
his Kingdom whereof they are the principal? I will return (for answer) the
words of that admirable Divine Mr. Mede (a gentleman certainly of as clear a
brain as ever the world could boast of) I salve it with a supposition of some
Nor will it one j^t take off from the exactress of the appointed Epoch ( viz
Christ's coming to judgment) considering how short a space this miraculous
conversion is promised to be effected ^^n, Is. 66.8. a place undoubtedly
treating of the Jews restitution, verse 20. where also is ment^oned the fiery
expostulation v. 15, 16. New Heavens, etc. v. 22. The inlargment of the
Gentiles. ver. 19. ut supra, yea and perhaps This very latitude or
latitude in that appearance, as being first to be uttered with some
preparation or preludium to the Jewish Nation, before his great and universal
appearing to the whole world to judgment. So Cestius Gallus the President of
Syria compassed Jerusalem with an Army, by way of anticipation, three years
before the final and fatal siege by Vespasian, for a warning to the believing
Jews to fligh to the mountains of Arabia, according to our Saviors sign given
them Luke 21.20. For strengthening of such a supposition, me thinks I discern in
Saint Matthew ( the Hebrew Evangelist) c. 24. verse 30. two such appearances
intimated, The one in the words, Then shall appear The sign of the Son of Man,
v. 19. And I will send a sign among them -- consider it.
sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and all the Tribes of the earth shall mourn;
( out of Zach. 12. verse. 10, 11, 12.) The other in the words following, And
they shall see the Son of man, coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and
great glory ( out of Dan. 7.)

But in case this may not satisfy, shall we therefore dare to gainsay some
Truths because our Mystery, Mystery.
shallow reasons cannot manage them? though truly without some such concession
that reverend man pleads for, I dare conclude that Malachy 4, 5, 6. will never
be understood while the world stands. Which great and dreadful day, that
burns like an oven, etc. verse 1. If not the day of judgment, 'twill prove
but of little assistance to unravell one Text by another. As for the marginal
reference, pointing at John the Baptist, the Admit the Fathers erred concerning
the person, and some other circumstances about this Elias, yet might the
substance of their opinion be true, for so they erred in many part culars of
the person, quality, and reign of Antichrist, yet for the substance the thing
was true.
Fathers (if we dare credit them) may deliver us of that scruple, generally
inclining that Christ's his second coming, (as well as his former) shall be
ushered in by that celestial harbinger, and (probably) the same Elias too, viz.
John the Baptist. If so, the margent breeds no repugnancy at al. It any yet had
rather construe this chapter of our Lords former coming, I require of him how
he dares cad that the Terrible Day of the Lord, burning as an O^en, and
devouring all the wicked root and branch, verse. 1. which our Savior himself
calls the Accept^ble y^er of the Lord, that proclames general mercy to the
Captives, sight to the blind, etc. Luke 4.18, 19, 21. How can that so sweet a
day be the same with this so dreadful, which sweeps a way root and branch, and
allows no quarter to the ungodly? or who will say that the spiritually
Remember the Apostles phrase [Led captive by the Devil, etc.] --
Captived, and blind, are not (during such captivity) in the state of
wickedness, yet, not then confounded, but illuminated? But especially how was
it true of the Holy Baptist in his former ministry (which yet Truth it self
spoke of him) that Elias first comes and restores all things, Mark 9.12. The
phrase being the same with what Saint Peter uses, Acts 3. Restitution of all
things; affixt to the time when he shall be revealed from heaven, verse 21? But
of that time Saint Paul will satisfy us, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. that it is when he
comes in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God; Surely this
very flaming day in Malachie, when the ungodly shallbe as the stubble, and that
day as a burning Oven. Lastly, who can possibly understand the Prophecy
otherwise, than of Israel's restitution, it being so consonant to the rest of
the Holy See Joel Zach, etc. ut supra. Joel 2.31. Great and Terrible Day. Note.
The glorious promises began to draw out in Christ's former coming (the Kingdom,
as was before advertised, being the same, though the state twofold,) Whence it
comes to pass that this Prophecy of 2. Joel, is quoted in Acts 2. of those
days; to wit, The Mystery beginning to issue forth then: but not to receive
full accomplishment (as to diverse particulars) till this Terrible Day, Ushe^d
in by the Suns darkness, the Moons turning into blood, etc. all which, the
Evangelists themselves (in the received opinion of the Church) refer to the
time of judgment Truly, this Note, if well observed, might cure many the like
webs in this controversy.
Penmen, who constantly date it on that Terrible Day? Pick any other meaning
from the second and third verse, who can; Only take in the fourth verse, for a
Monitor that Israel is here spoken to in propria persona. And for a corollary,
See how easily the sixth verse comes up to the same sense. He shall turn (or
(...), so Mark 9.12. (...). so in Acts 3.21. (...). Quaere, Whether this
notion, ( viz. conversion of the Jews) may not chiefly denominate Christ's
second coming, The time of restitution.
restore, see the LXX.) the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
hearts of the Children to the Fathers, i.e. He shall bring the refractary and
unbelieving postery of the Jewish nation, to have the same heart and mind
their holy Fathers and Progenitors had, who feared God and believed his
promises; that so their Fathers might as it were rejoice in them, and own them
for their own children; In plain English, he shall convert them to the faith of
that Christ, whom their Fathers hoped in, and looked for. I am now much
deceived, unless holy Gabriel interpret it the same way, Luke 1, 16, 17. both
in speaking literally of Israel, and in paraphrasing the latter part [And The
Hearts of Children to their Fathers,] by [And The disobedient to the Wisdom of
the just]. Read the Blessed Angels comment through. [ He shall go before him in
the spirit and power of Elias, to turn (or restore) the hearts of the Fathers
to the Children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the Just, to make ready a
people prepared for the Lord; to wit, he shall reduce the disobedient
offspring who now kick at Christ, to the wisdom and piety of the most zealous
of their Fathers, etc. This (by the way) is most sure, that the Gentiles in
Christ's former coming had gained little by this promise, in being effected upon
them, namely [restoring the hearts of the fathers to the children,] their
Ancestry being all Pagan.

As to the main difficulty of the Apocalyptical Gog and Magog, swarming, and
perishing at the end of the 1000. years, I commend every sober Reader to the
learned discourse of the worthy Mr. Mead, whose judgment about it was exceeding
solid, and virtuously modest, (as truly in all his tenets) and so powerfully
convincing, that no worse man than Dr. Twisse admired his discovery; Be only
thus far advertised, that Gog and Magog in the Revelation, are very far
different from those in Ezekiel. cap. 39. the one namely, to be destroyed at the
beginning, the other at the end of that renowned chiliad; So has it pleased
his wisdom, with two fiery conquests to begin and end that Terrible Day. The
Dawning whereof, or beginning of the Millennium is attended with the first
resurrection, and the morning-judgment on the then-appearing enemies of his
Kingdom; the evening, shut up with the universal resurrection, and the final
perdition of the latter Gog and Magog, with the casting of Satan into his
everlasting dungeon.

There Is none I hope will so distrust Gods providence, as to question the means
of deliverance from the wrathful flames of that day. How easy is it for the
God we serve to send forth fire with a limited commission? The guard of Angels
upon the elect ( Matthew. 24.31.) is neither weak nor subject to oversight. The
God of the Christians can secure us (if he please) without sindging in the
midst of the furnace, Dan. 3.27. Or peradventure the objects of that fury shall
be separated within the appointed lists of vengeance. Who can say, but that
Holy Joel's valley of * Jehos^phat, Chap. 3.12. and St. John's Quaere, if the
valley be not S. John's Armag.
Armageddon, Rev. 16.16. may intimate some such thing? And why may not St.
Paul's catching up in the clouds, and meeting our Savior in the air, point at
some miraculous rescue from that burning oven? It may not perchance work much
upon any, to hear that the Jews can produce a From Rabbi Elias.
tradition to this purpose, far Elder than the days of our Savior, though of
this I am certain, that the Apostles in their writings alluded to diverse
passages for which there is no other Testimony extant in the earth save Jewish
traditions. 'Twill (I dare say) pose the concordance to find where the
Archangel disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses, verse. 9. of S.
Jude. And who could be angry with me if I should tell him the Apostle seems to
speak wide enough from their sense that presume this catching up to be our
immediate transport to heaven? He expresses himself (me thinks) warily enough
to avoid that mistake, by Clouds, and Air, lest (possibly) we might imagine
Heaven to be meant, whereas we meet with many other places where this caution
is not so curiously prompted, e. g. The fowls of heaven or of the air
indifferently, for in the Hebrew notion the air is comprehended under the name
of Heaven, but here (though the hebraism would have allowed it) no mention of
heaven, but clouds and air. Consider well the context 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Those that
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, not carry with him. Does not [Bring
with him] imply the immediate stage (after the fiery vengeance) to be the
earth, not heaven? Again, Those that sleep in Jesus, not all the dead, will God
bring with him, So v. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first; What think you
of the first and second resurrection, most exactly parallel to 1 Cor. 15.23,
24. Of an order in the resurrection, Christ the first fruits, afterward, they
that are Christ's at his coming; not all the dead at Christ's coming, but they
that are Christ's; remember that; If any one tax me for rendering it
[Afterwards] I demand why our Translation turned the former word so, the two
words being of the very same cognation and extent, the one (...), the other
(...). some I persuade my self will tax them of partiality here and not me; The
truth is, they observed the former had allowed a great latitude betwixt Christ
the first fruits and those at his coming, viz, 1654. years (now) besides what
may be. And lest the Millenaries should catch hold on this handle, and require,
Why may not the latter also afford the extent they plead for betwixt the ^wo
resurrections, being words of equal force aad mean^ng, (differing no way, but
one made of the other) To av^id this rock, they Englisht the first, Afterwa^d,
(implying the respit of above 1600. years) but the second, Then, as if
(forsooth) it had been (...), intimating an immediate prosecution of the same
action, whereas It Is in the Greek not (...) and (...), but (...) and (...).
Truly, this is somewhat, but I would to God this had been all the foull play
Translations had offered to this opinion. I shall make thee start in the next
Chapter, Reader.
Afterward comes the end, the universal resurrection, etc. How close to this
runs Rev. 20.4.5. and who might not marveil, if the sense were diverse? If now
universal tradition through the whole Church of the Jews, and the constant
doctrine in the first three centuries of Christians, (acknowledged by the
Adversaries) founded on so harmonious concordance of old and new Testament, be
not sufficient to vindicate a truth against the scoffings of flesh and blood,
objecting carnally, to what is delivered for a Mystery, I know not what can.
The Lord open our Eyes.

CHAP. III.
Prooving (from what has been premised) Christ's personal reign on earth.

THat the forementioned Beatitude is to be performed on earth, will (I think)
scarcely be doubted by reasonable men, for most certainly, the 60: Chap. of Js.
all over, and the 65. from the 17. v. to the end (to which two, the 21. Chap.
of the Rev. is in many verses adaequate) can no way be satisfied but on earth,
and it is as clear that the rest of the prophets hold an even proportion with
those two Chapters. That all this bliss takes rise at the Blessed Jesus's
coming to judgment in fire and vengeance, (for I desire to be understood
without any amphibology) I am at present strongly persuaded that the second
Chapter makes good. The only demand that can remain is this, How for all this
can Christ's personal reign be asserted? To which I first retort thus, if such
an incomparable mystery (to receive achievement on earth) must enter at his
next coming, how well can it be avoided? it being m^st irrefragable that the
Jews restoration, and the Gentiles fullness, neither was ever, or can be
imagined a beauty of a days term, but a continued state of some very
considerable permanence; and if no more but this be granted, 'twill prove a
good step to the Tenet, it being (I doubt not) more than ever the Adversaries
expected to find proof. But that is not all. See Jer. 23.5, 6. -- The Lord our
righteousness shall execute judgment and justice on the earth. If on the earth
be not English, I have no more to say. The prophecy is As has been
sufficiently proov'd.
certainly yet unfulfill'd, * vide supra; weigh the verses following. Look
Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. I the Lord have spoken it, may help to assuage incredulity.
See Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. To this purpose is Zach. 6.12. Where the Righteous branch
must build the temple, (and in a prophecy for certain to be verified on earth
v. 15.) So Zach. 14.16. where the King, the Lord of Hosts, is to be worshipped
at Jerusalem. I am sensible enough how these places are commonly frustrated, by
answering, that they may all be made good though Christ abide in heaven. I
yield so too, they might and would be true if that only were the meaning. But
then remember, that the At the former Chap. prooves.
fulfilling is to be at his coming, at what time that admirable Prophecy
(amongst the rest) is to be completed, Js. 54.5. Where Jerusalems maker becomes
her husband, in most admirable harmony to Rev. 21.2. Js. 62.4, 5. As also that
other Rev. 21.3. The Tabernacle of God is with men, and shall dwell with them,
it being formerly averred and cleared, that by Tabernacle is meant the humane
nature of Christ: I would fain be satisfied what other sense can amount from
these sayings? If the humane nature's being and dwelling with men (which Ezekiel.
also praedicted c. 37.) an^ Christ in his body exercising righteousness and
executing justice in the Jer. 33.15.
land, (and this in such a state which can not possibly be Momentary, to wit,
the conversion of the Jews, etc.) require not a meaning and performance in this
world, we must despair of any assurance in expounding scripture. It Is very
remarkable (in passing) that St. Paul interprets this particular prophecy of
Js. 54. (which yet I persuade me, will not be imagined accomplishable any where
than on earth, See v. 3.) to the New Jerusalem that is above. Galat. 4.27. How
think you, is not this the very same Jerusalem, which S. John tells us (at the
appointed time) comes down from God out of Heaven? Which has been before
proov'd to be the mystery described by the Prophets, of Jews and Gentiles, etc.

From the new Testament, view Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this World, etc.
Sure, This world is English. For the earth, doubtless, and this lower world,
shall be the scene of some most eminent transaction, meant by Christ's kingdom;
Howbeit it was never imagined by any but base, carnal, and ignoble tempers, to
be less than Rev. 21.27. Js. 60.21: All righteous.
spiritual, and of quite another mode than the fashion of this world; which
consideration alone, I am deceived if it do not fully extricate those words of
our blessed Savior, which some have made use of for their chief argument
against this apprehension, John 18.36. My kingdom is not (...) see Joh. 15.19.
Where the knot is unti'de in S. John's own phrase [ye are not the World] viz.
not wordly.
of this world: It Is not said (in) but (of) viz. not after the manner of
worldly pomp, or administration, not of the same notion with what flesh and
blood suggests. or our shallow capacities are wont to apprehend, briefly (as
himself expresses it) not from hence, but out of Heaven from God, Rev. 21.2.
and every way a Heavenly glory, though on earth.

Mean what it will, (for I never encouraged to too much boldness in this
mysterious abyss) It Is certain we find ( Rev. Vid. 2 Timothy 4.1. The final glory
in heaven is (surely) the Fathers throne, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. Ergo the sons throne
must mean somewhat else. Nor yet can it be meant of his present Kingdom whereby
he rules in our Hearts (in our mortal state) being propounded as a subsequent
reward, and not as a present fruition, for we are but viatores yet; not
victores -- To him that overcomes will I give, etc.
3.21.) a distinct throne appropriated to Christ from that which belongs to his
Father. I will not multiply Texts till I have gained some footing, at what time
some I dare say will wonder to see what (otherwise inextricable) problemes this
clue may disintangle. Take one other, which if well understood speaks so home,
that it can never be avoided by any that understands the Greek. Hebr. 1.6.
(...) -- (...). Our Translators (to avoid this proof) do strangely transpose
[Again] contrary to the order of the Greek, that it may have reference to [he
says,] by way of a new quotation, and not to [bringeth,] But how
disingenuously, let any judge. Besides, while by such a transposition they
endeavor to refer the meaning of the passage to Christ's former coming, do not
they diametrically struggle against St. Paul, who determines his meaning to
his next coming Heb. 2.5? and that in the same word too, [(...),] which all
that understand the Greek know to signify most properly, strictly and
unavoidably [The Earth,] It being a participle of the feminine gender, used in
single, supposing (...) to be understood, e. g. (...), The inhabited Earth.
Read then the Text according to the original, and judge. [ And when he The
orig. (...) has the signification of the future tense, being the second aorist
of the subjunctive Mood, besides, it is joined with (...), Again], so that:
(...)] ought (in strictness) to be renderd [And when he shall bring again, etc.]
brings again the first begotten upon the earth he says, etc.] But Lord!
what pains some men will take to fool themselves out of truth! One thing may
not be pretermitted, that the text (as indeed the whole context) implies some
very glorious matter, which (if S. Paul may be allowed the Judge of his own
sense) is determined to By turning it The World to come they would seem to mean
the Kingdom of glory, but we shall find that the world in that sense is always
(...), and (...). but no where in all the Bible (...).
(...), The Earth to Come. What difference now between Saint Paul's state of the
earth to come, and S. Peter's new earth?

CHAP. IV.
Briefly showing the use of this Tenet.

BUt to what purpose is all this? May we not be saved without the knowledge of
it? Yes, I doubt not, or else, God help! But in the first place, It Is I am sure
no great blessing to stand in the number of such as S. Peter brands for
Scoffers, nor certainly any small exemption to be deliverd from that rabble.
Secondly, if it were proposed so many thousand years ago as a matter of so
rich-consolation to the hearers at that distance, it assuredly cannot want its
Treasures of felicity, (if well examined) to us who in all likelihood live just
on the borders of so great a mutation; I am sure much nearer than the ancient
Jews. Thirdly it would take off a great stumbling block, and hindrance to
conversion, from the poor mistaken Jew, who (being fortified with so universal
tradition of Ancestry) upon this stock, both hates and scorns us; And count we
it a small thing to be instrumental in so great a work toward Israel? for whom
the Dearest Jesus has See the 137. Psalm. and the 13. and 14. chapter of Is. all
over.
yet so yerning bowels that he will bless them that bless her? Numb. 24.9.
What though the plenteous vintage of their return be not expected till our
Lords coming, yet think we not that some few clusters of grapes would be an
acceptable offering unto our Lord? How ardently might it affect the despised
Hebrew to spy the graceful portray of his hopes in our New Testament? How
could his heart persist so irrationally obstinate, as not straitway to yield
our Jesus to be their Messiah, did but our Commentators dandle their rugged
souls by the gentle parallels of our Testament with theirs, and Kindly point
from Revel. 1.7. to Zach. 12.10? By which festque they might soon discern that
this is He, whom they once so barbarously pierced, and for whom (at The Jews to
this day expect not the Messiah before the day of Judgment. ut supra.
his next coming) they shall mourn with so deep compunction. But while they
observe us to distort the Scriptures (in avoidance of this opinion) by rough
and unnatural expositions, engrossing all to By our Gloss of Gospel Times, etc.
ut supra.
our selves, and defrauding their expectations of such promises, in which I
dare say they have the better half: they are scandalized at our partiality,
deride our giddiness, and grow confirmed in their infidelity. Fourthly, it were
the way to avoid almost every heresy that now reigns, since there can scarce
one be named, which has not been built upon the mistaken grounds of this
opinion. Thus Vavasor Powel Imps his faction upon this stock, counting the
Kingdom of the Saints to be erected in his tribe. The Anabaptists in Germany
(and the Levellers, their offspring, here,) pleaded that they were the Saints
that must inherit the earth. Nay, it is wonderful, that Popery, and many other
e. g. The Quakers, so numerous among us.
abominations crept in by the oversight of this tenet. Lastly, It opens an easy
possibility for the interpretation of many knotty perplexities in Scripture,
about which the weakness of some, the countrestrifes of many, and the
uncertainty of all, make our Commentators ridiculous, and our Religon subject
to contempt. I could name diverse, (and hope to do so in an after-treatise) But
now I aim at briefness.

CHAP. V.
Showing, that by misunderstanding this opinion, the Jews mistook Christ, and
the Gentiles let in Antichrist.

THat the Messiah was expected by the Jews in the age our Savior was born, is
so clear, that it needs no proof, Daniels Chap. 9.24, 25.
WEEKS had so daded them to the very time; From hence arose their swelling
hopes that the Kingdom of God should immediately appear, S. Luke 19.11. Which
apprehension, to as many as understood it It Is always the same Kingdom, though
under a twofold state as above showed from Dan. 2. etc.
rightly, the Holy Spirit never taxes, but backs it with a gracious elogie, S.
Mark 15.43. Luke 23.51. Luke 2.25.37.38. But ahlas! the traditions of the
Elders had interlac'd it with so many About that time All the East (as Tacitus
informs us) expected a King to rule over the whole world.
secular appertenancies, and external pageantryes, that the subtle Dragon by
this advantage dazzeld their fancyes with the glaring splendor of their
mistaken, and falsely pitched pomp, whereby the eyes of that unhappy age, now
(God wot,) made dim by such spangling flashes, quite overlookt the meaner
obscurity of his former coming, through their ill-manag'd conceptions of that
misrepresented glory. Upon this mistake they proceeded, ( John 6.) being
convinced by the miraculous entertainment, that he was that Prophet in whom
these glorious promises (misinterpreted by them) were to find accomplishment,
to make him a King. verse 14, 15. Thus in a word they oversaw that Rev. 22.16.
morning star, because their abused minds had not learnt to look for him in
that duskie cloud of his first appearance, nor rightly to distinguish of his
twofold coming, whereas the passages for both, through the whole Scriptures,
were so clear and pregnant, that it had been impossible for any Sophister below
the Devil to have frustrated their perspicuity; nor he (I think) by any weaker
shade than the power of darkness.

'Twas a feat of the same hand that juggl'd Antichrist into the world; for this
most lovely beauty within some while contracted so much soil (through the
odious defilements of unworthy minds) that by zealous Eusebius's days many
conscientious professors chose rather to gainsay the authority of the Eusebius.
was one of those zelotical Antichiliasts, and did his best to undermine the
Rev. o strange!
Apocalypse it self, than afford enterteinment to what they conceived so
ridiculous a vanity. The Devil could wish for no greater averseness than to
become so shie, as rather to deny Scripture than embrace a truth! About those
times the accursed Julian must needs inquire of Apollo's Oracle concerning his
Persian War, where the cunning Devil turns sullen, and would not be flatterd
by his many Sacrifices to the favor of an answer, At last his Coyness (being
solicited Why so mute) was courted forsooth into this sly return, that the
corpse (I wis) of Babylas the Martyr (buried near his temple in Daphne) stopped
his windpipe. Babylas is forthwith (at the Emperors appointment) dislodged by
the Christians, (when without doubt relics of so apparent an efficacy were
covetously snatched at by the remoovers) so that a conceit was quickly sprung,
that other Martyrs bones might be found upon trial as terrible to the Devil
as those of Babylas, which was no sooner essayd, but experience presently
verified it with improvement, and all the world so rung with wonders done by
Martyrs, that even holy men were at length surprised, and carried away with the
power of delusion; No more need now of questioning the Wonder not Reader, that
the opposers of this truth, should anciently challenge the Revel. for this
Mystery is so closely interwoven with that sac^ed Book; that it is impossible
for rational and impartial men to retein the one and reject the other. See
Revel. 10.7. chap. 11.15. chap. 20.4. (...) 21. all over, paralleld with Prop.
etc.
Revelation; Nay, but shake hands and be friends rather, for Heaven has
resolved the controversy -- Thus diverse ran a gadding after the Dragons lure,
and shortly fell to such expositions of Revel. 20.4. (about the Martyrs reign)
as might seem to establish Saint-worship cum privilegio, and authorize such The
main and fundamental error of Antichrist, is spiritual fornication, or
plurality of objects in divine worship, for this cause is it said, The Whore of
Babylon, not, the Liar, Mu^dress, or Tyrant of Babylon; so that the riste of
Saint-worsh^p is certa^nly the Epoch of Antichrist. But thou will marvail
Reader how th s abomination surpised (in a manner) the whole Christ^an world
shortly after the time of Julian, this cheat (no doubt) prooving an
unimaginable snare to the inadvertent Christians.
invocations upon the avouchment of providence it self, v. supra.

CHAP. VI.
Humbly presenting to all Christian minds certain characters from the sacred
Bible, which seem to denote that This Dreadful Day, which shall burn like an
oven, is hard by upon us.

IN the first place it is most certain that there is a limited time, clearly
expressed in the Revelation, upon the expiring whereof has past an oath from
That it is the Lord that swears, and this the measure of time, upon which the
Oath is pitched, See above, from Holy Dan. cap. 12.7. Where is plainly
mentioned (in the Oath) Time, Times, and half a Time. Besides, it is the bound
of Antichrist, ( viz. the Beast, cap. 13.5.) whose destruction we know to be at
the day of Judgment. 2 Thessal. 2.8. ut supra.
Christ himself, that time shall be no longer, Revel. 10.6. This limit is
declared to be 42. months, Revel. 13.5. or 1260. days, chap. 11.3. chap. 12.6.
or a Time, Times and half a time, chapter 12.14. being all but the various
expressions of the same Measure ( viz. of the Beast, and his coaetaneans,) So
many days making exactly 42. months, and those months amounting justly to
Time, times, and an half, to wit, three years and a half. If now the spirit
has also determined whether this period be meant literally for 3. single years
and a half, and manifestly propounded where the account shall begin, we can not
sure be so irrational but to conclude this to be an incomparable act of favor
in our Lord (to afford his Church so sweet a Thus was he pleased to deal with
his people concerning his first coming, Dan. 9.24, 25. as also about the
destruction of Jerusalem, Luke 21.20. being two passages of as high concernment
as could possibly be communicated to the Church.
warning, and encouragement to vigi^ancy) and a most rude neglect in our selves
if we despise so great salvation: But (really) both these doubts are explained,
(and therefore Reader, trust our Blessed Jesus on his Word, for the Apocalypse,
(as thou shall see ere I conclude) unties all the objections to the contrary.)
The former, about the understanding of the Days, is apparently discoverd to be
They must needs imply some definitive time, the Scripture using no number
indefinitely but those which the use of speech has made such, as, 1.10.1000.
But mixed and comp^und numbers as these are, 3.42.1260. are neither in the
Hebrew, nor (perhaps) in any other Language used indefinite y. If then a
definite limit be here employed, it m^st needs be either Historical or
Prophetical. Nay, that thou may be confident that Day is taken here for Year,
I may chance hereafter to advert^se thee of a most wondrous p ediction, once
given out upon this very ground in the Rev. which proved accordingly to the
very day.
Prophetical, (namely Days for Years) cap. 11. It being the space of the
Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, verse 3. who must lie dead three days and
a half, verse 9. and after that flourish again, verse 11. Now if the three days
and a half of their lying dead cannot possibly be understood historically, [for
three single days] (for how can the Inhabitants of one side of the earth send
gratulatory Messages to the other, by way of insulting over the dead Prophets,
in three bare days and a half? verse 10.) No more can the 1260. days of their
mourning: for as much as they are all parts of the same story, and must
necessarily be taken in the same sense. Ergo, Day for Year.

The latter, of the Ep cha from whence the Lord will have this number reckond
seems full as evident, chapter 12. The woman's a bode in the Wisderness (whither
she fled from the Dragon) is but these 1260. days v. 6. If then it be
revealed, when first she flew thither, the intent of such a mercy was
(assuredly) for his people to reckon from; Come now and see the goodness of our
God v. 13, 14. And WHEN the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, He
persecuted the woman-And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle
that she might fligh into the wilderness; Tell me, is not here a plain [WHEN]
from which thou ought to count? Does the ^ight of History cleer^y make
appear when the D^^gon was finally cast down, that is, when heathenism received
so remarkab^e a blow, that it never after that made head any more in the Roman
Empire? a moment so eminent that after it their never succeeded a Pagan The
Dragon was cast down from Heaven, verse 8. i. e. from the sovereignty and top
of dominion, which he injoyd during the time the Emperors were heathens, etc.
Emperor? This must needs be the genuine exposition of dethroning the Dragon,
for if Michael be the champion of the Church, Dan. 12.1. The Dragon (that
fights against him) must needs be the Chieftain of Heathenism.
Ethnicism never after publicly maintained, nor any open attempt ever made for
restoring it again? If all this be legible (in great letters) to as many as
will take the pains to look into Ecclesiastical story, will thou still persist
in doubtfulness about what time the Dragon was thrown down? Nay, has providence
so strengthened our assurance, by a collateral confirmation, that The very words
of the Historian run thus, Theodos. contracted his sickness soon after his
return from the battle against Eugenius, and dyed, etc.
scarce was this noble victory accomplished, but the great Eagle was manifestly
displayed in her two wings by which the Woman fled, and must all this pass for
casualtie? for the very next year, good Theodosius (under whom this renowned
battle was fought) was called for by our Lord, of whom the Historians (never
dreaming, in that, I dare say, of the Apocalypse) make this express, and signal
animadversion, that He remarkably by his Testament divided the Empire (the
ensign whereof was the Eagle, as every Schoolboy has heard) between his two
sons Arcadius and Honorius, assigning to one the Empire of the East, to the
other of the West; Say Reader, were not here given the two wings From this time
of parting the Empire between two Caesar's, East, and West, it constantly
remained so div^ded, to the very ruin of the Empire, whereas the Div^sion by
Constantin was quickly made up again; And it is remarkable that Constantin left
it to three sons, but Theod. to two only; two Wings, etc.
of the great Eagle? Consider it. But I will relate thee the story more
distinctly, with the very observable circumstances attending it, in the very
words (for the most part) of sober and godly Mr. Simson.

About the year 394. Eugenius (that fierce Champion for the Dragon, and one
that threatened to be another Julian) came with his Chieftain Arbogastus, at the
head of an exceeding formidable Army against Theodosius the great, upon the
bate quarrel of Religion, and the very design of restoring Ethnicism, briefly,
the two Armies engage, The battle went hardly with the Christians at the
beginning, but Theodosius had his recourse to God by prayer, and the Lord sent
a mighty tempest of O Nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris Aeolus armatas
hyemes, cui malitat ether, Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti. Claudian.
of this miraculous conquest.
wind, which blew so vehemently in the face of Eugenius his Army, that their
darts were turned back by the violence of the wind in their own faces. The
Tyrant Eugenius fell down at the feet of Theodosius to beg pardon, but the
Soldiers pursu'a him so straightly, that they slew him at the Emperors feet.
Arbogastus fled, and, being out of all hope of safety, slew himself.

How think thou (Reader)? Is it altogether improbable that this should be the
date of the Dragons downfall? Could providence have used a more opportune
festque, to point at a conquest over the Devil, than by the suggestion of a
tempest? Whereby the Prince of the Air might seem vanquished in his own
dominions, and by his own weapon too (a tempest.) Where should Angels skirmish
( Revel. 12.7.) but in the Air? And if St. John's words [ Howbeit, Daniel's
Text may seem to imply some such manner of conflictation amongst Angels,
toward the managing of sublunary affairs. Dan 10.20. This will all grant,
that the works of divine providence, and government, are executed by Angels.
War in Heaven] may chance not to intimate some such thing, (though in the
Hebrew notion the Air (as I said) is comprehended under the name of Heaven,)
yet what hinders but we may be prompted to make reflections upon them by so
transcendent (and significant) a circumstance as this of a tempest? Besides,
may not the consideration of Theodosius's praying hint some such divine matter
to thee? Thou have heard, I dare swear, (I would thou had always rememberd
as well) that t'as been a ruled case in the Church, time out of mind, Preces
and Lachrymae, etc. No other weapons are allowed us (in the contest of
Religion) but those; while Theodosius contended by arms, the Devil was too
hard for him, the Christians were sore put to it. 'Twas not the proper artillery
for Religion. But so soon as the hand drops the sword, and is lifted up, Holy
Michael's party carries it clear? No sooner is this Angelical Ammunition
recurr'd to, (Prayer's a Winged Weapon) but the Adversary's darts recoyl upon
his own pate, and the Dragon mauled by a tempest. If this therefore should be
the passage at which the B. Spirit here aims, (and prayer speaks as fair for
Michael, as the tempest pointingly to the Dragon,) then I am sure can it not be
far to our journies end (however) thou can not but take notice of some
admirable exactness (mean what it will) that about the same pitch of time the
Empire should be divided too; Theodosius, (lest too wide a latitude might
render the rest doubtful) sickning and dying viz. About the beginning of Anno
Dom. 395. to which if we ad 1260, it guides down to about 1655. I determine
nothing, but barely present it thee Reader as the duty of my charity, Though
other men's principles (as well as these) have leveld at 55 or 56, or some time
thereabouts. The Judge (for certain) is at the doo^. The Lord make us
watchful. Though I am no great favourer of Modern Revelations, yet I cannot
but account it the offering of my Charity to advertise thee of that memorable
passage of Mr. William Sedgwick, being a Minister of sober and very
conscientious account, who Anno Dom. 1646. at his devotions, received a voice
(with an appearance) to this sense, Go, tell thy fellow-brethren that yet ten
days and the Day of the Lord shall be. It Is well known, he was faithful to the
Command, and misunderstanding the import of the Time imagined it to signify
ten natural days. But he was not the first that might receive divine messages
and not understand them. I heard (says Daniel) but I understood not. chap.
12.8. This I am certain: He was carried on with so extraordinary a power, that
exceeding grave, rational, and Holy men can bear witness for him, how in most
places he came, he overthrew all the strong holds to the contrary. London and
that part of the Kingdom know him by the moe-name of Dooms-day-Sedgwick. But
consider it Reader, for it suits very marvailously with the period of the
Apocalypse. And remember our Chronologers compute the distance from the first
Adam to the flood about the same space that the Revelation seems to allow from
the second to Adam the fire.
shortly after his return from this battle, says Mr. Symson, who, (I dare
clear the man) never thought of the Apocalypse in speaking it. This sacred Book
affords many other marvailous characters of the same importance, all
concentring in the foresaid date of Theodosius's death; as, the first Trumpet,
the arising of the Beast out of the Sea, (applyable to Alaricus's stormy
invasion that very year) The first trampling the outer Court by Gentilizing
Christians, (for seriously popery is no better than Christned-Paganism) and the
appearance of the two horned falls Prophet, for the emergency whereof about this
very time you would wonder to hear what might be produced, but my design at
present allows it not, but hereafter may. I will therefore shut up all with
these following Quaeries.

First, Whether the slaughter of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.7. might not be
intended by our gracious Lord for a sign to his Church of the 1260. days of
their mourning, ( verse 3.) and the contemporals, to be then drawing to an end,
when we should see that more than ordinary contempt, and desolation upon the
Prophets? and for this regard chiefly (not so much (happily) for the
grievousness) might it obtein a singular remembrance and description,
Peradventure if this instance of Saint Luke, and Daniels weeks be well
observed, it may seem to be the method of our Lords gracious dealing with his
servants to be so indulgent to their frailties a to allow them predictive
warnings of his suture intendments, to serve as sweet incitements to their
watchfulness, and incouraging-advantages to their diligence.
even as the invironing of Jerusalem by the Army of Cestius Gallus, about three
years before the fatal siege by Titus, was foretold by our Savior as a
warning, that the desolation thereof drew near, Luke 21.20.

Secondly, Whether this present calamity, and unmatchable conculcation of
Protestantism, (for that, (especially the ministry,) must needs be the
attestation of Gods truth, if the Papacy be the beast,) Sound not as a comment
on Revel. 11.7. considering how visible it is to every eye, that the beast
which ascends from the bottomless pit, ( i. e. the same beast we are wont to
expound Antichrist, Revel. 17.8.) is the contriver and actor of our ruin, as
appears by his Legion of Jesuits and other emissaries swarming amongst us,
transforming themselves often into illiterate (but Inquire (Reader) of what is
reported of the beyond-Sea-Sem^naries, that the Students are accustomed (for
their recreation at lusory hours) to addict themselves to some manufacture or
other, whereby they become proficients not only in literal, but mechanic
knowledge too; what ever thou think on it, truly it seems no less to me than
a head-form policy of the Dragon; for by this opportunity they issue out among
the reformed Churches, some for g^fted Shoomakers, others, for inspired
Weavers, etc. to the undermining of our Reformation.
gifted) Enthusiasts, otherwhile into desperate Arians, yea and sometimes
(doubtless) into Anabaptists, Quakers, and Converted Jews (as that late famous
Impostor at Hull,) striking by all means possible at the very root and life of
our Religion, everting (to their power) the principles of our holy faith,
distracting us into infinity of schisms, and varieties of opinion; and (upon
all oportunities) insulting over our weaker Catechumeni; Where Is now your
Protestant Church? Can there any six of your Ministers be produced that consent
(universally) in one belief? nay can ye produce any ministers at all? Have not
your selves confessed, (and often struggled in the Controversy) What ever excuse
may be found in this matter for other Reformed Churches (who are wont to plead
necessity) can no way (as I see) relieve the Presbyterians of England, where
Episcopacy, was wilfully, inconfiderately, abominably, (and well if not
sacrilegiously) rejected by them.
No Bishops, no Ministry, Episcopacy being the known and only Door through
all ages by which ministers were initiated into their function, etc. In plain
terms this last blow stabs us to the heart, the truth being a granted one, and
made good by those two admirable Lights D. Hammond and D. Tailor, against all
the Presbyterians in Christendom. Judge now whether the Protestant-Prophets be
not Mistake not all the time in which the Prophets lay with dying pangs upon
them (for that is far more than three days) for that for which they lie dead,
But happily I may hereafter acquaint thee with such a moment of their fatal
blow, (after which there appeared no more hope for them in the world) that may
seem very probable to thee; From that time might thou call them stark dead,
all hopes being then cut off; whereas while any hope lasted thou could not
say were Dead.
dead, which cannot (at present) propagate their likeness.

Thirdly, would it not be considered whether the sundry pressing importunements
to read this Book (being far more than to any book in the Bible) may not import
that the contents of this letter do after some peculiar manner concern the sons
of men, in respect of those advantaging discoveries, and most indulgent
communications of our masters pleasure, through all the ages of the Church? the
Christian and pious observation whereof may fortify our resolutions against
all the black accidents we meet with in our pilgrimage; (being no other than
what our Lord has given us notice to expect in their appointed series;) and
constantly solicit us to a prudent watchfulness, and hold us to our continual
guard (against any possible surprizall in our times) down to the great and
dreadful appearance of our Dearest Lord. Examine this thing well (as thou love
thy soul) Good Reader, and try if it be a fancy of my own. See, if the proeme
to this sacred piece imply not what I speak. Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that
reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things
that are written therein, for q. d. From this time henceforth the Words of this
Prophecy declare the rank of events in their order, therefore, Blessed is he
that reads, etc.
the time is at hand. How often is inculcated (in the second and third
Chapters) that memorable Epiphonema? [He that has an ear to hear let him hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches] even seven times, (the number of the
Churches, all concerned in it) at the end of each Epistle. What less can
thou make of Revel. 4.1. Come up hither, and I will show thee the things which
shall be hereafter? That sure must needs be a very distrustful Soul which
accounts not this invitation to extend farther than barely to S. John. Or,
suppose, no farther, yet was not all Scripture given for instruction? Such
winning compeliations we find from the mouth every of the four proclaming (...)
not (...).
creatures ( chap. 6.) Our sweet Saviors own inviting language John 1.39.
Come and see; And that none may at any time think himself unconcerned, look
Revol. 13.9. If any man have an ear to hear let him hear. After all this, begin
to think with thy self, whether it may not be one of the Quaere it be not the
Devils method of fallacy, to cast some veil of prejudice upon such Scriptures
as contein the most advantageous discoveries to the Church? The place is now
well known (thanks to that Oracle Mr. Mede, no other man, I think, ever
discerning it) viz. Is. 9.1.2. by muddying whereof, he struck the chief stroke
to the Jews overseeing the Messiah, which had they clearly understood, it had
led them down most infallibly to expect his chiefest conversation and ministry
in Galilee. Whereas their want of intelligence in this passage of Is. turned it
into their chiefest snare, wanting (as they mispresum'd) divine warrant for his
abode there, so that it became their stumbling block, Does any Prophet arise
out of Galilee? Nay, and that to good Nathaniel himself, John 1.46. Does any
good thing come out of Nazareth? being a City of Galilee. For so gross a mist
had the Deceiver thrown on that Text (and consequently so aliene an
interpretation) that S. Matthew. being carried by the Holy Spirit to refer (for
this purpose) to that place, was fain to leave out the Devils trumpery with
which the Septuagint was choked in the Evangelists days, and so still
remains; compare, Matthew. 4.15. with Is. 9.1.
Devils principal stratagems, to deterr the Christians (as we usually see)
from venturing on this book, and to represent it as a sort of high presumption,
so much as to take a Text from it, being dressed all over in riddles. It Is true
indeed our Lord is pleased to speak there in prophetical Schemes and
Allegories, which ('it is probable) were once no less familiar and usual to the
Nations of the Orient, than our Poetical Schemes and Pictures are to us at this
day. This is most certain, that a wary observing the Prophetical language, and
emblematical manner of speakings in the Old Testament, is a most unconceivable
advantage to the dilucidation of these visions, whereby it may seem that such
types as those were Anciently very frequent, and of easy apprehension to the
Such Symbolical speech we find in Indian, Azyptian, and Persian monuments still
extant among us.
Eastern Countries; Nay, who can say but the primitive times had Apostolical
expositions (commended to choicer hands) to untie the more reserved
perplexities of Scripture? One thing I can tell thee, that many wise men have
conceived Saint Paul's words to Tim. 2. epist. 1. chap. 14. verse, of the good
depositum committed to him, to imply some such matter. Then tell me seriously,
shall we therefore neglect our Lords most deer and sweet letter (and one of so
much admirable and useful importance to our selves) because he has veild it
with such a dialect as may prove an instigation to our industry? And why will thou so wrong our master as to entitle upon him a message of his commands to
us, which yet can no possible way be in our times understood; especially after
so familiar a key as he has been pleased to afford us ( Revel. 17) by which if
well regarded, and used to the best advantage, we may (in a good measure) open
the rest of the secret? Which Chapter whoever shall answer to be also allegorical,
must give me leave to tell him that he appears little better than a mad man
(if not a blasphemer of our Lord) who will venture to say, when the Angel
undertakes the part of an interpreter, verse 7. that such words also are
Enigmatical. If to tell the mystery, be not to speak in plain terms, and make
a darker matter clear, we must never expect to understand English while we
breath. Again, what possible use could there be of that divine outcry, Revel,
18.4. Come out of her (i. e. Babylon) O my people, (which yet none can deny to
be an infinite favor) if it could in no wise be learnt where that Babylon
should be? O therefore take we heed (Deer Reader) lest we injure the sweet
ingenuity of the Lamb who was slain, and has opened that sealed Book for our
sake, Revel. 5.9. If open, then sure to be read.
who therefore holds it forth to us, no longer in a sealed, but an It Is Christ
that holds the Book, being the Angel on the Sea, etc. ut supra ex Dan.
open form, Revel. 10.8. and sends forth strait charge that thenceforth it
should be sealed no more, Rev. 22.10. yea, and at the drawing up quickens our
regard toward it, with the same motive he had used in the beginning; Blessed
is he that keeps the sayings of this Book, Rev. 22.7. As before, Blessed is he
that reads, etc. But who can be blessed in reading, or who can possibly keep
what he cannot understand? Reading without understanding was never any way to
blessedness.

But of that Day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels, neither the Son,
but the Father, Mark. 13.32. I desire to seem no otherwise than skeptical in
all these difficulties. But I pray confer with Rev. 5.9. Where our Blessed Lord
opens the sealed Book, and the worthiness to open it, is attributed to his
being slain, [Thou art worthy, etc. for thou wast slain.] The Son himself (as
man) before his Passion (we may speak't with a holy Reverence) had not this
mystery revealed to him; 'Twas only (as yet) in the Fathers hands, Acts 1.7.
The Son at thi^ time unslain, unglorified. The Book was as yet a sealed one
(answerable to Da. 12.4.9.) But the Captain of our salvation (who was made
perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.9, 10.) has now both unsealed it, and
Commanded it for ever to abide so, Revel. 22.10. So that may we not now think
(as the Apostle seems to intimate, 1 Thessalonians. 5.4. and 5.) that if that Day do
overtake any as a Thief in the night, (though this also uses to be another
objection) they are only such as are in darkness, and not the Children of the
Light? 'Twill (indeed) appear as the flood in the days of Noah, finding men
eating, drinking, etc. Matthew. 24.37. But neither does that Text implie the want
of all light in the sacred Oracles whereby we may be guided into this
expectation, but rather the hardness of men's hearts, as it was in the days of
Noah; when (sure) his so long continuance in the building an Ark might have
been conviction sufficient to any (but men before drowned in security) that the
Flood was coming. Might not every stroke upon that signal Fabric have proov'd
a Se^mon of repentance to ingenuous minds? Consult with that place of St.
Peter, and see if upon this very score it call not holy Noah the Preacher of
righteousness. 2 Pet. 2.5. To which purpose also may that other more obscure
passage of the same Apostle be urged far more sensibly (I trow) than it is wont
to serve for Purgatory, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. Namely that Christ by his Spirit
preached (in the Minist'ry of Noah,) to those rebellious miscreants, of so
narrow and confined Spirits, that they allowed not themselves so much liberty
of reason, and freedom of discourse, as to collect that the threatened Flood
must needs be approaching, though they saw an Ark so long in rearing. Answer me
(Reader) does not [the long suffering of God, waiting in the days of Noah,
while the Ark was preparin] mentioned by St. Peter, produce this result, That
they in the days of Noah obtained a very merciful premonition, Genesis 6.3. Yet
his days shall be an hundred and twenty years, being generally expounded (nay,
and by our Synode-Notes too) of Gods prediction concerning the Deluge.
in which they might have read the intentions of his vengeance upon those
times, had not their obstinate reluctancies rendered those sweet opportunities
ineffectual to themselves? And if the State of the World at his second coming
be as it was then, (as so we hear it must) does it not imply the Indulgence of
our Lord in gracious forewarnings, but our own defectiveness in their
observation?

Who ever (after all this) shall think this speculation of time a needless
curiosity, let him remember how our Savior reproov'd the Jews for neglect
hereof, Luke 12.56. O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but
how is it that ye do not discern this time? viz. that this is the very age in
which the Messiah is to be born. And that this was our Holy Savior's meaning
appears by that other famous passage of his recorded by the same St. Luke chapter
4. Where our dearest Jesus in mere design to point at Daniels Weeks, (which led
down to him) by the identity of the phrase, takes a Text from Isay, He has
anointed me to preach the Gospel. Luke 4.18. From whence he raises this so
useful doctrine, (had not his hearers been unimaginably stupid) This Day is
this Scripture fulfild in your ears, verse 21. But why (I pray) This Scripture,
and this Day? Why? Look in Daniel, and you will easily see the reason, D^n.
12.24. Seventy weeks, etc. -- And to anoint the most holy. q. d. The appointed
time leading to me is now expired, This Day is this Scripture fulfild in your
ears, The Spirit has anointed me -- How is it therefore O ye Hypocrites that
ye do not discern this time? The Lord deliver every one of us from the danger
of the like expostulation, How is it, etc. Since the Epoch guiding us in the
Revelation to his second coming, is far more clearly expressed than that which
led to his former in Daniel, Let any one weigh, [And when the Dragon saw he was
cast unto the Earth, etc.] with [Seventy weeks are determind upon thy people
and upon thy holy City] Their [WHEN] from whence they were to reckon, seems to
be but obscurely impli'd, ours clearly expressed, and yet they were called
Hypocrites, etc. And shall not we? God grant we be not.

I will present but one suggestion more to this consideration, and take leave.
Is it not probable that the subtle old Serpent, about the times in which Christ
was to be born (of which he was able enough to make collection from Daniels
Weeks) perceiving the Nations (as I told thee) partly from Daniel, and partly
from the Sibyls scatterd predictions, to be full of the expectation of some
admirable change, thrust in that mavelous piece of imposture about Salonius,
Pollio's Son, born smiling, purposely to become the subject on whom all those
glorious Elogies of happy mutation might be fixed, Note; This youth came
sm^lingly into the world, but our Lord with all the circumstances of humility,
and poverty, which aggravations no question but the Devil made use of to apply
[Redeunt Saturnia regna] to the me^ry Brat, and not to the despised Infant,
being assisted to this suggestion through the temporal Monarchy, by the vain
hope whereof he had prepared the world for this after-impression. ut supra.
as his exceeding remarkable manner of coming into the world (so quite contrary
to all other births) might very significantly portend, in design to divert that
age from pitching their eyes on the holy Infant Jesus? Vid. Elog. 4. Virgil.
But will thou not marvail if I show thee that the Devil (being loath to use
any other method than what formerly succeeded so prosperously) seeing,
(doubtless) that his second coming is near approaching, has laid the same
snare to divert our Nation from expecting this manner of his appearance, by
tempting one Arise Evans (a man very exemplary in having predicted diverse
things which have answerably succeeded, and consequently, authenrick enough to
be his instrument in such a snare) to fasten several presages concerning the
fate of the former King (of pious memory) all which obteind effect, and the
restitution of this his son, upon many passages of Scripture that evidently
concern this matter, as thou will easily acknowledge (Reader) if in his Book
entitled A voice from Heaven, where thou will find great variety from the Bible
(belonging to this mystery) applied to our state of things partly in what is
past, partly in what he incourageth us to expect in England? In a word, All the
glorious promises meant in Scripture of our Lord, he applies to the King of
England (calling him as I remember the root of Jesse) and in express terms
bids them that expect Christ's personal reign, to look for the accomplishment of
those promises in that speculation he acquaints us with about our K. Charles,
made by him to be the King that shall rule in righteousness, yea and that man by
whom God will Judge the World. V. pl.

Consider it Reader, and the Lord direct thee.

The Holy Trinity, to whom be everlasting honor, be pleased to open our hearts
and eyes to the discerning this mystery, and the time leading down unto it.

Amen.
The Request of the Author to his Fellow-Brethren, imploring their satisfaction
in these following considerations.
1. SInce by the principles of this Discourse the forementioned Mystery
(commencing at our Blessed Saviors coming) begins with Rome's Ruin, (for if
She be Babylon, her fall (as to the City) is affixt to the very hour of the
Witnesses rising, being the complete term of the 1260. Days, Revel. 11.13.)
Whether it be altogether unworthy of our attention to observe how full the
world is at this very day of expectation of that Longed-for Overthrow, in so
much that Diverse mouths and pens (without any reference at all to the
Apocalypse) have published their judgments of that incomparable Desolation
likely to be before 1656. pass over us. Nay more, Is it of no moment that the
Dissolution of the Turkish Empire (the Apocalyptical Euphrates) is aimed at by
Gaffarel about Anno 1655? Really, such prognostications are wont to affect me
as little as most men (I persuade my self) breathing; but in this case, where
the matter seems so clearly pointed at by the sacred Authority of the
Apocalypse, (especially their proofs being of a different nature from mine, yet
pitching on the same term,) I could not but present this humble expostulation.

2. Whether the Holy Spirit seem not to have (after some peculiar way)
determined the badge of the Witnesses-slaughter to be look'l after in Britain
rather than any other parts of the Reformation; and that for these Reasons.

First, The words (...), Revel. 11.8. Which we render In the street, will very
Naturally signify, The Adjective (as all will grant) is here put substantively.
In the Latitude (coming from (...), as every Schoolboy knows) In the
Out-Coast, border or Frontier, of the great City, or of the Roman Dominions;
and in this sense who sees not how well it suits with the State of Britain in
those times?

Secondly, Whether those words [were also our Lord was Crucified] must not
needs be understood figuratively? for where Christ was really Crucified (viz.
Jerusalem,) there are (I fear) no Witnesses to be slain, The G^and Mahumetan
Lording it there; or if there be any poor Christian-Pilgrims, yet are their
conditions no harder now than they have been for many hundred years together;
so that this slaughter can in no sense be verified of that place at this time:
And of the times past we have no reason to inquire, since this passage leads
down to the Conclusion. Besides, may not the Word (Spiritually) in the Text, be
a Key to open into such an acception? But if such a sense be here allowable,
need we go far for the application, if we do but reflect upon the horridness of
what this last age has been guilty? The Lords Christ might be Crucified when
some little dreamed on it. vid. Heb. 6.6. God (the searcher of Hearts) knows how
far I am from an Incendiarie's spirit in these demands, (for how can the
grounds upon which this tractate is framed possibly suit with such a design?)
All my aim is at my own and others satisfaction, and watchfulness.

Lastly, since it is Generally granted, that See his testimony in the Discourse.
Justin Martyr (within 30. years of St. John's death,) was so firm an assertor
of the Notion of the Day of Judgment deliverd in this treatise, as likewise
Irenaeus, both which lived and conversed with the Apostles immediate Disciples,
and peculiarly, Irenaeus brought up at Polycarpus's feet, who was St. John's
Disciple, and could relate to Irenaeus (as himself is known to say) what St.
John was wont to do and speak: I now earnestly beg of all my fellow Brethren
seriously to consider, whether it be not more than probable that this very
doctrine was derived to them from St. John's own mouth, especially, remembering
how suitable it is to the tenor of the Revelation, in which St. John was the
infallible Spirits Penman.

ERRATA,
PAge 2. for Jesus read Jerusalem. p. 3. Diverse read Divines. p. 9. (...) read
(...). p. 10. to read too. p. 15. store I use read storehouse.

FINIS.

