A LETTER TO A FRIEND, Concerning his CHANGING HIS RELIGION.

IMPRMATUR,

June 23. 1692. R. BARKER.



LONDON, Printed for R. Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's-Church yard, 1692.

The CONTENTS.
Preface.
Showing the reasonableness of any Man's changing his Religion upon proper
Motives, and of what nature they are, and wherein the scandal of such a change
is truly given. An enquiry is then made into the reasons of this Gentleman's
Proceedings, and those are observed to be chiefly two, viz. That he might
become more truly in the Communion of the Catholic Church, and that he might
be more Pure and Orthodox in his Faith and Worship.

. 1. The first of these Proposals i^ examined, and the Church of Rome is shown
not to (...) the Catholic Church upon account either of its Authority or
Comprehension. The first is proved in that the Catholic Church was not
established by our Savior under a Monarchical, but an Aristocratical
Government; and this is shown farther from the election and practice of the
twelve Apostles. That the Church of Rome is but a particular Church is also
shown from Scripture. An Objection relating to St. Peter is answered. The
practice of the Apostles and the Bishops their Successors shows that their
Government was in Society. Several reasons are urged farther, to prove that the
Church of Rome cannot be the Catholic Church; and that the Church of England
as a particular Church has equal right and as good a claim as she to all those
Promises which are made unto the Church by our Blessed Savior in the Gospel.

. 2. This is further shown to have been the opinions even of the Church of Rome
in former Ages, and proved from her Decrees and Practice in the Sacrament of
Baptism. A Comparison is also made between the Church of Rome, and that of the
Donatists on this pretense, and St. Augustine's Argument against the one,
applied in terminis unto the other.

. 3. A Comparison is also made between the Church of Rome and Church of England
as to terms of Communion, and thereby it is shown that (according to his notion
of Catholic) he that lives in the Communion of the Church of England, lives
more in the Communion of the Catholic Church, than any Member of the Church of
Rome.

. 4. A further Comparison is made between the Churches as to the Universality
of their Doctrine, and thereby it is shown that the Catholic Faith is much more
truly professed in the Church of England than in the Church of Rome.

. 5. It is also shown that in point of Doctrine the Church of England is more
ancient than the Church of Rome, so that the old Religion appears evidently to
be still professed there, and that no new Doctrine was brought in, but rather
abolisht by the Reformation.

. 6. The second Motive is enquired into and examined, and a brief Comparison in
this point is made between the Churches; showing how the one is ^ounded on the
Scriptures, and is consonant to the Law of God, and the Principles of Reason,
while the other has no ground but a loose Tradition, and Contradicts them,
both in her Doctrine, and Religious Practice.

. 7. The Question is more particularly stated in that Doctrine and Practice that
relates unto the Sacrament. With a brief Observation of the unreasonableness of
the one, and the danger of the other, as they now stand in the Church of Rome.

. 8. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this Point is laid down, and two
observations are made upon it: First, That our Savior's words at the
Institution of the Sacrament are not to be understood in a literal sense, as
she asserteth. Secondly, That if they were, yet neither can her Doctrine be
inferred from them, nor her Practice be justified by them.

. 9. The first of these is proved, 1st From the nature of the thing, in that it
contradicts our Senses, which are shown to be proper Judges in this Case, as
well as any other. The imposition also of the Schoolmen is detected, in
treating on this subject in improper terms; and farther it is also shown that
in this sense they cannot agree with the concomitant expressions as well before
as after the Institution.

. 10. The same thing is proved 2dly. From the design of the Institution, which
is shown and explained, and then compared with the Passover, and other
Sacrifices among the Jews; and so both the Practice and the Benefits thereof
are illustrated, by showing what they did, and what they expected.

. 11. It is proved also 3dly, From the occasion of that expression, which is
shown to be a parallel Phrase constantly in use among the Jews at the
Celebration of the Passover, and so by the evident meaning of their words, the
sense of our Savior is fully explained.

. 12. The Doctrine of the Church of England in this Point is shown to agree with
that of the Fathers, and the ancient Doctrine of the Church of Rome her self.
This is shown to be still evident in the Roman Missal,* although it has been
altered since the days of St. Ambrose, to make it more conformable to the
present Doctrine.

. 13. The former Observation is proved 4thly, From our Savior's own
Declaration, John vi. Where he tells his Disciples that he is spiritually to be
understood; and therefore as is further observed, not only St. Paul, but even
the aforesaid Missal calls the Sacrament Bread after its Consecration.

. 14. Another Comparison is made between the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and
that of the Church of England, as to the consequences of them, and thereby
shown that in the Church of Rome Men hazard their Salvation on the truth of an
Opinion that may be false, and more than probably is so; for none, not the
least advantage if it should be true.

. 15. The other Observation also is propounded, and therein it is shown that
our Savior's words in the literal sense can only respect his Body, and that
too as it was dead, and offered up to God in Sacrifice. And several Reasons are
offered thence to show, that this is not a proper Object for Divine Worship,
and therefore observed that the Council of Trent to justify their Practice, do
strein the words abundantly beyond all that they can bear, without any Reason
or Authority for it.

. 16. Another danger is observed even in going to Mass, as it is in the general
Practice of the Church of Rome, in that many are always present whenever the
Sacrament is Administered, who are not in a fit state to be Partakers of it; and
this is shown from Scripture, as well as the Practice of the Primitive
Christians.

. 17. Some other Particulars of the like nature are proposed, and briefly
touched to show the further evidence of the Proposition discust: And so the
Conclusion is made with an Exhortation to return.

A LETTER TO A Friend, etc.
SIR,
AS every Man's Salvation is his Principal Concern, and ought to be the chief
end of all his Undertakings, so no Action whatsoever can be justly liable to
Censure, that is either founded on that motive, or even tends to that design.
But it is very unreasonable to find fault with him, that shall change his
Sentiments of Religion, and consequently make an open Profession of it;
provided that he acts directly upon truly Christian Motives, according to a
real apprehension of the Truth, and a serious Conviction of the Conscience. The
only thing that in this Case is liable to Censure, being a base compliance with
the thoughts of other Men, or a change of the True Religion upon false
inducements; since neither God nor Man can be secure of his Fidelity, whom
Interest can bribe to act against his Conscience.

It is therefore no small Satisfaction unto me, and I believe also to the rest
of all your Friends, that being well acquainted with your former Conversation,
we believe your sincerity in all that you have done, and that no Temporal
advantage (the too common spur of mean and fickle Spirits) could ever incline
your thoughts to entertain a Notion, but as you were persuaded of and confided
in its Truth. So that either the want of a due Consideration in respect of your
Motives to believe, or some great mistake in your Notion of Religion, and that
as well in respect of the Faith which you deserted, as of that which you
embrace, have ever appeared to me as the reason of your Change; that you should
quit those Principles wherein you were Bred, for such as upon enquiry can never
appear unto you, either so Rational or so Christian. As it is the duty of every
Christian therefore, to endeavor the satisfaction of his offended Brother, and
to rectify those Errors that have seduced him from the Faith, so I think my
self obliged, by the special ties of Friendship, to be peculiarly concerned in
your Restitution, and not only to discover to you, the Sophistry of those
Arguments that have imposed upon you, but also to explain those Truths,
wherewith you seem unacquainted.

For if the account be true, which I have had of your Desertion, your Motives
to leave the Church of England, and Embrace the Communion of the Church of
Rome, were these: A desire to live more truly in the Communion of the Catholic
Church; and to become more Orthodox in your Faith and Worship. If then I can
make it evident that you were mistaken in both these great Proposals, and that
a contrary event in both, is the sure result of this your undertaking; It will
be reasonable to expect your Repentance for what you have done, and a
Reconciliation to that Mother whom you have forsaken.

. 1. How the first of these Proposals could ever influence your Practice, is a
very hard thing to be imagined; or why you should fancy now, that you are
more in the Communion of the Catholic Church, than you were among us before
your Change, is really a Conceit that I cannot find the ground of. Since the
common imposition by the Name of Catholic, must be too slight to move a Man of
Learning: When the Name of Roman Catholic is but an usurpt Title, that carries
little less than a contradiction in the terms. I know indeed, there is an Error
in the Notion of Church Government, that is too prevalent with many Christians,
and may possibly seduce them from the Truth of their Religion, to submit unto
those Laws that cannot oblige them: And that is, That the Government of the
Catholic Church on Earth is Originally Monarchical, and consequently that the
Unity thereof consists, in the due subjection of all the Members unto the
Dominion of one Universal Bishop. So that no Man can be a Christian, or in the
Communion of the Catholic Church, but he that will submit unto the Pope's
Authority. But in Truth it is fully evident from the Scriptures, from the
Constitution of the Church, and from the practice of all Christians in the
Primitive Ages, that the Government of the Church on Earth, is Aristocratical,
and that the Unity thereof, does eminently consist in the Communion of all its
Members. So that every Person that makes Profession of the Christian Faith, and
lives in the Communion of any particular Church or Society of Christians, he is
certainly in the Communion of the Catholic Church of Christ; and according to
the sincerity of his Profession, he has an undoubted Right unto all her
Promises. For first the Scriptures do expressly tell us Mat. x. 1. Mark iii. 14.
, that Christ Selected not one alone, but twelve Apostles, and Mat. x. 5. John
xx. 21.
that he gave them all but one Commission jointly, as well as made them by it
all equal in Authority: That he was so far from constituting one as his Vicar
upon Earth, with an Absolute Dominion over all his Brethren, that he forbad
such Ambition as disagreeable with his Laws, and Ordained Humility to be their
way of Government. Ye know (says he, Mat. XX. 25.) that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister: And whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your Servant. Intimating clearly, that Ecclesiastical Authority
is not like the Dominion of the Gentiles, which was altogether managed in a
Despotical way of Government: But as he himself was a pattern of Humility, and
submitted unto Death for the good of his People; so their joint Power should
consist in serving others, without any pretense unto a Temporal Dominion. St.
Paul, therefore most evidently refers the building of the Body of Christ (which
is certainly the Catholic Church) not to any one, but unto the Apostles in the
plural number, Ephesians. iv. 11, 12. and although he was himself the last of all
that Order, being, as he says, 1 Cor. xv. 8, 9. the least of the Apostles, as
one that was born out of due time. Yet he assures the Galatians, Galat. ii. 7.
that in point of Authority in the Church of Christ, he was inferior unto no
Man, in that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto him, as that
of the Circumcision was to Peter. And consequently then, St. Peter's
Principality (if he had any) was limited to the Jews that were Converted to the
Faith, and not extended to the Gentiles, over whom he never presided. So that in
this pretense of a Succession from the Prince of the Apostles, the Pope can
have no claim to a Jurisdiction in our Countries, except he can derive our
Pedigree from those of the Circumcision.

But to manifest more clearly, that the Church of Rome is not the whole Tree or
Body of Christians, no nor so much as the Root thereof, St. Paul not only
reckons her among the Branches, Romans xi. 17. but does expressly admonish her not
to usurp Dominion, as if he were suspicious of her future greatness, (...)
(says he) (...), Do not boast against, or rather, do not insult over the
Branches. But if thou boast, or insult thus, thou bear not the root, but the
root thee. Ib. v. 18. And lastly, to show the World farther, that it was but a
particular Church, and not the Catholic, to whom he wrote that Epistle to the
Romans; he threatens her, v. 22. with being cut off or totally destroyed, if
she continues not in the Goodness of God: Whereas Christ has expressly promised
to his Universal Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her,
Mat. xvi. 18. If any Man shall urge against me, that the Church to whom our
Savior made this promise, must be founded on St. Peter (as the Text expresses
it) and consequently it can be no other but the Church of Rome, who claims all
her Rights and Privileges from him. I answer, 1 st. That the whole Church of
Christ may be said in some Sense, to have been built upon St. Peter; in that he
was the first of the Apostles, that Preached the Gospel after the descent of the
Holy Ghost upon them; and it is obvious, that by his Sermon so many were
Converted to the Faith, that a Church was founded thereby at Jerusalem; and
this being the first Fruits of the Christian Religion, the whole Building might
properly be represented by it; and so that Promise of our Savior does not
respect the Church of Rome, whatsoever her pretenses are, but the whole Society
or Body of Christians. 2 dly, That St. Augustine in Expounding of that Text,
tells us Sic me saepissime sic exposuisse quod a Domino dictum est: Tu est
Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, ut super hunc
intelligeretur quem confessus est Petrus, dicens tu es Christus filius Dei
vivi: ac si Petrus ab hac Petra appellatus personam Ecclesiae figuraret, quae
super hanc Petram aedificatur, and accepit claves regni coeli. Non enim dictum
est i^^i tu es Petra, sed tu es Petrus: Petra autem erat Christus, quem
confessus Simon (sicut tota Ecclesia confitetur) dictus est Petrus. August.
Retract. l. 1. cap. 21. Tom. 1. col. 30. edit. Basil. 1556.

Non enim sine causa inter omnes Apostolos hujus Ecclesiae Catholicae personam
sustinet Petrus: huic enim Ecclesiae claves regni coelorum datae sunt, cum
Petro datae sunt; and cum ei dicitur, ad omnes dicitur amas me? Pasce oves
meas. Ib. de Agon. Christ. cap. 30. Tom. 3. col. 776.

Cui S. Petro totius Ecclesiae figuram gerenti Dominus ait, super hanc Petram,
etc. Ibid. Epist. 165. Tom. 2. Col. 751.


, that by the Rock, Christ meant himself, and not St. Peter: And also, that St.
Peter is not to be understood in that place, and many other in the Scripture,
as a single Person, but as fully representing the whole Society or Body of
Christians, to whom the Promises were made, and all those Favors given. For
Christ's Question in that place, was evidently proposed to all the Disciples,
and so the Answer to it appears in the name of all; and whatever gift or
promise was thus made to one, is to be understood as having a respect to all:
Since it is evident, that there is no one particular Benefit or Power granted
by our Savior unto St. Peter, but what the rest of the Apostles (as the
Fathers have observed) had an equal Right to, and as great a Concern in. And if
we consult our Ecclesiastical Records, we shall find this Commission to be
Executed thus (...), vide Eusebius. Histor. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 3.
; and (although St. Paul tells us, that the care of all the Churches came upon
him daily, 2 Cor. xi. 28.) yet both in planting of the Church, and in Governing
it being planted, no one single Person presided over all, but they acted all
alike as Members of a Society. And when they were called away by God to be
rewarded for their Labors, they left the same Form of Government with the
Bishops their Successors, who maintained it constantly for several Ages
following. And whenever any Dispute or Controversy arose among them, that was
destructive to their Faith or Discipline (as it was observed among the Apostles
themselves before Act. vi. 2. The twelve called the multiude of the Disciples
unto them, and ordained several Deacons to take care of the Poor.

Acts xv. 6. And the Apostles came together for to consider of this matter,
viz. whether it were necessary for the Gentiles to be Circumcised and to keep
the Law of Moses; which was afterward determined by them, v. 2^.


) they took care for to decide it in a Synod or Assembly. And we never find
that any single Person under the pretense, either of being Infallible, or of
having a Supreme Power over all the rest, did undertake for to determine what
was thus Disputed; but the Decree of the whole Church was required to decide
it, as the regular Act of the whole Society (...) Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
22. de Paschate.

Etiam de Haeres. Arian. (...). Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 5.


: Some of the Bishops being still assembled in a Synod or Council, and the rest
submitting unto their determinations. Thus their Unity was maintained in the
matters of greatest moment, and by their Vide Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. cap. 15.
and 22. etiam l. 5. c. 1. 4, 23. and l. 7. c. 29. and 30.
Literae Formatae, or circular Epistles in all the things of smaller
consequence; and so they preserved themselves entire, as one Society or Body of
Christians; not by any Superiority of one over the rest, but by the right hand
of fellowship from one to another Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli quod fuit
Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab
unitate proficiscitur. Primatus Petro datur ^ratione scilicet ordinis, non
jurisdictionis, ut observatu dignum est* ut una Christi Ecclesia, and una
Cathedra monstretur. Cyprian. de Vnitat. Ecclesiae. page 254. edit. Paris.
1643. item:

Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Ib.


. And each of them was so persuaded of the Unity of the Catholic Church which
was thus preserved, that whosoever was excluded from the Communion of any one
particular Church, he was adjudged as cut off from the Communion of the whole:
And could not be received into another Congregation, until he was reconciled
unto that Church which he offended Vide the Case of Marcio^, Excommunicated by
his Father the Bishop of Synope in Pontus, as it is related by Epiphanius: And
the proceedings of Synesius against Andronicus, concerning the Excommunicated
Persons in the Church of P^olemais. Both which could not be received into the
Communion of the Church of Rome, without particular Satisfaction in their
respective Churches; as it is observed by Mr. Thorndike. Epilog. to the Tragedy
of the Church of England. l. 1. c. 10.
. So that the Catholic Church of Christ cannot be confined to any Country, nor
yet limited or restrained to one peculiar Governor: but it contains the whole
Body or Society of Christians, even all that are Baptized into the Covenant of
Grace. And as every particular Church is at Unity in her self, by the
submission or agreement of all her Members under one Governor, so is the Unity
of the Catholic Church maintained by the agreement or correspondence of those
Governors, whereby they do compose one Catholic Society. And therefore it is
well observed, that there can be no more necessity of an Universal Bishop to
establish and maintain this Unity in the Church, than there is of an Universal
Monarch, to keep Peace and Commerce in the World: Since agreement among the
Bishops, is as sufficient to the one, as correspondence among Princes, is unto
the other. And as there cannot possibly be more than one Catholic Church,
because it contains all Christians, and consequently all particular Churches
whatsoever: So no one particular Society of Christians (let its extent be never
so great, or Members numerous) can justly lay a claim unto that Title. Nor on
the other hand, can any particular Church cease to be a Member of this
Catholic, as long as she continues Christian, that is, as long as she
retains the Holy Scriptures as the word of God and expounds their meaning by
Catholic Tradition. And consequently then, no Society of Christians can be
denied this privilege or any other Right and Claim which the Catholic Church
pretends to, until they do renounce the Faith, and cease to be Christians, and
so are no longer Members of the Body of Christ.

That the Church of Rome therefore is the Catholic Church, upon account,
either of its Authority or comprehension, is no more a Truth, than that a part
is the whole; the terms being equally evident, and therefore as plain in the
conclusion. And if the Church of Rome is but a particular Church, and so a
Member only of the Catholic: The Church of England also must have an equal
claim unto the same Right and Title, while no one can deny, that she is
Christian: And therefore she cannot lose her Property in the Promises of her
Savior, till she quits that Christianity whereon they are founded. Whence it
evidently follows, that all the Members of the Church of England, are equally
qualified for all Privileges in Religion, and all Advantages in respect of the
Catholic Church, which any Member of the Church of Rome can have a just claim
or reason to pretend to.

2. This is a Truth of so much Evidence, that all the Ancient Christians, even
in the Church of Rome believed it; otherwise their Decree against Re-baptizing
Heretics Vide Caranz. Sum. Council. Carthaginens. page 68. edit. Rothomag. 1655.
, made by Pope Corn^lius, and confirmed after by Pope Stephen, must contradict
the Principles of the Christian Religion, and deny Salvation unto Penitent
Believers: For if no Man can be a Christian, but he that is in the Communion of
the Catholic Church, and Praeter Ecclesiae societatem aqua baptismi non valet
ad salutem, sed potius ad perniciem. Augustine. contra Manich. Libr. 12. cap.
17. Tom. 6. col. 264.
Baptism is not Sacramental nor Beneficial to Salvation, where the Person is
excluded from the Society of Cristians: Such Baptism then must be necessary to
Salvation, as does make a Man a Christian and a Member of that Society. If any
Person therefore that is Baptized by one, whom you call Heretic, and with
whose Church you will not Communicate, be notwithstanding this so much a
Christian, as that he is to be Baptized no more; but if he shall change his
Religion and become a Convert to the Church of Rome, they will receive him into
their Communion, but never permit him to be Baptized again: I say then, this is
a fair Concession from themselves, that they Believe that he was a Christian,
and consequently a Member of the Body of Christ, before he was actually of
their Communion. For the Scripture tells Joh. xv. 2.
us, that every Branch (although it is unfruitful, yet it) abides in the Vine,
until it is cut off, viz. by an Apostacy from the Faith; nor can any new
Branch be grafted in, but by that Sacrament of Baptism, which Christ ordained
for it. And therefore it is evident, that those Ancient Fathers did not believe
that all Men were Apostates, who differed from them in Opinion as to Religion,
but acknowledged that they were still Christians though Erroneous, and
therefore would not repeat their Baptism which was complete before, but
received them Charitably by the Imposition of Hands. Which is a sufficient
Evidence, that the Catholic Church of Christ is more extensive than the Church
of Rome, and that a Christian may be a Member of the one, although he is not
actually in the Communion of the other.

And therefore it is observable even at this day, that in the Administration of
Baptism in the Church of Rome, no Man is obliged by his Baptismal Vow to
believe their own Articles or Constitutions, but only to Profess the Christian
Faith, as it is in common with all other Christians; and which is not
sufficient in a state of Maturity, to qualify any Person to be of their
Communion. And consequently then those Articles are not necessary in order to
be a Christian, although the proper Standard of the Church of Rome: But a Man
may be a Member of the Catholic Church, that is not precisely one of her
Communion. There is a Famous Act Recorded of the Donatists in Africa Cod.
Council. Tom. 1.
, that is exactly parallel with our present case. They being scarce a National
or particular Church, but rather a broken part or fraction of one, yet
positively decreed themselves to be the Catholic Church of Christ, and in a
Synod of their own party, formally Excommunicated all other Christians, that
would not submit unto their determinations. But certainly, no Rational Man will
say, that that Decree so made, was True and Authentic, or that all the
Christian Church was obliged to submit unto it, and to be concluded by it,
because it was boldly delivered as a Truth, and confidently asserted with
overgreat assurance, by a company of Men, that called themselves a Council:
But rather on the contary, such an Act is to be derided, and the Censure laughed
at, as contrary to Reason and all Humane Constitutions, which leave all Persons
in their perfect Liberty, until by themselves it is submitted. And therefore
St. Augustine's Argument Cum ergo fatearis me conversum ad Christianam fidem,
cum ego nec ad Donatistas nec ad Rogatistas conversus sum, sine ulla
dubitatione confirmas, praeter Donatistas and praeter Rogatistas esse
Christianam fidem. August. Epist. 48. Tom. 2. col. 190.
against them, is as fully unanswerable in respect of us, who make the same Plea
against the Church of Rome. For if you confess that I am a Christian, (although
I am no Papist) you declare then, that the Christian Faith is openly professed
without the Communion of the Church of Rome. And whosoever will endeavor to
reduce the Catholic Church to such a narrow compass, must be Guilty of the
Schism that is occasioned by it, in excluding so many Christians from the
Communion of Saints.

. 3. But that the Church of Rome might render it self more a particular Church,
and less the Catholic (if possible) than any other is, she has of late years
straightened her own extent extremely, by setting such new limits and restraints
on her Communion, as former Ages never heard of, nor the Catholic Church ever
prescribed or exacted. Thus Purgatory Qui hoc credunt (scilicet doctrina^ de
igne purgatorio post hanc vitam) and tamen Catholici sunt, humana quadam
benevolentia mihi falli videntur. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. Cap. 67. T. 3. c.
17^.
was far from being an Article of Faith, and necessary to Salvation in the days
of St. Augustine. Or the Worshipping of Images, from being a Duty in Religion
before the second Council of Nice Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel
in ipsa vera religione superstiti^si sunt, vel ita libidinibus dediti, ut
obliti sint quecquid promiserint Deo. Novi multos esse sepul^^orum and
picturarum adoratores. etc. August* De mor. Eccl. Cath. L. 1. c. 34. T 1. c.
774.

Vide etiam Tertull* de Idololatr. and Gregor. Epist. libr. 9. Ep. 9.


So that without believing things that are incredible, viz. Transubstantiation,
the Infallibility of the Pope, etc. And doing things that are unpracticable,
viz. Worshipping the Host, and the Virgin Mary, etc. no Man can be admitted now
into her Communion, but a Man, that is a real and most faithful Christian, that
believes in and conformeth himself to the Holy Scriptures, and also does
expound them in hard places, according to the Faith and Practice of the
Primitive Christians: Yet notwithstanding all this, he is excluded by her as
being an In^idel, and as far as in her lies, is deprived of the common
Benefits, and the Privileges of a Christian. Whereas the Church which you
Deserted, is evidently in this Case conformable to the Catholic, in that any
faithful Christian of any other particular Communion, if he does believe the
Scriptures, and understand them in the Sense of the Universal Church (as it is
delivered by the four General Councils) which you must also own to be the
Catholic Faith, if your Opinion differs not from that of Athanasius: If this
Man, I say, does make it his business to live up unto those Rules, he is freely
admitted into her Communion, and may publicly enjoy all the common Rights and
Benefits of a Christian, without any other Injunction or Imposition on his
Conscience. For none of her Articles are propounded with Anathema's, nor is
there so much as a bar from her Communion inflicted on those Persons that do
not Subscribe them; but (as their Title shows us) they were composed for Peace,
for the avoiding of diversity of Opinions, and for the Establishing of consent
touching True Religion. For the never did believe, that any Society on Earth
(as the Church of Rome asserts it of her self Licet Christus post coenam
instituit and suis discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie panis and vini
h^c vene^abile sacramentum; tamen hoc non obstante sacrorum ca^onum authoritas
and approba^a consuetudo Ecclesiae servavit and servat, etc.

Licet in primitiva Ecclesia huju^modi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub
utraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo ad evitandum aliqua pericula and scandala
est rationabiliter introducta, etc. Council. Constantiens. Sess. 13.

Insuper, Synodus Tridentina declarat, quamvis Redemptor noster in suprema illa
coena hoc Sacramentum in duabus speciebus instituerit, and Apostolis
tradiderit: tamen ^atendum esse, etiam sub altera specie tantum, totum atque
integrum Christum, verumque Sacramentum suum. Council. Trident. Sess. 5. can* 3.


) had power either to alter or to add unto the Faith, or to contradict the
Institution of our Savior, and the practice of the Primitive Christians, with
a bold tamen or non obstante to them, or ever to impose now Articles of Faith
upon the People, as absolutely necessary unto their Salvation, which the
Primitive Christians for some hundreds of years, were never known to have
thought, or heard of. So that (according to your own Notion) if to be
Catholic, is to be of no Party nor Faction in Religious Matters, but a
Christian in full latitude and in respect of the Church in general, since every
Member of the Universal Church must adjoin himself to some particular Society;
he that is in the Communion of the Church of England, must appear to live in
the Communion of the Catholic Church, more than any Member of the Church of
Rome: And you were strangely mistaken in your Sentiments of Religion, when in
this Notion of the Catholic Church, you quitted the one Communion, and
Embraced the other.

. 4. But perhaps you will tell me, that the Church of Rome is truly Catholic,
not so much upon account of its extent or comprehension, or even the terms of
Communion in her, as for her Antiquity and Catholic Doctrine; in that, she
appears the same from the days of the Apostles, while the Church of England, as
it is now established, seems to take her date from the Reformation of her. If
these should be your thoughts, there are two particulars that deserve to be
considered by you. 1 st. That no Article of Faith is maintained in the Church
of England as necessary to Salvation, but what is evidently founded on the Holy
Scriptures Art. 6.
, and consequently has been believed and received as such, by every true
Christian from the Primitive Ages. So that you cannot instance any one
particular, that we hold as such, to which the universal rule of Catholic
Doctrine, may not be easily and properly applied, viz. Ab omnibus ubique and
semper fuit creditum. It was at all times, and in all places, and by all Men
believed. Whereas every particular, wherein the Church of Rome does differ from
her, is also evidently of a later date; and it is easy to instance, whenever
you require it, if not the particular time when it was introduced, at least a
certain Age when it was not so believed. And consequently then the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, as she is at variance with the Church of England, cannot
with any Truth be styled Catholic, nor as it is such, be the occasion of your
Change.

. 5. The Second particular is, that the Reformation of any thing, does not
extirpate its former being, and new make it, nor yet essentially change it from
the same thing that it was before; but only rectifying what was formerly amiss,
and removing all things that were repugnant to its Nature, it leaves the Being
essentially the same, but renders it abundantly more pure and illustrious. The
Church of England therefore, cannot be truly said to have lost or changed any
of the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion by her Reformation, or any wise
to cease from being the same Church that it was before; since whatsoever was
received by the Primitive Christians, she still holds, believes, and openly
professes; and whatsoever was not so, she never could esteem as part of her
Religion. And she has made no change, either in her Faith or Practice, but by
rejecting of such Unchristian Novelties, as in the times of Ignorance and
oppressing Tyranny were slily introduced, and forcibly imposed upon her.
Whereas in the Canons of the Council of Trent (which do comprize the Faith, and
regulate the Communion of the Church of Rome) not only many things reputed by
the Ancient Fathers, as uncertain, (for instance, Purgatory Tale aliquid
(scilicet, Purgatio a peccatis) etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non
est, and utrum sit quaeri potest. August. Enchir. ad Lawrent. cap. 69. Tom. 3.
col. 176. vide etiam.. 3.
(as I showed before) but also some that are evidently false, viz.
Transubstantiation, as will appear hereafter) are not only therein determined,
and as Articles of your Faith, made a part of your Religion, but also delivered
to us with an Anathema to Unbelievers, and as the express terms of the
Communion. If therefore you will say, that the Religion or the Being of a
Church, is to take its beginning from the last system of the Christian Faith,
or the last change of Discipline that was Established in her; and will consider
farther, that the Faith of a Christian, is to be measured a credendis, not a
negatis, from the points to be believed, not those uncertainties that are
denied by him; You will find it necessary to acknowledge, that the Old Religion
is maintained in the Church of England, and that that of the Church of Rome is
of a later date: Since the Church of England (as I showed before) stands by the
Primitive Rule of Faith, and what ever was so determined by the first four
General Councils; and this without the mixture of any Secular Notions, or any
thing that is opposite, either to Reason or the Scriptures; and consequently
then, she professes the same Faith, and the same Religion, which she ever did,
and is not essentially changed since she was first Established. But the Church
of Rome has evidently made many changes and innovations, both in Faith and
Practice, and has imposed new Articles as necessary to Salvation, which were
never so reputed before her Injunction. And therefore in point of Doctrine as
also, she cannot be truly called the Catholic Church, nor on that account have
drawn you to her Communion.

. 6. As to your second Motive, founded upon the Excellence, both of Faith and
Practice, which you supposed in the Church of Rome, as that it is more Orthodox
than the Church of England: Should I Examine at large every particular
Disputation, into which this Point may lead us, to determine it, and which is
already extant and discust fully upon this Subject; it would probably require
more time than I can have leisure to expend, and withal, would seem impertinent
to my present design, which is your Satisfaction, with all brevity and
plainess: Especially, when so much has been said already by more Learned
Persons, that it is almost as impossible to add to, as to answer their
Arguments; and I cannot but suppose, that you are acquainted with them,
although you seem not satisfied nor convinced by their Evidence. It is
certainly sufficient in this case, to have recourse but to our foundation; that
our Faith and Worship both, are wholly founded upon the Scriptures, have the
consent of the Universal Church, backed with Reason and an uninterrupted
Practice, which warrants and maintains whatever we hold as necessary, against
the force of all manner of Opponents. Whereas, the Doctrine and Devotion of the
Church of Rome, is chiefly built upon a loose Tradition, or rather indeed, the
Projects and Inventions of Monastic Votaries; such Quare si solus Christus
audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos faciendum put averit,
sed quid qui ante omnes est. Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis
consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem. Cyprian. Epist. 63. ad
Caecilium. page 149.
as True Religion cannot countenance, nor the Law of God be persuaded to comply
with. In so much, that should a Stranger but inspect our Churches, and knowing
only that God is a Spirit, and that they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth; should he examine the grounds and circumstances of Public
Devotion in them, he would discover clearly the Nature of our Religion, both
consonant to Reason and the God we Worship; while the other is hid in
Ceremonies, buried in external I ormalities, and makes but a mere show or
pageant of Devotion.

. 7. But since however, there is one particular case of moment, in deciding
whereof, this Question may be resolved also, viz. Whither the Church of Rome,
or Church of England, is more Pure and Orthodox, both in Faith and Worship? It
will not be amiss to enquire into it briefly, and compare our Faith and
Practice, in relation to the Sacrament, which is the most Solemn branch of our
Devotion. For I shall ever acknowledge it as an obligation from you, if you
will be fair in this particular, and communicate your own Thoughts freely
without prevarication, whether you can submit your Reason in this particular,
to that Doctrine of your Church, that is so much against it? Whither you can
believe in your Conscience, as it is openly professed, that a Priest by
Consecrating Bread and Wine according to the Missal, can change their substance
into that of God? Or so Establish the Divinity in those Creatures, or under the
covert of their Accidents, as really to make them, or what you see upon the
Table, in their Shape, to become a proper Object to be Worshipped and Adored? For
since nothing can be more absurd, nor indeed more criminal in Religion, than to
apply God's Worship to any thing that is not God; there is nothing less than a
belief of this particular, that can be pleaded by you, to justify your
Practice, when you Worship and Adore the Consecrated Host in the constant
Exercise of your Public Devotion. Let us enquire therefore, I beseech you,
into the foundation of this Faith, and how this Notion (which appears
impossible to Mankind) should come to have that Credit in the Church, as to be
made a Principle of the Christian Religion; and not only be received as an
Article of Faith, but to be made the groundwork also of such a dangerous
Practice.

. 8. The Church of Rome dogmatically tells us Verum Christi carpus and sanguis
in Sacramento ^ltaris sub speciebus panis and (...) ^^^citer continentur*
transubstantiatis p^^^ in c^rpus, and (...) in sanguinem potestate Divina
Council Later^* c (...) 1.

Si quis negaverit intrabile^ illam and (...) com^ersionem ^^tius substanti^
p^^^s in corp.* and (...) substanti^ (...) in sanguine^ man* ^^^bus ^untaxat
spec^^^bus pani^ and (...) (...) ^versionem (...) (...) Trans^^ (...) atiene^
appeliat, anathe^a sit. Council. Trid* S^ss. 3. can. 2.

Ho^ tam admirabile sacramentum in ultima coena Rede^nptorem nostrum
instituisse Sancta S^nodus d^^et, cum post panis vinique benedictionem, se suum
ipsius corpus illis praebere ac suum sangui^em, desertis a^ perspicuis verbis
testa^us est. Quae verba a sanctis Evangelistis commemorata, cum propri^ illam
and ap^rti^ma^ significationem p^ae se ferant* secundum quam a patribus
intellecta sunt, etc. Council. Trid. Sess. 3. can. 3.

Si quis negaver^t in sanctissimo Eucharistiae sacramento contineri vere
realiter and substantialiter corpus and sangainem, ^n^ cum anima and divinitate
Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ac proinde totum Christum, etc. Anathema sit. Conc.
Trid. Sess. 3. can. 1.


that our Blessed Savior at the Institution of his Holy Supper, changed the
substance of the Bread and Wine, into the substance of his own Body and Blood.
For saying of the Bread, This is my Body, and of the Wine, This is my Blood,
and in both Expressions, being literally to be understood by all Men, his
Expressions cannot be true, except this change be really effected: It being
impossible in a literal Sense, that the same thing at the same time, can be
real Bread, and also the Body of Christ; and therefore they believe that after
the words of Consecration are pronounced, Christ himself with his Body and
Blood, his Soul and his Divinity, and not any longer Bread and Wine, do really
remain upon the Table; and so they Adore the Consecrated Host, as being really
then the Person of Christ, who is the Savior, God, and Judge of all the World.
Now, Sir, if you will but seriously consider all those words, which our Savior
Christ has spoken on this Subject, together with the end, design, and occasion
of his speaking them, it will not appear difficult to prove clearly to you,
First, that those words of Christ are not thus literally to be interpreted; but
directly contrary to this Doctrine, their true Sense is altogether Spiritual and
Mystical. And 2 ^ly, That if they were literally to be understood by all Men,
even in the utmost Sense those words can bear, yet they will neither assert
what the Council of Trent Decrees, nor justify your Practice* in Worshipping
the Host.

. 9. First, I say that the Words of our Savior Christ in the Institution of
this Sacrament, cannot be understood in a literal Sense, but must have a
sigurative or mystical signification. And this does appear fully from the
Nature of the thing, the Design of the Institution, the Occasion of the
Expression, and our Savior's own Judgment as to their Interpretation.

As to the Nature of the thing, it is a sufficient proof, that any Text of
Scripture is not literally to be understood by Christians, if its common
reading contradicts the Rules of Sense, and Principles of Philosophy, or
destroys the groundwork of all certainty and knowledge, and so roots up the
foundation of Religion in general. And if a Man, by being a Christian, is to
take those words of Christ in a literal Sense, and to believe, that that is
Flesh, which by his sight, touch, taste, and smell, he fully and clearly
discovers to be Bread, all those recited mischiefs, are the necessary
consequence, and there can be no Rule of any certainty in Religion. In so much,
that no Man can be sure, that there is a Bible, or that any such words as these
we treat of, are Recorded in it; or indeed, that any thing else is written in
order to his Salvation, if he must not trust his Senses, being rightly disposed
in relation to a proper Object, with a fit Medium. If you say, that this is an
improper Object, because it is a Substance, when Accidents alone do incur the
Senses. I say, that there is no other way to know a Substance, but by the
Accidents that are proper to it; and if it were possible for all the Accidents
that are proper to one Subject, to inhere another, it would be impossible to
determine, which is which, or ever truly to distinguish any one thing from
another. But it is also evident, that a Humane Body is the real thing we here
treat of; and that this is a proper Object for our Senses, appears plainly to
us from the practice of our Savior, in that he recurr'd unto them, even after
his Resurrection, and made them the only Judges of his Bodily Substance. Behold
(says he, Luke xxiv. 39.) my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle
and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have. So that
either this Body of Christ supposed in the Sacrament, must be a proper Object
for our Senses, or it is not that Body of Christ wherewith he arose from the
Dead: And the Priest must create another Body, such as our Savior never had,
before he can adapt it to this Doctrine of the Sacrament. It is therefore
evidently a device of the Schoolmen, to impose upon the Vulgar, that they
generally discourse thus of the Object of one Science, in terms and notions
that are peculiar to another; and instead of Matter and Form, wherein the
Essence of a Body does consist, and which do evidently demonstrate, that every
Humane Body does consist of Limbs, has Flesh and Bones with that Extent, Shape
and Dimensions that are proper to it, and whereof all Mankind are equally sure
and certain: All their Disputations are about its Substance and its Accidents,
which are Metaphysical terms, and may agree with a Spirit, with whose Nature
and Parts the wisest Men are unacquainted. And therefore abstracting from the
Senses, wherein the least intelligent are sufficient Judges, they confound our
Understanding in such intricacies and quillets, that even they themselves
cannot explain their meaning. And therefore I say, that either our Senses must
be Judges in this case, as well as other Bodies, or else that the Body of
Christ is not a Christum ubique totum praesentem esse non dubites tanquam Deum,
and in eodem templo Dei esse tanquam inhabit antem, dum, and in loco aliquo
cali, propter very corporis modum. August. ad Dardan. Ep. 57. T. 2. c. 285.
proper Body, as Nestorius heretofore did Heretically assert it; or else, that
God has appointed here, an irresistible deception of all Mankind, continually
in that which is most evident, and sure to be relied on, and how agreeable
these are to the nature of Man, or to the justice of God (especially if he
should punish us for being so deceived) I refer to any Man of reason to
determine.

I will not trouble you with the recital of any of those Arguments which
demonstrate this Change to be impossible, Vide The absolute impossibility of
Transubstantiation demonstrated by Mr. Johnson.
and that the Doctrine does imply so many contradictions, that it is no proper
Object for Almighty Power. But this I must desire you to observe, that if a
substantial change were made of the Elements by the words of Consecration, then
the act of the Apostles was manifestly different from the command of Christ
whereon it was founded. For nothing can be clearer from the Text, than that our
Savior gave the Bread, and commanded them to take and eat, (that is, Bread)
the words of its Consecration being not yet pronounced. If then they did eat
another substance and not Bread, who can truly say that they fulfilled the
Commandment of the Lord, or Received the Sacrament according to his order?

. 10. As to the Design in this most Sacred Institution, it appears to be the
same in relation unto Christians as that of the Passover was unto the Jews.
That as they did believe in a Messiah that was to come, and of whom their
Sacrifices were but Types and Shadows, and so were partakers of the Sacrifice
that he was to offer, by eating of those Sacrifices that did Typically
represent it: So we that now believe in a Messiah already come, should in a
parallel manner become Partakers of the same Oblation, and by an external act
like unto what they did in every Circumstance, we should obtain the benefit of
that propitiatory Sacrifice, and really and truly be made Partakers of it. And
therefore our Savior Christ appointed that Bread and Wine should be received
by his Disciples in the place and stead of his Body and Blood; which were the
real Sacrifice that he offered unto God for Man, and very improper things to be
actually eaten or drank by Christians, and therefore he calls the Bread his
Body, and the Wine his Blood, not as being really the things themselves, but as
Instituted by him to represent them to us. So that by a due participation of
these Creatures according unto Christ's appointment, it is certain that all
Christians are partakers of that Sacrifice which he offered to God for them;
and the Bread and Wine being duly Consecrated and Received in the nature of a
Sacrament, the Body and Blood of Christ is really and truly received by the
Faithful in them; not that the Elements are changed in themselves, or that
there is any real alteration of their substance; but the act is Spiritual in
respect of the Receivers, who take them not for Food, but as a Mystery in
Religion; and therefore they do not receive them in their common notion as they
are Bread and Wine, that is, proper Food to nourish or sustain the Body, but as
they represent the Body and Blood of Christ, and are appropriated by Faith to
nourish and support the Soul. And since then this Sacrament was ordained to
become a Sacrifice to Christians, as St. Augustin^ tell us, Ideo hic dicit
manducare panem quod est Sacrificium Christianorum. Aug. de Civil. Dei. l. 17.
cap. 5. Tom. 5. col. 954.

Hunc panem significavit manna, hunc panem significavit altar Dei. Sacramenta
illa fuerunt, in signis diversa sunt, in re quae significatur pa^ia sunt. Ibid.
in Johan. Tract. 26. Tom. 9. col. 22^.


and that those Patriarchs of old who believed in a Messiah that was to come,
were as actual Partakers of that Sacrifice which he has offered as we can be:
For they all eat the same spiritual Meat, and they all drank the same spiritual
Drink, 1 Cor. x. 3. Neither is there Salvation in any other, Acts iv. 12. And
yet it was impossible that they should eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his
Blood according to the Letter, because his Body was not framed yet, nor
actually born: It is therefore rational to conclude that we are still Partakers
of the Body and Blood of Christ in the same manner that they were, not in a
Literal but a Spiritual participation. Since the reception of them by Faith
only was fully sufficient to the Salvation of the one, and therefore is all
that is necessary to the Salvation of the other.

. 11. And this gives us a fair light into the reason or occasion of this
Figurative Expression; in that the Sacrament of the Eucharist being Instituted
by our Savior in the place of the Jewish Passover, which was now to be
abolished, many of the External Rites were still retained, to show that all
those Types are now completed: And therefore as it was usual at the
introduction of the Paschal Lamb, for the Priest or some other of the Company
to tell the People that this is the Lamb that was slain in Egypt, when the Lord
passed over the houses of our Fathers, and slew the Egyptians: And again, after
Supper was ended (distributing Bread and Wine to every one in order) was wont
to tell them, This is the Bread of Sorrow which our Fathers eat in Egypt:
Whereas all Men know that it could not possibly be that very Lamb that was
slain, nor that very Bread that was eaten in Egypt, but another Lamb, and other
Bread Instituted by God's order in the stead or commemoration of it: So our
Savior likewise at the Institution of the Sacrament using the same Phrase upon
the like occasion, ought to be understood in the same manner of expression. And
since it was in conformity to their constant way of speaking, that when he
Instituted Bread and Wine to be Received by Christians in the Commemoration of
his own death, as that Lamb was of the Passover, he said of the Bread This is
my Body, and of the Wine This is my Blood, we are to understand by it no more
than if he had told us, that they are Elements Sacramentally to be Received in
the stead and commemoration of his Body and Blood. So that although there is
nothing Corporeally upon the Table after the Co^^e^ration but the same things
that were there before, nor eat^^ by the Receivers, but very Bread, with the
very same substance that it always had: Yet in the notion of a Sacrament, and
as a Religious Mystery, it is not to be received as mere or common Bread by any
true or faithful Christian. But we verily believe that the Sacrifice of the
Body and Blood of Christ is actually and truly partaken of in those Elements;
and as the Church of England Emphatically expresses it, The Body and Blood of
Christ are verily and indeed taken and Received by the Faithful in the
Lord's Supper.

. 12. This you cannot but know to be the Doctrine of the Sacrament as it is
received in the Church of England; and if you will consult Antiquity you shall
find that it has not only been the general Doctrine of the Universal Church,
but particularly of the Church of Rome in former Ages. For the Ancient Fathers
generally speak Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis corpus suum illum
fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Tertul
adversus Marcion. 1. 4. cap. 40. p. 733. edit. Rothomag. 1662.

Nec panem reprobavit, quo ipsum corpus suum repraesentat, etiam in sacramentis
propri^^ egens mendicitatibus creatis. Ibid. Lib. 1. cap. 14. page 624.

Nam quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat, de multorum granorum adunatione
congestum, populum nostrum quem portabat indicat adunatum; and quando sanguinem
suum vinum appellat de botris atque acinis plurimis expressum atque in unum
coactum; gregem item nostrum significat commixtione adunatae multitudinis
copulatum, Cyprian. ad Magn. Ep. 76. page 2^9.

Vita unicuique erit corpus and sanguis Christi, si quod in sacramento
visibiliter sumitur, in ipsa veritate spiritualiter manducetur, spiritualiter
bibatur, August. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. Tom. 10. col. 250.

Ostendit ipse Dominus quid sit non sacramento tenus, sed revera corpus Christi
manducare and eius sanguinem bibere, hoc est enim in Christo manner, ut in illo
maneat and Christus. Ibid. de Civit. Dei L. 5. cap. 25. Tom. 5. col. 1313.

Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
proculdubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem ejus nec bibit ejus sanguinem,
licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis Christ. Ibid. in Johan. Tract. 26. Tom. 9. col. 230.

Ille instruxit postea duodecem and ait illis, verba quae locutus sum vobis
spiritus est and vita. Spiritualiter intelligite quod locutus sum. Non hoc
corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri
sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi, spiritualiter
intellectum vivificabit vos. Et sinecesse est illud visibiliter celebrari,
oportet tamen invisibiliter intelligi. Ibid. Enar. in Psalm (...) Tom. 8. col.
11^5.


of the Spiritual and Figurative Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and
do expressly call the same thing at the same time both Bread, and the Body of
Christ; which is impossible to be a truth in the Literal sense, and therefore
it is necessary to understand it Mystically, or reject those expressions as
false and incongruous. And it is also observable in other places, when some of
them fly higher in their Rhetorical expressions, and to inflame the Zeal, or to
raise the Devotion of their Auditors, who were apt to think too grossly of this
Sacred Ordinance, seem to express this change which you desire. I say it is
observable, that they often speak Ipsum igi^ur vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum
comedis. Lingua cruentatur hoc admirabili sanguine. Chrysoft. in Mat. Hom. 83.
fol. 150. Edit. Bas^^.

Quam praeclarus est calix iste, quam religiosa est hujus potus ebrietas? cruci
haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus
linguam. Author libr. De coena Domini in oper. Cyprian. insert. page 466.


not only beyond the truth and all that we believe, but even the very utmost
that you your selves will own; and consequently there is no reliance upon such
expressions, as show not the Faith but the Fancy of their Author. Nay, although
it is apparent that the Roman Missal has been altered since the days of St.
Ambrose, Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod
est Figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Ambros. de
Sacrament. L. 4. cap. 5.
to make it more conformable to your present Doctrine: Yet there is a memorable
expression still retained in it, in the very Prayer of Consecration, wherein
the Ancient Doctrine is sufficiently apparent. For it is certain that no Man
would ever pray to God to grant him less than he expected to receive, and yet
it is obvious that (although they pretend to a Transubstantiation, yet) they
desire no more there than what we Pray for who do not believe it. Their words
are these, Quam oblationem tu Deus in omnibus quaesumus ut benedictam, etc.
Facere digneris, ut nobis corpus and sanguis fiat dilectissimi Filii tui, etc.
Which Oblation we beseech thee O God to vouchsafe to render blessed, etc. that
it may become to us the Body and Blood of thy most Beloved Son, etc. Since then
the difference on debate is this, whether the Elements in the Sacrament are
changed as to their substance, and so really made the Body and Blood of Christ
in se, in themselves (as the Church of Rome asserteth) or whether without any
such Change or Alteration of their Substance they become Spiritually or
Sacramentally so Nobis, to us, who do Receive by Faith the Body and Blood of
Christ in them (as the Church of England does express it) I say it is
sufficiently apparent that the Composers of the Roman Missal have delivered
their Opinion for us, to be the same with that of the Church of England, and
not with the present Church of Rome. So that the Ancient Doctrine of that Church
is evidently for us, and whatever is professed in point of Faith upon other
occasions, yet the truth in this place so far prevails as to be openly
asserted, whenever Mass is Celebrated among you.

. 13. But lastly, this is not only the voice of Men, but agreeable to the
Declaration of Christ himself, who directs all Christians not to understand him
on this subject in a Literal Sense, but to expound his words Spiritually, as
containing a Mystery. For in the sixth Chapter of St. John's Gospel he is very
express as to the nature and design of this his Holy Institution, as most of
the Ancient Doctors have always understood him (though Non est Controversia an
in toto capite agatur de E^charistia; constat enim non ita esse. Bellarm de
Euchar. L. 1. c. 5.
Bellarmine for special Reasons is of another Opinion) insomuch that if any
Text of Scripture sounds fair for Transubstantiation, it is to be looked for
in that Chapter. But we find in the conclusion, that this was never intended by
our Savior. For when his Disciples were offended at his Doctrine, apprehending
foolishly (as St. Augustine observes) Ennar. in. Psalm. 98 ut antea Sect. 12.
that they must be Canibals in order to be Christians, as if the eating of
humane flesh was to be a Rite in their Religion; he rectifies their thoughts,
and explains his meaning fully, v: 63. saying, it is the Spirit that quickneth,
the Flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you they are Spirit,
and they are Life; that is as Loco prius citato. Sect. 12.
St. Augustine expounds it, they are spiritually to be understood by you, as
containing a Mystery that will hereafter be apparent in the Institution of a
Sacrament that will explain them. And therefore it is observable that St. Paul
calls the Eucharist Bread, and not the Body of Christ, but as it is received.
The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For me
being many are one Bread and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one
Bread, 1 Cor. x. 16, 17. and in the following Chapter, v. 26, 27, 28. even
after an account given of the Consecration of it, yet he is still express in
calling it Bread; and if words are to be understood always in a literal sense,
when no absurdity does follow, the Missal says the same thing in the Prayer
after Consecration, calling it Panem sanctum vitae aeternae, the Holy Bread of
Eternal Life. All which would strangely derogate from the nature of the thing,
if it were Christ's Body, and not Bread which they discourse of. But this is
confirmed beyond all disputation by that expression of our Savior at the
Institution of it, Do this in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this
Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death 'till come, 1 Cor. xi.
26. Since first Nemo ^ecordatur nisi quod in praesentia non est positum. Aug.
in Psalm. 37. Tom. 8. c. 312.
it contradicts the common form of speaking to remember a present Object that
stands before us, when we cannot make Reflections thus but upon absent things:
And secondly, if Christ should actually come whenever the Sacrament is
Administered, then that Holy Institution is no longer to continue, being to
determine on our Savior's coming; especially when we know Solet autem res quae
significat ejus rei nomine quod significat nuncupari. Aug. in Levit. quaest.
57. Tom. 4. col. 220.
that it is no ravity, even in the Scripture, for a thing that represents or
signifies another to bear the name or title of the thing represented.

. 14. If then, Sir, there is no advantage to a Christian in the Carnal
Manducation of the Body of Christ (as I suppose you will confess) and it is
^vident to all Men that in point of Faith, and as a Sacrifice, the Body and
Blood of Christ are as really and truly received by the Faithful in the Church
of England, as in the Church of Rome: You must needs acknowledge then that in
this Point of Faith and Worship you have gotten no advantage by the change of
your Religion; but rather on the contrary in the Rules of your Devotion, you
hazard your Salvation upon an Opinion that may be false, and more than probably
is so, for none, not the least advantage if it should be true. For if those
Elements should not be changed by their Consecration according to your Fancy
(and you know that besides all the reasons that can be offered against it,
Potest autem defectus contingere ex part materi^^ con^ecrandae, and ex part
formae a^ hibendae, and ex part ministri conficientis. Quicquid enim bo^um*
deficit, scilicet, materia debita, for^a cum intention, and ordo sacerdotalis
in conficiente, non conficitur sacramentum. Missal. Roman. De *defect. in
celebratione Missar. Sect. 1.
there are a multitude of Circumstances that may obstruct their Change) grosser
Idolatry cannot be committed than Men are daily guilty of in Worshipping the
Host. And if you will believe C^nsterus in his judgment on the Case, and it is
reasonable to allow him well acquainted with your Doctrine, you will find Si non
dotur Transustantiatio, tolerabilior ^oret ^^^um error, qui pro De^ colunt
statuam auream, quo m^dogentiles D^^^ s^^s vener ^bantur, vel pannum rubr^^^ in
husta^^ elevatum, quod de Lappis (...) vel viva anima^^a, ut quondam Eg^ptii,
quam eorum qui frustulum pa^^s (...) Conster. Enchirid. controv.
that your Public Devotion in this point of Worship does exceed the very
Heathens in their greatest Idolatry. And yet on the other hand, if those
Elements should ^e changed as (you unreasonably believe. but no Man can prove
by solid Argument) it is also evident that our reception of them by Faith is
every way as valid, as beneficial, and as effectual to Salvation, as can be
imagined in your Carnal Manducation. Since it is the Spirit that quickneth, and
the Flesh profits nothing; and it is not any action of the Body, but the
purity and sincerity of the Mind and Soul that God respects in any Holy
Exercise; and therefore it is this alone that ought to be regarded, which
unites a Man to Christ, and brings down God's Gifts and Graces on him, by a due
reception of that Holy Sacrament

. 15. But notwithstanding all this, if you continue positive in this Opinion,
and will resolutely adhere unto that 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3, 4.
Man of Sin that Exalts himself above all that is called God, contradicting
the Ordinances of Christ with a Non Obstante to his Institution of them: And
that sits as God in the Temple of God, imposing Laws and Restrictions upon
the Consciences of Men: In so much that you may rationally suspect your self to
have fallen into the state of those unhappy Persons to whom Ibid. v. 2.
God has sent a strong delusion that they should believe a lie, and obstinately
maintain these apparent Contradictions against all the force both of sense and
reason: That I may abate at least your fondness for this error, or restrain
that practice that against the Law of God is founded on it, I will offer my
second Proposition also to be considered, That if those words of Christ (This
is my Body) were to be taken in the literal sense, as effecting such a change
as against sense and reason is asserted, to make the Proposition literally
true: Yet I say they will neither justify your practice in worshipping the
Host, nor maintain the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as by the Council of
Trent it is taught and explained. For it is plain that those words of Christ in
the most literal sense that they can bear, can have no relation farther than to
his Body only, and this too in the most strict and limited notion of a
Sacrifice, wherein Mankind are made Partakers of it: Since (as your selves
confess) Here at once is Instituted both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament. A
Sacrifice in that it is ordained to continue the memory of Christ's death and
oblation upon the Cross, and the application of the general virtue thereof to
our particular necessities, by consecrating the several Elements, not into
Christ's whole Person as it was born of the Virgin, or now is in Heaven, but
the Bread into his Body apart, as betrayed, broken, and given for us; the Wine
into his Blood apart, as shed out of his Body for Remission of Sins, and
dedication of the New Testament, which be the Conditions of his Person, as he
was in sacrifice and oblation. Annotations on the New Testament Published at
Rhems, on Mat. xxvi. 26.
the design of the Institution was only this, that all Men might become
Partakers by it of the Sacrifice which Christ offered upon the Altar of the
Cross, when he made a full atonement for the Sins of the whole World. Now we
know that the nature of a Sacrifice is such, that it must be slain before it
can be offered; and consequently then this Body of Christ (into which you do
believe that the Elements are changed) must be dead as well as broken, and
totally abstracted or separated from the Soul, as it was offered up in
Sacrifice to God; and how this Body then in this very state and notion can be a
proper Object for Divine Worship, is a thing that deserves to be very well
considered. For it is very evident that it does not contain the essence of a
Man, since that consists chiefly in his rational Soul that is departed from it,
and to which St. Augustine tells us Postquam enim a Jud is in cruce suspensus
est, mox ut spiritum reddidit, unita suae Divinitati anima ad inferum profunda
descendit. Aug. Sermon. 137. Tom. 10. col. 899.
that the Divinity was united. And therefore though all his Sufferings in the
Flesh are truly attributed to him as the Son of God, because it was Christ that
suffered, who really was that Sacred Person, yet when we say that he was
buried, it is an improper way of speaking (as that Ex toto autem pars
significatur, cum dicitur Christus sepultus, cum sola ejus caro sepulta sit.
Ibid. de Anima. L. 1. c. 17. Tom. 7. col. 1158.
Father observes) and does express no more but the burial of his Body only,
since it is evident that it was not the Person of Christ, but only his Body
that was subject to that Passion. We generally look upon it as an infinite
condescension in Almighty God that he united his Divine unto our Human Nature
even in its greatest purity and perfection: But to expect that this Divinity
should be immediately united unto the grosser part of Man, even his Body or
Carcass, when his Rational Soul is separated from it, and when you cannot truly
say that even the Human Nature continues extant there; And much more to believe
then that any Priest whatsoever can effect this condescension at his pleasure,
and by the introduction of a Material Substance only unite the Divine Nature to
the accidents of Bread and Wine; which must then be inherent in the whole
Suppositum, or subsist by themselves, and so cease to be Accidents: These are
thoughts too hard to be entertained of God, except he himself in every
Circumstance had expressly declared and promised it in Scripture. The Council of
Trent therefore to avoid this difficulty, Si quis negaverit in Sacramento
contineri vere realiter and substantialiter corpus and sanguinem un^ cum anima
and divinitate Domini nostri Jesu Christi, etc. Anathema sit. Con. Trid. Sesse.
3. can. 1.
has joined the Soul of Christ together with his Body, to accompany his
Divinity in the Sacrament: Insomuch that I have heard a Doctor of Laws of that
Communion declare, that he believed that the Host after its Consecration was as
rational, discursive, and visible as any Man. But on what Authority all this
Confidence is founded, I profess I am in the dark as to its discovery. For take
those words of Christ (this is my Body) in any sense that they can bear, and
certainly nothing more than the Body of Christ can be expressed in them (besides
their Mystical signification) and if you will limit this unto the notion of a
Sacrifice, as I showed you must, that will infer directly that his Soul must be
excluded from it. And surely then whosoever he is that pretends to Miracles, to
act not only beyond the Power and the very Conceptions of a Man, but even
directly against all sense and reason; He ought to produce at least the
Commission that God has given him for to do such things, with such ample
Clauses and Expressions in it as confer that Power beyond all exception:
Otherwise Men cannot believe him that he is sent by God, but will undoubtedly
reject him, and despise his Doctrine. The Consequence then is this, That even
the most literal sense of Christ's words being granted, yet the Consecrated
Host is not to be adored: But this constant practice of Worshipping it at Mass
is a Crime not justifiable in any Christian, being directly contrary to the
first Commandment in the Law, and our Saviors Confirmation of it in the
Gospel; where he has expressly commanded us in these unquestionable terms, Thou
shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. iv. 10.

. 16. There is one thing more that is observable in this branch of your
Devotion, which I think my self obliged to make Remarks on, and that is the
general state of the Congregation when the Mass is Celebrated before them. For
the Sacrament being daily Administered in the sight of all the People* there
appears an eminent danger even in going to Mass, without such a Preparation for
it as befits a Worthy Communicant: Since if you consider seriously the Feast
which the King made at his Son's Wedding, as it is related in the Parable, Mat.
xxii. 2. and is generally understood to represent the Blessed Sacrament wherein
Christ is most especially united unto his Church: You will find that the Person
who is there Condemned was guilty of no other Crime or Misdemeanour but in
coming to the Marriage without a Wedding Garment. For it does not appear that
he so much as sat down among the Guests, or was any-wise a Partaker of the
Wedding Feast: But his Indictment is for his presumption, in daring to come in
without a proper dress, and for that alone he was Condemned to misery. In the
Primitive Church therefore we find this mischief most cautiously prevented, and
that Nullus Catechumenus, nullus auditor, nullus infidelis, nullus hereticus,
qui primam orationem persecistis, discedite, pueros recipite matres. Constit.
Apost.
whenever the Celebration of the Sacrament began, one of the Deacons stood up
and Exhorted all Persons that were unfit for to receive it, to retire. So that
instead of the common notion that is received among the People, that in the
Mass a Sacrifice is offered for all that are present at it: There is oftener a
danger than an advantage in such an attendance, and instead of taking away, it
rather adds unto their Sins: Since all Men know that the Sacrament cannot be
beneficial but only unto those that worthily receive it, as its very
Institution, Nature, and Promises do manifest: But it is very injurious unto
all Spectators that are not duly qualified for to join in the Communion.

. 17. I could easily run up this my Letter to a Volume with such like
Observations upon other Particulars, wherein you now profess to differ in
Opinion from me; As the Administration of the Sacrament in one Kind only,
directly contrary to our Savior's Institution, Mat. xxvi. 27. your Public
Prayers in an unknown tongue, against the express Doctrine of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
xiv. 28. your Praying to Saints and Angels in opposition to God's Law, and the
practice of his Servants, Mat. iv. 10. Revel. xxii. 8. and your Worshipping of
Images against the express letter of the second Commandment. But these are I
hope sufficient to my present Design, both to discover fully your disadvantage
in your change, and to clear those mistakes which were the occasion of it: To
show you plainly how continually you stand exposed to danger in that Profession
wherein you are; and that even your own Notions being granted as far as the
words can bear, yet you are daily guilty of a most grievous Sin; and this not
altogether in a careless run of irregular practice, but in the Solemn Acts of
your Public Devotion; and yet all this mischief you have drawn upon you
gratis, without any the least prospect of an imaginary Benefit, there being no
advantage which you can pretend to now, that you did not as fully and as
clearly enjoy before you were persuaded for to alter your Religion. I will not
therefore press you with any farther Arguments to return, to renew your first
love, and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; since I have reason to
hope that you will never shut your eyes against the light, nor obstinately
withstand your own Salvation. But when you seriously consider, and carefully
weigh the Arguments that are offered to you, and have strictly examined the
Principles of your Religion with a Rational indifference, and a Christian
diligence, that that Grace of God that has influenced your former Practice,
^ill be now as effective in enlightening your Understanding: And since it is no
shame to err, but to persist in error; the one ^eing the product of infirmity,
but the other of perversene^^; You will demonstrate your sincerity in what you
have do^e, by embracing of the truth on the conviction of your Conscience. And
that the God of truth may direct you in the right way to Heaven, and Happiness;
and by the influence of his Holy Spirit show you clearly what is right, and
what is true, and what that Orthodox Divine Faith is, which he requires in
every Christian; This is the hearty and the constant Prayer of

SIR, Your most Real and Faithful Friend and Servant in Christ, R. D.
Cork, the 29 th of December, 1691.

