A Particular ANSWER TO A BOOK Entitled, THE CLERGY IN THEIR COLORS.

Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, contra
Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit,

Aug. lib. de Trin. c. 6. September. the 18th 1651.

Imprimatur,

John Downam.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for William Leigh at the Turks-head in
Fleetstreet. MDCLI.

TO THE LOVER OF THE CLERGY (...) Mr JOHN DAVY OF Taunton Magdalen,
Perseverance.
Dear Uncle,
I Have sent you in these Papers a salve, such as by Gods blessing on your cost
and direction I was able to compose for that wound which an undeserved enemy
has made on the reputation of the Clergy: a wound too deep for me to search,
too great to cure: but having found one instrument that caused it where I now
reside, I have endeavored to apply my medicine thereto, hoping that (as is
believed of the Unguentum armarium) it may transmit some sanative virtue to
th'affected subject. Howsoever, I shall hereby manifest my respect unto the
suffering Parties, and (in some measure) have performed the duty of

Your most observant Nephew, and ever grateful Servant, J. D.

Sir,
I Have cursorily viewed this Book and think it seasonable for these times in
which the Function of the Ministry is so much opposed:

Yours, EDW. LEIGH.

TO THE AUTHOR OF THE BOOK ENTITLED The Clergy in their Colors, (...).
Sir,
IF you are indeed a Member of the Parliament of England, and not rather a
malicious Jesuit, slily endeavoring the increase of our divisions (which I
see cause to suspect,) Give me leave, as a freeborn Englishman, to declare my
thoughts concerning your Boook, entitled, The Clergy in their Colors.

Which you begin with a profession of your dislike of sheltring your self under
any man's wings: and no wonder; for whose Patronage need you desire, who call
your self a Patriot of your Country? I have as little propensity thereto as
your self; and yet I might justly be thought immodest and uncharitable too, if
I should impute all Dedication of Works to distrust of Workmanship, which you
there insinuate. The greatness of a man's confidence adds nothing (in facto) to
the goodness of his actions: No doubt but you may see Epistles Dedicatory
prefixed to many excellent Monuments of Learning and piety: Though the Art need
no Patron, yet the Artist may: as for example, You being a Member of
Parliament, for so (that I may not speak to no body) I must suppose you to be,
your very name is sufficient to commend to the world that which you have
written: But should such an obscure person as I am, set forth endeavors no
less deserving, yet could I not expect a like acceptance.

-- Plurima sunt, quae
Non homines audent pertusa dicere lana.
In the same Page you tell us that you decline the courting your Reader with a
flattering Epistle for his approbation, it being irrational and ridiculous,
etc. You do well in declining flattery: but Epistles to the Reader are for many
works necessary; and, as ridiculous as you suppose them to your present
purpose, you have no less in effect in this very Apology; for what is it other
then a Preparative to your ensuing Discourse? and an excuse for not
Epistolizing, is the very substance of many Epistles. So your second Section, I
am persuaded that many will look wishly upon me for this work, etc. And your
third, It Is probable that many will think me pragmatical, etc. have not indeed
the form, but contain the matter of Epistles. Which I take not notice of as any
great eyesore in it self, but as from you, who criticize most severely of any
man whose writings are at this time in my memory.

In that last mentioned Sect, you speak of a kind of Learning Idolized in
England, by which you mean skill in the holy Languages, as is afterward
intimated, p. 3. l. 13. And how I pray you is that Idolized with us? An Idol
properly is either that which men worship for a God, against the first precept
of the Decalogue, or which they superstitiously use in the worship of God
against the second: And of these the Apostle says, An Idol is nothing in the
world, 1 Cor. 8.4. alluding (as I suppose) to (...) inanitates, 1 Samuel 12.21.
there translated (...), as also, Isa. 41.29. in regard they frustrate the
expectation of their confiders; there being no such divine power present with
the Idol, as against the first Commandment is supposed, no any such acceptance
of their exhibition in the service of the true God, as is imagined by the
violaters of the second. Now can you call the gift of tongues lying vanities,
which the Apostles reckons among the gifts of the Spirit? 1 Cor. 12.10. which
whether inspired by the holy Ghost immediately, or acquired by Gods blessing on
men's industry, have the same use in order to their end, viz. the making known
the mind of God: and how that should be made known so far as (blessed be God)
we understand it, without the holy Scriptures, or they to us Englishmen,
without the use of tongues, do but tell me, and take my Buckler. Or if you
would have only their continuance superfluous (the Scripture being already in
our Vulgar Language) you will either discover your ignorance of their
multifarious use in Exposition, or foul ingratitude for the benefit you have
received from them. Or if you mean Idolatry, improperly spoken (for your word
Idolize implies action, and so a culpability rather in the subject then the
object) you then complain of their abuse only, and so you may as well complain
of the best things that are; for what is so good as may not be abused? And you
might with as little absurdity have prohibited us the quotation of holy
Scriptures in defense of true Religion, because reprobates wrest them to their
own destruction.

And now give me leave to expostulate with you a little in the words of the
Apostle, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do not thou commit
sacrilege? The calling of the Ministry you plainly despise, and if the persons
in especial manner dedicated to God, do not escape you, it is not to be hoped
that you will acknowledge any, so much as relative holiness in Places and
Things: And if that be your judgment, I beseech you tell me, how there can be
any sacrilege, or how that sin which Paul there argues to be so bad as
Idolatry, can at all be committed? But this by the way.

In the third Page (for you Sections are not distinguished by figures) you
assert, that It has pleased God in all ages to confound the wise and mighty,
by poor and despicable instruments in the eyes of the world. And you call our
Savior Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs to witness what no good Christian will
deny. But what is this to your purpose? Will it hence follow that Learning is
useless in the Church of God? Because God sometimes works without means, must
he never work with them? It was well foreseen of you therefore, while you made
an exception in your instance, saying some of the Prophets, and many Apostles;
but why you should put our Savior Christ into your illiterate catalogue, I
know not; unless that when it shall be proved impertinent to the main question,
in this particular, you may limit it to your immediatly-foregoing assertion, to
which you have (it may be for that cause) sophistically annexed it. And as for
all those you speak of, recorded by Mr Fox in his Acts and Monuments, although
they were children in Learning, yet they stood on men's shoulders, and might
therefore see further then a Popish Polyphemus: For I hope you cannot deny God
made use of many famous lights of Learning for illumination of the unlearned
people of that time, some of which went to heaven in fiery Charets with them.
Christ called indeed unlearned men, but he taught them what was necessary to
their Apostleship while they preached only to the Jews, and that within the
limits of their own Country, where the Hebrew tongue was well enough
understood, as appears, Acts 21.40. although they used the Syrian Dialect: But
after our Savior his Ascension, when they were to teach all Nations, the gift
of Tongues as thereto requisite, was conferred upon them. And as Manna ceased
when the children of Israel came into the Land of Canaan; so extraordinary
gifts ceased, when God had by ordinary provided for the propagation of
Religion. So that to inhibit the use of learning in our Preachers of the
Gospel, were as irrational, as to have forbidden the Israelites eating the
fruits of Canaan, because they had Manna in the Wilderness.

Presently after, you make an odious parallel with Romish Wolves and
Presbyterian Pastors, affirming that as they, so these hold it dangerous for
such people to breath, by whom their pomp and gallantry is like to fall. Now
Sir, I require you to prove this bloody accusation, and to make it appear that
the Grandees of the Presbyterian faction (as you call them) bare such mortal
hatred against any people in England, for Religions sake, as the Popish Priests
in Q. Mary's days had against all people of reformed Religion, or else I shall
hold you guilty of a malicious untruth for so speaking. And yet as if this were
a small matter to make them homicides, you would make them murderers of souls
too, by affirming, that As the Popish Clergy debard the common people from
reading the Scriptures; so these had rather people spent their time in reading
of tales, or following their worldly affairs, but when they are hearing them
speaking contradictions, etc. Now I am sure that I am compassed about with
clouds of witnesses, who will testify with me, that we never found cause of
such suspicion: but the Ministers of the Gospel do always exhort to reading
and meditation of the Word of God: or if any such had been, we have not wanted
time and means enough to displace them since the beginning of this Parliament.
Yet still your charge runs generally against the Clergy, as if quatenus Clergy
they were the greatest enemies to the Church of God. And yet if you were not
over-biassed with prejudice you would confess with me that the same men you
inveigh against have been the instruments of what good God has wrought in your
soul, either by their word or writings. Good Sir, do but examine, when did you
first come out of nature, and by what means? and do not with Themistocles his
Heart, crop that bush in a calm that sheltred you in a storm. Or if it be not
true by your self, yet sure it is that multitudes of gracious souls will
acknowledge men of that calling for their ghostly Fathers. And what greater
seal of an Apostleship can be desired then what the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor.
9.2. in these words, If I am not an Apostle to others, doubtless I am one to
you, for the seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. As therefore that
Potentate said of his government, Call it what you will, but by it I keep the
people in good order: So may I say of the calling of the Ministers amongst us,
Call it you what you please, I am sure the word in their mouth, is, by the
grace of God accompanying it, made the power of God unto salvation. This is it
that excited me, otherwise studious of obscurity, to make my self (I know not
yet how) public spectacle, and Aegles-like, to force nature upon the sight of
injurious dealing: for I am neither Parson, Vicar nor Curate, and might
notwithstanding any private interest have been silent: but the Cause is Gods,
on whom I depend, and may therefore say with the Lepers, 2 King. 7.9. I do not
well to hold my peace. And indeed should the redeemed of the Lord, that have
had the knowledge and love of God wrought in them by our public Ministry be
silent, when such indignities are cast upon it, it were enough to make, as our
Savior says in the Gospel, the stones to cry, that I may not say, to cry out
against them, and to condemn their ingratitude.

In page 4. you carp at the distinction of Clergy and Laity, but for what
reason we may go look: though things in themselves be distinct by nature, yet
they cannot in discourse be distinguished without several names; whereof your
own practice gives experience in the title of your Book, viz. The Clergy in
their Colors; which if you say was done for distinctions sake, that we might
know of whom you speak, as p. 45. grant us the same liberty, and we ask no
more. It Is a question whether you know how the first of your family came by his
name, and yet you will think it cannot with justice be taken from you: But the
Clergy have besides Antiquity, Etymology for their name; being so called from
(...), a Lot, because they are instead of the Levites, the Lot of Gods and God
of their Inheritance, in especial manner; for in a larger sense it is applied
to all the faithful, 1 Pet. 5.3. and so are the Saints called Priests too,
although not by their particular but general calling of Christianity: and so
all the Lords people might without offense be called holy; but yet when these
same words were usurped by Korah in opposition to the holiness of the Priests
Office, God punished that schism of his with a stranger schism of the earth
that swallowed him up. Nor is the word therefore less pertinent, because
Clergymen are not now chosen by a sortilegium, as was Matthias; for Apostles
were a distinct degree of Ministers, and to be chosen by God himself. But
however, we are not so much in usual words to regard a quo, as ad quid; and in
every Art we must keep the same terms it has been expressed in aforetime, or
else we can neither understand, nor be understood. My lot is fallen to me in a
fair ground, says David. Psalm. 16. alluding to the manner of dividing the land
of Canaan to the twelve Tribes; and by like Analogy is Cyrus called Gods
anointed, and yet we do not suppose the Persians to have had any such ceremony
as anointing in their Kings Inauguration. And as for the other member of the
distinction (Laity) he that knows no more of the primitive Church then the
beginning and end of their Liturgy, may there see (...) and (...), which in
neither place can be synthetically taken; for the Minister did not keep
silence, but the people, nor was he both the dismisser and the dismissed. But
howsoever you quarrel with the name, it is the thing that troubles you, the
very Office it self. It was once threatened for a judgment, that there should
be like people like Priest, Hos. 4.9. But you are not satisfied with likeness,
but must have them the very same. From which error if neither the fearful
punishment of Kora, Dathan and Abiram in the wilderness, of Vzza before the
Temple built, of Vzzia in the Temple, deter you; nor the practice of the
Apostle in ordaining Ministers, and making their Office antitype to the
Priest's Office in the Law, ^ Cor. 9.13, 14. and 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. neither the
practice of the Church of God in all ages, nor the Churches being upheld to
this day by that Ministry, convince you, I know not to what purpose I should
insist longer on this particular, nor can I conceive to what end you read the
Scripture. We expected a Reformation according to the Word of God, and the
example of the Primitive Church: but let it appear that either of them will
allow of your opinion, and I will with humility and sincerity of heart go to
Paul's Cross (if such a place there be in London) and there sing a Palinodie for
this my error.

In the same Page you charge them with contradictions and strange divinity,
such as they have taken upon trust from Ancient and Modern Writers, etc.
Claudius accusat maechos: for how can that be strange Divinity, which your self
confess to be found in Ancient and Modern Writers? But examine what Authors
you will, you shall be found in this opinion a stranger to them all. You need
not therefore fear (what you seem to doubt of, p. 9.) that your respondent
would bumbast his discourse with allegations out of diverse Authors, seeing all
that you expect may be dispatched in one syllable, which is, ALL. But how any
man can without brazen impudence oppose his private conceptions to the
unanimously received verdicts of all Churches in all ages, comes not within the
verge of my apprehension. Then follows, Of which their Studies are full, and
without which they dare not appear the next Sunday in the Pulpit. Some Studies
are indeed well replenisht, and if all were so it would be so much the better:
but a charitable Christian would from hence gather that such men spend as well
as are spent in the duties of their calling, and how much more is expended in
this kind so much the more does it argue their conversation to be without
covetousness. But they dare not, etc. How know you that? What then makes them
so ready in divine discourses on all occasions? But you have a clear proof of
it. And what is that? If they be from home and are spoken to to preach, you must
excuse them, etc. Which argues not dependence of a Library in any candid
judgment, but rather desire of sufficient premeditation, that they may not do
the work of the Lord negligently. Is it not their set duty to labor in the
Word and Doctrine? Dabitur in hora was an extraordinary gift for extraordinary
times: What, no more but up and preach? I had thought prayer before study,
consideration of the state of the people to hear, a subject selected for that
purpose, method most making for edification, with application of the doctrine
excogitated to the Preachers self first, etc. had been requisite; all which in
a strange place cannot suddenly be well effected. Then follows immediately, And
yet for all this they as confidently obtrude themselves upon the people to
tell, etc. as those that have the immediate assistance of the holy Ghost, etc.
What did they excuse themselves for not preaching, and yet for all that obtrude
their Sermons to the people? How can both be true? unless you mean at some
other time, for you do not say so. And who they are that have immediate
assistance, in that sense you deliver it, I know not: but sure I am there be
some Preachers who compose their Sermons without any other present help of
Books then the holy Scriptures; who yet will acknowledge themselves to be but
as Mushrums in comparison with many Cedars for ability, against whom you belch
out that scandalous accusation.

In the fifth Page you seem to travel with discoveries which people were not
yet able to bear: of whom you have nevertheless a tender respect in regard God
is good to his Saints under a variety of dispensation, and they sweetly enjoy
him. And why will you not give the people of God leave to enjoy his presence
under what dispensation God has placed them? Why do you call them a poor
deluded people, if you acknowledge their enjoyment of God in their present
condition? And if it were possible for them to relinquish their station,
whither would you carry them, what can you promise them, and what security will
you give them for performance if you promise any thing? Strange it is to me
that you should acknowledge the the blessed condition of the people, and yet
cry down the Ministers under the same dispensation; How short herein do you
come of Joseph Salmon himself? He professes himself above forms, and yet to
such as are under that dispensation does not disallow them: you acknowledge
Ordinances, and endeavor their destruction; for what is it less to grant a
public worship without the Ministry, then as that merciless deceiver D. D'
Alva did, who promised life to his prisoners, but would allow them nothing
wherewith to preserve it? Should all they whom you call Clergy be excluded,
how many miles might a man travel to hear a Sermon? Truly Sir, your writing
discovers you to be a man subject to like passion with other men, and having
begun to speak, I should but flatter you in concealing it. You tell us indeed
but in the sixth Page, that you take no pleasure to cast dirt in men's faces,
and promise much tenderness, love and meekness: but how well you perform it,
let the next Page witness; where taking occasion to blame Mr Cheynell for
foul-mouthed language, as Diogenes trampled on Plato's Pallat with greater
pride then ever was used in it; so you do the same by him which you reprehend
in him. What else mean these words, Sign in Aries and Cockoe month? Was the
man so crafie that he might not be answered, and yet might he be flouted? Give
me rather (if I must have one) a railing Rabshakeh, then a scoffing Michol:
Virulencie of speech many times whets the spirits of Gods people, and makes
their zeal more fervent: but scoffing has commonly, as it were, an enchanting
power of benumming the affections, as experience teaches us. And therefore not
unlikely it is that the Apostle, Heb. 11.36. ranks mocking with scourging; and
if we compare, Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4.29. we shall find mocking called
persecution. You spoke but a little before of your being carried out by the
spirit of the Lord: and now I pray you Sir, consider whether these words be
congruous to the spirit of God or no; yea (whatsoever you may think of them) to
common sense: for what means The sign in Aries? I had thought Aries had been a
Sign, what was the sign in the sign? Truly Sir, if you did it ignorantly, you
were more bold then wise: if wilfully, I know no ground for your confidence,
unless as the Pope said he would pronounce Cathedra, in contemptum
Grammaticorum, so you calling your self a Parliament man, think you may speak
nonsense by authority. (...). O Thales, Thales, quoth an old Wife, how
think thou to comprehend the things in heaven, and can not see what is
before thy feet? when he going a Star-gazing fell into a pit: So how do you
think to persuade us that you are wiser then all the Learned of past and
present ages, while we find you stumbling in the very A.B.C. of an Almanac?
Or if your wisdom be only spiritual and not carnal, why do you thus miscere
sacra profanis, and having begun in the spirit, proceed in the flesh? What
cause you have to accuse Mr Cheynel of madness, I know not, for I never heard
of the man but by your relation: but never (till now) did I know any man well
in his wits, condemn men for Droans by reason of their industry, as you have
done, p. 8. for what less then industry does reading and writing of voluminous
discourses signify.

Then with a Sarcasticall reproach you assault the Assembly of Divines, as, you
say, they are called. What will not a man of a malignant spirit carp at? A
Professor of Mathematics is called a Mathematician, of Logic a Logician, of
Rhetoric a Rhetorician; and why must not a Professor of Divinity be called a
Divine? O base envy! for what else can any man say in such an exception? And
what in your Ironical accusation do you find culpable in them? but that In
seven or eight years time, with the help of the Kirk of Scotland, they bring
forth only a Catechism, and Annotations on the Bible: whom yet Telephus like
you heal as it were with the rust of the same weapon; for anon, p. 29. you
charge them with being able to do nothing without leave from the Parliament.
Now whether the Egyptians dealt worse with the Israelites in giving them no
straw and commanding them to make brick, or you with that Assembly, in binding
their hands, and complaining of their idleness, let the world judge. If I had
heard of nothing done by them, yet they deserve too reverent opinion of me to
be thought idle: and I have heard their Annotations commended by some, who
probably, can judge as well as you; and would therefore think it extreme
impudence in any man to affirm with you, If none be the worse for it, few are
the better. And when we look for a reason hereof in the next words, there is
nothing but Experto creed Roberto: Which when I first saw, I turned back to the
Title page to see if your name were Robert, that so I might have an
asseveration of at least one man's experience; but it might be Robin Hood for
any thing thence to be collected, for him you have up too p. 4. I marvel with
what face you charge Preachers with bold obtrusion of their doctrine, and your
self so magisterially require our assent to your calumnies on no better account
then Experto creed Roberto.

As for your following complaint of their wary handling or unprofitable
prolixity in explaining Scriptures: I have no more to say to it, but that if
some be less able, they be the more wise in being wary. The Scriptures are as a
water in which as a Lamb may wade, so an Elephant may swim: Who is sufficient
for these things? says the blessed Apostle, of the Ministerial Office, 2 Cor.
2.16. But (thanks be to God for them) we have many that handle not the Word of
God deceitfully, but show themselves Workmen that need not be ashamed: the
undervaluing of whose labors, considering what good God has wrought by them,
may give us just cause to fear, that he will in justice deprive us of them.

In p. 10. you say that for some years past, you have entered into a serious
consideration of your later end, etc. And so no doubt have many others, and the
further they have proceeded in that meditation, the more heartily they have
embraced the Ministers of the Gospel. But on search of the Scriptures you find
contradictions, absurdities and inconsequencies, etc. You might have done well
in showing us what doctrines held forth by our Ministers were repugnant to the
Word of God; which you have not done here, nor in the remainder of your
discourse; as I might make appear now, but for inverting the order begun. But
how comes it to pass that the further you seek the more you are entangled,
while the more we search, the more we are confirmed? But, as a wise man of this
Nation said concerning Philosophy, A little might make a man an Atheist, a
great deal might make him a Divine: so in matters of this nature, men of the
shallowest apprehensions are the greatest gainsayers: For among many such
complainers of contradictions I have not yet found one, who in its Logical
propriety, could tell what a contradiction was. I cannot say that ever I heard
false doctrine in a public Sermon in my life time, and yet (I am bound to
thank God for it) I have of a child been instructed in the rudiments of
Religion; these hear it in every Sermon; and yet when I come to reasoning with
them, they and I are in the points controverted altogether of the same opinion.
But as Ictericorum oculis omnia flava, so they having a spirit of contradiction
in them, may imagine all that they read or hear to be full of contradiction.
Omnia perversas possunt corrumpere mentes. As Harpaste complained of the
darkness of the house when her eyesight failed her: Or as too indulgent
parents complain of the Schoolmasters negligence, when their own fostering
their children in untowardness is the cause of their non-proficience: so do
these men father upon the public Ordinances the spurious brats of their own
inventions. Who but these complain of pudling the waters of the Sanctuary by
confused preaching, and talk of new lights, and strange revelation? who had
they but an impartial eye to their own condition, would rather complain of the
darkness of their own understanding.

In p. 12. you tell us how hardly people could be drawn from the good opinion
they have of their Teachers, and the Teachers themselves Pope-like will not
submit for many inconveniences. To what, I pray you, should they submit? for
you do not tell us what? Should the Moon stay her course because a Wolf barks
at her? Or the builders of Jerusalem desist from their labor, because
Sanballat and Tobia mock at their proceeding? Does Christ teach us to pray the
Lord of the harvest to send forth more laborers into his harvest, and must
they that are entered withdraw themselves upon your malevolent persuasion? Must
the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts be left like the field of Solomon's sluggard?
What, be there no souls still to be called home by the preaching of the word,
none to be confirmed, none to be comforted? O Sir, whatever you boast of your
own experience, had you ever been truly sensible of a natural condition, felt
the dolorous throws of a new birth, and apprehended the soul-ravishing comfort
of Gods Spirit speaking true peace to your conscience, which by this despised
preaching is daily wrought in the hearts of Gods chosen, you would say with
them, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things? and with the believing Galatians be ready to
pull out your eyes for them, whose eyes you would rather have pulled out.
Witness your envying their Profit and Credit, while you affirm them to have no
right to either. Nor is it a Tithe matter you talk of (though that but for
covetousness sake need not have been questioned) but p. 13. you allow them not
the benevolence of the people and so would at once rob them of their respect
and maintenance, and the people also of that liberality that might redound to
their account in the day of the Lord. But why have they no right to either? As
for their Credit, the Apostle says, They that labor in the word and doctrine
are to be accounted worthy of double honor: It Is worthy our observation that
Honor is here subjected in the people, as being their duty to give it, Are to
be accounted; for Honor est in honerante non in honorato, so that if it be the
peoples duty to give it, here is honor complete, 1 Timothy 5.17. It will be long
ere you envy their pains if you hold in this mind; who might therefore answer
you, as Marius is by Salust in his Jugurthine war, brought in speaking to the
people of Rome; Invident honori meo, ergo invideant labori, innocentiae,
periculis etiam meis, quoniam per haec illam cepi. And for their maintenance
they have such evidence as no man can show for any other inheritance; men's laws
may alter, and Proprieties be Impropriated, but God's more sure then that of
the Medes and Persians alters not. (...), says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.14. The
Lord has ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel:
And from the sixth verse of that Chapter to the fourteenth he argues to the
same purpose. And the Spirit of God foreseeing what shifts men were like to
invent, whereby to debar Ministers from their due, and themselves from their
duty, adds an especial caveat to that precept, Gal. 6.6. as worthy Mr Dyke
(quem honoris causa nomino) in his eximious Tractate of the hearts
deceitfulness has observed, Cap. 17. p. 234. for having said in the sixth
verse, Let him that is taught in the word make him that taught him partaker of
all his goods, to prevent such witty excuses as might hinder the sincerity of
performance of that duty, he adds in the seventh verse, Be not deceived, God is
not mocked. -- Besides, it were unreasonable, 1. That they who are employed for
us should not be maintained by us, The labourer is worthy of his hire. It was
spoken by our Lord to them who took no more pains for preaching but to travel
and speak, and not to study as these do. 2. That so much expense as is requisite
to fit men for the Ministry should have no recompense. A man that has served
an Apprenticeship seven years has a Calling to live on, but he that has spent
three times seven in Study, shall by your allowance have no reward for all his
expense of moneys, time, or labor: which how it can stand with that royal Law
and consent of all civilized people, To do as we would be done by, let any
reasonable man judge. Perhaps you will say they are not the men, or they have
some other ill qualification rendering them incapable of what privilege
otherwise were assigned to them. Why? but these are the Dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments, these are they that watch over our souls; it is by their
Ministry that God convinces, converteth, confirms his people, and to whom
else can it be applied? You complain of defects in the execution of their
Office; be it granted; yet let them have therewithal the allowance due to all
mortal men (from us at least) and they may pass for current in the balance of
a Christian judgment. Very heinous were the sins of Ely's sons, 1 Samuel 2.22,
24. and yet the people are held guilty of sin for abhorring the offering of the
Lord. And Christ made great complaint of them who sat in Moses chair in his
time, who yet commands the people to hear and obey them, whom yet he convinces
of errors in the doctrine it self, Mat. 23. Is it not strange reasoning, that
because a man is not yet near his journies end he should therefore sit down and
go no further? and yet what less does this sound, Because our Ministers have
not yet attained to so clear knowledge of the mind of God in Scripture, as to
hold it forth so distinctly as some of the people do, or at least think they do
understand it; let there therefore be no more Study and no more preaching? Why?
how then shall we come by more knowledge? you say by searching the Scriptures:
one might think then the Eunuch should have had no great need of Philip. It Is
true indeed (as Luther said) no matter if all our books were burnt, so the holy
Scriptures were well learned, and rightly understood: but do you by bare
reading, meditation and comparing Scripture with Scripture, without any help of
tongues and other Histories, give a satisfactory answer to many questions, to
which the Scriptures give occasion of enquiry, Et eris mihi magnus Apollo: I
will acknowledge you then with Apollos in the Acts to be a man mighty in the
Scriptures indeed. Or if this might be supposed by your self, yet we know some
men will not, many men cannot, most men do not spend so much time about them:
and if your own conscience might speak freely, it would confess, That for the
knowledge you have attained to in Divinity, you are, next to God, beholden to
the labors of the Clergy.

But p. 13. This would abate the heat of Parsons kitchens, and hinder their
families from following fashions, etc. And would it not also abate the heat of
charity in giving, and of nature in many indigent receivers, who from the
Parsons most commonly receive most liberal contributions? The Apostle says, A
Bishop must be given to hospitality: but you are so far from consenting to his
exercise of hospitality, that you allow not other men to be hospitable to him.
And as for fashions, I think no man (but in some causes extraordinary) ought to
be singular; the fault is therefore chiefly in the first inventer. But the
Clergy, the Clergy (for there be but few of them Parsons in comparison with the
rest) they are in all the fault: As the Heathens were used to say of the
Christians, when any general calamity befell them, Away with the Christians to
the wild beasts; their motes be beams, their mole-hils mountains, their flies
be Eagles: and yet all England knows that there is scarce one to ten of your
insolent humor, who may not as easily be known from a sober-minded Christian,
as a sligering Morrice-dancer from an ordinary spectator, by his fantastic
habit and behavior.

In the same p. 13. I have heard Papists say, etc. And I have heard Papists
upbraiding us with dissension, not for any man's being divided from himself, but
some of us from others by contrariety of opinion: and how well soever you agree
with your self, you are not the least fomenter of that division.

What p. 14. you declaim against peoples taking Religion upon trust, is worthy
acknowledgement, and not unfrequently do we hear from this Clergy, which you
look so despitefully on, the same doctrine. Many time have I heard them exhort
to imitation of the Bereans, and pressed that precept of our Savior, Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures; that so they might at length tell the Church, as the
Samaritans did the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy word, etc. that so
if a new Religion come in fashion, and the stream of the times turn, they may
have bank to hold by, ground of their own to stand on, and not be carried away
with every blast of vain doctrine. But if constancy in perilous times, and
stability in Religion signify a sure foundation, whether shall your fickleness
or other men's perseverance most commend them to the Church of God? For, you
say, you were sometime of the same mind, sick, as you call it, of the same
disease; and I wish for your everlasting healths sake you were Sermon-sick in
another sense then you are. If your meaning be you were one of them that have
no more but an implicit faith, I will yield you sick of a dangerous disease
indeed: but if you apply it to the condition of all them you write against, I
think you may be answered as the Emperor, who having read over the sum of
Christian Religion, and saying, (...) was replied unto, (...). Or rather in the
words of St John, You went out from us because you were not of us, if you had
been of us, you would have continued with us.

In p. 15. And therefore men cannot justly be taxed of immodesty, etc. To tax
people of immodesty for bare questioning, will not suit with the forementioned
doctrine: It is the duty of Ministers to endeavor their doubting peoples
resolution: to many of whom I may apply for their commendation, what of
Sempronia is recorded to her infamy, Vt saepius peteret viros quam peteret. For
I know them publicly to encourage, and privately to invite men to this duty:
and yet I must tell you that it is oftentimes seen that where duty may lead a
man to make question, there may be immodesty used in manner of propounding and
maintaining. Men that have not learned to deny themselves, may pertinaciously
persist in an erroneous opinion, to which self-love has so married that
nothing but death can separate them: Men many times defend their opinions as
they do their Countries, not because true, but because their own. And I am
persuaded that not only many a bastard-Christian, but some even of the truly
regenerated, are of such peevish and cross-grained disposition, that an Angel
from heaven could scarce give them satisfaction.

What clue was woond up in your discourse, p. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. is by your
self unravel'd again p. 21. for by producing some texts of Scripture sounding
free grace, and some free will, you endeavor to evince, what before you have
asserted concerning contradictions in Religion, as our Pulpit-men exhibit it.
But in p. 21. you confess Can and Cannot in a diverse respect may consist well
enough, as 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God. (...). For God does
not nolentes vi trahere, and draw men to heaven as Cacus drew beasts into his
den, backward, but by a (...) makes them willing: and God by his word
commanding what we must do, gives us power to do what he commands. But if you
say, this is not sufficiently distinguished in teaching, I answer that you do
not consider how the same subject should be differently handled by a
Rhetorician and a bare Logician: If Preachers should use in their public
Sermons nothing but definitions and divisions, what impress were they like to
make on the peoples affections? And yet in regard to peoples infirmity, I could
wish that Gospel Truths were by some men, at some times held out more
distinctly then they are. But he that is acquainted with the body of Divinity
need not always be poring on a Skeleton, but using an ingenuous candor in
hearing, he can discern the joints and nerves of distinctions and Aporisms
thereto belonging, under the flesh and outmost ornaments of amplification.

And what is said to this may likewise be applied to p. 22. where you would
seem to make contradictory things in themselves subordinate; viz. Gods
election, and man's accepting the means of salvation; for God has ordained to
the end by the means. So also concerning the perseverance of the faithful and
their seeming possibility of falling (for I may not be allowed here to state
the questions, it is done largely enough already by others.) In all which
allegations you translate the pretended crime from the Ministers to the
Scriptures; for whatsoever oppositions you gather out of their Sermons are
either the same totidem verbis, or at most but a Paraphrase on the holy
Scriptures.

To your rule p. 23. I give my approbation, and the rather, not because new,
but for that it is common: Bonum quo communius, eo melius. For as without use of
the common elements no man can continue is his being; so neither without this
rule did any man ever read the Scriptures with understanding. It is much
therefore that you should deigne to insert it in this your supercilious
insultation. I have known many self-conceited Scioli indeed who thought they
told news when they did but carry herbs to Ephrata; (as the Jewish Proverb has
it) And although it be very little that I know in comparison to what I ought,
yet I have scarce had patience enough sometimes in hearing such punies
documentizing me in obvious things; which because new to them, they thought had
been so to me, although I had known them from my childehood as familiarly as
mine own name. But because we err not so much by ignorance as incogitancy, I
will suppose that you have given us this instruction for the help of our memory
rather then of our understanding; but on this condition, that you will from
hence take occasion of considering, what necessary use we have of a constant
Ministry; for although men know as much or more then the Preacher can tell
them, yet have they still great need of hearing. He that is of God (as well in
facto, as in fieri) hears Gods Word; which is the means of growing as well as
of begetting, 1 Pet. 2.2. And as the body has still need of nourishment,
although it be come to its full (...), which it will have supplied by a
slovenly Cook, rather then perish with famine: So the soul even of a
strong-grown Christian is not kept by the power of God unto salvation
otherwise, then by his Ordinances (where they are exhibited) of Sacraments and
Preaching. We know in general Publicorum cura est minor, and if there be not
men enough appointed for that sacred imploiment, it is like to be but badly
performed. Many an unregenerate Master has a gracious servant, many an
irreligious parent a pious child by Gods blessing on the public Ordinances,
who had had small means of enlightening otherwise: And since the rains of
Government have lien but loosely on the peoples neck, how many Churches stand
like deserted Abbeys appointed to demolition? We thought much in time of
Bishops to have had no other afternoons exercise in some places, but Prayer and
Catechizing: but many Parishes have now, nor one nor other: They who can
procure means will not, they who would cannot, and so in conclusion, Et succus
pecori, and lac subducitur agnis. Besides, it is to be considered that although
things absolutely necessary to be believed are but few, yet there are many
things to be done: the greater part by far of the word of God, contains
direction for a godly conversation. For although Love be the fulfilling of the
Law, yet this Charity has so many objects, and (by reason of corruption from
within, and temptation from without) so many impediments, that it requires many
rules of direction, and of them, because of our many infirmities, a frequent
inculcation. But what need other reasons? we are sure it is Gods command, and
therefore must needs be our duty. 'Twas not the inestimableness of the fruit,
but the Infiniteness of the Prohibitant, that gave hainousness to the sin of
Adam: nor are the Ordinances of God necessary for the efficacy of the outward
Action, but in regard to the authority of Divine institution. It pleases God
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. while
to others it is said, Behold ye despisers, wonder and perish.

In p. 20. you tell us, that for solution of questions in Religion you have
somewhat more to say then ever you heard or read from these men. Now if you
have a better key to open the Scriptures with then other men, how dare you be
so injurious to the Church of God as to conceal it? seeing, Qui novit, neque id
quod sentit exprineit, perinde est ac si nesciret. And if it be one of the
things which people cannot yet bear (for such things you speak of, p. 5, 6.)
how unjustly do you blame the Clergy for not laying such an unsupportable
burden on them? What you know more then others, is to others unknown, but I am
sure knowledge unsanctified is but like a sword in a mad man's hand, and many a
man's learning may be to himself but a candle to light him to hell. Multos
nasci, and omni scientia egere satius fuisset, quam sic in propriam perniciem
insanire.

In p. 24. you tell us of our nearess to the Papists: in expressions I suppose
you mean, which are most expanse; for otherwise the world knows we are at
sufficient distance. But concerning this my opinion is, that we have gone
farther from the Papists then we need in some things, although not so far as
they have gone from the truth in other.

For resolution to your instance, p. 25. [They say that a man has power to do
good works, but we say he has not.] I answer, that Although it be God that
works in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure: and every Christian
may truly say of his graces, and all operations from them proceeding, as Jacob
of his children, They are they which God has graciously given to his servant;
yet THE REGENERATED MAN IS IN ABLED BY THE GRACE OF GOD ASSISTING HIM, TO DO
GOD MORE AND BETTER SERVICE THEN THAT WHICH HE DOES. Which Proposition well
considered may much extricate a mind infetterd with seeming oppositions of
this nature: And the same refutes that gross speech of your [ When we are
humbled for our sins we do tell God Almighty news, that he would have had us
walk more holily then we have done, but we had not power so to walk. And what
you there speak of faiths being a work, we must understand of the (...)
credere, for otherwise it is not true: But who of our Preachers ever said that
faith was a meritorious cause of salvation, and did not rather acknowledge the
very (...) to be from Christ? and if so, they affirm no more of faith then they
do of obedience, as to this particular.

But p. 26. The Papists say good works are meritorious, but we say No, and yet
I have heard it said, if we believe, repent, etc. it is Gods duty to give us
heaven. The word Duty seems somewhat too harsh: but since we cannot understand
Gods acting toward us, but according to the slender model of our apprehension,
we may with due reverence to his glorious Majesty affirm; That although our
works do not by any merit in them, oblige God to reward them: yet we having his
promise for our assurance, are as truly ascertained of the accomplishment
thereof, as if God were Debtor and we Creditors. The sum whereof is, That the
true Believer has the Justice as well as the Mercy of God for his Asylum, and
may pray with the Psalmist, Deliver me in thy righteousness. For Christ having
satisfied the Justice of God for him, and imputed his own Righteousness to him,
he may expect from God that fruition of himself, which Christ has purchased
for him; of which the present grace of God inabling him to believe, and
endeavor to obey, gives testimony. For they do not say that Gods rewarding men
is aequalitatis, but liberalitatis, not condignitatis, but benignitatis; and
that he rewards not propter, but secundum opera: which very secundum, as I
understand it, signifies but this, To whom God gives greater measures of grace
here, on them he will bestow greater degrees of glory hereafter: not in regard
of essential happiness, which must be equal to all, but in respect of accidental
blessedness, making such a difference as is between the members of the body,
although every member be equally informed by the same soul, and has in it self
whatsoever can make for its perfection. In p. 28. you confess your whole
discourse to be negative: which choice whether it were made for your ease or
not, you may thereby take to your self the greater liberty of accusing, and
whatever answer be given, you can scarce be destitute of some means of evasion.

After that you invade the title Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as owned by the
Clergy. I wish you would (if such a thing can be done) but pen some discourse
bare of Tropes and Figures, every word signifying according to its natural
propriety, and then see what a deformed piece of work it will be: no doubt but
a knife from off the Anvil will be near as useful, and what rules of art or
reason can require such severity of expression? But that I may play with you a
little at your own game, what do you dislike it for? You say, They understand
not their Message. In a secular signification, you may know better then I, what
belongs to that Office: but if Legatus be an Ambassador, and it be the
essential form that denominates, then is it the being sent, and not the manner
of negotiation that makes an Ambassador: He that carries the Ambassie must be
the Ambassador, whether transported by word or writing: if not, what means
Hypsipyle saying of her newborn children, Legatos quos pene dedi pro matre
ferendos? And yet how can they be said ignorant of that message, which is so
effectually done that multitudes of souls to their everlasting comfort, have
received the glad tidings of salvation by them delivered? And if you please to
view the term in Greek, the same word which the Apostle uses, 2 Cor. 5.26.
translated, We are his Ambassadors, is (...), which must needs be near of kin
to (...), being both derived from the same (...). Which title the blessed
Apostle does not arrogate to himself, but speaks in the first person plural, as
if he should say, We, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, or what Minister
soever else by whom men believed. And the same Apostle Gal. 4.14. commends
the Galatians for receiving him, not only as the Ambassador of Jesus Christ,
but as Christ himself: now between whether (think you) was the great disparity,
Christ and Paul, or Paul and Presbyters? Surely if it were commendable in them
to receive Paul as Christ, it cannot be blameable in us to receive them as
Paul. What, would you have none allowed for preachers of the Word until they
be called, as that Apostle was, immediately from Heaven? when Christ had called
Andrew, he called Peter, when Christ had called Philip, he called Nathaneel;
and so when the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior were sent to preach the
Gospel themselves, they also called others to the same, in effect, function.
And I know not why we may not acknowledge the same succession still, unless
the whole Church of God can ratify nothing without your approbation. If the
internal call be questioned, he or none that pretends to the calling, must
resolve it; for I hope you have no more of the (...) then they that lay on
hands in ordination. It is sufficient for us that the efficacy of divine
ministration depends not of the sanctity of the person ministering; or else
Judas had never been an Apostle; for he was one of them whom Christ sent to
preach; witness his appellation (...). Nor have discerned any so great
indignity cast upon Gods Ordinances by the religious people of my time, as that
Idolizing of Ministers, and making Gods Word man's, while they professedly hear
it with respect of persons.

In p. 29. You endeavor to make void that title, as to them belonging, because
they depend on the Civil Magistrates authority in their acting. As the
Assembly of Divines waited on the Parliament with their Creed and Catechism.
And would not the Apostles themselves, if there had been Christian Magistrates
in their time, have implored their assistance for the furthering of their
proceedings? I, but they ask leave of men to do what their Master has
commanded them. I answer, in our duty to God some things are essential, some
accidental: for the first we need no man's leave, the command of God lays on us
a necessity of performance: but for other circumstances thereto belonging, we
may, yea and ought to be regulated by Magistrates. Besides, the Assembly
convened by authority of Parliament, and therefore whatever the members thereof
act other wise in reference to their ministerial office, yet quatenus
Synod-men, they depend of the Parliament that called and upheld them. But your
words seem to import a restraint by the Parliament laid upon them: and if so,
it no more derogates from the truth and dignity of their Ministerial function
to be so impedited by any outward obstruction, then it did from the blessed
Apostle Paul's, whose visitation of the Church of Thessolonica was once or twice
hindered by Satan, 1 These. 2.18.

In page 33. you promise us a pregnant Argument, that such men are not sent by
Jesus Christ, that is, their difference in judgment. 'Twas well you did not
say impregnable; for I hope your meaning being understood, we shall easily
disprove your argument. For do you affirm them to differ in the Fundamentals,
or in the superstruction of religion? If the first, we deny your assertion. For
which of them opposes Peter's enunciation, on which Christ promised to build
his Church, Mat. 16.18. we believe and are sure that thou art Christ the Son of
the living God? who among them confesses not the holy Trinity, the Divinity
and Humanity of our Savior, his obedience and satisfaction, the Souls
immortality, last Judgment and life eternal? but if their difference be in
non-necessaries, we have no where promise of infallibility in such particulars;
I hope Saint Paul had immediate assistance, and yet his (though but
conditional) toleration to the Church of Corinth, does not omnimodo quadrare
with that decree made by the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. What shall I
speak of that disastrous clashing between the Master Builders at Antiochia?
Act. 15.37, 38. or of Paul's severe reprehension of S. Peter for his
double-dealing between the Jew and the Gentile? what divisions are there
amongst ours more then about the fringe of Christ's garment, and such as were it
not for other men's interest more then the Clergies, might probably in good part
be well composed. What is there more plainly then the abolition of Jewish
ceremonies taught in S. Paul's doctrine? and yet it is affirmed that 15.
Christian Bishops successively were circumcised in Jerusalem before its
destruction: and if it might be supposed that some of ours were for, and some
against Paedobaptism, it will be no greater blemish then rebaptization was to
Cyprian. Unity in doctrine and manners is indeed desirable, but perfect
harmony is reserved for the life to come, of which there can be here but an
imperfect inchoation: God who brings good out of evil makes his Ministers
infirmities, like Paul's bonds, fall out many times for the furtherance of the
Gospel. Their contention in the forementioned Text was very high (...) even
like the utmost sharpness of fever fit: for although they were Apostles yet
they were men, -- (...), for God by their separation made way to the further
spreading of the Gospel. No wonder therefore the Apostle says there must be
heresies even amongst you, 1 Cor. 11.19. And yet further to convince you of the
insufficiency of your argument, do but consider whether the men whom you
approve (if any you do allow) for Ministers of the Word, be not men subject to
like infirmities with these you speak against; and if so, what validity has
your argument against one more then against the other?

In p. 34. You compare Gods praying people to Fools and Knaves in Stage Plays,
and that for their wry mouths, squint eyes, and scru'd faces. I believe they
are not more like a Player for action, then you a Poet for expression, or else
you have learned what that Siren Attica gave for a descriprion of Oratory,
(...). But they are not (you say) the men that God and nature made them. Why?
God made man to look upwards: Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad syderatollere vultus.
and yet are men squint-eyed for looking up to heavenward? no nor for looking
downards neither; for who disallows the Publicans humble deportment? God has
made man to go upright on his feet, and yet never blames him for kneeling, or
falling flat on his face in divine worship. Surely it would better argue a
gracious heart, not rashly to censure any good endeavor, although it were
accompanied with some small indiscretion in the actor. But you say you are
assured that if the exactest scrutiny be made, there can be no precept or
example found for it. But as confident as you are, you forgot Hanna, 1 Samuel
1.13. which, but for her trembling lips and blubred face, could not in her very
prayer have been taken for a drunken woman. Whether you have like fervency of
spirit in prayer or no, I cannot hope that you would use like mildness of
speech, had you lain under a like causeless reprehension. Our Lord forbids
disguising faces in hypocrisy, Mat. 6.16. but why was any such thing done in
hypocrisy, if it had not a character of good affection when done in sincerity;
for the hypocrites counterfeited a sorrowful countenance, that they might gain
to themselves the opinion of devout men by that outward imitation. The face
naturally characterizeth the mind; and when frons est animi mutabilis index,
the the disparity is made de industria. and of set purpose: and that not only
in the height of an affection, for we many times guess rightly by a strangers
countenance at what good will he bears to the profession of Religion, Momus
might have been summoned to Natures Court, for saying man's body wanted windows
in the breast, for a man's countenance, garments and gesture do bewray his
disposition, Eccl. 19.27, 28. But I marvail how any man whose face is as though
he would go to Jerusalem, can thut deride the discoveries of the Spirit of God,
his striving within men. My heart is extremely hard (the Lord in mercy mollify
it) and yet I could not utter these words as you speak them, and not tremble in
rehearsing. Artificial modulation of the voice of which you speak, p. 35. is,
no doubt to be rectified by Christian prudence, for every art is but (...) and
all things in the Church must be done to edification. But seeing you affirm it
to be done in hypocrisy, I can have but heavy thoughts of you while I measure
your faith by your charity.

In p. 36. you promise clearly to demonstrate our Clergies absurdities and
grossness by singing Psalms: but upon examination you are so far from a
scientificall, that you have not so much as a probable argument; for if any man
irrationally abuse the Psalms, is this an absurdity in the Clergy, and that the
whole Clergy? as if quatenus Clergy they were all irrational in this
particular. I hope it will not make a little for their vindication, that you
are so hardly driven to find somewhat against them, that you must needs forge
this false accusation. I know the contrary practiced by many Ministers in
public exercises, and by all religious persons that I have known to sing
Psalms in their private houses. To take Psalms at a venture, or to go through
the whole Book in order, does indeed seem to me absurd and irrational: but to
select one or two staves, or more, suitable to their purpose, and to read it
themselves, is the common practice of many godly Ministers, and I have known
Parish-Clarks so to demean themselves in that office, that they deserved
commendation of all their Auditors: and that it may with heed-taking in the
choice of a Psalm, and sometimes by change of a word, be performed; I have most
part of my time known by experience. That is not true (which you would persuade
us) that not one Psalm of the 150. can indifferently be sung by a whole
Congregation; for to say nothing of the Jews great Halelujah sung at their
Passover, and most probably by our Savior and his company, from 113. Psalm to
the 119. exclusively, it is contrary to the experience of all well considerate
Christians. For daily exercise indeed, and to save people a labor in choosing,
I have known selected parcels of Psalms framed together, which were so composed
by Godly Ministers before I was born, and some copies of that kind I have
still by me. So that to impute this absurdity to the whole Clergy is as unjust
as that of the profane multitude: Some Puritans are knaves, and so they are
all: Some professors are hypocrites, and therefore all are no better: and I
wonder a man that talks so much of rationality should bring in this for a
demonstration.

I cannot close with you in p. 38. neither where you say, Therefore the people
are undeservedly censured for withdrawing themselves from such meetings. That
because they cannot at some times join in some one exercise, they should cast
off all: especially c^osidering how easily such an irregularity might be
corrected, and that indeed you would rather have endeavored, if subversion
more then reformation were not the scope of your intention.

In the same Page you make the Clergy the main Incendiaries in stirring up
people against the Parliament: and this too must be set upon the common head,
as the fault of the whole Clergy; whereas all the Christian world knows, had it
not been for what influence the Clergy had upon the people, there had long ere
this time been no Parliament to be opposed.

In page 40. You upbraid the Clergy with being beholden to a Lexicons and you
might as well have said a Horn-book or Primar, for to them they may have been
beholden too: what disparagement is it for the highest building to have had its
foundation low in the earth? or if you mean the constant use of it, no man's
memory is infinite. We know but in part, and prophecy but in part, 1 Cor. 13
8, 10, 11. And yet for all this (you say) some of them have such bold
foreheads, etc. more skill then the Septuagint. Sir, it being acknowledged by
the Church, that the 70. were not (...), I know not why a modest man having
more then 70. times 70. of his judgment, may not as well cleave to these as to
them, their translation as well as others being subject to disquisition. And
what if a Minister, not so much as they Master of the Languages, meet with one
of the errors of the Seventy, in which they did (...) as is observed by the
learned, is it ever the less true in his mouth, because he was not the first
that discovered it?

In p. 41. Because they know many of the Laymen are good Scholars, and better
then many of them, etc. they are in Orders forsooth, etc. These words of yours
are inconsistent with Piety and Polity: First, They are against Piety; for
never did any people, how barbarous soever, worship a God, who did not also
acknowledge a Priest. And yet if the natural Law had been quite extinguished,
sacred Orders are evidently grounded upon the Word of God, and have been with
reverence admitted in all ages of the Church. It was not the least circumstance
aggravating the sin of Jeroboam, that in his time, who would might consecrate
himself, and become Priest of the high places; and yet they were not so
irreligious as to serve without some kind of consecration. To what has been
already said to this purpose, I shall only add here this one Text more. Romans
10.15. Who can preach except he besent? dejure (I suppose) all men understand
it, not de facto: and Origens many errors have in the judgment of the Church
been imputed to his so long neglect of Orders. But they derive their title from
the Bishops, whom (you say) they will not own. That I may speak my mind
freely, I think that Presbyters in taking off Episcopal propts, did but as it
were pull an old house on their head, and it would have made more for the good
of the Church, if Episcopacy had stood with its due regulation. But so it comes
to pass through the deceitfulness of our hearts, that When Gods cause and our
own concur, we are apt Jehu like to drive furiously: and truly I think many
of the Presbyters (whom I deservedly honor) as well as the people following
their humor, have not been free of envy or coveteousnesse in prosecution of
that design, of which by this time it may have repented them. But whether they
acknowledge them for Bishops or no, it is sure they never disallowed them as
Ministers, and what then will their receiving their call from them make to your
purpose? M. Luther renounced his Monastic life, because it was not allowed by
the Word of God to vow what was not in the votists power: but he never
renounced his Order although received in the Popish manner: no more did any
other of the martyred Bishops and other Ministers (as far as I remember) who
deserted the Romish Church as well as he. We mistake the Church of Rome if we
imagine it so full of error as to have had no truth left in it: For certain it
is not so much corrupted as were the 10. Tribes during the reign of 19. Kings
successively in Israel: and he that well observes the state of the Jewish
Church in the days of our Savior, will find it scarce so good as the Romish
Church now. But howsoever, if Orders be given and received now with us,
according to that direction which the Apostles left, and the primitive Saints
practiced, what need we trouble our selves with any intermediats? (...), said
Ignatius: and therefore, as to themselves, they need not regard your horrid
sarcasm, in these following words; By which impsition of hands the holy Ghost
is conveyed into them, as it was brought out of Scotland in a Cloak-bag. And
why is it not conferred? because all such gifts as some had in the Apostles
time are not given; the second temple of Jerusalem might then have been
disallowed, for that it wanted besides magnitude and stateliness of structure,
1. The Ark of God. 2. The Vrim and Thummim. 3. The glory of God appearing
between the Cherubims. 4, The fire that descended from Heaven and consumed the
sacrifices. 5. The immediate gift of prophecy: for from the days of Malachi
to John the Baptist, they had only what they call (...). And yet the Prophet
Hag. 2.9. says the glory of the second house shall exceed that of the first.
But as the name of God is by you in these words abused, so all good men ought
to be troubled: for the same expression is recorded for a most blasphemous
Proverb in the History of the Council of Trent translated out of Italian by
Sir N. Brent, lib.6. page, 497. Although I know not whether Hezekiah's command
concerning Rabshakeh be not here observable, Answer him not. Now the Lord
himself behold and judge who most abuses his holy Name, you or the Presbyters:
for mine own part I have no more to say to it, but The Lord rebuke thee.

But secondly, This sentence is inconsistent with good Polity; for what
confusion must needs be brought into a Commonwealth by means not being allowed
the free use of their vocation, but that every man who supposes himself able
for another man's calling shall take his place from him? The Vtopians to avoid
unnecessary professions, were every man to make his own clothes: but the
prudent Statesman, who devised it, never dreamed of such an ataxie as you
would bring in, who make no complaint of the vainest superfluity, and yet
purposely oppose that which is the one thing necessary. But I should wrong the
cause in hand by being beholden to any lower proof then the voice of Gods
Spirit (seeing you deny your self to be an Antiscripturist.) What can be
plainer then that of the Apostle? 1 Cor. 7.24. What calling any man is in, let
him therein abide. Or that of Peter, where he reprehends, as worthy of
punishment, (...); that is, Exercisers of jurisdiction in other men's Dioceses,
1 Pet. 4.15. What if other men be as good Scholars, is it nothing but
scholarship that makes a Minister? I cannot think but that other Jews might be
as handsome Butchers and Cooks, as the Levites, who yet might not be allowed to
kill and dress their own sacrifices. It Is true, Christ, though he called Levi,
called no Levite, that he might abolish the former manner of worship: yet he
chose some to wait on this Ministry as they did on that, and of them distinct
orders, as twelve Apostles, and seventy two Disciples; and after his Ascension,
others by mediation of the Apostles; who are also said to be ordained by the
holy Ghost, Act. 20.28, either because the Apostles were by the holy Ghost
directed to that Ordination of Ministers where they had planted Churches, or
because the gifts of the Spirit inabling for that Office were in their laying
on of hands conferred; or it may be for both. But that Christ appointed these
orders in his Church, we may see, Ephesians. 4.11, etc. And he would not have
directed his Epistles by St John in the second and third Chapters of the
Revelation to the Angels, that is, the Ministers of the seven Churches, if he
had not approved of that Office: And that it is with diligence to be proceeded
in, the word is plain, He that has an office let him wait on his office, he
that teaches on teaching, he that exhorts on exhortation. Do but make the
cause your own by supposing, if it could be proved that another man can husband
your estate better then your self, must he deprive you of your propriety? If
another man be found more worthy to serve the state then your self, must he
take from you that place to which you say you were chosen.

In p. 42. you have yet another fling at them, and that is for waving questions
when they cannot resolve them: And this also, if it be true, is but a personal
infirmity, and no whit impugneth the Office of the Ministry. Tishbi solvet
nodos, had not been a Proverb among the Jews, if they had not in some questions
of Religion been still unresolved. But if because one Lawyer could not resolve
me in one Law-case, I should call the Law an imposture, and the Lawyers
Juglers; would you not think me more fit for Bedlam then for any civil society?
and yet this were orthodox in your divinity. Concerning the opposition you
would make between faith and reason (because you both use, and require your
Respondent to use all possible brevity,) I refer you for satisfaction to a
little Book lately set forth, and entitled, The reasonableness of Christian
Religion. And what you say of the man of Macedonia (meaning a better living)
and of the abuse of Funeral Sermons, p. 44. is also to be reckoned among
personal offenses, which no man does as a Minister, but as a sinner, it being
common to all men in some kind or other to transgress.

In p. 44. you have, While they are under such dispensations they are in a
Labyrinth of trouble, one while having rest in their spirits, another while
distraction, judging of the love and anger of God toward them, according to
their actings, as if God were as inconstant as they. You would not be thought
an Antiscripturist, p. 51. You would not be thought to take men off from duty,
p. 56. and yet you condemn that dispensation men are under, who are inconstant
in their feelings. Now whether are you in state of Grace or Glory? this I hope
you will not say, and the other will confute your opinion. I know Grace to be
Glory inchoate, and Glory to be Grace consummate: But by state of Grace we
understand that condition to Godward a man is in after his conversion, so long
as corruption is inmate with grace, and like the Canaanites to the Israelites,
will dwell with him: for sin does remain though it do not reign in the
Regenerate, and grace is given to sustain the soul against corruption and
temptation: the filth continues, though the guilt be removed, and the guilt,
though wholly in foro divino, yet not so in foro conscientiae, if wheresoever
there be faith there is also infidelity: Faith is therefore called a shield,
because it defends against despair: Now no man can say his charity is
perfect, or his patience undisturbed, and yet must we believe any man's faith to
be insuperable, in evidence as well as adherence, in reflect as well as direct
action? God give me faith so long as I have doubt, and when I shall have no
longer doubt, I shall have no need of faith.

But They judge of Gods love or anger, etc. There is not any knowing Christian
that thinks love or anger to be in God, quoad affectum, because it would argue
mutability, which Scripture and reason teach us cannot be in him: But quoad
effectum we ought to judge; for the most faithful servants of God upon their
uneven walking, I mean their not sticking so close to the rules of obedience as
sometimes they do, and even when they do not, are enabled to do, observe, not
only outward calamities, but inward desertions ingruing: And whether God be
displeased or no, surely every true child of God will find cause to be
displeased with himself for his own disobedience: And if any man that hat Gods
Word for his guide, live under any higher dispensation, I acknowledge my self
to be experimentally ignorant of that condition. And what is your conceit of
this? You write only negatively, and so keep your self in a cloud still: But
when you have sublimed your conceptions of God, and extracted from them the
purest quintessence, yet still you have of him no adequate, but an analogical
conception only. God dwells in light inaccessible: we can but per transennas
videre, while we dwell in houses of clay; and cannot see him as he is, while we
have about us the body of sin: Nor afterward neither can God be apprehended,
more then ad modum apprehendentis. As therefore our Savior said in the Gospel,
Why trouble you the woman, for she has wrought a good work upon me? so, Why
disturb you the Church of God, putting people out of their good way, and
obscuring the light by which they walk, since you cannot hold them out a better?
it is a greater light must overcome the less; and when the Sun of
Righteousness shall arise, the Moon and Stars may fail: but neither the
Glowworms of earthly preferment, nor the ignis lambens of flattering speeches,
nor the ignis fatuus of fantastic opinions ought to seduce us: no, nor the
blazing comets of pretended revelations attract our confidence.

An approver of which dotages you seem to be, p. 47. where you have these
words, I am much satisfied in my spirit, having done that which I was convinced
was my duty, by the stirrings within me to this thing for at least a year past.
But how came you to be convinced that you ought to revile them whom God
commands you to honor? You say, by the stirrings within you: But what if the
spirit within you lusts to envy? we are commanded to try the spirits whether
they be of God or no, 1 John 4.1. Now if your word be consonant to the voice of
Gods spirit in the holy Scriptures, God forbid, but that I should lay my hand
upon my mouth: but your drift is to undo the Clergy, which consequently must
deprive us of the means of salvation, which God by the men of that calling
holds forth to us, and that upon no other ground then some of your own carps
and crotchets, and contradictions, which you would have fastened to their
discourses, but were fain to let them fall (rather then have them no where)
upon the sacred Scriptures. Set all the faults you have reckoned upon the
tenters to make them odious, and stretch them n longer then they will hold to
be theirs, and they will be found but a few personal infirmities, such as we
cannot have men without, and such as any but a Malignant Ham would rather cover
then blazon abroad. You complain indeed of formality in religion, p. 44. and
abuse of Ordinances, p. 46. but how you knit these into the net you make to
catch Clarks, in I see not. Irregularity in singing Psalms has the greatest
cause of complaint that I find in your Book, and that is far from being a
property of the Clergy; for it agrees neither omni, soli nor semper, as is
shown before. The Word of God in St Paul's time was preached by some out of
envy, by some out of vainglory, by some out of covetousness, yet herein the
Apostle rejoiced that it was at all preached, Phil. 1.18. and if you had the
same Spirit with Saint Paul, you would not show your self of a contrary mide.
Sir, as you love your soul, take heed of trusting to your inward stirrings: You
may be sure the subtle Tempter will not ordinarily suggest to a religious man a
temptation to open profaneness, because it is not like to find acceptance:
but he will put into such a man's head good thoughts sometimes to keep out
better, he will strive to increase his hatred of meritorious conceits, thereby
to insinuate into him neglect of duty, and possess him with grand detestation
of formality in Religion, in hope thereby to beget in him a disesteem of
Ordinances. Be not rashly confident of such motions, knowing that the devil in
form of an Angel of light, may easily through the treachery of our deceitful
hearts ensnare us. I desire to press this consideration the more earnestly,
because the main of your discourse consists in accusation, a practice from
which the very devil takes his denomination, as if it were the worst quality he
has, or his very profession; for so (...) dicitur (...), as we have the word
used, Luke 16.1. (...), he was accused. I say again, be not deceived: the
devil brought a colorable accusation against Job, and there is little more in
all that satirical invective of your, as you apply it to the Clergy.

In p. 48. You would not have people hearken to them in matters of State. If
you had said no more, I should have had nothing to say against you; why did you
not take that for your theme: and yet seeing you speak so much of the Clergies
interest, I may take notice of yours in this particular: for had not Ministers
meddled in matters of State when time was, you had scarce had any State-matters
to meddle with now. But how shall cases of conscience depending on matters of
State be resolved? suppose (which no doubt has been somewhere done) a Minister
be enquired of concerning the lawfullnesse of taking the late Engagement; if he
do his office, he falls under your censure for meddling in a State matter, if he
refuse, he is condemned for a Malignant: so that a Clergyman considing or
diffiding cannot be innocent: (...). But they stir up people against the
Parliament (you say,) which if they do, I hope the Parliament has better arms
then your pen to defend it. But what makes you so hot in the business? you,
who if you be out deserve not to come in and if you be in, deserve to be outed?
doubtless the worst spoak in the wheel cracks first. Though you worship no
Images, you may be a Worshipper of imaginations, and adore the spurious brats
of your own brain, begotten in spiritual fornication: and then the two-edged
sword in the mouth of the Clergy must needs terrify you, being to divide
between you and your errors. It may be there would be no cause of complaining
of their being against the Parliament, if you were out of it. Hatred against
powerful Preachers of the Word, has ever been a symptom of an unsound heart:
and if your inside were turned outward, I doubt we might there read somewhat
like the words of angry Agamemnon; (...)
(...)
or that of Ahab concerning Micaiah, I hate him, because he never prophesies
good to me but evil; Ministers being for no other cause your enemies, but
because they tell you the truth. Such were the complaints that the rebellious
Jews made against Jeremy; he fell away to the Chaldeans, he weakened the hands
of the men of war, he sought not the prosperity but the hurt of the people:
no less then High Treason in every Article. So they by the Apostles in the
Acts? These are the men that have turned all the world upside down; The very
foundations are out of frame, but what has the righteous done? they stir up
people against the Parliament? What the Clergy, the whole Clergy, and quatenus
Clergy? so that their very calling is opposite to the power and privilege of
Parliament? then lay all their faults upon me, if that can be proved, and Vnum
pro multis dabitur caput. -- Then to prove what I know not who denies, you
produce a place of Scripture, viz. Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject,
etc. Which because it is positively and directly, whereas the rest of your
discourse (as your self confess) is negative, and your texts of Scripture but
obliquely introduced, I will see how these words as a proof will stand with
your prohibition of humane learning. Suppose any conspiring servant make this
plea for himself: I am under command and must obey that power to which I am
subject; for all power is of God. And by like proportion may every underling
thus defend his guilt in any rebellion, unless you tell him that by power is
meant lawful authority, and not every force. But while (...), or (...), or
(...), or (...), or (...), may be translated power as well as (...), how can
you be able without Greek to confute the Defendant? So if it be demanded
concerning the last word (damnation) why it is here annexed to the breach of the
fifth Commandment, seeing sins against first Table are in their several order
and degree more heinous then they against the second; or if it be asked, why the
word is rendered Damnation, it being not (...) but (...), which is rather
judicium, what satisfaction by bare meditation of the word, and that in
English, can be given?

In p. 49. Where there are any endowed with the spirit of prophecy, that
declare the truth as it is in Jesus, and that their conversations as the one
hand do not pull down, etc. I love them, etc. But your plaster is too narrow
for the wound which your former discourse has made, of which if you will not
be persuaded, I shall speak in vain: and if you will you need no other
instructor then your own experience in this matter. But whether you be
persuaded or no, you must not think to persuade us that none of the Clergy you
so despightfully taunt at, are sincere publishers of the will of God, and men
whose lives are suitable to the doctrine which they preach. Great was the
cruelty which Nahash the Ammonite would have exercised on the Israelites, by
putting out the right eyes of all the men of Jabesh, 1 Samuel 11.2. but you
endeavor to put out the eyes of our understanding, which would be by so much
the more dangerous, by how much our souls are better then our bodies. Am I
deceived, or do I not know the Sun when I see it shine? Whence, I trow, is this
confidence of yours? if you were Emperor of the world, yet your most impetuous
puissance could not violate our reason: had you Nestor's language, (...), Or
had a stream of Eloquence like Euripus, that carried ships under sail against
the wind, yet were it not possible for you so far to force our
understanding, as on your bare word, (and that no Clergymans neither) to make
us take for uniform most irreconcilable (...).

In p. 50. Or have renounced their admission to the Ministry, as some have done
upon very good grounds, I am fully satisfied, etc. I would you were else: but
how shall other men be satisfied in this: First, That a Minister may on good
ground renounce his admission to the Ministry? Or secondly, how having
renounced his calling he is still a Minister? You say, (though falsely) the
Clergy is Pope-like in delivering Doctrine; for they exhort people to examine
it by the Scriptures: but what you are like I know not; for the Pope would not
offer to obtrude such stuff as this to the Irish themselves, the most
credulously facil in Religion of all Catholics; That the same man is a
Minister and not a Minister, upon profession of his own satisfaction, with out
any further reason or distinction.

You profess great self-denial but in p. 47. and tell us, how you brake
through all danger your reputation was in, despising what the men of the world
say, etc. and yet I cannot see but that you are as tenderly affected with your
reputation as any man else; for you apologize for it here and there, inveigh
against your Antagonist, and take such revenge as words will give you: I, and
here p. 51. (to which all the rest is as nothing) you appeal to God for your
vindication: which no man that reverenceth the name of God would do in a matter
so contemptible as you would make your reputation. Non Deus intersit, nisi
dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit. --
Whether or no you love fame, it appears by your words, that you hate infamy;
and thereby are in Cicero's judgment worthy reprehension. Multi contemnunt
mundi strepitum, reputant pro nihilo gloriam, sed timent infamiam, offensionem
repulsam, voluptatem severissime contemnunt, in dolor sunt molliores, gloriam
negligunt, franguntur infamia. Although I think a good name to be a blessing of
God, and therefore to be much respected, and carefully preserved.

In p. 53. I am non of those that squeeze and grind the people to enrich
themselves. By like then you confess there be some that do so: and seeing in
the subsequent Page, you promise your self in your Sphere to act against all
corruptions of Church and State, me think you ought to have told who these
oppressors be. For people receiving this ill report from you, will be ready to
think, If such oppressors be Officers under the Parliament, why (being known)
are they suffered? if any among themselves, yet there the major part can
overpower the minor, but if such a complaint still continue, what a reverend
opinion of the Parliament is this disgraceful report like to beget in the
heart of the people? and yet all this is done to advance your even-now (if we
will believe you) despised reputation. And now whether are you or the Clergy
greater adversary to the Parliament? I have no accusation against you, or any
man else in such matters; but this I boldly affirm (and to your everlasting
infamy be it spoken) that if you be no Caterpillar procuring a corporal, yet
you are no better then a Locust of the Bottomless pit, endeavoring to procure
a spiritual famine, such as the Prophet Amos speaks of, chap. 8. verse. 11, 12.
not of bread, nor thirst of water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord: when
they shall go fromsea, etc.

In p. 54. Churchmen, as they are by some called, but how worthily, judge you.
I will do as you bid me, and judge, as much reason for a Minister to be called
a Churchman, as for M. Fry to be called a Parliament Man: and that whether you
take Church for the people of God, or for the place of public worship. And why
not? you must give me leave to guess at your meaning, for you do not reveal
it, Now because I have heard some (besides self-conceited novices) affirm
Steeplehouses to be absurdly called Churches, I may suppose you of the same
opinion, and upon that supposition to deny to Preachers the name of Churchmen.
But the truth is the houses are more properly called Churches then the people.
Indeed if you ask me what is (...); I answer, it is in its largest acceptance
any Assembly, as Act. 19.41. (...) for, he dismissed the Assembly; but in
Divinity it is used to signify, A people called out from the rest of the world
by the preaching of the Gospel. But what similitude of sound is there between
Ecclesia and Church? This word Church therefore differing but by corruption of
speech from Kirk, is an abbreviate of (...), the Lords House. Now these places
appointed for public worship are certainly houses in proper speech, whereas
the people of God are called a house metaphorically, in regard of their
resemblance to a material building: but we having not a word properly to
denominate the people by, use this word Church, when applied to them by a
Metonymie: as the Latins on the other side apply the word Ecclesia to the
house, which properly signifies the people: to avoid (as I suppose) the Roman
Templum as Heathenish, and the Greek Synagogue as Jewish. Whence it appears,
that the houses only are in proper speech called Churches: to which every man
else of the Congregation belongs but according to his general calling of
Christianity, but the Minister also by his particular calling, from which men
take their denomination: so we say, Wool-men, Silk-men, Heard-men, and why not
(but that your envy can allow them nothing that is good) Churchmen?

In p. 54. You express your confidence in God, for being carried to the Land of
Rest: and that on this ground, as it seems to me, which is contained in the
very next words, I having no misgotten goods to stare in the face of my
conscience, nor errors, nor blasphemies to affright me; and presently after you
confess your dependence on the love of God through his Son. Which words I no
whit dislike in themselves; for I acknowledge works to justify not only before
men, but in the Court of conscience, as they testify the truth of our faith:
from which office the infirmities that accompany them do no more derogate, then
the imperfection of our faith from the truth of our believing. But seeing you
are so curiously critical against our Preachers for want of all possible
perspicuity in every expression, you may consider how unkindely you would take
it, on so slight occasion to be accused as guilty of a contradiction. For in
these words you do not only allow in your self what you condemn in others, p.
44. concerning inconstancy of assurance according to instability of action in
the duties of obedience; but you jumble Faith and Works together,
Sanctification (though but privative) and Justification by the merits of
Christ: and if so strong a member as you would seem to be, have such tender
ears as to complain of contradictions, or confuse expressions, where other men
apprehend no such matter, it is possible some other upon this occasion may make
bold to taunt you in the words of the Satyrist;

Loripedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus. And now may I say of our
Shepherds what David of his Metaphorical sheep, What have they done? Many
good works have I done among you, said our Savior to the Jews, for which of
them do you stone me? so many good things have we received from the Clergy, for
which of them do you thus (to use C. Agrippa's phrase) lapides loqui? Is it
nothing to be excluded the Parliament as an inconsiderable part of the Nation?
nothing for them to abridge themselves in lawful recreations, for fear of
other men's excess in imitation? nothing to be worried with uncessant clamours
of Schismatics? and which is worst of all, that the precious balms of Gods own
people (by ill applying) should break their heads, and cause them to pray also
against their wickedness? Is it for this they spend and are spent?

-- Hunc fertilitatis honorem
Officijque refers? --
Is this the reward of their Labor? Is it for this they strain their wits,
macerate their bodies, neglect provision for themselvrs and posterities, and
contract remediless diseases? Hoc est cur pallet, cur quis non prandeat hoc
est? Such discouragements to learning, if but for politic reasons would be
unsufferable. Well may Colleges be empty of Students, when men's mouths are
full of reproaches, and their hands of injuries against that, which is the
chiefest end of all their studies. Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte, negabit.
If other men were of your mind, how contemptible would this sacred Function
be? Praestaret dentiscalpia radere, quam literarijs monumentis insudare.
Respect and maintenance you would deprive them of, and what then will they have
left that men can take from them? It is well their mental endowments are
without the reach of your sacrilegious clutches, or else they had been devoured
too: unless you would forbear (as Tiberius refused to take the life of one
whom he was minded to torment) that by them they may be the more apprehensive
of their misery. Expositors on those words of Job 19.20. I have escaped with
the skin of my teeth, do observe, that the devil left Job his mouth whole, that
with it he might blaspheme God, and bewail his calamity: so have the Clergy
their Learning left them (I will not say with Menippus, Literas habent queis
sibi and fortunae suae maledicant) but to lament their own and the Churches
misery. They are indeed but your words that we hear; and yet they, though
leviter volant, graviter vulnerant: but if you had power over the Clergy
answerable to your will, you would quickly give them cause to complain in the
words of that exiled Poet, Vix habet in nobis jam nova plaga locum.

The sum of all I have to say concerning your discourse is this: You are a
scourge in the hand of God, with which he is pleased to chastise his Laodicean
Angels: under which yet they may behold his favor, on their repentance. Rev.
3.19. And I beseech God to give you also sight of your error, and pardon for
it, lest when the Lord has done correcting his people, he cast his rod into
the fire of his wrath. Now is their hour of temptation, and now are the powers
of darkness prevalent against them; now are they conformed to their Master
Christ in suffering, being also given into the hands of men who despitefully
use and persecute them, -- (...) But be of good comfort (precious souls) for
your redemption draws nigh: the rod of the wicked shall not always rest on
the back of the righteous, (...) (...) -- The righteous shall have dominion in
the morning, when the wicked shall be turned into hell.

I have answered your Book no sooner, because how long soever it has been
extant, it came but lately to my hand, and by the date 1650. I could not think
it still unanswered: but being otherwise informed, I took this task upon my
self, for fear you should think it unanswerable, although men of greater
abilities might perhaps disdain it as unworthy their answer. I have herein used
more frequent interrogations then suit to the mildness of my disposition, but
I was in part thereto constrained by your negative manner of writing. In the
main I desire to have been sincere, as in charity I think you to have been in
yours; for it is possible for a man to think he serves God in his greatest
disservice. For what infirmities of my own I have herein discovered, I desire
not concealment but condonation: for humanum est errare, in many things we
offend all: and Hanc alijs veniam cupimus dabimusque vicissim.

IN your Postscript you deny your self to be against duty. For answer to which
I desire you but to consider the words of our Savior Christ, where being about
to give a cognizance of false Prophets, he says, Ye shall know them by their
fruits. What? the fruits of their lives? no doubtless, for then we must give
the better to diverse heretics, and to many of the present Papists: but if the
fruits of their doctrine be intended, as necessarily they must, what rotten
stuff would you feed our souls with? no specious Apples of Asphaltus would so
deceive our taste, no glistering Cantharides so poison our bodies, as this
doctrine of devils (in form of Angels of Light) beguile our souls. You are not
(you say) against duty: no more was Pelagius against free grace, if you will
believe him: but as he did Gratiae vocabulo uti ad frangendam invidiam, so do
you draw the vail of duty over your irreligious Category, to cover the
horridness of your intention. For you clearly set your self against public
Ordinances, by which we come to the knowledge of our duty, by which we are
reproved for omission, and exhorted to performance of our duty: and if sublata
causa tollitur effectus, let any reasonable man judge if you be not against
duty.

If the public Ministry be the ordinary means of knowing, loving, fearing, and
obeying God (as all faithful souls will witness it to be) then he that would
deprive us of the public Ministry, would rob us of the ordinary means of
knowing, loving, fearing, and obeying God: But you endeavor to deprive us of
the former, and Quod causa causae est causa causati, as well in privatives as
in positives; I abhor to write, and I wish you would tremble to think how
deeply you are involved in the conclusion.

And now Sir, If you be not one that does (...), reason might persuade you to
acknowledge your errors: and if that glimmering light of it that I can hold
forth, how much more those resplendant rays that proceed from greater
Luminaries? But if a spirit of delusion has possessed you, and your Gangrene
be come to a (...), dolendum est a medico, quod non delendum medicina. I am in
part satisfied, as I have in part performed my duty. And having no more to say
to you, I must say what remains to God hearing prayers: to whose mercy I commit
you, and continue, Though the weakest oppugner, yet the strongest (in desire at
least) detester of your errors,

J. D.

TO THE LOVER OF THE CLERGY (...) M. JOHN DAVY OF Taunton Magdalen,
Perseverance.
Dear Uncle,
I Have sent you in these Papers a Salve, which by Gods blessing on your cost
and direction I was able to compose for that wound which an undeserved enemy
has made on the reputation of the Clergy: a wound too deep for me to search,
too great to cure: but having found one instrument that caused it where I now
reside, I have endeavored to apply my medicine thereto, hoping that (as is
believed of the Unguentum armarium) it may transmit some sanative virtue to
th'affected subject. Howsoever, I shall hereby manifest my respect unto the
suffering Parties, and (in some measure) have performed the duty of

Your most observant Nephew, and ever grateful servant, J.D.

The Author of The Clergy in their Colors (of which this is an Answer) was
for publishing the same, expelled the House, and his Book ordered to be burnt.


