Sir WILLIAM DAWESs SERMON Preached before The Gentlemen Educated at
Merchant-Taylors School. Jan. 16. 1699.

Christianity best propagated by the good lives of Christians.

A SERMON Preached before The Gentlemen Educated at Merchant Tailors School, AT
St Mary le Bow, Jan. 16. 1699.

By Sir WILLIAM DAWES, Baronet, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford, at the Princes Arms in St
Paul's Churchyard, and Tho. Speed, over against Jonathan's Coffee-House in
Exchange-Alley, Cornhil, 1700.

To his Honored AND Much Esteemed Friends, THE STEWARDS OF THE Feast of
Gentlemen Educated at Merchant Tailors School.
Tho. Andrews, Esquire; Mr Henry Butler, Rich. Graham, Esquire; Charles Cox, Esquire; Edw.
Goldesbrough, Esquire; Stephen Hervey, Esquire; Mr Benjamin Walford, Caesar Bradshaw,
Esquire;


A SERMON Preached before The Gentlemen Educated at Merchant-Taylors School,
etc.
St Matthew, Chap. the 5th, v. 16. the latter part of the verse, That they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
IN the former part of this Verse, we find our Blessed Savior exhorting his
Disciples, and in them all other Christians whatsoever, to an unblameable, holy
and exemplary conversation. Let your light, says he, that is, the light or
knowledge of the Gospel which is in you, so shine, or show forth itself, in all
the graces and virtues of a true Christian life, before, or in the sight of
men, that they may see your good works, not only works of charity, as some too
narrowly expound it, but all sorts of good works whatsoever, and be by them
excited to glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

By which phrase two things may be meant: either, First, that men may be hereby
invited to rejoice in, and give thanks and praise to God, for for these visible
and glorious effects of his grace and goodness, amongst men; or secondly, that
they may hereby be provoked to reform and amend their their lives: Unbelievers,
to come over the true belief, and wicked Believers to the true practice of
Christianity: and both by so doing to glorify God, in that way which of all
others he most approves, by doing his will, by bearing much fruit, by serving
him with their bodies and spirits, which are his.

And both these senses, I make do doubt, were intended in these words; but I
shall insist upon the latter only in my following discourse: the whole design
and business of which shall be, to make good and apply this useful proposition,
which, I think, may very naturally be inferred from the words of my Text, viz.

That the unblameable, holy, and exemplary lives of Christians are a very
likely means, both of bringing over Unbelievers, and converting wicked.
Believers, to a true and steadfast belief and practice of the Christian Religion.

That this is true, as to Unbelievers, might be sufficiently proved from
considering: That the holy Scriptures do recommend to Christians this method of
converting Unbelievers, which, it is most certain, they would not do, were it
not fit and proper for this end. Thus we find St. Peter 1 Ep. 3. c. v. 1, 2.
exhorting the Believing Wife, to win over the Unbelieving Husband to the faith,
by her chaste conversation. That God, especially having appointed this means for
the attainment of this end, will, no doubt, in an extraordinary manner sanctify
it by his grace, and make it effectual to it. And lastly, That it is plain from
experience, that the growth of Christianity has been always very much owing to
this cause: there having been multitudes of Unbelievers, as all Ecclesiastical
Writers assure us, won over to the faith of Christ, by the incomparable Piety,
Charity, and Sobriety of the first Christians.

But, because men are generally desirous to see the reasons of things, how they
come to pass, and by what natural power each cause produces its effect, I
shall endeavor, as briefly and clearly as I can, to manifest this, as to the
point in hand, by these following Considerations: some of which will show, how
the holy and exemplary lives of Christians contribute toward the conversion of
Unbelievers, more remotely, and by distant consequence; others, more directly
and immediately. And

First, Let it be considered, that the holy and exemplary lives of Christians
will naturally attract the eyes and thoughts of Unbelievers, and, by ^o doing,
probably engage them in some serious reflections upon the Christian Religion,
the effects of which they shall plainly perceive to be so glorious and
wonderful. Whatsoever is extraordinary and surprising men are naturally apt to
gaze at and admire, and to enquire into the causes and original of; and
consequently, the lives of Christians, which, when led according to the Rules
of their Religion, are very extraordinary, and vastly beyond any thing that was
in the world before, will be very likely to provoke men to a curious
observation and examination of them, as also of the grounds and principles from
which they proceed. These burning and shining lights, cannot fail at least of
startling and awakening such as were before in darkness, and in the shadow of
death: These blessed fruits of the spirit cannot fail of persuading men at
least to taste and see how good the Lord is, and when we have once brought them
so far as to taste, there is very little fear of their not liking.

Secondly, The holy and exemplary lives of Christians will be a sure means of
recommending them to the favor and esteem, love and friendship of Unbelievers:
and consequently a sure means of gaining opportunities of conversing familiarly
with them, insinuating truth into them, and making them willing and easy to
receive it. For there is no man (let him be of what profession or denomination
he will) that does not admire Justice and honest dealing, sincerity and
veracity, kindness and Charity, etc. wheresoever he finds them; and therefore
here can be no doubt but good Christians, who must needs be, in a conspicuous
manner, eminent for the practice of these and all other virtues, will soon
become the darlings of all mankind; obtain a mighty Interest in their opinions
and affections, and then, by consequence, a mighty power, both of leading them
into, and confirming them in, the knowledge of Christ. Just as it was in the
case of John the Baptist, who, having first approved himself to the world, by
the extraordinary fanctity and severity of his life, there immediately went out
to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and
gladly heard his Doctrine, and were forthwith Baptized of him.

Thirdly, The holy and exemplary lives of Christians, if ever they come to
debate the principles of their Religion with Unbelievers, will give a mighty
weight and advantage to all their Arguments, by taking away all jealousies and
suspicions of trickishness, and insincerity in them; whereas our experience
assures us, that, let men argue never so well in behalf of Religion, yet if
their Arguments are not backed by their lives, they are seldom, scarce ever,
successful. And the reason of this is plain: because the Arguments of such men
are always suspected, and, they themselves being manifest Hypocrites, their
Arguments generally pass for such too.

Fourthly, The holy and exemplary lives of Christians will so powerfully
represent to Unbelievers the reasonableness and excellency of the Christian
Religion, as well as the usefulness and advantage of it, toward the present
and future happiness and well-being of mankind, that they cannot fai, of
engaging their affections toward it, and not only strongly incline them to
examine into the grounds of it, but even prejudice, and prepossess them in
favor of it, and make them wish and desire that it may be true, by showing them
how much it is for their Interest that it should be so. Thus, for Instance,

When they shall see its precepts all exemplified in the lives of its
Disciples: how capable they are of being practiced, notwithstanding all the
seeming difficulties in the Theory, and how much they tend to exalt and ennoble
human nature, when practiced, by drawing it off from the carnal and sensual, to
the rational and spiritual life; they will be constrained to acknowledge it a
reasonable, constrained to wish it a Divine Service.

Again, when by comparing the lives of Christians with those of other men, they
shall plainly see how much they do surpass them, in piety toward God, Justice
and Charity toward men, and in a Regular and well ordered Government of
themselves, their lusts and passions (and this they would soon see, if
Christians were but careful to direct their lives according to their Rule) they
must needs own, that they have a more excellent Rule of Life to walk by, than
other men, and earnestly desire, that this were to be the standing Rule to all
Mankind.

Once more, when they shall observe, from sensible and living proofs, how much
the Laws of Christianity duly put in execution, tend to preserve the Peace,
order, and beauty of the Universe, and the particular happiness, and well-being
of every member of it; How contented and useful it makes every man in his own
Station: how respectful and obedient to his Superiors, how humble, kind and
helpful to his inferiors, how just and beneficent to all; how utterly it
eradicates from the minds of men every Root of bitterness, which may make them
uneasy either to themselves or others, and how plentifully it inspires them
with all those Craces and Virtues, which may serve to promote their own, and
their Neighbors happiness; but, above all, with what sure and glorious hopes
it fills them of a blessed immortality, in prospect of which, they are able to
triumph over all the miseries and troubles of this present Life, and defy all
manner of dangers that may threaten them, nay even Death itself: When, I say,
they shall experimentally and sensibly find the conduciveness of the Christian
Religion, toward these admirable and desirable ends; how can it be conceived,
that they should not straitway fall in Love with it, and eagerly desire to
employ themselves in examining those Reasons, and readily give those Arguments
their full weight, which serve to confirm them in the truth of it. And this
will put them into an excellent Temper and Disposition for receiving

Lastly, That evidence which the Holy Lives of Christians carry in them, of the
truth and Divinity of the Christian Religion, and this is very strong and
powerful. For

First, It is most highly probable, that that Religion, which so much tends to
raise men up into a conformity, and likeness to God, and, as St Peter
expresses it, to make them partakers of the Divine Nature, as it is plain from
the Holy Lives of Christians, the Christian Religion does, had that God for its
Author, to whom it is so very like. Were there any thing in the lives of
Christians, led according to the Rules of their Religion, either unlike to, or
unworthy of, God, this would be a sufficient argument against the Divinity of
it; for God certainly can do nothing, either unlike to, or unworthy of,
himself. But since every line and feature of a true Christian is exactly
answerable and agreeable to all our purest and most refined notions of God, it
seems highly unreasonable, not to acknowledge him for his Father. But

Secondly, The Holy Lives of Christians seem to me to be an infallible
demonstration of the Divinity of the Christian Religion: it appearing utterly
impossible, that any thing less than infinite Wisdom and infinite Power joined
together, should be able to raise men's Lives to that perfection, which the
Christian Religion visibly does; and consequently that must be infinite wisdom,
and infinite power.

In vain, alas! had the wise men of this world, for about four thousand years,
exercised their wits, in searching out such perfect Rules of living, as shine
so illustriously in the lives of true Christians. And is it then imaginable
that there should come one man at last, wiser than all the world before him,
who should be able of himself to atchieve this mighty work? No certainly, the
work was more than humane, and not to be accomplished but by the infinite and
multifarious wisdom, which so richly dwelt in our Jesus, who has been in these
last days the Author of it. Nothing less than that Scripture, which has been
given us by inspiration of God, could have been sufficient for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God
might be, as we now see him, perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.

And, as our wisdom to find out, so our power to execute, the means of arriving
at this perfection was much too short. For, supposing that, of our selves, we
could have discovered those excellent Rules of life which Christians now walk
by: yet considering how very disagreeable they are to flesh and blood, and how
constantly and how violently they thwart our dearest affections and
inclinations, and how many and how potent enemies we must have fought our way
through to the observance of them, we cannot but acknowledge it impossible for
us ever to have kept them; For it is not in the power of man, considered in
himself, to be continually fighting against, and bearing down himself: it is
not in the power of mere unassisted man to wrestle with, and get the victory
over, principalities and powers. But what the natural power of man could not
do, that the supernatural grace of God has effectually done: and by this we,
who of ourselves are weak, and unable to do any good thing, are made strong in
the Lord, enabled to do all things, and to go on unto all perfection.

This then I look upon as a standing Miracle to prove the Divinity of the
Christian Religion; namely, the vast change it has made from the carnal to the
spiritual man, visible in the lives of all good Christians, and incapable of
being effected by any thing less than the Divine Power and Wisdom.

And thus you see plainly how the lives of good Christians do conduce very much
toward the conversion of Unbelievers to the Christian Religion; by inclining
them to look into it, gaining opportunities of instructing them in it,
representing it amiable and lovely to them, and by preparing them for, and
offering to them, not only probable, but even demonstrative evidence of the
Divinity of it. I proceed to show

Secondly, That they conduce every whit as much toward the conversion of
Wicked Believers to a true and steadfast practice of the Christian Religion. For,

First, The holy and exemplary lives of good Christians will be a continual
Reproach and Reproof to the bad ones; by showing, in themselves as in a Glass,
how insincere and hypocritical they are, how unlike in word and deed, in
reality and profession, how inconsistent with themselves, and how unworthy of
that holy name, by which they are called. All this must evidently appear, from
viewing the lives of good Christians, between which and those of bad ones there
will be seen, at first sight, such a monstrous disparity, as will render wicked
Christians odious and contemptible, in the sight of all men, even of such as
are not Christians themselves (for all men naturally love sincerity, and a
correspondence between men's actions and professions) and moreover make them, if
they are not quite hardened, ashamed of themselves, and resolve, either to
shake off their Christian Profession, or their Unchristian Conversation. The
Righteous, say the wicked, in the wisdom of Solomon, c. 2. v. 12, etc. is not
for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings, he upbraideth us with our
offending the Law, and objecteth to our infamy the transgressing of our
education. He was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us even to
behold, for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion.
We are esteemed of him as counterfeits, he abstaineth from our ways as from
filthiness.

Besides, the reproof of a good life has this peculiar advantage of all other
sorts of reproof, that it is not capable of being misconstrued, and so
neglected upon pretense of its proceeding from personal malice, particular
piques, and private interests and designs, as they are. A good life is a
reproof at large, and therefore no man can say, I am the person designed by it;
it is the necessary means of our Salvation, and therefore no man can be so
foolish as to imagine, that it proceeds from any particular spite, or ill will
to him. The reproof of it is the most lively and powerful, because the most
sensible that can be; and yet at the same time most inoffensive and like to do
good, because it points at no particular persons, nor can be ascribed to any
ill designs.

Secondly, The Holy and exemplary lives of good Christians, will be a continual
Lesson of instruction to the wicked, and, having showed them that they walk
wrong, direct them how to walk right; by setting before them, in lively
colors, the exact pourtraict of a true Christian, sensibly tracking out for
them the path they are to walk in, and going visibly before them, and, by so
doing, as it were leading them on by the hand, in it. We have such a great
mixture of sense with our reason, and besides are so naturally prone to imitate
those of our own kind; that there cannot a greater blessing befall us, than to
be surrounded with good examples; which may serve for a sensible Comment upon
the laws of Reason and Religion, the better to inform our minds in them; and
likewise to provoke us rightly to apply this natural inclination we have to
imitate one another.

Lastly, The Holy and exemplary lives of good Christians will be a continual
encouragement to the wicked, to forsake their sins, and return to their Duty;
by becoming to them a plain demonstration, not only of the possibility of
practicing their Duty, but also of that most desirable ease, pleasure and
satisfaction, that most delightful hope, and joyful expectation, which
constantly attend upon the practice of it.

And what can an erring Christian possibly need or desire more, in order to his
amendment, than to be made sensible of his errors, and at once instructed and
encouraged to forsake them? This will be sufficient for his Reformation, if he
be willing to be reformed, and if he be not, nothing will.

Upon the whole then, considering the vast influence that the holy Lives of
Christians have, toward the propagation, not only of the true faith, but also
true practice of the Christian Religion, I think I may very justly make these
following inferences.

First, That a Christian not only may, but some times in Duty must, so do his
good works, that they may be seen of men, or with a design to have them seen of
men: and for this plain reason, because it is vastly for the honor of God and
the good of mankind that it should be so. It Is true indeed, our blessed Lord,
who to the last degree abhorred all self-conceit and vainglory, has commanded
us not to do our alms, and by parity of reason other good works, before men, to
be seen of them; that is to be seen of them, for that end, for which the
Pharisees (to whom our Lord plainly alludes here) desired their good works
might be seen, namely, purely that they might get the praise and glory of men,
and therewith feed and inflame their vanity and Ostentation. But, as for those
who have no other end in letting their good works be seen, than the Glory of
God and the good of their Brethren; they are so far from being concer'd in this
prohibition, that they have express warrants for what they do, not only from
the reason of the thing it self, but likewise from many Texts of Scripture,
which command them to set their candle on a candlestick, to let their light
shine before men, to be like a City on an hill, which cannot be hid, etc.

And this I take to be, not only a plain Justification, but a very high
commendation of our present meeting; that, at a time when many have denied the
Lord who bought them, and the love of almost all is waxen cold, we are bold to
make a public show of our Faith and Charity; and both by word and deed openly
to prove our selves the true Disciples of the Blessed Jesus; that so we may, by
our example, happily encourage others to become so: and by this means
effectually propagate that true Christian faith, which works by love, and is
shown by its works.

Secondly, Hence I infer that all the Atheism, Deism, Profaneness and
Immorality, that is now so rife amongst us, comes very much from, and is very
much encouraged by, the ill lives of us who profess the faith of Christ; or, at
least, from want of that exemplary Holiness, which is so strictly required of
all Christians. It being absolutely impossible, as well from the nature of the
thing itself, as from the justice and goodness of Divine Providence, that our
Savior's Kingdom should not daily be enlarged, if we were but duly careful; by
the goodness of our lives, to invite into it such as should be saved; and, on
the contrary, as impossible that the Devils Kingdom should flourish as it does,
if we did not, by the badness of our lives, plead for it, set it up, and help
to support it. To remove therefore this grievous scandal, together with all the
fatal consequences of it, I infer,

Thirdly, that we ought all immediately to set about reforming the World, by
reforming our own lives, and so making them fit means and Instruments of
reforming others.

And methinks the pleasure of turning Souls to Righteousness is so truly
great, the work in it self so noble, so much for the honor of God and our
Savior, and the promises annexed to it so glorious; and this way of doing this
work is so easy, lies so level even to the meanest capacities, and is withal
so inoffensive, and yet so very likely to prove effectual, that these alone,
abstracted from all other considerations, ought to be a powerful invitation and
encouragement to us to lead holy and exemplary lives.

Besides, as we shall receive extraordinary rewards in another world, upon
account of the good we have done other men by our examples, so shall we
likewise undergo extraordinary punishments, upon account of the ill we have
done by them; the sins of other men being justly chargeable upon us so far, as
our examples have been the occasion of them. It is therefore of the highest
moment and importance to us, to abstain from every appearance of evil, to
provide things honest in the sight of all men, and in all things to show our
selves patterns of good works.

But this is more especially incumbent upon us, who have had the advantages of
a Religious and learned education, and, from our very infancy, have been
instructed in the knowledge, and exercised in the practice, of the Christian
Religion: and, by this means are better qualified for becoming burning and
shining lights, in the midst of this perverse and crooked generation. If we,
who have thus received many useful Talents at God's hand, are not careful duly
to improve them to his Glory and the good of Mankind (the ends they were given
for) we know our doom, and cannot but own the justice of it, to be beaten with
many stripes.

Fourthly, Hence it appears that we ought frequently to contemplate the
Examples of good men, out of which there are so many and so great advantages to
be drawn. We should learn in them to see our own faults, and to mend them; to
behold the Divine beauties and perfections, and transcribe them; to study God
in his Creatures, his Laws in their Lives, and the direct way to Heaven in the
footsteps of them, who take exact care to trend right toward it. In one word,
we should, as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews exhorts us, often
consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works.

And this is one excellent use we may make of our present meeting: to look
round about us, and see what brave and generous Souls there are amongst us, who
have been famous for serving God, and doing good in their generation: and
immediately to take fire at their examples, and become all Holy zeal and
emulation: and, from this instant, to exert our utmost strength, for the
overtaking, if possible, at least for the coming up to, and keeping equal pace
with, these Heroic Saints, who have now so far out-gone us in the paths of
virtue. There has been a time, when we have eagerly striven to rival one
another, in matters of much less moment and concern; O let us not flag here,
where all that we can desire, and more than we can conceive, even eternal life
and happiness is, it self, at stake.

Lastly, I have but one thing more to add, and that is this: that, although in the
beginning of this Discourse I told you, that by good works here we are not to
understand only works of Charity, yet we are certainly principally to
understand those; and that for this plain reason, because the Gospel always
places works of Charity at the head of our good works, these being those good
works which God expressly prefers to sacrifices and burnt offerings, and which
our Savior every where declares his value of above all others, and will at
the great day of Judgment lay the most particular stress upon.

Let us then be peculiarly careful to excel in these good works, so acceptable
to God, so dear to Christ. More especially now: when we are met together with a
public profession of doing good: when we are going to pay a debt, of Gratitude
shall I say, or rather of strict Justice, to that School, to whose tender care
of us most of us owe many of the Temporal blessings which we enjoy, and all of
us, in great measure, our hopes of those that are eternal: And, lastly, when we
have the noblest instance and opportunity of doing good offered to us, that can
be; the providing both for the souls and bodies of those who are unable to help
themselves; those, who are not only of the household of faith, but, as it were,
of our own household too; and that too in such a way, as shall make our Charity
extend itself to the Souls of many who are yet unborn, by training up young men
for the Ministry, and more immediate attendance upon men's Souls. Let us I say,
having these opportunities, these encouragements, these obligations, be glad to
distribute and willing to communicate. Let us give as freely, as we have
received, and as cheerfully, as if we were yet receiving; Let us sow
plentifully that we may reap so, and make use of this opportunity of doing
good, as those that are not often like to meet with such tempting ones again.

To conclude all; If we really desire to show our love and respect for our
School, as we pretend, and to give it a Character and Reputation in the world,
let our good works become Advocates for it. Let the true Christian principles
which we learnt there, shine forth in all our actions, and they will give it a
sufficient Luster. Let us prove by the largeness of our Charity, both our good
will toward it, and our sense of the many advantages, which we have received
from it; and, by that and all other virtues, make it plainly appear to the
world, that it is indeed, what it pretends to be, and what will be its
everlasting Glory, a true Seminary for Virtue, a faithful Nusery for Heaven.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IN a short time will be published by the Author of The Duties of the Closet, a
small Treatise, showing the Nature and Design of the Holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, with persuasions to the frequent use of it; also short devotions
at the time of receiving it, 120. Price stitched 3 d. but those persons who are
so charitably disposed to give them away, may have them for 20 s. a Hundred.
Printed for Tho. Speed

Books printed for Thomas Speed, over against Jonathan's Coffee House in
Exchange-Alley in Cornhil.
THe Duties of the Closet, Being an earnest Exhortation to private Devotion.
The Second Edition. Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Two Sermons, one Preached before the King, the other before the Lord Mayor.
Both By Sir William Dawes Baronet. D. D. And Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty. Quarto. Price 6 d. each.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Fisher, Sister to the Honorable Sir
William Dawes, Baronet, D. D. And Wife of the Reverend Dr. Peter Fisher.
Preached at Bennington in Hertfordshire, June. 2d School, By William Milner Vicar
of Shiphal in Hertfordshire, Quarto. Price 6 d.

Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Sermon Preached before the Queen
at White Hall, October 12. 1690. By William Beveridge, D. D. Rector of St.
Peter's Cornhill. The Fourth Edition, Quarto, Price 6 d.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, late Vicar of Dedham
in Essex, Preached in the Parish Church of Dedham, Feb. 2 d. 92. with a short
Account of his life, By Joseph Powel, M. A. Rector of St Mary on the Wall in
Colchester, Quarto. Price 6 d.

Several Books published by Dr Richard Lucas, Vicar of St Stephen
Coleman-street, and Prebendary of Westminster. Sold by Sam. Smith, and Benj.
Walford, at the Princes Arms in St Paul^s Churchyard
DR Richard Lucas's Practical Christianity; or, an account of the Holiness
which the Gospel enjoins with Motives to it, and the Remedies proposed against
Temptation; with a Prayer concluding each distinct Duty. in 8 vo. price 3 s. 6
d.

-- His Enquiry after Happiness, in three parts, in 8 vo. Vol. I. of the
possibility of obtaining happiness. Vol. II. Of the true Notion of Human Life.
Voll. III. Of Religious Perfection. These three Parts bound in two Vol. Price
10 s.

-- Christian Thoughts for every day of the Month, with a Prayer, wherein is
represented the Nature of unfeigned Repentance, and of Love toward God, 120
Price 1 s.

-- The plain Man's Guide to Heaven; containing his Duty, first, toward GOD;
secondly, toward his Neighbor: with proper Prayers, Meditations, and
Ejaculations; designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, and such like.
In 120. Price one Shilling.

-- The Duty of Servants; containing, first, their preparation for, and Choice
of a Service; secondly, their duty in Service; together with prayers suited to
each duty, all which may be accommodated likewise for the most part to
Apprentices. To this is added a Discourse of the Sacrament, suited peculiarly
to Servants. The second Edition. In 120.

-- Twelve Sermons preached on several occasions before their Majesty's, the
Lord Mayor, etc. some of which were never before printed. In Octavo.

FINIS.

