HEAVEN REALIZ'D OR The Holy Pleasure of daily intimate Communion with GOD,
Exemplified In a blessed Soul (now in Heaven) (Mrs. Sarah Davy.) Dying about
the 32 Year of her Age. Being a part of the precious Relics, written with her
own hand. (Styled by her) The Record of my Consolations, and the Meditations of
my heart.

Published by A. P.

Come and hear all you that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done for
my soul, 66 Psalm 16. Printed in the Year, 1670.

To all sort of Readers.
WHosoever thou art into whos^ hand providence may cast thi^ small piece I have
to beg o^ thee that thou would no^ despise it before perused; it pleases the
wisdom of God, thus to ch^ose the foolis^ things of the world to confound the
wise, an^ weak things to confound the things that ar^ mighty, things that are
not to bring to nough^ thing that are, that no flesh can glory in h^ presence,
especially when the wisdom ^ the flesh exalts it self against the Wisdom of
God, in the simplicity of the Gospe^ and the lusts of men against the Holin^ of
it, when the mystery of God in Chri^ there, the dwelling of the Spirit, in
sanctified believers is denied and called a delusion I say, in such an hour of
blasphemy, the appearance of the Spirit in its clear enlightening, and excellent
workings, in a weak instrument is a blessed testimony against the Atheism,
Prophanity, Blasphemy; and high derision of Godliness, that every where
abounds; If thou art one of those who have only a Form of godliness and
Worship, satisfying thy self with some kind of outward Worship, and so make a
sorry shift to still thy conscience whilst in thy sins, and walking after thy
lusts, a Lover of pleasure, more then of God, as the Character of the Apostle,
of such is.

And have thence a low and slight esteem ^f serious Godliness, and d^^mest the
^artings with the World, and pleasures of sin and vanity like death it self,
and that living wit^ G^d in self-denial, mor^ification of s^n, holiness, an^
Communion with God is a dark m^lancholly and uncomfortable walk (as the Devil
and a carnal heart suggests) here thou has^ a full confutation thereof; as also
the experience of all the holy people of God i^ the world) in this precious
soul who realized that rich consolation and holy pleasure in serving God, and
walking with hi^ and choosing (very early) the dispise^ ways of God, rather
then the pleasures o^ sin for a season, in a holy disdain and daily trampling
under her Foot the vanity which the foolish hearts of most go after in a daily
solacing her soul, in drinkin^ of the Rivers of the pleasures of God, being
sick of Love to blessed Jesus Christ, who^ she had chosen her Savior,
Bridegroom Lord, and King; whose love, beauty, an^ glory ravished her heart,
who held him i^ the gallery's, in his banqueting house whose banner over her
was love, and i^ his blessed Ordinances came as to the gate of Heaven, there
giving him he Loves.

Thou, poor sinful soul, yet in darknes^ to these things, which are but as a
soun^ of words to thee, In reading hereof (^ ^he grace and power of the Lord
may accompany it* cast of those mean and base ^houghts of the despised ways of
Christ and holiness and believe these things to ^e real, and satisfyingly
enjoyed by ^his blessed Soul, and thereby break off from thy course of Vanity,
and of this World, and fall in Love with Heavens ^ays; and set thy self (the
Lord helping ^hee) to seek and know this beloved Jesus, ^ho was this Souls
delight, and fall in love with him, and attend at Wisdoms ^ates (though blacked
and scorned by ^e World.)

And thy own soul may come to expeence the same things; to find out a pleant
life of sweetest contentation in the Fa^ur of God, and enjoyment of his good^ss
and Love in his dear Son Jesus christ, the true wisdom (as this Soul ^th
blessedly cleared) that makes wise un^ Salvation; with Jesus Christ thou shall
^d the Righteousness that can ^ustifie thee, ^e precious blood that can cleanse
thee, ^ Light that shall shine into thee, the Love that shall for ever endear
thee, the Life that shall quicken thee, the power and spirit that shall convert
and change thee, the fullness that shall satisfy thee; the peace and joy in
believing that shall quiet and comfort thee in every condition here on earth,
and assure thee of Eternal blessedness and glory hereafter; If this be not to
be chosen before making provision for thy deceitful lusts, that entice thee,
flatter thee, in walking after them will certainly damn thee, to Everlasting
terrors, and horrors, wailings, howlings, that will never have an end among
the impenitent the careless, unconverted, the unholy in the lake provided for
them, I say, if glorious delightful certain salvation from this wrath to come,
be not to be chosen, embraced, pursued, laid hold of in the first place let thy
soul seriously weigh and consider take time apart every day to muse on it pray
and betake thy self to the Scriptures and hearing Godly Ministers that give of
the experience hereof, then let the word and conscience judge, etc.

Particularly; let younger persons (especially young Gentlewomen) be greatly
affected with this precious example and be persuaded of the joy and sweetness
this blessed Soul did find in seeking the Lord in the days of her youth, who
received instructions betimes, about the eleventh year of her Age; began to
know God as a holy God, to fear sin, to pray in secret, to delight in daily
reading the Scriptures, to fall in love with the beloved Jesus Christ, to
choose him her Lord and Bridegroom, and to wait in the Ministry of his despised
servants, to know him, and hear his voice, and became a Disciple and follower
of him; ravished with his love, admiring his grace, and glory, diligently
inquiring after his feedings, and betaking her to the ^ollowing of his people,
in a congregation ^f believers, where her soul delighted it ^elf (and as she
speaks in her Meditations ^ere) solaced her self in Communion with ^er Lord,
sitting at his Feet to hear his ^retious words, going home with her ^eart
filled from God, and in her retirements, praying meditating f^eding on the
word, making the day of the Lord a holy delight, go, tender soul, and through
grace, be found in all these blessed practices, and thou may live
delightfully here, and be saved eternally.

When thou art come to years, to be capable to understand any thing, as it is
said of Moses, Heb. 11. 24. 25. Refuse the pleasures of sin, which are but for
a season, and choose the true wisdom, and to be found in her paths, for her
Mershandize is better ^hen the Merchandise of silver, and the gains thereof
then fine gold, which this Heavenly Soul really experienced, and one part of
her choice Meditations is of this Wisdom, as in the perusal of it; you will
fi^d? Oh what is the pleasures of sin; and that but for a little, very little
season, ^anity, emptyness, a bubble, a pleasant ^ream, to such a rich, solid,
satisfying, durable, glorious enjoyment of Jesus Christ, while h^re as but a
taste of the glory shall be revealed? Those vain pleasures of Youth must issue
in sorrow, and deep repentance, and bitterness of Soul if ever pardoned, and
saved; but the pleasure of knowing, having, being in Christ Jesus and the
delightful fellowship of the Saints have with him, issues a bl^ssed,
chea^fulness, and joy in God, without fear of Repentance, unless it be that we
have no more of Christ in us; and that we sin against such Love and Grace so
freely revealed to us?

Oh how happy are younger Men and Maidens as the Psalmist speaks 148 Psalm. that
begin to fear the Lord from their youth to seek early after Jesus Christ; for
the Lord to see their Faces, before the throne and to hear their sighs and
cries after him, for Christ, the Spirit, saving grace, power against all sin,
to take up a Cross, and choose ye affliction and reproach of the Lords people,
before the vanity's, Pride of Life, and Fading Glory of this world, this, oh
this, is happiness, soul-happiness, everlasting happiness, ri^hes, honor,
peace, blessing, which none can take away.

Especially in an Age of the great corruption of youth, when Religion is made a
byword and a scorn, when many hardened and blaspheme, when so Few of the youth
of noble and generous familyes, Fall in with serious Godliness, sobriety, but
serving diverse lusts and pl^asures, to all excess of Riot, to the debasing of
their Spirits, in a degenerateness from true Nobility and generousness of
Spirit, which is in knowledge, good learning true wisdom and piety, as fitting
them to serve God and their Generation.

Oh in the midst of such impiety's, how beautiful, how honorable, how pleasing
to the Holy God, for any younger persons, especial such as pretend to a
generous mind and education, such as are in Family's, where excess profaneness
abounds or the Sons and Daughters of Godly Parents, to betake your selves to
seek and know and fear, and serve the great and blessed God betimes, to be an
example and a blessing to secure Christ and holiness, and heaven, to walk in
the truly noble, delightful, precious ways, which this piece and she that lived
it holds forth unto thee.

In order hereunto how should the Soul of Parents (unless they will be Soul
Murderers to their Children) be in travail for grace and Conversion for their
Children, and not think it enough, to get them Estates, honors, and great
things in this Life, and leave them and it under a curse, that all sorts of
Parents not only give them liberty, but encourage them to Godliness, to pray
and read the Scriptures, and attend upon powerful means of grace to tremble at
sin; to dispose of them in the world in order hereunto, as this blessed Soul
acknowledges the good use of Parents reproof and instructions unto her.

1. In this piece, you have first an account of her Conversion and calling, how
the Lord gradually carried on her first convictions, her daily diligence in
prayer and the word when a child, the discoveryes she had of the Free grace of
the Gospel of the Mystery of Christ, of Righteousness by Faith, of being in
Christ, of the love o^ God, and F^llowship with him, of which she gives an
exact and distinct account, discovering the choice and spiritual understanding
she had in the Mystery of the Gospel, not taking up only from sin to duty, when
Christ and grace little understood, as it may be feared many do; nor yet
turning grace into wantonness, but under the constraints of the choice
discoveryes of Free and glorious Grace, and the loves of God (in the admirement
and adoration of which she lived) to attend to most intimate Communion with
him, the breathings and partings of her Soul, as you will see still running out
afrer more enjoyment of and likeness to her dea^ Lord Jesus, and exactest
holiness, bemoaning her self wherein she fell short.

2. Next you will meet witk her longing after the re^l Communion of Saints,
(which all profess to believe in the Creed but will not bear the practice of)
in the pure ordinances of the Gospel) in a con Congregational Chuch, (so
called) which when she enjoyed she expressed those blessed delights she had in
Fellowship with the Lord Jesus, the kisses of his Lips she there met with his
blessed Ordinances, and establishment of soul, in peace and joy in believing;

3. You have a choice discourse of Wisdom, the true Heavenly Wisdom, which her
Soul diligently sought after, and found, which was more precious to her then
Rubies, and all the things that are not to be compared to it; the rich
experience whereof she commends to the World in the debasement of all fleshly
Wisdom i^ comparison of it!

Especially to her dear Relations in the flesh, which is the next particular in
this discourse, to whose acceptance she commends it, with such bowels and
gratio^ affection, and sweetness of Spirit, such powerf^l convincing motives,
and from what of Heaven her own Soul has tasted, as might become one very
skilful in the word of Righteousness; to whose serio^ perusal with the blessing
of God, I would commend it as that which may lead you into the path of Life,
helped on by the singular example of her Life, in her Holy, sweet, acceptable,
conversation toward you, which I hope you are convinced did arise from a
divine principle of Grace, so to fill up every Relation to you, longing after
all your Eternal Salvation in Christ Jesus, oh may all of you be engaged not
only to read but to beg of God; the same Spirit of Wisdom and grace, that was
found in her, to walk in the same steps and ways Heaven ward, that this be not
a witness against any of you at the great day of Jesus Christ.

4. The next part is (as she styles it) the mystery of Godliness, namely of the
mystery of God in Christ, the grace and love of ^^e Father revealed by him, in
which I may take lib^rty to say, is as much of the Miste^y of the Gospel,
discove^ed as usua^ly I have met with in so little a Room, especially as to
living in a delightful fellowship therewith which was her great business, till
taken up unto him.

5. The rest consists of occasional Meditations, choice experiences,
ravishments of Divine Love, admirations of grace, holy praises, sweet supports
under trials, with the account she used to take of her self of hearing the
word, and the preparation of her soul thereto, in those precious longings of
her Soul, to meet with her dear Lord in Ordinances and the high value she put
upon Communion of Saints, in a Church of Christ, of which there is but Room for
the giving out of some tastes, in this little Treatise.

Lastly, her Meditations of death, which the spirit of Christ was preparing her
for in her time of health, whereby death was made familiar to her, that she
fell asleep in Jesus, even before we were aware of it and indeed she could
hardly bear the absence from her dear Lord any longer; as in her last Poem you
will perceive.

Surely by such a despised Testimony, the sleepy World is condemned, and every
Soul that peruseth it, should be provoked to take the Kingdom of Heaven by the
same violence; And Professors of Godliness may hereby be convinced of
slightness of Spirit, sinful neglects, formality in duty; and ordinances Love
of the World, decays in Grace, taking up with privileges of Saints, when
intimate Communion with the Lord, and growth of grace is not so seriously
attended to by them, against which this Treatise is also a living Testimony,
and may be blessed of God to the quickening of them.

Let all such specially but remark that ve^n and Spirit runs through their
short discourses, which was to prepare and keep her Soul to God, to be duly
calling in her own heart, much in deepest humbling and ^el^ reflection, Praying,
Reading, Meditation, being her Morning and Evening exercise, highly esteeming
every opportunity of enjoying the Lord, accounting the feet of those beautiful
that brought the good tidings, having a high reverence and affection for the
servants of Christ in that work, and an entire love to all Saints; as Saints,
though of different persuasions at this day, in the weakness, Tenderness,
Patience, Love of the Spirit; especially let me bespeak the Congregation of
Christ whereof she was a Member in this City, as also all the Churches of
Saints, to be following this Holy and precious example and practice, which
seem^th to be ordered by a hand o^ pr^vidence and grace, to awaken professors
from the evils mentioned, which I fear have overtaken many, instead of their
soul being kept in life, and warmth, and attending to spirituallity; and growth
in grace, and being full of love and good works, under the loud calls they have
thereunto by the word and providence of God they are under, that they may
witness a good profession, as they are called thereunto, in the midst of a
gainsaying generation.

Reader in a word thou may here learn what it is to live and dye,
comfortably, which is the great concernment before thee, which the Lord in his
rich grace give unto thee, and bless the reading hereof for the ends for which
it is published; as prays,

Thy Servant for Jesus sake. A. P.
In the Year 1670.
The Account of her early conversation.
O my Soul, consid^r the wonderful goodness of God, revealing his free Grace
and unbounded Love toward thee a poor Worm; oh how wonderful is this
condescension, of his that thou should be made an object of mercy? my soul
forget not his unspeakable love, let it be recorded, keep in remembrance th^se
choice blessings of a loving Father, bestowed so freely on me in the Lord Jesus
Christ the dear Son of his Love, who has born with thee in many weaknesses,
i^firmities, and ever seemed to ov^rlook all corru^tions and set thee under his
eye of pity, and compassion; O let this be a means m^re to incite to a near
closer walking with God, that thou may be born up against the w^les of S^tan,
thy subtle enemy, whose aim i^ to destroy thee for ever.

IN the 11 Year of my Age the Lord was pleased to take away my dear Mother, my
Parents were very dear and tender of me and did not leave me without
instructions of the things of God; At that time the Lord was pleased to carry
out my heart to things I then knew not. For as soon as my Parents had taught me
there was a God, I had an awe upon my heart concerning him, I could then reason
with my heart and said, the Lord made me, and he made me to serve him, and I
must do it; so being young, the Lord was pleased in the freeness of his Grace,
to kindle in my heart some small sparks of affections to himself; I remember on
a time a little Brother of mine was sick and my Mother being very tender of her
Child one Lords day would not go to Church, which caused me also to stay at
home, but wanting employment, out of my Mothers sight went to work about my
babies, at night the Lord was pleased to take a way the Child I standing by the
Cradle, which brought a fear upon me presently that I had been the cause, by my
working that day, of the Lords anger in taking away my brother.

I also remember that I went out and wept bitterly, in the consideration of my
days work, but never let my friends know it, I was much troubled at it, but
hoped such was the ignorance of my heart that all would be well again by my
praying and going to Church, which I was careful to do and fearful to om^^ one
duty which might hinder the means of my salvation, and cause the Lord to be
displeased with me.

The Ten Commandments was much upon my heart making that my only rule to walk
by, and was earnest with the Lord that he, would help me to the daily observing
and fulfilling of them for! then knew there must be a greater power then my own
to enable me to the performance of it, also my Parents taught me in my
Carechism what was my duty toward God and toward my Neighbor, and by my
continual saying of them the Lord was pleased to work them upon my spirit, and
into my affections and then in mercy to take notice of me in the freeness of
his Grace, and tender mercy to own me in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom I was
ignorant of a^ to what he had done and undergone for my soul, but now I cannot
but admire to behold the infinite goodness and tender love of God, who was then
pleased to choose me from amongst my Brethren, and his own self took care of me,
leading me by many paths of providence, passing over all my Corruptions, my
weaknesses and my failings caused me to find a tender hearted Father of a great
and Holy God, oh how sweetly has the Lord been pleased to carry on the work of
Grace in my poor unworthy Soul! How exceedingly does his Glory shine and his
goodness appear in that he wh^ i^ the high and mighty One, the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords should condescend so
far as to cast his eye upon a Worm, much more His love upon a distressed
creature, About the same year of my Age, the Lord was pleased to take away my
dear Mother by which I had a great loss yet knowing it was my duty to trust God
at all times I labored therefore to be content and the Lord was pleased to
bear me up by considerations of his love, I was in the time of my Mothers life
sickly and weak, subject to diverse bodily infirmi^ies, which made my Mother the
more tender of me, hence I was more sensible of my great loss, but such was the
goodness of God that he was pleased then wholly to take away my distemper and so
heal m^ that I have through his mercy never since been troubled with it, I fell
under some other trial but the Lord was pleased to enlarge my heart to lay open
my case before him and in mercy caused me to see that he did not despise my
poor supplications, but was graciously pleased to sweeten my troubles, and by
this to comfort me in that they carried me nearer to the Lord, sometimes he was
pleased to mittigate them, but mostly gave me strength to go through them and
patiently to bear them, thus was the Lord pleased to exercise his loving
kindness and tender compassions to my poor soul carrying of it as a Lamb in his
Arms; But oh why was my heart so dead that I was so long contented in a state
of Ignorance, and not more desirous to come to the knowledge of his ways? but
thou O Lord art good and thy ways past finding out, thy tender compassions
never fails those whose hearts are upright before thee; O blessed is the Soul
to whom thou impu^est no sin for certainly O Lord should thou have been so
just a^ to mark what was done amiss, O Lord my sins, my corruptions, my daily
actings, besides that guilt of original sin brought into the world with me was
enough to have sunk me into the bottomless pit for ever.

I could not see the need I had of my troubles, nor the end for which they were
sent, but blessed be thy Name O Lord, who in thy righteousness and goodness,
and tender mercy did^^ afflict me, thou might have spared thy pains and have
bestowed those sweet discoveries of thy love on such who would have better
improved it* and have let me perish to all Eternity.

Oh how is my soul bound for ever to extol the riches of thy grace, now I have
seen his glory, I abhor my self in dust and ashes, oh how unworthy am I to
appear before ^^ee? but blessed be thy name who have not left me in despair;
but in the sight of my unworthiness and the wretchedness of my condition,
caused me to se^ that there was hope concerning this matter, that thou had
laid help upon one who was mighty to save.

About a years time I lived very contentedly and in much ease, in my outward
conditions, but I began to be unmindful of the Lord who had done so much for
me; O how apt was I to forget the rock of my salvation, I began to find these
things indifferent to me, which before I had prosecured with much Zeal, the
dishonoring of Gods name by others being so common where I was, I did not find
my se^f so affected as before, nor so much troubled at it, till the Lord was
pleased by new allarums to aw^ken my drowsi^ ^oul, which was so willing to be
lulled a sle^p b^ Satan in a sinful security, and by afflictions some outward
trouble, brought me truly to consider my ways, and to lie low again before the
Lord, often spreading my condition before him in private, who was graciously
pleased once more to look upon me and caused me to see the tenderness of his
love toward me.

Then did I begin to grieve at their dishonouring God by their profane
walkings, and the Lord was pleased to cause an aw upon my spirit concerning him
and his ways I was mighty desirous to receive the Lords Supper, but I dar^d
not, I wondered at some that made so light a thing of it, when I found it to be
of much weight upon my spirit, I found them in their ways very profane and
cold to any good duty, I then began to apply my heart unto the Scriptures,
desiring the Lord to give me an understanding therein, it was much upon my
spirit to desire that the Lord would be pleased to open my heart as he did
lydia's that so I might attend unto the things that were of God.

It pleased the Lord, my time being expired at ^chool, to return me home to my
Fathers house Mr Pierce being then Minister, the first Sermon I heard from him
did much take upon my affections and raise up my desires unto the ways of God,
preaching from the 4. Cant. 7. 8. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot
in thee. wherein he opened the beauty of a Soul in Christ, and the love, the
Lord was pleased to honor such a Soul withal, this filled me with desires and
longings to be such a one, but how to attain unto it I did not know, then was I
full of fears and doubtings and Satan brought into my mind my evil and unworthy
walkings, under so much of the love of God as I had been partaker of this made
my Soul walk heavily under much dispute a long time and when the Lord was
pleased to come into my heart by a word at any time which did refresh me, it
lusted but a little time.

The Devil would be ready to tell me, that was not my part, I was too apt to
catch at Ch^ldrens bread and think that my own which did not belong to me, thus
did he follow me a long time, robbing me of the comfort of many a sweet Sermon,
making me wa^k in such sadness which was taken notice of by my f^iends, I would
fain have related my condition, and declared my doubts but could not do it, yet
in these doubts found some comfort, I found my Soul much carried out in love to
Christ, I could delight to sit alone and meditate on the love of Christ, held
forth in the Gospel to poor sinners, and in the former testimonies of his love
wherewith he had followed me in every outward providence my soul would be many
times carried out to admire the freeness of his love, my soul longed for such a
heavenly communion which put me much at the throne of Grace to desire one
glimps of his Glory, one testimony of ^is love in Christ, but Satan's suggestion
put ^e to a loss in my comfort he would often persuade me I was a Hypocrite,
and that I was fallen from Grace, this was a sad and great burden upon my
spirit, and I thought my sins was so great I must cry out with Cain, my
punishment should be greater then I can bear, yet was the Lord in his goodness
pleased not long to leave me in this condition, but to incline my heart more,
and with much affection to the word, remembering the deadness of spirit I had
been under.

There was few I was acquainted with whom I could in the least have any
converse with in the whole Town, thus did I labor to keep my troubles to my
self, I remember a sentence which did something refresh me (which was) He w^ll
lead sin^ers ^n the right way, and the Lord was p^eased to come into my heart
with this truth, I never said unto the ^ouse of Jaco^ s^ek ye me in vain, then
did I go unto the Lord and earnestly desire the assistance of his spirit to
seek counsel, in this matter I sought ove^ the book of God and begged of the
Lord with tears, that he would be pleased to give me a right understanding in
what I could not well apprehend, so gracious was the Lord at that time to give
in answer to my poor request and caused me to find much sweetness and comfort
in reading, which before I never had found, this raised up my heart to praise
the Lord for his mercy toward me and gave me much comfort in that I hoped the
Lord had not forgotten to be gracious but had in mercy owned himself to be my
God hearing prayer, and that the poor weak prayer of a wretched miserable
creature *who was looked upon with the e^e of scorn and much despised) this
carried up my soul to joy in the Lord with praises to him, in which I found
much comfort and encouragement, then did I in my heart resolve to wait upon the
Lord with my poor petitions for strength till he should p^ease to give me a
clearer evidence of his love, and the true knowledge of his ways, which I
desired to know above all earthly things; t^us was the Lord p^eased to come in
with a gracious i^fluence of his holy spirit whereby I received comfort from
every ^ermon I ^eard, for about 2 Months space.

But then how was my sinful and deceitful heart puffed up, what thoughts did I
begin to have of my self how had the Devil changed his not^ and told my proud
heart, my state was now good and my graces were much increased, for which I
ought to be much esteemed, how ready I was to do any thing which might secretly
make me bethought well of by such as knew it, then did I walk as one that was
well principled in Religion and a great profess^r. O wicked wretch that after
so much love should dare to be so careless as to let Satan steal away my heart,
yet the goodness of the Lord whose mercies endure for ever, would not suffer me
to rest in this condition, but was pleased by a Sermon to make me behold my
condition and search into with a single eye, the subject he preached from was
the 25 of Matthew, the parable of the ten virgins, whereby he showed how far a
carnal outward professor might be like a real Christian, and ye^ have never a
dram of grace which the Lord was pleased to fasten upon my soul making me to
weigh my actions and the thoughts of my heart with the pure word of God where I
^ound much unsoundness and rottenness, then was my heart east into its former
sadness, then was the Lord pleased to h^mbl^ my soul under the sense of a proud
dis^^^d^ent heart and made me to be more watchful to my ways and apply my
heart to reading and prayer* which before it was much straightened in.

Thus did I look into the ways of some other professors, where the Lord
discovered to me many weaknesse^ and failings by comparing of their ways unto
the pure word of God, I saw a shortness of that Gospel spirit the whole Gospel
so sweetly treats of this was a stumbling block to my soul thus was my trouble
greatly increased wherein Sa^an was very busy to destroy the comforts I had
formerly had, None could I find to declare my trouble so malicious was the fire
brand of hell to cause several jealousies in the hearts of people what might be
the cause of my trouble, and as Daevid says my humbling beca^e a reproach unto
m^, I cared not for company but most to be aloue, in which I did contemplate
the sweetness of his Divine Mercy, yet desiring the Lord would ease me of my
burden, which I thought to be very great often should I sit and bewail my sad
condition; and be ready with Job to curse the day of my bi^th, yet in this my
distress the Lord was p^eased to bring me to his feet, then would I come with
tears and offer up my poor sup^lic^tions before the Lord, where I found my
heart much enlarged being affected with the love of God to sinners, and carried
out much upon those words, call upon the Lord and he will hear thee, he is nigh
un^o a^l that call upon him, to deliver them ou^ of trouble, and many more
sweet and seasonable Scriptures was the Lord pleased gra^iously to bring into
my remembrance, and powerfully to apply unto my heart, which made me go often
unto the Lord and spread my condition before the Throne of his Grace, having
much encouragement to hope in his mercy, thus did I find much comfort and
sweetness in my secret communion with the Lord and found much ease in my
troubles, which I took a^ gracious returns of my poor broken prayers, and was
much carried out to trust in him and to w^it upon him, then could I sit and
call to remembrance the mercies of old as a tender and a loving father, who
nourished up my poor soul, which made me exceedingly admire the infinite riches
of his Grace and the freeness of his love in Christ Jesus to my poor Souls;
which made me often cry out, Lord what am I that thou should take such notice
of a poor creature, that thou should cast thine eye of love upon me, (though
the Devil would yet be busy and often cast into my thoughts doubtful fear)
what was there in me should cause the Lord to pity me, and indeed I could do
nothing in my self, which began to increase my trouble, yet I remembered it was
the saying of David when my father and my Mother forsook me, then the lord
would look upon me, this did at first revive me, but then I considered David
was a holy man after Gods own heart, how dare I to lay claim to any thing
belonged to him.

Thus was my base distrustful heart exercised with va^i^^y of tempta^ions by
the Devil, as to distrust the goodness of the Lord; and to rob my soul of the
comforts he was pleased many times to come in withal, many times has the Lord
been pleased to come in by a Sermon to my soul, and as it were spoke unto my
present condi^ion, but oh how dull have I been to remember, and how did my
unworthy walking cause those blessed truths to slip out of my mind, yet was the
Lord in mercy pleased to keep my heart sincere before him, to plead for mercy
for the Lords sake, for whose sake he was graciously pleased to continue his
tender and compassionate love unto me,

The sweet experiences of the tender love of God to my Soul, at Mrs. W. at
School.
THen was the Lord pleased in much bounty to appear very gracious to my poor
Soul and drawed out my heart much to long after the knowledge of his ways, now
being yet under the old way of Worship, I b^sought the Lord truly to convince
my Judgment as well as my aff^^ctions of the way which is of his own setting
up, but for a small time the Lord was pleased yet to leave me to my self that I
found my self at a loss being dead and dull yet performing outward duties but
with little spiritual life, and my heart also was carried out after vanities,
then I found that I had lost the former sweet incombs of the Lord, and the
refreshings of this blessed spirit, and was as one lu^led a sleep by the
deceitful enchantments of Satan, and malicious devices.

O wicked and dec^i^ful ^ea^t; how could thou so soon forget such bondage
delivered from such (...) a^ the Devil had so often got thee into, how soon
have thou forgot the God of all thy mercies how have thou made the Lord to
serve with thy sins.

Yet once more was the Lord pleased to call me out of my benumbed conditions
and showed how I was running my self into my own destruction.

Oh the goodness of the Lord who never d^d leave me but to see my o^n in
a^ility to live without his he^p, then did the Lord in mercy convince me of the
empti^ess of all Earthly vanities and also of that way of formal worship that
it was a dead carnal lifeless thing under which my soul could not prosper and
so growing weary of it more and more at length besought the Lord to guide my
poor i^norant Soul which was so easy to be led away with every wicked and
^ub^ile device of ^atan, my heart desired much to hear go^d men, and when I
could with convenience, which some took notice of and said I was one whom the
Apostle speaks of, having i^chi^g ears, ever l^arning; etc.

^his did much afflict me, about which the Lord was pleased to give me a heart
to see^ him and that earnestly for his assistance in the knowledge of his truth;

One more experience of the providence of God appeared unto me, as an
encouragement to trust in his mercy and to wait upon him by prayer for all
things, I had at that time a distemper upon me of which I saw no hope of cure,
yet one day particularly being in a serious meditation of the infinite goodness
of the Lord, toward me, the Lord was p^eased to direct my eye upon a place of
Scripture where I found the woman coming to the Lord, confessing that she had
^pent a^l she h^d ^o be cu^ed of her Infirmity, and one touch of Christ's
garment had done it, from thence may not I come trembling that have received so
many testimonies of his love and tried so many medcines before I came unto the
Lord, or loo^ed up to him for help then did I bewail my unp^ofitableness yet
went unto the Lord in the language of the Lepper and said Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, who was not deaf to my poor request but in some small
time was graciously pleased as I may say without means wholly to clear me of it,
this mercy carried up my heart more to praise the Lord then any yet I had
received who notwithstanding all my weaknesses and sinfulnesses was graciously
pleased to follow me with many mercys.

Of further discoveries of Christ,
Then was the Lord pleased in his gracious Providence to remove me to a place
in H. Sh. where I had much more advantage of means and helps for my poor Soul.

Where the Lord was pleased to give me through his grace, a little more
insight into the mind ^f Christ, evidencing himself to be a God gra^ious and
merciful, abundant in g^odn^ss, etc. I was filled with admiration, to see the
holy glorious God, abase himself to so poor a wretchless Creature as I then
was, I cried out with earnest desires and longings after more of the knowledge
of this God, but here came I under strong temptations, Satan was powerful in
raising up of spiritual Pride, but the Lord whose goodness never failled me,
did then take care for me, thou O Lord who broughtest me out of the Pit of
despair, O suffer me not to climb up to the Mount of Presumption, then was the
Lord pleased in the tenderness of his love to convince me that the poor in
Spirit, were heirs of the Kingdom; that the lowly Soul was his habitation, then
I besought God, begging at the Throne of Grace, for the assistance of his
gracious Spirit, without which I could do nothing, and that he would humble me
even to the dust, that so my Soul might not loose the sight of that Glory
revealed in the face of Jesus Christ.

This the Lord was graciously pleased to grant; and sweetly bring me to see a
riches in Christ Jesus and that this was more to be desired then all the
treasures upon Earth.

The longings of her Soul after Church Fellowship, and all the Ordinances of
Christ.
THen did I long after God, and the enjoyment of him in his own way, and said
Lord thou have made me, O lead me in that way wherein I may bring most glory to
thy self, I durst ^ot trust my own judgment but resigned my self unto his
will, and continued my petitions at the ^hrone of Grace, and at length he was
pleased g^ati^us^ to answer my poor prayer, ^less^d be ^hy name O Lord, O let
my Soul be enlarged in thy p^a^ses.

One day the Lord was pleased by a strange providence to cast me into the
company of one that I never saw before, but of a sweet and free disposition,
and whose discourse savored so much of the Gospel, that I could not but at
that instant bless God for his goodness in that providence, it pleased the Lord
to carry out our hearts much toward one another at that time, and a little
while after, the Lord was pleased to bring us together again for the space of
three days, in which time it pleased God by our much converse together, to
establish and confirm me more in the desires I had to j^yn with the people of
God in soc^ety, and enjoy Communion with them according to the order of the
Gospel, she was of a society of the Congregational way called Iudependants, and
gave me so clear a demonstration of their ways, that upon considerations and
searching of the Scripture for the understanding of which learnestly besought
the Lord) I was clearly convinced in my judgment* that this was the way which
came nearest to the ru^e of the Gospel, and the commands of Christ, then were
our hearts firm^y united, and ^ blessed the Lord from my soul for so glorious
and v^sible an appearance of his love, for I had many sweet refreshments given
me at that time, when she was gone, I was sensible of the great mercy the Lord
had been pleased to show me, but in an instance snatched it from me again, at
which I began to be troubled, but after a few reflections to this purpose, why
do I not patiently submit to the will of my Father, who knows what is best for
me, my soul was again filled with hungrings and thirstings after God for a more
clear and full in^oyment of him, and that in that b^essed ordinance appointed
for a seal to co^fi^m the Covenant he hat^ graciously made, through hi^ dear
Son with a^l believers, this was at a time; when the Lord was pleased as to
outward appearance to frown upon his people, it seemed an hour of darkness to
me, my heart was troubled, then was I earnest with the Lord further to ^irect
me in the way that he should choose, and the Lord was pleased to shine in with
some Gospel light, and cause me to see a vast disproportion between a
supersti^iou^ way of worshipping of God and a spi^itual sincere way, in which
spiritual Christians serve him, then I said O that God would please to bring me
into the Fellowship and Communion of his own people, and if he has appointed
them to suffer. Oh that I might be one that he would count worthy to suffer for
the name of Christ, Oh how does my Soul desire to bear part in the affliction
of Sion, much rather then to enjoy the mirth and pleasure of an earth^y
Kingdom, then did I cast my self upon the Lord and offer up my Soul to him who
knows how to frame it according to his own blessed will, then I said Lord have
not thou the ^earts of all creatures in thy hand, and have power to turn them
into what frame soever thou please, bring mine into a conformity to thy
blessed will, O do it Lord for thy mercies sake, then I made known my desires
unto my friend by letter to join in society with that congregation whereof my
friend was a member.

For about that time the Minister of the Parish intending to give the Sacrament
preached a preparatory Sermon from 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29. v. Showing the sweet
nature of that blessed ordinance, the danger of unworthy r^ceive^s and how a
Christian ought to be qualified before partaking thereof at the hearing of
which I was awakened and the Lord was pleased to come in with sweet comfort and
refreshments considering the blessed provisi^n God had graciously made for
those that prepared to mee^ him therein; but I was troubled when I considered
that very few or none of his Communicants were so quallified to appearance
which was my great burden, for I longed much to partake of that ordinance but
dared not to* do it in that manner and with such persons

None could I use freedom with in this matter but those who I feared would make
my trouble greater but thou O God who art ever ready to help in time of neeed
thou the wise counselor wilt not be far from the Soul that truly seeks thee,
then I called upon the Lord who was graciously pleased to grant an ear to my
request, and through the help of my friend to b^ing to remembrance, 1 Cor. 10
16. 17. v. by which I was much establish^d, but more when I saw the number of
his Communicants whom he had examined and accep^ed such as was very b^ind,
ig^orant, forma^ creatures then I came to a resolution through the b^essing of
God to wait with patience till he should see good to open away wherein I might
enjoy such ordinances in power and purity and so as I might expect Gods
presence and blessing, which at last he was gratiousl^ pleased to do making
that my friend an in^trument thereof.

Oh let my heart be more carried out to God with praises, and put a new Song
into my mouth, make it my work to glory that thy great name, since thou art
thus pleased to own me in thy dear Son.

Of Recording her Experiences.
O My Soul thou have found by sweet experiences how good a thing it is to wait
upon the Lord let not the gracious taste of his love slip out of thy remembrance
but whilst he has given thee life improve these mercies and the talent he has
lent thee, to his own glory, and let the gracious workings of the Lord as he is
pleased to honor thee with incomes of his love, and the sweet breathings of
his holy spirit, recount them here in order as the Lord shall give thee leave
that they may be upon record against an evil day, a day of temptation, for how
many precious evidences have thou lost, for want of remembering them, but now O
Lord help me to deal faithfully with my Soul in declaring thy power and the
riches of thy Grace in the daily remembering of thy merci^s, O cause me to see
the growth of my Soul, in Grace and in the knowledge of my gracious God, that
my ^oul may only aim at the Glory of my red^^mer.

The Lord was thus pleased to carry on his gracious work with much power in my
poor Soul, notwithstanding ^he Devils suggestions, many ^ear^* etc. As that my
condition surely was not yet so good as I did hope it to be, and to doubt
whether my joy was not mere presumption, but the Lord in his goodness was
pleased in a little time to clear it more fully to me and cause me to se^ by
the workings of his holy Spirit, sweet evidences of his tender love and b^ought
into my meditation many blessed premises which he was pleased to bless unto my
So^l, and confirm unto me with much establishment.

The Lord being thus pleased by his wise Council and his tender love thus to
guide my unworthy Soul, at length b^ hi^ gracious providence brought we to the
place where the Church met though they were strangers to me yet was he pleased
to cause me to find much love and tenderness, and there I had that blessed
opportunity to receive that sweet refreshing Ordinance which my Soul had so
much longed after. Blessed be his Holy name: O thou my Soul since thou have
seen the gracious de^lings of the Lord toward thee be not thou unmindful of
his praise.

Improve thy talent to thy Masters use; lay out thy strength for God, and let
thy heart be carried out for ever to remember the tender and unspeak^ble love
of thy dear Lord unless thou put thy hand to he^p, my strength is nothing, I am
a po^r weak nothing not able to do any thing if thou should once leave me
never so little.

The Choice Discoveries of Christ to her Soul, when joined to a Church, in the
Lords Supper,
OH how was the Lord in mercy pleased to manifest his Glory and goodness to
thee O my Son in this Ordinance in which he was graciously pleased by faith to
draw thee up to recive those outward elements the bread and wine as presenting
the immediate body and blood of the Lord Jesus broken and shed for thy sins, O
tho^ unworthy Soul how graciously was the Lord pleased to come with power,
raising thee up to praise and admire the exceeding riches of his Grace in
choosing thee to be partaker of so great a blessing, how was he pleased to fill
thee with spiritual joy at thy returning home, and give thee leave to come into
his presence to return him thanks with joy that he was pleased so graciously to
manifest himself unto thee poor unworthy Soul, as a God hearing prayer and
answering thy poor request with so much mercy, which the Lord enable thee for
ever to remember to his Glory thou know I desired to do so even from my
Youth, and if my deceitful heart deceive me not I dare appeal unto thee for the
sincerity of it oh that thou would make me useful to thee in that way or
any way thou shall be pleased to choose that I might glorify thy great and
holy Name.

Sweet Discoveries of the Love of God in Jesus Christ.
Oh how good a God have I, who is pleased every day to bear up my Soul with the
sweet influ^nces of his gracious Spirit, and precious incomes of his tender
Love, O how could I sit and meditate of thy loving kindness all the day long,
where can I find any comfort in this World but in thy presence, there have I
Lord indeed through thy Grace found a fullness of Joy, a time of endless
pleasures, O what am I or what is my Fathers House, that I should be the
daughter to a King that I a worm a poor detestable creature mad^ up with clay
and dust nay worse then a worm they being creatures which shall prey upon me
for that I am a^pointed for their food, yet that the Lord of Hosts the Holy One
of Israel the High and Mighty God, the King of Glory, the King of Kings, who is
a King over the whole Earth, should yet be pleased thus to abase himself as to
have thoughts of love for such a poor unworthy w^etched creature as I am, oh
how unworthy am I of thy favors, yet Lord because thou have b^d me hope in thy
mercy I dare do no otherwise, nay Lord thou have commanded me to believe, Lo^d
I believe pardon my unbelief, that should in any ways cause me in the least to
distrust the riches of thy Grace or thy unspeakable goodness which is thy
Glory, since thou art pleased dear Lord to make a worm the object of thy grace,
Oh let my Soul enjoy these sweet transcendant pleasures which lie discovered to
my soul in the rich treasury of thy unbounded love whilst others take their
fill of Worldly vanities.

When I considered the sinfulness of my nature, my weaknesses, my frailtyes,
and my many infirmities, oh what is there in me should ever cause the Lord to
pity me or yet to continue his favor to me, in so ^aspeakable a manner, N my
Soul bless thou the Lord for Jesus Christ in whom the Lord is pleased richly to
look upon thee? O happy is the soul that is born up by such a support, how
wretched had my soul been, had not the Lord laid help on one who is mighty,
had not thou had the Lord to be thy Savior, Christ the dear son of God to be
thy Redeemer! O blessed be the Lord, and blessed be my Rock who has thus
looked upon sinful mankind, and thus loved the Sons of Men as to give his only
dearly beloved Son to dye for such poor miserable wretches as I! O the
wonderful goodness of God the transcendant and unspeakable riches of his grace
in Jesus Christ! O my Soul can thou but be filled with holy admiration at the
infiniteness of his Glory* the unspeakable and transcendant beauty of thy dear
Redeemer, this indeed is rich mercy.

That the Lord should come into the World and give his life a ransom for poor
sinners, but that thou should be one for whom the Lord was pleased to leave
his glory to take upon him the habit of a servant, the nature of a sinful man,
that thou should be one for whom the Lord became himself a curse to redeem
thee from the curse, that was due to thee and from that which there was no
Redemption but through the blood of that pure and spotless Lamb, that Christ
the Son of God should give himself to dye a shameful death for thee that thou
might live, that thou might be partaker of those glorious benefits and
gracious privileges which came by him? O my soul* that thou should be one to
whom such exceeding love is shown! O my soul how does the love of Christ
constrain thee to love him, O my poor unworthy soul how art thou bound for ever
to admire, and only aim at and seek the glory of thy dear Redeemer! O my dear
Redeemer how is my poor unworthy heart carried out to admire thy dear and
tender love?

Lord if to enjoy the Communion with thy Saints, and people here on earth be
such a glorious privilege which thou have made my soul to long after; O then
what is it to enjoy Communion with thy Saints and Angels to all Eternity in the
presence of my Lord and Savior? What darkness can Eclipse that glory or rather
will not that glory quite put out that glory which the World but falsely yields;
what is all the glory of the World, or all the Kingdoms of the Earth compared
to the apprehention of a Heavenly Kingdom in the soul here, much less to the
full enjoyment of it to all Eternity? What is all the glory of the world, but
poor empty husks, poor deceitful vanities; a very lie, which at the best makes
but ashamed, but Lord how glorious art thou in the beauties of holiness, my
Soul, has found enough in thee to fill it with a holy admiration: O that I
might forever be admiring of thy glory: what are the treasures of the earth
poor low base things, that we should have our hearts so much carried after
them? What is it the hearts of the World runs out so much after? is if there
was their greatest happiness? Is it not that they may gain abundance of riches?
and what are they when they are gotten but thorns to put out their own eye^,
they ^oyl and labor hard in the wo^ld ^or that which is at best of no enduring
substance, and if they make a shift to keep it whilst they continue here, yet
at the Grave this the great happiness must leave them; O misserab^e are they
whose chiefest good consists in worldly vanities, what is all the treasure upon
Earth to that in esteemable Riches, which are only to be found in Jesus Christ,
of how much greater value is that one pearl of great price, then all the Pearls
and Diamonds and the richest treasure upon earth, Lord fill thou my heart with
Heavenly Treasure and let my Soul be rich in grace, oh that i^ might be such in
which I might bring glory to thy Name,

Meditations upon my Saviors Love.
HOw excellent a thing is Love, how does it adorn a Christian and comes most
near the Image of a loving Savior, never was any love like to his love, he
loved us not because we first loved him, no we were enemies, yet even then he
loved us and had compassion on us; O the riches of divine Love, see the sweet
indearments of a loving Savior; greater love can no man show then to lay down
his life for his friends; yea but our dear Lord said down his life for us when
we were enemies, and from being enemies he is pleased to style us friends, and
not only so but behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us
that we should be called the sons of God and if sons, then Heirs of God, and
Coheirs with Christ in Eternal Glory.

O blessed change from enemies to friends, from friends, to Sons, and so heirs
with the Lord Jesus of an eternal inheritance; O the gracious effect of this
transcendant love; Now are we Sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we
shall be, why can greater testimony of love be shown then this to be taken into
the number of Gods Children? to be counted Sons and Daughters of the Great and
Glorious God? the Lord of Hosts; the High and Mighty King of Kings. Oh yes, it
does not yet appear what we shall be, now we see but darkly as in a Glass, but
here is mercy, this is tender love* that when he shall appear who has so loved
us, even our dear Redeemer in his Glory, we shall be like him for we shall see
him as he is, our dear Savior who was content not only to lay down his life
for us that we might be partakers with him of his Sonship and also of the
G^ory.

Oh the transcendant and unspeakable love of God to poor Souls, whom the Lord
Jesus is pleased out of the rich treasury of his divi^e Love to reconcile unto
God by the blood of the Cross, and what has the Lord required again of us poor
Worms for all his benefits, but that we should return him love again, and this
is the love he requires that we should keep his Commandments, oh bl^ssed Lord
and thy commandments are not grievous but delightful to the Soul that loves
thee, and what is thy Commandment dear Lord this is my Commandment (and it is
a ^ew Commandment) that you should love one another my Commandments are not
grievous it is only love that is required, and that you should manifest it in
obedience to my commands; one of which is that you love one another, but how
dear Lord shall we manifest our love to thee in loving one another, how have
thou required that we should love one another, have not I set you an example.

Did not I first love you? and therefore give you this new Commandment; that
as I have loved you so you would love one another, with a sincere pure
unbounded love, such a love as seeks not your own things, but the good of
others, such a love as is inward and not in outward show only, but in deed, and
in truth, in the sincerity of your hearts, such a love as seeks the good and
spiritual advantage of one another Souls, to love one another as I have loved
you, or to love thy friend, as thou love thy self, most willing to do that
which may be for thy friends good, although it be to some prejudice to thy
self; this is love and by this you shall know that you are my Disciples, if
thus you love one another; and by this men shall know that you are mine, such
as I have loved from the beginning, Oh dear Lord how art thou pleased thus to
plead with pooe clods of cl^y what sweet argument of thine own matchless
goodness.

Art thou pleased to lay down thy life to draw poor sinful Souls to thy self, O
Lord whom did thou ever bless with a clear sight of the least glimps of thy
most gracious goodness, that yet could not love the Lord, are not our hearts
harder then stone, How many is there do profess to love thee but in works deny
thee, even in this great matter of love even in loving one another,

Do we not rather back-bite, and discover one another; where is that tender
bearing one another burdens? Where is that sweet convincing spirit to reprove
as should be in Christians? how few are to be found but such as fear both to
reprove and to be reproved, to exhort or to be exhorted in that since; where is
that love which hides a multitude of faults? that love that works no^ thinks ne
ill to his neighbor, where is that spirit of mourning over one another
infirmities, that spirit of supplication in one another behalf, Lord where is
this Spirit to be found in the measure it ought.

Sure but in few that do make profession of thy name Lord! is there not secret
pride lie^ hidden through Hippocricy in our base deceitful hearts; whoever saw
the Lord that could not love, who Lord have thou ever brought under the power
of thy constraining love, that are not willing there to rest, but Lord unless
thou teach by thy holy spirit, and give us daily supply from thine own self
we can do nothing O Lord we are not able to de one good action without thy
especial grace, but here lies our fault still we have not power no strength,
Lord we have not because we a^k not, Our dear Lord has said, Ask and you shall
receive, O how largely is he pleased to make promise unto poor worms,
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it; and again repeats it, And if
ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it, is not there a gracious promise
from the mouth of him in whose power it is to make it good; Is it not from the
Lord himself who is the only giver of all good, whose word the least tittle of
which shall not fall to the Ground, O then, why are we not more at the throne
of Grace, since he is pleased in mercy to afford unto us so glorious a
priviledg^, O that my soul may abide seeking of thee, that my heart may still
more and more be carried out with this sincere love, unto thee and thine; O
suffer me dear Lord once more to say with boldness through thy Grace I will not
let thee go until thou herein will bless me.

This before her Marriage.

La libre de mon Consalationes and la meditationes de mon Coeure, Sarah Roane,
December 1660.

My Meditations from that blessed experience the Lord has been pleased in much
mercy through the infinite Riches of his Grace, to give my poor unworthy Soul,
of his unspeakable love in Jesus Christ, by the preaching of the word and
reading of the Scriptures.

Meditations of Wisdom in embracing the offer of Jesus Christ.
WISDOM is accompanied with a most glorious train of Heavenly beautie^ exact^y
formed into a scene; which does present the souls eternal happiness and being
united with the soul, make it pertaker of her graces she carries ever with her
(and those that fin^ her shall find with her) in esteemable values and things
of great price, happy therefore is the man that sits knocking at her gates for
in her are all the paths of pleasure, and the ways of peace, and what can be
defired more? Pleasure is that the world is most eager after, but it is such a
pleasure as ends in sorrows, these pleasures cannot bring peace to the soul,
they may satisfy them selves with vain hope and say peace, we shall do well,
but surely sudden destruction shall come upon them, there is no peace for such
says my God.

But now here is pleasure which proceeds from the breast of wisdom, such
pleasure as will bring profit to the soul, and peace also, such pleasure as
will never hurt the soul but make it happy for ever.

What is it people take pleasure in, is it not commonly in things that excel
for richness, for glory and delight, etc. Pray consider what thing more
glorious can we have then to be found in the radiments of Heaven for glory, for
beauty, for splendour, for delight and comfort, such are not to be found in the
earth, nor in the least to be equalled with it, to enjoy Communion with a God
who is infinitely glorious, so that there is none like unto our God, to have an
interest in a Christ, who is altogether lovely, and can it be expressed the good
and comfort a soul in Christ is enriched withal, even with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory? Oh what comparison can be made with the joys of heaven and those
Rivers of endless pleasures, which are at Christ's right hand for evermore,
these are the pleasures which true spiritual Wisdom, is accompanied with, nay
her paths are pleasantness and her ways are peace, she leads in the ways of
God; and those ways are the ways of peace, and worldly troubles can never
overcome a heavenly peace, is it not a comfort to a Soul though in the midst of
storms, in the world to see himself at peace with God, what sufferings would he
think hard and too much for him to bear, when he sees his Soul in a bond of
peace being reconciled unto the Father by the Son even Christ Jesus? This is
not such a peace as the world gives, no it is the peace of God which passes
all understandings which God is pleased to give unto his Saints alone as an
earnest of eternal happiness; and it was the care of our dear Savior himself at
his parting out of the world to leave his peace with us even with his own, to
bear them out and keep up their hearts in those trials, temptations, and
conflicts which they are sure to meet withal in their pilgrimage before they
come to that holy Hill of Sion, that heavenly Jerusalem, that glorious City of
which the Lamb himself is the light, which being attained the recompense surely
outpasses very much the labor after it here is the pleasure of a true
believer, in the fruition of God, and here lies his comfort in being at peace
with God, and this can bear him up, and support him though in the midst of a
fiery furnace, now those are the pleasures of the godly, but the worldlings
pleasures are of another kind, the wicked deli^hteth himself in world i^
vanities, as if their were the greatest happiness, and truly so it is to them
they think not of their eternal being, (...) make provision ^or the flesh ^ha^
they may (...) the lu^t thereof; And h^d rather loose heaven with all the glory
of it, although it be a being of eternal rest, rather then part with their base
lusts in which they take pleasure, and which they cannot keep long but may in
the midst of those their p^easures ^e snatched away and (...) to receive the
reward of their actions in horror and eternal darkness those that had rather
sin then suffer for the cause of Christ here, shall assuredly suffer for their
sin to all eternity, he is not worthy of Christ that cannot with co^ten^ part
wi^hal for him, what is our all even nothing, when we consider the gain we have
by Christ; nay what have we of our own to loose what we have is it not from the
hand of our heavenly father who is the given of all goodness.

We ^^ceive it and cannot he that gives all take it a^ again w^ensoever he
pleases, and if he through his infinite wisdom seem good to take hose things
from us which might through our base corrupt hearts proves snares to our Souls,
and give unto us heavenly treasures, the riches of his grace and gift of his
holy spirit, the true wisdom, to know him, who to know a right is life Eternal,
and having of these how great will the exchange be, what cause can a Soul in
such a case have to complain, although he were stripped of all worldly comforts,
surely he ought to lay his hand upon his mouth and submit unto the Lord in all
things; Naked came I out of my mothers womb, etc.

Yet sometimes the Saints of God, walk in heaviness under the afflicting hand
of God, even when the Lord has withdrawn his quickening presence from them,
which made David lie sobbing under so great an oppression, also all the dear
Children of God have been sensible of the loss they have sustained by Gods
withdrawing of his presence from them, what, sad cries and complaints have the
church made for the same reason? but will God forsake for ever, no he will not,
for a moment I hid my face from thee but in everlasting kindness will I
remember thee whom God loves he loves for ever, and chastisements are but
effects of his love the dearest of Gods Children may stand in need of the rod
of Correction.

And God is pleased as a loving Father to try all wa^es for his Childrens good,
he will hide his face from them that they may see the evil of their sin* which
has caused them to loose the comfort of their Souls, and thereby return with
repentance that they receive mercy, for he is a tender hearted father who looks
with the eyes of compassion on his Children and will hear them when they cry
unto him, he will put their tears into his bottle, so precious are they in his
sight, he will comfort the mourner and has pronounced him blessed, O blessed
be the means that brings such blessedness to the Soul? that it should be taken
notice of by the great God, who would not be a mourner all his days to have
such a comforter to help and succor him? and who would not forsake the vain
pleasures of the world to enjoy those heavenly felicities and eternal
pleasures, which are at Christ right hand for ever more.

Lord give me evermore that bread and satisfy my Soul there with; O see where
beauty lies, the Kings daughter is all glorious within, there is her beauty, not
laid open to the eyes of worldlings, but in the sight of her well beloved
alone, to the world they look black and swarthy, yet are they washed in the
fountain of his blood hence they are declared to be without spot, the world
sees not these things, but the Lord is the searcher of hearts, and the tryer
of Reins whose eyes go through the earth and knows who they be; whose hearts
are upright before him; O here is wisdom, even in the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus, whom to know, to know a rigbt is life Eternal, to know God to be a wise
just and merciful God to those that have his fear in their hearts, who desire
to walk in obedience to his ways, and whose soul trembles at his righteous
judgments, but to such that wilfully disobey his commands and despise his Laws
setting their hearts against God and fight against him by their lusts, the
language of whose heart is truth, God sees it not; God sees all thy doings,
ye the very thoughts are not hid from him, thou have thy inventions, and
gloriest in thy strength, know vain man God laughs thee to scorn, if God say^s
but the word thy devices shall perish and thou shall be consumed in the fire of
his Wrath? who will come rendering vengeance upon such who obey not his word, and
who can stand before a consuming fire, if the thoughts of God be so dreadful to
unrepentant sinners; here what will it be to such as the day of Judgment when
they shall be summoned to appear before the presence of an angry God being only
covered with their abominati- abominations, then shall they call to the (...)
fall upon them, and the Mountains to hi^e (...) from ^he fierce wrath ^^ an
angry God, who will ^onsume them with the brea^^ of his nostril^; Al^s* then
there is no Mediator for their poor Souls, no interceeder shall they see; he*
who would have been a Savior to them, now their Judge, then shall they look
back and consider the p^et^ous time they have lost* the many offers of Grace
they have rejected and despired the Spirit of the Lord, which would have led
and instructed them in the way which leads to eternal happiness.

But now it is too late, the time of grace is gone, the day is past, Christ
knocked at the door of thy heart* but thou would not* he has proffered grace
and mercy but thou rejectedst it, and would have none of it, Christ has word
and entreated and waited that he might be gracious, yet thou have been deaf and
blind and hardued thy heart against him who pitri^d thee and would Have brought
th^e out by (...): intrea^ies of the way thou have run headlong into, to thy
own destruction, but thy heart was filled with vani^ies at best which now thou
have found to be but shadows, and thine ears were stoped and so taken up with
thy lusts and pleasures that thou could give no ear to the entreaties of a
Christ, nor the kind invitations of a blessed Savior, who has called upon you
to come and buy without money or prise only with the loss of your lusts, justly
may it be said that thy destruction is of thy self, that thou ha^t wilfully
and willingly ^un thy self headlong into that gulf of hor^^r and eternal
misery, O Souls, consider whom you do despise what dullness is it thus posseseth
you to reject the Lord of life; who^e service is so precious who is all love
and swe^tn^s^, and the only thing to be desir^d, what is there to be desired
that is not to be found in him, who is all fullness, out of whose fullness his
own receive ev^n grace for grace, and what can we se in our minds to be more
pleasant to us then that which is but full and lovely what beauty can be like
this beaut^, what glory can be equal to thi^e, what is there can be compared
unto thee, O my Lord thou art all togather lovely, who do you despise, O see
how wretchedly rather (naturally) do thou sit upon a dunghill and feed upon
husks, rather rhen feed at the banquet of fat things, feasted at the Kings
banquet, that had rather be bondslaves to Sin and Satan, which brings nothing
but shame and confusion both to Soul and body, then to be freemen of Jesus
Christ, by whom comes life salva^ion and eternal hapyness. what thing is there
in the world is so requisite and so needful, that we should be thus blinded,
from beholding the necesity and the need we have of a crucified Christ, what
things is there in the world so glorious and so beautyful that should take our
hearts off from those heavenly objects, those celestial beauties, those beams
of g^ory, that are set at the right hand of God, O then be no longer fools but
wise, redeeming the time get wisdom, which is of so glorious a nature as to
bring you to the true knowledge of God who calls upon you saying

Blessed are they which attain to this Wisdom, and lay it up in their hearts,
in so doing they shall find riches and honor proffit and pleasure and that of
a higher Nature then any the world can produce and with all that blessed peace
of conscience which brings the Soul to joy eternal* what are the riches and the
honors of the world? riche^ take wings, thy are but a little dust, things
which God in an ordinary way of providence gives to the wicked, when he has
denied them to the dearest of his Children; aye, and they are the wickeds
portion, therefore grudge it them not, for they are their good things in this
life, but thine are laid up in the bosom of the Fathers love, theirs shall be
but for a time, but thine for eternity, besides, they that have most of them
have them not without their trouble, they are empty having no substance nor
real^ity in them, but shadows.

Which by a fair show, delude the Soul and draw it in to a snare, these are the
things the world is so eagar after which being gained the value of them would
not counter veil the loss of the least smile of God; how much better is it to
gain Christ though with the loss of the world and allworldly enjoyments, then
to gain the world with the loss of Christ; So likewise honeurs, they shall all
fall, and come to nothing, keep it as long as thou can which will be but as
long as thou live, it is but for a moment, and there be many thing, may
combine together to cut it short even in the midst of that moment, but say thy
henor should carry thee to the Grave it will leave thee there, it will not
carry thee to Heaven, the wise and the honorable dies as does the fool; the
poorest man that is, can claim so much ground as to bury them in, and thou
can do no more, of earth thou wast made and to earth thou shall return, there
is nothing more sure then what is honor worthy? [worldly honor

What ^ools are we when at the best it is but vanity and most that are in
honor perish as do the beasts happy is the man a from ^he Lord the King of
Kings will honor with h^s grace and holy Image, surely the best Robe is put
upon him ev^n the Robe of Ch^ists Righteousness, the White Robe of his
inocenc^, the Ring shall be put upon his finger, and he shall be more glorious
and honorable then the Kings of the earth; you will say, it is honor to a man to
have the King his friend, much more honorable it is then when the King is his
Father and if this be honor to be a friend or child to an earthly Prince, of
how much greater honor is it to be the child of the Heavenly King who is so
infinitely above all the world, that the whole earth is but as the d^op* of a
Bucke^ on the small dust of the Ball^nce unto him, at whose feet Kings shall
lay down their crowns and Rulers shall be i^ subjection, and when he speaks,
who can resist his power? who with his voice makes the earth to tremble, the
Lord who i^ mighty in ^ower, in Wisdom, in knowledge, in me^cy, and in truth,
who made all things out of nothing and can withone word of his mouth reduce
them to nothing again gain, he is the King of Kings and the Lord of glory, he
pulls down and se^teth up as he pleases.

Here then lies true honor and true happiness even in the favor of this God;
O what adva^tage has that Soul over the world whose Soul has an intrest in the
Fathers love as there is no love so great so there is no love so true as that
where with he love^h his peculiar ones, his love it is a transendant love; so
it is in comprehensible love, it has no bound, but it in dures forever; what
love is there like unto it? what variety and change do we see daily the world
produces: in this ma^ter or love of creatures, to day we may see a show of
love and affectious and think we are happy in them but how suddenly do they
change, how little a thing will set them at a distance and break their amity; O
this is the love of the world and what 1st worth? but here is a love which is
not subject to change as to the Nature of it is such a love as the substance of
a man's house will not purchase, which the Lord of love in spires his people
with it is a Spiritual and evangillicall love, such a one as proceed from the
divine nature a perfect love which admits of no change, his love is infinite
and eternal whom he loves he loves forever, A Soul once rereceived unto the
Fathers love shall a bide forever; Who shall separate us from the Love of God
which is in Christ Jesus neither height nor depth nor principallities nor
powers neither things present nor things to come shall do it; Death it self
cannot take this love from his beloved ones* no it will but make a way for the
perfecting of that love which here we enjoy but in part.

The love of God is also a tender and compassionate love, the love of friends
wax cold but the love of God shall never be diminished, A mother may forget her
child, but such is the Nature of our Heavenly Father who has engraven his
beloved ones so deeply in his heart that it is impossible they should be
forgotten sometimes he is pleased to correct his dearest Children, but it is as
a dear and loving Father chast^ising whom he loves, sometime he hide^ his face
but it is for a moment that he might remember them in everlasting goodness, he
looked upon us in our low estate when no eye pitied us, then was a time of
Love, then the Lord had compassion on us, and out of his infinite wisd^m found
out a means for the recovery of our Souls, he laid help upon one that was
mighty, even his dear Son, the son of his love; who gave himself a ransom that
he might redeem our souls out of eternal misery; behold with what manner of
love the Father has loved us when we were vile wretches, sinful creatures he
sent his only begotten, who was willing to leave his Glory to invest himself
with misery for the good of Souls, he that sat at the right hand of the
Fathers Glory, he, even the Lord of Glory took upon him the form of a servant.

He became poor for us that we through his poverty might be made rich, and
heirs of the Kingdom of glory, O what was there in us to invite the Lord thus
to love us, it was an act of mercy alone, riches of his Grace bestowed upon us
in Jesus Christ.

O then why do we spend our money for that which is not, why do we spend our
pretions time in catching shadows, and in the mean time let go the substance,
why do we promise our selves good out of vanities, which are nothing but
deceit, and in the mean time deprive our selves of that Soul satisfying comfort
which can only ma^e us happy to all eternity, is God so gracious and is the
riches, of his grace so freely bestowed upon us O then shall we any longer
reject so great a blessedness does Christ stand knocking at the door of our
hearts out of love to our Souls and shall we deny him entrance, shall we
despise his calls.

And those tenders of Grace made in his word, those intreati^s and sweet
i^vitations sent unto us to compel and bring unto him, to bring to life it
self, and so raise us out of the Grave of Sin, wherein we lie and so be made
partakers of that ^^vine nature, and Coheirs with him in the Kingdom of Glory,
and shall we now contine sti^l in our stubborness, and resist wilfuly our Souls
good, shall we whilst Christ woe^ and entreats us in his word and by his spirit
to be reconciled unto God, to lay hold of mercy before it be too late, stop our
ears and ha^den our hearts to our own destruction? he can raise up Children out
of the dust to praise him! it is the love and tender compassion of God toward
us who wills our Sa^vation, and would not that we should perish, but should
live for ever, shall we for the love of a base lust forgo so great a
blessedness, O hardness of heart. blinded and benumbed with Sin, who having any
sense would not melt before beams of divine love* what heart so hard as stone
cannot but be pierced at the considerations of that love which with Christ has
loved us.

In whom is all fullness and will give out his fullness, in such abundance into
thy Soul, as shall make thee for ever happy, who would not joyfully submit to
be under the protection and sol^ Government of such a King, whose ^oke ^s easy,
and whose burden is light, whose ways are pleasant and whose paths drop marrow
and fatness, in whom is all things and who i^ infinitable to supply all wants,
and whatever thou stand in need of Oh consider what a blessed comfort is it
for thy soul to have such a friend, to stand by thee at the great and terrible
day, when the Lord shall pour out the Vials of his wrath rendering vengeance
upon those who have wilfully neglected and made slight of those tenders of love
and mercy, the Lord has so freely offered unto them, who have despised the
means of their salvation.

To my dear Brothers and Sisters, this poor, yet sincere Manuscript of my
truest love, from the serious Meditations of my Soul, out of the blessed Word
of God.
Exhertations never come unseasonable, never are unuseful unto the Sou^ who
delights it self in the ways of God, which my Soul, throu^h Grace has
experienced, and that alone has put me upon this according to the measure,
wherewith the Lord has enabled me, to desire the good and eternal welfare of
the Souls of my dear Brothers and Sisters; and as we are all one in flesh and
blood, oh that it were the will of the Lord that we might be all of one and the
same spirit, sanctified by faith through the blood of Jesus Christ, (and it may
be) as I hope it will (a Sisters counsel) which has experimentally tasted the
wonderful goodness of God, may work yet more upon you through the operation of
his good spirit, therefore suffered me to say it is good to seek the Lord
whilst he may be found to call upon him whilst be is near.

Oh that I could persuade you to lay hold on time, whilst the day lasts, not
to resist the tenders of Grace, when they be offered to you, least they be hid
from your eyes, it is only the infinite wisdom, goodness, and mercy of God,
which only causes him to look upon such sad wretched rebellious creatures as
we are, who could of stones raise up Children to praise him, he has no need of
us nor our services. but the need we had of a Savior, has caused him to look
upon us when no eye pitt^ed us, and in his infinite wisdom found ou^ a means of
deliverance even the dear son of his love, whom he has given to be broken,
bruised, suffer death, and become a curse for poor sinners, that he might
redeem them from the curse of the Law, but this privilege does not belong to
all sinners in general, but to such who by a lively faith, lay hold upon this
crucified Christ, else they who are sinners, will be sinners still they shall
dye in their sins and the wrath of God will be upon them to all Eternity, great
is the misery of a Christless and grac^less soul, being an enemy to God, then
how can God be otherwise then an enemy to it? Oh how can a soul rest in such a
condition as this, what peace can they have.

Does it not then behove every soul to be earnest in searc,hing to find out the
true estate of his soul knowing for a truth (they being the words of our
Savior* that unless a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, till they are regenerated and become new creatures in Christ, putting
off the old man with his deeds and putting on the new man, which is after the
spirit, in righteousness and true ^oliness, and this is all to be done by an
interest in Christ, that so his righteousness may become ours, and all those
privileges of grace and mercy which he has purchased may be imputed to us
through the blood of his Cross, and so by being in Covenant with the Father,
through the Son we shall have all things, Oh what a blessed state is it to be
in Covenant, with the great God of Heaven and Earth! Oh what a depth of Love i^
it, and how great a comfort is it to a poor soul covered over with a leprosy
to see a Ph^sitian not only able but willing to cure him, for a poor lost
creature which sees himself undone, in himself by reason of the vast guilt and
debt which lies upon him, the shame which lies upon his soul by reason thereof.

As not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven when he shall not see only his
debts paid, but also Christ his advocate pleading with the Father in his
behalf, oh here lies the Souls true happiness, and here is a believers comfort,
that Christ died not only for sinners, but for me, a sinner, what is this to
me, or what comfort can it bring me to have a notion as most of the World has,
that Christ died for sinners, and I am one amongst the rest; and therefore I
hope to be saved by Christ, had I no greater evidence for heaven, my condition
would surely be ever miserable, but blessed be God it is otherwise with me, and
certainly if it were not, my soul would be in a very restless condition, oh did
but any of you know what it is to be in a state of Grace, you would surely see
a sweet change you would look over and lament the many precious hours you have
let go in se^king after vanity, and in the mean while lost so much sweetness
and comfort as is to be had in the knowledge of God*ways, which are the things
only delightful, having substance and reality, and can only proffit the Soul,
All other things are mere shaddows; empty husks, which cannon satisfy the
Soul, these things which appear so pleasing to you now, would (when b^ Grace
you come to see the evil of them) be the objects of your hatred; there is
nothing so glori^us, so sweet, and so lovely, as is the Lord Jesus, he is
a^together lovely to a gratiou^ Soul, who has tasted of divine goodness, and
has been refreshed with the sweet streams of his Love, which had you once but
tasted* you would surely see all earthly enjoyments but poor, vain things, and
count them all as nothing, yea worse then nothing in comparrison of that hidden
treasure, that unsearchable riches, which is laid up in the Lord Jesus, and
shall ^e revealed in his Saints, oh that the Lord would incline your hearts to
consider and weigh these things in your mind, which is it better that your
bodies, should for a moment of time enjoy the deceitful pleasures in this
World, then that your immortal Soul^s should enjoy those transcendant and
certain pleasures which shall never fade? those heavenly Mansions of eternal
rest; which those Souls shall find who are in Christ, at the last day and shall
live in the presence of their dear redeemer for ever, where the Soul shall
never find more trouble, but be ever praising the Lo^d, and singing
HAL^LE-LUJAHS to the King of Sain^^, oh how glorious a time will this be, who
is it then, that would not be content (with Balaam) to dye the death of the
righteous, but unless we live the life of the righteous our latter end would
not be so, if Christ be not in us, we are reproba^es, we lie under the heavy
Wrath of an angry God, and as it were dropping into hell every moment, there to
receive the just reward of our doings in eternal destruction from which there
is no redemption, in a Lake which burns with brimstone and fire, and never
goes out, is not assurance better then suspense, is it not good to have
assurance a^ways about us, that when we shall come to render up our Souls at
what timesoever they are required of us, we may have nothing to do but resign
it unto our fathers bosom? Oh presume not in thy own supposed goodness Nothing
but Christ's blood could purchase Redemption, and if by a lively faith thou
can lay hold on him thou shall be made partaker of Christ and his benefits
his righteousness made over to thee.

Then may thou with boldness, thorough Christ, have ^c^e^s unto the throne
of Grace; and, through the Son, enjoy communion with the Father, being related
to God, having him to be thy Father, b^ing a member of Christ, being bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh, the temple of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
God dwelling in you; and is God thy Father then consider who it is is p^eased to
own thee for a child? not a man, no nor the best of men, would you not think it
great honor to be the Son of some Noble Man, much more if you were Son to a
King, is it honor to be Son to an earthly King an will you count it no glory
to be Son to the King of Kings? will you give honor to an earthly King and
will you not honor him by whom Kings Reign? surely if God becomes thy Father
he deserves honor from such a poor wretched creature as thou art? consider the
transcendant love and i^finite wisdom of the great God in calling all out of
the world, if thou belong to him; he will look on thee when thou art in thy
blood when thou art covered over with a Leprosy of sin, and corruption, and no
eye pitied thee, when thou were dead then he says, l^ve ye being an enemy he
reconciled to himself, through the Blood of his own Son, the Son of his love in
whom he was well pleased, in whom he delighted, in whom there was no sin
neither guile found in his Mouth yet this was the infinite unspeakable Love of
God to poor sinners and for our sakes was the Lord of glory willing to come
down out of the Bosom of his Father, into the Circle of corruped earth, to
disrobe himself of his glory, and take upon him sinful flesh, nay, he took upon
him the form of a Servant and ^umbled h^mself unto death, even thae cursed
death of the Cross, that he might exalt thee and purchase for thee a crown of
Glory; what heart is there but a heart of stone that these charractors of Gods
unspeakable Love cannot make impression upon, have you seen the Love of God in
Christ and not been touched with a lively sense of so infinite a mercy; have
you experienced it is any wise and not found the love of Christ to be a
constraining Love? surely, those that have tasted the gracious sweetness of the
Lord, will be filled with a holy admiration, and will have a heart full of
breathings after those Heavenly visions and long for a more entire Communion
with the Father of mercies and the God of Love;

But these seem to be strange things to a carnal Soul, they are not to be seen
with the eyes of flesh but by the eye of faith through the opperation of the
Spirit the holy spirit of God the holy Ghost the comforter which our Savior
promised to send to his disciples and with them the whole elect of God, now did
we but consider the miserableness of our condition by nature, being dead, du^l,
blockish, having no life, or sense at all in any spiritull action, yet that the
Lord should awaken such out of the graves of there sins and reveal the
righteousness of Christ unto them, who can but admire the infinite goodness of
our God, now when this spirit of God works it comes with power, discovering
sin, and teaching the Soul to deny all ungodlyness and sinful lusts, and to
live righteously and soberly in this present evil world, the Soul is convinced
of siin, before of righteousness, Christ came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance, who will seek to a physician that is not sen^able of any
want he have of him, be that thinks himself most secure has the most need of
help, La^dicea said she was rich and full and needed nothing when Christ found
her poor blind and naked and she knew not not her miserable condition being
destitute and wholly wanting,

When we see our selves at a loss, O whether shall we go but unto Christ, who
is infinitely able to save unto the ut^e^most all that by faith come unto him,
let us not despair for God is faithful who has promised and his word shall
stand for ever, let us fly unto the throne of his graee by that new and living
way which he has found out and appointed for the eternal comfort of poor
sinners, even the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, and the Son of his love,
that whosoever truly repents from his heart, and by faith lares hold upon him
shall not perish but have everlasting li^e, O let us admire the infinite
goodness of the lord, and dilligently inquire whether we have ever had this
change, effectual wrought in us or no, have we the sh^mt^mbes of a new born
Soul in us then we shall ^ee what cause we have to magnify the riches of his
grace in calling us from the world unto himself by his holy spirit, that has
not suffered us to lie buried under the ruins of our own sins out of which we
cannot come without the dr^wings of God and the greatness of the mercy will
heighten our praise, when we consider the infinite number of dead Souls on the
right hand and on the left, and yet that the Lord should please in a more
particular manner graciously to look upon us* A Heaven born Soul as new born
babe desires the sincere milk of the word that it may grow thereby, which
being fed upon through the power of the spirit, is able to bring the Soul into
a perfect state in Christ Jesus, who is the word of life and the express image
of his fathers person, A new creature finds in himself a wonderful change,
every faculty of his soul is changed, Christ died to redeem us to himself from
the world from our vain conversations, As well to sanct^fie us as to save us,
that we should live no longer to our selves but to him that has bought us and
purchased to himself a peeular people z^a^ous of Good Works; that he might
reign as a King in our hearts who is the King of righteousenss and who has
commanded us to be holy as he is h^ly; without which there is no seeing of the
face of a holy God; and si^ce it is only Love and new obediance which proceed
from Love that the Lord of Glory has required of us in return of those
unspeakable tok^ns of hi^ Lov^ to us, O what are we or what is our Love that we
should not think all we have two little for so good a God that we should not
willingly render unto the Lord our ALL is nothing at all, what is good is of
the Lord not ours, and his but just that he should have his own; O then let us
not keep back any part of what the Lord has required of us, but let us turn to
him with the whole heart, for it is his by purchase and though he has in mercy
afforded us greater comforts for our use, it is not that our hearts should be
taken up in them but that we might have a Santified use with comfort of them,
that we might use them to his glory who is the giver of all good things; these
has he given to us for to be our Servants to supply our necessity and if we
set a higher price upon them, he can take them from us he has required that we
should set our affectiones on things more noble, on things that will never fade
away, but are of an enduring substance, which if we do in the seeking the
Kingdom of Heaven, he has promised that all things shall be added to us; O
could we but do so, how sweet and comfortable might our lives be, when being
invested in the Robe of our redeemers righteousness, we may through him enjoy
Communion with the Father and live in the assureance of his love, who has said
I will never laave thee or forsake thee, O Blessed promise which if we could
but by faith lay hold upon we need not be dismayed nor fear nor be in care for
any thing but may with blessed David say, the Lord is on my side I will not
fear what Man can do unto me.

Meditations upon hearing the Voice of Christ.
MY Sheep hear my Voice, the Sheep of Christ a^e few, a little flock, and to be
one of these Oh how great a blessing is it? the world is large and full and
that the great JEH^VAH should please to pick out for himself one of a Tribe*
and one of a Family, a small remnan^, a peculiar people, and (thee) ONE, O how
great and gracious is thy wonder working God? It could not be from any thing of
thy desert but from his tender pity his bowels of compassion, to thy poor
sinsick soul, O what can thou render unto the Lord, for all his benefits,
what recompense is there for so much mercy, when all is mercy thou art made
p^rtaker of; y^a thy whole life it is made up of mercy, thou art, through
Grace, O Lord, my gracious God, my tender hearted Father in thy Son, And if
thou please to water this barren g^ound, barren by nature it shall be made a
fruitful garden yea thou can make it bring forth fruit yea much fruit, yea
such fruit, in which thou take delight, in which thou may have glory is
thine own Grace.

And give comfort to this poor unworthy Soul of mine, unworthy in it self but
thou dear Lord have been pleased to favor it with so great evidence of thy
Love, O let me Lord for ever ^^nd, these sweet refreshing showers.

O how sweet a thing it is to sit at Wisdoms Gate, at the footsteps of the
beautiful gate of the Temple of Sions King, there to behold his glory? As a
sheep of Christ to graise upon those Mountains of spices on which the Son of
Righteousness shines, O how glorious art thou in the beauty of holiness, here
indeed is rest and here is comfort, true satisfaction and everlasting felicity.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the King of glory, is pleased to stoop so low to poor
unworthy creatures, and in the condescension of his gracious Love, to take upon
himself the style of a poor shepherd to his people yet is he such a one who
through his grace will teach his sheep to know his voice and follow him, O who
can learn this Lesson, Lord, but such whom thou shall teach therefore, says
David blessed is the man whom thou teaches, and instructest out of thy Law.

A shepherd leads his poor silly sheep, creatures, who of all others have
least to defend themselves, into the green pastures, there to feed securely,
whilst his watchful eye is over them, least Wolf or Bear should rob him of any
one, his care is also for the young and tender Lambs, in cherishing and
preserving them from cold and hunger which they cannot bear.

Such is the care of him, who is thy Shepherd O my soul if thou art one that
hears his voice if thou art one whom he has known, whom he has looked upon in
grace and mercy, and so known as to make thee follow him art not thou one of
his Sheep? O then, with comfort be assured thou shall be fed, thou art enriched
by this with greater treasure and more honor, then if thou were the only child
unto a King, yea then if thou had in thy possession the greate^t treasure in
the world, know he that is thy shepherd is the Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, who does not only know what thou stand in need of and what is fittest
for thee but is willing yea ready to give out of his fullness to supply thy
wants, and help thy necessities, then will I go unto my Rock since he has
brought me to behold his Glory and to taste through Grace, the powerful
influences of Love, My earhly parents were they Kings or Princes could do no
more, but give me life and place to breath in, but Eternal Life and endless
Glory has thy great Kingly shepherd purchased for thee, it is no less then a
Kingdom, has it been the fathers good pleasure, to take his little flock
whilst here into his gracious Custody that none; no not Satan himself that
enemy of Souls, shall ever be able to pluck them out of his hands, Oh let thine
eyes be upon him by whom thou live, that rock and fortress of thy souls
salvation, O what comfort is in his smiles. And it is he can keep thee in his
favor and continuance of his Love, therefore make glad my Soul, O Lord, with
the bright beams of thy most glorious countenance; that so my Soul may live; O
there is bitterness in thy frowns? when thou hidest thy face I am as those that
go down into the pit of utter darkness; O it is thy presence makes things
pleasant to the soul, and only gives it comfort in this world; O it is thy
presence fits us for thy will, and keeps humble, and sincere before thee, life
is a death unto the soul without thee, O that I might no more offend that Grace
by which I live, O Lord take thou my soul* though weak into thy everlasting
Arms, that so I may no more be drawn aside from thy Commandments nor do the
things that may displease thee.

Of heart examination.
O How good a thing it is, my soul, to be often taken up in this blessed work
of self examination; how it does stand between thee and thy Lord, the Lord will
give thee his assistance to help in so great and good a work, if thou will make
thy addresses to him, with blessed David commune with thy own heart and be
still, surely thine is not without evil? when the wise man says the hearts of
the Sons of men are full of evil, yea the Lord himself has declared, Genesis 6.
5. v. and every imagination of the thoughts of Man's heart to be only evil, and
that continually, the heart is deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked and who can know it? says the Prophet Jer. 17 9. v. none but God, he
searches the heart and ^ryeth the reins, Great mistakes through a deceitful
heart, thou may entertain and apply to thy self that comfort which of right
belongs not to thee, a deceitful heart says, often times Peace where no true
peace is, therefore, O how precious is that peace of God that passes
understanding* that only can make the Soul happy* that blessed peace which the
Lord Jesus breathed upon his poor disciples, and left them as a glorious legacy
of precious Love, O my soul, It must be Christ in thee, the hope of Glory, must
be the author of thy comfort and eternal happiness, therefore says the Apostle
by this truth try the truth of your condition, examine your selves, whether ye
be in the faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove your own selves know ye not your own
selves, that Christ be not in you except you are reprobates, a sad and dismal
condition to be rested in, and since it is so needful a thing to be found in
Christ.

O my Soul, how requisite would it be, and how much would it add unto thy
present and eternal comfort to be fully assured in this point of so great
importance, but what should a poor weak creature do, Lord I will cast my self
at thy footstool, O do thou prove me and try me, and suffer me not to rest
under a deceitful heart, make clear this in the way of prayer, meditation, etc.
and to my Soul, that by the spirit speaking peace my soul may be sealed up with
everlasting comfort by which to glorify the riches of thy free Grace for ever.

Meditations of being in Christ.
TO be in Christ is to be a new Creature quickened, inlivened, delivered from
the power of sin and Satan, and the deadness of our sinful natures, to serve
the living Lord, the spirit is given unto those whom he has called by Grace
and taken into Covenant with himself, for he that has not the spirit of Christ
is none of his; and this spirit is holy, humble, gracious, teaching the soul to
know the voice of him that gives it; My sheep her my voice, the Lord knows them
also, for he has given them of his own spirit, and so made them to be
partakers with him of the Divine nature, by which grace the soul comes to be a
follower of Jesus Christ denying ungodliness and sinful lusts.

All these things which are in opposition to so glorious a change, and to be
more in conf^^mity unto our Lord and Savior, who has g^ven of his spirit unto
poor souls that they might be so, n^w the fruits of the spirit is love, joy,
peace, long s^ff^ring, gen^^^^^ss, goodness, faith weakness, tempera^ce,
fu^filled all in that blessed pattern the Lord Jesus, who out of Love to the
poor Soul made himself an example that thou thereby might learn of him
instructions.

Now the righteous Lord loves righteousness; and is graciously pleased to place
a delight in that soul that desires to walk humbly before him, having access
unto the father by the same spirit of Christ living in the soul; by faith
through him to find acceptance at the throne of Grace, and favor in the sight
of the great and holy God, now my soul be earnest in the search, this great
thing ask the assistance of thy great JEHOVAH thy tender loving father who only
can give grace and promises graciously that he will supply the wants of them
that truly seek him, and shall spread their case before him through so rich a
mediator, the Mediator of that new and everlasting Covenant of grace and mercy,
who has said for the comfort of his poor Worm^ here whatsoever ye shall ask
the father in my name* believing it shall be done unto you, O is the Lord so
gracious and have thou so great refuge to run to, why stand thou here gazing?

Meditations of being the Servant of Christ
OH how rich a privilege is it to be a Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ? has
not my Lord been pleased to give me a heart truly to beg this, yea from my soul
to beg that he would cast his yoke upon my neck, that he would accept of me
poor worm to be his servant? O how much more did my soul long to be made a door
keeper in the house of my God then to enjoy the grea^est glories of the world?
O how has my soul longed, yea thirsted after the living Lord, that he would
please to make me one, whom he would honor with the beholding of ^is glory not
desiring greater privilege, O but my Soul now see and above all admire the
gracious condescension or thy glorious God, who has not only answered the poor
request which he did through grace enable thee to breath out before him, but
has abundantly enlarged his bounty, and filled thee with joy, he has filled
the hungry Soul with good things; with the best things, and given thee not only
a sight of his Glory, but, O the abounding Love, the unspeakable goodness, of
thy gracious God an interest in that glory, so that thou can through grace
now say thou art my God, thou art my Lord, so great a privilege to me; thou
know dear Lord, my soul desires to resine it self to thee, make it such as
thou would have it, Lord I am thine, do by me wha^soever seems good in thy
sight, this afternoon the Lord was pleased to bring open home unto my soul the
glorious nature of prayer, through the Ministry of our dear Pastors, from the
12 of Romans to the 12 v. that this prayer is, It is a Saints recreation, A
glorious exercise in which the Soul has access to go through a Media^or,
whereby a Saint may improve his interest daily at the throne of grace, and make
humble confession of our manifold transgression^, to ask things needful for us,
these remain on our part, but to return humble and hearty thanksgivings to the
Lord for all our mercies, herein is the Lord glorified; and O what a comfort
through Grace is it, when we can give thanks, when we can come and return
hearty and humb^e thanks at the throne for all the good we have, and do daily
receive from the bountiful hands of our great JEHOVAH, Lord be thou pleased to
engrave this upon the heart of thy poor servant.

Meditations on the 11th of Luke 19. Of a new heart.
And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you, and I
will take the stony heart out of the flesh and will give them a heart of flesh.
WHo is the giver of this new heart even the Lord of Glory, what is this new
heart, it is a pure, single, upright, sincere heart, why does the Lord in the
conversion of a Soul, give him a new heart, because it is the heart; that he
requires in duties the sincerity of the soul to walk before him in Love; this
cannot an old base carnal heart do, until it be renewed, an humble soul goes
with a regenerated Soul, the Lord will give more grace unto the humble (but
pride the Lord resists.

Oh give thy poor unworthy one more grace and keep my soul humble under the
sense and feeling of thy gracious Love, so shall I Lord still praise thee and
whilst I live extol the riches of thy grace, O to enjoy this sweet communion
with thy glorious self.

Dear Lord this is more delightful and more precious to me then to enjoy the
greatest treasures upon e^rth, how precious is the Lord unto my soul? These are
the excellencies and the glorious privilege of a regenerate soul, a new
creature, whose heart is changed, through the gracious opperation of the holy
spirit, the whole nature is changed the glorious Image of the Lord Jesus is
r^newed on it, it is made an heir of Heaven, a temp^e of the Holy Ghost, a
member of Christ.

Of thirsting after assurance of Heaven*
BLessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be
filled, they shall be made to drink deep of the wells of Salvation, they shall
be filled in the mansions of eternal glory, when others shall be deprived of
the least crum of comfort it is he that seeks, shall find, and he that knocks
shall have the door opened unto him, seek ye first the kingdom of Heaven, and
the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you, things
of this life are but additional acts of his bounty,

The great and prime part of a Christians work, is to make sure of Heaven and
his e^ernall happyness hereafter, O great is that goodness of the Lord, how
abundant his compassion, his love to poor sinful man, who would not have them
set their hearts on such poor low things, as only this world affords; but a
Kingdom of glory, yea an everlasting Kingdom, that shall never fade, a kingdom
in which dwells righteousness, the righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, no
less then these things would the Lord have his poor people covet after, the
rest are but things less material, and shall be given over and above, these
things shall be added to you, O wonderful goodness.

Such great and glorious privileges, such promises, such additional comforts,
Oh what is man that thou should be so mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou should thus delight to do him good, Oh my soul this is the Lords
doings, it is the great JEHOVAH, is thus pleased to stoop and condescend on
terms of mercy, to take poor sinful souls into his favor, I, and he wills,
nothing less to them then an eternal weight of Glory, and is not this worth
seeking after, O sure it is to that soul, who has had a taste of what it is,
su:e heavenly treasures far exceed all earthly vanities, then surely in
proportion to the goodness of them, should the desire of the ^oul be let out
after them, Therefore, O let thy affections be set on heavenly things, since it
is the goodness of the Lord to thee that thou might ^ast that he is
gracious, that thou should by sweet experiences find him to be faithful in
whatsoever he has promised for good unto thy soul, thy poor immortal soul,
which without his grace had perished to all eternity, O it is for good to thee,
the Lord has thus commanded thee to seek that everlasting Kingdom, O it is thy
soul will be the gainer, and thou, through grace shall one day find it so.

O remember my Soul, thy Covenant with God in the day of thy espousal, then
when it was the time of love, when he was pleased to put thee in the clefts of
the rock Christ Jesus, and then to cause his g^ory to p^s^ before thee, to make
with thee an everlasting Covenant, settled and sure; that in the
unchangeableness of his Grace shall stand for ever, were thou but all ways in
the contemplations of these heavenly joys thy heart could find no time to
place it self on such mean things as this poor world affords, to be rich in
Grace, and to be heirs of Glory, O how much better is it then to be encumbered
with the things below, to have Communion with God, and to joy in the presence
of thy King, is far better then to be in favor with the greatest Princes upon
Earth, oh let my soul, dear father, live daily in the rich experience of this
blessed truth more and more, whilst my abode is here, oh let me find the daily
quickening of thy gracious spirit, to enjoy thy presence is to live in Heaven
whilst here, oh t^s thy self that makes the passage sweet to Glory, oh it is the
cords of thy Love, that makes the soul to run with hungrings and breathings
after thee, that makes it love thy precepts more then its daily food, thus thou
have made me through thy grace experimentally to taste, O then hide not thy
face, dear Lord, from my soul; The Loves wherewith thou have delighted my soul,
goes beyond all earthly glories; oh in the sense of this let my soul walk
before my God in its integrity, yea for this will I go unto my God and Father
for daily supplies since he it is that gives liberally.

Meditations of Death.
IS death a terror to a g^atious Soul? what is there in it can affright thee,
when as the sting is gone, let it put on its worse ill shapen dress it can, it
shall produce no harm unto thee.

Death shall but ^elease thee from a wretched world of misery, and prefer thee
to a glorious Crown of blessedness the one will make thee everlasting
miserable, the other eternally happy in the fruition of the fathers Love in the
full, free, and perfect enjoyment of his glorious presence unto all eternity,
oh then how happy how blessed a thing it is to be dissolved and be with Christ,
where sin shall no more haunt thee, here, poor soul, thou can not choose but
see thy self daily involved with sin, followed with corruptions one of the
worst of sinners; and in that thy shame should pull thee down into the dust,
and make thee daily mourn in the abhorrency of thy vile self, since it is a God
of so much Love that thou do daily sin against, oh wretched Soul may thou
cry out who shall deliver thee from this body of death.

Yet O my soul take comfort in a dying Lord and glory in the strength of him,
who is the God of thy salvation; O let his strength be magnified in thy
weakness, and the riches of his grace appear more glorious in the saving of
such a one, thou well may say thou art the worst of sinners, and yet through
grace thou can say thou do abhor sin, do thou delight in it, no, it is thy
burden and since it is so, take comfort.

In the remembrance of him who sweetly says, come unto me, he has taken out
the sting, and is become thine advocate, yea, and will plead thy cause, through
his own merit, and everlasting Righteousness, in which through free grace, and
infinite mercy he will present thee spotless before the throne of that Heavenly
Grace;

But since, O Lord, it is thy Childrens priveledge not to sin sure it is our duty
to be looking up to thee for new supply of strength to be kept daily in thy
fear O how blessed is the Soul whom thou shall keep, and ^each out of thy law?
whom thou shall feed with the pleasant fruits of Righteousness, and cause to
rest under thy shadow with much delight, sure here alone is pleasure and
everlasting peace; to feed with the flocks of Christ and to lie down in those
pleasant pastures of eternal comfort, where Christ the beloved of thy soul
shall preserve thee unto all eternity;

Of Communion of Saints.
O my Soul, what a mercy is it to go into the presence of the Lord in the
Congregation of his people, to enjoy Communion with thy God in the assembly of
his Saints.

YEt if it be his pleasure, by a just cause to keep thee back; yet have thou
cause to hless him for ever for Jesus Chrsst that rich mercy, that unspeakable
goodness, and for that word wherein he is received unto thee, O my soul through
the Spirit of that infinite grace, here may thou sollace thy self in divine
Loves, and fill thy self with joy, have thou but faith, then may thy joy be
full, in Meditating of his gracious Attributes; he is the Lord God All Mighty,
but if not so to thee, what avails thee could not thou say, through grace,
this it my Lord, this great God is my Father, how miserable would thy condition
be to have this God to be thy enemy, though thou were full of what this world
could give thee, of highest enjoyment yet shall thou be for ever miserable; but
thy God is a merciful God, O it is good for thee that he is so, he is a God
whose Glory is his Goodness; and his goodness is his glory; a God who is still*
the same and changes not, man may be said in all he does or says to be but
vanity as a thing from himself, he being but a finite Creature, but who shall
gain say the great and everlasting God, whose power is in and from himself, he
is in deed a faithful God, a God that keeps Covenant with those whom he
through grace, has taken into Covenant with him self;

Meditations of the unchangeable Love of God,
THen, O my soul, is the Lord unchangeable, is he still the same, and will be
so, O then re^oyce in the rich mercies of thy everlasting God; here is comfort
for thee in your assureance of his love unto the end, ^ have made an
everlasting covenant with the house of Jacob, and if thou be of the seed of
Jacob, this promise sure belongs to thee, Jesus Christ in Testates thee in this
new covenant, who has once for all offered up himself a Sacrifice, the
everlasting satisfaction of divine justice, for those whom by the Lords
gracious determinate will should have an intrest in this rich redemption, O
rich ind^ed, being purchased (not with corruptable things) but with the
pretions blood of Jesus Christ, that lamb of God without spot, or blemish, it is
want of faith, poor soul, makes thee doub^ful though thou manifest; as to thy
self, condemn thy self as one unworthy, to hope for the least mercy, much less
to believe such rich privileges belong to thee yet considering; my soul (for
to thee I write) thou art commanded to believe and without faith it is
impossible to please God, and the Lord is thus wonderfully pleased in the great
condescension of his gracious Love, to take it as a glory done to him from a
poor creature, though the good of believeing is to us, the glory of the act
unto the Lord, who gives the power to any poor creature to believe, so to
believe as to see so great a Salvation; in so believeing, how can the soul but
stand in admirations and glorify the riches of that grace, which caused, the
great JEHOVAH to look upon so poor a worm, with such a Love, Behold with what
manner, of Love the Father has loved us, that we, even we, might become the
children of God heirs with and in Christ Jesus of an eternal inheritance
incorruptable and full of glory; and that thou may be filled with joy in
these thy sweetest contemplations; has not the Lord then pleased, sometimes to
evidence his gracious love, to thee in Christ Jesus and therein seek thee by
his gracious word, with that holy Spirit, of promise to be thy God and Father?

O he is the same God still, and if he loved thee, it was with an everlasting
Love, if he has taken thee into covenant with himself, it was to be thy G^d
for ever, have thou h^d this saving grace made sure to thee, fear not, but that
the Lord not only can but will preserve his own, he will ass^^edly fu^fill and
^erefect that good work he has begun in thee; was one drop of Christ's Blood
^^^d in vain^ was it not of power sufficient to accomplish the end, for which
it was shed even the bringing many Sons to glory; surely the Lord shall not
come short of what he has designed, the Divil may strive to pluck thee from
thy God, but remember that g^atuus lord of thy redeemer unto his Sheep, that
hear his blessed voice and follow him; I give unto the eternal life, and they
shall never peris^, whom the Lord has owned, neither shall any man pluck them
out of m^ hands: O what a gracious privilege is here, thus to be kept by an
Almighty power, the power of that great God, out of whose hand, no man, nay
Satan, nor any of his Instruments, can ever be able to pluck thee; Christ has
purchased an everlasting redemp^ion and to those who are in him, there is no
condemnation; O blessed, and for ever blessed be the Lord; for this sweet
truth, and f^r the evid^ncing of it in some measure to my poor unworthy soul; O
how good a God is our God, who has not only stored up such rich mercies for
poor worthless ones, but is also please to leave it on record and wills that
his poor creatures should be made happy in the know^edge of this their eternal
happiness, O then, my soul, take comfort in those bleeding wounds of thy sweet
Savior; yet be thou humbled for it was thy sins that pierced his tender side,
he knew no sin, yet for thy sake became sin to bear thy punishments thou wast
his enemy, yet he could dye for thee, to reconcile thee to himself; when thou
wast in thy blood, a loathsome creature, then pity moved him, to show
compassion to thee, that thou might live, he loves thee first, that thou
should then Love him; it is not thy flesh makes thee accepted but thy Savior;
thou art still a soathsome lump of filthyness; but by that comeliness which
Christ has put upon thee thou art accepted through an intrest in him, thou
shall be beautiful in the sight of thy Lord and Father; this is O soul thy
privilege, renew thy intrest by thy daily approach and acting faith upon those
glorious objects; let Christ be all in all to thee that thou having nothing in
thy self might see thy ALL in him and fetch thine ALL from him; O blessed be
that fountain in whom all fullness, yea everlasting fullness dwells?

Meditations on the 11th Chapter of Matthew verse 28, 29, 30.
See here (O Soul) the precious invitations of a glorious Christ.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden and I will give you rest,
etc.
WHo is it the Lord invites, is it not poor distressed sinners, O it is such he
calls to taste his mercies lo, every one that thirsts come, and come freely
these tenders of my Love, these are the tenders of Love, the Soul satisfying
comforts, come unto me, bring hither thy wearied soul though laden with
iniquities I will give thee rest, cast thy burden upon me? O merciful Redeemer
that art thus pleased for the good of man to bear the burden of our sins,
those loads of Iniquities, which we should have sunk under in wrath, to all
Erernity.

But since the Lord has in his wisdom, in his goodness, in the abundant riches
of his Grace, been pleased to be the sinners friend, O let it be of great use
unto my soul who am the greatest of sinners it is thou who see my wearyed
tired Soul.

O blessed be thy holy Name, for the riches of this grace, thy unspeakable Love
that wilt not despise the poorest nor unworthy soul that nee^s thy help,
although they cannot crave it, nor dare not lift up their eyes unto the Throne
of thy Grace, yet will thou be gracious unto whom thou will be gracious, and
because thy tender comp^ssions fail not, therefore thou art pleased to have
mercy upon me, a poor wretched creature, ah to thy name be glory and let my
soul dear Lord for ever live thy praise, for thou alone can work that frame
upon my heart, that only pleases thee, O it is into thy gracious hands I would
commit my soul, work in it Lord thy will, since I am thine through grace, O let
me live no longer to my self, for thou art my strength by which work O Lord in
me such a child like frame of spirit, as becomes thine, to yield thee in true
obedience with holy fear, O let the Image of my Lord be formed in me, that so
in his light I may see light, that I may be filled with joy, and comfort and
may have something to su^port me in an evil day, a day of trial and temptation,
My soul, O meditate upon the unbounded love of God in Christ thy Lord, and the
Lord in the abundant riches of his Grace in ab^e thee with a sincere heart and
sound judgment to apply these sweet soul experienced comforts and relishes of
Love, wherewith thou have, through grace been comforted often, and since prayer
and Meditations is the way to make safe the soul; when Satan with his subtle
Engines seeks to batter; Lord let him not prevail but let thy grace be now
sufficient for me, and now my soul taste here, feed upon the sweetness of this
call, Come unto me, it may be thou have said thy sins are many and thou dare
not come, an but consider who it is that calls thee is it not Christ thy Lord,
yet he commands thee because thy sins are many and thou art troubled with the
weight of them, therefore come, leave not thy sins behind thee, for that thou
can not do, but bring them to the feet of Christ thy Savior, he in his grace
will ease the burden wherewith thy soul was laden and give thee a blessed
exchange, even his own righteousness imputed to thee, so have thou found a
righteousness in him, made thine by which being clothed, thou have access unto
the Throne of Grace, and shall find favor with thy God, yea the Lord will be
thine everlasting Righteousness and though thou art polluted and defiled with
sin and corruption, yet in Righteousness were thou called, and Christ will
cloth thy naked Soul with his Righteousness, a garment without spot or
blemish, O come and come daily at his call, give no time to Satan to cast it in
thy Teeth that thou shall one day perish through the mul^itude of thine
iniquities, for Christ is mighty and of power to save unto the utmost, and
though thou can see nothing in thy self but that which might bring eternal
wrath upon thy head every moment yet here is thy comfort in that he has
accepted thee in the beloved, for whose sake he can deny thee nothing and
therefore O Lord to thee be Glory for ever, who in thy love and tender
compassion to my poor Soul have delivered it from the pit of corruption.

For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back, O that my Soul made living by
thy Grace might ever praise thee; who is it calls me, O my Soul; behold the
Lamb of God made Man to take away the sins of the World, Christ Jesus the
eternal Son of God dis-throned himself to be a Savior, of poor sinful Man,
lost and undone Man, for whom there was no way of Redemption, but by him, and
by him alone, O here is love indeed; Behold I come says he to do thy will O God
he was willing to come from heaven to earth from Glory to be clothed with
flesh, the garment of sinful man and all that thou may be clothed with
Glory, immortality eternal life, Behold O my Soul and be filled with holy
admiration, with what manner of Love the father has loved us, that so we
should, we sinners be called the Children of the great and Holy God; a God who
inhabitest eternity, whose dwelling is in the highest heavens, who is the King
of Glory, and being come to call poor sinners co repentance through the eternal
wisdom of the father perfected redemption by taking our natures upon him, he
who knew no sin became sin for us, that we should be made in him partakers of
the Righteousness, which is by faith in his blood, he has paid thy debts and
cancelled thy bonds, he is become thy surety, and has broken down that
pertition wall which was between thee and thy fathers Glory, has made a way
that new and living way, through his own blood to approach the Throne of Grace,
and is there now making intercession for thee, O blessed is that Soul whose
iniquities thou have covered and whose sin thou have pardoned; and blessed be
that Soul to whom thou (in grace) shall be pleased to impute no sin, for how
great O Lord are our daily sinnings against thee, the least of which were
enough to separate this poor immortal Soul of mine for ever from thy gracious
presence, but it is thy grace which makes thy unworthy creature hope, and the
unchangeableness of thy most glorious will? O therefore it is such poor
unworthy sinful creatures were not long ago consumed, O blessed be God for thy
grace and thy long suffering, mercy whereby thou bear and have pity on thy
poor redeemed ones; O then my Soul fly thou unto the Throne of Grace.

Loose not so great an opportunity of coming to thy Savior, refuse not so
great love tendered unto thee, the bearing so great a burden, the weight of
which would sink thee down into the bottomless pit of eternal perdition, under
the heavy wrath of God, there to have perished to all eternity; O the
unfathomed and transcendant love of thy God and Heavenly Father? O my Soul, how
can thou read and not live ever in the meditations of such great and glorious
Love, as this where with the Lord has loved thee, he was content to give
himself a ransom unto death to satisfy the Justice of his Father, and to
regain that favor for thee, which thou by sin had lost, he was content not
only to forsake the bosom of his father to empty himself of all his glory; but
to come down upon this sinful earth, he who was the glory of the whole world,
was content to confine himself in a Virgins Womb, he who had possession of the
utmost parts of the earth was now content with a poor lodging in a stable, he
who is a King of Glory was p^eased to take upon him the form and habit of a
servant, and all for thee, he was content to be come poor and low that thou
through his poverty might become rich, he who with one blast of his Nostrils
could have consumed at once his enemies was now content to be scourged,
buffeted, spit upon, crowned with Thorns, and all this to purchase life for
sinners, he who was equal with God, the express image of his fathers person, he
the Son of God, the dearly beloved of his Soul, was sweetly content to bear the
scoffs and base reproaches of sinful ma^e and prayed for them, Father forgive
them for they know not what they do, this the Lord Jesus was pleased to undergo
for thee, nor is this all, but O those bloody sweats which run down his tender
cheeks for thy hard heart, those terrible agonies of Soul he felt having the
whole wrath of God due unto thee* and the world of sinners poured forth upon
himself, being smitten as with the strokes of an enemy, which made him cry out,
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, these are the gracious evidences of
the Love of God to these poor sinful Souls and thus hateful is sin in the eyes
of a holy God, as not to spare it in his dear and only Son, who never sinned
but in that he took upon him our sins, he must also bear our punishment; he
himself bear our iniquities in his own body, upon the tree, he became a curse
for thee, to redeem thee, from the curse of the Law, this was the love of thy
Savior, O behold the Love of thy Redeemer how powerful and constraining is
this Love, was ever any Love like this? Hardly shall we see a Man lay down his
Life, for us when we were enemies, to be buried in a Grave that with him thy
sins might be buried in everlasting forgetfulness, he rose again that in him
thou might be glorified, and to prepare a place for thee in endless Glory,
where he is now at the right hand of God making intercession for thee, who
would not have an Interest in this Christ, who would not be in union with this
Savior, O Soul taste and behold the goodness of this Lord in whom it has
pleased the Father all fullness should dwell, Oh the sweet constraining power of
his transcendant Love, who loved thee when thou were miserable to make thee
happy, O who would not fear thee, O thou King of Na^ions, and now what has thy
glorified Redeemer, thy Lord required of thee for all his love to thee he
caused thee to cast thy burden upon him, when weary and heavy laden, and
imposes nothing upon thee, but a sweet and easy yoke, take my yoke upon you;
be intressed in my Love, what is this yoke but a sweet complacency of love in
uniting of the parties loving, Soul, says the Lord of Lords give me thy sins,
and take my self, to be thy Savior, take my yoke on thy neck, that so thou
may become in union with me, thou may become mine and I thine; as my
tender Spouse? Lord, what are we poor empty sinful creatures that thou shou
dest thus condescend, to woe, invite entreat, such poor despicable creatures,
who might command us by thy power to do whatever pleases thee.

O were it not the infinite goodness of our God to poor sinful man, thou
might have, left us to have perished in our iniquities, and raised up
children of the stones to praise thee, O sweet condescending love for us to be
yoked in your affections unto thee and from enemies become thus thy friends; to
receive the yoke of Christ it is to receive the love and commands of Christ and
be united as a branch unto the vine by which thou do enjoy true Spiritual
communion with thy God; what happiness like this? how great and many are the
privileges that come by him; O blessed be God for this love, and the eternal
riches of his grace in effecting and calling thee to so great an eternal weight
of glory, O had it not been through free grace what benefit could thou have
had of this most glorious redemption by Jesus Christ? what power could thou
have had to come and cast thy self at his feet under the weight of thy sins it
was free grace that led the out, to see thine own insufficency, unto any thing
that was good, and thy miserable condition without a Christ, O was it not free
grace and mercy by which the Lord was pleased to draw thereby the cords of
love, unto the Lord Jesus by whom a lone thou have redemption; O what hadest
thou been and what had been thy life had it not been for this sweet crown of
all thy comforts; therefore O Lord to thee be glory for the riches of thy
grace, by which my soul is yet alive to praise thee; and blessed be thy mercy,
for it is great to me poor miserable sinner, what are the privileges thou
injoyest through this sweet union with thy Savior; O surely they are enough to
make rhee live for ever in the meditations of them, who can fathom that
bottomless Ocean? O how can thou comprehend that which is in comprehensible;
this love which passes understanding, into which the more thou searchest the
more thou admirest, O what can thou say, but be filled with holy admiration,
to behold with what manner of Love the Father, the omnipotent King of Kings,
and the eternal Lord who reigns in endless Glory has loved thee,

Meditations on the great mystery of Godliness.
O how great is the mystery of Godliness, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

HOw wonderful excellent, of how great concern, to know him aright? Help thou
my Soul d^ar Lord to meditate on this sw^^^ incomprehensible subject, O fill it
with this Rich and Heavenly Treasure; O let me not only know, but sollace my
self in the fountain of this Eternal comfort, did it not please the father out
of infinite love and pity to poor lost and undone wretc^es to find out a way
for their Redemption, not by the blood of Bulls and Goats, whereby a yearly
atonement was Typically made for the appeasing of his Wrath, no but a full and
satisfactory Redemption by the precious blood of Jesus Christ as of a Lamb
without blemish, now what was this Lamb but a divine brance of Glory, equal
with the Father, the dear son of his Love, for whom it was his gracious
pleasure to provide a body, for a sacrifice that thereby poor man who had lost
himself by disobedience in a sinful body of death might in the obedience of
Jesus Christ, in his body, and blood, and through his merrits find everlasting
life, such was the love and pity of the great and holy God there being no
other way for our restoration, but to part with the dearly beloved of his soul,
and to bring him under his severest anger, ^^ he paid to Justice the ulmost
farthing, and such was the gracious pleasure of our dear Redeemer who was
content it should be so, Lo^^ (...) to ^^ thy will O God, O matchless goodn^ss?
methinks I s^e the heart and affection of my dear Redeemer in this work putting
the father in mind of his determinate will, sacrifice and burnt offerings thou
would no^, but a body have thou prepared or fitted me, then said I, lo I
come, In the volumn of this look is is written of me, to do thy will, O God, in
sacrifices and burnt offerings for sin thou had no pleasure but Lord thou
have spoken of me and fitted me for the full and complete satisfaction to ^hy
Justice, and here I am, lo I come to do thy will, O my God I am ready to give
my self a ransom, for the good of poor Souls, Poor Soul see what matter here
is then of comfort in the application of this great transcendent love unto thy
self, it was not thy desents but his great mercy made him own thee.

O this constraining love, let it work more upon thy heart to draw thy will to
his, he came to do and was obedient to his fathers will for thee, and will thou
not be subject unto him, that has done so much for thee?

Now the work for which Jesus Christ came into the world was to save sinners
such as by faith lay hold upon him for Eternal life God was pleased to make man
in his first Creation in a perfect state of Innocence gave him power in his own
hands either to stand or fall, but poor man that would be wise, yea wiser then
God himself soon lost hi^ happiness for one poor temptation.

So having broken the Law, lies liable to the curse of it, to all eternity, it
being my possible that a finite creature, should ever be able to make
restitution to an infinite God, by keeping that Law, that Righteous law, that
pure law, which in one very thought is broken; the Lord therefore seeing the
sad condition of poor fallen man, being under the curse of the Law, and wholly
unable to make the least satisfaction to Divine Justice, was infinitely pleased
in Grace and Me^cy to look with pity on them, and to find out this way the
only way for their deliverance, so he was pleased to lay help upon one that was
mighty, and infinitely able to save unto the utmost, those that come unto him,
Christ then by his sufferings and obedience has finished the work his Father
gave him to do, h^ has paid the uttermost farthing his Fathers Justice can
demand, he has answered the Law in taking upon himself the curse of the law,
so that he was made not only sin for us, but the curse also, but Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, in being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.
13. v. Thus has the Lord Jesus Christ regained Eternal Life, which man had
lost and to him has the Father given this eternal life.

Even unto the Son, whom he has made heir of all things and it is by having a
propriety in Christ, this life is to be had, it is he that has the son has
life, this life eternal, and he that has not the son has not life, 1 John 5.
12. v.

Of the excellency of the knowledge of the mystery of Christ.
O What wonderful sweetness is there in this knowledge; what Divine excellency
is in it, what does this import to me unless I know him to be mine? this is the
knowledge of him which brings eternal life, when I can through grace, have the
witness of this in my Soul, and that the father has been pleased in his
infinite grace to give me unto Christ, as one for whom he has shed his blood
and taken into Covenant with himself.

Poor Soul wha^ a mercy is it to come to the knowledge of what the Lord Jesus
is; and what he has done for poor sinful Man, this little comfort till thou
know what he has done for thee, it is the particular application of it to
thy self that makes thee happy, since thou art one whom he is pleased in
infinite grace and mercy to make choice of, and thus to set his Soul upon thee.
Thou might have heard of Christ and yet have perished to all eternity, it
would have been small comfort for thee when in a storm ready to be beaten in
pieces with the waves, though thou did see a ship afar off sai^ing from thee
what good would the ^ight of that do thee? but it is those whom the Lord is
pleased to take and shut into the Ark Christ Jesus that are secure, that are
preserved from the storms and tempests, even unto eternal life; O live still in
his favor. by paying thy vows to thy dear Redeemer, grieve not the holy spirit
of his Grace, by which he has thee unto the day of Redemption, O consider him
not only given of the Lord as Priest; but also as King, and Prophet, the Lord
give thee a heart to own him in his Kingly Office, and help thee by meditation
to apply thy Soul in faith unto his sovereign power; and has the Lord redeemed
thee, poor Soul look up and see thy happiness thy debt is paid and thou art set
at liberty.

God enjoyed in mercies.
HOw sweet and comfortable is it to sit at mercies Gate, and be fed by the
bountiful hand of Graces, Charity, those who are full of employments bless
themselves in abundant of what they possess, forgetting the God of mercies,
from whence they slow, but those who receive their mercies daily from the Lord
they are truly sweet to that Soul, that sees how its whole life depends on
mercy, and every thing it has or can in joy comes all from mercy, this is
sweet to it and the soul thus sensible of mercy will be serious in praises.

Then Lord if mercies be so sweet,
let me beg mercies still,
Oh let the Channels of thy Love,
run free my Soul to fill,
Oh le^ the bounty of thy Love
each day my Soul secure,
And let dear Lord, thy mercies sweet.
to me poor worm endure,
So shall I taste with much delight
thy blessings which are sure,
In them O Lord would I rejoice
as coming from the hand,
Of my dear Lord, and Sovereign,
who does all things command,
Let not the fullness fill my heart
with pleasure and delight,
And take away my serious thoughts
from praising thee aright.
O rather let me be in want
then filled with loathsome Pride,
That will the Soul securely blind,
and sweetened mercies hide,
O let it be thy mercies still
that I through grace may sing,
A song of praise to my Lord,
from whence all mercies spring.
Of self insufficiency.
HOw apt is the foolish heart of man to be puffed up with strong conceits of
its own abilities and think it self, something when indeed it is nothing, O a
monstrous piece of deceit, therefore the Lord in his infinite wisdom suffers
Souls to wander a little and so discovers the hearts deceitfulness, that so
poor creatures might go more out of themselves, and see their own in abilities
to any good, and that they have nothing to depend on but the sure mercies of
Jesus Christ have I not said with David, surely I shall never be m^ved, these
sweet experiences of mercy and constraining love has so engaged my Soul to
walk uprightly before God, but I see there is no strength in me, nor am I able
to do any thing without fresh supplies of strengthening grace from thee*
therefore dear father be not far from helping thy poor worm that cries for
succor from thee, shall I ever give the reigns of my heart, to run after the
foolish pleasures of the world?

No not in the least, there is a snare, and Satan lurking to deceive,
therefore, O Soul, be watchful, and despise them all as things unworthy of thy
love, why they are vain and foolish, but increase thou still after that greater
good, that Souls enamouring sweetness, consisting in eternal pleasu^es, in the
most glorious Mansions of heaven, where are celestial treasures and
transcendant comforts.

Lord keep my heart from fooiish vanity,
And let my Soul feed ever upon thee,
O let my joys and comforts once again,
Quicken my Soul and there through grace remain
O let the glory of thy grace appear,
To joy my Soul and to suppress my fear;
In sight of precious Christ my Savior dear,
Then shall I never have more cause of fear;
Yet it is too great a privilege for me
I have deserved naught but shame from thee,
Should thou be just ^o mark what is amis^
There Is nothing Lord of good dwells in my flesh,
It Is at thy gracious footstool I would lie;
To plead for mercy without which I dye.
Of Worldly Honor.
HOw poor a thing is worldly honor yet how it is hunted as if that were the
chiefeli good, as if the only way to make them happy were to have respect and
honor from this foolish vain World, poor Soul why are we so deceived with vain
shadows, whilst letting go the substance, that Soul is truly honourab^e which
is truly gra^ious.

O how much better is it to be blessed with the least smile of Christ, then to
be made empress of the whole world, man being in true honor understands not,
abides not but is like the beast that perishes, soon forgetting his Maker,
and from whence he is taken, not willing to remember that he is dust and
thither he must ^eturn, his heart is taken up with other things, how to exceed
in state, in richness of attire, in gallant speeches yea is there not too many
who would thing it most honorable to be most vicious, O how my Soul bleeds for
their desperate blindness!

O why will you thus rebel, and cause the Lord to pour forth the Vials of his
Wrath upon your heads, who thus profane that holy and blessed name of the
eternal glorious Majesty at whose presence Angels cover their faces and at
whose voice the earth shook, O what a Monster is sinful man, whilst in the
state of Nature.

But now poor Soul go not too far in searching others ways; Keep more at home
unvail thy sad deceitful heart, thou have cause enough to lament and sadly
bewail thy own miscarriages. Is there not still rebel^ion, harbors in thy
breast? O too too much, many for rebelling against an earthly Prince go not
unpunished, but from whom do thou revolt but from thy dear and loving father
a tender hearted God who through riches of Grace looked upon thee, had mercy on
thee, and owned thee in his dear Son, the Son of his love* what punishment
m^yest thou not be thought worthy of, that should grieve the spirit of God,
who has abounded thus in love and mercy unto thee, Ah wretched soul, when he
has hid it from thousands of others.

Surely had but the Lord been pleased to cause one of the least glimps of Glory
to shine upon several of their rejected Souls, they had exceeded thee in
holiness of life, sincerity of heart, and all humble obedience, they would not
have had those daily fail^ngs thou art attended with, had but they tasted of
that heavenly banquet that soul enriching treasure which is laid up in an
eternity of Glory, would they not more thirst and long? O could they be
satisfied without being swallowed up in Glory, without that immediate
possession that faith gives, Heb. 11. 1. v. Would they see any thing to take
delight in, in this World below Christ, would they not set the Lord ever before
them, and desire to be ever with him, but what art thou, and how far come
thou short in every duty, but O my Lord in thee is my hope, here is my comfort
still, for what am I without supports and supplies from thee, I had fainted
long ago had not thou by special grace upheld me, and given in comforts from
thy self.

Sure Lord it was from free love, and thou have said thy love in^ures for ever,
thou art God and therefore changes not, O therefore it is that I was not
consumed long ago, and since thy Grace dear Lord is still the same. O let my
Soul for ever trust in thee, till thou shall please to free me from this body
of death, in which I cannot serve thee without sin, for when I would do good,
evil is present before me, O but blessed be the Lord that there is a
deliverance wrought and that by Jesus Christ, and that in him I am not left
without this blessed hope, which being revealed in due time, I shall be
released and enter into my fathers joy, O Heavenly joy indeed, where thou shall
be for ever happy, in the most glorious presence of thy Lord from whence
nothing shall part thee, and where thou shall never sin more, but be for ever
singing HAL-LELUJAH'S to his holy Glorious Name, for this then will I wait, but
Lord grant me help from us above to run with patience that race which thou have
Lord appointed me to run, with perseverance in true Godliness unto the end.

That when any B^ridegroom comes
I may be dressed,
With him to go unto that
Marriage Feast;
And being fitly trimmed
may meet my Dear,
And gracious Lord
where I shall never fear,
More to displease him,
but delighted be,
In fresh Communion
to Eternity;
O blessed Lord how have
thou sweetened grace,
In making me to behold
thy Heavenly face,
How beautiful do thou
appear to thine,
On whom thou make
thy glorious face to shine;
Inflame my heart Lord
with more heavenly fire,
And fill my heart with love
more to aspire,
Through grace dear Lord
thou have made love to me,
More sweet and pleasant
then all Wines can be,
By sweetness blessed
and put in gracious store,
Given to those poor Souls
which will implore,
Thy Heavenly blessings
O let thy love then fill,
M^ Soul with Songs
of praises to thee still,
If drops of love
thus pleasant are to thee,
What will the Ocean
in thy presence be.
But I have tasted the abundant goodness of my God therefore shall my Soul
trust in thee, and though my sins are many, yet thy love is unchangeable, O
blessed be thou, O Lord, and blessed in thy everlasting love, by which thou
were pleased to look upon so poor and base a creature, and cloth her naked
soul.

(When new born by grace, in Eternal Wisdom) with that most glorious robe of
Righteousness, through which to afford it so glorious a privilege as to come
into thy presence, even I a poor worm and to plead with the great and holy, O
infinite and transcendant love of the eternal glorious God? to poor sinful Dust
and Ashes?

And now what has the Lord required in return of this his great and tender
love, by which he has broken thy bands, but love for love again, can thou
not love the Lord with all thy heart that thus has loved thee, What love,
Lord, was ever like that of thine to me and shall it be for gotten?

O shall my stupid heart forget what Christ has done for me? O let it be more
deeply engraven in my Soul?

But now my Soul should we examine how far thou have gone in thy Masters work
he has committed to thee, how far short do thou come of doing what thou
were commanded, yet through grace, my Soul desires to be found faithful in the
talent thou Lord have in mercy committed to my trust, and nothing more has my
soul desired then to be made conformable to thy blessed will in all things,
what is thy will O Lord, let my will be wholly assenting thereto, thou art he
who know what is best for me, O how sweet and how much pleasure should I
find in affliction^ or in the greatest evils this life could inflict upon me,
could but I find my God in them.

O how sweet and glorious would be the darkest and obscurest corner of the
earth might I but find there thy glorious presence, far better then the Courts
of Princes, what are they Lord or all the pleasures of this vain world to one
hours communion with thy blessed self.

O blessed be the holy name of my most gracious Lord, who caused me to say with
blessed David, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of my God then to
enjoy the greatest pleasures and preferments upon the earth.

Yea Lord so do I fear my frail Nature and my Deceitful Heart, that I dare not
ask thee any thing of that, least I fall into temptation, or be taken in a
snare; and so forget my God; but this would I do, dear lord, wholly resign my
self into thy gracious hands, what Lord thou see fitting for me, let me be
there with content.

My time, O Lord, which here I have is short, and thy pleasure shall suffice,
since thou have chose for me an Heritage Eternally in thy presence where is
fullness of joy, and riv^rs of pl^asures for evermore, but this, Lord; let me
beg, since t^s thy gracious pleasure thus to condescend to suffer such poor
Worms to plead with thee, O that thy grace may be sufficient for me to answer
all my wants and subdue all my corruptions, and every thing that stands in
opposition to thy Glory, that I may pass the time of my so journing here i^
fear to offend my good and gracious God, whom I have not found flack concerning
his promise, but infinitely beyond what I dare ask;

For Lord in thee are all my fresh springs, and thou only know of what I
stand in need, this is my comfort that through grace I can say, O let me ever
remember it unto thy Glory that though thou feed me with the bread of
affliction yet thou art my God and, though I am a poor unworthy sinful creature
yet art thou still a God that changes not, but thou have made with me through
thy free grace and mercy an everlasting Covenant, which shall never be revoked.

Meditations on the power of God, God being her Father.
FIx thou, O Lord, my Soul upon those heavenly Mansions those Celestial Glories
where thy presence dwells, then shall I say Lord make thou here my resting
place, my soul desires to be with thee and to behold thy Glory, man in his best
estate is altogether vanity, and yet the infinite and holy God sees matter of
pity in him, yea he pittyed them in their low estate because his mercies
endure for ever, it was mercy caused him to take such pity of the poor Soul,
when in thy blood, when poor and miserable, wretchedly miserable, and he is the
same God still, not only able but willing to continue merciful ye the mercy of
the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting unto them that fear him; and as the
heavens are in height above the earth; my poor soul look up then and see. O see
what great things the Lord has done for thee; it is ^e the holy one of Israel
who in habiteth eternity, who dwelletl^ in the ^ighest heavens in the infinite
and in compre^ensiable God the King of glory the Lord of hosts, omnipotent in
power, Majestyes, and g^ory, omnipotent in every place, a God w^ose name is
wonderful, and who gloryeth in his mercy, because he delights to be
gracious, it is he whose own arm brought Salvation for thee and has redeemed thy
life from destruction, and saved and called thee out of the cruel bondage of
him who sought thy final destruction; O therefore, my soul, forever bless the
Lord and forget not all his benefits; let them be written on the table of thy
heart for an everlasting memorial, this great King of Heaven and earth that
has condescended so far as to stoop to the poor sinful dust and ashes, from
whom thou deservest nothing but frowns, and eternal wrath, begs thy acceptance
of him to be thy Savior behold I stand at the door and knock O open those
everlasting doors that the king of glory may come in, And take up his abode in
the poor Soul so ever, O how blessed is that place where thou will dwell; shall
I not be kept? O keep me from sin, from grieving that holy spirit of grace, O
come sweet S^viour take up thy rest here in my poor n^ked Soul, and let my
resting place be under the shadow of thy wings, then shall I fear no ill for
thou art my support and comfort for ever.

My Soul what great use may thou make of this great grace, what singular
comforts may thou reap from this great benefit, if this great God be thy
Father, poor Soul here is grace indeed why then as a father pittyeth his
children so he is pleased to pity thee; O he considers thy frailty, and that
thou art but dust, therefore as a tender father who has long waited that he
might be gracious, he still retains mercy, his everlasting mercy unto those
he has been pleased to take into his everlasting Covenant, Is this God thy
Father? O then poor Soul how greatly art thou honored? Is it no small thing in
the eye of David to become the Son in Law unto an earthly King, and shall it
not be a great thing in thy account to be the Daughter of so great a King? Ah
my poor Soul has the Lord thus honored thee has he i^d^ved thee with so
great a Glory: O then walk worthy thereof.

VVilt thou dishono^ him that gave thee breath, and formed thee out of the dust
to live and praise him, who has purchased thee to b^ a peculiar one unto
himself: O will thou defile that glory by thy unworthy walking? If thine
earthly Father deserves that honor as is due to him by nature, and the
commands of God, of how much more honor is thy heavenly father worthy, to whom
thou art beholden for thy All; O then be careful, my poor Soul, and do not
dishonor the name of thy great God, is this great God thy Father, then delight
thy self in his presence, and rejoice in him above all, for thou ^ast found,
through grace, how sweet it is to be in the presence of thy God and Father, to
solace thy self in his Love, O how sweet a thing it is to possess this, to
enjoy that Communion in which thou art said to be kissed with the kisses of his
Lips, and made partaker of those heavenly Glories.

O how good is it to be in the contemplation of these eternal and transcendant
beauties, these glorious streams of living waters, these sweet shades of
everlasting comforts, and to be filled with that everlasting fullness, that
fills all in all; O how much better is it to my Soul to be one of the meanest
in thy presence to behold thy Glory, then to be the greatest potentate upon
Earth.

Let me behold thy Glory; O cause thy face to shine upon me, so shall all
darkness be dissipated, and nothing shall appear too hand for me, when thou
have clothed me with thy strength; O it is thy presence makes all things
beautiful, O it is this presence brings true comfort, and gives full satisfaction
to thy Soul; satisfaction is not to be had in any thing below a Savior, no not
in very friends, they are all but fading comforts, and may leave thee, and
forsake thee, but then says David, even then the Lord took me up, my heavenly
father has a greater love a pity for me, he has said, In the presence of the
Fathere shall no ill come to thee, the Lord will take thy drooping Soul into
his banqueting house, and speak peace to thee, by love embraces, he will stay
thee with flaggon, and comfort thy love sick Soul with the choicest delights; O
how sweet is his fruit, eaten under his shadow, what comfort is it to a wearied
Soul, lie down under so sweet a shade, to to take its rest from scorching
heats, storms, and tempests.

If th^s great God be my Father, then I will go unto him and make known my
wants he can he^p in every condition, and supply all my w^nts, plentifully;
Lord I want wisd^m* Lord I want all things but have thou m^d^ (...) christ to
be all things for me, then in giving him to me thou give all and blessed be
thy great and holy name; And ^rt thou O God, my Father! How can i^ be so great
a privilege belongs to me, poor wor^, O let me then indeed and truly depend on
thee, O let my trust be in my God, and suffer not my Soul to turn aside from
thy commands; O my poor Soul cast all thy care upon the Lord, and trust in him
for ever, for blessed are they that trust in him at all times, and who can
thou better trust thy self with then in the hands of thy Father? And such a
Father whose tender bowels are so great as will not suffer any thing to come
nigh thee for thy hurt; he knows what is best and fittest for thee, a God whose
power reaches over all the World, and can bring to pass whatsoever pleases
him.

O there is nothing, Lord, too hard for thee? thou can in one moment make thy
poor servant such as thou would have her to be: O do so, Lord, for thy dear
me^cies sake, and let the glory of all return to thee.

Then have thou such a God to go to as thy father in the time of need, O what
comfort is there for thee in any time of outward troubles when thou can say
thou art in the hands of a gra^ious, merciful God, who afflicts bu^ in
measure, when ^he does afflict and that not according to what thy sins and
iniquit^es have deserved, a God that is slow to ^^g^r, p^enteous in mercy, and
when he does chastise it is to separate thee from thine iniquity, and make thee
know in what thou have offended him, O let the end of thy chastizing hand, dear
Lord; be such to me as may refine my Soul, from all its dross, then such
afflictions shall be good ye good for me, that keeps me in the favor, that
cause me to find acceptance with thee.

Make that a great comfort to me in the greatest straight and difficulty that
can come in this world, he who has all power in his own hands shall he not do
whatever he pleases with his own, yet he has promised never to leave nor for
sake them, he will be still the God of those that fear him, and will deliver
them when they cry unto him; O therefore my soul, fear the Lord and let thy
trust be ever more in him, fear not man who has a Linited power, and shall go
no further then thy Heavenly Father gives them leave, they plot and devise
mischief against thee and thine anointed, thou see, O Lord, and will thou not
arise to plead thine own cause, that they may see and be confounded, every one,
when there council shall be brought to naught, and they made to see the
greatness of the God of Jacob; O Lord, though we have sinned, let not thy great
name be poluted by those who know thee not

O let that be still more glorious, though thy people perish and come to
nothing; and as for me, dear Lord, fit and prepare me for thy will, O let my
soul and heart be filled with looking and longings after thee, O let me still
be ever in thy presence and it shall be well with me for ever;

My further meditations on Death.
DEath is a Jailer who unlocks the prison doors of a gracious soul, and ushers
it into the presence of his heavenly father who is a gracious and a merciful
God, there to be embraced in the arms of a loving Savior; and to enjoy a
fullness of eternal glory; by hearing the voice, Come ye blessed of m^ father
receive the Kingdom prepared for you: But the wicked, Death arests and brings
bound before the Tribunal Seat of God where he shall behold alone the frowns
of an angry God before whose anger who is able to stand? there shall he see
Divine Justice eternally satisfying on him, and never satisfied, Satan on one
side and his own conscience on the other accusing of him, and Jesus Christ who
would have him his Savior now his judge pronouncing the dreadful sentence of
that eternal damnation, Go ye cursed of my father into everlasting destruction
prepared for thc Devil and his Angels; Blessed and for ever blessed are they
who have the Lord for their God, for whom Christ will say, O death, I will be
thy death, ye through the power of his might, will I not be afraid; Christ has
over come Death, he has taken away the sting, then in Christ I shall be
through grace more then a Conqueror; then Death I will bid thee welcome,
blessed Messenger when thou art sent to break my chains and unlock my Fetters,
Locks, and Bolts, which keeps me from the presence of my Lord, which is a
burden to my soul, and hinder me of the most blessed prospect of mine eternal
happiness, and when thou shall bring me into the presence of my redeemer, there
to behold his face in glory, then shall my soul be satisfied, when I wake I
shall behold thy face in Righteousness; O my God.

Now, O my soul, thou do pretend to fear the Lord but do thou really, so
examine thy self, can thou approve thy heart to God, in all sincerity, he
has done great things, O and wonderful, for thee what have thou done for him
have thou demonstrated a return of Love to him that has bestowed so much Love
on thee surely it is a day in which the Lord does threaten an end of all flesh
before him and art thou exempt from his ever ruli^g power it is time to make up
thy accounts for how know thou how soon the Lord may call to reckon with
thee, O it will be sad to have a name to live, and yet be dead; to have thy
portion among Hypocrites it is thy duty to be found serving the Lord with all
fervency of spirit out of a pure mind giving glory unto him: to walk holy and
humbly with thy God, to take delight in thine approaches before him, to lie low
at his footstool, in the sense of what thou art and what thou have received;
to have respect unto all his commands and do his will to submit thy self unto
him, in all obedience, to live in a continual dependence upon him, to take up
thy Cross dai^y, and follow him; will thou be a wise child then understand the
will of thy heavenly father, O how have thou fallen short of thy duty to thy
gracious Lord? who never yet was wanting unto thee, Lord thou art my helper,
and unto thee I fly, for my soul have had experience, even of the truth of
grace, to th^e be glory my hope is still in thee my God who know the frailty
of thy poor creatures and pittyes them under their infirmities because they are
but dust; O Lord it is free grace that must enable me to do what thou requirest
and blessed be God for that glorious grace, by which thou have in abled me to
find the sweet experience of spiritual in livenings to all or any of these
things in any measure; though but small; In thee my well springs are, this I
can say, O Lord, my soul desires to do thy will, make me such a one as thou
would have me be, Lord I am thine, do with me what soever pleases thee, I
could desire to live if by my living I might glorify thy name, yet allo wish
to be dissolved to be with Christ, to be disrobed of sin, and c^oathed upon
with his eternal Righteousness, to be freed from imperfection, to be complete
in Christ, in all perfection so to enjoy a free Communion with my Lord in Glory
to all eternity.

Meditations of a day of trial, or preparation for sufferings.
THe Soul that truly fears the Lord is happy, and he that exercise th faith
shall ever find him faithful let what will come* he shall not be afraid of
evil tidings, etc. O happy Soul that is in such a case, yea happy is he that
has the Lord for his God; An interest in Christ in a day of trouble is help
and succor, what can come amiss to me if the Lord be my God, it is true I may be
spoiled of all I have, but they that take it from cannot rob me of my glory in
being a believer, then come what will, seeing my Crown is safe through grace
will I receive.

It Is no great honor to be trading in the paths of Christianity, when there is
none forbids it, and when a change comes, cast of any Religion because it is
out of fashion and credit. O remember that any who have once set their hand to
the Plow and look back are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, for they that are
such draw back unto perdition and the Lord will take no pleasure in them, no it
is he and only he that indures to the end shall be saved? But what if our
Estates* our liberties nay our very lives lie at the stake, you must either
part with these or submit unto humane invensions, this is indeed a great, but
poor Soul be not thou disturbed.

But remember any former arguments and be not afraid to trust God with thy
condition be it what it will for therein thou may deny the Sovereignty
power, and faithfulness of the great and holy God double the portion of the
fearful^ and unbelieving, But O my Soul for to come nearer to thee, suppose the
Lord should suffer thee particularly to come under this trial unto the utmost
extent, for O who knows how soon that may happen, and thou art not prepared to
encounter with it; therefore how needful is it to be mindful of thy Lords
commands, watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, it will be a sad
reward thou will meet with by entering into a temptation to save thy self, and
thereby loose thy God and thy Souls comfort; Is not Christ to be esteemed more
then all things? besides what is he not made exceeding precious to thy Soul and
will thou, can thou, part with him on any terms, surely thou have not loved
him for Loaves only, but for that excellency the Father has clothed him with,
the fear of man brings a snare, but he that trusts in the Lord shall be safe;
man says thou shall not do this etc. it is disobedience to commands of men, and
the Issue of it will be either prison, Banishment, or death, but the spirit of
God says pay thy vows though it come in competition with thy very life, for he
that loves his Father Mother etc. Ye his very life, better then me is not
worthy of me and he that takes not up his Cross to follow me cannot be my
disciple, then surely it is better disobeying man on earth then to be found an
offender of the Majesty on high; the ways of Christ are still the same good
ways, in persecution; and they were in peace, nor are they a whit the less
disowned by Christ for being disallowed of man; the soul that truly is
established in Gospel truths is upon a sure foundation, and owning Christ to be
his Lord and King, gives the honor due unto his, King, his Lord, and Law giver.

As thy redeemer as thy savior; as a mediator now in heaven, interceeding for
thee, as thy Lord and King, as one who being fully interested in the fathers
love, and in all the father is, and has also made thee through grace to
perticipate thereof; O the unbounded riche^ of free love, what love was ever
like to that of Christ's, who loved not his life unto the death; but gave it
freely for thee, that thou may thereby freely come out of that cursed damned
estate thou else had lain in unto all eternity: and into the glorious liberty
of Sons; O how sweetly sounds that word, Sons and Daughters, heirs of a
Kingdom, and Coheirs with Christ Jesus this is a believers portion; and a
glorious portion through the lively exercise of faith for the Lord in the
offers of his grace, says come, come freely; without any worth in your selves,
or good of your own, and take my Son and with him all that shall make you
eternally happy, the Lord Jesus he a lone is thy redeemer, he a lone is thy
Redeemer he alone has perfected the work of thy Redemption?

And unto him be glory, ye all glory for ever and for ever who still had been a
glorious and a holy God though thou had perished to all eternity; and now
what has he required of thee; O my soul; but to love him to own him and this
love begits obedience to him; and love unto his laws and from which if thou
should now draw back thou will deny thy love to him and through a slavish
fear make Shipwreck of thy faith deny the power faithfullness soveranity and
omnipotency of the great God and so be come a prey to Satan, and loose thy
soul, thy God, thy Christ, and all thy heavenly treasures forever: the Lord in
his mercy prevent it and all this for a song, a sinful compliance with the men
of the world and for fear of there threats sin against such Light; such Love,
such Convictions, of Conscience as the Lord through rich grace has manifested
to thee; then consider how the Lord speaks to his poor covenant people, who art
thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall dye, when I am on thy
side, who has power to do with all men whatsoever he will; am not I your
Father, and cannot you trust me with your preservation, though in suffering
times, there fore, O my soul, trust in the Lord, let him be all thy stay, and
^^e assured all shall be well with thee if suffering be thy Lot, as it is all
theirs that will live Godly ^^ Christ jesus; the Lord will give out strength
proportionable, for he has said that he will lay no more upon thee then he
will enable thee to bear; then let thy sufferings be what they will, they shall
be crowned with a glorious Isue thy small moment of affliction shall work for
thee an eternity of glory: say; they then vaunt over thee with reviling
speeches and reproach the too with sedition, Hypocri^, Heretics, Schismatics
etc.

Better is it to bear the Reproach then be truly guilty but what is this when
the Lord* says, Blessed are ye when all men hate, Reproach; and speak all
manner of evil against you for my sake, shall the Disciples be ab^vt his Lord;
for what can they do to thee that they have not done to him?

He suffered a vile and shameful death without the camp, for the bearing this
reproach; he was scoffed at, made a scorn off, reviled, buffered. spit upon;
and at lengt crucified, and all for thy sake, taking it patiently and quietly,
and cannot thou be content to suffer some small thing for his sake, who has
suffered such great things for thee; therefore my soul, fix thou thy faith on
Jesus Christ who ever lives to make intercession for his affiicted ones, and
is ready at hand to give seasonable supplies for every condition; O be found
still walking in his ways, and full of love to his precious Laws, and trust
him with thy condition, who can deliver thee from trouble, or else preserve
thee and bear thee up under it;

Blessed David says the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen
upon me, and for thy sake I have borne reproach, shame has covered my face, it
was good David's portion to fall under such reproaches, as were even ready
sometimes, to have broken his heart, yet for his help has his recourse to God,
ye though the Lord is pleased seemingly to turn away his ear, yet he will seek
no other help, I was a reproach to all mine enemies but, especially among my
Neighbors, ye his very friends reproached him but says he, As for me I will
call upon God and he shall save me, evening and morning, and at noon will I
pray and cry aloud and he shall hear my voice, O let this be thy work to
approve thy integretie and sincerity unto God, And so plead with thy God for
mercy and deliverance, for what matter is it how man Judges of thee so thy
heart be right with God; what disadvantage will reproaches bring unto thee;
M^ses este^med the reproaches of Christ; greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt; therefore says Paul; I take pleasure in reproaches, Yea if you be
reproached for the name of Christ h^p^ are ye, for the spirit of glory and of
God (in a more eminent manner) rests upon you, the Church of God in all ages
has lain under such afflictions and the father has so ordained it, for the
purging away of sin, the purifying of man from his dross, that so he might
become as tried silver resigned, fit for holy use, and therefore seeing the
necessity of it, says the Apostle, beloved think it not st^ange concerning the
fiery trial which is to try you as though some strange thing happened unto you;
it is no new thing, therefore know thy duty in it; but rejoice in as much as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed ye
m^^ be glad also with exceeding joy; And in another place, if you suffer with
him you shall also Reign with him, and let none of you suffe^ a^ an evil doer
at a M^^derer, thief, or as a busy body, in other men's matters, yet if any
man suffer as a Christian, (clea^ly) on that account, let* him not be a shamed
^ut let him glorify God on this behalf for the time is coming that judg^ment
must begin at the house of God, and if it first begin at us what shall the end
b^ of them tha^ obey not the Gospel of God, and if the righteous sca^cely be
saved where shall the ungodly and siners apear,

Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping
of their Souls to him in well doing; as un^o a faithful Creator; through grace
I desire to pitch my Soul ^n everlasting faithfulln^ss, by which I trust I
shall be kept in even walking in his own paths; be they never so rugged, yet if
I meet my Lord, I shall do well; his gracious presence makes every condition
sweet, and though this poor pi^gramage represents nothing but thorns and
briars; it will be recompensed with an eternity of glory; A place where no
sorrow shall be known, but fullness of joy add pleasure, and the comp^eat
enjoyment of thy Lord for ever; therefore O Lord into thy gracious care I do
commit my self, my Soul and spirit; Lord fit me for thy will, and let me only
fear thy righteous judgments and be sound trembling at thy word; so shall I be
kept faithful unto the end.

Sparks of Divine Love.
Love is a heavenly fire fetched from above
Irradiant beams shot from the God of Love,
Un^er those blessed shines my Soul abide
Let all thy paces there be multiplied,
In firength and beauty there to rest secure
Through Love divine which ever shall endure.
Have thou, dear Lord, such great things done for me,
And shall I not give up my heart to thee,
^oo poor a thing, yet Lord since it is my All,
O take it Lord though it be poor and small,
O take it, Lord, by purchase it is thine
Let me not any longer call it mine.
Nor set it on poor fond things here below
Which vainly are but actors of a show,
Or feig^'d objects painted ore delights
Appear a little and pass from our sights
Vain shadows of a poor short Sunny day,
While ^e peruse them, quickly fly away.
A praising Soul.
Lord shall a heaven born Soul forget to sing
Eternal praises to her Lord and King
Shall she be one that seems not to know
The hand from which her mercies still do flow
O quicken Lord thy servant, O that she,
May have her life all praises unto thee.
O it is a life of praises thou would have,
Thy poor redeemed ones return to thee,
Give Lord what thou art pleased from them to crave.
Of thy own store, what thou acceptest must be,
Then, my dear Lord, I shall not cease to sing
The Song of Canaan unto Isreal's King.
Though in a Land so far and strange I be
As destitute of what I would enjoy,
Let me by faith my Native Country see
And not forsake my treasure for a toy,
O blessed be thy name which still does keep,
My dro^sie soul which else would ever sleep.
And loose its glorious comforts, sweet delights
Which in the presence of its Lord is found,
Those Heavenly Glories and transcendant sights
In which to empty souls Grace does aboundi
O glorious Grace let my soul still admire,
And warm it self at this blessed Heavenly fire.
O shall I grieve that glorious spirit which
Is pleased to bow and condescend so low,
Thus to a poor unworthy sinful wretch.
How is it Lord that I thy Grace should know
And that thou should be pleased to look on me
So as redeem me from such misery.
A hymn of free grace.
What shall I do my soul, shall I then speak
Or shall I let my heart through silence break
Should I be dumb then sure stones would cry
Me shame and magnify the Lord on high
Who does his riches wonderful bestow
On such p^o^ worm^ as crawleth here below.
But now to praise him would I fain begin
Who is my God my Lord and eke my King,
Who in his goodness has done more for me
Then can with admiration spoken be:
O though I would I want both power and art
For to express what l^es within my heart,
But since it is the heart Lord thou would have
Acceptance is the thing I only crave,
Receive it Lord O that I could aspire
Into thy a^ms which is my Souls desire.
On wings of faith and Soaring acts of Love
Oh in the Clefts behold me as thy Dove;
My sweetest Lord, help me to sing thy pra^se
And tell the world the wonders of thy grace,
Shall I be dumb and live henceforth as one
To whom such favor never had been shown
Then were I sure unworthy ere to live
But Lord what is wanting thou can quick^y give.
Both tongue and heart that daily I may bring
Of sweetest Odor, my poor offering,
Let my soul bless the Lord with all delight
Of thy glory have a daily sight,
Goodness and mercy that do so excel
O in its fillings my Soul still dwell.
The ocean of his love so sweet and pure,
Which shall to all eternity endure,
What greater good unto my soul can bring,
Then singing praises to my Lord and King,
Lord take and keep me there why shall we part,
It Is thy own hand must hold my feeble heart.
A short dialogue between flesh and spirit.
Flesh. Fond foul what ^ileth thee thus low to deem,
Our pleasure and our comforts here below,
And that thou do so highly them est^em
As if thou did not care such things to know
Is it not better mirth for to enjoy,
Which makes fat the bones and glads the heart,
Then in thy musings thus thy self annoy.
At last persuaded he with them to part.

Spirit. Fond fleshly part this all thou have to say
Cease now with all spetious flattering speech,
And never think by all thy pleas to sway
A soul that now is got above thy reach,
All thy suggestions I cannot approve
Seeing in earth thy comforts all do lie
But I much live in flames of heavenly love
With heavenly comforts which will never dye.
What are your pleasures that you count so great
But very froths and bubbles in the wind,
What can they do for you at mercies seat
Or can you true contentment in them find,
Indeed your fleshly e^es cannot behold
These Jewels of most rich and glorious worth,
That pearl of price, that City of pure Gold,
And therefore think to set yeur pleasures forth.
Poor Soul alas why do thou cavil so,
My comforts come from a far greater spring,
Then are the puffs of mirth which you would know
Whilst I desire the love of Christ my King,
My musing such with which I would not part
For all your mirth and pleasant melody,
Christ's dearest love take away my heart
In which lies Joy and true felicity.
Your company wherein you do delight
Like to your self are made of earthly moul^
Which will at length to feast the worms invite
Then where is your pleasures which so dear you hol^
My joys my comforts and my aim shall be
To rest in Heaven to all Eternity.
There Is fellowship with holy Angels bright
And Hal^le-lujahs sing to the King of Kings,
There Is sweet Communion with the Saints in light
When fire consumes your perishing earthly things,

The Lord feeding and keeping his Flock,
See how the Lord does of his Flock take care
And plenteously his Love to them does share,
Reaching his arm of mercy them to guide
And leading them fast by the Rivers side,
Thore does them feed in pastures pleasantly,
And hiding them from Rage o'th enemy,
Now let thy heart with praises ever sing,
Even to thy Savior, Shepherd, Lord and King.
Longings to be with Christ.
Sin sick am I
And fa^n would dye
Reaching forth to Eternity,
I Will leave the world with all my heart
With it i am willing Lord to part
To be with thee; O Lord its best,
And in thine arms to be at rest,
Unto the world I ^ain would dye
To live with thee Eternally,
Sweet Savior then thou art gone before
A place in Heaven to prepare.
Post Script of her own.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him with these eyes, O
that the time would come.

But I will wait upon the Lord, the days of my appointed time till my change
come.



FINIS.
The Contents.
1. THe account of her early conversion. 2. Of further discoveries of Christ.
3. The longings of her Soul after Church Fellowship. 4. Of Recording her
experiences. 5. The discoveries of Christ to her Soul when joined to a Church
in the Lords Supper. 6. Sweet Discoveries of the love of God in Jesus Christ.
7. Meditations upon her Saviors love. 8. Meditations of Wisdom in embracing
the offer of Jesus Christ. 9. Exhortations to her Brothers and Sisters. 10.
Meditations upon hearing the voice of Christ. 11. Of heart examination. 12.
Meditations of being in Christ. 13. Meditations of being the Servant of Christ.
14. Of a new Heart. 15. Of thirsting after assurance of heaven. 16. Meditations
of death. 17. Of Communion of Saints. 18. Meditations of the unchangeable love
of God. 19. Meditations on the 11th Chap. of Matthew 28, 29, and 30. v. 20.
Meditations on the great mystery of Godliness. 21. Of the excellency of the
knowledge of the mystery of Christ. 22. God enjoyed in mercies. 23. Of self
insufficiency. 24. Of worldly honor. 25. Meditations on the power of God, God
being her Father. 26. Her further meditations of death. 27. Meditations of a
day of Trial or preparation for sufferings. 28. Sparks of Divine Love. 29.
Apraising Soul. 30. Ahymne of free grace. 31. A short dialogue between flesh
and spirit. 32. The Lord feeding and keeping his flock. 33. Longings to be with
Christ.
ERRATA.
REader, your Charity is desired in amending some little faults of the Printer,
the rest are these.

In the epistle, Page 11. line 15. f. partings r. pantings, p, 15. l. 17. ad
which) runs. f. their r. these, p. 1. l. 2. for conversation r. convertion, p.
11. l. 20. f. east r. cast, p. 15. l. 19 f. this r. his, p. 28. l. 6. f. son r.
Soul, p. 31. f. N. r. O p. 39. l. 9. f. and read, and, l. 11. f. de r, doc, p,
47. l. 15. f. truth read tush. l. 26. f. as read at, p. 49 l. 19, f, but read
both, p. 59. l. 9. f. suffered r. suffer, p. 63. l. 11. f. would r. will, l.
15. f. to r. to, p. 68. l. 25. f, his r. it is, p. 79. l. 15. r. bring home, p.
88. l. 15. f. received r. revealed, p. 89. l. 4. f. it. r. is p. 94. l. 10. f.
lo r. ho, p, 103. l. 5. f. your read ours, p. 110. l. 14. ad sealed, p. 123. l.
15. f. a r- and, l. 27. ad to, p. 131. l. 18. f. him r. bin, p. 135. l. 6. f.
receive r. rejoice. l. 10. f. any r. my, l. 20. ad trial, ^* 22. f. any r. thy.
p. 137. l. 1. f. and r. is.

To be sold at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's,


