This for the PARLIAMENT, COUNSEL, And the Officers of the ARMY Of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland; In patience to read and
consider, Eccle. 7. 8, 9. Hag. 1. 5.

Being that the servants of the Lord are to finish their true and faithful
Testimony against the world, as the Lord shall move them so to do, who live and
move in him, that so they may finish their course with joy; And now for this
end and purpose have I ^ given forth this my Testimony, that I might be found
doing the Will of God, whom I serve in the Spirit of his Son, not knowing but
that my service herein may be acceptable to all, or some of you, and if but to
one, shall be glad, and if to none, my labor shall not be in vain in the Lord,
who is the reward of all them that obey him and diligently seek him.

Written about the middle of the sixth Month, 1659.

By a lover of the truth, as it is in Jesus, a late Member of the Army, known
by the name of THOMAS DAVENPORT.

Lament. 3* 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

This for the Parliament, Council, and the Officers of the Army of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in patience to read and
consider, Eccles. 7, 8, 9. Hag. 1. 5.
FRIENDS,
THis is the day of the Lords power, wherein the light shines, and has most
gloriously appeared, and is breaking forth more and more unto the perfect day,
being the day of your visitation wherein you have been warned; so that none of
you can say that you are ignorant of what you should have done for the Lord,
for his Servants have not had their mouths shut, but by the Lord God have been
opened to declare unto you their message from the Lord, that you might have
been turned from darkness to the light, from the power of Satan to God; and
though the most of you have sought by excuses to put it off from you (and made
light of it) as a thing not worth taking notice of, and to cover your selves;
yet I say you shall not be covered in this his day, for there is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall not be known; for
the word within you is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of your hearts,
so that all coverings and vailes are and shall be rent, and woe be to him that
is covered and not with the Spirit of the Lord; and therefore you cannot be
cleared before the Lord God, for that which he has placed in you, as a
witness for himself, does testify against you to your faces, that you have
not been faithful to the Lord, to, and in what he has entrusted you withal,
even unto that which he has made known unto you; therefore is the Lord God
coming forth against you, to warn you, and also to plead with you, seeing the
cause of his people you have not pleaded, and if deliverance will not come, by
you, to his own seed, he will arise to deliver some other way, and break you in
pieces as he has done those that have gone before you, and he will plead the
cause of his own dear and tender lambs himself, whom you have neglected to
hear; has not their cause come before you? have not you heard of the
oppressions of the Saints, and who it is that oppressed them? are these things
come before you, and they not relieved, and power in your hands to do it if you
had stood in the Lords Council? nay, you have been so far from pleading their
cause, that you have taken part with them that have been their oppressors, in
that you have strengthened their hands that they may continue still to prey
upon the servants of the Lord; have not these greedy dogs the Priests (for so
the Prophet calls them) which will never have enough? have they not been
tearing in pieces, and spoiling and persecuting the Saints, declaring of what
generation they are born, after the flesh, fulfilling the Scripture, for as it
was, even so is it now; and are they not upheld by a Law formerly made by the
Pope? and now upheld by you, nay worse, in that treble damage is established?
and some have sheltered themselves under this, and have taken four or five
fold, and others almost all that poor men have, having no regard to wife or
children; such is their cruelty to satisfy their beastly lusts; and you having
no more regard to preserve the Nation; Therefore it is just that the sword
should come upon you, in that such a generation as this is now upheld by you,
who are ready* (in all Plots and Conspiracies laid to shed innocent blood) to
have their hands in them, and against your selves, as at this day does appear,
which is all the reward you get from them at the best, which is less then to
have your Souls devoured; And has not the Lord overturned them that went
before you, whose hands were found in these things which you uphold? and do you
think to prosper whilst you uphold such oppression, contrary to what your
covenant and promise was openly, and in secret before the Lord? Now let that of
God in your own Consciences judge, whether this be right in the sight of God,
and whether in this the Good Old Cause be maintained, or bondage continued (in
stead of liberty) for tender Consciences? Now if you mind not your Covenant
made to the Lord, as they minded not that went before you, whom the Lord has
overturned, the same shall overturn you and bring you down, if you walk in
their steps; this was their iniquity, and is yours now to uphold such things,
as namely, Tithes, which the Lord Jesus the second Priesthood by his coming in
the flesh has put an end unto, he abiding a Priest for ever, who is made not
after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life;
now the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the
whole Law; I say, it was their sin and is yours now to uphold them; and shall
not the iniquity of the wicked destroy them? Surely it shall, if they turn not
from it and repent; now let that of God, which is just in you all, make answer;
if the Lord should throw you down, and there should come to reign over you (you
returning and becoming faithful to the Lord in what you knew) and for
Conscience sake toward God could not submit unto such things as should be
imposed on you, would you be dealt so with your selves? would you have your
goods spoiled, and your bodies cast into prison, into dungeons and holes? would
you be whipped, stockt and stoned for that you could not do, because of the fear
of the Lord? and would you Judge it a Just and Righteous thing in them, who had
power to restrain your persecutors and would not? and is it a Just and
Righteous thing that we should pay them wages that do no work for us? or would
you have us to pay wages to other men's servants? nay, would you have the
servants of the Lord to pay them wages who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies, who are enemies to the Son of Righteousness in that service
they do, seeking to turn men from the true Light, and so shuts the Kingdom
against men, and will neither go in themselves, nor suffer them that are
entering to go in, which Christ cries woe against? Now can ye friends and
servants of the Lord uphold such as these (and now let that of God in you all
judge, whether you be his servants that uphold them?) shall not we rather with
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles bear our Testimony against them, who have
said, The watchmen are all blind and ignorant, all of them dumb dogs and
greedy, which can never have enough, and shepherds that cannot understand, they
all look to their own way, every one for his own gain from his Quarter, like
beasts of the field that seek to devour; and also the Prophet cries out, Mine
heart is broken within me, because of the Prophets, all my bones shake, for
both the Prophets and Priests are profane; yea, in mine house have I found
their wickedness, says the Lord; I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem
a horrible thing, They commit adultery, and walk in lies, they strengthen also
the hands of the evildoers, that none do return from his wickedness, for from
the Prophets is prophanness gone out into all the land* and says the Prophet,
There is a conspiracy among the Prophets like roaring Lions, ravening the prey,
they have devoured Souls, her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned
my Holy things, they have put no difference between the Holy and profane,
neither have they showed difference between the unclean and the clean; and may
not the same Testimony be born against the Priests of England, now in this his
day by the Servants of the Lord? and the Lord Jesus calls them Pharisees,
Hypocrites, and cries woe against them that go in long robes, and loves the
uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greeting
in the Markets, and love to be called of men Master, Master; and says he, ye
shall know them by their fruits, their hearts they have exercised with covetous
practices, witness their cruel persecutions, and that they have forsaken the
right way, and are gone astray following the way of Balaam, who loved the wages
of unrighteousness, but these are worse, for he durst not take it; and says
the Prophet, Put into their mouths and they will speak Peace to them; but these
are worse, for those that have upheld them, and put into their mouths, they are
preparing War against them; and if you say they are not all such, to wit, the
Ministers, so called; I s;were, though some of them have put on a thicker
covering, and their deceit, to them who are out of the Light of the Body which
is the single eye, cannot be discerned, yet in the pure Light of God are they
all seen and made manifest to be of the same nature, root and ground, for there
is no difference among them, who brings not the doctrine of Christ, and being
out of the faith that purifieth the heart, are drove out from the presence of
the Lord God with Cain who was a murderer, and slew his Brother, and wherefore
slew he him? because his works were evil and his Brothers good; but behold, the
Lord is against all false prophets, priests and ministers, that steals my Word
every one from his Neighbor, and use their tongues and say, He says it, when
the Lord has not spoken unto them; the Lord will require it at their hands.
Now be you warned from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that ye do not hold
them up in their deceits, for this I declare from the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, that that which helps, and they that are helped shall fall together,
for a witness I am for the Lord God, knowing the terror of the Lord, whose
wrath is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, and unto them that are contentious
and do not obey the truth, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every Soul of man that does evil, for there is no respect of persons with God.

And if you say, we will not be subject to the higher Power, but slight
Magistrates and will give them no honor, nor yield obedience to the Laws of
the Land, which ye Magistrates are bound to uphold.

I answer, We are subject to the higher Power, for there is no power but of
God, and to that Power which is of God we are subject, unto which all must bow,
of things both in Heaven and Earth; and because we are subject to the higher
Power, and for Conscience sake cannot resist the power which is the Ordinance
of God, therefore it is that we suffer by them who are out of the Power, and
will not be subject to it; and to all Magistrates are we subject, who are the
Ministers of God for good, who Rule in, and by the Power, unto which all are to
be subject for Conscience sake; but to those who are out of the Power, unto
which all are to be subject for Conscience sake, and have set by another in
their own wills which is of the Prince of the power of the air, to that for
Conscience sake we cannot obey, but for Conscience sake toward God bear our
Testimony against it, by our sufferings for the truths sake, and otherwise as
we are moved of the Lord, for we cannot be subject but for the Lords sake; And
for the laws you maintain contrary to Christ, for Conscience sake toward God,
you are not bound to maintain them, for that which binds here, is in the will
of man; therefore are you bound by the Will of God and for Conscience sake to
throw them down, and so to break the bonds of wickedness, that the oppressed
may go free, that so you may be established in maintaining the righteous Law of
God, that ye may become a blessing to these Nations, which if ye refuse, ye
will become a curse.

And for honoring the persons of the Magistrates with hat and knee, or the
persons of any men, that we deny, and what honor can they expect who are not
vessels of honor but of dishonor, being not purged from these things, and so
not fit for their Masters use? Now whether ye be such, let that of God in all
your Consciences, which cannot lie, judge, or whether you have gone from that
which is truly honorable, and is that, in all, which is to be honored? And
those that comes to this, neither honor nor respects men's persons, nor honor
one of another, but seeks the honor woh comes from God only, which will
stain the glory of all flesh; now as the Lord requires, have we honored all,
for our love has wrought unto all men without respect of persons, that all
might come to the knowledge of the truth, that they might be saved and redeemed
from their vain conversations, even from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God; and has not the mouths of the servants of
the Lord been opened toward you in dear love to your Souls and bodies, to warn
you to repent and turn from that which will be your ruin, if you turn not
betimes unto the Lord? and have not the servants of the Lord been made free
(for the seeds sake which is in you and among you, which most of you have not
owned) to discover to you the Plots of your enemies that are intending to
devour some of you (which had you stood in the Council of the Lord, had been
under your feet, trodden on by you the dust, for such honor have all the
Saints) and had not this been greater honor to you then the putting off the
hat, and to give you flattering titles, which your enemies would do, if they
came before you while mischief were in their hearts against you; though when
such have come to some of you, to show love in making known your enemies,
because they could not put off the hat and give you flattering titles, you
would not suffer to come into the room to you; Is not this a shame that such a
thing as this should be, when Jesus Christ has denied and shuts them out from
the Faith, which have it but in respect of persons? I say, that such a thing as
this should be held up by them who profess to believe in the Name of Christ
Jesus, who has said, I receive not honor from men; And how can ye believe
that receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor which comes from
God only? But says he, They loved the praise of men more then the praise of
God, therefore came ruin to themselves, and the Nation both. Now I say to you
all, be you warned from the Lord God, that ye consider these things betime, and
turn not from the Council of the Lord (which that of God in all your
Consciences, if you take heed unto it) will make manifest to you, that ye
perish not in your gain saying.

This have I written in dear love to all your Souls, that the time and
opportunity, put into your hands, may be by you faithfully improved, for the
carrying on of the Lords work in this his day, as that of God in all your
Consciences shall make manifest unto you, and whether you will hear or forbear
I am clear of you all, having dealt plainly with you in the sight of the Lord
God, who am a Friend to all men without respect of persons, for the seeds sake.
T. D.

THE END.

