A SERMON On Psalm. CXIX. V. 57. Showing wherein the Good Man's Portion AND
Dependence CONSISTS.

By JAMES DAVIES, M. A. Rector of Barton-Mills in Suffolk.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Jane.
Dec. 6. 1678.


LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, near
the West End. MDCLXXIX.

A SERMON ON Psalm. CXIX. 57. Thou art my portion O Lord; I have said that I
would keep thy words.
WE have an Account of David's Resolution and Choice: His Choice is expressed
in the former clause, Thou art my portion, O Lord; his Resolution in the
latter, I have said (or I have promised) that I would keep thy words.

From the former we may observe, That it is a special part of Wisdom to have
ones choice well and thoroughly fixed; and particularly to have it fixed upon
God, so as to make him our portion.

First it is a matter of great importance, and a special part of wisdom, to
have ones Choice well and thoroughly fixed; that is, to have one certain end
propounded, to which all a man's actions may tend, and all his other ends be
subordinate. For as the Moralists truly tell us, it is impossible for him to
govern his Actions well, who has not in the main, directed his life to one
certain end. It Is the Observation of a great and wise man; Says he, Consider
mankind, consule your acquaintants, or your reading, you shall find but a very
few persons, who have directed their life to one certain and assured course,
which is the truest drift of Wisdom: and therefore it is, that Mankind is
generally so defective.

For the avoiding of which unsettledness and want of design in men's actions,
the Advice of Seneca is very material; Epist. 71.
As often as (...) what thou should do, or what thou should avoid; be
sure to look for direction to that which thou have made thy chief End; for to
that, whatsoever thou do, ought to agree: But then be sure that thou have
first settled that. For it is an error, that we pretend to advise about
particular Ends, when we have not resolved upon, nor settled the general End,
without which no man can arrive at any certainty or Uniformity of Living.

That thus to have settled one's End, and the scope and design of one's Life,
is a matter of great importance, may be confirmed from common Observation and
Experience. It Is so in all the Affairs and Undertakings of Men. He who addicts
himself to the War, and resolv's upon that kind of life, is much more likely to
do great things in the Martial way, than he who only happens to be a Soldier,
or is driven to it by Necessity. Or, he who intends for Merchandise, if he
resolves to make it his business, and bends his Mind and Thoughts that way, is
more likely to thrive and grow rich, than he who is not yet resolved what
Profession to follow.

He who is thus loose and undetermined in his choice, is like to do but little
good in any thing he sets about, till he be better resolved.

Even so it is in our Christian Profession; He who hopes to attain to the Ends
of Religion, must make it his business: he must remember above all things
whither he is designed. There are many things that will interpose and require
some of his time and thoughts, but that which is Chief in his heart must be,
that he may gain that Pearl of great price, and arrive at that happiness which
he has made his choice.

As Merchants in their Voyage touch at diverse Ports to cleanse and victual, and
perhaps trade for some small matters: But their chief care and drift is, that
they may get with safety to the Port whither they are bound: So it is with every
diligent Christian; he converses with the (...) because it is necessary for him
in his Voyage; he touches upon the Cares and (...) of this Life, because they
are in his Way, (...) he cannot well avoid them: But his heart is chiefly^
(...) that Jerusalem which is above; and his principal Care and Endeavor is
that he may get with safety thither.

Now by the Consent of the Wise Men of all Ages, the great and last End of Man
is Happiness. And amongst us Christians, there is no Question, but that
happiness consists in the Favor and Enjoyment of God: such an enjoyment of him
in this life as this life is capable of, and a more perfect and immediate
fruition of him in Heaven. This therefore is our main End. This we ought to fix
upon as the Principal Object of our Choice, and to look upon it as our great
business in this World, That God may be our Portion.

This is the Second Branch of the Proposition, That it is the Wisdom of every
Man and Woman to make God their Choice and Portion.

What it is to make God our Portion, is plain enough from the common notion of
the Word Portion, which signifies a shame in the division of any thing;
specially of Estates and Inheritances; such a share as Parents use to give
their Children, which being the necessary foundation of their subsistence in
the World, they look upon it as their main Dependence. So ought God to be the
Portion of every faithful Soul, that is, He ought to be the Comfort, the
Treasure, the main Dependence of every faithful person.

But how can the infinite incomprehensible God be said to be the Portion of a
Creature?

We must know, that the Expression is not to be understood of God Personally or
Essentially. For so, no Creature can comprehend, contain or possess him. But it
is spoken according to the familiar Style of Scripture, and may be explained by
other places of the like nature. As where God calls Abraham his Friend, and
tells him, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1. And
where David calls God his comfort and his joy, his hope, his rock, his
fortress, and the like; which Expressions are not to be understood in a strict
and literal, but in an Analogical sense.

So that the Particle Thou, must be understood either Exclusively, or Causally.

First, Exclusively, Thou, and none other in comparison of thee; As if the holy
Psalmist had said, I value my Interest in Thee far above all other things.

All other things, as they are infinitely below thee, so I do not think they
deserve to be named in Comparison with thee. The same thing is most fully and
affectionately expressed, Psalm. (...). where David seems at first to have admired
Riches and Prosperity, to have thought them a Valuable Portion, and therefore
to have envied the Prosperity of the wicked; but when he better considered, and
saw the Vanity and Uncertainty of their condition, being destitute of the fear
and favor of God; he retracted his opinion, and altered his Choice. Then he
preferred God before all, verse. 25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength if my heart, and my portion for ever.

If we thus explain the Psalmist's words, by way of Comparison, the Wisdom of
his Choice is so evident, that it needs not to be proved. For what is any
creature in comparison of the Creator? What is outward splendour or felicity, in
comparison of the Favor of God, which is better than life it self? What are
the goods of this world, to that Immortal Kingdom which is above? What are the
poor low gratifications of our Senses and vain Affections for the present, in
comparison of those Purer Delights, and more Excellent Glories of the Kingdom
of God? Indeed there is no comparison betwixt these, and therefore it were very
needless to insist on this sense any farther.

Secondly, Thou art my Portion, to wit, Causally; Thou, that is, the Emanations
of thy Goodness are my Portion.

God is to be loved and chosen in regard of his Infinite Perfections: In regard
of his Power, whereby he does whatsoever he pleases in all the World; In regard
of his All Sufficiency, because he alone is able to make us perfectly happy; In
regard of his Infinite Wisdom, whereby he knows the Exigencies of our
Condition, and what is fittest to be done for us: But specially, in regard of
his Goodness, and the Effects and Emanations of it, whereby he is inclined to
concern his Wisdom and Power and Providence, for the good of them that love
him. So that to speak explicitly, it is as much as if David had said, Oh Lord!
the Participations of thy Goodness are my Portion. Thy Word and thy Blessing,
thy Favor and Protection, the assistance of thy Grace, and the sense of thy
Love, thy Gracious and Comfortable Presence now, and the hope of enjoying thy
Glorious Presence hereafter; these are my Choice, my Portion, and my only
Treasure.

Let us take a short view of each of these, and we shall find that they amount
together to a vast Portion.

First, Thy Word, and the Gracious manifestations of thy Self and of thy Will
therein, is to me a great Portion and Treasure. Nothing will be more plain to
us, than that David esteemed it so; if we read over this Psalm, and observe,
how often he mentions and celebrates the Word of God, and declares the great
Love and Esteem that he had for his Statutes and Commandments. We may see it
almost in every other Verse of the Psalm throughout. What Interjections of Love
and Delight does he breath out upon this Occasion! v. 97. Oh how I love thy
Law! all the day long is my study in it. And in the beginning of the Psalm,
verse. 14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all
Riches. And verse. 111. he professes that they were his Portion, and his Joy.
Thy Testimonies have I claimed as my heritage for ever, and why? they are the
very joy of my heart. Certainly, howsoever we value it, it is a singular Favor
of God, that he vouchsafes us his Word for our guidance and direction; and that
he has been pleased therein, to discover to us somewhat of Himself, and of our
duty and happiness.

Neither of these could be known any otherwise, with any measure of Certainty;
and without the knowledge of them, how sad and uncomfortable would our condition
be? To find in our selves desires after Happiness, and yet not to know what
that Happiness is, nor where to find it; to feel our condition calamitous and
unhappy, and not to know to whom to address our selves for help, nor upon what
considerations to stay our minds; to have a stormy and troublesome Journey to
go, and at the End of it, no other repose than that of the Cold Grave and the
Chambers of Death; the Uncertainty it self, and much more such Expectations,
would be sad and amazing. Yet such would our condition be, were it not for the
Light of God's Holy Word; which alone acquaints us with the Gracious Purposes
of God toward us, and the provision which he has made for our everlasting
Happiness after death; whereby we are armed with courage and good Hope, and
enabled to bear all things cheerfully, in a joyful apprehension and assured
expectation of the Glory, that shall be revealed.

Without Divine Revelation, we could be at no Certainty in matters of Religion;
which would reduce us wholly to a life of Sense, and render our condition no
better that of the Beasts that perish. Nay, it would be much worse than that of
the Beasts. For though perhaps their Pleasures and Enjoyments are not so
refined as those of Voluptuous men; yet neither are they so Interrupted with
the Conscience of death, which as often as it occurs, even in the midst of
Laughter, is enough to make the Heart Sorrowful. And from this, nothing can
secure us, but that which upon possible Conditions gives us hope of the
Comforts and Joys of the future Life.

Briefly, What Light is to the World, that the Word of God is to the Soul. Take
away the Light, and what do all the Works of Art and Nature signify? The World
it self seems to be vanished, when the Light is gone; and if it should so
continue, the World would be a Chaos, and a Dungeon, not worth the Inhabiting.
So truly without this Divine Light, we should be lost as to our spiritual and
rational; that is, to our best Capacities; which ought therefore to indear unto
us the presence, and possession of this Sacred Treasure, and engage us to walk
in the Light of it.

Secondly. As the Knowledge, so much more the Grace of God, is a great Portion.

Under this may be comprehended, both the gracious Acts of the Divine
Providence, and also the Comforts and Assistances of the Holy Spirit.

First, in respect of the Divine Protection and Goodness: so David esteemed God
his Portion. As if he had said; Oh Lord! by thy Providence I live, and by thy
Goodness I am maintained and preserved, and delivered out of all danger and
distress; and not only so, but I have a comfortable life, and a plentiful
subsistence, (as we know God raised him from the Sheepfold to the Throne,) and
what more can a man have to his Portion? We might truly say the same, if we had
thankful hearts as he had, to consider from whence our Blessings come. Our
Houses, our Lands, our Wealth, our Friends, our Children, and whatsoever else
we value, or account dear to us in this World, proceed all from the Bounty and
gracious Providence of God. And therefore in reason, these later, as being the
Causes of the former, ought to be esteemed our Portion, rather than the things
themselves. The things themselves may be lost, or taken from us; but the Causes
of them are a Treasure that cannot fail. The goodness of the Lord endures for
ever, and ever, upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness upon Childrens
Children. Psalm. 103. 17.

Again, in respect of the Aids of God's grace, and the assistances of his Holy
Spirit; so David accounted the Lord to be his Portion. As if he had faid; When
I consider the greatness of my sins already committed, and the weakness and
proneness of my Nature to fall into the same or the like again, and thereby to
provoke thy wrath, and expose my self to the dreadful Effects of it: when
notwithstanding all this, I consider that there is forgiveness with thee, to
pardon my sins, and remit my deserved punishment; and not only so, but that
thou art pleased to give me grace, and strength, and tenderness of heart,
whereby I am preserved and restrained from running headlong into ruin: when I
consider all this, how infinitely do I find my self bound to thy Grace, how
deservedly ought I to esteem it my Portion and Treasure? I should be a
miserable Creature without it, and therefore I cannot but think my self happy,
in that thou art pleased to make me a partaker of it.

Lastly, Thou art my Portion, that is, thy Presence, and the hope of Enjoying
thee, is my Portion. As if it had been said; This is that which I mainly aim at
and long after; this is that which I esteem my great and last Happiness: That
after the enjoyment of thy gracious Presence here, I shall enjoy thy Glorious
Presence hereafter. This is indeed the great Portion and Inheritance of the
Sons of God, the refuge, and hope, and expectation of every faithful person.
Every thing besides this, is too little and mean, to be the Portion of an
Immortal Creature.

The place we now converse in, and the things that are before us, are indeed
fit accommodations for our Journey, but these we must leave behind us to the
next Travelers that come after. We may not abide by these, but hasten toward
another Country, that is an heavenly, where our Portion and Inheritance is
reserved for us. On this Portion, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
Holy Men of God, have ever depended. And we find that it was the result of
David's dependence in an eminent manner, Ps. 17. 14, 15. Where David
distinguishes himself from the men of the World, who have their portion in
this life; and declares what his portion was; As for me, (says he) I will
behold thy face in Righteousness, and when I awake up after thy likeness, I
shall be satisfied with it; which is generally interpreted of the Presence of
God in that blessed Estate after the Resurrection.

This is the first Argument to prove the Wisdom of this choice, because of the
Excellent things that are contained in this Portion; the Knowledge of God, the
Light and Comfort of his word, the assistances of his grace, the protection of
his providence, the sense of his favor and gracious presence here, and the
hope of the Vision and fruition of him in glory: To these may be added, (as an
inforcement to this first Argument,) the excellent properties of this portion,
and the things contained in it; to wit, the sufficiency, and durableness of
them; as also their sutableness to the Nature, and necessities of our Souls.

First, One excellent property of this portion, is its sufficiency. It is able
of it self alone to make us happy. This property the Philosophers required in
their Supreme God. But they knew not well, where, nor in what object, to look
for it: because they knew not God. They turned themselves first to one Object,
and then to another; to health, and wealth, and honor, and pleasure, and
wisdom, and whatsoever else they could devise. They found some worth and
Convenience in many of these things; but as for that (...), or self
sufficiency, which they required to the constitution of true happiness, in vain
did they seek for that in any Creature. Every thing under the Sun, in this
respect, is no better than Vanity and vexation of Spirit. The likeliest thing
they could think on, wherein to place Happiness, was the Operation of Virtue;
which indeed is a Lovely and Venerable thing: but far enough (in many cases)
from making the possessor happy, were it not for that God, who is the gracious
Incourager and Rewarder of it. He alone has that Fullness and All sufficiency
in himself, which can fill all our Souls, and answer all our Wants, and
satisfy our utmost. Capacities.

So David resolves in another place, where he seems to put this Question,
concerning the happiness of Man, Ps. 4. 6. Who will show us any good? he
resolv's it thus, Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. And
in the following Verse, he declares; Thou have put gladness in my heart, more
than ever Worldly men had in the time, that their Corn and Wine and Oyt
increased. And so again, Psalm. 144. after he had reckoned up the Blessings of
this life, he concludes thus; Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea
blessed are the people, who have the Lord for their God.

A Second Property of this Portion, is, that it is certain, and durable. It is
the great disparagement of all the things of this World, that they are all
finite and transitory. The Psalmist therefore justly reproves the folly of
those Worldly great men, who persuaded themselves, that their houses should
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, and called
their Lands after their own names; whereas Man being in honor abides not, but
(in respect of his present mortal condition) is like the Beasts that perish,
Ps. 4. 11, 12. Honor, and Wealth are slippery things, that can hardly be
ensured to any man for the little time of this life, but it is certain they can
be kept no longer. No man can carry away any thing with him when he dies,
neither shall his Pomp follow him.

Daily Observation and Experience proves the same in all other Examples. The
best things we have of this World are here to day and gone to morrow. A few
days, or perhaps a few hours, shall change the most Vigorous health into
sickness, and languishing. He who now lives delicately, and at ease, will
within a short time be arrested, if not with want, yet with pains and
infirmities, that will make his good things tastless and unsavory, and bring
him down to the Worms and Dust. He who is happy in his friends or relations,
must expect e're long to part with them, and to have nothing left of them, but
the bare remembrance. The same is equally true of all other Worldly enjoyments.
We may possibly outlive all our share of them. It has happened so to many, the
greatest men in their times; such as Croesus, Darius, Perseus, and many more;
who from great and high estates, as it were from the top of Worldly felicity,
were tumbled down as in a moment into bonds and poverty, and all the
extremities of an unprosperous condition. But what need we examples of that,
when we see nothing in the World but Change and Uncertainty, of which every one
is or shall be an Example himself, even thou who read, as well as he who has
written. The World must fail every one who depends on it, for two certain
causes; because that is mutable, and we are mortal. God has made every thing
here mutable by the standing Laws of his Providence, and he has made our
condition here as well by the Laws and Constitutions of our Nature, as by his
positive Sentence and Appointment; so that in either respect we can have here
no durable certain portion.

But what a weakness or rather madness is it, to choose that for ones portion,
which he is sure to lose? how extremely miserable must his condition be, when
he comes to have his Portion taken from him? When a man who has made this
World, and his own will and pleasure in it, his only end and portion, shall be
stripped of these, and have nothing left to carry with him when he goes out of
it, but an accusing Conscience! nothing of good, not so much as good hope lest,
to nourish and satisfy his Soul in its endless duration!

How much a wiser and happier course shall we take, to secure to our selves
that other Portion which is certain and perpetual? God is Eternal, and his
Favor is Endless, it is not subject (in its own Nature) to diminution or decay.
It lasts as long as we live; and when we die, it accompanies us into the other
World, and gives us comfort and confidence in his presence and the holy Angels,
and puts us into the possession of never-ceasing joys. To this Portion
therefore does our Blessed Savior direct his Disciples, Matthew. 6. 19, 20. Lay
not up for your selves treasures upon Earth, where rust and moth corrupt, and
where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for your selves Treasures in
Heaven, where neither rust nor moth do corrupt, and where Thieves do not break
through, nor steal.

Thirdly, This is such a Portion as provides for the necessities of the Soul.
The comforts of it are spiritual and internal, and so more suitable to the
rational and better part of Man.

The Soul is a Principle distinct from the Body, as appears by this amongst
other Arguments, that it is not to be satisfied with bodily Objects or
Enjoyments. In the midst of these, a man's mind may be ill at ease. It may be
wounded with guilt, or overwhelmed with sorrow, or amazed with fear of the
Divine Vengeance. It may be disturbed as Belshazzar was in the midst of his
Beasting and Jollity. It often happens, that in the midst of this kind of
laughter, the Heart is sad, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. The Soul is
so far from being satisfied with these things, that the abundance of them is
rather apt to cloud and debase and darken it, and to make its condition worse
than it would be in the absence of such abundance. So that these are no
suitable Portion for the Soul. We might as well expect to satisfy a hungry
stomach with good words, as to satisfy the Soul with sensual Enjoyments. These
are as much too gross for the Soul, as the other are too thin and meagre for
the Body.

But the Portion here mentioned is abundantly sufficient to enrich and satisfy
the Soul.

The devout Contemplation of God, and of his Excellent Power, Glory and
Goodness, do mightily raise and refine and delight the Soul; how much more the
enjoyment of him? As he is the Author, so he is the proper Object of our
spirits; which never seem to be at home, but when they are conversant with him.
And therefore it was absurdly affirmed by Epicurus, (as Plutarch well Observes,
and largely proves,) (...).
That the disbelief of a God, and of all future recompense, tends to the quiet
and happiness of men's lives; whereas there is nothing more true than the
contrary. The very thoughts of God are better able to stay our Minds, and calm
our Passions, and ease our troubles, than any other consideration whatsoever.
And the comforts of his Word, and assistances of his Grace, and other
Emanations of his Goodness, (such as have been mentioned,) have that force upon
our spirits; that when we can attain to some sense of these, and keep our
selves in some moderate possession of them, we cannot but think our selves
happy in this imperfect state. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
says the Apostle, Romans 5. 11. and Verse. 2. We rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. And Verse. 165. of this Psalm, Great peace have they who love thy Law. Now
Peace, and Joy, and good Hope, are the proper Entertainments of the Soul. And
these issue naturally from a Religious application of our selves to God, and
from the sense of his favor, by which our Minds are refreshed and comforted
for the present, until they can be restored to that Immense Fountain of
Goodness, and be made to drink of those Rivers of Pleasure for ever.

Thus much concerning the great things contained in this Portion, and the
excellent Properties of it.

A Second Head of Arguments to prove the Wisdom of this choice, may be taken
from the Effects, and Benefits that are consequent to it.

Particularly, 1. The fixing of our hearts firmly upon God as our Portion, is a
good help to make us steady and constant in that which is good, and to prevent
the contrary evil of Inconstancy. We know of how great moment Constancy is in
matters of Religion. It is a property that cannot be separated from it, without
frustrating the whole design of it. It is the great Condition our Savior
requires of his Disciples, If ye continue in my Word, then shall ye be my
Disciples indeed, Joh. 8. 31. and Chap. 15. 4, 5, 6. Abide in me and I in you.
He that abides in me, the same brings forth much fruit. If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch cut off from the Tree. Therefore Verse. 9.
Continue ye in my Love. There is scarcely any man so bad, so utterly void of
all sense of Religion or Humanity, but that at one time or other he may do some
worthy things. Nero himself, whose name is so in-famous for Cruelty and
Bloodshed, is said once in his life to have wept, when the Sentence of a
Malefactor was brought to him to be signed, and to wish that he could never
have written.

It is only Order, Moderation, and Constancy, that shows a wise Man and a good
Christian. All other things may be found in an indifferent and defective man.
Now what likelier means can there be to establish the heart, and make a man
constant, than fixed and deliberate Choice? When the Mind is engaged upon one
Object, and so not at liberty to rove and wander after others? Whereas a
double-minded man (that is, one who is undetermined in his Judgment and Choice)
is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1. 8.

Such a one lives, like a man that walks without any design, who is
indifferent, what have he makes, or what path he takes. Sometimes he goes
forward, and sometimes he stands still, and looks about him, and by and by he
turns aside to the next Object that invites his Eye: whereas he that is to run
for the Goal, makes all the have that is possible. He lists not to loyter nor
to gaze; but he bestirs himself with all his might, because the Goal is in his
eye, and the honor and reward of overcoming are in his thoughts. So it is
likewise in this case; he who has not settled this in his heart, That Religion
is his business, and that God alone is the Portion of his Soul, and that all
other things are but vain, or at the best but indifferent; will be apt to turn
aside to those Vanities, which he has not yet learned to disesteem. But on the
other hand, he who is thus persuaded, is not so like to go astray; but having
fixed his End, and that so wisely, will be apt to proceed more Evenly and
Regularly toward the attainment of it. If any thing happens to come in his way
to tempt or divert him, he presently remembers that this is contrary to his
measures, and to the choice he has made. And therefore he turns away from the
Temptation, and his heart turns toward God, and minds him that He is his
portion, which it would be a madness to deprive himself of, for any of the
foolish momentary enjoyments of Sin. No doubt they, who have seriously made
such a Choice, will find themselves to be thus engaged; and there is scarcely
any Temptation, which such a posture of mind will not enable a good man to
resist and overcome.

Secondly, the benefit of making God our Choice and Portion, appears, by the
Ease and Comfort of it in every Condition. First as for Ease; it is an uneasy
thing to have ones mind unsettled, and much worse to have it settled on a wrong
Object, which is the case of all vicious and ungodly men. For either such men
do not prefix to themselves any certain End, but live at Large, like the
irrational Creatures, that eat and drink and enjoy what is before them, without
considering any farther end of their being; or else they addict themselves to
some particular Vice or Vanity, which instead of easing and comforting the
mind, afflicts and confounds it, when a man comes to reflect on the miserable
Choice he has made. On the other hand, nothing can contribute more to a state
of rest and inward satisfaction, than to have one's Choice settled, and to have
it fixed so happily as upon God. This sets the whole business of a man's life at
a stay, and frees him from the solicitude of his thoughts, and from the trouble
of farther consultation. It answers his mind, as to the great Question of
happiness; and so settles his spirit, and puts him into such a condition, that
it is not an easy matter to disturb the repose, and happiness of his life. It Is
likewise highly beneficial in respect of the Comfort of it in every condition.
If the Lord be our portion, it cannot be imagined that we can want any thing
that is good for us. For whatsoever is wanting in other kinds, is abundantly
made up in him. His love and favor, and blessing, and assistance, the
consideration of his gracious providence, and the hopes of his glorious
promises, are sufficient to make us happy, whatsoever our outward condition be.
There will be Concussions in the World, and Troubles in men's particular
affairs. Sad casualties, sicknesses, disappointments, losses, calumnies,
defamations, oppression, and violence; these are the common Entertainments with
which the World treats its guests at one time or other. All which, tho they be
grievous to flesh and blood, yet they have not that powerful, nor malignant
influence upon those who trust in God, that they have upon others who live on
themselves. If they happen to be surprised at the first approaches of trouble,
they soon recall and recover themselves. They know they have a friend, and they
look up to him, and that (like our Savior's presence with his Disciples on the
Sea) calms, and stills the rage of their troubles, and furnishes them with such
considerations as these. What tho my Friends are taken from me? yet God is with
me, who took me out of my Mother's Womb, and has sustained me ever since I was
born. What tho my health be impaired, and my body grown feeble, so that I
cannot enjoy my self as formerly? Alas! this is not the thing on which I
depend, this weakness may bring me nearer to that which is my main End, of
which if I secure my duty, I am sure, neither pain, nor age, nor any other
Accident can deprive me. What though my portion in the World be small? yet I
have the Creator and Disposer of it. Tho I am low, he is high above all; and I
am sure his Providence takes a care of me. I am rich enough, if I can but keep
Patience and Integrity, Lord thou art my Portion, Oh! make me happy in a
faithful adherence to thee, and in the communications of thy Love and Goodness
to me, and I have enough.

This has always been the Refuge and Comfort of the People of God, to retire
to Him, and there to hide and shelter themselves from the storms of this
present evil World. This bore up Job's spirit, and helped him to get above the
miseries of his Condition; I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. Job. 19. 25.

The same was David's constant refuge, who in the midst of the greatest dangers
and distresses, when he had nothing left to secure him, but God's protection;
thought himself safer in that, than in the security of Castles and fenced
Cities. And therefore he so often calls God his Refuge, and strong hold, his
Castle, and deliverer: Not only because he trusted that He would deliver him
out of his troubles, but because he found that he supported him under them; and
gave him such Comfort, as made his Condition happy, when in outward appearance
it seemed to be desperate.

Of this we have many Instances in the story of his Life, particularly after
the sacking of Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Where the text says of him, that he was
greatly distressed; for the people spoke of stoning him; (but it is added in the
close of the verse) but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. The like
he declares of himself, Ps. 142. 4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld;
but there was no man that would know me. Refuge failed me, no man cared for my
Soul. I cried unto the O Lord; I said, thou art my Refuge and my Portion in the
Land of the living. The same was the comfort of the three Children, when they
had no other prospect, but that of Death, and a burning fiery Furnace. Our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us, Dan. 3. 17.

To these we may add the Examples of the Apostles, and First believers; whose
lives were a continual warfare, yet they were more than Conquerors. They were
compassed about with Evils on every side: but they were so far from being
distressed or cast down at it, that they joyed in God, and rejoiced in their
Tribulation. They had nothing, yet having him for their Portion, they were as
though they had possessed all things.

Now he who has thus settled his Affairs, that he is or may be happy, in
despite of the World, and the worst things he can meet with in it, cannot but
be granted to have taken a very wise course, and to have made a very wise and
beneficial Choice.

Thirdly, the Benefit of it is seen in this, that it is an infallible means to
mortify us to this World; because it engages us not to make any other thing our
Portion. But this will fall in most fitly with the last particular, which shall
be, to Enquire, by what means we may compass this great End and business of our
Lives, To have God for our Portion.

The best direction in this case will be,

First, that we choose him for our Portion. And Secondly, that we do as David
resolves in the close of the verse, I have said that I will keep thy word.

First, to choose him for our portion, is the way to make him so. If this seem a
small or easy matter, we must know that there is a great deal comprehended in
this Choice. It implies that we prefer God in our Judgment, and Esteem, above
all other things; and that we prefer his Love and Service, before all the
delights, and present advantages of Sin. It amounts in effect to what was
mentioned before, That we make not any other thing our portion. Other things we
may have, and esteem, and enjoy them two, in their just measure and degree: but
we must not overvalue them, nor dote on them, we must not bestow our hearts on
them, nor repose our trust and happiness in them. God must be uppermost in our
love and esteem, (as Solomon chose Wisdom before Riches and Honor) otherwise
he will not be our Portion.

To this purpose our Savior has told us in effect, That we cannot have our
Treasure on Earth, and in Heaven, Matt. 6. 19. He has told us, That we cannot
serve two Masters, God and Mammon; if the one be our Portion, the other cannot,
will not be.

But since we are allowed to love other things, how shall we know whether we
make them our Portion or not? We may know it by the room and place those things
have in our hearts. If they have the pre-eminence, they are our Portion; for
two Chiefs or Principals cannot consist together in our choice. If God be our
Portion, all other things will be chosen, and loved, and used in subordination
to him, and his love and Service.

It will not be difficult for us, if we observe the motions of our own hearts,
to make a Judgment concerning our selves. In the Course of business and
Temptation, we may sometimes observe a kind of Competition betwixt God and our
selves; that is, betwixt our duty, and our corrupt Inclination and Interests.
Now when it is come to a struggle and Competition in the Will, observe which
side usually prevails, and we shall soon know how the case is with us.

If the awe and love of God, and a Religious sense of our duty, prevail; we may
conclude we are right so far. But if vain and corrupt inclinations prevail; we
may so far conclude, that God is not our Portion. For that is every man's
Portion, which he prefers, and values, and seeks after most: Indeed it is in
effect his God, and his being carried out after it with love and delight, is
that Idolatry of the heart, of which the Scripture speaks. For Instance, He who
sets his heart on the World, and hunts after riches unreasonably, and sticks
not to violate his Duty and his Conscience for the gaining and keeping of them,
and prefers them before the true Riches; such a man has his portion in this
World, and is guilty of that Covetousness, which the Scripture calls Idolatry.
The ambitious man likewise, who will do any thing to be great, and climbs up to
it by base complainces and unworthy Actions, he has made choice of his Object,
Vanity is his Portion: And so for those who make their Belly and their pleasure
their God, meat and drink and other base sensual Liberties are their Portion.
So likewise the Envious and Malicious, who will contrive and repay evil, and
practice revenge (contrary to the express will and Law of God,) mischief is
their darling and their Portion. The thing is as true in all other Instances,
where it is plain that our duty lies on one hand, and Sin on the other. If we
see the sin before us, and accept of the Temptation to it, we do by just
Interpretation prefer it before God, and the rewards of Religion, and take it
for our Portion. That which sways a man's will, and bears rule within him, and
disposes of him and his Actions, is in very truth his Idol; howsoever he may
flatter himself to the contrary, or persuade himself, through his partiality,
that God will interpret it otherwise. Consequent to this first means of making
God our Portion, is, that holy and happy temper of being Indifferent to the
things of this Life. If we can be moderate, and Indifferent about these, it is
an evidence that our hearts do not cleave to them, and that we do not look on
them as our Portion. This indifferency consists in an eveness of mind toward
temporal good and evil: not to value, or love, or desire the one, as though our
Happiness depended on it; nor to dread the other, so as to think our selves
miserable and undone, when any temporal evil befalls us; but to look upon both
with a deference and submission to the will of God, always esteeming him as our
main refuge and dependence. For the maintaining and preserving of which good
indifferency, we must take heed of eager and importunate desires on the one
hand, and of excessive fears and solicitude on the other. For people to be sick
for any thing they desire, as Ahab was for Naboth's Vineyard, 1 Kings, 21. Or
to be clamorous, and importunate, as Rachel was, saying, give me Children or
else I dye, Genesis 30. 1. Or to be distressed at any cross accident, as Rebecca
was, only on supposition of Jacob's marrying one of the Daughters of Heth,
saying, What good shall my Life do me? Genesis 27. 46. Or indeed as David was for
his ungracious Son Absalom, when God had but newly delivered him out of his
hand, so as to wish, would God I had died for thee, 2 Samuel 18. 33. It is too
much for good people to be thus Violently concerned for any of these things.
When we fear things, or grieve for them, with so much dejection and distress of
mind; it is a sign we loved them too well, and that we do not depend upon God so
entirely as we ought: and so on the other hand, when we long for any thing with
so great Ardour, and Intensness of desire; it is a sign we place our happiness
in it, and that we could be willing to quit all else, and to make it our
Portion. It argues that we look not much unto God, nor regard what his Will and
Pleasure is, if we can but accomplish our own desires on any Terms. Such
eagerness and impetuousness of affection shows, that our minds are not stayed
upon God, but that we look after other things besides him as Principal
Ingredients of our happiness. It shows that we are not rooted and grounded in
his Love, and that our Wills are not sufficiently subdued to his Holy Will and
just Government. It is a matter of great consequence therefore, to have this
indifferency firmly settled in our minds, as that which will minister greatly
to the ease and happiness of our lives; and without which, in some good
measure, we cannot be said in any tolerable sense to have God for our Portion.

Lastly, If we would have God for our Portion, we must do as David here
resolves and promises, I said (or I have promised) that I would keep thy Word.

To keep God's word, is the same, as to do his Commandments; which the Psalmist
subjoyns as the condition of that high privilege of having God for his Portion.

He is not to be had on any other Terms; neither are we to expect that he will
make us happy in his favor, when we provoke him with our Sins. These intercept
the Influences of his Grace, and obscure the light of his Countenance. They
displease, and provoke our Heavenly Father, and make us unmeet for the Portion
and Inheritance of his Children. If we would have him for our God, we must be
his People; and how can that be made appear, but by being governed by his Laws?
This is the constant Tenor of the Covenant; and there is no pretense, nor
privilege whatsoever, that can entitle us to the blessings of it, unless we
walk as the People of God. It Is not enough that we call our selves his People,
neither is it enough to do as those spoken of in the Prophet Ezech. 33. 31.
They sit before thee as my people, and hear thy words, but they will not do
them, for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after
their Covetousness. God is not to be imposed upon by such Pretenses, neither
will he be flattered, where he is not truly loved and obeyed. The truth of
which is to be tried by that rule of the Apostle, Romans 6. 16. Whom ye yield
your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of
Sin unto death, or of obedience unto Righteousness. It is not enough that we
wear his Livery, or bear the badge of his Servants; but we must do him actual
service, otherwise we cannot expect to receive wages from him.

God was in a peculiar manner the God of Israel, and he calls himself a Husband
to Israel; but when they deserted his service, and committed abomination, he
retracted that Relation; and commanded the Prophet to use the name Lo-ammi^ for
ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. Hos. 1. 9. and Chapter 2. 2.
she is not my wife, neither am I her Husband. God will not be ours, unless we
be His, neither will it avail us to be his in Name only, but we must be so in
deed and in truth.

After all this it must be acknowledged, that we are frail sinful Creatures,
and that our great security and confidence lies in the Infinite Mercies of God,
and the merits of our Savior. But it is a Religious care over our selves and
over our ways, that qualifies, and makes us fit for the mercy of God: that he
may pardon that, wherein through weakness we come short of our duty. This was
the Course that David took, whom we find begging of God for mercy, verse. 2. be
merciful unto me according to thy word; but withal he resolves in this verse,
to keep God's Law, and verse. 3. he is said to have performed what he promised,
I turned my Feet to thy Testimonies. And so Job, tho his great Confidence was
in God, yet the sense of his own Integrity made his confidence more rational,
and satisfied him that it was not only a vain presumption. And therefore he
thought it fit to make protestation of his Innocence and Integrity* Chapter 31.
To this purpose our Savior plainly tells that young man, Mat. 19. 17. if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Where he makes the one of these
the necessary Condition of the other, and implies, that no man can obtain
Eternal life without keeping the Commandments.

One thing more may be observed from the form of the words, I have said, or I
have promised, that I would keep thy words; the Psalmist seems here to call to
mind, and renew some former resolution and promise, whereby he had more
solemnly devoted himself to the Service of God.

Herein we shall do well to follow his Example. Doubtless good Resolutions (not
to speak now of Vows) are of great use to help to keep us close to our duty.
For when a man finds himself, bound (as it were) by his own act and deed, and
engaged by a Covenant which he has made with himself, upon the best and most
important Reasons; this cannot but strengthen him in the performance of his
duty. David bound himself in the strictest bonds of this kind, as is more fully
expressed, verse, 106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
Righteous Judgments.

Besides, as this is useful to our selves, so it is available with God, for the
obtaining of his favor. For when we thus dedicate and devote our selves and
our lives to his service, it will move him to communicate himself more freely
to us, and to become our Portion.

The design of all that has been said, is first to move every considerate
person, to enter into Account with himself, and see what Choice he has made.
Let him ask himself what has been, and is his main business, and design in the
World, and see what answer his Conscience will make him.

If he have yet made no settled Choice, he has done very unwisely in spending
so much time without design. If he have made a wrong Choice, it is high time to
inquire into it, to the end he may be convinced of his Error, and amend it.

Let him know then that every one who lives in any vice or custom of Sin, is
justly interpreted to have made that his Choice; although perhaps he have not
chosen it with the Circumstances of a formal Deliberation and Election. Now for
the recovery of such a one, it is necessary for him to make an Estimate of the
quality and true Value of that which he has accepted of for his Portion. And
indeed in this respect a vicious person may be said to have some advantage by
his folly; because he is, or may be convinced out of his own experience, of the
Emptiness, vexation, and dissatisfaction of the ways of Sin. If such a one
would but hearken to his own reason, and conscience, or if he would but
diligently consult his Memory, I believe it might be left to himself to make
his own Choice without any farther direction. Let him turn back, and see of
what nature those things are, about which he has been busied all this while.
Let him ask his Soul, whether he has found comfort, or satisfaction, in any of
those things which he has hunted after with the neglect, or gross Violation of
his duty; what good any of his Sins ever did him; and whether he has any
reasonable hopes that they will do him good in the End? Whether he can think
that any of those things which he has seen, or enjoyed, or addicted himself to
in the World, are a fit Portion for an immortal Creature? whether he has met
with any Object, that is able to make him substantially happy, and to secure
him in that happy State? He must be more than an Ordinary wretch, that will
pretend to affirm any such thing; and if there be no such Object here to be
found, he may be sure he has been wrong all this while, and it concerns him now
to make a wise and a better Choice.

And indeed, if we do but duly attend to them, our own minds will point and
direct us to God. They naturally incline toward him, as things do toward
their center and place of rest. He is the Supreme good of our Souls, and
therefore he alone is to be chosen, and all other things to be neglected, and
despised, in Comparison of him.

Secondly, if we are conscious to our selves, that we have made this choice, it
should engage us to exercise great degrees of Patience and Contentment; and
help to moderate our fears and sorrows for other things. For why? if God be our
Portion, is it not enough? is not he Alsufficient? cannot he make us happy,
unless the World also smile upon us? Indeed we are too apt to think so, but
it is for want of Faith, and an holy dependence upon God. If we could live up to
the Effects of having God for our Portion, it would mightily raise and enable
our Spirits, and set us much above the reach of worldly Successes and Events.
Too great concernment about these is a disparaging of our Choice, and discovers
Worldliness, Irresolution, and Folly. It Is to imitate the folly of that Miser,
who pined for the loss of his smoke, when his Coffers were full, and his
Fortune over-flowed.

Lastly, as we ought to choose God for our Portion, so ought we to live
continually in the View and sense of the choice we have made; that so we may
neither forget our engagements, nor contradict what we have done, nor frustrate
our selves of our main End, by any contrary intermediate Actions. Every way of
Wickedness makes it appear, that our Choice in this kind is but dissembled, and
that there is nothing of truth or reality in it. For how can any one say, that
God is his Portion, when he prefer's other things? How can thou, without
blushing and confusion, say to God, Thou art my Portion, when thy heart goes
another way; and thou followest thy own will and ways and Inclinations, which
are contrary to his will, and the rules and Laws which he has prescribed? Thou
may not think that he will be thy Portion ever the more for such a nominal,
pretended, superficial Choice.

What therefore must we do? We must keep close to our Choice, and see that our
behavior may be agreeable to it. We must often call it to mind, and keep it,
as it were always in our Eye; and by the View of that (as of our Port) we
shall be directed the better to steer our Course.

We should likewise often recollect, and call to mind, our settled Religious
Principles. We should thus commune with our hearts, I have determined long ago,
that nothing in this World is to be depended on for happiness. I will therefore
use and enjoy every thing here as tho I did it not. I believe, and by
Experience find, that God alone is able to satisfy my Soul; my business
therefore shall be to serve him, and seek his Favor. I am satisfied, that the
great business and concernment of every one, is, so to order their lives, that
they may dye well, and live with God for ever, when this Minute of life is
expired. And being thus convinced, and persuaded* I know I ought not to go
against my own sentiments, but to live according to my Principles, and
according to my aims and expectations. I have chosen God for my Portion, which
is the highest privilege any Creature is capable of. I am therefore bound to
walk worthy of this high calling as far as I am able; and so to exercise, and
accustom my self, that I may be the better fitted for the holy Presence and
Enjoyment of God. Such principles imprinted on the Heart, and often resorted
to, will be apt to infer and produce such good effects.

The good God give every one of us the Wisdom to choose the better part, and the
Grace so to apply our selves to the obtaining of it, that it may not be taken
away from us. Amen.

FINIS.

