A DECLARATION OF THE Peaceable Royallists.
1. Concerning the King, We are not so mad, nor so foolish as to endeavor to
enslave our selves, and the whole Nation under a Tyrant. We know that King
James had his faults, and King Charles had his faults, and the present King of
Scots has his failings, as all men are sinners too too bad God knows. Indeed,
although we thought we did well in assisting the King against the Parliament,
because the word of God commanded obedience to Kings, yet had we but known of
that most dreadful curse of King James (who cursed himself and his Posterity
for ever, if he spared any that was sound guilty of Sir Thomas Overbury's
death, and after the Lord Carr was found guilty and condemned for that Fact, he
did spare him, and would never suffer him to be executed. We say, had we known
this) we should have let God alone, and not have been so forward in assisting
him in our late unhappy wars; for whosoever shall read a Book entitled The
Court of King James, and compare it with the last engagement made by the
Parliament Saturday 3d December. 1659 (the said Engagement running thus, I A. B.
do hereby declare, that I do renounce the pretended title of Charles Stewart,
and the whole Line of the late King James etc.) will find that Gods judgments
are just; Nevertheless we are exceeding sorry for that Family, out of the love
we bore to Charles out late King, because he granted many good things so
willingly, before any Arms was taken up on either side, namely, 1. The damning
all Patentees and Monopolies. 2. The taking off Ship Money. 3. That no Papists
should sit in Parliament. 4. That Bishops should not be Lords. 5. That there
should be a Parliament every three years. 6. That this Parliament should
continue until it dissolved it self. And then after all this, for the
Parliament to demand his Power from him, and because he would not give it them
to fight with him for it, we thought it was too hard measure, and that we were
bound in Conscience and duty to help him, not knowing of the aforesaid
imprecation of King James, or that the finger of God was in it. But now the
Militia being by Conquest the Parliaments right, we pray God it may be rightly
employed, and for Peace sake, and for preventing the coming in of Foreign
Nations, and for poor-old Charles his sake, our desires are, 1

That Charles Stewart may be but only Speaker of the Parliament, and have no
more Power then William Lenthal had in Parliament, and that an hostage may be
sent into France for him, to come hither to that purpose, and that there may be
successive Parliaments, and he but the Speaker; And we will all be quiet and
submit to the Parliament, and their Army, in all things necessary to Peace and
security of the Nation, and for Peace and good Trading with Foreign Nations.

2. Concerning Church matters, we do not desire a rigid Episcopacy no more then
a rigid Presbytery, (which is detestable to us) we are now indeed become
Independants, and are fain to Congregate where we can to worship God in the Old
way; and our Ministers have no Tithes, but are content with the Alms of our
Congregations, and we desire only but our liberty of whose Office should be
only to oversee all private Congregations, that every one should worship the
true God according to the Scriptures, So that no Atheism, nor idolatry, nor any
wicked worship should be introduced; and for Anabaptists, so long as they
Baptize in the same Faith, we are not against them. And for the Quakers so long
as they confess Christ to be a light in their Conscience, and walk honestly by
that light, and do not introduce any Doctrine against Christ's Doctrine, we are
not against them neither.

3. We confess Gods just Judgments upon those of our profession, that have
been notorious lewd persons, we are sorry for the former pride of our Lords and
Gentry, Our Bishops and Ministers also have indeed been too idle, too proud and
too covetous in times past; and the prophanness and wickedness of many, will be
laid to their charge. We consider, that among all Sects and Opinions in
Religion, there are some good, and some wicked among all; and for the good
people amongst them all, we desire to live in peace with, but for the wicked of
all parties, we desire they may all be punished by the Magistrates, according
to the Laws. And from henceforth we disclaim and disown all Swearers,
Drunkards, Whoremongers, Blasphemers, profane persons, Thieves, Cheaters,
Liars, Hypocrites, Idolaters, Murderers and Extortioners, etc. from cowing into
our Congregations, or joining in communion with us, according to our Liturgy
or Book of Common Prayer, if we know them to be such wicked people.

Also we desire all Breakers of Oaths, Vows, and Protestations, and Engagements
(who ever they are) to repent, that God may forgive them as well as the King.
And that King James may be their warning. And when Peace is settled, we hope
all poor penitent Royallists shall have some relief for former losses and
Sequestrations.

BEATI PACIFICI.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Freeman, 1659.


