A DECLARATION of some of the SUFFERINGS OF THE People of God CALLED QUAKERS.
FRIENDS,
WE lay these sufferings before you who have known sufferings, and been
exercised therewith, for you in this the day of your prosperity, in the Fear of
the Lord and his Wisdom, to read over and consider the sufferings of the People
of God, who have suffered all along in the days of the Commonwealth, and of
the two Protectors, and now suffers in the Kings Name, for Christ and his
Truths sake, and for obeying his commands.

And we have suffered all along under these changeable powers before you, our
meetings have been broken up, our houses plucked down, our windows broken, and
pulled out of our Meetings, and cruelly abused, knocked down, and stones and
dirt thrown at us, and have suffered cruel mockings, and shameful reproaches,
and many whipped, stockt, and laid in Irons, and D^n^ (...), and be^ty (...), and
prisoned till death, and some put to death ^n these Dominions, and the only
thing has been for the speaking of the truth, and warning people of the day
that is come upon them (yea, many in sackcloth and ashes) who would not hear
nor regard, whose day of visitation is over.

And there has suffered for Conscience sake and the Truths sake (the causes
being hereafter expressed) the number of 3179.

1. For meeting together in the Fear of the Lord, as the Saints did in the
primitive times, and exhorting one another, and building up one another, and
praying together in their several houses, as the Apostles did from house to
house, have been beat, imprisoned, and not suffered to pray together as Daniel
did, but plucked us up by the hair of the head when we have been at prayers; and
some have been stockt and whipped, and others their ^^rses taken from them, and
some fined and imprisoned, some until death, and some knocked down and left for
dead, others dragged on the ground by the hair of their heads and cruelly beaten
and trod upon, their clothes rent, and blood shed, not sparing women with
Child, nor old age, the number of 827 persons.

And they broke up our Meetings in the Common Wealths and Olivers time, under
pretense, that we plotted to bring in Charles Stuart; and now he is come in,
they are broken up by some of your Magistrates, under pretense that we are
against the King, but we a^e in that which cannot lift up a hand, nor plot
against him nor no man, by which we see all things, and have unity with God,
and meets together to worship him in the Spirit and Truth, and thus are we
deprived of it, by many who have been against us, as much formerly as now, who
if they were tried, they are neither Friends to themselves, nor to God, nor the
King, who will not let us have so much liberty as Ballet fingers and such as
use plays, nor let us meet to pray together, and build up one another in the
Holy Faith, which was the command of the Apostle to the Saints in the Primitive
times, for which practice have we suffered all along, as sheep for the
slaughter, and as such as have no helpers in the earth, whose lives from it are
taken: And our sufferings has been also great in Scotland, Ireland, Virginia,
and New England, the number of Sufferers and multitude of which sufferings and
meetings which have been broken, are to large, hardly to be mentioned or
numbered.

2. And for not going to the public worship, many have been fined and
imprisoned, and their goods taken from them; Now where do you ever read that
ever the Jews or Gentiles ever fined the Christians for not coming to the
Temple at Jerusalem, or the Synagogue, or Dianas Temple? Nay, is it not worse
then the Turks paying their Sessments and Taxes? May they not have their
liberty there to meet together to Pray and Worship God? ye men of understanding
cons^der this.

3. And for warning people to repent (in the Markets and other places) of their
sin and wickedness, have been whipped, stockt, and put in Fetters and Irons, and
some imprisoned, the number of 516 persons.

4. And ^^r not swearing, as Christ commands they should not swear, for obeying
his Doctrine, and keeping to yea and nay in their Communications, according to
his command, have been Stockt, Whipped, Fined and Imprisoned, and suffered the
loss of their goods ^^8 Persons.

And we have suffered under pretense of being Papists and Popishly affected,
and our Friends have suffered for going beyond the Seas to declare against the
Papists, George Ba ly imprisoned till death in France, one John Love imprisoned
till death in the Inquisition in Rome, and John Parrot ^es there yet in Prison
to finish his Testimony for the Truth and against Idolatry, and yet the Oath of
Abjuration has been tendered unto us to make a prey on us, knowing that our
Principle was, that we could not swear no manner of Oath, for which cause we
have suffered in our Lives and Estates; and now the O^th of Supremacy and
Allegiance is tendered to us against the Pope, to make a prey upon us that knows
our Principle is against the Papists, that knows our P^^nciple that we cannot
swear at all no Oath, but keeps to yea and nay in our Communications, according
to Christ's Doctrine, who declares against all Popery and the supremacy of it;
Now if (...) yea be not yea, and nay nay so found to you and all men upon the
earth, then let us suffer for breaking of that, as much as for breaking an
Oath; and besides very illegally is that Oath put to us, as you may see in the
examining of the manner of their putting it to us.

5. For not paying toward the repair of Steeple Houses, and for not paying
Clerks wages, have had their goods spoiled, strained, and taken away above
treble the demand, 256, which is worse then ever we read of the Jews or
Gentiles, that ever they made the Christians do, to repair Dianas Temple, or
the Jews Synagogue or Temple, that they fined them, and took their goods for
not doing so.

6. For visiting Friends in Prison, and carrying them necessaries that lay in
nasty Straw and Dungeons, Fetters and Irons, locked up, beat and bruised their
bodies like jellies, have been ^mprisoned and beat, and some whipped and stockt,
others fined and their goods taken away, and some sent away w^^h passes, as
wanderers and vagabonds, though Persons of Estates, and some have had their
goods taken and been imprisoned besides for entertaining of their friends,
which ^s worse then the heathen did to the Apostle, who suffered his
acquaintance to come to him and visit him, and he taught in his own hired house
in Rome, where the Seat of the Emperor was; and worse then ever we read the
Heathen and the Jews did to the Christians in the Primitive times; and
therefore what can be paraleld with this Generation, for it is for Truth and
not for evil doing for which we suffer, and for bearing witness to the Truth;
Therefore ye men of Reason and of Understanding, consider these things that
there may be a restraint of violence and not of virtue, but that virtue may be
cherished.

Few minds the sufferings of the Saints and the afflictions of Joseph, but the
Apostle said, Them that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution, them that have been our greatest Persecutors, have been the
greatest in the form of Godliness, but denied the power.

7. And for not paying Tithes for Conscience sake, that bears Testimony to the
^^erlasting Priesthood, that ends the first, that takes Tithes, who redeems out
of the earth, have suffered long and tedious Imprisonment, besides the loss
and spoil of their goods while at the same time their bodies have been kept in
prison in those holes and nasty Dungeons, 918. and some have suffered as
aforesaid for small sums, as four pence, twelve pence, eighteen pence, and two
shillings, and for about 706. pounds 8. shillings and 11 pence demand for
Tithes, the Priests and others have taken 3000 pound 3 shillings and eight
pence, and some of them have not been contented with treble damages, but some
of them have taken ten times more then their pretended due has been, which we
never read that so many did suffer in the Apostles and primitive times for not
paying tithes to the Jewish priesthood (which Christ ended and tithes,) or to
the Gentiles, as we have done in our age within this nine or ten years, nor in
all these heads or particulars above mentioned, though many of the Martyrs we
believe have suffered for not swearing, and not paying Tithes since the
Apostles days, by them who are called Christians, as you may read in the book
of the Martyrs, that suffered and bore their Testimony to the life of Jesus,
which used the word Thou to a single person, and c^^ld ^^t y^u off their Hat,
as we conduct for Conscience sake, and cannot give men the honor below, and
though we would have all men clothed with that honor which is from above, and
we have all men in esteem, and would have them be saved and come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

Imprisoned in the Kings name,

Because for Conscience sake they cannot swear, as Christ commands they should
not swear, but keep to yea and nay in their Communications, 74 persons.

Hartford-shire.
Richard Martin. Edward Fag. Thomas Se^et.
Committed to prison the ninth of the fifth month, 1660. the cause was, they
were summoned at a Sessions to appear as Jurors which they did, and were
willing to serve their Country, but because they could not swear, the Court
fined them sive pound each of them, and to lie in prison until they paid it,
one James Cooper being the chief Judge of the Court.

Oxfordshire.
Thomas Goodaire. Benjamin Staples.
Committed to Prison the fifteenth day of the seventh month 1660. by Sir Wiliam
Walter (so called) and Sir Thomas Pennaston because for conscience they could
not swear; and the Oath of Allegiance being tendered to them the second time,
for refusing again to swear, the said William Walter being Judge) with the rest
of the Bench passed this sentence against them following: You are out of the
Kings protection, and all your Lands, Goods and Chattels are forfeited, and to
be seized upon for the use of the King, and you are to remain in prison during
the Kings pleasure.

Cheshire.
Alexander Parker imprisoned in Chester common Goal, because for Conscience
sake he could not take the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

Twenty of these following were committed to the common Goal in Chester
(because for Conscience sake they could not take the Oath of Allegiance) the
eighteenth of the eighth month, 1660. by Grosvenor and Peter Dutton called
Justices.

William Thomlisson. Richard Thomlisson. Randle Coxton. Randle Hare. Thomas
Tailor. John Madocks. John Badly. William Hill. John Parker. Roger Smith. Owen
Painter. John Newton. Richard Thomlisson. Henry Morcy. Ed. Acion White. William
Lake. John Maddock. Thomas Probbin. Robert Prichard. Roger Andrews. John ap
Vrian. R^ger ap Vrian. William Matthews.
Glamorgan-shire.
Twenty of these following were taken out of a peaceable meeting, and had
before the Governor of Cardiff, and the rest of them called Justices, who
proffered them the Oath of Allegiance, and because for Conscience sake they
could not swear, they are committed to prison in Cardiff, with the other two,
and there remains.

Edward Edwards. John Richard. Toby Hody. Rowland Thomas. Matthew Ienkin. James
Thomas. Thomas Isha. William David. Perc. Robert. Jenkin Evan. James Lewis.
John Mayo. Walter William. Morgan Harvy. John David. Thomas Roberts. Evan
Phillip. William Harvy. William Moor. Thomas Williams. Francis Gauler. Richard
Adams.
Wilt-shire.
Thomas Troud of Dinton being summoned to serve in a Jury at the last Assizes
at Sarum, he did appear, intending to do the said service, as truly and justly
as the Lord should enable him, but refusing to take the Oath, was fined ten
pounds, and committed to prison in Fisherton Anger, and there remains.

Cumberland.
John Bewly committed to the Goal in Carlisle the nineteenth day of the seventh
month, 1660. by John Eylonly, and John Deuton called Justices, because for
Conscience sake he could not swear.

James Adamson committed to the aforesaid Goal, by him called Sir Francis
Samkeld the seventh day of the eighth month, 1660. because for Conscience sake
could not swear.

William Laithwait committed to the aforesaid Prison, by the said Francis
Sawk^^^ the same day, the cause was, there being a great contention about James
Adamson words, which he had spoke to the Justice (between the Justice and the
people, the said William standing by said, take heed of adding to his words, at
which the Justices Clerk swore, so William said to the Justice, if justice were
rightly executed, it would take hold on swearers, then said the Justice
laughingly, well, i will take ten groats o^ him another time, then the swearing
Clerk spoke to the Justice to proffer William the Oath of Supremacy, etc. And
because he said he could not break the Command of Christ, who says Swear not
at all, he was committed to Prison as aforesaid, and there remains.

Northampton.
Daniel Wills, George Robinson, William Acton, All committed to Northampton
Goal in the Seventh Month, 1660. Because for Conscience sake they could not
take the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

Lancashire.
John Lawson, William Gibson, James Smith, Imprisoned in Lancaster-Castle,
because for Conscience sake they could not take the Oath of Allegiance.

Surrey.
Thomas Patchen, and Henry Gill, Imprisoned for not swearing, by Daniel Harvey,
Adam Brown, and Nicholas Carew.

Berkshire.
Henry Hedges, John Giles, Humphrey Knowles, Leonard Cole, Andrew Pearson, All
in Prison in Reading Goal, because for Conscience sake they could not take the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Cornwall.
John Kirton, Edward Angier, Imprisoned in Lanceston, because for Conscience
sake they could not swear.

Pembrookshire.
Thomas Barret, David Gibbon, James Picton, Imprisoned by one called Sir
William Murton, and one Simon Degg, because they could not take the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

Thomas Symins, Hugh Symins, Committed to Prison by James Lloyd, and James
Bowen, called Justices, upon the complaint of one Jenkin Lewis Clerk, that they
had neglected the Parish Church for one whole year, the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy was tendered to them, and because for Conscience sake they could not
swear, they were sent to Prison.

William Bateman, Morgan Eynon, Henry Reely, Committed to Prison, because they
could not take the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

Norfolk.
Robert Alling of Buxton, the 24th of the Sixth Month, 1660. Committed to
Prison, because he could not swear, nor put off his Hatt, by one Francis Cory.

Middlesex.
Edward B^lling, Steven Heart, Richard Hills, Imprisoned, because for Conscience
sake they could not take the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

These following are Imprisoned for not paying Tithes, who bears Testimony to
the everlasting Priesthood that ends the first that takes Tithes, who Redeems
out of the Earth.
Hartfordshire.
Matthew Harold, Samuel Rud, both Committed to Prison on the Twelfth day of the
Eighth Month 1660. by Nathanael Stratton, Under-Bailiff to William Cross, by
the Order of Ralph Sadler Impropriator in the same Parish, one of them for the
tithe of 7 Acres of Corn, the other for the tithe of 3 Rudes of Barley.

Thomas Wood, John Barfoot, Committed to Prison the 31 day of the 5th Month
called July, in the year aforesaid, by Order from William Clerk, who Rented the
tithes of Roger Elbrow, Priest of Widford; and the said Clerk caused to be
taken from the ^^id Thomas VVood goods worth 20 l. for the Tithes of 12 Acres
and a half of Corn, most of it Barley and Pease; and from John Barfoot was
taken Three Pounds-worth of goods, and their Bodies still kept in Prison.

William Staly, of Much Munden, committed to prison at the suit of Ralph Sadler
Impropriator, the 21 day of the 8th Month, 1660. for the tithe of Two Acres of
Barley.

Edward Brocket, of Hitchon, Imprisoned the 18th day of the fifth Month, 1660
for Tithe, by a VVarrant from William Russell, called Earl of Bedford.

John Roberts of Hitchen, Imprisoned the 25th of the same Month for Tithe by
the same Order.

Somersetshire.
Richard Adams of Lymington, Imprisoned the Tenth day of the Sixth Month, 1660.
by Warrant from William Lacy Sheriff, at the suit of Robert Brayn Priest of
Lymington, for not paying him Tithes, where he lay in Prison till death.

William Parsons of Lymington Imprisoned the 30th of the 6th Month, 1660 at the
suit of the said Robert Brayn Priest.

Thomas Morford, John Evans, of Ingsbatch in the Parish of Ingscomb, were
Imprisoned the 22 day of the 6th Month 1660. for tithes, at the suit of James
Masters Priest.

Julian Evans of the same, Aged near 100 years, was brought Prisoner the same
day to Ilchester at the suit of the same Priest Masters. The said Julian,
Thomas Morford, and John Evans, all three Imprisoned for the tithe of one
Living.

Jerome Langdon of Queen Camel, Aged about 67 years, was Imprisoned the 27th
day of the 6th Month 1660. at the suit of Robert Newman Impropriator, for one
Acre, being about one Load, the tithe whereof at utmost might be worth about 4
s.

William Martin of Queen Camel, Imprisoned the 27th of the 6th Month 1660. at
the suit of the said Robert Newman, for the tithe Hay of about Four Acres of
Meadow, worth about 4 s.

Mary Thatcher of Queen-Camel Widow, Aged about 64 years, having 4 Children,
was Imprisoned the 27th day of the 6th Month 1660. at the suit of the said
Newman, for the tithe of about one Acre and three yards of ground, not worth
above 6 s.

John Goodson of Merston Magna, was Imprisoned the 17th day of the 7th Month,
1660. at the suit of Henry Andrews, Farmer to the said Robert Newman, of the
tithes of Camel, for Pitching three parts of a Load of Beans to the Plough on
the behalf of his friend John Langdon (a Prisoner for tithes) and for no other
cause as he knows, Thomas Pitman, and Robert Baker Bailiffs, with others, broke
open the door upon him with much violence, and refused to take Bond of
Appearance, though offered by six sufficient men, until the Bailiffs had spent
10 s. 4 d. at an Alehouse in little more than one night; then pretended they
would take Bail, if he would pay the score, the which he refusing to do, was
carried Prisoner to Ilchester.

Thomas Hurd of ^^merton, Imprisoned the 7th day of the 7th Month, 1660. for
tithes, at the sui^ of William Prynn Impropriator.

John Sage of Chewton, Imprisoned the 20th day of the 7th Month 1660. at the
suit of Richard Kinsmel Impropriator.

John Cole and Richard Hill of Furrington, Imprisoned the 20th day of the 7th
Month, 1660. at the suit of the said Richard Kinsmel Impropriator.

William Hagget of Weston-Bamfield, Arrested the 5th day of the 7th Month 1660.
at the suit of Henry Andrews, only for laboring in the time of Harvest to
hell, in the Corn of John Langdon a Prisoner as aforesaid.

Yorkshire.
Henry Thompson of Weston Imprisoned in York Castle, the 11th of the 8th Mon^^
called October, 1660. for tithes, by William Vavasor of Burley Impropriator.

Wilts.
Isaac Self of Market-Lavington, Imprisoned in Fisherton-Anger for tithes, by
one I hn Mearweather an Impropriator.

William Bartlet of the same, Imprisoned in the same Goal for tithes, by the
some Impropriator, and have both remained there Eleven weeks this 20th day of
the 8th Month, 1660.

Robert H^dden of great Cheverel, in the same Goal, because he could not pay
tithes to Priest Gough of the same place, and has been a Prisoner Twelve weeks
the 20th of the 6th Month, 1660.

Cumberland.
Richard Robinson, William Rawling Francis Holeton, Imprisoned in Carlisle for
tithes, at the suit of William Granger Priest, the Second day of the 8th
Month, ^600. by George Denton called Justice.

John Potter, Imprisoned in the same Goal, the Second day of the 6th Month,
called August, 1660. at the suit of John Hodgson, Rowland Hodgson and Alexander
Hodgson, Impropriators for tithes.

Warwickshire.
Edward Corbit, John Corbit and Thomas Walker, In Prison for tithes in Warwick
Goal, where they have remained Ten weeks this 19th day of the 8th Month, 1660.

Glamorganshire.
Matthew Gibbon Prisoner in Cardi^^ for tithes.

Humphery Kirk, Richard Watford Imprisoned because they could not pay tithes.

Glocestershire 3d. 6th Month. 1660.
Thomas Hill, William Wooly Imprisoned in Gloucester Castle, because for
Conscience sake they could not pay tithes, at the suit of one John Griffin,
Priest.

Francis Pinnel, Imprisoned in the aforesaid Goal, the 8th of the 8th Month,
1660. because he could not pay tithes to Henry Heane Priest of V^veston.

Henry Lloyd and John Cox, Imprisoned upon a Capias, the 9th of the 3d Month
1660. at the suit of Edward Bowland Priest, for tithes.

Norfolk.
William Tilney, of Bellow, Imprisoned at the suit of John Phillips Priest for
tithes, the 21 of the 7th Month 1660. and remains a Prisoner.

Benjamin Lines, Committed to Prison the 24th day of the 8th Month, at the suit
of Nicholas Barwick for tithes.

Surrey.
Arthur Standbridge, Committed to Prison for tithes, at the suit of Henry
Hollowel Priest.

Richard Newman Imprisoned for tithes, at the suit of Charles Blackwel Priest.

Thomas Avery Imprisoned, because he could not pay tithes to Leonard Litchford
Priest.

Robert Tribe Imprisoned because he could not pay tithes to George Vauhan.

George Brickstock committed to prison for Tithes.

Richard Web, John Adams, Richard Beard Imprisoned at the Suit of Edward Goring
and John Apstle.

Nottinghamshire.
William Claytor Imprisoned, because for Conscience sake he could not pay
Tithes.

Cornwall.
Richard Tregenna Imprisoned at Bodmin for Tithes, at the Suit of James Forbes
Priest. John Ellis prisoner at Pensame for Tithes.

Westmorland.
Richard Berket, Richard Seddal, Imprisoned in the eighth Month, for not
swearing in a Sheriffs return.

Norfolk.
John Hilton in present sufferings because he could not swear, being summoned
to serve in a Jury at a Copy hold Court, and therefore John Lovel Lord of the
said Court, and now Justice of Peace, commanded his Bayliffe to seize all the
estate of the said John Hinton, which is done accordingly, to the vallue of
about a hundred pound, and farther threatens to throw the said John Hinton his
Wife and Children out of the possession which he bought and paid for, and that
for no other cause, but because he could not swear, though he expressed his
willingness to serve if he might have been accepted without an Oath.

Sussex.
Abraham Chrichenden, Nicholas Beard, Imprisoned for Tithes, this ninth Month,
1660.

Bucks.
John Lucas and two more in Alisberry Goal for Tithes.

Southampton.
Twenty one taken out of a peaceable Meeting, and because they could not
promise not to meet any more, were kept several days prisoners, not suffering
their food to be brought to them, eleven of which were afterward releast, but
ten still remains prisoners.

Wilts.
Giles Shurmur, John Garner, And two more commmitted to prison for Tithes.

Huntingtonshire.
Francis Lambested of Elton imprisoned, the eighth day of the ninth Month,
1660. for Tithes by John Cooper Priest of Elton aforesaid.

William Griffin imprisoned for Tithes by the said John Cooper, the thirty one
day of the sixth Month, 1660.

John Apthorp of Abotsly, imprisoned the same day for Tithes, by John Luke
impropriator.

Yorkshire.
William Overon, John Barbar, Miles Frankland, All imprisoned for Tithes a^ the
Suit of Robert Hitch Priest.

Matthew Watson imprisoned at the Suit of Robert Ludson Priest.

William Norrison imprisoned, by one called Sir William Cholmly, for having a
Meeting at his house.

Dorsetshire.
Hercules Toby and John Butler, imprisoned by Edmund Butler, the second day of
the sixth Month, 1660. for not paying him Tithe.

Robert Ring, of Glazen Broadford a man of about fourscore years of age, cast
into prison for the Tithe of one Acre of Corn, by Elias Harvy an Impropriator,
the seventeenth day of the eighth Month, 1660.

Elizabeth Masters Widow cast into Prison for Tithe, by Elias Harvy, the
seventeenth of the eighth Month, 1660. whose husband has already suffered
imprisonment until death, because he could not for Conscience sake pay him
Tithe to satisfy his covetous desire.

John Gillet cast into prison by John Hodder Priest, the ninteenth of the
eighth Month. 1660. for not paying Tithe, to satisfy the greedy desire of
that covetous hireling that never has enough.

These following are fined and imprisoned for not putting off their Hats, and
not giving men the honor below, and some for meeting together in the fear of
the Lord in their several houses, as the Saints did in the primitive times, and
for not paying Clerks wages.
UPon the sixteenth day of the 7th Month, 1660. there being a meeting of the
Lords people (who in scorn are called Quakers) in the Town of Sherborn,
consisting of about thirty persons, inhabitants of the same Town, and the
Parishes adjacent (who being met together to wait upon the Lord and worship
him, having no other end nor purpose in their thus assembling together) There
came into their meeting one Bestel a Schoolmaster of the same Town, with a
Constable and others, who did wickedly blaspheme Gods Truth, and commanded them
of the meeting to go with them to the Justices; whereupon one asked if they had
an Order either from Judge or Justices, they answered, That for Order they had
none, but the Constable was a Warrant of himself; but they said nay, and
refused to go with them. Then Bestel commanded the Constable to do his Office,
whereupon they pulled and haled them out of the house where they were peacably
met, and the said Bestel commanded the Constable to set one man to each of
them, and so to hale and drive them along to the Justice, and after they had
haled and beaten them along some part of the way, they left them; Then one
demanded their Order for their thus laying violent hands on them; So one put
his hand on his sword, and said, That was their Order (many of them having
swords and staves) Then Bestel with the Constable commanded the Tithing-man to
have them back again, while they themselves went to the justices to fetch a
Warrant; So they were brought to the Bailiffs house of the Town, where they
were kept all night with watchmen to guard them, and the ne^t day were had
before Winston Churchel called a Justice, and others, who demanded of them,
Whether they did not know of an Order against their meeting together in a
riotous manner (thus they demanded of them, though they were peaceably met
together to wait upon the Lord as the Lords people use to do) and with some
other words asked them, if they would give sureties? which thing they could not
do, being peaceable men, and having not broken any just or known Law, but only
were met together to wait on the Lord in his fear (having the word of a King,
That none should be wronged for Religion, as long as they live peaceably) So
the Constable was commanded to take them away, and a Mitimus was made, by which
nine of them were sent to the County Prison at Dorchester, and five more passed
their words to appear at the Sessions, which was about two weeks after, where
they did all appear, who being brought before the Court (of which John Davis
sat as Judge, and with him sat Winstone Churchel, Giles Strangeways, George
Fulford and Thomas Baynard, etc. called Justices) their accusation was read,
wherein was many false and wicked things charged against them, which by them
were never done nor spoken; Then they were called over, and the Schoolmaster
likewise (who was the causer of their imprisonment, but he being not present
(nor any other) to prove what was charged against them, the aforesaid John
Davis Judge of the Court questioned Winstone Churchel who committed them, for
not binding over the said Schoolmaster to prosecute against them. Then George
Fulford one of them that should have done Justice, and have freed the innocent,
when none appeared to accuse them of any evil, or the breach of any known Law)
stood up and said, There need no other evidence against them, then their
standing with their hats on in the face of the Court, which he said did
represent his Majesty's person; so silence was commanded in the Court, and that
all should be uncovered upon pain of Imprisonment, but they keeping on their
Hats, were asked the reason why they did so? who answered, It was not in
contempt of the Court, but for Conscience sake that they kept them on; Yet
notwithstanding, for no other cause but for wearing their Hats, were these
fourteen persons, whose names and fines are undermentioned, all fined by the
Court, and returned to prison to Dorchester until they pay it, although
Winstone Churchel (when they were first brought before him) said, he did not
regard the putting off of Hats, for said he, his Majesty looks not for it, yet
the same Winstone Churchel with the others aforesaid, fined them and sent them
to prison again, where they remain to this day, for no other cause but for
keeping on their hats, and called it a contempt of the Court, which they said
did represent his Majesty's person.

John Pitman fined, 10. pounds. Thomas Long the elder, 1^. p. Thomas Long the
younger, 20. s. John Hopkins, 20. shillings. Benjamin Hopkins, 20. shillings.
Joseph Hopkins, 40. shillings. William Scot, 5. pounds. John Scot fined, 40.
shillings. Francis Tuilour, 4^. shillings. George Ryal, 40. shillings. Edmond
Bound, 40. shillings. Thomas Miller, 40. shillings. Richard Philip's, 40.
shillings. Charles Noak, 40. shillings.
Bishopric.
Lancelot Wardel, Richard Wilson, Imprisoned for not putting off their Hats,
and for not respecting men's persons.

Middlesex, London.
Thomas Coveny, John Pennyman, Humphry Wolrich, Committed to prison by Richard
Brown now Mayor, for not putting off their Hats to him.

Sollomon Eccles committed to prison for going as a sign.

Essex.
George Fox junior being at a Meeting in the worship of God, was taken out of
the Meeting, by Order from the Mayor of Harwich, and in the Kings Name
committed to Prison, and since was brought to Lambeth house, and from thence is
Ordered to the custody of the Sergeant at Arms.

Robert Gressingham of Harwich sent for from his house, and is also committed,
and remains prisoner in the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, without any thin^
proved against him, or without examination, contrary to all Law and Justice.

Nottinghamshire.
Robert Carnil imprisoned in Nottingham Goal, the eighteenth day of the eighth
Month called October, 1660. being bound for William Smiths appearance in
Easter Term, so called, at which time, and at the day limited he did appear in
person.

Worcestershire.
Daniel Baker imprisoned in Worcester, for declaring against wickedness and
^^nity in the streets.

Hartfordshire.
Robert Heart committed to Prison the sixth day of the eight Month, for saying
(being bid go to Church and hear the Word of God) he could not hear it (...) a
drunkard, for he can prove by many witnesses, the Priest has been drunk many
times.

Yorkshire.
Oliver Ketterridge of Hornsey Burton in Holdernesse, imprisoned in Home
Castle, a the Suit of Francis Smith Clerk, for his wages, for saying A^^^,
being five pen. and four sheaves of Corn.

^^mitted to Prison in the Names of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, so
called, and of Oliver and Richard Cromwell, and yet remain Prisoners.
Essex.
THomas Eltom, John Eve of Much Easton imprisoned in Colchester Castle, in the
ninth month, 1659 for Tithes, at the suit of Thomas Leader priest.

John Emson, William Crow imprisoned in Colchester Castle at the suit of
Thomas Vale impropriator, the nineteenth day of the eleventh month, 1659. by a
writ of ^^tachment for not taking a copy of a Bill put into the Exchequer
against the said John Emson and William Crow by the said Thomas Vale
concerning Tithes, and remain prisoners.

William J^niveer of Broxted sent prisoner thither at the suit of John Pool
Impro^riator for Tithes, about the beginning of the ninth month, and since was
put into the same warrant with Thomas Eltom and John Eve above named, at the
suit of Thomas Leader priest of Much Easton, and now remains prisoner.

Thomas Chapman, William Freeting both imprisoned in Colchester Castle about
the seventh day of the third month, 1660. at the suit of Robert VVicks priest
of Burnham, by a writ of Attachment for trespasses against the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, so cal^ed.

Thomas Bradee of Ashleden Imprisoned in Colchester Castle the seventh day of
the third month, 1660. by a writ of Attachment for not appearing in the
Exchequer to answer to priest John Anger about Tithes.

Robert Levet of Stobbing sent prisoner to Colchester Castle at the suit of
John Sorrel impropriator, the fifteenth day of the sixth month, 1660.

John Adams of Hadsicok sent prisoner thither about the twenty sixth day of the
seventh month, 1660. by a writ of Attachment from the Keepers of the Liberty of
Eng^and (so called) and by a writ of common process both at the suit of Thomas
Wallis priest of Hadstock about Tithes, and he is now a prisoner.

Thomas Mumford and Anthony Page imprisoned in Colchester for Tithes, at the
suit of John Cooper of Saling impropriator, and Anthony Maxey impropriator, the
said Thomas has been a prisoner near three years.

VVidow Balls and William Balls both of Horsely imprisoned in Colchester, sent
prisoners to Colchester at the suit of John Write priest for Tithes, although
the said William Ball occupied no land.

Abraham Couzin, John Dankes, Wil^iam Drake, Sent Prisoners to Colchester for
doing something on the first day of the week, by Thomas Beek Mayor, and John
Shaw Recorder, and kept in Prison six weeks, and then let go upon their promise
to appear when called for.

Somerset shire.
John Langdon, Thomas Loscomb, Henry Gerrish, Ann Brock, John Roman, Robert
Carpenter, Robert Hillburn, John Comb, Tristram Gundry, George Tailor, John
Allen.

The most of these are close Prisoners for Tithes being sued in the Name of the
^eepers of the Liberty of England so called.

Oxfordshire.
Edward Butcher of Milcom Imprisoned the third day of the twelfth Month, 1659,
^y Richard White Priest of Wickington for not payment of Tithes.

Timothy Poulton of Charbery Imprisoned the ninetenth day of the eleventh
Month, 1659. at the suit of Thomas Cobb Impropriator for not payment of Tithes.

Thomas Tailor of Norley sent to Prison in Trinity Term so called, 1659. at the
^^it of Thomas Twitty Priest of the aforesaid Town for not payment of Tithes.

Thomas French, of Chippen-Norton, Imprisoned the seventh day of the second
Month, 1658. at the suit of William Thomas (Renter of the Tithes of the
aforesaid Parish) because he could not pay him Tithes.

Alexander Harris of Chalbery Imprisoned the fifth day of the eleventh Month
1657. at the suit of William Brown Priest, for not payment of Tithes.

Yorkshire, the fourteenth day of the eight Month, 1660.
Richard Towse of Garton Imprisoned in York Castle, the eleventh of the ninth
Month 1659. by Christopher Sarret of the same Town Impropriator for Tithes.

Yorkshire.
Alice Maw widow, John Halliday of Towthorp in the Woulds, Imprisoned in York
Castle for tithes the nineteenth of the ninth Month, 1659. By Thom^^ Jackson
impropiator.

William Peart and Richard Smith of Crake Imprisoned in York Castle for Tithes,
the fourth day of the first Month 1659. By John Humes Priest of the same Town,
and yet remains Prisoners.

Richard Arnel, Richard Parker, and Thomas Clark of Snaith Parish Imprisoned in
Pontefract Goal for Tithes, the nineteenth of the first Month 1659 by John
Ludley Priest of S^aith.

Cumberland.
Anthony Patinson of the Abba imprisoned the eighteenth day of October, 1659.
by Thomas Craster, and Cuthbert Studholm, called Justices, for following his
calling being a Weaver, in a Corporation Town, as they call it, although he had
served four years to the trade, and nine years in the Army.

Nottingham shire.
William Smith, Imprisoned for not paying tithes by William Packlington of
North Collingham.

Edward Laford, Imprisoned for tithes by Richard Godsane, and Richard Lamb, of
Collingham.

Robert Morefen Imprisoned at the suit of Thomas Huit called Knight, for
tithes, and after the said Robert had suffered a years imprisonment, the said
Huit died, and though no man prosecuted the said Robert, yet he is kept in
bonds by the Sheriff.

Edward Langford Imprisoned for tithes at the suit of Richard Godsaue, and

Richard Lamb, aforesaid, and he has suffered eleven Months this eighteenth
day of the eight Month 1660.

Thomas Elsam imprisoned for tithes by William Pocklington aforesaid and has
suffered above five Months.

Roger Storrs imprisoned for tithes by Richard Standfield, and has suffered
fifteen weeks.

Lincoln shire.
Robert Whitman, now a Prisoner in Lincoln for Tithes at the suit of John Coal
who hires the tithes of the priest, he has been prisoner ever since the twenty
one of the ninth Month 1659.

Vincent Frotheringham imprisoned the twenty third day of the first Month,
1659. for tithes in the aforesaid Goal at the suit of Lawrance Sandon Priest.

Lincoln.
Edward Walley, now a prisoner for tithes at the suit of Henry Wames, and James
Green, has been prisoner ever since the fourteen of the second Month, 1660.

Richard Frothingham, now a prisoner for tithes at the suit of Lawrence Sandon
a Priest, he has been a prisoner ever since the twenty one of the second
Month, 1660. This Richard is Father to the above named Vincet Forthingham, and
the Priest imprisons the Father, because he cannot satisfy for the Sons
tithes, though the old man has no interest in any Tythable goods where this
priest can claim any property.

Northamptonshire.
A poor widow woman who has two children committed to Northampton Goal near a
year since, there remains still for Tithes of about five shillings vallue, at
the Suit of one Robert Wilds Priest.

William Vincent committed to the aforesaid Goal about ten Months since, where
he yet remains, because he could not swear to his answer to one Priest Andrews
Bill.

Lancashire.
Richard Myers, Alexander Rigby, imprisoned in Lancaster Castle for not paying
Tithes.

Suffolk.
Richard White, Imprisoned in that County, at the Suit of Priest Usher, because
for Conscience sake he could not pay him Tithes.

Thomas Burchham Prisoner in Bliborough Goal for Tithes.

Barbary Jarmine Imprisoned in Ipswitch Goal, for speaking to a Priest.

John Easeling in Ipswitch Goal for Tithes.

Glocestershire, the 11th. of the 9th Month, 1659.
Thomas Hapcot Imprisoned at the Suit of Richard Bislon Priest of Breedon in
Worcestershire, for Tithes.

Ann Web Widow, imprisoned the twenty fourth of the ninth Month, 1659. upon a
Capias at the Suit of Anthony Hungerford Impropriator for Tithes.

In the County of the City of Gloucester.
Thomas White imprisoned the eighth of the eighth Month, 1659. upon a Capia^
at the suit of Thomas Bishop Impropriator for Tithes.

Norfolk.
John Goddard, Henry Goddard, Abraham Howes, imprisoned in Norwich Castle for
Tithes, at the Suit of Thomas Theodoreth, the twenty seventh day of the second
Month, 1660. notwithstanding the said Thomas Theodoreth had not long before
taken away several loads of Corn from two of the aforesaid parties; and of A.
Howes he took for the Tithes accounted to be five pound odd money, Cattle worth
eleven pound, and keeps them in prison besides.

Matthew King of Northwalsham in Norfolk, imprisoned the nineteenth day of the
second Month, 1660. at the Suit of Thomas Simmons Priest in Suffeild for
Tithes, and yet remains Prisoner.

Bedfordshire.
John Apthorp, Dorothy Neal, John Samn, Elizabeth Brace, Imprisoned in Bedford
Goal, because for Conscience sake they could not pay Tithes.

Dorsetshire.
Roger Coward cast into prison by Benjamin Maber Priest, the twenty fourth day
of the ninth Month, 1659. for not paying him Tithe.

Here follows a short Relation of some few of the cruel and inhumane usages,
(which have reached unto blood) which many of the People of the Lord have met
with and under-gone at their meeting together in the fear of the Lord, as the
saints did in the primitive times in their several houses, which cruelty if it
be not restrained, will bring upon this present power and Authority the guilt
of the inocent blood of many righteous souls.
Westminster.
John Scafe, Edward Bylling, Thomas Matthews, and about three or four score
Persons more, being at the house of Stephen Heart in new Palace yard at
Westminster, where on the seventh day of the twelfth month called February,
1659. they were peacably met together in the fear of the Lord, Some of the rude
Soldiers and others the Inhabitants of Westminster came in great rage and
violently pulled many of them out of their meeting room, and did sorely beat
and bruise many, and draged some on the ground by the hair of their heads,
others had their clothes rent and scarffs taken away, and some were knocked
down; And one Woman with child was so abused and hurt, that she said she was
undone. And after this and other mischief by them and some of the Inhabitants
of Westminster was done, they rifled the house and broke the glasse-windows,
and threatened more mischief for the future, and some were heard to say they
had taken an Oath to that purpose.

And at another meeting afterward, some of the rude Soldiers and others came
again and did much abuse Friends and beat them, and pulled the said Stephen
Heart out of his house and knocked him down, and beat him so that his senses
were astonished.

Middle-sex.
John Wooldrige and others being on the first day of the week peacably met
together to wait on the Lord in his own hired house at Brainford, there came
into the house two men who said they were Constables, and without any warrant
or Legal Authority, they violently pulled him out of his house (in which action
they wrincht his wrist and had him before James Hawley (called Justice) who
without the breach of any Law of God or man, forthwith commanded a Warrant to
be made, and sent him to prison.

Surry.
As the people of God were peacably met together to wait on the Lord at Mitcham
in Surry, on the third day of the fifth month, 1659. the rude people of the
Town came to the place where they were met, and threw hatfulls and a pail full
of dirty water on them, and threw dirt on the face of him that was speaking.
And as they were going to the meeting many Friends were beaten and abused, and
some thrown down and trampled on, and dragged on the ground by the hair of the
head and kicked, and some had their clothes torn, and called them Rogues, and
threatened to kill them; And one Friend was thrust into a pond, and knocked down
in it, and there kept a pretty space, and when they had so done, they drove the
Friends like Beasts out of the Town with staves, and huncht them, and puncht
them, and hurt them, and no Officer neither Magistrate nor other would stir to
preserve them, or keep the peace, which the rude people broke, though some of
them were told of this cruel usage, and feared that some of them might be
killed.

At another meeting on the 7th day of the same month, the rude people came
again, and threw much dirt and Cow Dung upon them, and sonn^ (...) ^a^^ and
into the mouth of him that was speaking and declaring the Truth, and when they
saw this would not disturb them, so as to cause them to break up their ^^^ing,
they fired a Gun or Pistol three times upon them.

At another meeting on the tenth day of the same Month, the rude people came
again to the house where they were peaceably met in the Fear of the Lord, and
with a Scoop-shovel cast in scoop-fulls of dirt and dirty water upon them,
which did so wet and daub them with them, that they were almost covered
therewith, insomuch that they appeared as though they had been dragged through
a dirty Channel; And when the rude people had so done, then they cried out see
now like Witches they look, with other filthy and brutish words not fit to be
mentioned, all which the people of God bore with patience, without making any
resistance. And when this was done, then they threw in clods of dirt upon them,
and drew them forth of the meeting, and tore some of their clothes, and threw
d^wn others, and stoned others, and brake the windows of the house, and the
fence of the Friends ground where they met, and drove them through the Town.
And some of the Friends after all this in going to a Justices house, were
sorely beaten, and some had their blood shed, and were in danger of their
lives, and those ^^de people cried out, let the Justice kiss their breech.

Hartford-shire.
At a peaceable Meeting of the people of God at Sawbridgworth, the rude people
of the Town (amongst whom were some of the Servants of him who is called
Justice Hewet) came to the door and threw in water, rotten eggs, man's dung and
stones, of which the said Justice Hewe^ being informed, and desired to preserve
the people of God from violence and the rude multitude in peace, he the said
Justice Hewet, instead of performing the duty of a Magistrate, and preserving
the people in peace, so encouraged the rude ones, that the hands of the wicked
were strengthened and encouraged in their mischief, and he refused to do
Justice according to his place.

Northamptonshire.
The people of God being peaceably met together, to wait on the Lord in a
Close, near the house of William Lovel, and upon his own ground, there came one
Captain Pinkard, and many of his Troopers on Horseback, and entered upon the
ground, and in a brutish and in humane manner, rode amongst the Friends, and
many of them received much hurt with their Horses and otherwise, and they broke
up the Meeting, and took away the said William Lovel and others, and sent them
to prison, where diverse of them were kept two Months, and the said William
Lovel kept prisoner nine Months, and he was more cruelly used, then can be
briefly expressed, for no other cause, but for having a meeting at his house.

Warwickshire.
There being a peaceable Meeting of the people of God, at a place called Grin,
at the house of the Widow Meeks, the said Widow for suffering a Meeting there
was turned out of her house, and the house its self pulled down.

Yorkshire.
There being a peaceable meeting of the people of God, at the house of Friend
Blacklin in Yorkshire, where were met about thirty persons, the rude people
came into the Meeting and violently pulled them out one by one, and knocked many
of them down, and wounded many of them.

Nottingham-shire.
A peaceable Meeting of the people of God, was by wicked and ungodly men, (...)
^ewark, and the Friends received much hurt, and much of their (...), by the
rude multitude, and about four score of them were haled ^u^ of the meeting one
by one, and were cruelly beaten and abused.

Sommerset-shire.
There being a peaceable meeting of about two hunded of the People of God at
Martock upon the second day of the second Month 1657. five men who called
themselves Minsters, and who are called Mr. Hallet, Mr. Stephenson, Mr. Duke,
Mr. Collens, and Mr. Thomas Lie, come to the place where the meeting was, and
brought with them a great company of rude people with long staves, Pikes, and
such like Weapons, and fell on the Friends, (who were met in the fear of the
Lord) and beat them and pulled them and tore their Garments, and made loud
outcries; and the rude peoples hands were so strengthened by the company and
countenance of the Priests, and their rage and madness such against the people
of God, that had not the Lord wonderfully appeared in his peoples deliverance,
some might have lost their lives.

At a meeting of the people of God on the first day of the fifth Month 1659. at
Threshford, the rude People came with Kettles, Panns, and blowing horns, and
with Pipes, Lowbels, and a Drum, to make a noise and a cause a disturbance, and
the noise they made was great, so that friends could not hear the truth
declared; Amonst which rude company there was one who is called a Minister, and
he to manifest him himself ruder then the rest, beat the drum himself, to make
a greater noise then was made before, who with the rude multitude, flung
stones, and dirt, and water at friends, and some of them affirmed that they
were hired to do so, and that they that hired them stood by and encouraged
them, giving them Bear and Ale for their service Now let the understanding
Reader judge, who were chief Instruments in chis wickedness, etc. And whether
such serve our Lord Jesus Christ or their own lusts, and whether the end of
such is not destruction.

Northumberland;
As diverse of the People of God were met together in his fear at a place called
Elledsdon, there came a company of rude men and women (amongst whom was the
Priests wife of the Town of Elledsdon, who came from the steeple-house) and in
great violence haled forth of the meeting about twenty friends and forced them
out of the Town, and over a little River; But after some season the rage of the
rude people abated, and so by permission of the chief Actors, the people of the
Lord met together again, then the Priest himself came from his steeple ho^^^,
and having a stone in his hand of two or three pound weight, he desperate^y
threw it at one of the friends, and his wife also threw stones at friends, and
they did so encourage the rude multitude, that they made a fresh assault upon
them, and with great fury dragged and haled friends out of the meeting again,
and threw them down and dragged them on the ground, and the Priest encouraged
the rude people to stone the Friends, and said it was warrantable by the
Scriptures, and he would bear them out in it, and that if ever they came again
he would set his mastiff dog at them.

Wrexham in Wales, the eight day of the eleventh Month, 1659.
The people of the Lord being met together to wait upon the Lord, many rude
Soldiers that belonged to the Irish Brigade came to the meeting place with
staves and crab-tree cudgels, and thrust and pusht one another upon Friends,
and one standing up and bidding them be civil and quiet, they cried out pull
him down, and out with him, and so fell upon him, and the rest of Friends, and
forced them out of the meeting place, striking them with their staves, and some
friends getting up into some upper rooms the Soldies followed them up, and
broke open the door and came to them, and there beat them and abused them very
much, and at that time they drove some Friends into the water, and one they
pu^^ down in the water, and bruised him so that the Blood ran down, another
man's head was broken, and his blood shed in the street.

Middle-sex. the sixth day of the third Month, 1660.
Some of the People of God being met together, etc. in the house of one John
Elson, in St. John's street, (so called) there came a great company of rude
people who violently threw stones at the said John Elson, (and other Friends)
and broke his windows very much, and endeavored to break down his door, and
after the meeting was ended, the rude multitude fell upon one man, and plucked
off much of his hair, and shed much of his blood, and rent the clothes of
others, and threw dirt in the said John Elsons face and eyes, and spit upon him.

Wilt-shire. the 13. of the 3d. month called May, 1660.
Many Friends being assembled together in the fear of God in Cummerwell in the
Parish of Bradforth, there came several Troopers of Captain Edward Hungerfords
Troop, who forced into the meeting, and pulled out one Robert Storr, and had him
to the City of Sarrum before the Commissioners, who upon examination of him
said, they found that he had been at an unlawful meeting, and so committed him
to prison.

Gloucester-shire, the 8. day of the 3d. month, 1660.
Friends being peacably met together (in Mase-moor) to wait upon the Lord,
there came one John Coney of that place with a sword in his hand, and violently
thrust open the door, and came into the room, and said be gone, and struck one
Nicholas Wasfield several blows with his sword in his scabbard, after which he
drew his sword, and thrust violently at the said Nicholas Wasfield, and gave
him many sore blows on the shoulders with his naked sword, and being asked by
whose order he did this, he said by the Mayors order.

At another meeting of Friends at Cirencister in the County aforesaid, on the
13. day of the 3d. Month, 1660. and on the 16. day at Nailsworth, there came (a
wicked man that is a great Professor, with some others with him, with their
swords drawn and their pistols cocked, and lighted matches in their hands) into
the meeting, and laid hands on one Friend, and had him before the Mayor of
Gloucester, who said to the Marshal he should take him away, and set a strong
guard of Musketeers to look to him, and this they did upon suspicion that he
was a Jesuit.

Wilt-shire. the 16. day of the 3d. Month, 1660.
Friends being met together in the fear of the Lord at Calne, there came into
the meeting several rude Soldiers with two Sergeants, who are under the
command of Colonel Edward Bainton, and of his own company, commanded by Captain
Lieutenant John Lavington, and commanded Friends to depart their meeting, who
desired to see their order, for breaking up their meeting, they being peacably
met together, but the Soldiers answered their swords was their authority, and
so with violence did hale Friends out of their meeting, using threatening
words, and came in amongst Friends with drawn swords and muskets cockt,
although Friends made no resistance.

Cumberland.
At a meeting of Friends at Carlisle, the Soldiers came to the meeting, and
with ^iolence haled and thrust out Friends out of their own house, and carried
some to their guard, and one Friend they plucked out by the head when he was at
prayer, and plucked him down.

Lanca-shire, the 13. day of the 3d. Month, 1660.
John Thomas a servant of Sr. George Middleton (so called) set upon three women
with impudent scoffs, said he would kiss one of them, and did abuse them and
wrong them, and plucked their coats loose. And the same man did abuse Friends,
and he would have cut Friends with an Ax, but that he was restrained by some of
his fellows, and the same Knights man set upon six friends as they were going
to a Meeting to wait upon the Lord, who beat them and abused them, and bruised
their faces, and shed much of the blood of two of them.

Che-shire, 17. day of the 3d. Month, 1660.
Friends being at a Meeting at Northwich, there came one John Cumberbatch of
Nantwich, with ^any others of the new raised Militia, and haled out three of
our friends, and carried them before the Commissioners, and keeps one a
Prisoners, and showed much abuse to friends.

Yorkshire, 12. day of the 3d. Month, 1660.
Friends going to a Meeting at or near Bellerbe, the Militia Soldiers beat
them and broke their Meeting, and violently abused them, and struck them with
their naked Swords, and would not suffer them to meet, and this they did in the
Name of the Higher Powers.

Cambridge, 8. of the 3d. Month called May, 1660.
At a Meeting of Friends in Wesbidge, Thomas Lecock had his head broke that the
blood ran down, and was knocked down, also another man was feld down with
stones, also a maid was shot in the neck with a Pistol which did receive much
harm, and one William Allen was plucked out of the Meeting, and when they had
got him out, they cried fall on, and few there was of our Friends that passed
away without receiving much hurt, and it was judged by friends, that a load of
stones and dirt were thrown into the Meeting room at Friends.

At a Meeting of Friends in Cambridge on the twentieth day of the 3d. Month,
1660. there came a great company of Scholars and other rude people to the
meeting, and did exceedingly abuse Friends, by dragging them out of the
Meeting, and kicking them, and throwing them against the ground both old and
young, men and women, and tore one Friends hair off his head, and abused others
so, that it is a shame to relate.

Gloucester-shire, 25 of the 3d. Month, 1660.
Two Friends being in a house reading in the Bible, there came in some
Soldiers and fetched them before the Captain, who asked them several questions
to ensnare them about the King, and would have forced them to drink the Kings
health, and when he saw they would not be subject to his will, he began to
rage, and enquired for the stocks, and then he called for a halter, and put it
about one of the Friends neck, and so they put it over an iron hook, and
strained it as if they would have (immediately, taken away his life, and then
he committed them into the hands of the Constable, and about two hours after
they were brought before him again, and he asked them about the King again, and
being not answered according to his will, he was much enraged against them, and
struck them several times on their bare heads, with his Pistol, and then after
much threatening he let them go. And the same Captain Abbington came that day to
Nailsworth where Friends Meeting was, and got Bear, and would have had one
Friend to drink the Kings health, but he refused and said if the King were
there himself, he did believe that the King would not require it of him, then
one of the Soldiers presented a Pistol toward him and threatened to shoot, and
struck fire, and the same Soldiers beat and abused other friends at that time,
and one of the Soldiers fell upon one friend, and drew his sword, and
threatened to run him through, and afterward put a rope about his neck, as if
that they would have hanged him

At another meeting of Friends on the first day of the 4th. month, 1660. the
same Soldiers with a drum beating, came violently into the meeting place with
their swords drawn, and Guns and other weapons, and one of the Soldiers with a
naked sword in his hand pulled down the friend that was a declaring, and forced
him out of the room, and took away him and most of the men that were there as
Prisoners, and the Mayor of Gloucester committed two of them to prison, where
they yet remain.

On the third day of the fourth Month Friends being peacably met together, to
wait upon the Lord at Chillingham, there came a Soldier under Captain How, and
said he had Orders to Break up the meeting, and hailed one out, and because he
could not break up the meeting himself, he said he would fetch more Soldiers,
who when they came said they had, Orders to break up such meetings; then the
Friends asked them to show their Orders, but one replied his sword was his
Order, and asked whether they would have it, and so fell upon them and haled
them forth violently out of the meeting, and one of the Soldiers drew his
sword at a Friend, and said he would run him through.

Cambridge upon the eight of the second Month called April, 1660.
The Scholars with other rude People came into our meeting place (where we were
met to worship God) did fall violently upon us, beating us until they drew the
blood of many, pulling us out by the hair of the head, having no regard to old
or young, men nor women with child, but tearing their clothes, casting them
into the nasty and loathsome Channels in the streets, and those things they
continued to us as a practice in our meetings; upon the thirteenth of the third
Month called May, in the like manner they came into our meeting and violently
broke the Locks and boults with great hammers, shamefully abusing many, and no
Magistrate appearing to suppress these things, but Alderman Blakely, whom they
also abused in the like manner throwing him in the Channel.

Again upon the twenty seventh of the same Month the Scholars joined themselves
together in a great number, falling upon us with sticks, and struck Friends on
the heads, faces and hands to the hurting of many; a Justice of peace being in
the room charged them in the Kings Name several times to be quiet and to keep
the peace, but they not regarding that Authority, proceeded in violence, and
got a Smiths great hammer, and broke open four doors, and broke a wooden
window, and took pieces of the boards and beat us with them, and drew us out
into the streets, and there knocked several of us down, shedding the blood of
twenty four persons, that the blood lay upon the stones in the street, in the
sight of the People; and thus having broke down all the seats, windows and
stairs, that the people could not get up into their lodging chambers, and
having pulled us out into the streets, some they held until others put dirt
into their mouths; at the same time also they stabbed two women in the street,
as it is judged, with penknives, the one being an Aldermans Wife in the Town,
the other a widow woman.

And in the like manner every first day of the week do they continue abusing of
us more or less, And the Mayor of the Town who should discourage and punish
these evil doers, does countenance and encourage them in it, setting his
Officers to stop us from our meeting, saying, we shall have no more meetings,
and has given order unto his Officers to hinder us the next first day. These
are but a ^aint of things to represent the whole.

Witnesses hereof Henery Forster William Allen John Smith John Webb Samuel
Nottingham Matthew Blakely Edward Salmon John Moon Eusebius Read Thomas Golden
John Peace Thomas Read Thomas Hawks George Nash Philip Williamson Clement
Crabb John Heart Ruben Stevens Jeremiah Rose Richard Steaton Edward Wright
Samuel Cater Robert Letchworth Gregory Tingy James Blakely Alderman John
Cranwell John Parnell


Bark-shire the twenty seventh of the third Month called May, 1660.
Friends being peacably met together at Kingstone-lye in that County, there
came to the meeting place many rude people, four of whom went into the meeting
with swords drawn to break up the meeting, and one friend desiring to know
their Order for so doing, their answer was their swords was their order, and so
they violently abused Friends as follows.

Richard Greenway was dragged by the hair of the head out of the meeting and
thrown into a standing poole of stinking water and mud; Richard Ballers was
wounded with a sword.

John Clerk was pricked with a sword, Edward Ballard was pricked with sword.

Robert Crook had his head br^ke and was thrust into a pond, and Edward Walte^
had his head broke.

Barth. Mayling and Thomas Coeburn were both thrown into a pond and beat*
Robert Samson was beaten.

Adam Lawrence thrust into a pond and beat, Andrew Pearson thrown into a pond
headlong, these were all dragged to the pond by the hair of the head, and many
others were abused.

Yorkshire the thirteenth of the third Month called May, 1660.
Friends being met together (at Bellerby in the County aforesaid) in the
worship and service of God, there came to the door diverse armed men crying,
where be these rogues, we have order to break up your meeting, some of them
saying we will cut you as small as bread; whereupon a Friend went to the door
to know the real cause of these so coming, and whether they had any order to
hinder our peaceable meeting, so speaking in meekness to them, telling them our
meeting was in the fear of the Lord without a thought of harm to any Creature,
and desiring to see their order for so doing, one of them drew his sword, and
said that was his order, and with it struck him that spoke to him, upon which
all the rest fell upon friends beating and cutting them, and pulling them out
of the meeting, shedding the blood of many, and brusing many in a most uncivil
and cruel manner, striking down many to the ground, with that violence that
their senses were taken away, some lying upon the ground for dead, in which act
of cruelty they cried they were for the King, and pleaded his Authority for it,
and so do abuse his Name and Authority, Laws and subjects; in which cruelty
about forty men of honest and good repute was cut with swords in their heads
and bodies, and bruised and maimed, upon which several are lame, and some of
them so wounded that it may be their death, the particular wounds in head,
body, and arms we shall forbear to mention particularly, but the cruelty of it
was such that there was no regard unto any man of account, office or otherwise,
which thing being considered in it cruelty might break the heart of him that
pitties the people, or would preserv^ the Nation in peace; besides several
women about ten or twelve were every on^ of them sore abused with swords and
staves, and some of them drawn through the water, which is not only suffering
unto them, but is a great reproach and dishonor unto the supreme authority and
government in this Nation, which if it continue will produce very bad effects.

Some of the Names of those that did appear with swords and staves in this
cruel persecution are as follows,

Christopher Haw Christopher Dixon Christopher Collison William Imson Leonard
Wright Mar. Jaques Francis Burg Christopher Burrell Henry Wright John Foster
Robert Wray Christopher Dawson Henry Fawcet Christopher Kerby John Wright
Matthew Ellerton
Westminster.
On the twelf day of this Month called June, we being meet in the new
Pallace-yard in the fear of the Lord, according to our accustomed manner, we
were again abused by the Lacquies and rude people, and pursued as far as
Whithall, and many friends had their blood drawn in a cruel manner, and after
the meeting was ended the profane People entered into the meeting house, and
abused the people that dwelt there, in so much that we were forced to entreat
some Officers of the Army (whom we knew) to clear the house, who with some
difficulty did it, our oppressions are great and hard to be uttered and
Numbered; Therefore O King in the fear of the Lord, lay them to heart and let
them be removed, that the Land may no longer mourn for the testimony of Jesus,
and exercise of a good conscience.

At Steventon in Bark-shire
The seventh day of the eight Month. 1660. many of the people of God coming
together to worship God at Steventon in Bark shire, the Constable with many
more being armed with halberts, prongs, pikes-staves and other weapons, came to
the house and pulled Friends out in a horrible brutish manner, tore their
clothes from their backs, and threw about six of them into the water, and took
one man and trod upon him so long till the blood came from his mouth, and till
some of the wicked brutish people cried out take heed you do not stifle him,
and some near 60. years of age were so served, and then they drove us along in
the dirt dashing up the dirt upon us, and Friends demanding what warrant they
had for their so doing, they said they had Order, but showed not any, and
though we told them we had the word of the King for our quiet meetings, and
General Moncks Order, but they regarded it not.

Norfolk
At a meeting in Fowlsham the Constable charged several of the Town to aid him
in the Kings Name, and hailed Friends out of the meeting, beating some of them
himself, and others throwing them down in the mire rending their clothes, and
carried away above one half of one man's cloak; and when he had got the rude
Multitude together he left Friends in their hands, who beat them and threw
stones and mire upon them.

John Hilton.

Yorkshire the seventh day of the ninth Month, 1660.
Upon the twenty fourth day of the eight month in the year one thousand six
hundred and sixty, Christopher Tailor and Richard Scostrop, with many other
Friends of the truth being met together in peace without harm to any, to wait
upon the Lord, being in a piece of Ground belonging unto William Cave in the
Town of Bramhup, Priest Crossland called Minister of that Town, and Edward
Wadington who called himself high Constable, came in amongst us in much hatred
and emnity, having gathered a Multitude of the rude people and baser sort of
together, and when the said Richard Scostrop and Christopher Tailor being moved
of the Lord, did instruct Friends and people in the way of the Lord, the said
Priest Crossland and Edward Wadington, was the first that laid violent hands on
them and hailed them away, charging the rude people who were found in swearing,
lying, and cursing to assist them, to which they were ready, like their Priest,
showing forth the fruits of his teaching, hailing and pushing them as if they
had been thieves, that Christopher Tailor was moved to say they were like to
murder him, and Richard Scostrop was bloody with their tearing of him, not
suffering them to speak any words of exhorta^ion to the people. But Priest
Crossland said they had an order from the King not to suffer us to meet or
speak together, but we supposing it was not so, the Kings word being that none
should trouble or molest us for our Religion or opinion, while we lived
peacably in the Nation, we demanded to see his warrant, which he denied; and
the rude people pulled Richard Scostrop as they were commanded by their Priest,
up from his knees, being calling upon the Name of the Lord in prayer with
Friends; now let all who have any soberness or understanding consider if this
Priest who is called a Minister of Christ, abides in his Doctrine, or if he be
come to the Law and the Prophets, who says, do unto all men as you would they
should do unto you, or did he so unto us; and he and the rest dragged us out of
their Town, and after they had like Wolves amongst sheep, teared us out of
their Town, would not suffer us to stay in the common street, or rest, but
haled us on a long lane, and shoved us toward a common, far from the Town, and
would not by any word was spoken, keep themselves in peace toward us who
offered harm to none.

Now in this manner and many several ways are we by Magistrates, priests and
rude people who are encouraged and by their leaders caused to err, persecuted
in pretense of warrant from the King, and power given from him, and as it was
in Olivers time done by them unto us, so is it now, and our sufferings in many
places greater, and the hand of the evil doers more strenghthened against us,
who since we were a people, have not persecuted any, or sought revenge against
our persecutors in the least manner, but with patience have suffered what has
been done unto us, knowing that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution, and be hated of all men for his Names sake, and do rejoice
that we are counted worthy.

These Friends of the truth whose Names are under written, who do give their
Testimony of the truth and of Things herein mentioned, who were present at the
time of this persecution, Nicolas Rawson, John Jackson, Michael Renold, Anthony
West, William Overhead, John Barber, with many more Friends.

Darlington the eighteenth of the ninth Month, 1660.
This day week our meeting was broken, and some had before one called a
Justice, who theatened if we met again, to send us to prison.

South-hampton.
Friends being met together in the fear of the Lord in Portsmouth, videlicet,
On the twenty one day of the eight Month last past they met together in silence
at a Friends house, where as they were waiting upon the Lord there came a guard
of Soldiers and beset the house, and some they hailed out of the meeting, and
dragged the man out of the house down the street to the main guard, and then
brought him up to his house again, and shut him with the rest in the house
until the secon^ day about the seventh hour at night, and then turned them
forth and withdre^ their guard; then upon the next first day being the twenty
eight day of the eigh^ Month, as Friends were met together, there was likewise
a guard of Soldiers beset the house and kept about twenty and one persons
close prisoners in the Friends house (which was all that were then gathered
together) and there kept them, not suffering any provision to come to them but
(...), they kept them all there until about the sixth day of the week
following, and then came and haled forth such as was not of the Town and set
them at liberty, but the rest being about ten Friends they keep still prisoners
in the house; then the last first day those that were not Imprisoned met
together in another place at a Friends house, and them they haled forth of
their meeting and committed the men to a prison it* the Town called Felltons
hole, where they still remain, and all this is (as they say* because Friends
will not promise them not to meet any more in Town as the baptists has done;
This is a short relation of their cruelty in that place toward Friends.

Monmouth-shire.
David Jones Imprisoned in that County for not coming to the steeple-house, wh^
if he would pay 1. s. per week for 12. Months past, all which time he has not
been there, which comes to 2. pounds 12. s. he might be releast.

Fleet London.
John Pollard and Joseph Pollard imprisoned first in Colchester Castle 13.
Months and 2. weeks, then returned from Colchester to the upper Bench prison,
and there kept prisoner five Months and a week, and is since committed to the
Fleet Prison, at the suit of Mathias Armiger, Farmer of Tithes, who with
Benjamin Maddock (for less then 2. years Tithes valued to be worth about 35.
pound) have taken 57. Cows and Bullocks, with one Bull, in all worth about 12
score pounds from the said John and Joseph Pollard, and returned nothing again,
and is kept a Prisoner besides.

Yorkshire.
Samuel Thornton, being in a Meeting at Leeds, with many more of the Lords
people, though he be a free man of the same Town, was taken violently out of
the Meeting by Martin Isles and John Dawson Alderman, and hailed to Prison, and
there detained 5. days, with several others which was also haled forth of the
same Meeting, which were Inhabitants within the said Borrough, and the said
Samuel Thornton, by the said Alderman was ordered to be whipped and sent from
Constable to Constable, which was done accordingly, though the place of his
natural birth was but three miles from thence, and he well known in the said
Town.

Also, Samuel Thornton was taken forth of a peaceable Meeting of the people of
God at Holbeck, by order of the Priest there, and haled to Leeds before the
said Alderman with two more, who caused a Mittemus to be made and sent him to
the Correction-house at Wakefield for a Vagrant, where he was detained three
Months, and he had been an Apprentice in the same Town, and after was called
to the Sessions* and there fined 10. pounds and sent to Prison again, though he
had broken no known Law, nor for any other thing, but for being in a peaceable
Meeting amongst Gods People.

Dudly Templer of Wethersfield in Essex, sent William Allen to Prison, for no
other cause but for coming to the Town of Wethersfield to a Meeting there, and
since from time to time his Clerk with many of the Town, in a violent manner
have pulled us out of our Meetings, and not suffered us to be at quiet, but
sometime set guards of men in several places to keep us from meeting, and
sometime fined several for coming to our meeting, and from John Child, by a
warrant from him or by his Order, they pretending a warrant, they took a horse,
Sadle and Pillion and what belonged to him, and kept him three weeks but one
day, and then sent him home, without sadle, bridle, pillion and the rest which
they keep to this day, notwithstanding have been often demanded of them; And they
beat many friends much for coming to the Town, and suffered rude boys and
others without reproof to abuse sober people, to the shame of Justice and the
possession of their Town, and this has been done in the presence and hearing
of him the said Dudly Templer and not reproved; And he himself has scoffed at
Friends, and evil entreated many, and set the rude people on to hale us out of
the Town, when if any thing could have been charged against us, he being a
Justice and a Commander of a Troop of Horse, might have brought any of us to
trial, and not in such a manner, contrary to Law and Justice, have abused us,
and broken the peace of this Nation, and so rendered himself incapable to to
Rule, and is to be ruled by Justice himself.

And of this his proceedings hundreds can testify who have been eyewitnesses,
and sufferers by him, and his Clerk, and others of the Town of Wetherfield.

Essex.
At a Meeting in Thaxted in Essex, the People of God being met peaceably
together to wait upon the Lord, a great company of rude people of the Town
gathered otgether about the house, swearing and cursing what they would do to
the Quakers as they called them, and the place of their meeting being near the
high way, they cast in dirt and stones, to the great annoyances of the
peaceable people that were then waiting upon the Lord, and they were much
abused by stones and abundance of dirt cast upon them, which the rude people
took out of the open street; and there came a drunkard swearing and raging,
like unto a mad man, and he and the rude people broke into the house, and laid
violent hands upon many of the peaceable people, and endeavored to pull him
down that was speaking to the people in the fear of God.

And for some hours in this manner they abused sober people in their own house
that were met together to wait upon the Lord and to worship him in spirit; and
when some went to some of the Magistrates in the Town to acquaint them with
this abuse, desiring them to keep the peace, they made light of the matter, and
would not appease the rude Multitude nor preserve the sober people in their
just right and liberties, for it was said that one of the Magistrates should
speak to the drunken fellow aforesaid to come up into our meeting, and bad him
make sport; and so great was the abuse that the sober People was forced to
remove their meeting to another place, whither the rude people also followed
them, and did cast dirt and stones at them.

Some more of the cruel sufferings of the people of God called Quakers related,
which has been acted in the Town of Cambridge by the rude Scholars, Soldiers
and Towns people.
Cambridge.
UPon the thirteenth day of the third Month following, (called May) the
Scholars and rude Multitude came and brake open several doors and burst the
locks and bolts with a great hammer, and when we passed out from our meeting we
were most shamefully abused by the Scholars and rude Multitude, several
hundreds standing in the streets, some beating of us, and some rejoicing to see
us beaten.

Upon the twentieth day of the same Month, the Scholars and Soldiers and the
rude Multitude came in with one of the chief Constables which said, that the
Mayor had a letter from Ja. Tompson of Trumpington, called a Justice, which did
inform the Mayor that several of us had arms, whereupon we desired that we
might be searched, they searching some few of us and finding none, the rude
Multitude fell violently upon us and drew some of us out by the hair, and
pulled and haled all the rest out, and kicked William Allen who was moved to
declare the truth to the people in the Power of the Lord, being so grossly
abused, that he was very unable to go abroad for several days.

After that we was parted from the meeting house, they came with hammers and
what pieces of wood they could get, and fell to work on their Sabbath day, and
they did break and batter the house within and without, that it is judged by
their own Generation that twenty pounds will scarce make it as it was.

Sutton.
Henry Foster was pulled out of the meeting house, and had before the Mayor and
Aldermen where he was searched for Arms, but found none, and discharged to come
any more to his own hired house upon a first day.

Upon the second of the fifth Month, 1660. Friends being peaceably met
together, several of the Scholars and others with them came with a Smiths great
hammer and other things, and broke up the house, although two doors was open
into the same, and with the boards and shivers of the house armed themselves,
with which they knocked down many in the house and in the street, shedding the
blood that day of near thirty, and bruising the flesh of nere an hundred in a
very lamentable manner, some of whom were dangerously wounded.

Also the eight of the fifth Month the Scholars assaulted the meeting again,
and tore friends out in an exceeding uncivil manner; And on the 15th. day they
broke up Friends meeting again and near pulled down the house, and with the
ruins of the same wounded several Friends.

And besides, the Scholars and others that join with them, do daily tear
friends clothes as they pass in the Streets, and nip and abuse their flesh,
and pull them by the hair, and stone, buffet and knock Friends down when they
have pulled them out of the meeting and tread them in the channels, that had
not the Lord wonderfully preserved them, many Friends had been slain ere now.

The Names of part of twenty four that had their blood shed by the Scholars and
others in Cambridge, besides many that had their clothes rent and knocked down
into the Channels and kicked and trod upon, and one was kept in the mud till he
was almost smothered, and others pinched and pulled by the nose, and some
stabbed.

John Smith John Webb Ann Norris William Allen John Ware Thomazin Blackly
Margret Mathews Robert Letchworth William Page George Nath John Tournel Chatris
Edward Matthew Blackly John Harvy Edward Salmon Phillip Williamson William
Wells Thomas Gray Phillip Viping James Viping
Cheshire
Friends being met together in the fear of the Lord at one Lawrence Fletcher
his house, there came some Soldiers and broke up the meeting, and they fell on
the Friends and haled them forth, and some they threw forth, and down, tearing
others by the hair of the head till they had all forth, and this they did
without showing any order, but being asked for their order, they said they had
left it at the Town.

Glamorgan-shire
In the eight Month called October, 1660. Friends being peaceably met together,
several Soldiers with their Muskets, swords and lighted matches, in a brutish
manner took all the men Friends out of their Meeting, being twenty, and had
them to the Castle and set them in the Dungeon till the next day, and then the
oath of Allegiance was proffered to them, and because they could not break
Christ's command (who says swear not at all,) they were ordered to be kept
prisoners where they yet remain, this tenth Month, 1660.

From Cirencester in Gloucestershire.
We whose names are here under written, on the eighteenth day of the ninth
Month were met peaceably together in the fear of the Lord, there ^^me in
amongst us the two high Constables so called, with other Offices and men of our
Town that were gathered together, charging us in the Kings Name to go along
with them, answer was made that we were met peacably together in the fear of
the Lord, and if they had any thing to lay to our charge we were there ready to
make answer; but that would not satisfy them, and one of them said he had a
warrant from the Lord Harbert to take us, we requiring the warrent to be
showed, but could not see it, they gave order first to hale our women and
children forth, and then said they would send for pistols, and when they had
discharged three or four amongst us, we would be willing to go forth; but we
were not willing to break our meeting, so they began to hail and tear and push
us forth adoors and ran against us as we passed along the streets; we
acquainted them that the King had promised us our liberty in worship, one of
the Constables made answer that the King had promised no such thing; so they
brought us to prison and thrust us in, and gave the Jailer orders to keep us
there until the Comissioners came to Town, and at present there we remain
prisoners for the truths sake.

Thomas Onyon Robert Newcome Walter Howlings John Roberts Philip Gray Richard
Townsend Thomas Barnfield John Silvester Thomas Elridge William Hinton Richard
Bartlot John Ovendell Henry Stacy Richard Bowly Thomas Knight John Clark Thomas
Bowly John Cripes Jacob Howlings Roger Sparks William England


Durham Darlington the third of the tenth Month, 1660.
Where we the people of God called Quakers had a meeting peaceably, and waiting
upon the Lord in the aforesaid Town, the Captain sent some Soldiers, and
violently broke up our meeting and carried away forty or more of us to the
Castle of Durham, and as we were passing along we met the Captain and the
Justice who threatened us much in high expressions, and five of us they single
out, and said we should go to prison if we did not give bond for our good
behavior, and four of them is sent to Durham Castle, for no other cause but
for meeting together to worship God in spirit, according to Christ's Doctrine,
which now is come to be fulfilled and witnessed.

Portsmouth the second of the tenth Month, 1660
As the people of the Lord were met together to worship God in the spirit
peaceably in the said Town, Captain Sprag sent several files of armed men with
firelocks, and violently haled out of our meeting eighteen men and women, and
punched them and dragged them along, and shut the Gates, and men and wives were
turned from their habitations, and children and families and callings, and are
not permitted to come in again, though some came in again, yet were turned out
of the Town again from their Families and employments, and some desiring to
have their Instruments to labor withal was not permitted; besides were kept in
a house where Friends met, by a guard nineteen days, denied to see their
wifes, Families, Children, and gave commandment no victuals should be brought
to them; and a Officer said if they turned us out of the Town, and set Soldiers
to plunder our houses they served us well enough, though we never acted any
thing against this Government.

Ireland.
FOr speaking the truth to people in Steeple Houses, Markets and other place^
(have sufferred in the Nation of Ireland) and for other causes herein expressed,
have been fined, whipped, Stockt, Imprisoned and suffered loss of their goods, 94
persons

For meeting together in the fear of the Lord in their own houses according to
the practice of the Apostels and the true Churches in the Scriptures mentioned,
have been Imprisoned, etc. nineteen persons.

For speaking the truth to the people in Steeple Houses and Markets, and other
places have been Whipped and Imprisoned, and some stockt and shamefully beaten
and abused, thirty four persons.

For not swearing, as Christ commands they should not swear, two persons had
goods taken from them worth eight pounds ten shillings, and one had taken from
him seventy barrels of Salt.

For not paying Tithes for conscience sake, that bears Testimony to the
everlasting Priesthood, that ends the first that takes tithes, eight persons
for two pounds sixteen shillings four pence demanded for Tithes, have had taken
from them goods worth thirty four pounds ten shillings.

Stopped (as they were passing the streets and high ways about their occasions)
and Imprisoned twelve Persons.

For receiving Friends, and for visiting Friends in Prison, one was Imprisoned,
and another fined five pounds.

Sufferers for other causes for the truths sake eleven Persons.

An Account of the sufferings of Friends in Scotland, where there has suffered
for the causes hereafter expressed, in all ninety one Persons. SCOTLAND.
For denying the Priest practices, have been Excommunicated forty five Persons.

For meeting together in the fear of the Lord, have been stoned and beaten
eleven persons.

For speaking the truth to people in Steeple Houses and Markets, and asking
Priests questions, have been Imprisoned, and some stockt and whipped, and some
banished, in all fifteen Persons.

There was likewise Imprisoned and otherwise abused, and some banished, and no
cause why showed, in all eighteen persons.

A Declaration of some Part of the Sufferings of the People of God in scorn
called Quakers, from the Professors in New England, only for the exercise of
their Consciences to the Lord, and obeying and confessing to the Truth, as in
his light he had discovered it to them.
TWo honest and innocent women stripped stark naked, and searched after such an
inhumane manner, as modesty will not permit particularly to mention.

Twelve strangers in that Country, but freeborn of this Nation, received twenty
three whippings, the most of them being with a whip of three cords, with knots
at the ends, and laid on with as much strength as they could be by the arm of
their executioner, the stripes amounting to three hundred and seventy.

Eighteen Inhabitants of the Country, being freeborn English, received twenty
three whippings, the stripes amounting to two hundred and fifty.

Sixty four Imprisonments of the Lords people for their obedience unto his
will, amounting to five hundred and nineteen weeks, much of it being very cold
weather, and the Inhabitants kept in Prison in harvest time, which was very
much to their loss, besides many more Imprisoned, of which time we cannot give
a just account.

Two beaten with pitched roops, the blows amounting to an hundred thirty nine,
by which one of them was brought near unto death, much of his body being beat
like unto a Jelly, and one of their own Doctors, a member of their Church, who
saw him, said it would be a miracle, if ever he recovered, he expecting the
flesh should rot off the Bones, who afterward was banished upon pain of death,
there are many witnesses of this there.

Also an Innocent man an Inhabitant of Boston, they banished from his Wife and
Children, and put to seek a habitation in the Winter, and in case he returned
again, he was to be kept Prisoner during his life, and for returning again, he
was put in Prison, and has been now a Prisoner above a year.

Twenty five Banishments upon the penalties (of being whipped, or having their
Ears cut, or branded in the hand) if they returned.

Fines laid upon the Inhabitants for meeting together and edifying one another,
as the Saints ever did, and for refusing to swear, it being contrary to Christ's
Command, amounting to about a Thousand pounds, besides what they have done
since, that we have not heard of, many families in which there are many
children are almost ruined by these unmerciful proceedings.

Five kept 15. days in all without food, and 58. days shut up close by the
Jailer, and had none that he knew of, and from some of them he stopped up the
windows, hindering them from convenient air.

One laid neck and heels in Irons for sixteen hours.

One very deeply burnt in the right hand with the letter H. after he had been
whipped with above 30. stripes.

One chained the most part of twenty days to a log of Wood in an open Prison
in the Winter time.

Five appeals to England denied at Boston.

Three had their right Ears cut by the Hangman in the Prison, the door being
barred and not a Friend suffered to be present, while it was doing, though some
much desired it.

One of the Inhabitants of Salem, who since is banished upon pain of death, had
one half of his House and Land ceized on while he was in Prison, a month before
he knew of it.

At a general Court in Boston they made an Order, that those who had not
wherewithal to answer the fines that were laid upon them (for their
Consciences) should be sold for Bondmen and Bond-women to Barbados, Virginia,
or any of the English Plantations.

Eighteen of the People of God, were at several times banished upon pain of
death, six of them were their own Inhabitants, two of which being very aged
people, and well known among their Neighbors to be of honest conversations,
being banished from their Houses and Families, and put upon traveling and other
hardships, soon ended their days, whose death we can do no less then charge
upon the Rulers of Boston, they being the occasion of it.

Also three of the Servants of the Lord they put to death, one of them they
caused to be Executed in 24. hours after they had taken her.

And when we heard from thence last, there was four more in prison, who
according to their Law, were to be banished upon pain of death, and twenty four
of the Inhabitants of Salem were presented, and more fines called for.

These things (O friends) from time to time have we patiently suffered, and not
for the transgression of any Just or Righteous Law, either pertaining to the
Worship of God, or the civil Government of England, but simply and barely for
our consciences to God, of which we can more at large give you (or whom you may
order) a full account (if you will let us have admission to you, who are
banished upon pain of death, and have had our ears cut, who are in England
attending upon you) both of the causes of our sufferings, and the manner of
their disorderly and illegal proceeding against us, Who begun with Immodesty,
went on in Inhumanity and Cruelty, and were not satisfied until they had the
blood of three of the Martyrs of Jesus; Revenge for all which we do not seek,
but lay them before you, considering you have been well acquainted with
sufferings, and so may the better consider them that suffer, and may for the
future restrain the violence of these Rulers of New- Egland, you having power
in your hands, they being but the children of the family of which you are chief
Rulers, who have in diverse of their proceedings forfeited their Patent, as upon
a strict enquiry in many particulars will appear. And this (O King and you of
his Counsel) we are assured of, that in time to come it will not repent you, if
by a close rebuke you stop the bloody proceedings of these bloody persecutors,
for in so doing, you will engage the hearts of many honest People unto you,
both there and here, and for such works of mercy, the blessing is obtained, and
showing it is the way to prosper.

We are witnesses of these things.

Who besides long Imprisonments, and many cruel whippings, had our Ears cut,
John Rous, John Copland.

Who besides many long Imprisonments, diverse cruel whippings, with the seizing
on our Goods, are banished upon pain of Death, and wait here in England, and
desire that we may have an Order to return in peace to our Families Samuel
Shattock, Josiah Southick, Nicholas Phelps.

A Declaration of the Sufferings of the Inhabitants of the Province of Mariland
in Virginia, as follows.
WIlliam Fuller and Thomas Homwood, had taken from them because they could not
be conformable to the unrighteous Orders of Court made by the Officers of
Cicilia Baltamore in Mariland, to the value in goods, eight pounds five
shillings and eight pence.

Taken from Richard Keen for not training, the sum of six pounds fifteen
shillings by the Shireff, and his Servants have received much abuse; The
Sheriff drew his Cutlash, and with the point made a thrust at his Breast, and
struck him over the shouldiers, and said you Rogue I could find in my heart to
split your brains; The Sheriffs name is William Coursey, there be several
Witnesses to testify the Truth of this thing.

Again, this Captain of the Soldiers, whose name is John Odbor, with Justice
Askam with a rude crew, drank out certain Casks of Wine bought of Justice
Askham, for which Wine they came to Richard Keen, and to other men's houses to
take away their Goods, to make payment for that which they had idly spent:
Justice Askham so called, coming to Richard Keens house, was taxed by the wife
of Richard Keen for being drunk at one of their Randivous; He replied he was
not drunk, for said he a man is never drunk if he can go out of the Carts way
when it is coming toward him.

William Muffet, fined for not training to the value of six pounds fifteen
shillings, and one John Bogge an Officer of Captain Thomas Brook gave order to
the Sheriff, that if he could not take his goods, to take his Chest, if not his
Chest his Shirts.

John Knap, had taken from him for not training, goods to the value of seven
pounds ten shillings with a Chest, and fined to the value of three pounds ten
shillings for not swearing, he being an ancient man about sixty years of age,
and has labored hard in the strength of his days and years, to get those
goods together.

William Berry, was fined to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings for
entertaining Thomas Thurston into his house one night.

Michael Brooks, fined seven pounds ten shillings because he could not swear,
and four pounds ten shillings because he could not train under the command of
John Odbor Captain, who declared in the presence of many that they were not fit
to be Soldiers that could not swear, be drunk and whore it.

Edward Keen, fined for not training, to the value of four pounds ten
shillings, under the said Odbor Captain.

Edward Hinkesman, fined to the value of four pounds ten shillings, for not
training under the said J. Odbor.

Henry Osborn fined to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings, because he
entertained Thomas Thurston one night, and to the value of four pounds ten
shillings for not Training under John Odbor captain.

John Day fined to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings for entertaining
Thomas Thurston, and to the value of four pounds ten shillings for not Training.

Woodman Stocley fined to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings for not
taking the oath of a Constable.

Richard Preston was fined to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings for
entertaining Thomas Thurston one night into his house.

Taken from John Baldwin to the value of five pounds five shillings for not
Training.

Taken from Thomas Cole to the value of forty eight pounds because he could not
swear.

Thomas Mears was fined to the value of eight pounds five shillings because he
could not swear; Likewise John Norwood Sheriff took away in goods from the said
Mears to the value of five pounds because his Son could not Train.

Taken from Robert Clerkeson to the value of five pounds because he could not
swear, and for not Training, to the value of forty shillings.

Taken from Henry Woolchurch because he could not Train to the value of five
pounds five shillings.

Taken from Edmond Burton because he could not swear, to the value of eight
pounds, he being a poor man.

Taken from Susan Eliot to the value of sixteen shillings for her man missing
once Training.

Taken from John Larking to the value of fifteen pounds, because he could not
swear.

Taken from Robert Harwood to the value of eleven pounds, because he could not
swear.

Taken from John Homwood to the value of seven pounds ten shillings, because he
could not Train.

Taken from Thomas Underwood because he could not swear, to the value of seven
pounds ten shillings, he being a very poor lame man, and not the use of his
Limbs to labor, and has a Wife and four small Children.

James Pascal a poor man, having a wife and two small children, and his wife big
with another, John Norwood Sheriff took from him for the value of three pence
three farthings, to the value of three shillings three halfpence, in meat that
was provided for his wife and children, and said that the Court had lent it him
for the imprisoning of Tho. Thurston.

Jonathan Neale had taken from him because he could not train, to the value of
forty five shillings.

Hugh Drue, fined to the value of four pounds ten shillings, he being a very
poor man and in debt, sold his Cow to satisfy part of his debts; Baltomores
Officers having knowledge of it, seized upon that he sold his Cow for, which was
to the value of five pounds five shillings, because he could not train.

William Davis, for not training fined to the value of four pounds ten
shillings, and had taken from him in Goods to the value of five pounds eleven
shillings, he being a very poor man.

William Cole had taken from him one Servant valued to be worth sixteen pounds
which was his Apprentice bound for seven years, valued to be worth by them five
pounds five shillings, taken from him because he could not Train.

John Norwood Sheriff, came and demanded of Samuel Chew, to the value of
eighteen pence, for the Imprisonment of Tho. Thurston, he denying to pay it,
took from him to the value of three shillings.

Taken from Richard F nsal upon the same Demand for Imprisonment of Thomas
Thurston, for four pence halfpenny, taken from him to the value of twenty pence
halfpenny.

Thomas Turner was in Court, having business there, and Coming with his Hat on
before the Court, where was present Edward Lloyd, and Samuel Withers, they
caused his Hat to be taken from him, and never returned it again.

Again, the said Tho. Turner was before the Court where was present Samuel
Withers, and Thomas Todd, and Thomas B^sson, and because he could not bow to
them they caused his hat to be taken away, and never returned it again.

Ralph Hawkings because he could not swear had taken from him to the value of
ten pounds five shillings, he being but a poor man, and it is likely, it is
more than one third of his Estate.

Robert Dun had taken from him because he could not Train, to the value of
eight pounds five shillings.

Francis Barnes had taken from him, because he could not Train, to the value of
six pounds five shillings.

John Ellis for not Training, had taken from him to the value of six pounds
five shillings.

Henry Carline had taken from him because he could not put off his Hat in
Court, to the value of three pounds fifteen shillings.

Taken from William Eliott, because he could not Train, to the value of four
pounds seventeen shillings six pence.

Edward Coppedg, because he could not Train, had to the value of five pounds
seven shillings six pence taken from him, and suffered punishment by whipping
on the bare Back, a very poor man, having a Wife and two small children.

More taken from Henry Carline for not Training, one Cow, one Calf, one
yearling Heifer, prized by them but at the value of five pounds thirteen
shillings six pence.

John Woollcott had taken from him by John Norwood Sheriff, because he could
not Train, to the value of five pounds five shillings.

William Read because he could not Train, had taken from him one Servant,
valued at four pounds ten shillings by them, which had about a year to serve,
he being a very poor man, and his servant was accounted to be worth seven pound
ten shillings.

Ishmael Rite, and William Stockden, and Guy White, for not Training, the
Sheriff William Coursey by order from Captain John Obdor has violently taken
from them to the value of seven pounds, and the Sheriff threatened to turn us
out of our house and Plantation, John Askham Justice of Peace being by at that
time; And further they arrested Ishmael Rite to the Court, and would have him
to take the oath of a Constable, he refused to take the oath, but told them he
would perform the office faithfully so far as his conscience was clear, but
that would not satisfy them, they threatened to fine him to the value of seven
pounds ten shillings, the Sheriff took away for fees to the value of forty five
shillings.

John Holladay for not Training had taken from him the va^^^ in goods five
pounds six shillings and three pence.

Again for not assisting the Sheriff John Norwood, to take Thomas Thurston, was
whipped severely.

These are not all the sufferings by much which this poor people have undergone
and not for evil doing, but for keeping Faith and a good Conscience, which many
has put away and made shipwreck of, else all these inhumane, barbarous, cruel
works of darkness could never have been brought forth, which has shamed their
Government and their Profession.

Friend and friends, we having the word of a King, and again renewed by a
Declaration, that we should not suffer upon the account of Religion, and being
given forth by you that have suffered for your Religion, and beyond the Sea,
had more tolleration then in your own Nation: (which we have had the same
likewise) and now in the Kings Name do we suffer, and specially by such as have
been against You that be in authority, which is to get favor with you; And our
Meetings are broken up with much violence, and haled out, and abused, and
bruised, and thrown into waters, and many imprisoned and bruised to the
dangering of their lives. And these things are done in your Names, and you may
be unacquainted with them: Therefore they are laid before you, and given to you
to consider.

For if the liberty of your Consciences (when you were banished) had been
restrained, and you had been forced to deny your Religion, it would have
grieved you. Therefore consider them now that be in your state, who had rather
die then offend God; And whether you do own those things that are done in the
Kings Name, yea or nay? If not, that there may be a restraint to their violence
to stop the unmerciful men with their Clubs, and Staves, who are making havoc
of the Innocent, that they may not make the King a cloak to do wickedly; For
your understandings have been exercised in these things who have known
sufferings, by which you may the better feel and know the condition of others.

And now you may consider the Law and the Prophets to do as you would be done
by, and to show mercy; For we are imprisoned because we cannot take an Oath,
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, as before is expressed, the Servants of
Christ, who commands them not to swear, but keep to yea and nay in all their
Communications; And yet we are Imprisoned and Mangled, and mis-called as
Traitors, and threatened that our estates must be taken away, and confiscated to
the King, because for conscience sake toward Christ, and in obedience to his
C^mmands we do not swear. And many now knowing Friends principles that they
cannot swear, do avenge themselves upon them by tendering them the Oath, t at
would be much against the King if they had an oppertunity. Now these things
being done in the Kings Name, we that suffers desires to know whether You own
that these things should be done in his Name? For we gave forth an answer to
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy which we presented to You and the King,
of which we desire to have an answer from You; And whether You will own those
things; For we do not charge them upon the King, because he gave forth the word
of a King and a Declaration to the contrary; and as knowing who they are that
are Actors of these things in the Nation, against Honest, Godly, Innocent,
Harmless Servants of the Lord that loves Peace, and Righteousness, and are for
the establishment of that in Truth.

For we are threatened (and they say) that we shall have no protection, because
we will not swear, and looked upon as Traitors that any man may kill us, if we
will not swear, and have no protection from the Law, and from us our Goods is
to be taken, our families spoiled.

Therefore (...) justice be done, and Judgment be divided right; for that
preserves both G^^^rnment, and Magistrates, and a People in peace; And yet the
Taxes and Sessinent of us required, and yet cannot have the benefit of the Law,
which you do understand paying that, People may have their liberty in Turkey.
Therefore these things are laid before the King and You, that You may
understand (not as charged upon him) what things are done in his Name; That
with Truth, Justice, Righteousness, and Wisdom you may rule; And know the Law
was not made for the Righteous, but for sinners and transgressors, and that He
and Ye all may distinguish between such; For we were (in the days of O^iver)
fined and imprisoned and slandered as Jesuits and the like, because we could
not disobey Christ's Doctrine to swear, and take an Oath, our Principl^ is known
through all these Dominions, and many other Nations, not to swear any Oaths at
all, whatsoever is an Oath being forbidden by Christ Jesus, and upon no other
account; and we have given forth a paper to that purpose unto the King; Now all
other people does not deny swearing upon this account (as we do) for Christ's
Command and Religion sake, therefore other peoples condition is not ours, Who
will swear, and does not scruple taking an Oath upon this account (but for
other ends) Therefore there must be distinction made betwixt us and them. Now
if you should say, To let us have our liberty which was but to let Christ's
Commands be obeyed) this would let up others that say they cannot swear.

But then you must mind upon what account it is, for we have given our account
unto the King, and to the whole Dominion, and to the whole Christendom, both in
Word and Writing and Print; So we desire you to give us an answer, Or to give
forth something to stop the proceeding of the forcing Oaths on us, and that we
shall not be imprisoned upon this account, nor our goods spoiled to the ruin
of our Families; for it is known that we could never swear in the days of
Oliver, nor Richard, nor the Parliament, nor in the time of the Committee of
Safety, (so called) nor our friends beyond the Seas in other Nations; Yet we
have suffered more in this Nation then in any other Nation concerning that
thing, not swearing; and if our yea be not yea, and nay nay, then let us be
punished for that (if thou do doubt or question as much as thou would do
for not swearing; And if ye doubt or question our faithfulness that lie in
Prisons, and Irons, and Dungeons, because we cannot take an Oath, let us be
sent for up before You to satisfy You further, for that Oaths is put the more
in the enmity to us, because they know we cannot swear, whereby the unjust
thinks to revenge themselves upon us, which there is no people in the Nation
does refuse the Oath for Conscience ^ake but us; For they know that friends
will stand to their principles, and therefore they know they can make spoil;
And now i^ lies upon You to remedy these things, and to break the jaws of the
wicked (as J^b did) that rends the Innocent to pieces.

And our Friends and People beyond Sea, in Holland that cannot swear for
Conscience sake to obey the comands of Christ, the Magistrates puts no oath to
them, neither does cause them to suffer, or say any penalty upon them for not
swearing, who keep to yea and nay in all their communications, according to
Christ's Doctrine and the Apostle, Mat. 5 chap. and James 5.

Acts the 17. Paul disputed daily in the Market and in the Synogues, and this
was their practice, and you may see the impatience of them oft-times in the
Synagogues and Markets, and many times their patience of their hearing of him,
which he calls Noble, and in the Church which the Apostles had planted, they
might all speak one by one, if any thing was revealed to him that sat by, the
first was to hold his peace, and this was the order in the Church of God, 2.
Cor. 1^. And now in the Churches so called that are established since the
Apostles days, if one that sits by, something be reveled to him from the Lord
to speak it forth, it is called disturbance, and he is haled out and
persecuted; and if he bid people Repent in the Markets and streets, that swears
and curses, and lies and ^re drunkerds, they fall upon him with fists and
staves and hales him before Magistrates, and casts him into Prison, as a
peace-breaker, whereby truth has not had so m^^^ liberty as Balad-singers, and
singing ballads and jest Books in streets; and if one ask a question in the
Synagogue, being not satisfied what another delivers or speaks or disputes
upon, by them that be in the Synagogue they are haled out and cast into prison
in steed of giving them satisfaction or convincing the gainsayers, if they
were such that did question, which shows a degeneration amongst the Christians
from the Apostles practice and command and life.

And armed and disguised men have come into our meetings with naked swords
falling upon Innocent harmless naked people in our meetings, and men carried
out in the night and in winter season and time of the snow, and there bound,
and laid on hills.

And many cast into nasty holes and deep dungeons, not suffered straw, though
the place was so bad that they stood almost over shoes in water, and trampled
in mud and excrements and not suffered to have a little fire to take away the
smells; and cruel Jaylors have thrown chamber potts full of excrements on our
heads; and thus we have suffered by the professors of Christ's words, who have
no such example in the Scripture for these their practices, which shows they
are those that have the form of Godliness but denies the Power, and from such
the Apostle bids turn away.

And further sixty of our Friends have been sued up (to appear at London) by
Priests and others this last term.

And you cannot say our meetings are tumultuous, for they are such people as
the Priests and Teachers of the world do teach, and be under their nature, that
comes with clubs, staves, stones, dirt, shoutings, making a noise, scoffs,
mocks, reproaches, slanders, which is a dishonor to the Teachers, and not a
grace to the Governors and Rulers, and they are (...) makes tumults against
whom we never lifted up a hand, but with members (...) patiently suffered,
except it has been to let you know that such dishonor the very profession and
Name of Christ and Government and are a grief to the Rig^^^us, and causes the
way of Truth to be evil spoken of and all that we desire is that they that
profess themselves to be Teachers, teach their people the way of holiness, and
they that are Magistrates do bring them into the practice of civility, and that
them that fear the Lord may live peaceably, that is our prayers, and that you
may grace your Government, and your Teachers may do that, that their fruits may
be so seen, that others may glorify God, and that they might be followers of
them as they are followers of Christ.

Kent.
Edward Noak^s of Word in East Kent farming Land at the rate of eighty pounds
the year (for one years Tithes clamed, which was but twenty pounds, had taken
from him goods to the value of one hundred pounds, and was kept two years and a
half in prison called the Kings Bench, besides.

Shropshire.
We being peaceably met together in Shrowsbury this tenth Month, 1660. There
came some Soldiers and broke up the meeting and had us to prison, because we
could not for conscience sake take the Oath of Allegiance, being twenty one
persons.

Richard Moore John Shield Oliver Atherton Thomas Jackson Richard Ward Edward
Jefferis John Jefferis (...) Trotte (...) Ienks Abraham Poyner James Farmer
Constantine Overton John Pain John Millington Owen Roberts Thomas Studly Ralph
Sharply Samuel Averal Humphry Overton Francis VVinsor Henry Rawson


POSTSCRIPT.
A further Account being sent up of more that are Imprisoned since the other in
this Book were printed, which being added to the former, there is at present in
prison of our Friends, sufferers for conscience sake, three hundred and
seventeen persons.

THE END.

