THE DECLARATION AND MESSAGE Sent from the Queen of Bohemiah, Lord Craven, Lord
Goring, And diverse other English Gentlemen, resident at the Hague in Holland,
on Friday last, November. 5. 1652.

To Charles the Second, Son to the late King of Great Britain.

With the Queen of Sweden's gracious Letter; and Her Resolution to engage for
the Parliament against the Hollander.

Together with the Answer and Speech of Charles and Second, to Her Majesty's
LETTER.

Imprinted at London for G. Horton, 1652. And are to be sold at the shops in
London and Westminster.

Honored Sir,
ON Friday being the fifth of this instant November, the Lord Craven, with
diverse other English Gentlemen, gave a visit to Her Majesty the Queen of
Bohemia at the Hague, where they sat in Council (from 9 in the morning, till 7
in the evening.) to consult and advise how they might (even in this present
Juncture of Time) propagate the Work in hand, for the most easy and facile
advancing of the Intrest of their Lord and Master Charles; whose present
condition they much commiserate; And indeed, it does not a little concern them,
since that they are all balanced equally in the Skales of your English
Judicatory. In consideration whereof, they resolved once more to put the Chance
of the Day to its Hazard, and agreed upon a Declaration to be published in the
Name of their Master, to invite all the loyal-hearted English throughout the
United Provinces, to an engagement for Him: And in pursuance thereof, her
Majesty has sent a Message to her Nephew Charles, importuning his Residence at
the Hague, etc. But I can give you no account of the event thereof, by reason
He has not as yet returned an Answer.

The chief obstruction which causes the delay is said to arise from Sweden; by
reason that Queen Christiana has given him to understand by a Message, That
she is resolved not to put the general peace into the b^llance with any
particular Interest; neither can she enter into a League Offensive or defensive
with the Netherlands, considering the great abuses and wrongs formerly by them
sustained, etc.

Further assuring him, that she is obliged and bound by the laws of God, to
advance the public peace of her People, and to preserve and defend Them,
according to the great Trust reposed and committed to her Charge, against all
Confederacies, Combinations, and particular Interests, that may prove dangerous
and destructive to her Weal-publique.

Upon reading of this Message, the King seemed to be much astonished, and in
the presence of the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Wilmot, and diverse other
Gentlemen, struck his hand upon his breast, saying, Heavens protect me, for
verily I think I have not now a true friend in the World: Well! God's Will be
done; he is all-sufficient, and in him I will repose my sole Trust and
Confidence; therefore I will not fear what man can do against me.

He continues still at the Palace-Royall in Paris; his Council are very active
to promote and carry on the Design, and M. General Massey is as busy as a
little Lord with the high and mighty States, to stir up the fire of Revenge,
which lies glowing in the Embers throughout the United Provinces.

We hear that the English are still at Portelongone, where the Dutch have got
leave to come in, upon pretense, say they, to bury some eminent persons among
them killed in the late fight; having permission to bury their dead, they have
interred 8 of their Commanders, among which the Vice Admiral is said to be one,
with 3 Captains; the English General having desired the Governor of that place
to furnish him with some powder and shot for his money, he has excused himself
of a non-possibility, whereupon the same has been supplied by way of Porto
Ferraro.

The two Squadrons of English and Dutch do remain very quiet to the Ha^bor, not
offering the least act of Hostility one to the other, only that the Trumpeters
of each pa^^^do daily sound several Challenges each to the o^h^r, to provoke
them to fight; the which to preve^^ the Governor has caused more Guns to be
plant^^ upon the two Bulworks that command the (...) to double the Watch, and
moreover has (...) of ^^^^^al brass-pieces of Ordnanee to the Town of Piombino.

Great are the preparations for War throughout all the Provinces; but the most
active and forward to engage are the English: Yet there is a people who are
loath to run the hazard of War, knowing that it is not a little Ghelt must feed
the flame, and want of Trade will soon make a hole in the bottom of their
purses. And so I leave them between Hope and Despair: God knows the future
Events, and not I.

Leyden. 7 November. stilo novo.
On Monday being the eighth of this instant, we received intelligence, That Sir
George Carteret is very busy with his Pickeroons upon the Western Coast,
seizing diverse small Vessels, but sometimes they snap short of their prey; and
instead of prize receive shipwreck. Amongst the rest, a gallant ship richly
laden with plundered Plate, and other famous Commodities, was bulg'd upon the
Sands near Little in Kent, and became a prey to the Inhabitants thereabouts: she
is by estimation deemed to be worth forty thousand pounds.

Two hundred sail of Colliers are now bound from Newcastle for London; they put
forth on the third of November, and are daily expected at the Hope.

General Blake maintains the Western seas, and expects the coming forth of the
Dutch Fleet very suddenly. Vantrump has tendered an Oath to all his Officers
and Seamen; and unanimously they have vowed to dispute their Quarrel upon the
Neptune Ocean to the last man. But it is the Muzzle of the Canon, and not such
Squibs must resolve our Case.

FINIS.

