THE RELIGION OF Mar. Luther NEITHER CATHOLIC NOR PROTESTANT, Proved from his
own Works.

With some REFLECTIONS In ANSWER to the Vindication of Mar. Luther's Spirit,
Printed at the Theater in Oxon. His Vindication being another Argument of the
Schism of the Church of England.

OXON. Printed by Henry Cruttenden, One of His Majesty's Printers. MDCLXXXVIII.

The Religion of M. LUTHER neither Catholic nor Protestant, Proved from his
own Writings.
I. LUTHER's Religion not Catholic, in Eight Instances.
Inst. 1. BEgin we first with his impious Doctrine concerning the Blessed
Trinity, of which he thus speaks, The Divinity is threefold, as the three
Persons are, etc. And from hence the reason may well be, why Luther expunges
out of the Litany this Verse, Holy Trinity, one very God, have mercy on us. And
hereupon he is not afraid to say, that the word Trinity is but an Human
Invention, and sounds coldly. And then further adds, that his Soul hates the
word Homousion, or Consubstantial; for thus he writes, Anima mea odit
Homousion, and optime exigerunt Ariani, ne vocem illam prophanam and novam
regulis fidei statuiliceret. My very Soul hates the word Homousion, [ or
Consubstantial,] and the Arians, not without reason, required, that it should
not be lawful to put this profane and new Word among the Rules of Faith.
Luther's Blasphemy against the B. Trinity was such, and so odious, that even
Zuinglius did purposely write against Luther about this very point. [So relates
Zuing. of Luth. tom. 2. in resp. ad confut. Luth. fol. 474. Luth. in Ench.
praecum ann. 1543. Luth. in postil. majori Basiliae apud Hervagium in Enarrat.
Evang. Dom. Trin. Contra Jacobum Latomum, tom. 2. Wittemb. latin edit ann.
1551. Zuing. tom. 2. in respons. ad Confess. Luth.]

Inst. 2. Concerning the event of things, Luther holds, That all things come to
pass through a certain Stoical and Fatal necessity; for he defending this
Heresy, thus writes, Nullius est in manu, etc. It is in no man's power to
think good or evil; but all things (as Wickliff's Article, condemned at
Constance, did rightly teach) proceed from absolute Necesssity. And again, fate
or articulum etc. I do confess Wickliff's Article, of all things coming to pass
by Necessity, to have been falsely condemned in the Conventicle of Constance.
[In assert. damnat. per Leonem, art. 36. Luth. de servo arbitrio c. 32.]

Inst 3. To the dishonor of Christ's Passion, and also to the Merit of his
Redemption, he teaches, that Christ not only suffered in Body, but likewise his
Divinity suffered too; for thus he writes, Cum credo, quod sola humana Natura
pro me passa est, Christus vilis, nec magni praetii salvator est, etc. If I
believe, that only the Human Nature of Christ suffered for me, then is Christ a
Savior but of a base and small worth; and himself needs a Savior. And
Luther speaking of this point in another place, thus reprehends the Zuinglians;
The Zuinglians did contend against me most pertinaciously, that the Divinity of
Christ could not suffer. A Doctrine so Blasphemous, as that it was refuted not
only by the Zuinglians in Luther's days, but even by Beza too. [Luth. in Conf.
Majore in Coena Domini. Vide In Council. part. 2. Ep. Theol. c. epist. 60.]

Inst. 4. Concerning the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, Luther
teaches, that all men (and women also) have authority and power to administer.
These are his own words, The first Office of a Priest is to preach the Word,
etc. But this is common to all: Next, to baptize; and this also all may do,
even women, etc. The third Office is to Consecrate Bread and Wine: But this
also is common to all, no less than Priests; And this I avouch by the Authority
of Christ himself saying, Do this in remembrance of me: Christ speaking to all
then present, and to come afterward. If that then which is greatest of all is
given indifferently to all Men and Women (I mean the word and Baptism,) then
that which is less (I mean to consecrate the Supper) is also given to them.
Thus Luther. Nay, Luther proceeded so far herein, that (as Dr. Covel witnesses,
in his Defense of Mr. Hooker, art. 15. p. 101.) he was not afraid to affirm,
that the Sacraments were effectual, tho administered by Satan himself. With Dr.
Cavel agrees the Protestant Hospinian, thus writing, Lutherus eo usque
progreditur, etc. Luther proceeds so far herein, that he maintains the
Sacrament to be a true Sacrament, etiamsi a Diabolo conficeretur, tho it were
to be Consecrated by the Devil. [Luth. tom. 2. lib. de Min. Eccl. instit. fol.
368, 369. Vide lib. de abrog. Missa privata, tom. 2. fol. 249. and lib. de
captivit. Babylon. c. de ordine. In hist. Sacr. par. altera fol. 14.]

Inst. 5. For absolute denial of Temporal Magistrates (an Heresy indifferently
condemned both by Catholics and Protestants) we find Luther thus to write,
Among Christians no man can, or ought to be a Magistrate; But every one is to
other equally subject, etc. And again, As Christ cannot suffer himself to be
tied and bound by Laws, etc. So also ought not the Conscience of a Christian to
suffer them. [Luth. de seculari potest. in tom. 6. Germ. Luth. in tom. 7.
Wittenb. fol. 327.]

Inst. 6. Concerning Luther's denial of certain Books of Scripture. And first,
the Epistle of St. James is called by Luther, Contentious, swelling, strawy,
and unworthy an Apostolical Spirit. The Book of the Apocalypse is also rejected
by Luther, by the acknowledgment of Bullinger, for which he says good and
learned Men were offended with him. I will add Luther's contempt of Moses, and
some of the Apostles: against Moses he thus writes, Habuit Moses insecunda
labia, irata, etc. And again, Moses habuit labia diffusa fell and ira. Of St.
Peter he says, St. Peter did live, and teach, extra Verbum Dei, contrary to the
Word of God. [Luth. praefat. in Jac. edit. 4. Ienensi: Tom. 3. Wittenberg. in
psalm. 45. fol. 423. In ep. ad Gal. c. 1. tom. 5. Wittenb ann. 1554. fol. 290.]

Inst. 7. Luther also taught an Heresy whereby the Propagation of Christian
Religion is much endangered; to wit, That it was not lawful to wage War against
the Turks; his words are these, Praeliari contra Turcas, est repugnare Deo
visitanti iniquitates nostras per illos. To wage War against the Turks, is to
resist God visiting our sins by them. Of which Erasmus thus writes, Many of the
Saxons following herein that first Doctrine of Luther, denied to Caesar and K.
Ferdinand Aid against the Turks, etc. declaring, they had rather fight for a
Turk not Baptized, than for a Turk Baptized. [Luth. in tom. 2. Wit. In assert.
damnat. per Leonem decimum assert. 34. In ep. ad fratres Inferioris Germaniae.]

Inst. 8. Concerning Faith and good Works, Luther taught an Heresy disallowed
by all learned Protestants. He says, It is impiety to affirm, that Faith
without Charity justifies not. Nay he adds further, Fides nisi sit sine, etc.
Except Faith be without the least good Works, it does not justify; nay it is
not Faith. And lastly, the more to debase good works, he thus says, Works take
their goodness of the Worker; and no Work is disallowed of God, unless the
Author be disallowed before. [Luth. upon Gal. Englished, in c. 2. Luth. tom. 1.
prop. 3. Luth. Sermon. Engl. 204. etc.]

II. LUTHER's Religion not Protestant, in Eight Instances.
Inst. 1. HE ever maintained the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of our
Lord in the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, and that to the Elements upon
Consecration. And his Followers, for their peculiar Defense of this Doctrine,
are styled Lutherans by Zuinglius, Calvin, the Church of England, etc. who
impugn the foresaid Doctrine.

Inst. 2. Luther also defended Prayer to Saints, for their intercession to God
for us. Of which point he thus writes; De intercessione divorum, etc. As to
the Doctrine of Intercession of Saints, I hold with the whole Christian Church,
and it is my judgment, that Saints ought to be honored and invocated by us.
[Luth. in purg. quorund. Artic. and in epist. ad Georg. spalat.]

Inst. 3. He also taught the Doctrine of Evangelical Counsels; to wit, that a
man might do more than he is commanded, as appears out of his Book, De
Assertionibus, Art. 30.

Inst. 4. The Doctrine of Purgatory he taught; of which see Tom. 1. Wittenberg.
in resol. de Indulgentiis, Concl. 15. and in disp. Lipsica cum Eckio. And upon
this ground he is confessed by Urbanus Regius (a Protestant) to defend Prayer
for the Dead. [In 1. par. operum formula caute loquend. cap. de Sanct. cultu.

Inst. 5. Luther further taught, and approved the use of Images in Churches, as
Beza witnesses. [In resp. ad art. Coloq. Mont. part. alt. in. praefat.]

Inst. 6. The indifferency of Communion under one, or both kinds, is allowed by
Luther, in these words, Quamvis pulchrum sit etc. Although it were very seemly to
use both the species, or forms, in the blessed Eucharist; and tho Christ
commanded nothing herein, as necessary, yet it were better to follow peace etc.
than to contend about the forms. [Luth. in epist. ad Bohemos.]

Inst. 7. Concerning the making of the Sign of the Cross upon our Foreheads,
Johannes Crevelius (a Lutheran) thus witnesses, Cum imus cubitum, sive
surgimus electo, cruce nos juxta Lutheri and aliorum piorum institutionem
signamus: When we go to bed, or rise from thence, we sign our selves with the
sign of the Cross, according to the advice of Luther and other pious men, [In
his Refutation Caeremon. Missae, printed at Magdeb. 1603. p. 118.] And Johan.
Maulius (Luther's Scholar) thus writes of Luther, Respondet Lutherus, signo
crucis facto, Deus me tueatur; Luther answers, at the making the Sign of the
Cross, God defend me. [Loc. com. 7. page 636.]

Inst. 8. Finally, to omit diverse other points, (wherein Luther never dissented
from the Church of Rome,) Luther ever maintained, that the Government of the
Church is Monarchical, and neither Aristocratical nor Popular: of which point
Luther thus writes; Cum Deus voluerit, etc. Seeing God would have one Catholic
Church, throughout the whole World, it was needful, that one People, imo unum
aliquem Patrem istius unius populi eligi, yea some one Father of this one
People should be chosen, ad quem and suos posteros spectaret totus orbis, to
whose care, and his Successors, the whole world should belong. [In loc. com.
class. 1. c. 37. p. 107.]

Thus much to show, that Luther, after his Revolt from the Catholic Church,
did still retain many Catholic Doctrines, that are denied by modern
Protestants, and consequently was no true Protestant.

REFLECTIONS in Answer to the Vindication of Martin Luther's Spirit, Printed at
the Theater in Oxford.
THE Vindicator of Luther's Spirit seems to have writ with the same spirit. His
first Cavil is at the Considerer's Rule of trying the spirits of the Teachers
of new Doctrines, by their fruits. And he is willing (p. 2.) to stand to this
Test, and that Luther's spirit should be tried by his morals; but yet he sees
no necessity neither of his submitting to such a Rule (the reason is obvious,
of which more afterward,) and therefore he chooses rather to appeal to St.
John, 1 Ep. 4. 2. every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God. But certainly such Confession must be fruitful of good Works,
or else what differs it from that of the Devils. But be the sense of this Text
as the Vindicator would have it, yet Luther gains nothing by it: For he that
denies that Jesus is Consubstantial with the Father, is not of God. But this
did Luther, as is evident from the Instance of his hatred to that Article of
the Christian Faith.

Next, The Vindicator endeavors to clear Luther of the Solifidean Doctrine,
contrary to Luther's own words cited by the Considerer, as also Inst. 8. in
this Paper.

Thirdly, Concerning Luther's vilifying Vows, Acts of Mortification, Penance,
single Life, etc. before he makes any defense he puts the Question, why the
Considerer in giving so long a List of Luther's Doctrines, slipped that of
Indulgences? For the Answer of which the Vindicator is referred to the
Considerer's Tract of Pennances and Indulgences, that for so many years has
baffled the most Celebrated of the Church of England; and therefore may safely
defy his less considerable Pen. As to the Charge against Luther concerning
Vows, the Vindicator replies, that Luther was not utterly against them. But yet
afterward he pleads for the Lawfulness of Luther's breaking his Vows, without
assuring us, that he could not by continuing in his Cloister, and using the
ordinary means of Prayer and Mortification, have kept them. That Text of
Scripture urged by the Vindicator, All men receive not this saying, Mat. 9. 1.
does not prove, that God denies this Gift to any, or that any ever failed the
attaining of it that sincerely endeavored after it: Tho the Church of England
Version in favor of this loose opinion (to say no worse of it) has in this
place corrupted the Original. And thereupon the Vindicator seems to applaud
Luther for relinquishing his Habit, his Canonical Prayers, etc. for the sake of
Bora, (a Prostitute Nun, a fit Mother of such a Reformation,) as incapable of
Marriage as himself. For how could he have the leisure and the retiredness of
the Cloister (says the Vindicator) to perform all those Acts of Devotion, when
the Burden of the Reformation [and Bora] lay upon his shoulders. But if I well
remember, the Vindicator's killing Argument, that Luther might break his Vow
and Marry, is, because Costerus says, It Is less sin for Priests to Fornicate
than to Marry. Therefore for Luther to Marry was no sin. A wise Consequence!
But suppose this Quotation out of Costerus to have its full force; yet if he
held Fornication a mortal damnable sin, as certainly he did, neither Priests
nor the Vindicator would be any gainers by it; for both he that fornicates, and
he that marries after Vows, are equally liable to eternal Damnation. But if
Luther could have lived continently, as he says he did whilst a Monk, (and
nothing appears to show he could not) what can be alleged in defense of his
doubly wicked sacrilegious Marriage?

4. To the Objections of Luther's rejecting the Authority of the present
Church, and the denying it to be a true Church, the Vindicator knows not what
to answer. However, to blind the matter, something must be said, and therefore
the Church which Luther contemned must be the Court of Rome. But then to the
Question, which himself puts, concerning the Visibility of the Church for many
Ages, even according to Luther's Note of it, viz. the true and sincere
preaching of the Word, he gives you no other Answer than what might be expected
from an ordinary Quaker; That in all that dark midnight of Popery (Midday is
darkness to some sort of Creatures) which filled the Earth for so many Ages
there were still some Gleams of Light, some Witnesses that arose to give
Testimony to the Truth, to protest against Innovations: But whether those
Gleams, those Witnesses, were Lutherans, or Calvinists, or Zuinglians, or
Cranmerians, or Parkerians, he knows not. They seem to me to have been an
invisible people, and (like the Spanish Black-Bills in Oates's Plot) to have
lived under ground; or at least the saying there were such people, may serve or
a time to beguile the unwary, and to keep on foot and carry on the holy Cheat.
But instead of a proof that they were indeed the Visible Church of Christ, he
refers us to a testy saying of Scaliger's, that has nothing of Truth in it.

But the Vindicator seems much offended, that Luther should be charged with
denying the Validity of the former Clergy's Ordination: Yet he does not
reflect, that Luther argued no true Consecration of the Eucharist from the
defect of Ordination, as being convinced of it by the Devils argument. And as
for the Flourish he speaks of, it is his own, not Luther's. Nor does Luther's
proceeding in the Work of the Ministry prove, that he owned his Mission from
the preceding Church; but rather that he looked upon himself to have had an
extraordinary Mission, or otherwise what Authority could he pretend (and
certainly so great an Apostle would do nothing without just Authority) to
Ordain and Commission others? Of which in its proper place. To Luther's calling
the Pope Antichrist, Bishops his Apostles, and Universities his Lupunaria; the
Vindicator seems to subscribe, and applaud him in it; and I doubt not but he
would contribute his Faggot toward the Burning of him in effigy. But yet this
is an Error exploded by learned Protestants, Hammond, Thorndyke, Grotius, and
others; and has been preached against in this University by much learneder men
than the Vindicator.

Here I must beg leave to digress with the Vindicator, to two gross mistakes of
his, p. 27. whereby he thinks he has given the Church of Rome a terrible blow.
The first is, That to give an inferior sort of Cult or Respect to the Elements,
is to worship them with Divine Worship; which is false ex terminis, unless it
be true, that an inferior worship is the supreme. The second mistake is, That
for a Priest to operate the presence of the Body and Blood of Christ (which
Church-of- England Ministers pretend to do after their fashion) is neither more
nor less than to make God. So then to operate the presence of a thing is to
make the thing. To operate, e. g. in Baptism the presence of the Holy Ghost is
to make the Holy Ghost. And so also to occasion the presence of the Vindicator
of Luther in the Divinity or Logic School, would make him a Vindicator of
Luther; which is utterly impossible.

5. To Luther's rejecting Councils, the Vindicator writes pro and con; 1. That
he did so, when (in his private Judgment) they went contrary to Scriptures; and
so (says he) do all the Reformed; he might have added, and all Heretics in the
world, all of them preferring their private interpretation of Scripture to that
of the Church: But secondly, Luther did not so, because he never refused (if we
may believe his Defender) to be concluded by the Authority of a Council legally
summoned. The noise of his Adversaries (says the Vindicator) who were
perpetually crying Councils and Canons, when they had nothing else to say for
their Cause (and was not that enough?) might perhaps force out an expression or
two from him, etc. He had fire in his temper, and a German bluntness, and upon
these provocations might possibly strain a phrase with too great freedom. And
what was the innocent freedom this Reformer took? It was only to asperse the
most sacred and famous Councils that ever were, the Apostolical at Jerusalem,
and the first Nicene, (submitted to by Protestants themselves). Arguing from
the Injunction of the first, to abstain from Blood and things strangled (which
was only Temporary) that it is lawful not to obey the Decrees of Councils. And
saying of the second, That its Canons were Hay, Straw, Wood, Stubble; and
particularly concerning the Third Canon of that Council, prohibiting the Clergy
to have with them in their House any Women unless their Mother, Sister,
Grandmother, or Aunt, That he did not understand tbe Holy Ghost in this
Council. What? Has the Holy Ghost nothing to do but to bind and burden its
Ministers with impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary Laws? And, lastly, he
affirmed, That the Christian Doctrine received more Light from the Children's
Catechism than all the Councils. This one Text, beware of false Prophets, Mat.
17. 15. (says swaggering Luther) may suffice against the Authorities of all the
Popes, Fathers, Councils, and Schoolmen, who attribute to Bishops and Ministers
the sole power of Judging and Deciding Controversies. In the very Council of
Nice, the best that ever was before or since, even then began they to make Laws
and claim that power. -- Wherefore since such an Error, and so great Sacrilege,
has been able to prevail so long, I will (and command) once for all, that those
Sophisters hold their Prating, etc. And is all this in a Reformer nothing else
but straining a phrase; and so great a wickedness in him no sin?

6. The Arraignment of Luther for speaking contemptuously of the Fathers, the
Vindicator says is a rank Calumny. But is at a Calumny to say he speaks
contemptuously of the Fathers, who was not afraid to assert, In the Writings of
every one of the Fathers how great Errors are there? how often do they contradict
themselves? who is there of them that does not very many times wrest the
Scriptures? Is not that a Contempt of the Fathers, to call the Thomists.
Blockheads, for proving the Sacrifice of the Mass by a multitude of the
Fathers, and ancient Custom? And to averr, That if there be nothing to be
replied in answer to the Fathers, better however to deny all the Fathers than
grant the Mass to be a Sacrifice? What Luther drolls upon the Fathers in his
Table-talk will not pass with the Vindicator to have been in earnest, because
(I suppose) he thinks it was in his Cups. But it is strange, that his serious
preferring Melancthon before all the Fathers, should by the Vindicator be
called not an affront or contempt against the Fathers, but a complement to
Melancthon? And yet some of the Church of England, that think themselves
Learned, have been heard to say, That they do not see why Dr. Tillotson, Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dr. Tenison, Dr. Sherlock, etc. may not pass for Fathers of as
good Authority in the Church, as St. Ambrose, St. Austin, etc.

7. To the Proof of Luther's setting up his own Authority against the Church,
and maintaining his own Doctrines as infallible, nothing is answered. The
instance which the Considerer gives, is the Doctrine of Consubstantiation,
wherein Luther pretends Certainty and Revelation in God's Word. Could any man
have persuaded me (says Luther Epist. ad Argent.) there was nothing but Bread
and Wine in the Sacrament, he had much obliged me. For being in great
perplexity, I took great pains in Discussing the point; I endeavored with all
my might to extricate and free my self, as well perceiving I should thereby
very much incommode the Papacy. But I see I am caught, there is no way of
escaping left me: For the words of the Evangelists [This is my Body, etc.] are
too plain and clear to be forced to any other meaning. It is evident, that in
this Doctrine Luther was neither Catholic, nor Church of England Protestant.
But yet so much a Catholic he was, as to hold the real presence of the Body
and Blood of our Lord in the Sacrament. Being forced to it (as himself
Confesses) by the words of Scripture. But how one that holds a Doctrine so
contradictory to the sense and reason of a Church of England man, should
deserve the extravagant Encomiums of the Vindicator, I cannot understand.

8. To Luther's altering the public Liturgy, and reforming the Service of the
Mass, the Vindicator replies in great fury, that the Considerer has mistaken
Hospinian. But yet he saves me the labor of examining the Quotation, and
rectifying the Folio, by his yiedling the cause. For he confesses, that Luther
was deputed to throw out all that Part of the Service of the Mass that made the
Sacrament a Sacrifice. And what is throwing out, but Altering and Reforming the
Service of the Mass? But then he says, Luther did not impose his Form as
obligatory. Not as obligatory; si quid melius illis revelatum fuerit, if any
new Revelation could supply them with a better. But can any one say, he did not
impose it as obligatory, before and instead of the ancient Form of the Church?
Or otherwise what signified his writing a Book for the abolishing the most
ancient and venerable Service of the Mass?

To Luther's taking upon him the Authority of Ordaining Bishops and Ministers,
the Vindicator admits the fact; but says, it was done not out of choice, but
necessity. A worthy Answer! What necessity was there? Were there no Bishops in
Germany at that time? Or does it any where appear, that ever the Church allowed
of any such necessity? Yes, the Vindicator presents us with a well known
passage of St. Austin, In Alexandria and per totum Aegyptum, Si desit Episcopus
consecrat Presbyter. This passage is well known not to be St. Austin's, but the
words of another Author, (see St. Austin's Works, Qu. de utroque Test. 101.)
Nor does the word Consecrat signify Ordaining: The Presbyters in Egypt, or
any other place, being never permitted to Ordain upon any pretense whatsoever.
But Consecrat here may signify the same with Consignat; and by this is meant
Consecration of Chrism, which tho proper to a Bishop, yet, it seems, in Egypt
was done by Presbyters in the Bishop's absence. But it was not for the
Vindicator's purpose to give the true sense of this passage: For if the
Presbyterian Ordination fails, where will the Church of England find Refuge,
when her own Ordination shall be called in Question?

10. To Luther's sentencing the Canon Law, consisting of the Decrees of
Councils and Popes, to the Fire, and Burning them in a solemn Assembly of the
University of Wirtenberg, the Vindicator owns the fact to be true. But he
denies that it was done upon Luther's own Authority: For he had a Commission as
a Preacher of God's Word; and he had taken an Oath at his going out Doctor, to
confound as much as in him lay all pernicious Doctrines. A very solid Defense!
Luther it seems did pass sentence upon the Decrees of Councils, etc. for the
confounding Doctrines which in his own private Judgment he thought pernicious:
But he did it as a Preacher of God's Word, and a Doctor, not as the
Arch-Reformer Martin Luther. But the Vindicator distrusting this Argument,
says, Luther had other motives. And what were those? His Books had been
solemnly burnt at Rome as Heretical: His own people were startled at it; so
that he was fore't boldly to make Reprisals, to buoy up his Followers courage.
A fair Concession. The Church Censured Luther's Books as Heretical, Luther
returns the Censure upon the Church, and Condemns her Decrees as pernicious.
And yet this in a Reformer was no Usurping an Authority, but only declaring his
Opinion as the Scholars did at the Oxon Decree against Bellarmin, and other
Jesuits, without knowing or being able to show, that those Writers held any
such pernicious Tenets.

11. To Luther's pronouncing Anathema's, and Excommunicating the Reformed that
dissented from him, the Vindicator replies in a Question, Is there no
difference between a Judicial Anathema, and a Wish of Execration? So that
Luther might Curse, but not Anathematize his Dissenting Brethren. The Monks,
says he, writ upon their MSS. Anathema to all that should violate them. I
suppose he means by MSS. the Registers of Founders Statutes, and Donations
belonging to Monasteries: The weight and effects of which Curses (if we may
believe Reformed Writers themselves) are both felt and dreaded to this very
day. But the Vindicator after three or four unhandsom Sarcasms, pretends to
prove his point from the Considerer's own words, [Luther required not
Conformity to his Doctrines out of any Authority he claimed to impose them,
which Authority he renounced;] Here the Vindicator leaves off in the middle of
a sentence very politickly, and like a Reformed Controvertist, lest the other
end should sting him. The sentence goes on [but yet (which is somewhat more) he
required a Conformity to his Doctrines from a Certainty of Divine Truth which
he pretended to be in them] And so the Obedience he refused as a Magistrate, he
claimed as an Oracle; and would have his own pretended Apostolical certainty of
Doctrine set up instead of the Church's Authority; and those that would not
submit, must expect his Apostolical Censures; notwithstanding it was easy for
Dissenters to produce more reasons for leaving him, than he could for leaving
the Church.

Yet this Certainty of Doctrine the Vindicator calls Protestant Certainty, and
is much in love with it, and wonders the Considerer should not understand it; I
guess he means, when one of so narrow a capacity as himself fully comprehends
it. But I dare challenge him and all his Party, to show me which of the
Protestant Churches is the true, wherein this pretended Certainty of Doctrine
may be found. A little after, the Vindicator compares Luther's Condemning his
Brethren the Sacramentarians, and their returning the Censure (notwithstanding
the great difference between them in the point of the Real Presence) to the
feud of Hierom and Ruffinus, of Epiphanius and Chrysostom, of Victor and the
Greek Bishops, of Paul and Barnabas. The very recital of this absurd passage is
a sufficient Reflection.

12. Luther's Evil-speaking (so ill becoming an Apostle) the Vindicator does
not undertake to defend; but confesses it to be such as neither Friends nor
Enemies could approve. However he would have Luther's way of Writing to be the
Humor of the Age. But why should then the Tigurine Divines blame his Confessio
Parva? That it was full-fraught with Nicknames, as Devil, etc. and other
Unchristian terms of Reproach; so crammed with lewd, nasty, ribaldry stuff; so
full of anger, maliciousness, fury, and madness, that none (that were not as
mad as Luther himself) could read it without astonishment at so unfortunate and
unheard of an Example, etc. And another Zuinglian said, That God for Luther's
pride had taken from him the good Spirit, and given him a Lying one in it is
stead. And does not the whole current of Writers of his own time, in a manner,
say the same thing? For a Gentleman to write a scurrilous Satyr (even upon an
Heretic) may be a great fault; but for an Apostle to be an Evil-speaker, a
Blasphemer of Kings, of the whole Catholic Church, and of God Almighty
himself, is certainly an unpardonable Crime.

The Considerer observes of Calvin (another principal Reformer) that he was of
the same Spirit with Martin Luther, and gave as ill Language where he owed
submission and obedience. This the Vindicator calls stepping out of the way,
and thinks himself not obliged to take notice of it, because perhaps less able
to defend him than Luther. In the same page the Vindicator takes up the
Considerer, for saying St. Peter's Example not Doctrine was false; and will
have St. Peter's Doctrine to have been false; and he gives you this reason for
it, Elymas withstood Paul, Alexander withstood Paul, and they erred in
Doctrine, therefore St. Peter Erred in Doctrine. Why so? because Paul withstood
him, and it is highly probable that he withstood Paul again, and so became an
Elymas. Good God! that such a blasphemous Argumentation should be Licensed in a
Christian University. But I cease my wonder, when I hear that lately a whole
Sermon was Preached before the University against this great Apostle, and
passed Uncensur'd.

13. Proceed we next to Luther's famous Disputation with the Devil. Luther
confesses it. The Vindicator will have it to have been either a Dream or a
strong Temptation. But which should know best, Luther or the Vindicator? Mr.
Walsingham, in King James's time, was convinced by it. He went to the King, as
Head of the Church, to be satisfied: The King sent him to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and he turned him over to his Chaplain Dr. Covel for satisfaction,
who had nothing to Reply, but what Confirmed this Gentleman in the belief of
this story of Luther [and of the Devil's being the Author of the Reformation].
His Book called His Search, then Baffled the whole Church of England, and
remains unanswered to this very day. This Argument likewise convinced the
Ingenious Mr. Chillingworth; and his Reply to it after his Lapse, says only,
That for ought he knew it might be a Melancholy Dream, (and it might not). No
force at all of an Argument in this; as indeed in none of his Replies to his
own Motives. Which made the Learned Protestants say, That Chillingworth had
better have slighted and contemned his Motives, than to have returned such
weak Answers to them as were not able to bring his own Old Mother back again to
the Church of England. To return to the Vindicator: Afterward he seems to own
the Disputation, and endeavors to vindicate the Devil's Arguments, as being
the same that are now used by the Reformers. The Devil's first Argument; That
in the Church (of which Luther then professed himself a Member) there was no
true Faith, or knowledge of Christ, no true Priesthood; the Vindicator passes
by, as knowing that the Learned Protestants have left the Devil in this point,
and for him to appear on his side alone, would look ridiculous to his own
Party. The Devils second Argument was, That according to Christ's Institution
the Priest ought not to Celebrate the Blessed Sacrament alone, as Luther had
done for many years; The Considerer's Answer is solid, and not touched by the
Vindicator. Luther might have answered, That his partaking it alone was not his
fault: Nor yet the fault of others, who were no way engaged to Receive it with
him so often as he Offered it. But this did not hinder, that he might not
partake himself, when others did not. Nor was he obliged by any Precept of our
Lord, to forbear either Partaking or Offering, tho there were none to
Communicate with him. And as for the sense of those Texts of Scripture urged by
Satan (and now by his Vindicator) he was to adhere, not to Satan's, or his Own,
but the Church's Judgment thereon. And the Church always judged (as is manifest
from her practice) that the Consecrator might partake alone when no others
presented themselves. The Devil goes on to object, That Luther (in his public
Mass) did not give the Sacrament entire (because not in both kinds) to the
People. The Considerer replies, That Luther might have answered the Devil, as
the Church does her Adversaries, That there is no Precept of our Lord's
commanding a necessary receiving in both kinds. Neither modern nor ancient
Church so interpreting the words of Institution; the ancient Church frequently
giving the Eucharist to Sick, and to Absents from the public Service, only in
one kind; holding that she Offended herein against no Command of our Lord. To
this the Vindicator answers, That the Bishop of Meaux on this subject says the
clear contrary. But then he must say it contrary to the Fathers (St. Dionysius
in the second Age, Eccl. Hier. c. ult. prope finem. Tertul. l. ad Uxor. St.
Cypr. Sermon. de Lapsis. n. 10. in the third Age. St. Ambr. Orat. de ohitu Satyr.
and Eus. in the Fourth Age. In the fifth, St. Austin l. adv. Julian, Pelag. c.
4. prope finem and Tom. 2. Ep. 106. post medium.) Lest therefore the Vindicator
should seem to have said nothing, he advances a stale Objection, many times
urged, and as often answered. I should perhaps have passed it by, had it not
been lately vigorously pressed by some of the Oxford Divines to a serious
Gentleman for the Confirming him in the Church of England. The Objection
pretends, that Communion in one kind was Decreed in a Council with a non
obstante to the Custom of the Primitive Church. The Decree of the Council, as
to this point, Defines, That although Christ Instituted this venerable Sacrament,
and administered to his Disciples in both the species of Bread and Wine, and
that after Supper, tamen hoc non obstante, yet notwithstanding such
Institution, and administering in both kinds, and that after Supper, yet the
Church has and does Observe and Command, That this Sacrament may not be
Celebrated after Supper, nor be received by any that are not fasting, unless in
such cases of Necessity allowed of by the Church. And in like manner, That
although in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was received by the Faithful under
both kinds, yet for the avoiding some Hazards and Scandals, this (the present)
Custom was upon good reason introduced, of Consecrating under both kinds, and
the Laities Communicating under the species of Bread only; it being firmly to
be believed, and no way to be doubted, but that the whole Body and Blood of
Christ is truly contained under either species, as well that of Bread as that
of Wine. All sides grant, that our Savior Instituted in both kinds, and that
he did it after Supper; but where does it appear, that he commanded all should
receive in both kinds, and that they should receive after Supper? And yet if he
in his words of Institution commanded the one, he also commanded the other; for
both are equally contained in those words. And if the Church can Interpret and
Command (as also the Church of England does) that people should communicate
fasting, why may she not also Interpret and Command, that people shall receive
in one kind only? Thus much of this fraud. But is it not a shame, that such
falsities should be Authorized by an University that was Founded for the
defense of Truth, and the increase of God Almighty's Church; and not for
deluding of unwary Souls.

The Devil's next Objection against Luther's being a Priest is, That the Mind
and Institution of Christ was, That other Christians also should communicate in
this Sacrament; but Luther was Ordained not to give the Sacrament to others,
but to Offer Sacrifice. The Considerer replies, That according to this
argument, neither would the Priest have Authority to give the Sacrament to
himself. And besides, that Sacrificare in the Church's sense, takes in also the
distributing part. Here the Vindicator pretends, that it is not the Church's
sense; and he takes his argument from the Catechism of the Council of Trent
(Cap. de Euch.. 75.) There (says he) the Eucharist is said to be Instituted
upon a double account; the one, that it might be a spiritual Food for our
Souls; the other, that it might be a Sacrifice for our Sins. From whence he
infers, that certainly the Ministering the Eucharist to the people belongs to it
as it is the Food of our Souls; and therefore as a Sacrament, not as a
Sacrifice. The Church in this place holds, that it is Ministered to the people
as a Sacrament, but does she not also hold, that it is Offered to God Almighty
as a Sacrifice first, and afterward distributed as a Sacrament? And does not
the word Sacrificare include both? The Vindicator would have baffled himself,
if he had but put down the remainder of the Paragraph; which expressly
explicates the Eucharist's being both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, by its
Figure and Type the Paschal Lamb, that being first Offered by the Children of
Israel as a Sacrifice, and then Eaten as a Sacrament. But for a fuller account
of the Church's sense, the Vindicator is referred to her Decrees, where he will
find, that Priests have power given them of Consecrating, Offering, and
Distributing the Body and Blood of Christ, as also to Remit and Retain Sins, to
Bless, Govern, Preach, Baptize, etc. And is not all this more than to Offer
Sacrifice? In this point the Devil and the Vindicator are at odds. The Devil
urges the nullity of Luther's Orders, upon the account of his being a
Sacrificing Priest. The Vindicator distinguishes upon him, That tho the Form
(of making him a Sacrificing Priest) should be a little defective, yet where
the Church Intends to convey Orders, there they are actually conveyed; and his
being made a Sacrificing Priest did not prejudice Luther's Orders at all. That
is to say, he might be a Sacrificing Priest, and a not-Sacrificing Priest, by
the same Form. Had he also, by the same Form, a new Authority given him of
beginning a new Ordination, that should be opposite to that of the whole
preceding Church? These are the Goliah-Arguments in which the Vindicator
exposes himself and his Party to defy the Church of God.

The Devil proceeds to another Objection against Luther's Orders, His using the
Mass as a Sacrifice Propitiatory for Sins, contrary to Christ's Institution.
The Vindicator closes with him, and waving the word Propitiatory, puts the
Question, Whether it be truly a Sacrifice? In which he might have satisfied
himself out of any of the Catholic Writers, who would have told him, that the
Mass is a true, proper, unbloody Propitiatory Sacrifice for Sins; and that
according to Christ's Institution, who at his last Supper gave his Body for his
Disciples, Offering it up first to God as a Sacrifice, before he gave it to
them as a Sacrament: This is my Body which is given (to God) for you. And the
ancient Fathers are full of Testimonies to this purpose. See Bell. The
Vindicator seems not to have read the Fathers, and therefore is advised to
consult them before he Replies, and take great care how he denies the Daily
Sacrifice of the Church, and the Christians only Propitiatory Sacrifice for
Sins.

13. The Vindicator takes no further notice of Luther's Conference: But is very
angry, that the Considerer should meddle with his Friend Zuinglius, another
principal Reformer; and that he should say of him, that he also had a Visit
from an Evil Spirit, that helped him to an Interpretation of Hoc est Corpus
meum, for the establishing his Virtual Presence; and that Zuinglius confessed
it, with this asseveration, vera narro adeoque vera, etc. What I tell you is
true, nay so true, tho I would have concealed it, yet my Conscience forced me
to utter what the Lord would have me impart, notwithstanding the many Scoffs
and Jeers to which I know I shall expose my self thereby, etc. And lastly, that
Luther said of it, That it was as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that the
Zuinglian Heresy was nothing else but the Mockery of the Devil, who had
shamm'd Zuinglius with a sorry but crafty Interpretation. This Apparition to
Zuinglius the Vindicator calls an ordinary Dream, as if he himself had had many
such. But does he not at the same time deny the Testimonies of Zuinglius and
Luther? And he that will give the Lie to his own Party, even those he pretends
to Vindicate, what Arguments can be sufficient to convince him! If such a clear
Discovery of the variety and subtilty of Satan's temptations and wiles, as the
Considerer, consonant to the Word of God, has made, (which all good men
thankfully receive), is therefore rejected, because it condemns the principal
Reformers out of their own Works and Confessions, what wise man (that consults
his eternal good) will not rather abominate such Reformers than deny the Truth.

14. To the Resemblance of Luther's Change of Religion in several particulars
with that of Mahomet's, the Vindicator replies, That he was almost tempted to
return the kindness with a Parallel between some body and Judas. Intimating,
that every one that leaves the Church of England, and becomes a Catholic, must
be a Judas. And consequently, that the Greatest and most Excellent Person in
the Nation must be so too, and yet at the same time remain the Supreme Head of
the Church of England. But he not daring to speak out what he meant by some
body, chooses rather to asperse Pope Boniface, as if he had begun a new Kingdom
in the Church about fifteen years before Mahomet. For the proof of which he
gives us no Argument, and yet he would have us believe it; tho at the same time
Demonstration on our side will not convince Protestants of Luther's beginning a
new Kingdom. As to the Book he mentions, called Turco-Papismus, if he means by
it, that Roman Catholics are Turks, I suppose the Church of England will not
bear him out in it. Unless such as lamented the taking of Buda, and wished less
prosperous success to the Christian Arms. But upon the whole matter the
Vindicator thinks the Parallel childish, and the Considerer not skilled in
hitting features. Let us see then: Did not Luther resemble Mahomet in those
particulars urged by the Considerer? As, 1. In rejecting the Sense and
Exposition of Scripture received in former times. This Innovator urging, that
the Sense and Meaning of the Scriptures, as the other that the Words and
Writings thereof, were falsified. And was it not Luther that said, That he
scorned to submit himself or his Doctrine to the Judgment of Bishops (the
Fathers of the Church), and that the World had been long enough guilty of such
a foolish Humility? And did Mahomet ever say any thing more rebellious? 2. Did
not Luther resemble Mahomet in the manner of his Coming. Neither of them
working Miracles, yet pretending to an extraordinary Authority in Reforming the
World. Both of them destitute of the Virtues of the Holy Spirit, temperance,
meekness, etc. propagating their Principles, the one by his Railing Tongue, the
other by his Sword. Some of Luther's own Brood said of him, That he had much of
the Evil Spirit in all his Reproofs, very little of the meek amicable Spirit of
God. Even his Friend Melancthon said little less, when he wrote to Calvin, That
for twenty years he had expected Banishment from Luther, upon the account of
some difference between them, concerning the Bread-Worship of some of Luther's
Followers. 3. Did not Luther resemble Mahomet in Sensuality, and the indulging
his Appetites; pleading much for the Necessity of Marriage; scouting the
Counsels of Perfection and of a stricter Life, as Celibacy, Monastical Poverty,
Obedience, etc. Dispensing with his own Vows. The Vindicator's Argument, page
23. That Luther might Dispense with his own Vows without having recourse to the
Judgment of the Church is new Divinity; for tho it be true, that no Power in
the Church can Dispense where the cause is not just, yet it is as true, that
the Votary (v. g. Mart. Luther) is incapable of judging of the justness of the
cause, or taking upon him Authority of Dispensing in his own case. And
therefore the Reasons that Luther and his Vindicator seem to offer, that his
Vow was not binding, ought to have been weighed in the Sanctuary, and have
passed the Judgment of the Church: His own private thinking his Vows null not
being sufficient to make them so, unless his pretended extraordinary Mission
could also give him an extraordinary power of Dispensation. The Vindicator's
darling reason of Luther's picking out Bora, for the making the President he
was going to set the more conspicuous, and the declaring openly, that the
Quarrel between him and Rome was irreconcilable, is the publishing his own and
Luther's shame. And what he says against Celibacy (one of our Lord's Counsels
of Perfection) that many that made profession of it lived wicked lives, may as
fitly be applied against Matrimony (one of the Holy Sacraments), and Sodom and
Gomorrah as easily there be found (for I do not read that any in those Cities
professed a single Life), and yet both Celibacy and Matrimony remain Holy
Institutions in the Church of Christ for bringing Souls to Heaven. 4. Did not
Luther resemble Mahomet in his attempting to degrade the formerly received Head
of the Church upon Earth, as Mahomet did the Head thereof in Heaven;
pronouncing the Chief Pastor of Christ's Flock Antichrist, and the Church of
God his Spouse; applying to him all the Marks of that great false Prophet,
whose steps Luther himself notoriously followed. The Considerer gives more
Instances of the Parallel: But I remember what the Vindicator answers to the
Considerer's pressing Luther's preferring Turcism to Christianity, the Alcoran
to the Bible, and Mahomet to Christ, That here his fancy had made a Giant of a
Windmill. The Considerer had no thought of Windmills, but the Vindicator it
seems had, which made him slip (as he phrases it) from one Paragraph to
another, without answering the Arguments of any of them.

Lastly, To the Considerer's Sentence upon Martin Luther, according to our
Savior's Rule, (by their fruits you shall know them), That it was easy to
discern this Person (Martin Luther) not to have been possessed with the Good,
but the Bad Spirit, the Vindicator seems to answer, That one that teaches true
Doctrine may be a bad man; and that the Doctrine of the Apostles and the
Primitive Church is never the worse for such men's Preaching it. But he should
have observed, That Luther was no ordinary Preacher, but the Beginner of a new
Church; and therefore his Life should have been like that of the Apostles. To
prove that it was so, the Vindicator parallels him with St. Paul, p. 25. in
wrestling against Principalities and Powers, etc. there enumerating the
greatest part of that Apostles Virtues; adding, I could not forbear setting
down this Panoply of St. Paul, wherewith Luther completely armed himself in his
Spiritual Warfare; and I do not know whether this Description belongs so justly
to any man as him since the days of the Apostles. And in the Conclusion of his
Book he is more extravagant in the Praise of this monstrous Reformer. Such
absurdities need no Reflections. The few Instances given in this Paper, more
largely insisted on by the Judicious Considerer, are I think sufficient to
satisfy any unprejudiced Reader, That Luther was not a St. Paul, or indeed any
Saint, or good Christian; but on the contrary, a Sacrilegious, Insolent Opposer
of the Catholic Religion, that under the show of Reformation divided the
Church of Christ.

If therefore what is said in the Considerations of the Spirit of Martin Luther
be true, the Church of England, in her Vindicating and Abetting so notorious a
Schismatic, in the very Act of Separating himself from the Whole, True,
Visible, Hierarchical Church of Christ, must be Schismatical. And that what is
said in the Considerations, etc. is true, evidently appears from the preceding
Reflections; wherein is briefly and plainly shown, That the Oxford Vindicator
has proved nothing to the contrary.

FINIS.

