THE DECLARATION OF THE Protestant NOBILITY and GENTRY of the Province of
MUNSTER IN IRELAND.
WE the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of Munster, Assembled together, have
well Considered the Violations that have been on the Laws of this Kingdom,
since his Majesty's Accession to the Crown, contrary to his several
Declarations and Promises, for the Preservation and due Execution of them, the
Innovations and almost Subversion of the Protestant Religion, by means of the
Countenance that has been given the Priests, Friars and Jesuits; both which,
with ^he Menaces of the Popish Party, to lay this Kingdom ^n Ashes, in case any
Army should Land here from En^land, has endangered the loss of our Religion,
Laws, Lives, Liberties and Properties: For the perservation of which, and
prevention of this Kingdoms utter Depopula^ion and Ruin, which must inevitably
follow the many Thefts and Outrages committed by the Popish Forces of ^his
Kingdom, who have no other Support than the ^lunder and Rapine of the
Protestants, whom they ^hreaten to Extirpate in opposition and contrary to the
^aws of God, of Nations, of Nature, and the known Laws of the Land, we have
unanimously Resolved, not only the Preservation of our selves, our Religion,
Laws, Lives and Liberties, by Repelling Force with Force, but also of all
Persons, of what Degrees soever, behaving themselves with Moderation amongst
us. And for the better securing our selves and such from the mischievous
Designs and Contrivances of our Enemies, we have, and do hereby mutually oblige
all and every of us, each to other, That we will, to the utmost of our Power,
stand by each other in the Suppression of all that shall molest us, or any, or
either of us in our Religion, Laws, Lives, Liberties and Properties. And as we
are Resolved to give Obedience to the established and known Laws of the Land,
so we will expect an Observation of them in others, and molest none that molest
not us in this so just Undertaking: As we are ready to Adhere with all the
Protestants of this Kingdom, so we doubt not of their Concurrance and just
Compliance with us in these out necessary Resolutions. And we farther declare,
That if the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom do Attempt to put their, Threats
in Execution, we will immediately put our selves into Arms, and submit our
selves to the Conduct and Command of the Right Honorable William Earl o^
Inchiquin, and the Honorable Henry Boyll, Esquire; or either of them, as they, or
either of them, shall think fit.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, 1689.


