THE DEBATE At Large, BETWEEN THE HOUSE of LORDS AND HOUSE of COMMONS, AT THE
FREE CONFERENCE, HELD In the Painted Chamber, in the Session of the CONVENTION,
Anno 1688.

Relating to the Word, ABDICATED AND THE Vacancy of the THRONE, In the COMMON's
Vote.

Printed for J. Wickins; And to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1695.

The Debate at large, etc.
Martis die 22 Januarij, 1688.
IN the Convention met, upon his Highness the Prince of Orange's Letters, this
Day in the House of Commons. A Motion being made that the House would appoint a
Day, to take into Consideration the Condition and State of the Nation.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,
That the House, on Monday, next, at Ten of the Clock in the Morning, take into
Consideration the State and Condition of the Nation.

Lunae 28 die Januarij, 1688.
The House then (according to the Order of Tuesday last) proceeded to take into
Consideration the State and Condition of the Nation.

Resolved,
That the House do now Resolve it self into a Committee of the whole House, to
take into Consideration the State and Condition of the Nation.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Mr. Hamden took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker Reassumed the Chair.

Mr. Hamden Reported from the Committee of the whole House that, having taken
into Consideration the Condition and State of the Nation, they had agreed upon
a Resolve; which he Read in his Place, and then delivered the same in at the
Clark's Table, where the same being Read, was as follows.

Resolved,
That King James the Second, having Endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of
the Kingdom, by Breaking the Original Contract between King and People; and by
the Advice of Jesuits, and other Wicked Person's, having violated the
Fundamental Laws, and Withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has Abdicated the
Government, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant.

Resolved,
That this House do agree with the Committee, That King James the Second,
having Endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by Breaking the
Original Contract between King and People; and by the Advice of the Jesuits,
and other wicked Persons, having Violated the Fundamental Laws, and having
Withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government; and that
the Throne is thereby Vacant.

Ordered,
That Mr. Hamden do carry up the said Resolution to the Lords for their
Concurrence. And it was carried up to the the Lords, by Mr. Hamden, accordingly.

Sabbath. 2 die Feb, 1688.
A Message from the Lords to the Commons, by Sir Miles Cook and Mr. Methwin,
Two Masters in Chancery attending the House of Lords.

Mr. SPEAKER, The Lords have considered of the Vote of this House of the 28th.
of January last, to which they concur with Amendments; unto which Amendments
they desire the Concurrence of this House.


The Amendments made by the Lords to the Votes sent up to them from this House,
the 28th. of January, were Read, and are as follows,

L. 8. Instead of the Word Abdicated Read Deserted.

L. 9. Leave out these Words, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant.

Lunae 4 die Feb. 1688.
To the First Amendment, Proposed by the Lords to be made to the Vote of the
Commons of the 28th. of January, instead of the Word Abdicated, to insert the
Word Deserted, the Commons do not agree; because the Word Deserted does not
fully express the Conclusion necessarily inferred from the Premises, which your
Lordships have agreed; for your Lordships have agreed, That King James the
Second has Endeavored to Subvert the Constitutions of the Kingdom, by
breaking the Original Contract between King and People, and has Violated the
Fundamental Laws, and Withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom. Now the Word
Deserted respects only the Withdrawing, but the Word Abdicated respects the
whole; for which Purpose the Commons made choice of it. The Commons do not
agree to the Second Amendment to leave out the Words, And that the Throne is
thereby Vacant.

1st. Because they conceive, that, as they may well infer from so much of their
own Vote as your Lordships have agreed unto, That King James the Second has
Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant; so that if
they should admit your Lordships Amendment that he has only Deserted the
Government; yet, even thence, it would follow that the Throne is Vacant as to
King James the Second, Deserting the Government, being in true Construction,
Deserting the Throne.

2dly. The Commons conceive they need not prove unto your Lordships, That, as
to any other Person, the Throne is also Vacant; your Lordships (as they
conceive) having already admitted it, by your Addressing to the Prince of
Orange the 25th. of December last, To take upon him the Administration of
Public Affairs, both Civil and Military; and to take into his Care the Kingdom
of Ireland, till the meeting of this Convention. In pursuance of such Letters,
and by your Lordships renewing the same Address to his Highness, (as to Public
Affairs, and the Kingdom of Ireland,) since you met, and by Appointing Days of
Public Thanksgivings to be Observed throughout the whole Kingdom, all which
the Commons conceive to apply that it was your Lordships Opinion, That the
Throne was Vacant, and to signify so much to the People of this Kingdom.

3dly. It is from those who are upon the Throne of England (when there are any
such) from whom the People of England ought to receive Protection; and to whom,
for that cause, they owe the Allegiance of Subjects; but there being none now
from whom they expect Regal Prrotection, and to whom, for that cause, they owe
the Allegiance of Subjects, the Commons conceive, The Throne is Vacant.

Resolved,
That the Earl of Wiltshire do go up to the Lords to desire a Conference upon
the Subject matter of the Amendments.

The Earl of Wiltshire Reports, That, he having attended the Lords to desire a
Conference, they had given Answer, That they did consent to a Conference
immediately in the Painted Chamber.

Resolved,
That the Comittee to whom it was referred to prepare Heads of Reasons at a
Conference with the Lords, be the Managers of the said Conference.

Mr. Hamden, Reports from the Committee appointed to Manage the Conference with
the Lords, That they had Attended the Lords at the Conference, and Communicated
unto their Lordships the Reasons why this House does not Concur with their
Lordships in the said Amendments.

Martis 5 die Feb. 1688.
Mr. Hamden Reports from the Conference with the Lords, that the Earl of
Nottingham spoke to this Effect,

That the Lords had desired this Conference with the Commons, that they might
be as happily United to the Commons in Opinion, as they are inseparable in
their Interest; and that they are, at this time, uneasy that they cannot Concur
with the Commons in every thing; because it is of so great a Concern to the
Nation, and from so great and Wise a Body. That he then delivered what the
Lords had done in Reference to the Subject Matter of the last Conference, and
said; That the Lords did insist upon the First Amendment of the Vote of the
House of Commons of the 25th. of January last, instead of the Word Abdicated,
to have the Word Deserted.

1st. Because the Lords do not find, that the Word Abdicated is a Word known to
the Common Law of England and the Lords hope the Commons will agree to make use
of such Words only, whereof the Meaning may be understood according to Law, and
not of such as will be liable to doubtful Interpretations.

2dly. Because in the most common Acceptance of the Civil Law, Abdication is a
Voluntary Express Act of Renuntiation, which is not in this Case, and does not
follow from the Premises, That King James the Second, by having Withdrawn
himself, after having endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of the
Government, by Breaking the Original Contract between King and People, and
having Violated the Fundamental Laws, may be more properly said to have
Abdicated, than Deserted.

He said the Lords did Insist on the Second Amendment, to leave out the Words,
And that the Throne is Vacant, for this Reason.

For that although the Lords have agreed, that the King has Deserted the
Government, and therefore have made Application to the Prince of Orange, To
take upon him the Administration of the Government, and thereby to Provide for
the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, yet there can be no other Inference drawn
from thence, but only that the Exercise of the Government by King James the
Second is Ceased; so as the Lords were, and are willing, to secure the Nation
against the Return of the said King into this Kingdom; but not that there was
either such an Abdication by him, or such a Vacancy in the Throne, as that the
Crown was thereby become Elective, which they cannot agree.

I. Because, by the Constitution of the Government, the Monarchy is Hereditary,
and not Elective.

II. Because no Act of the King alone can Bar, or Destroy the Right of his
Heirs to the Crown; and therefore in Answer to the Third Reason alleged by the
House of Commons, If the Throne be Vacant of King James the Second, Allegiance
is due to such Person as the Right of Succession does belong to.

The Question being put that this House do agree with the Lords in the said
First Amendment.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put that this House do agree with the Lords in the said
Second Amendment.

The House divided.

The Yea's go forth,

The Tellers for the Yea's, Sir Joseph Tredenham, and Mr. Gwyn. 151.

The Tellers for the No's, Mr. Colt, and Mr. Herbert. 282.

And so it was Resolved in the Negative.

Resolved,

That a free Conference be desired with the Lords upon the Subject Matter of
the last Conference.

Ordered,
That it be Referred unto, Sr. Robert Howard. Mr. Polexfyn. Mr. Paul Foley. Mr.
Serj. Maynard. Mr. Sergeant Holt. Lord Faukland. Sr. George Treby. Mr. Summers.
Mr. Garraway. Mr. Buscowen. Sr. Tho. Littleton. Mr. Palmer. Mr. Hamden. Sr.
Henry Capel. Sr. Thomas Lee. Mr. Secheveril. Major Wildman. Colonel Birch. Mr.
Airs. Sr. Richard Temple. Sr. Henry Goodrick. Mr. Waller. Sr. John Guyes.


To manage the Conference.

Ordered,
That Mr. Dolbin do go up to the Lords, and desire a free Conference with the
Lords upon the Subject Matter of the last Conference.

Mr. Dolben Reported, That he having (according to the Order of this House)
attended the Lords to desire a Free Conference with their Lordships, upon the
Subject Matter of the last Conference, they had agreed to a Free Conference
presently in the Painted Chamber. And the Managers went to a Free Conference,
at the Free Conference in the Painted Chamber.

Mr. H -- den. MY Lords, the Commons have desired this Free Conference from
your Lordships upon the Subject Matter of the last Conference, that they may
make appear unto your Lordships that it is not without suffitient Reason, that
they are Induced to Maintain their own Vote, to which your Lordships have made
some Amendments; and that they cannot agree to those Amendments made by your
Lordships for the same Reasons.

My Lords, the Commons do very readily agree with your Lordships, That it is a
Matter of the greatest Concernment to the Kingdom in general, its future Peace,
and happy Government, and the Protestant Interest, both at Home and Abroad,
that there be a good Issue and Determination of the Business now in Debate
between Both Houses, and a speedy one as can consist with the Doing of it in
the best manner. This way of Intercourse between Both Houses by Free
Conference, where there is full Liberty of Objecting, Answering, and Replying,
the Commons think the best Means to attain this End, and to Maintain a good
Correspondence between Both Houses, which is so necessary at all Times, but
more especially in the present Conjuncture; this, my Lords, will bring Honor
and Strength to the Foundation that shall be laid after our late Convulsions,
and discourage our Enemies from Attempting to Undermyne it.

It is true, my Lords, the present Difference between your Lordships and the
Commons is only about a few Words; but the Commons think their Words so
Significant to the Purpose for which they are used, and so Proper to the Case
unto which they are applied, that in so Weighty a Matter as that now in Debate,
that they are by no means to be parted with:

The Word Abdicated, the Commons conceive is of larger Signification than the
Word your Lordships are pleased to use Desert; but not too large to be applied
to all the Recitals in the Beginning of the Commons Vote, to which they meant it
should be applied. Nor ought it to be Restrained to a Voluntary Express
Resignation, only in Word or Writing, Overt-Acts there are that will be
significant enough to amount to it.

My Lords, that the Common Law of England is not acquainted with the Word, it
is from the Modesty of our Law, that it is not willing to suppose there should
be any Unfortunate Occasion of making use of it: And we would have been willing
that we should never have had such an Occasion as we have to have Recourse to
it. Your Lordships next Amendment is, that your Lordships have left out the
last Words in the Commons Vote, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant.

My Lords, the Commons conceive it is a true Proposition, and That the Throne
is Vacant; and, they think, they make it appear, that that is no new Phrase;
neither is it a Phrase that perhaps some of the old Records may be Strangers
to; or not well acquainted with: But they think it not chargeable with the
Consequences that your Lordships have been pleased to draw from it, That it
will make the Crown of England become Elective. If the Throne had been full, we
know your LordShips would have assigned that, as a Reason of your Disagreement,
by telling us who filled it; and it would be known by some Public Royal Act,
which might notify to the People in whom the Kingly Government resided; neither
of which has been done; and yet your Londships will not allow the Throne to be
Vacant.

My Lords, I am unwilling to detain your Lordships longer, from what may be
better said for your Lordships Satisfaction in these Matters, by those whose
Province it is: I am to acquaint your Lordships, that the Commons do agree, it
is an Affair of very great Importance. Here are other Gentlemen that are
appointed to manage this Conference, and will give their Assistance to bring
it, we hope, to a happy Conclusion, in the Agreement of Both Houses, in this so
very a Considerable Point.


Mr. S -- rs. My Lords, what is appointed me to Speak to, is your Lordships
First Amendment, by which the Word Abdicated, in the Commons Vote, is changed
into the Word Deserted; and I am to acquaint your Lordships what some of the
Grounds are, that induced the Commons to insist upon the Word Abdicated, and
not to agree to your Lordships Amendment.

1st. The First Reason your Lordships are pleased to deliver, as for your
Changing the Word is, That the Word Abdicated your Lordships do not find, is a
Word known to the Common Law of England; and therefore ought not to be Used:
And the next is, That the common Acceptance of the Word amounts to a Voluntary
express Act of Renuntiation which (your Lordships say) is not, in this Case,
nor will follow from the Premises.

My Lords, as to the First of these Reasons, if it be an Objection, that the
Word Abdicated has not a known Sense in the Common Law of England, there is
the same Objection against the Word Deserted; for there can be no Authority, or
Book of Law produced, wherein any determined Sense is given to the Word
Deserted: So that your Lordships first Reason has the same Force against your
own Amendment, as it has against the Term used by the Commons.

The Words are both Latin Words, and used in the best Authors, and both of a
known Signification; their Meaning is very well understood; though it be true,
their Meaning be not the same: The Word Abdicate does naturally and properly
signify Entirely to Renounce, Throw off, Disown, Relinquish any thing or
Person, so as to have no further to do with it; and that whether it be done by
Express Words, or in Writing, (which is the Sense your Lordships put upon it,
and which is properly called Resignation or Ceasion) or, by Doing such Acts as
are Inconsistent with the Holding, or Retaining of the Thing; which the Commons
take to be the present Case, and therefore made Choice of the Word Abdicate, as
that which they thought did, above all others, most properly express that
meaning: And in this latter Sense it is taken by Others, and that it is the
true Signification of the Word, I shall show your Lordships out of the best
Authors:

The First I shall mention is Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, L. 2. C. 4. S.
4. Venit enim hoc non ex jure civili, ex jure naturali, quo quisque suum potest
abdicare, and ex naturali Praesumptione qua voluisse, quis creditur, quod
sufficienter significavit. And then he goes on, Recusari Haereditas non tantum
verbis, sed etiam re potest, and quovis indicio voluntatis.

Another Instance, which I shall mention, to show that for the Abdicateing a
thing, it is suffitient to do an Act which is inconsistent with the Retaining
it, though there be nothing of an Express Renuntiation, is out of Calvin's
Lexicon Juridicum, where he says, ( Generum abdicat, qui sponsam repudiat:) He
that Divorceth his Wife, Abdicates his Son in Law. Here is an Abdication
without Express Words; but is by doing such an Act as does suffitiently signify
his Purpose.

The next Author, that I shall Quote, is Brisonius, de Verborum significatione
who has this Passage, Homo liber qui seipsum vendit, abdicat se statu suo:
that is, He who sells himself, has thereby done such an Act as cannot consist
with his former Estate of Freedom; and is therefore properly said, se abdicasse
statu suo.

Budaeus, in his Commentaries ad Legem secundam, de Origin Juris, Expounds the
Words in the same Sense, Abdicare se Magistratu est idem quod abire poenitus
Magistratu:) He that goes out of his Office of Magistracy, let it be in what
manner he will, has Abdicated the Magistracy.

And Grotius, in his Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, L. 1. C. 4. S. 9. seems to
expound the Word Abdicare, by manifest habere pro derelicto: That is, That he
who has Abdicated any thing, has so far Relinquished it, that he has no
Right of Return to it. And that is the Sense the Commons put upon the Word: It
is an Entire Alienation of the Thing; and so stands in Opposition to Dicate: Di
cat qui proprium aliquod facit; abdicat qui alienat, so says Pralejus in his
Lexicon Juris. It is therefore insisted upon as the Proper Word by the Commons.

But the Word Deserted (which is the Word used in the Amendment made by your
Lordships) has not only a very doubtful Signification; but in the common
Acceptance both of the Civil and Cannon Law, does signify only a Bare
Withdrawing, a Temporary Quitting of a Thing,and Neglect only, which leaves
the Party at Liberty of Returning to it again. Desertum pro Neglecto, says
Spigelius in his Lexicon: But the Difference between Disserere and
Derelinquire, is expressly laid down by Bartolus, upon the 8th. Law of 58th.
Title of the 11th. Book of the Code, and his Words are these, Nota diligenter
ex hac Lege, quod aliud est Agrum disserere, aliud derelinquire; qui enim
derelinquit, ipsum ex poenitentia non revocat: sed qui deseret, intra biennium
potest.

Whereby it appears, my Lords, that, that is called Desertion, which is
Temporary and Relieveable: That is called Dereliction, where there is no Power
of Right to Return.

So in the best Latin Authors, and in the Civil Law, Deserere Exercitum is used
to signify, Soldiers leaveing their Colors, Cod. Lib. 12. S. 1.

And in the Cannon Law, to Desert a Benefice, signifies no more than to be
Non-Resident; so is Calvin's Lexicon, Verb. Desert. secund. Canones.

In both Cases, the Party has not only a Right of Returning; but is Bound to
Return again: Which, my Lords, as the Commons do not take to be the present
Case; so they cannot think that your Lordships do; because it is expressly said,
in One of your Reasons given in Defense of the last Amendment, That your
Lordships have been, and are willing, to secure the Nation against the Return
of King James; which your Lordships would not, in Justice, do, if you did look
upon it no more than a Negligent Withdrawing, which leaves a Liberty to the
Party to Return.

For which Reasons, my Lords the Commons cannot agree to the First Amendment,
to insert the word Deserted instead of Abdicated; because it does not, in any
sort, come up to their Sense of the thing: So, they do apprehend, it does not
reach your Lordships meaning, as it is expressed in your Reasons; whereas they
look upon the Word Abdicated to express properly what is to be inferred from
that Part of the Vote to which your Lordships have agreed, That King James the
Second, by going about to Subvert the Constitution, and by Breaking the
Original Contract between King and People and by Violating the Fundamental
Laws, and Withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, has thereby Renounced to be
a King according to the Constitution, by avowing to Govern by a Despotick
Power, unknown to the Constitution, and Inconsistent with it; he has Renounced
to be a King according to the Law, such a King as he Swore to be at the
Coronation, such a King to whom the Allegiance of an English Subject is due;
and has set up ano^ther kind of Dominion, which is to all Intents an
Abdication or Abandoning of his Legal Title, as fully as if it had been done by
express Words,

And, my Lords, for these Reasons the Commons do insist upon the Word
Abdicated, and cannot agree to the Word Deserted.


Mr. Sergeant H -- lt. My Lords, I am commanded, by the Commons, to assist in
the Management of this Conference, and am to speak to the same Point that the
Gentleman did, who spoke last to your Lordships First Amendment.

As to the First of your Lordships Reasons, for that Amendment, (with
Submission to your Lordships) I do conceive it not Suffitient to alter the
Minds of the Commons; or to induce them to change the Word Abdicated for your
Lordships Word Deserted.

Your Lordships Reason is, That it is not a Word that is known to the Common
Law of England. But, my Lords, the Question is not so much, Whether it be a
Word as Ancient as the Common Law, (though it may be too) for that will be no
Objection against the Useing it, if it be a Word of a known and certain
Signification; because that we think, will Justify the Commons making use of
it, according to your Lordships own Expression.

That it is an Ancient Word, appears by the Authors that have been Quoted, and
its frequently met with in the best of Roman Writers, as Cicero, etc. And by
the Derivation from Dico, an Ancient Latin Word.

That now it is a known English Word, and of a known and certain Signification
with us, I will Quote to your Lordships an English Authority, and that is the
Dictionary set forth by our Countryman Minshaw, who has the Word Abdicate as
an English Word, and says that it signifies to Renounce, which is the
Signification the Commons would have of it: So that I hope your Lordships will
not find Fault with their useing a Word that is so Ancient in it self, and that
has such certain Signification in our own Language.

Then, my Lords, for that Part of your Lordships Objection, That it is not a
Word known to the Common Law of England, that cannot prevail; for, your
Lordships very well know, we have very few Words in our Tongue that are of
equal Antiquity with the common Law; your Lordships know the Language of
England is altered greatly in the several Successions of Time, and the
Intermixture of other Nations; and if we should be Obliged to make use only of
Words then known and in use, what we should deliver in such a Dialect would be
very Difficult to be Understood.

Your Lordships Second Reason, for your First Amendment in changing the Word
Abdicated for the Word Deserted is, Because in the most common Acceptance of
the Civil Law Abdication is a Voluntary Express Act of Renuntiation. That is
the general Acceptance of the Word, and, I think, the Commons do so use the
Word in this Case, because it has that Signification: But I do not know,
whether your Lordships mean a Voluntary express Act or formal Deed of
Renuntiation: If you do so, I confess I know of none in this Case: But, my
Lords, both in the Common Law of England, and the Civil Law, and in common
Understanding, there are Express Acts of Renuntiation that are not by Deed; for
if your Lordships please to observe, the Government and Magistracy is under a
Trust, and any Acting contrary to that Trust is a Renouncing of the Trust,
though it be not a Renouncing by formal Deed; For it is a plain Declaration, by
Act and Deed, though not in Writing, that he, who has the Trust, Acting
contrary, is a Disclaimer of the Trust; especially my Lords, if the Actings be
such as are Inconsistent with, and Subversive of this Trust: For, how can a Man
in Reason, or Sense, express a greater Renuntiation of a Trust, than by the
Constant Declarations of his Actions to be quite contrary to that Trust?

This, my Lords, is so plain, both in Understanding and Practice, that I need
do no more but Repeat it again, and leave it with your Lordships, That the
doing an Act inconsistent with the Being and End of a Thing, or that shall not
Answer the End of that Thing, but quite the contrary, that shall be Construed
an Abbication and Formal Renuntiation of that Thing.


Earl of N -- m. Gentlemen, you of the Committee of the Commons, we differ from
you indeed about the Words Abdicated and Deserted; but the main Reason of the
Change of the Word and Difference, is upon the Account of the Consequence drawn
in the Conclusion of your Vote, That the Throne is thereby Vacant: that is,
What the Commons mean by that Expression, whether you mean it is so Vacant as
to null the Succession in the Hereditary Line, and so all the Heirs to be cut
off, which we say will make the Crown Elective? And it may be fit for us to
settle that matter first, and when we know what the Consequence of The Throne
being Vacant means in the Vote as you understand it, I believe we shall be much
better able to settle the Difference about the Two Words.


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. My Lords, when there is a present Defect of One to
exercise the Administration of the Government, I conceive, the Declaring a
Vacancy, and Provision of a Supply for it, can never make the Crown Elective.

The Commons apprehend there is such a Defect now; and, by consequence a
present Necessity for the Supply of the Government, and that will be next for
your Lordships Consideration, and theirs afterward.

If the attempting the utter Destruction of the Subject, and Subvertion of the
Constitution, be not as much an Abdication as the attempting of a Father to Cut
his Son's Throat, I know not what is.

My Lords, the Constitution, notwithstanding the Vacancy, is the same; the Laws
that are the Foundations and Rules of that Constitution are the same: But if
there be in any particular Instance, a Breach of that Constitution, that will
be an Abdication; and that Abdication will infer a Vacancy.

It is not that, the Commons do say, the Crown of England is always and
perpetually Elective; but it is more necessary that there be a Supply when
there is a Defect, and the Doing of that will be no Alteration of the Monarchy
from a Successive One to an Elective.


Lord Bishop of E -- ly. Gentlemen, the Two Amendments made by the Lords, to
the Vote of the Commons, are as to the Word Abdicated, and as to the Vacancy of
the Throne: That Abdicated may be Tacitly by some Overt-Acts, that Gentleman,
(I think I may name him without Offense) Mr. Summers, very truly did allege
out of Grotius: But, I desire to know, Whether Grotius, that great Author, in
Treating on this Subject, does not interpose this Caution, If there be a
Yielding to the Times: If there be a going away, with a Purpose of seeking to
Recover what is, for the present, Left or Forsaken: In plain English, If there
were any thing of Force or just Fear in the Case, that does void the Notion of
Abdication: I speak not of Maladministration, now of that hereafter.


Mr. Sergeant M -- rd. But, my Lords, that is not any Part of the Case declared
by the Commons in this Vote, when the whole Kingdom, and the Protestant
Religion, our Laws and Liberties, have been in Danger of being Subverted, an
Enquiry must be made into the Authors and Instruments of this Attempt; and if
he, who had the Administration entrusted to him, be found the Author and Actor
in it, What can that be, but a Renuntiation of his Trust, and consequently his
Place thereby Vacant?

My Lords,

Abdication (under Favor) is an English Word; and, your Lordships have told
us, the true Signification of it is a Renuntiation. We have indeed, for your
Lordships Satisfaction, shown its meaning in Foreign Authors; it is more than a
Deserting the Government, or Leaving it with a Purpose of Returning. But we are
not, I hope, to go to learn English from Foreign Authors, we can, without their
Aid, tell the meaning of our own Tongue.

If Two of us make a mutual Agreement, to Help and Defend each other from any
one that should Assault us in a Journey, and that he that is with me turns upon
me and breaks my Head, he has, undoubtedly, Abdicated my Assistance and
Revoked.


Lord Bishop of E -- ly. The Objection of the Lords against the Word Abdicated,
is, That it is of too large a Signification for the Case in Hand. It seems to
be acknowledged, that it reaches a great Way; and therefore the Lords would
have a Word made use of, which (by the Acknowledgment of that learned
Gentleman) signifies only, The Ceasure of the Exercise of a Right.

If there be such a Defect as has been Spoken of, it must be Supplied; there
is no Question of that.

And I think we have, by another Vote, declared, That it is Inconsistent with
our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, to have a Papist to Rule over this Kingdom.
Which I take to be only as to the Actual Exercise and Administration of the
Government.

It is Grotius his Distinction between a Right, and the Exercise of that Right;
and, as there is a Natural Incapacity for the Exercise, as Sickness, Lunacy,
Infancy, Doting Old Age, or an Incurable Disease, rendering the Party Unfit for
Human Society, as Leprosy, or the like; so I take it, there is a Moral
Incapacity; and, that, I conceive to be a full Irremoveable Persuasion in a
false Religion, contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity.

Then there must be a Provision, undoubtedly, made for Supplying this Defect in
the Exercise, and an Intermediate Government taken care for; because become
necessary for the Support of the Government, if he to whom the Right of
Succession does belong makes the Exercise of his Government Unpracticable, and
our Obedience to him, Consistently with the Constitution of our Religion,
Impossible; but that, I take it, does not alter that Right, nor is an
Abdication of the Right.

Abdication, no doubt, is by Adaption, an English Word; and well known to
English Men conversant in Books: Nor is it Objected, that it is not a Word as
Ancient, as it may be more Ancient than the common Law of England; we find it
in Cicero, and other old Roman Writers.

But, as to Cicero, I would observe that there is a double Use of the Word;
sometimes it is mentioned with a Preposition, and then it signifies the
Renouncing a Actual Exercise of a Right, as Abdicare a Triumpho: And, sometimes
it has the Accusative Case following it, and then it signifies the Renouncing
of the very Right, as that which was mentioned, Abdicare Magistratum; so that
the Signification (as the Lords in their Reason) is doubtful: And such Words,
we hope, the Commons will not think fit to use in a Case of this Nature and
Consequence, as ours now in Debate.

And besides, the Lords apprehended that great Inconveniences will follow upon
the Use of this Word, if it mean a Renouncing absolutely of the Right.

It seems the Commons do not draw the Word Abdicated from His Withdrawing
himself out of the Kingdom; for then Deserted would (no Doubt) have Answered.
That Abdication is the same, whether a Man go out of the Kingdom, or stay in
it; for it is not to be esteemed according to the Place, but the Power.

If a Man stays in the Kingdom, this is Abdicare, with a Preposition, to
Abdicate the Exercise of the Government, but not the Right of Governing,
according to the Constitution; and to such an Abdication, (if it be so
declared) my Lords, I believe, may soon agree.

Then, Gentlemen, there is another Distinction in those Authors that Writ
concerning this Point, which are chiefly the Civilians; there may be an
Abdication that may Forfeit the Power of a King only; and there may be One,
that may Forfeit both that and the Crown too. It is a Distinction indeed in
other Words, but to the same Sense: I will tell you presently why I use it.

Those Abdications that are of Power only, are Incapacities; whether those I
call Natural and Involuntary, as Defects of Sense, Age, or Body, or the like;
or Moral and Voluntary, as Contrariety in Religion; an Instance whereof there
was lately in Portugal, which was a Forfeiture only of the Power, and not of
the Name and Honor of a King; for though the Administration was put into the
younger Brother's Hand, the Pattents, and other Public Instruments ran in the
Elder Brothers's Name.

This not, without all Doubt, Naturally an Abdication in the full Extent of the
Word; nor do I here (as I said) consider, whether that the King be gone out of
the Kingdom, or stay in it; but only, whether he be fit for the Administration,
which must be Provided for, be he here, or gone away.

But the highest Instance of an Abdication is, when a Prince is not only Unable
to execute his Power, but Acts quite contrary to it; which will not be Answered
by so bare a Word as Endeavor.

I take these to be all the Distinctions of Abdications.

Now, if this last Instance of an Abdication of both Power and Right, take
Place in a Succeeding Monarchy, the Consequence will be, That there is a
Forfeiture of the whole Right; and then that Hereditary Succession is cut off;
which I believe is not intended by the Commons: There is indeed one Instance of
the Use of such an Abdication in Monarchy, and that is, that of Poland; and
such an Abdication there makes the Throne Vacant; and those with, and in whom
the Power is Invested of making Laws, (to wit the Senate) appoint one to Fit
it: But that, and whatever other Instances of the like kind, these may be all
of Elective Kingdoms; for though some of them are, or may be in Kingdoms now
Hereditary, yet they were, in those times, Elective, and since altered into
Hereditary Successions.

But, here is One thing, that is mentioned in this Vote, which I would have
well considered, for the Preservation of the Succession, and that is the
Original Compact: We must think sure that meant of the Compact, that was made
at the first Time, when the Government was first Instituted, and the Conditions
that each Part of the Government should observe on their Part, of which this
was the most Fundamental, That King, Lords, and Commons, in Parliament
Assembled, should have the Power of making New Laws, and altering of Old Ones:
And that being one Law which settles the Succession, It is as much Part of the
Original Compact as any: Then if such a Case happens, as an Abdication in a
Successive Kingdom, without Doubt, the Compact being made to the King, his
Heirs, and Successors, the Disposition of the Crown cannot fall to us till all
the Heirs do Abdicate too. There are indeed many Examples, and too many
Interruptions in the Lineal Succession of the Crown of England: I think, I can
instance in Seven since the Conquest, wherein the Right Heir has been put by:
But that does not follow, that every Breach of the First Original Contract,
gives us Power to Dispose of the Lineal Succession; especially, I think, since
the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, and King James the first, that have
Established the Oath of Allegiance to the King, his Heirs, and Successors, the
Law is stronger against such a Disposition: I grant that from King William the
First, to King Henry the Eighth, there has been Seven Interruptions of the
Legal Line of Hereditary Succession; but, I say, those Statutes are made since
that time, and the making of New Laws being as much a Part of the Original
Compact, as the Observing Old Ones, or any thing else, we are Obliged to pursue
those Laws, till altered by the Legislative Power, which singly, or jointly,
without the Royal Assent, I suppose, we do not pretend to; and these Laws being
made since the last Interruption, we are not to go by any President that was
made before the making those Laws.

So that, all that I conceive, ought to be meant by our Vote is, But a Setting
aside the Person that Broke the Contract: And, in a Successive Kingdom, an
Abdication can only be a Forfeiture, as to the Person himself.

I hope, and am persuaded, that both Lords and Commons do agree in this, Not to
break the Line of Succession, so as to make the Crown Elective: And, if that be
declared, that this Abdication of King James the Second reaches no farther
than himself; and that it is to continue in the Right Line of Succession, that
I hope, will make all of One Mind, in this important Affair.


Earl of C -- n. As I remember, Mr. Summers, who spoke to the signification of
the Word Abdicated, did Quote Grotius, Galvin's Lexicon, and other Civil
Lawyers, where the Express Words make it to be a Voluntary Act; and so are all
the Instances that ever I Read or Heard of; that is, there either was some
Formal Deed of Renuntiation, or Resignation; or some Voluntary Act done of the
Party's own; and such whereby they have shown they did Divest themselves of the
Royalties.

I think truly, Gentlemen, it is very apparent that the King, in this Case,
has done nothing of this Nature: It is indeed said, by that learned and
ingenious Gentleman, Mr. Summers, That it may arise from the Facts, that in the
Vote it has been declared he has done, breaking the Fundamental Laws, and the
Original Contract: and endeavoring to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom.
I will not discourse the Particulars that have been alleged, to make out this
Charge; But I may say this much in General, That this Breaking the Original
Contract, is a Language that has not been long used in this Place; nor known
in any of our Law Books, or Public Records: It is sprung up, but as taken from
some late Authors, and those none of the best received; and the very Phrase
might bear a great Debate, if that were now to be spoken to. Mr. Summers did
likewise speak something to the particular Case, and the Grounds of the Vote;
he said, The King is Bounded by Law, and bound to perform the Laws made, and to
be made. That is not denied; I would take Notice, that his Obligation thereunto
does not proceed from his Coronation Oath; for our Law says, He is as much
King before he is Crowned, as he is afterward; And there is a Natural
Allegiance due to him from the Subjects immediately upon the Descent of the
Crown upon him. And though it is a very requisite Ceremony, to put him under a
farther Obligation by the Conscience of his Oath; yet I think it will not, nor
can be denied but that, as King, he was bound to Observe the Laws before; and
no Body will make that Oath to be the Original Contract, as I suppose.

But, my Lords and Gentlemen, if you do admit that it was never intended, by
the House of Commons, to relate any further than to this King himself, I
believe my own Opinion would concur to secure us against his Return to Govern
us: But then, Why is there such a Contention about a Word? Does all this imply
more than Desertion?

But it is said, that Abdication does imply a perfect Renuntiation, which I
cannot see how it is in this Case, so as to leave us at Liberty to supply as we
please, and break the Line of Succession.

Mr. Sergeant Maynard says, That it is not indeed to make the Government
perpetually Elective. I would know, what he means by Perpetually: Our Breaking
through the Line now, by a Choice out of the Lineal Course, is an Alteration
and a President: And why may not others take the same Liberty we do? And, Will
not that make it Perpetually Elective?

But truly, I think, no Act of ours can alter the Lineal Succession; for, by
all the Laws we have now in Being, our Government appears to be Hereditary in a
Right Line of Descent: And upon any Descent, when any one cease to be King,
Allegiance is by Law due to his Legal Heirs, as Successor, before Coronation,
as after,

I was in great Hopes that you would have offered something in Answer to One of
my Lord's Reasons against that part of the Vote, which declares, The Throne to
be Vacant.

That no Act of the King's alone can Bar or Destroy the Right of his Heir to
the Crown, which is Hereditary, and not Elective. And then, if this matter goes
no farther than King James the Second, in his own Person, How comes the Vacancy
and the Supply to be Devolved upon the People? For if he only be set Aside,
then it is apparent, whether the Crown is to go, to the Person that has the
next Right of Succession; and consequently there is no Vacancy.


Earl of N -- m. Gentlemen, I would not Protract Time, which is now so
necessary to be Husbanded; nor perplex Debates about any Affair like that which
lies now before us, It is not a Question barely about Words, but Things, which
we are now Disputing.

The Word Abdicated, it is agreed by Mr. Summers, is a Word of Art; and he has
told us what its Signification is, from those that are Skilled in the Art to
which it belongs: He does acknowledge that it is no Lawword among English
Lawyers; nor known to the Common Law: But then he says, neither is the Word,
used by the Lords, Deserted.

I agree to him, that neither the One, or the Other are Words used in our Law;
but the Inference I would draw thence is this, That we have no words applicable
to this Case; because we never before had such a Case; and we must not draw
Inferences of Law in such a Case, that are not deducible from Rules well known
in our Laws.

I will not Dispute what the Sense of the word Abdication is in the Civil Law;
but that it is a Civil Law Word, is agreed to by me; and if it be, for that
Reason, I am against using of it; because I am so much in Love with our own
Laws, that I would use no Words in a Case that so much concerns our Legal
Constitution, but what are fetched from thence.

I hope I shall never see our old Laws altered; or if they be, God forbid, we
should be the Voluntary Agents in such an Alteration.

But, then we are told the Word Deserted does not reach our Case; because the
Signification of the Word is but a Temporary Leaveing, or Forsaking of his
Power, which he may Reassume; nay, which in some Cases there is a Duty upon him
to Return unto. If that were all, Mr. Summers has given himself an Answer to
that Objection, out of what he alleges of the Lords Reasons, who have declared
that they are willing, To secure the Nation against the Return of King James
into this Kingdom; and will therefore concur with the Commons in any Act that
shall be thought necessary to prevent such his Return: so that it should seem
we were agreed in that Matter; and if that were the Point we should find Words
proper, soon enough, to express our meaning by.

But, I find neither of these Words will, on the One Side or on the Other, be
allowed to signify this Meaning; therefore we should (as I take it) come
presently to think of some other that would. But, the Reasons why my Lords did
chiefly insist upon the Alteration of the Word Abdicated was, Because they did
apprehend, that it being a Word not known to our Laws, there might be other
Inferences drawn from it than they do apprehend our Laws will Warrant, from the
Case, as it is stated in the Fact of this Vote; and, as they conceive, is done
in the concluding of the Throne's being Vacant.

Therefore, I think it would shorten the present Debate, if we did settle that
Point first; and, as we frequently in Parliamentary Proceedings, Postpone this,
and that Paragraph in a Bill, till some others that may be thought fit to be
Determined first, be agreed to, so we should Postpone the Debate about the word
Abdicate, till the Vacancy of the Throne be Settled; for if we were sure that
the Throne were, or were not Vacant, we should easily light upon what Word were
Proper to be used in this Case.

I should therefore Propose, that we might Debate that first, because if there
be an English Word of known Signification in our Law, which should signify no
more than Renouncing for a Man's self; and which would not amount to so much as
Setting aside the Right of Others, that Word may be used; and, if no other, the
Word Renouncing it self may be taken, which would be best agreed to.

Acting against a Man's Trust (says Mr. Sergeant Holt) Is a Renuntiation of
that Trust. I agree it is a Violation of his Trust to Act contrary to it; and
he is accountable, for that Violation, to Answer what the Trust suffers out of
his own Estate: But I deny it to be presently a Renuntiation of the Trust, and
that such a one is no longer a Trustee.

I beg his Pardon, if I differ from him in Opinion, whom I acknowledge to have
much more Learning in his Profession than I can pretend unto; But if the Law
be, as he says, in a private Case; then I must beg leave to forbear giving my
Opinion in a Case of this public Nature that is now before us, till I know
what such a Trust is, and what the Law says in such a Case.

If indeed, you do pretend That the Throne is Vacant, and Both Houses agree to
that Conclusion; I think it will be no matter what Word is used about it: But,
if we do not agree unto that Conclusion; I think it will be afterward easy to
show which is the fittest Word to be stood upon; or to agree on some other.

I Pray therefore (to shorten the Debate) that you Gentlemen would speak to
this Point first; and when that is Resolved, I hope we shall easily come to an
Agreement about the Other.


Sir George T -- by. I think, my Lords, that we may not consent to begin at the
End, and first to enquire of the Conclusion, before the Premises are settled:
For the Vacancy of the Throne follows, as an Inference drawn from the Acts of
the King's, which are expressed most fully by the Word Abdication; and to
enquire what the Consequence is, when the Fact is doubtful, from which the
Consequence is to ensue, is beginning at the wrong End; till we state the Fact,
we can assign no Consequence at all to it: Therefore, my Lords, I think the
present Debate is to begin, where the Difference between the Two Houses does
begin, and that is at the Word Abdicated; and, when that is over, we shall
regularly come to the other Point in Difference.

We are gone back too far, when we offer to enquire into the Original Contract,
Whether any such thing is known or understood in our Law or Constitution? or,
Whether it be new Language among us? And I offer this to your Lordships
Consideration for Two Reasons,

First, It is a Phrase and Thing used by the Learned Mr. Hooker in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Polity, whom I mention as a valuable Authority, being one of the
best Men, the best Church Man, and the most Learned of our Nation in his time,
and his Works are very worthily Recommended by the Testimony of King Charles
the First; He allows, That Government did Originally begin by Compact and
Agreement.

But I have yet a greater Authority than this, to influence this Matter, and
that is your Lordships own, who have agreed to all the Vote, but this Word
Abdicated, and The Vacancy of the Throne: And therefore so much enough to be
said to that; and go back to Debate what is not in Difference, is to confound
our selves, instead of Endeavoring to compose Differences.

And truly, my Lords, by what is now Proposed, I think, we are desired to go as
much too far fowards, when the Vacancy of the Throne is proposed to be the
Question to be first Disputed before the Abdication, from which it is ^^^^rred.

But sure I am, it is very much beyond what the Vote before us does lead us
unto, To talk of the Right of those in the Succession: For that goes farther
^han the very last Part of the Vote; and it is still to lead us yet farther, to
say any thing about making the Crown Elective: For, I hope, when we come to
answer your Lordships Reasons, we shall easily make it out, that it is not in
this Case; neither was there any Occasion given by this Vote to infer any such
thing: We shall therefore, keep the Points as they are both in Order of Place,
in the Vote, and of Reason in the thing; and, as we have done hither, to speak
to the words Abdicated and Deserted, the words to be Disputed about in the
First Place. Another Lord did give One Reason against the useing the Word
Abdicated, Because it is a Word belongs to the Civil Law, and said, He would by
no means exchange our own English Common Law for that. I entirely concur with
that Noble Lord in that Point; but he did agree to us also, That there is no
such Word in our Common Law as Deserted; that is, which should signify, by the
Stamp the Law puts upon it, any Sense applicable to the Matter in Hand.

Then, if we must not use our Word, because unknown to our Common Law; neither
must we use your Lordships for the same Reason, and so shall be at an entire
loss what Word to use; and so, indeed, they may well come to consider the
Conclusion first, who leave us at Uncertainties on what Terms we are to
Discourse; and there cannot be a greater Confusion in any Debate, than to state
a Conclusion without the Premises; which we must do, if we cannot agree how to
word the Fact we infer from.

My Lords, I shall not much differ from what, in general, has been said
concerning the Sense of the Word Abdicated; for it seems to be agreed on all
Hands that it is a Renuntiation: Neither, will I contend for an Involuntary
Abdication; because I think it means a Voluntary Act: But truly what your
Lordships mean, in your Reason against it, by the Word Express, I cannot so
well understand.

That a King may Renounce his Kingship, I think, may be made out both in Law
and Fact, as well as any other Renuntiation; and that, as far as I can discern,
by your Lordships Reasons, and this Days Debate hitherto, is not intended to be
denied by any: Indeed some of my Lords have told us, That there it is meant of
the Exercise of a Right which may be Renounced, without Renouncing that Right.
Whether that be a true Distinction, or no, is not very Material: but if it be,
that the very Kingship it self (as including a Right to Govern) may be
Renounced, and has been, it will be no Difficulty to make out, by Instances in
all Countries, not only where the Crown is, or was Elective; but also where it
was Hereditary and Successive.

If a King will Resign or Renounce, he may do so, as particularly Char. 5th.


Earl of P -- k. That was an express Solemn Renuntiation.


Sir George T -- by. My Lords, the particular manner of Doing it, is (I take
it) not matter in Debate just now before us, till it be settled whether a King
can Abdicate at all, or Resign, or Renounce his Kingship at all; this then
being granted That a King may Renounce, may Resign, may Part with his Office,
as well as the Exercise of it; then the Question indeed is, Whether this King
has done so, or no?

That he may do it, I take it for granted, it being an Act of the Will: Then
let us now inquire into the Facts, as set out in the Vote, Whether this Will
of his be manifest? for that you have heard it may be discovered several ways;
the Discovery may be by VVriting, it may be by Words, it may be by Facts:
Grotius himself, and all Authors, that treat of this Matter and the Nature of
it do agree, That if there be any Word, or Action that does suffitiently
manifest the Intention of the Mind and Will, to part with his Office; that will
amount to an Abdication, or Renouncing.

Now, my Lords, I beg leave to put this Case, That had King James the II. come
here into the Assembly of Lords and Commons, and expressed himself in VVriting,
or Words, to this Purpose, I was Born an Heir to the Crown of England, which
is a Government limited by Laws, made in full Parliament by King, Nobles, and
Commonalty; and, upon the Death of my last Predecessor, I am in Possession of
the Throne; and, now I find, I cannot make Laws without the Consent of the
Lords and Representatives of the Commons in Parliament; I cannot suspend Laws
that have been so made, without the Consent of my People; this indeed is the
Title of Kingship I hold by Original Contract, and the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Government, and my Succession to, and Possession of, the
Crown; on these Terms is Part of that Contract; this Part of the Contract I am
weary of, I do Renounce it, I will not be obliged to Observe it; nay, I am
under an invincible Obligation not to comply with it; I will not Execute the
Laws that have been made; nor suffer others to be made, as my People shall
desire, for their Security in Religion, Liberty, and Property, which are the
Two main Parts of the Kingly Office in this Nation. I say, suppose he had so
expressed himself, doubtless this had been a plain Renouncing of that Legal
Regular Title which came to him by Descent: If then he, by Particular Acts,
such as are enumerated in the Vote, has declared as much, or more than these
Words can amount to, then he has thereby declared his Will to Renounce the
Government: He has, by these Acts mentioned, manifestly declared that he will
not Govern according to the Laws made; Nay, he cannot so do; for he is under a
Strict Obligation, (yea the strictest) and Superior to that of the Original
Compact between King and People, to Act contrary to the Laws, or to Suspend
them.

By the Law, he is to administer Justice; aand to Execute his Office according
to the Tenor of those Laws; and, the Coronation Oath obliges him likewise to
consent to such Laws as the People shall choose: But on the contrary, by that
unfortunate Persuasion (in Point of Religion) that he has Embraced, he is
Obliged to Suspend the Laws that defend the Established Religion, and to Treat
it, as it has been (as we well know) called, as the Northern Heresy; and, under
Pain of Damnation to Extirpate it: And, in order to it, did set aside and
Repeal all the legal Fences of it, without Consent of Parliament. What the
Endeavors and Practices of that kind have been in the last Reign, I suppose,
we are not now to be told of, or Instructed in; and if (as is very Plain) this
does amount to a manifest Declaration of his Will, no longer to Retain the
Exercise of his Kingly Office, thus Limited, thus Restrained, then in common
Sense, as well as legal Acceptance, he has suffitiently declared his
Renouncing of the very Office: As for his Departure out of the Kingdom, it is
not material, whether it was Voluntary or Involuntary; but it is suffitient
that his Actings declare, quo Animo, he went away, he no longer would pursue
what he designed; and was so strongly Obliged unto the contrary, by the Duty of
his Office and Relation, and the Obligation of the Original Contract; as
likewise his own Coronation Oath, and then he desires no longer to be here.

So that, taking both these things together, that he will not,; nay he cannot
(as thus persuaded in Point of Religion) Govern according to Law; and thereupon
has withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom: It is a manifest Declaration of his
Express Renouncing and Parting with his Kingly Office: And therefore I cannot
depart from insisting upon this word Abdicated, which does so well correspond
to the Fact of the Case, and so well express the true Meaning of the Commons in
their Vote: Nor can we Consent to the Postponeing this Point, till the other
about The Vacancy of the Throne, be determined; for this is the very Foundation
upon which we are to to proceed, for Establishing the Superstructure of the
other Conclusion.


Earl of N -- m. This Learned Gentleman that spoke last, says, It is necessary
to prefer the Premises before the Conclusion, as being the Foundation of the
Superstructure. Truly, I apprehend that this word Abdicated was part of the
Conclusion, and not of the Premises; The Vote runs thus, That by Breaking the
Original Contract, having endeavored to subvert the Constitution of the
Kingdom, and having withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, he has Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne is thereby Vacant.

I take it to be (as I say) part of the Conclusion, the other part being joined
by a Copulative; therefore that which is but the other part of the Conclusion,
is not to be inferred from the other part of the Premises. But take it to be
(as you say) that The Vacancy of the Throne is another Distinct Conclusion from
all that preceded, as the Premises, and therefore it is to be considered last;
I would then beg the Favor of You, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, to
answer me one Question about this Point of Abdication, Whether you mean by
Abdication a Renouncing for Himself, or for himself and his Heirs.

If You mean only Abdication for Himself, it will have a different Influence
upon the Debate and Resolution of the Case, as to the meaning of that You call
the Conclusion; for then, How can the Throne be Vacant?

But if it be meant for himself and his Heirs, then I apprehend it is no more
than what you say at the end, That the Throne is indeed Vacant; and then this
Abdication cannot be Part of the Premises, but must be the same Thing with, or
Part of, the Conclusion: I will not undertake to dispute, Whether a King of
England may, or may not, Renounce his Kingdom? For my own Part, I think he can,
and I may go so far in Agreement with those that have spoken to this Point, To
yield that he may do it by implicit Acts, contrary to the Kingly Office.

For a King to say, He will not govern according to Law; and for a King to act
wholly contrary to Law, and do that which would Subvert the Constitution, is (I
think) the same thing.

But then I must say also, That I think there is a Difference between Saying
so, and Doing something inconsistent with what the Laws require; for every
Deviation from the Law is a kind of Breach of the fundamental Laws; for I know
no Law, as Laws, but what are Fundamental Constitutions; as the Laws are
necessary, so far as to support the Foundation.

But if every Transgression or Violation of the Law, by the Prince's Connivance
or Command, were such a Breach of the Fundamental Laws, as would infer an
Abdication, then were it in vain to call any of his Ministers or Officers to
Account for any such Action.

Then the Action is the King's, and not Theirs; and then adieu to the Maxim of,
A King's not doing Wrong: And we may have Recourse to that other Respondent
Superior, as more effectual Satisfaction.

I take this Matter to be so plain, as to the Distinction that I have
mentioned, that nothing can be more; and it has been thought so essentially
necessary to have it clear and manifest, That those two great Instances of
Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, were express solemn Renunciations,
and those confirmed in Parliament by the Lords and Commons, by the Act of
Deposing them.

Therefore I cannot infer from the Facts enumerated in the Vote, That this
should be an Abdication for himself and his Heirs.

But therefore, because in this first Point it is disputable, what is meant by
a Word not known of Signification in the Law; it might, I think, do well to
consider what is to be inferred from it: And therefore all I have now said, is
only to this purpose, That either Both make One Conclusion, or else the Latter
cannot be inferred from the Former.


Sir George T -- y. I beg Leave to say something to what this Noble Lord has
last spoke unto: When I call this Point of the Vacancy of the Throne a
Conclusion, I did not mean altogether to exclude Abdication from being a
Conclusion from the Particulars enumerated before; for indeed it is the nature
of a double Conclusion; One from the particular Facts mentioned, That thereby
King James has Abdicated the Government.

The Other, from the Abdication, That thereby the Throne is Vacant: By the
instanced Acts, he has Abdicated the Government; and by his Abdicating the
Government, the Throne is vacant. As to the rest of that which his Lordship is
pleased to say, I perceive he does (as he must) agree to me, That a King may
Renounce by Acts as well as Words, or Writings.

But then, I would add, and agree with his Lordship also, That God forbid every
Violation of the Law, or Deviation from it, should be reckoned an Abdication of
the Government. I desire to deliver my self from the Imputation of any such
absurd Conceit.

When a King breaks the Law in some few particular Instances, it may be
sufficient to take an Account of it from those evil Ministers that were
instrumental in it, why such a thing was done, which was against Laws? Why such
a Law was not Executed by them, whose Duty it was to see it put in Execution?
You may, in ordinary Cases of breaking the Law, have Remedy in the ordinary
Courts and course of Justice.

But sure! He does not take this to be such a Case, or these to be ordinary
Violations of the Law; and therefore in the extraordinary Cases, the
extraordinary Remedy's to be recurred unto; for the King having a limited
Authority, by which he was obliged to keep the Laws made, as to the executive
part of the Government, and to observe the Constitution for making such New
Laws as the People should find necessary, and present him for his Consent; when
he does Violate, not a particular Law, but all the Fundamentals; nor Injure a
particular Person in Religion, Liberty, or Property, but falls upon the whole
Constitution it self, what does all this speak?

He therein says, I will no more keep within my limited Authority, nor hold my
Kingly Office upon such Terms.

This Title I had by the Original Contract between King and People; I Renounce
that, and will assume another Title to my self; that is, such a Title, as by
which I may Act as if there were no such Law to Circumscribe my Authority.

Where shall any Man come to have Redress in such a Case as this, when the
Malefactor comes to be Party, unto whom all Applications for Relief and Redress
from Injuries should be made, and so he himself shall be a Judge of his own
Breaches of Law. This most apparently was the Case as to the Quo Warranto's,
which was a plain Design to subvert the Constitution in the very Foundation of
the Legislature.

It is because the King has thus violated the Constitution, by which the Law
stands, as the Rule both of the King's Government, and the Peoples Obedience,
that we say, He has Abdicated and Renounced the Government; for all other
particular Breaches of the Law, the Subject may have Remedy in the ordinary
Courts of Justice, or the extraordinary Court of Parliamentary Proceedings: But
were such an Attempt as this is, made on the Essence of the Constitution, it is
not We that have brought our selves into this state of Nature, but Those who
have reduced our legal well-establish'd Frame of Government into such a slate
of Confusion, as we are now seeking a Redress unto.


Earl of R -- er. The Lords have given their Reasons why they altered the word
Abdicated; because it is a word not known to the Common Law, and of doubtful
Signification: Therefore it would be well if the Commons would please to
express their own Meaning by it. I believe my Lords would be induced to Agree,
that the King has Abdicated, that is, Renounced the Government, for himself.
If you mean no further than that; and if You do so, Why should You not be
pleased to explain your selves, that every one may know how the Matter stands,
and to preserve a good Correspondence between Both Houses, in such a Juncture
and Conjunction as this?

But if you do mean any thing more by it, than Abdication for Himself only,
though their Lordships should agree to the using of the word Abdicated; yet this
would prove a greater Argument against their Agreeing in the Other Point, about
the Vacancy of the Throne? Therefore, we would be glad to have you explain your
selves, what you mean by it.


Then there was a little Pause.

Mr. H -- en. If the Lords have nothing further to offer upon this Point, it
will be fit for Us to go on to the other Amendment, made by the Lords to Our
Vote.


No Lord offering to speak, the Commons proceeded to the Second Amendment.

Mr. Sach -- rel. My Lords, Your Lordships Second Amendment to the Commons
Vote, (to wit, To leave our the Words, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant)
the House of Commons cannot agree with Your Lordships to that Amendment; and
they do conceive they have many and great Reasons why they should not do it.

But, my Lords, They very much wonder, how it comes here to be laid upon Them
(as it seems to be, by one of your Lordships Reasons) That they, by using those
Words of Abdication and Vacancy, signify an intention of making an Alteration
of the Constitution of the Government.

I would not misrepresent Your Lordships Words, or misrepresent Your Meaning:
But you are pleased to say, That you cannot agree to such an Abdication or
Vacancy, as that the Crown should thereby become Elective: As if the Commons
had Thoughts of making the Kingdom Elective, when no such thing was either
meant by Them, or can be deducted from their Words.

But, my Lords, One Reason why they differ from You is, They think (upon the
nature of your Proceedings) they are in the Right, to insist upon their Vote,
as they sent it up to your Lordships: And they conceive, as to all the Reasons
your Lordships have been pleased to give them for your Alterations, not One of
them has so much Argument in them, as they might well expect.

The Commons Reason for their Disagreeing to this Amendment, was, Because they
conceive (that, as they may well infer) from so much of their own Vote, as your
Lordships have agreed unto, That King James the Second has Abdicated the
Government; and that the Throne is thereby Vacant: So if they should admit your
Lordships Amendments, That he has only Deserted the Government; yet, even
thence would follow, It Is Vacant, as to King James the Second: Deserting the
Government being, in true Construction, Deserting the Throne.

Now, to this they do desire, That your Lordships will consider and see,
Whether you give any Answer to this Reason; or rather, Whether you do not leave
the Matter still in the dark, and (in Truth) leave the Nation in a perpetual
state of War?

Your Lordships Answer to that, Although you have agreed, that the King has
Deserted the Government, and therefore you have made Application to the Prince
of Orange, To take upon him the Administration of the Government, and thereby
provide for the Safety and Peace of the Kingdom; yet there can be no Inference
drawn from thence, but only that the Exercise of the Government by King James
the Second, was ceased, so, as the Lords were, and are willing To Secure the
Nation against the Return of the said King into this Kingdom; but not that
there was either such an Abdication by him, or Vacancy in the Throne, as that
the Crown thereby became Elective; to which they cannot agree. I desire now to
know of your Lordships, what Part of this Reason has given an Answer to what
the Commons said in their First Reason; That they may very well conclude from
their own Vote, as to what your Lordships have therein agreed to, That the
Throne is Vacant, as to King James the Second, Deserting the Government, and
Deserting the Throne, being in true Construction the same. Instead of answering
this Reason, your Lordships come and apply it here, only to a bare Giving over
the Exercise of the Government by King James. And, pray, my Lords, let us
consider where we are.

If the Case be so, then King James the Second, who has only left the Exercise,
continues in the Office, and is King still; and then all the Acts that we have
done in this Convention, are wholly (as we conceive) not Justifiable; You are
in no Place or Station to Relieve your selves, or the Nation, in this Exigence;
unless you will think of setting up another Regency by your own Authority,
without his Consent; which, I conceive, by the Laws of England, you cannot do.

What then follows upon all we have done? We have drawn the Nation into a
Snare, by the Steps we have taken; and leave all in such an Intricacy, as we
have no Power, by Law, to deliver them out of; nor can we answer for what we
have done, unless the King should dye, and that would leave the Succession
uncertain.

My Lords, I only apply myself to consider the Reasons of your Lordships, for
insisting upon this Second Amendment; because, I conceive, your Lordships have
therein given no Answer to the Reason first given by the Commons, why they
cannot agree to your Lordships Amendment.


Mr. Poll -- en. My Lords, your own Reasons (under Favor) do show, That your
Lordships do intend, that the King is still in the Government? This, I think,
is most apparent out of your own Reasons.

For when you have declared, That the King has Deserted the Government, and
then say, No Inference can be drawn thence, but only, That the Exercise of the
Government by King James the Second was Ceased; then you do thereby still say,
That King James the Second is in the Government; for if only the Exercise be
Ceased, the Right does still remain: Then, I am sure, we have no reason to
Agree with their Lordships in that Point.

Next, my Lords, truly we cannot see how this thing that you would have can be
inferred from your own Vote, That only the Exercise of the Government by King
James ceased; since you do not say, that he deserted the Exercise of the
Government.

And if your Lordships had any purpose to express your Meaning by a public
Vote, That only the Exercise ceased, surely your Lordships would have put in
the word Exercise there: But when in your Vote you say, The Government was
deserted, you cannot mean only the Exercise of it.

And that it is the first Reason that the Commons give your Lordships why we
cannot by any means admit of your Lordships Amendment, because Throne and
Government are in the true construction the same; but the Exercise of the
Government only (as you express it) and the Government it self, (if your Reason
conclude right) are not the same. And we are to reason from the words expressed
in the Vote.

Next, my Lords, we say. It cannot be inferred from the words, as they rest in
your Lordships Vote, that only the Exercise of the Government as to King James
the Second, did cease.

For if we read that part about Deserting the Government, with the rest of the
Particulars that go before, his endeavoring to Subvert the Constitution of the
Kingdom, breaking the Original Contract, violating the Fundamental Laws, and
withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom; then can any Man of Understanding think
that this deserting of the Government can be any thing else but somewhat that
is agreeable to all those precedent Acts, which are not a ceasing of the
Exercise of the Government only, but a destruction of the Government it self.

But besides, my Lords, under Favor, the Administration or Exercise of the
Kingly Government is in construction and consideration of Law all one and the
same: And, I think, no body that would reason aright from thence can say there
is any distinction between Government and the Exercise of the Government; for
whosoever takes from the King the Exercise of the Government, takes from the
King his Kingship; for the Power and the Exercise of the Power are so joined,
that they cannot be severed.

And the Terms themselves (taking them as the Law of England, which we are to
argue from this Case, teaches them) are so co-incident, that they cannot
either subsist without consisting together: If a Man grant to another the
Government of such a Place, this imports the Exercise of the Government there
to be granted thereby.

As if the Islands belonging to this Crown and Dominion of England (as the
Plantations abroad) if the King grants to any one the Government of Jamaica, or
the like, sure no one will say, that That is not a Grant of the Exercise of the
Government there.

So that wherever a Government is granted, the Exercise of that Government is
meant and included, and therefore the supposed Distinction may be something
indeed, if they be only notionally considered; but it is a Notion altogether
disagreeing to the Laws of England.

When your Lordships say in your Reasons, That the Exercise of the Government
as to King James the Second is ceased, which as far as you can go in this
Point, the Commons can by no means agree to this Reason; for by the words so
used (the Exercise ceased) we apprehend, that you mean, the Kingship continues
still in him, and that only the Exercise is gone.

And if it be so and it be utterly unlawful, and as great a Crime (as what Law
says it is not?) to make away from the King the Exercise of the Government, as
to take from him the Government, then it may do well for your Lordships to
consider, whether you are not Guilty of the same Crime and Thing which you
would decline by your Amendment.

The Commons therefore cannot admit, That there should be a taking away of the
Exercise of the Government from the King, any more than the taking away the
Government which (we say) he has himself given away by Abdication. And if K.
James be our King still, we cannot by any means agree to the keeping of him out
of the Kingdom; for if it be his Right to be King still, God forbid but that he
should enjoy it, and be admitted to the Exercise of it again.

Then, my Lords, for the Conclusion that your Lordships have added to your
Reason (as making it from the very Words of your Vote) that it is, That it
would infer such a Vacancy in the Throne, as that the Crown should thereby
become Elective; This, we conceive, is a conclusion, That he has no Premises
either from our Actions, or our Sayings, or our Votes, or any thing else in
this Case; nay, it is quite varying from all the Premises: But when such a
Conclusion can be shown to follow from them, then it will be time enough for us
to give our Answer to it.

But, my Lords, this is that we do insist upon; That if the Right of Kingship
be still (after all that is agreed on both hands) due to him, we cannot in
Justice agree to keep him from it. And if it be not his due Right, but by these
Acts, his subversion of the Constitution, his breaking the original Contract,
and violation of the Fundamental Laws, he has Abdicated it (as we say) and
this Abdication has put him by his Right, and so his Right is gone from him
(as we conceive it is); then, I think, we may lawfully go on to settle the
Peace and Welfare of the Nation.

But the Right to be still in him to have a Regency upon him without his own
Consent, or till his Return, we take it to be a strange and impracticable
thing, and would be introductive of a new Principle of Government amongst us.
It would be setting up a Commonwealth instead of our ancient regulated
Government, by a limited Monarchy; then, I am sure, we should be justly blamed:
And therefore we can by no means submit to your Lordships Alterations of our
Vote, upon any of the Grounds and Reasons that have as yet been offered.


Earl of C -- n. As to what Mr. P -- n has offered, I desire to observe a word
or two, and that is from the Commons second Reason for their disagreeing to
their Lordships Amendments.

You say there, That the Commons do conceive they need not prove to your
Lordships, that as to any other Person besides King James the Throne is also
Vacant: Does not this show, that the meaning of the Vacancy is a Vacancy
throughout, as well as with respect to King James. I ask your Pardon if I do
not declare my own Opinion about the Vacancy as to him; but all that I mention
this for, is to know your Meaning in this Point, how far the Vacancy is to
extend.

You said before, That He had Abdicated the Government, and thereby the Throne
was Vacant. How is it Vacant? Is it only as to King James, or is as to Him and
all or any of his Posterity, or any of those that are in the remainder in the
Royal Line in Succession? If it be as to them too, then it must necessarily
follow, that the Kingdom must thereby become Elective still, or the Government
changed into a Commonwealth; neither of which, we hope, the Commons intend by
it. And therefore that made me ask before what a grave and learned Gentleman
meant when he said it should not be perpetually Elective.


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. I am sure, if we be left without a Government, as we find
we are (why else have we desired the Prince to take upon him the
Administration?) sure we must not be perpetually under Anarchy, the word
Elective is none of the Commons word; neither is the making the Kingdom
Elective the thing they had in their Thoughts or Intentions; all they mean by
this matter, is to provide a Supply for this Defect in the Government, brought
upon it by the late King's Male Administration. And I do say again, this
Provision must be made; and if it be, that would not make the Kingdom
perpetually Elective? I stand not upon any Word, but am for the Thing, that a
Provision be made to supply the Defect.


Mr. P -- n. Do your Lordships agree, That the Throne is Vacant as to King
James the Second? If so, or if you will say it is full of any body else, and
will name whom it is full of, it will then be time for the Commons to tell what
to say to it. If your Lordships will please to show that, we shall go on to
give it an Answer.


Earl of C -- n. Your own words in your Second Reason are, That You need not
prove to us, that it is to any other Person the Throne is also Vacant: Then how
should we name who it is full of? Admit for Discourse sake, but we do not grant
it, for my part, I do not. I say, taking it to be Vacant, as to King James the
Second, then you ask us, Who it should be Supplied by: Must it not be Supplied
by those that should have come if he were dead?

For, I pray consider, I take this Government, by all our Laws, to be
Hereditary Monarchy, and is to go in Succession by Inheritance, in the Royal
Line; if then you say this Government is Vacant, that would be to put all those
by that should take by Succession, and that will make the Kingdom Elective for
that time.

You say, The Throne is Vacant: then I may very well ask, Who has the Right of
filling up that Vacancy? We say, There is no Vacancy; if there is, pray is
there any body that has the Right of filling it up?


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. That is not the Question before us; yet that will come
properly in debate, when we are agreed upon the Vacancy.

The Noble Lord says, It is by our Law an Hereditary Monarchy. I grant it; but
though it should in an ordinary way descend to the Heir, yet as our Case is, we
have a Maxim in Law as certain as any other, which stops the course; for no Man
can pretend to be King James's Heir while he is living; Nemo est haeres
viventis.


Earl of P -- e. To that Point I think my Lord of C -- n gave an Answer, That
it should go to the next in the Line that were to take it, if the King were
dead: for as we should be understood, we should make it a Case of Demise of our
Kings, our Law calls it; that is, the King is dead in Law by this Abdication or
Desertion of the Government, and that the next Heir is to take by Descent.

You, Gentlemen, ask us who the Throne is full of; I think it is sufficient to
know that there are Heirs who are to take by Lineal Succession, though we do
not or cannot positively name the particular Person; and therefore we may well
conclude there is no Vacancy.

Suppose I should be told such a Gentleman is in such a Room, and there I find
him, and another man with him, and I come out and tell you so, and ask, Which
is he, you may be doubtful which of the two is the Man, but sure the one of
them is he; but because you cannot tell which it is, shall I conclude no such
one is there? If there be a doubtful Title, (that is, dubious in whom the Title
resides, but a certain Title as to some one) and I cannot directly name him
that has the immediate Right, yet it is sufficient to prevent the Vacancy,
that there is an Heir or Successor, let him be who he will.


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. But your Lordships will neither agree it is Vacant, nor
tell us how it is Full. King James is gone, we hear or know of no other, What
shall the Nation do in this Uncertainty? When will you tell us who is King, if
King James be not? Shall we everlastingly be in this doubtful condition?


Earl of P -- e. Sure Mr. Sergeant M -- d, you will agree there is One, and no
more than one, to whom a Right does belong of Succeeding, upon failure of King
James. Has he no Heir known?


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. I say, No Man can be his Heir while he lives. If he has
any, it is in Nubibus, our Law knows none; and, What shall we do till he be
dead? It cannot descend till then.


E. of P -- e. You agree, That notwithstanding King Charles the Second was
abroad at his Father's Death, and did not actually Exercise the Government, yet
in Law, immediately upon his Father's Decease, he was not the less Heir for
that; nor was the Throne Vacant.


Mr. Sergeant M -- d. That is not like this Case, neither because the Descent
was Legally immediate; but here can be no such thing during King James's Life,
as an Hereditary Descent: So that either here must be an everlasting War
entailed upon us, his Title continuing, and we opposing his return to the
Exercise of the Government, or we have no Government for want of a Legal
Descent and Succession.

Pray, my Lords, consider the Condition of the Nation till there be a
Government; no Law can be executed, no Debts can be compelled to be paid, no
Offenses can be punished, no one can tell what to do to obtain his Right, or
defend himself from Wrong.

You still say, The Throne is not Void, and yet you will not tell us who Fills
it: If once you will agree, That the Throne is Vacant, it will then come
orderly in debate, How it should, according to our Law, be Filled.


E. of N -- m. The Objection (as I take it) that is made to these Reasons, the
Lords have sent for their insisting upon the Amendments, is, That we have not
fully answered in them the Reasons given by the Commons for their not agreeing
to those Amendments.


Mr. S -- l. My Lords, we say you have not fully answered the first of our
Reasons.


E. of N -- m. Gentlemen, I intend to state the Objection so:

That first Reason of yours I take to be this in effect, That our word
(Deserted) being applied to the Government, implies our Agreeing that the King
has Deserted the Throne, those two being in true construction the same; and
then by our own Confession, the Throne is Vacant as to him.

To this you say, my Lords have given no Answer: Truly, I think it is a clear
Answer, that the word (Deserted) may have another sense, and does not
necessarily imply Renouncing entirely of a Right, but a ceasing of the
Exercise. But then, if that does not Vacant the Throne as to him, the other
Reason comes to be considered, How came you to desire the Prince of Orange to
take the Administration upon him, and to take care of Ireland till the
Convention, and to write his Letters circulary for this Meeting? And to renew
your Address to the Prince, and to appoint a Day of Public Thanksgiving?

In answer to that, my Lords say, That tho the King's Deserting the Government
(as they agree he has done) did imply the Throne to be Vacant, yet they might
justly do all those Acts mentioned in the Commons Reasons; because if barely
the Exercise of the Government were deserted, there must be a supply of that
Exercise in some Person's taking the Administration; and as none so fit,
because of the Prince's relation to the Crown (and his presence here) to
Address unto about it, so none so proper to make that Address, as the Lords;
for in the absence of the King they are the King and Kingdoms great Council,
and might have done it by themselves, without the Commons; but being met in a
full representative Body, they joined with them.

Mr. P -- n indeed has said, There is no distinction in Law between the
Kingship and the Exercise of it. And That it is the same Crime, in
consideration of Law, to take away the Exercise, as to take away the Kingship.

I shall not dispute with that learned Gentleman (whom I very much honor for
his Knowledge in the Profession of the Law) what Offense either of them would
be now, for we are not discoursing concerning a Regency, how the Government
should be Administered, but we are barely upon the Question, Whether the Throne
be Vacant, so that we may have another King. But if we should grant a Vacancy
as to the King himself, we are then told, the next in Succession cannot take,
because no one can be Heir to one that is alive. Yet, I think, the Answer given
by my Lords before is a very good one, That tho the King be not dead Naturally,
yet if (as they infer) he is so Civily, the next of course ought to come in as
by Hereditary Succession; for I know not any distinction between Successors in
the case of a Natural Death, and those in the case of a Civil one.

For I would know if the next Heir should be set aside in this case, and you
put in another, whether that King shall be King of England to him and his
Heirs, and so being once upon the Throne, the ancient Lineal Succession be
altered: If that be so, then indeed it is sufficiently an Elective Kingdom, by
taking it from the right Heir.

If it be not so, then I would ask, Whether such King as shall be put in, shall
be King only during King James's Life. That, I suppose for many Reasons, is not
their meaning; but, at least he must be made King, during his own Life; and
then if there be a Distinction made as to the Succession between a Natural and
a Civil Death, if King James should dye during the Life of the new King, what
would become of the Hereditary Monarchy? Where must the Succession come in,
when the next Heir to King James may not be next Heir to the present Successor?

Therefore we must reduce all to this point, which my Lords have hinted at in
their Reasons, Whether this will not make the Kingdom Elective: for if you do
once make it Elective, I do not say that you are always bound to go to
Election, but it is enough to make it so, if by that President there be a
breach in the Hereditary Succession, for I will be bold to say, you cannot make
a stronger Tie to observe that kind of Succession, than what lies upon you to
preserve it in this Case.

If you are under an Obligation to it, it is part of the Constitution. I desire
any one to tell me what stronger Obligation there can be; and that, I say, is
Reason enough for my Lords to disagree to it, it bringing in the Danger of a
Breach upon the Constitution.

Next, Gentlemen, I would know of you, if the Throne be Vacant, whether we be
obliged to fill it; if we be, we must Fill it either by our old Laws, or by the
Humor of those that are to choose; if we Fill it by our own old Laws, they
declare, That it is an Hereditary Kingdom, and we are to take the next to whom
the Succession would belong, and then there would be no need of standing upon a
Vacancy.

If we are to Fill it according to the Humor of the Times, and of those that
are to make the Choice, that diverts the course of Inheritance, puts it into
another Line: And I cannot see by what Authority we can do that, or change our
Ancient Constitution, without committing the same Fault we have laid upon the
King.

These are the Objections against the Vacancy of the Throne, which occur to me;
and We, my Lords, desire a Satisfaction to them before we agree to the Vacancy.

And, I think, the Answering them will lead us unto that which I take to be the
main point in question, Whether the Vacancy of the Throne, and Filling it
again, will not, as my Lords say, endanger the turning this Hereditary Monarchy
of ours into an Elective one.


Mr. S -- l. My Lords, it seems very strange to us, that this Question should
be asked us, when we come to show, That your Lordships Reasons for leaving out
this part of our Vote are not satisfactory, neither do answer the Reasons we
gave for our not agreeing to your Lordships Amendmonts: And it is much stranger
that we should be asked, Whether this Vacancy extend to the Heirs, when you
will not tell us, whether it be Vacant as to King James himself.

You put it upon us to say, the Execution or Exercise of the Government is
ceased; but you will not say the Throne is vacant, so much as to him: And if it
be not, what have we to do, or consider, or debate, of any consequence, whether
it will infer an Election or not?

We desire of your Lordships that which we think is very proper; first, to know
whether the Throne be vacant at all: If it be, then our Proposition in the
conclusion of our Vote is true, That the Throne is thereby vacant.

My Lords, I think we come here very much in vain, till this Point be settled;
What Satisfaction can it be to your Lordships, or Us, or the Nation, to know
that such things as are mentioned in the Votes have been done by King James,
and that he has deserted (as you say) the Government, if he still retain a
Right to it, and your Lordships will not declare he has no Right, but amuse
the Kingdom with the doubtful words of the Exercise (as to him) Ceasiug. If
that be all you mean, what need the Question be asked, how far it is vacant,
for it should seem it is not vacant at all.


E. of N -- m. Will you please to suppose it Vacant as to King James, that is,
that he has no Right? Then let us go on to the next step.


Mr. S -- l. That, my Lords, we cannot do, for all our business is to maintain
our own, That the Throne is Vacant.


Mr. S -- s. My Lords, your Lordships, as a Reason against the word Abdicate,
say, It is not a word known in our Common Law. But the word Vacant, about which
we are now disputing, cannot have that Objection made to it; for we find it in
our Records, and even applied in a parallel Case to this of ours, in 1 Hen. IV,
where it is expressly made use of more than once, and there it does import what
I think it does import in this Vote of the House of Commons, now in debate, and
to require any further or other Explication of it than the Record gives, will
be very hard and unreasonable; for we are here to give the Commons Reasons for
maintaining their own Vote, and nothing else.

If your Lordships please to look into the Record in that case, there was first
a Resignation of the Crown and Government made and subscribed by King Richard
the Second, and this is brought into the Parliament, and there they take
notice, that the Seeds Regalis (those are the words) fuit vacua; and the
Resignation being read both in Latin and in English, in the Great Hall at
Westminster, where the Parliament was then assembled, it was accepted by the
Lord's and Commons.

After that, it proceeds further; and there are Articles exhibited against
Richard the Second, and upon these Articles they went on to Sentence of
Deposition and Deprivation, and then follows the words in the Record; Et
confessim ut constabat ex proemissis and eorum occasion Regnum Angliae cuui
pertinentiis suis vacare. Then Henry the Fourth rises up out of his place as
Duke of Lancaster, where he sat before, and standing so high, that he might be
well enough seen, makes this Claim to the Crown: The words in the Record are,
Dictum regnum Angliae sic ut praemitur Vacans una cum Corona vendicat.

After that, the Record goes on, That upon this Claim the Lords and Commons
being asked, What they thought of it, they unanimoufly consented, and the
Archbishop took him by the Hand, and led him ad Sedem Regalem Proedictum, etc.

Nay, and after all this, it is there taken notice of, and particularly
observed that prius Vacant sede Regali, by the Leasion and Deposition
aforesaid all the public Officers ceased; there is care taken for Hen. IV's
taking the Royal Oath, and granting of new Commissions.

My Lords, the Commons do therefore apprehend, that with very good Reason and
Authority they did in their Vote declare the Throne to be Vacant. But as to the
going further to enquire into the Consequences of that, or what is to be done
afterward, is not our Commission, who came here only to maintain their
Expressions in their Vote against your Lordships Amendments.


E. of R -- r. In a free Conference the Points in question are freely and fully
to be debated; and my Lords, in order to their agreement with the Commons, are
to be satisfied what is meant, and how far it may extend.

You, Gentlemen, that are the Managers for the House of Commons, it seems, come
with a limited Commission, and will not enter into that Consideration which (as
our Reasons express) has a great weight with my Lords, Whether this Vote of
the Commons will not make the Monarchy of England, which has always heretofore
been Hereditary, to become Elective.

That the Vacancy of the Throne will infer such a Consequence, to me appears
very plain; And I take it from the Argument that that last Gentleman used for
the word Vacant, out of the Record of Richard the Second's time, that is cited
for a President for that word. But as that is the only President, yet it is
attended with this very Consequence; for it being there declared, That the
Royal Seat was Vacant, immediately did follow an Election of Henry the Fourth,
who was not next in the Right Line; Did not then this Hereditary Monarchy in
this Instance become Elective? When King Charles the Second died, I would fain
know, whether in our Law the Throne was Vacant. No sure, the next Heir was
immediately in the Throne. And so it is in all Hereditary Successive
Governments.

Indeed, in Poland, when the King dies, there is a Vacancy, because there the
Law knows no certain Successor: So that the difference is plain, that wherever
the Monarchy is Hereditary, upon the Ceasing of him in possession, the Throne
is not Vacant; where it is Elective, it is Vacant.


Earl of C -- n. I would speak one word to that Record which Mr. S -- s
mentioned, and which the Lord that spoke last has given a plain Answer unto;
by making that difference (which is the great Hinge of the matter in debate)
between Hereditary and Elective Kingdoms. But I have something else to say to
that Record.

First, It is plain in that Case King Richard the Second had absolutely
resigned, renounced, or (call it what you please) Abdicated in Writing under
his own Hand. What is done then? After that, the Parliament being then sitting,
they did not think it sufficient to go upon, because that Writing might be the
Effect of Fear: And so, not voluntary; thereupon they proceed to a formal
Deposition upon Articles, and then comes in the Claim of Hen. IV,

After all this, Was not this an Election? He indeed says, That he was not the
next Heir, and claimed it by Descent from Henry the Third; yet he that was
really the next Heir did not appear, which was the Earl of Maroh; so that Henry
the Fourth claimed it as his indubitable Right, being the next Heir that then
appeared.

But, Gentlemen, I pray consider what followed upon it; All the Kings that were
thus taken in (we say Elected, but the Election was not of God's Approbation)
scarce passed any one Year in any of their Reigns, without being disturbed in
the possession.

Yet, I say, he himself did not care to owe the Crown to the Election, but
Claimed it as his Right. And it was a plausible Pretense, and kept him and his
Son (though not without interruption) upon the Throne. But in the time of his
Grandson Henry the Sixth, there was an utter Overthrow of all his Title and
Possession too: For if you look into the Parliament Roll, 1 Edw. 4. the
Proceedings against King Richard the Second, as well as all the rest of the
Acts during the Usurpation (as that Record rightly calls it) are annul'd,
repealed, revoked, reversed, and all the words imaginable used and put in, to
set those Proceedings aside as illegal, unjust, and unrighteous. And, pray what
was the Reason? That Act deduceth down the Pedigree of the Royal Line, from
Henry the Third to Richard the Second who died without Issue, and then Henry
the Fourth (says the Act) Usurped; but, That the Earl of March, upon the Death
of Richard the Second, and consequently Edward the Fourth from him, was
undoubted King by Conscience, by Nature, by Custom, and by Law.

The Record is to be seen at length, as well as that 1 Hen. 4. and being a
later Act, is of more Authority.

And after all this, (I pray consider it well) the Right Line is restored, and
the Usurpation condemned and repealed.

Besides, Gentlemen, I hope you will take into your consideration, what will
become of the Kingdom of Scotland if they should differ from us in this Point,
and go another way to work, then will that be a divided Kingdom from ours
again. You cannot but remember how much Trouble it always gave our Ancestors,
while it continued a divided Kingdom; and if we should go out of the Line, and
invest the Succession in any point at all, I fear you will find a Disagreement
there, and then very dangerous Consequences may ensue.


Sir R -- H -- d. My Lords,

The Proceedings and Expressions of the House of Commons in this Vote are fully
warranted by the President that has been cited, and are such as wherein there
has been no interruption of the Government according to the Constitution.

The late King has, by your Lordships concession, done all those things, which
amount to an Abdication of the Government, and the Throne's being thereby
Vacant: And had your Lordships concurred with us, the Kingdom had long e're
this been settled, and every body had peaceably followed their own business.
Nay, had your Lordships been pleased to express your selves clearly, and not
had a mind to speak ambiguously of it, we had saved all this Trouble, and been
at an end of Disputing.

Truly, my Lords, this Record that has been mentioned of Henry the Fourth, I
will not say is not a President of Election, for the Archbishop stood up, and
looked round on all sides, and asked the Lords and Commons, Whether they would
have him to be King; and they asserted, (as the words of the Roll are) That He
should Reign over them. And so it is done at every Coronation.

As to his Claim, they did not so much mind that, for they knew that he Claimed
by Descent and Inheritance, when there was a known Person that had a Title
before him.

For, that which a Noble Lord spoke of touching the Public Acts that have been
done since the King left us, I may very well say, we think them legally done;
and we do not doubt but that Power which brought in another Line then, upon the
Vacancy of the Throne by the Leasion of Richard the Second, is still, according
to the Constitution, residing in the Lords and Commons, and is legally
sufficient to supply the Vacancy that now is.

That Noble Lord indeed said, That your Lordships might not only with the
Commons advise the Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration, and
join with us in the other things, but that you might have done it of your
selves, as being in the absence of the King, the Great Council of the Nation.

My Lords,

I shall not say much to that point, your Lordships Honors Privileges are
great, and your Councils very worthy of all Reverence and Respect.

But I would ask this Question of any Noble Lord that is here, Whether, had
there been an Heir, to whom the Crown had quietly descended in the Line of
Succession, and this Heir certainly known, your Lordships would have assembled
without his calling, or would have either Administered the Government your
selves, or advised the Prince of Orange to have taken it upon him? I doubt you
had been (pardon me to say it) all guilty of High Treason, by the Laws of
England, if a known Successor were in possession of the Throne, as he must be
if the Throne were not Vacant.

From thence, my Lords, your Lordships see where the Difficulty lies in this
matter, and whence it arises, because you would not agree the Throne to be
Vacant when we know of none that possess it.

We know some such thing has been pretended to as an Heir Male, of which there
are different Opinions, and in the mean time, we are without a Government; and,
Must we stay till the Truth of the matter be found out? What shall we do to
preserve our Constitution, while we are without a safe or legal Authority to
act under the same according to that Constitution, and in a little time it
will, perhaps, through the distraction of our Constitution, be utterly
irremediable?

I do not deny, but that your Lordships have very great Hardships to conflict
with in such a Case, but who is the occasion of them?

We all do know the Monarchy is Hereditary; but how, or what shall we do to
find out the Successor in the Right Line?

You think it will be a difficult thing to go upon the Examination who is Heir;
perhaps it will be more difficult to Resolve in this Case, than it might be in
another: For though heretofore there have been Abdications and Vacancies, it
has been where the King has been of the same Religion of the Established
Worship of the Nation; and amongst those that pretended to the Succession, the
several Claimers have been Persons born and bred up in that Religion that was
Established by Law; or it may be there has been a Child in the Womb at the
time of the Vacancy.

But then, my Lords, there would not be much difficulty to examine, Who should
Inherit, or what were fit to be done. I confess, I say, there are Difficulties
of all sides, or else your Lordships sure would have spoke out before now: And
if you had been clear in it your selves, you would have let the Commons and the
World have known it. But it not being clear, must we always remain thus? Use
what words you will, Fill up, or Nominate, or Elect, it is the thing we are to
take care of, and it is high time it were done.

My Lords,

There is no such Consequence to be drawn from this Vote, as an Intention or a
Likelihood of altering the Course of the Government, so as to make it Elective,
the Throne has all along descended, in an Hereditary Succession, the main
Constitution has been preserved.

The President of Henry the Fourth is not like that of Elections in other
Countries; and I am sorry there should be any occasion for what is necessary to
be done now.

But when such Difficulties are upon the Nation, that we cannot extricate our
selves out of, as to the Lineal Successor, your Lordships, I hope, will give us
leave to remember Salus populi est Suprema Lex.

And if neither You nor we can do any thing in this Case, We, who are met under
the Notion of an Assembly or Convention of the States, then have met to no
purpose; for after we have Voted our selves to be without a Government, (which
looks as if something were really intended as to a Settlement) all presently
sinks, and we are as much in the dark as we were before.

And, my Lords, I pray give me leave to say one thing more: Your Lordships say,
You will never make a President of Election, or take upon you to Alter the
Succession.

With your Lordships Favor, the Settlement of the Constitution is the main
thing we are to look after. If you provide for the supply of the Defect there,
that point of the Succession will, without all question, in the same method,
and at the same time be surely provided for.

But, my Lords, you will do well to consider; Have not you your selves already
limited the very Succession, and cut off some that might have a Line at Right?
Have you not concurred with us in our Vote, That it is inconsistent with our
Religion and our Laws to have a Papist to Reign over us? Must we not come then
to an Election, if the next Heir be a Papist? Nay, suppose there were no
Protestant Heir at all to be found, would not your Lordships then break the
Line?

By your Lordships Vote that is so inconsistent, you do suppose a Case of the
greatest Consequence that can be, may happen; and if that should happen to be
our Case, that the whole Protestant Line should fail, would not that
necessitate an Election, or else we must submit to that which were inconsistent
with our Religion and our Laws?

If your Lorships then, in such a Case, must break through the Succession, I
think the Nation has reason to expect you should take care to supply the
present Defect, where the Succession is uncertain.

My Lords,

If this should not be agreed unto, what will be the Consequence? We that used,
and justly, to boast of living under the Best of Governments, must be left
without any one; for, your Lordships, it seems, cannot agree with us to supply
and Fill up this Gap in it, or tell us who is the Successor: And we must not do
it our selves by Election; which is the only way left us to provide for our
Settlement.

Truly my Lords, upon the whole, I cannot tell what condition we shall be in,
or what we can do further; but we must even part, and break up in Confusion,
and so leave the Nation to extricate it self, as well as it can, out of this
Distraction. But then, at whose Door that will lie, I must leave to your
Lordships own Thoughts.


E. of P -- e. We have indeed passed such a Vote, as that Gentleman says,
against a Popish Prince's reigning over us, but I should think that amounts to
no more than a Resolution, that by a Law to be made we will take care of it in
Parliament: Therefore I think that which we aim at, and that which the
Constitution of our Government does require, is, to put things in a legal
method: And, in order to it, I would have the Legal Successor declared and
proclaimed, and then a Parliament summoned in that Prince's Name, and the whole
matter settled there.

An Act made by a King de facto is Void as to a King de jure; therefore I would
have the Constitution preserved, and would desire, that all that is done in
this matter may be again done in Parliament.


E. of C -- n. Sir R -- H -- d was pleased to say, That by the same method that
the Throne now should be Filled, by the same the Successor should be D^clared,
and the Right Line Settled. Is not that declaring the Crown to be Elective?

Suppose you say nothing, but Fill the Throne, Is it not to take away the Right
Line of Inheritance? And, Will not such Successor claim it for his Posterity?

Truly, I think if the Right Line be Declared in the same way that the
Successor is, then we take upon us to dispose of the Inheritance of the Crown
absolutely; which, I think, by all the Law I ever read or could hear of among
us, is out of our Power; and, that neither House, or both Houses together, have
power to do any thing relating to the Succession, but by Act of Parliament;
which the two Houses by them*selves cannot make.


Sir R. -- T -- e. I think we are now going too far in this matter; the
Question before us is only, Whether there be a Vacancy in the Throne. After we
have done with that, I do not see how this will preclude the consideration of
any Claim to the Succession.

Your Lordships say, You are under great Difficulties upon this Subject. But,
my Lords, till you have declared the Throne Vacant, I must presume to say, I do
not see how it is possible for any of us to make one step toward a Settlement.

If there be any Claims to the Crown, that consideration will be next; and how
to come at them, I conceive we are in the same Capacity as our Predecessors
were to provide for all Exigencies as shall emerge, and for the supplying all
Defects in the Government.

It is true, by the Acts of Queen Elizabeth and King James, first, we have the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance that are to be, and have been taken by all
Persons.

But, my Lords, there is an old Oath of Fidelity, that uses to be required in
Leets, and that by the ancient Law of England every man ought to take that is
Sixteen Years of Age; and this was as much obliging to the King, his Heirs and
Successors, as any of those later Oaths are, for they seem only to be made to
exclude foreign Authorities, and not to infer any new Obedience or Subjection;
therefore I am only saying, we are in as natural a capacity as any of our
Predecessors were to provide for a Remedy in such Exigencies as this.

I do not intend to trouble your Lordships any farther than the words of the
Vote lead me.

If the Throne were Full, what do we do here; nay, how came we hither? I would
fain know, whether all that is mentioned in one of our Reasons of the
Administration being committed to the Prince, and those other Acts, do not all
imply at least that we are in such a Case as wherein the Throne is Vacant,
otherwise, if it had been full, I appeal to any one, whether we could have
assembled or acted in any other Name, or by an other Authority, than his that
filled it. Then do not all these things declare, that there is a Vacancy?

My Lords,

I have done, having said this, That it is a subsequent consideration, how the
Throne shall be Filled, and all the Particulars that relate to it remain
entire, after this Resolution taken.

But I think we are at present to go no further. No Man, I hope, thinks there
is a just Ground for any Apprehension of an Intention to change the Government;
I am sure there is no Ground for any such Apprehension: So that we have all the
reason in the World still to insist, That your Lordships should agree with us,
that the Throne is Vacant, or we shall not be able to move one step further
toward a settlement.


Sir T -- L -- e. My Lords,

So much has been said in this matter already, that very little is to be added.

But give me leave to say unto your Lordships, That those Amendments your
Lordships have made to the Commons Vote, are not agreeing with your other
Votes, nor any of the Acts done since the Abdication. Had it been in the common
ordinary case of a Vacancy by the King's Death, your Lordships in December last
would sure have let us know as much: But it is plain you were sensible we were
without a Government, by your desiring the Prince to take the Administration,
and to issue out his Letters from this Convention.

But, my Lords, I would ask this Question, whether upon the original Contract
there were not a power preserved in the Nation to provide for its self in such
Exigencies?

That contract was to settle the Constitution as to the Legislature which a
noble Lord in the beginning spoke of; so we take it to be: And it is true, that
it is a part of the Contract, the making of the Laws, and that those Laws
should oblige all sides when made; but yet so, as not to exclude this original
constitution in all Governments that commence by compact, that there should be
a Power in the States to make provision in all times, and upon all occasions,
for extraordinary Cases and Necessities, such as ours now is.

I say nothing now as to the Hereditary Succession; our Government has been
always taken to be Hereditary, and so declared when there has been occasion to
make provision otherwise than in the direct Line.

But our matter is singly upon a Point of Fact, Whether the Throne be Vacant
(as the Commons say it is) by the Abdication of King James the Second.

This present Vacancy is nearest to that of Richard the Second, of any that we
meet with in our Records; and the Phrase being there used, we insist upon it as
very proper. And when that is agreed unto, the House will, no doubt, declare
their Minds in another Consequential Question that shall arise in a Proper way.
But this is all we can speak to now.


Sir G -- T -- y. To discourse, Whether the Crown of England would by this
means become Elective, is altogether unnecessary; and I think your Lordships
have given no Reasons that are sufficient to make the Objection out, neither
any Answers to the Commons Reasons for their Vote.

It seems to me an odd way of Reasoning, first to mistake the meaning, and then
give Reasons against that mistaken meaning.

The Question is only here, Whether we can make good this Proposition, That the
Throne is Vacant by the Abdication of tht late King.

I confess, it is a melancholy thing to discourse of the Miscarriages of
Governments, but it is much more afflictive to talk of unhinging all the
Monarchy by a breach upon the direct Line of the Succession, as, if the Crown
of England did actually descend to Lewis the Fourteenth, it would not be in the
power of the States of this Kingdom to divolve it upon another Head,

A Noble Lord put an Instance of two Men in one Room, one of whom was really
such a one: But though a stander by could not directly tell which was he, yet
it could not be said by him, that such a one was not there. But if you please,
I will put this Case:

Suppose there were two Men in one Room, that no one alive could tell which was
which; as suppose this to be the Case of the two Children of Edward the Fourth,
that they had been kept close Prisoner by their Uncle Richard the Third, so
long, that there were no living Witnesses able to tell which was the eldest of
the two, that would occasion a difficulty much what as intricate as ours here.
One of them must be Eldest, but by reason of the uncertainty, must not an
Election be made of them? And, could any thing else do but an Election?

But, I say, the proper single Question here is, Whether we have well said, and
well affirmed upon the Premises that are mentioned in the former part of the
Vote, that he was Abdicated, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant.

Your Lordships in part agree; for you say, He has Deserted the Government;
then you say, He is not in it. And it is as much as to say, He has left the
Kingdom destitute of a Government.

Now, if there be any sense in which our Proposition is true, will you deny the
whole Proposition, because it may be taken in a sense that is dubious and
uncertain, as to the Consequences.

You cannot say the Throne is Full; if then there be a Doubt with you, to be
sure it is not like to be evident to us, especially in this Case, considering
who your Lordships are.

You are the Persons that usually are or ought to be present at the Delivery of
our Queens, and the proper Witnesses to the Birth of our Princes. If then your
Lordships had known who was on the Throne, we should certainly have heard his
Name from you, and that had been the best Reason against the Vacancy as could
have been given.

My Lords,

We say no more than our Ancestors have said before us, as you see by the
Parliament-Roll, 1 Henry IV; and I must maintain the Record to this purpose,
that the Government is Vacant, as it is there declared, and as it is expressed
in our Vote: So that we have not invented or coined a word for our turn,
neither is the Notion new, it is a word that has been used before in a Case as
near this as any can be*

But it is objected, that That should be no President, because of what followed
upon that Vacancy of the Throne. I desire that your Lornships would read the
Record.

The next thing there, is, Henry the Fourth comes himself, and says, He
Claimed the Crown as descended from Henry the Third, and the Lords and Commons
assented. It is true, the Archbishop did propose him (as was usual at
Coronations) and he did there actually ask them, Whether they did choose him for
their King; they agreed to it, and the Archbishop makes a Discourse upon the
Virtues of a Man to Govern the Nation better than a Child; and then he is
placed in the Throne. And this I take to be a proper, plain, applicable
President in our Case.

But that Noble Lord's Objection strikes at the very Heart of it, if the
Objection be rightly made, That all these Proceedings, and so consequently the
Words and Phrases there used, are all repealed, 1 Edw. 4.

My Lords,

It is very well known, and readily agreed by us, that Edward the Fourth came
in in disaffirmance of the Title of the House of Lancaster.

As those times went, whenever there was any Turn in Government, (as there were
several) there were new and contrary Declarations about the Title to the Crown,
made constantly in Parliament; and what one Parliament settled, another undid.

But then this Advantage we have on our side, that as we have this first
President for us, so we have the last; for I need go no farther than the
Parliament Roll of 1 Henry VII. 12.16. where the Record is set right again.

The Act for Deposing Richard the Second is indeed by 1 Edw. IV. Repealed, and
says, That Henry the Fourth usurped the Crown, and murdered Richard the
Second; and thereupon it proceeds to attaint Henry the Sixth. But then comes in
Henry the Seventh, and 1 Henry VII. there is an Act made, that sets aside all
the Acts and Attainders made against his Line, and consequently repealed 1 Edw.
IV, which repealed 1 Hen. IV.

And I would observe one thing by the way concerning Henry the Fourth: He was
of the Line of Lancaster, and when he came to the Crown, would not endure to
have his Crown reckoned only Matrimonial, or suffer the Style to go in the
Names of Henry and Elizabeth, as he must have done if he had stuck to the Title
by the Right Line of Succession: No, he always stood up for his own Title,
though he had the Heiress of the House of York in his Bosom.

Therefore, my Lords, his Act for restoring the Record of 1 Henry IV. again, it
is as good an Authority as it was before, and somewhat better; for it has the
(...) on its side, which is unrepealed to this day.


E. of P -- e. Henry the Seventh had a good Right and Title by Marriage to the
Crown, in re Vxoris. No one can question but his own Title, as descended from
Henry the Fourth, was an Usurpation; and he would not suffer any one to
prescribe which Title was best, as long as it was acknowledged he had one good
one

That this Kingdom is Hereditary we are not to prove by President in the List
of our Kings and Queens; for we shall scarce find above three in any direct
Line, without some interruption; and therefore we are not to fetch our
Presidents or Proofs so far as those days. And this I speak for the Reason
which was hinted before.

The Laws made are certainly part of the Original Contract; and by the Laws
made, which establish the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, we are tied up to
keep in the Hereditary Line, being sworn to be true and faithful to the King,
his Heirs and Successors; whereas the old Oath was, only to bear true
Allegiance to the King. There (I take it) lies the Reason why we cannot (of our
selves) without breaking that Contract, break the Succession, which is settled
by a Law, and cannot be altered but by another, which we our selves cannot make.


Sir G -- T -- y. Your Lordship is pleased to say Henry the Seventh's Title by
Descent was an Usurpation. I think it is pretty hard to determine what Title he
did govern by, since though his Wife was the Lineal Heir, yet she had no part,
or so much as a Name in the Administration. And if it were too great an Issue
to be tried then, it will be harder to do it now. And it has been said, It was
his Mother's Counsel to him, not to declare particularly upon what Foot his
Title stood.

But, my Lords, if we should allow none for Acts of Parliament, but those that
were made in the Reigns of Hereditary Kings, and in the Right Line, I doubt we
should want the greatest part of those Laws that compose the Volume of
Statute-Books, and the Records by which we enjoy a great part of our
Inheritances and Possessions.


Mr. Sergeant M -- d If we look but into the Law of Natrue (that is above all
Humane Laws) we have enough to justify us in what we are now a doing, to
provide for our selves and the Public Weal in such an Exigency as this.


Sir R -- T -- e. If Laws made about the Succession be so obliging, what then
shall we say to the Succession of Queen Elizabeth, who had an Act of Parliament
(to the keeping of which an Oath was required) against both her and her Sister.


E. of P -- e. But to show what Opinion she her self and the Wise Men of her
Times had, and were of, in this point, there is an Act, made in her Reign, and
yet in being, which declares it to be a Proemunire to affirm, The Parliament
cannot settle the Succession of the Crown, or alter it. Entails in Parliament
have been of the Crown, both ancient and modern, yet the Authority of another
subsequent Act has prevailed against such an Entail: So that it should be done,
I say, in Parliament.


Sir R -- T -- e I think we are in as full a Capacity to take care of the
Government as any of our Predecessors, in such an Exigence; and if we do as
they have done before us, that is not to be called a changing of the Monarchy
from an Hereditary to an Elective.


E. of N -- m. After this long Debate, pray let us endeavor to come as near as
we can to an Agreement: We have proposed some Questions, about which my Lords
desired to be satisfied; You, Gentlemen, have not been pleased to give an
Answer to them, and we have no great Hopes of getting one from you, as this
Debate seems to be managed.

On your part, you have declared, That you do acknowledge the Monarchy is
Hereditary and Successive in the Right Line; then I cannot see how such an
Acknowledgment consists with the Reasons you give for your Vacancy; for I
cannot imagine how a Kingdom can be an Hereditary Kingdom, and that King who
has Children now in being (at the time of his forsaking the Government) can
have the Throne Vacant both of him and his Children.

The Course of Inheritance, as to the Crown of England, is, by our Law, a great
deal better provided for, and runs stronger in the right Line of Birth than of
any other Inheritance. No Attainder of the Heir of the Crown will bar the
Succession to the Throne, as it does the Descent to any common person. The very
Descent, by Order of Birth, will take away any such Defect.

And so was the Opinion of the great Lawyers of England, in the Case of Henry
the seventh. Then cannot I apprehend how any Act of the Father's can bar the
Right of the Child (I do not mean that an Act of Parliament cannot do it); I
never said so, nor thought so, but I say, no Act of the Father's alone can do
it, since even the Act of the Son, which may endanger an Attainder in him,
cannot do it, so careful is the Law of the Royal Line of Succession. This is
declared by many Acts of Parliament, and very fully and particularly by that
Statute 25 Henry the Eighth, Cap. 22, entitled, An Act concerning the King's
Succession; where the Succession of the Crown is limited to the King's
Issue-Male first, then Female, and the Heirs of their Bodies one after another,
by course of Inheritance, according to their Ages, as the Crown of England has
been accustomed and ought to go in such Cases.

If then the King has done any thing to divest himself of his own Right, it
does not follow thence, that That shall exclude the Right of his Issue; and
then the Throne is not Vacant, as long as there are any such Issue; for no Act
of the Father can Vacant for himself and Children.

Therefore if you mean no more than but the divesting his own Right, I desired
you would declare so: And then suppose the Right gone as to him, yet if it
descend to his Lineal Successor, it is not Vacant.

And I told you, One Reason my Lord's did stand upon against agreeing to the
Vacancy, was, Because they thought your Vote might extend a great deal further
than the King's own Person.

But your all owning it to be a Lineal Inheritance, and this Vacancy, methinks,
do not by any means consist.

You declare, you never meant to alter the Constitution; then you must preserve
the Succession in its ancient course: So I did hear a worthy Gentleman conclude
it to be your Intention to do. But by what methods can it be done in this Case
by us? I desire to be satisfied in a few things about this very matter.

I desire first to know, Whether the Lords and Commons have Power by themselves
to make a binding Act or Law. And then I desire to know, Whether according to
our ancient Legal Constitution every King of England, by being seated on the
Throne, and possessed of the Crown, is not thereby King, to him and his Heirs.
And without an Act of Parliament, (which we alone cannot make) I know not what
Determination we can make of his Estate.

It has been urged indeed, That we have in Effect already agreed to what is
contained in this Vote, by Voting, That it is inconsistent with our Religion
and Laws to have a Popish Prince to Rule over us.

But I would fain know, Whether they that urge this, think that the Crown of
Spain is Legally and Actually excluded from the Succession by this Vote.

No Man sure will undertake to tell me, That Vote of either House, or both
Houses together, can Alter the Law in this or any other point.

But because I am very desirous that this Vote should have its Effect, I desire
that every thing of this Nature should be done in the ancient usual Method, by
Act of Parliament.

GOD forbid that since we are happily delivered from the Fears of Popery and
Arbitrary Power, we should assume any such Power to our selves; What Advantage
should we then give to those who would quarrel with our Settlement for the
Illegality of it? Would not this, which we thus endeavor to crush, break forth
into a Viper?

For that Record of 1. Henry the Fourth, I acknowledge the words of the Royal
Seat being Vacant are used. But since you your selves tell us of it, That Henry
the Fourth did claim by Inheritance from his Grandfather, that, methinks, may
come up to what I would have the declared sense of both Houses upon this
Question; (to wit) The Throne might be Vacant of Richard the Second, but not so
Vacant but the claim of the immediate Successor was to take place, and not be
excluded, but entirely preserved.

And Richard the Second seems to have had the same Opinion, by delivering over
his Signet to them.

Our Laws know no Inter regnum; but upon the Death of the Predecessor the next
Heir is in uno and eodem instanti.

It was so Resolved even in Richard the Second's own Case; for at his
Grandfather's Death it was a Question, Whether King Richard the Second or the
Eldest Son of his Grandfather, then living, should succeed; and it was
Resolved, That he ought to have it, because of his Right of Inheritance; which
is the more remarkable, because of the contest.

And when Richard the Third usurped his Crown, to make his Claim good to the
Right of Inheritance, he Bastardized his own Nephews.

And so it was in all the Instances of the Breaches that were made upon the
Line of Succession, which were some Seven (but all illegal); for such was the
Force of the Laws, that the Usurpers would not take the Crown upon them, unless
they had some specious pretense of an Hereditary Title to it.

That which I would have Avoided by all means, is, the Mischievous Consequences
that I fear will ensue upon this Vacancy of the Throne, (to wit) the utter
Overthrow of the whole Costitution of our Government. For if it be so, and the
Lords and Commons only remain as parts of it, Will not this make the King one
of the Three Estates? Then is he the Head of the Commonwealth, all united in
one Body under him. And if the Head be taken away, and the Throne Vacant, by
what Laws or Constitutions is it that we retain Lords and Commons? For they are
knit together in their common Head; and if one part of the Government be
dissolved, I see not any Reason but that all must be dissolved.

Therefore it is of very great importance that we come to an Explanation, how
far you mean the Throne to be Vacant; and that if it reach to the King and his
Heirs, (notwithstanding all the the Acts of Parliament about the Succession) we
may consider how the consequences of that will effect the Constitution; for, I
presume to say, it may then be in your power as well as to say, we shall have
no King at all.

I was mistaken by the Gentlemen who took notice of what I said the Lords might
do of themselves, in the absence of the King: I would not be understood to say,
the Government devolved upon the Lords; but I may say they are the Governments
great Council in the interval of Parliaments, and may have greater sway by the
Privilege of their Birth, in the Exigencies of the State: As appears in several
Instances, and particularly the first of Henry the Sixth, and during his
Infancy.

There was a Case put by one Gentleman, about the two Sons of Edward the
Fourth, being kept Prisoners so long, till it could not be known by any Living
Witnesses which was the Eldest: I would only ask that Gentleman, Whether in
that case he would say the Throne were Vacant; certainly there would have been
One in the Throne.

But then it follows, that though there should be an Uncertainty of the
particular Person, yet that would not infer a Necessity that the Throne should
be Vacant.

Upon the whole matter, you seem to understand your own words to signify less
than they do really import.

I do not find that you purpose to make the Kingdom Elective; and yet you talk
of supplying the Vacancy by the Lords and Commons.

You do not say, That the King has left the Crown for himself and his Heirs;
and yet your words speak of a Vacancy, and nothing of the Succession; but you
do not tell us what you mean.

Therefore, if this matter were explained, that my Lords may know how far the
Intention of the Vote reaches, that it may not abroad, or hereafter, be
construed to go beyond such Meaning, (that is) as to the King himself, and not
to his Heirs, perhaps there might quickly be a happier Accommodation than can
be expected while things remain thus, still in doubt, and in the dark.

Gentlemen,

If any of you can settle this Matter in its true Light, it would do very well;
and it is You must do it; for the Words are Yours, and so we must be told your
Signification and Intention by your selves.

If you mean by Abdication and Vacancy only that the King has left the
Government, and it is Devolved upon the next Successor, that may perhaps
satisfy my Lords, and we may agree upon some Settlement.

I must confess, any Government is better than none; but I earnestly desire we
may enjoy our Ancient Constitution.

Therefore I again renew my Request, That you would come to such an Explanation
as may breed an Union between the two Houses, for the strength of your
Consultation and Resolutions in this great Emergency.

If the Kingdom were indeed Elective, we were in a Capacity of Electing, but
pro hac Vice, according to the Constitution, this Question would be greater
than what it was before; but then the great Debate in it would only be, Who
should first have the Honor of Laying the very Foundation of the New
Government.

But as this case stands upon the Foot of our Ancient Laws, and Fundamental
constitution, I humbly beseech you to consider, Whether at the same time that
in this way you get an Established Government, you do not overturn all our
Legal Foundations.


Mr. P -- F -- y. I hope, my Lords, there is no danger of shaking our
Fundamentals in this case; but we are pursuing those Methods that agree with
our Laws and Constitution: For though the Monarchy of this Nation be Hereditary
in the Ordinary course of Succession, yet there may fall out a case wherein
that cannot be complied with, and a plain Vacancy may ensue. For, put the case
the whole Royal Lines should fail, (as they are all mortal as well as we our
selves are) should we in that case have no Goveenment at all? And, who then
should we have but the Lords and Commons? and I think that case comes nearest
to the case in question, where the Successor is not known; for if he had been,
we should have heard of him before now. And, what is the reason that it should
then in the former case devolve to Lords and Commons, but that there is no
King? And they being the Representative Body of the Kingdom, are the only
remaining apparent parts of the Government, and are only to supply the Defect
by providing a Successor. And, is here not the same Reason here? We are without
a King, I am sure I do not know of any that we have: If that fall out to be the
case now, that will inser a Vacancy with a witness; and it will be of necessity
that the Lords and Commons take care to supply it.


Mr. G -- E -- e. My Lords,

We are led, and, I think, out of the Way, into a very large Field, hunting
after the Consequences of a Vote not yet settled or agreed unto: We have, as I
conceive, nothing but the Vote it self to consider of, or debate upon: We do
not intend to prejudice any Legal Right: But what the consequences of this Vote
may be, before the Vote it self be passed, I believe no Man can reasonably
pretend to ascertain, unless he have the Spirit of Prophecy.

The Throne may be Vacant as to the Possession, without the exclusion of one
that has a Right to the Succession, or a Dissolution of the Government in the
Constitution; neither will there be room for the Objection of a King de facto,
and not de jure, which some of the Lords were pleased to express their Fears of.

This Gentleman that stands by me instanced in a Record, and that was mistaken,
as a President for the proceeding in this Case; it was only mentioned by him to
show, that by using the word Vacant the Commons did no more than our Ancestors
did before us; and therefore it was not an unknown word or thing to have the
Throne Vacant.

We do apprehend we have made a right and apt Conclusion from the Premises, for
otherwise all the Vote is but Historical.

We declare the Late King has broke the Original Contract, has violated the
Fundamental Laws, and has withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, that he has
Abdicated, actually Renounced, the Government.

What occasion was there for such a Declaration as this, if nothing were
concluded from it? That were only to give the Kingdom a compendious History of
those Miseries they have too well learnt by feeling them.

Therefore there was a necessity to make some Conclusion; and none so natural
as this; That we are left without a King in the words of the Vote; that the
Throne is thereby Vacant, which it may be as to the Possession, and yet the
Right of Succession no way prejudiced.

But, my Lords, we come here, by the Commands of the House of Commons, to
debate the Reasons of their Vote and your Lordships Amendments, not to dispute
what will be the consequences, which is not at present our Province.


And so the Conference ended, and the Members of each House returned to their
respective Houses.

Die Jovis 7mo Feb. 1688.
A Message from the Lords, by Sir Robert Atkins and Sir Edward Nevill.

Mr. Speaker,
The Lords have commanded us to tell you, That they have agreed to the Vote
sent them up of the 28th of January last, (touching which there was a free
Conference yesterday) without any Alterations.

FINIS.

