The Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at the Rendezvous at
Nottingham, Nov. 22. 1688.
We the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties assembled
together at Nottingham, for the defense of the Laws, Religion, and Properties,
according to those freeborn Liberties and Privileges, descended to us from
our Ancestors, as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious dress they can put
upon us) do here unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent, 1. By the King's
dispensing with all the Established Laws at his pleasure. 2. By displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing others in their
room that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable by the Established Laws
of our Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By discouraging all persons that are not Papists, preferring such as turn to
Popery 5. By displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they would,
contrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
arbitrary. 6. By branding all men with the name of Rebels that but offered to
justify the Laws in a legal Course against the arbitrary proceedings of the
King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By burthening the Nation with an
Army, to maintain the violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By
discountenancing the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By forbidding the
Subjects the benefit of petitioning, and construing them Libellers; so rendering
the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their arbitrary Ends. And many more such like,
too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Government
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Councels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our posterity over to such a
condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten; we will to the utmost of our power oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange (whom we hope God Almighty has sent to rescue us from the
Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost Endeavors for the recovery of our
almost ruined Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and herein we hope all good
Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and Fortunes be assistant to us, and
not be bugbear'd with the opprobrious terms of Rebels, by which they would
fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations; for we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed person
will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have Sworn at their Coronations; which Oath, how well it has been observed of
late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law; but he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will the Law; and to resist such an one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense; and in this Consideration
we doubt not of all honest men's assistance, and humbly hope for, and implore
the great God's protection, that turns the hearts of his people as pleases
him best; it having been observed, That people can never be of one mind without
his inspiration, which has in all Ages confirmed that observation, Vox Populi
est Vox Dei.

The present restoring of Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
people, like Plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while; but if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present storm that threatens the
Papists, be past, as soon as they shall be resetled, the former Oppression will
be put on with greater vigor; but we hope in vain is the Net spread in the
sight of the Birds: For (1.) The Papists old Rule is, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, though the Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And (2.) Queen Mary's so ill observing her promises to the
Suffolk-men that helped her to her Throne. And above all, (3.) the Popes
dispensing with the breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises, at his pleasure,
when it makes for the service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say,
are such convincing Reasons to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-Shews of Redress, that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a freely Elected Parliament, to whom,
under God, we refer our Cause.


