A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF Mary Queen of Scots, AND The Occasions that
brought Her, and Thomas Duke of Norfolk, to their Tragical Ends. Showing the
hopes the Papists then had of a Popish Successor in England; and their Plots to
accomplish them. With a full ACCOUNT of the TRIALS Of that QUEEN, and of the
said DUKE. As also the TRIAL of PHILIP HOWARD, Earl of Arundel.

From the Papers of a Secretary of Sir Francis Walsingham.

Now Published by a Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Sign of the Three Legs in the
Poultrey over against the Stocks-Market. 1681.

A Preface to the following Trials; giving a brief Hystorical Account of the
Life of Mary Queen of Scots, and the occasions that brought both Her, and the
Duke of Norfolk, to their Tragical Ends, and the Earl of Arundel to his Trial,
etc.
IT may seem strange or unseasonable, while the Press labors daily with the
present Popish Plot, to trouble the world with that which concerns only Those,
that so long ago are past and gone: But as there are too many amongst us, that
question the Reality of the present Conspiracy; so there are not a few that
deny the Truth of those heretofore. Or if they acknowledge any thing either of
the Powder Treason, or Babingtons Conspiracy, they extenuate the same almost to
nothing, by alleging, that they were attempted by a few Private High-Spirited
Gentlemen, extremely provoked with great Injuries and bitter usage, which were
the only causes of their desperate Resolutions, for which they themselves
sufficiently suffered; and that therefore their Treasons are no more to be
filed to the Account of their Church, etc. But by the following papers, I
conceive these Evasions will be silenced, for thereby it will appear,

1. That there was during a great part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign a continued
Series of Popish Treasons successively, (though God be blessed unsuccessfully)
carried on, and that not by a few Desperado's, but by a great number of persons
of the most considerable Fortunes and Abilities of the Roman Catholic Religion.

2ly. That the main intentive and scope of the said Conspirators, as every
where they declare, was to root out Protestantism, and set up Popery, unto
which Attempts they were chiefly animated by the prospect of an immediate
Popish Successor, viz. the said Mary Queen of Scots.

3ly. That the Papists then were to make use of the same Vmbrage; as now they
do, viz. to raise Lies and Slanders of the Puritans, and prerend that they
designed Rebellion, only to color their own real Treasons, as appears by the
Queen of Scots Letter to Babington.

4ly. That these fatal Councils of the Guises and Popish Priests, brought that
great Princess (who had the misfortune to be led by them) to Ruin; so that by
endeavoring to anticipate the Succession, she not only lost it, but also her
Life.

These and several other Remarkables, which no doubt the Judicious Reader will
observe in the perusal, occasioned the publication of the ensuing papers at
this time; It Is confessed, the same are not so exactly taken, as the Trials of
the present Age; The Ingenious Skill of Speedy and short writing being much
improved since those times; yet it is evident by the Manuscript, that there was
no little care and diligence used therein, so that nothing material seems to
have escaped, nor do any Historians give so punctual an Account of the
Transactions as these papers, which before never saw the Light; concerning the
Authentickness and Truth of which, the Antientness of the handwriting of the
Original, might be a sufficient Testimony, had we not another more probable
Argument; which is, That they were lately found amongst some Ancient papers
that heretofore belonged to a Secretary of Sir Francis Walsingham, an eminent
Minister of State at that juncture; For whose use it is very credible the same
were so curiously collected. Besides, If any shall be be at the pains to
examine them, they will find them to agree in the main with the Histories of
those times, not only with the Learned Cambden, and the rest of our own
Writers, but with the Great Thaunus, nay with the Jesuit Strada too.

But for the satisfaction of those Readers that are not so conversant in
History, that they may the better understand what they meet with in these
Trials: we conceive it will not be unwelcome to prefix a brief Account of the
Life and unhappy Fortunes of the Illustrious Mary of Scotland, on whose
Adventures all these prosecutions did depend; wherein we shall impartially
state matter of Fact without the Reflections of Buchanan, or intolerable
flatteries of Causin the Jesuit.

Mary Queen of Scots, was the daughter, and sole Legitimate Issue of James the
fifth, King of Scotland, and of Mary his Queen (a daughter of the house of
Lorrain) born in December, 1541. she was scarce eight days old, when the King
her Father dyed, and the Scottish Nobility being divided into Factions,
(whereof the Family of the Hamiltons, and the Earl of Lenox, were the
respective Heads; The one side supported by King Henry the eighth of England,
and the other by the French King Henry the second) she was by her Mother (who
being a French-woman, inclined unto that Kings Interest) sent into France about
five or six years of Age, to learn the Accomplishments of that Court.

There she was educated under the French King, and the house of Guise, her
Uncles, who being desperate Enemies to the Reformation, seasoned her with
violent principles against the Protestant Religion; she was a Lady very proper
and beautiful, of a great Wit and Courage beyond her Sex. These Advantages, and
much more several important Reasons of State, induced the French King to
conclude her a fit Match for his Son the Dauphin: For hereby they thought
themselves not only sure to unite the Kingdoms of France and Scotland, (she
being Sovereign Queen of the latter, as he was Heir apparent to the former) but
also had a prospect of the Crown of England, looking upon this Mary of
Scotland, (as Great Grandchild to King Henry the seventh; to be the next
Heiress thereunto after Mary, who had by this time mounted the English Throne;
For as for her sister Elizabeth, they not only knew her to be one they called
an Heretic, but also gave out, she was Illegitimate, and so on both Accounts
represented her as incapable to succeed. Hereupon a Marriage was solemnized
between the Dauphin and this Princess, Apr. 24th. 1588. in Nostredam Church at
Paris.

On the 27th of November following, Queen Mary of England, after a short Reign
(rendered infamous to all Posterity, by the Butcheries committed on
Protestants:) departed this Life; And though Elizabeth according to her
undoubted Right, was with the general consent and applause of the Lords,
Commons, and all the people proclaimed Queen, and most happily succeeded her in
the Throne: yet had the Guises inveigled the French-King into such strong hopes
of adjoining England to the Crown of France by the aforesaid Title of their
Niece the Queen of Scots, that he openly owned the claim thereof, so that
thenceforwards his Son and Daughter in Law used the style in all their Acts of
State, Francis and Mary of Scotland, England and Ireland, King and Queen; and
caused the Arms of England to be Engraven and Painted on their Palaces,
Housholdstuff, and Heralds-Coats. And the said King Henry dying shortly after,
this Francis, who succeeded him by the name of Francis the Second, and Mary
Queen of Scots (by the Council of the said Guises, who bore great sway in
France) publicly assumed to themselves the Sovereignty of England and
Scotland, as well as that of France and Scotland; pretending to Queen
Elizabeth's Ambassador, who complained thereof sometime, that the Queen of Scots
bore the Arms of England only to show the nearness of her Blood to that Royal
Line; and sometimes, that she did it only to cause the Queen of England to
forbear bearing those of France.

Much dispute there was about this matter, which Queen Elizabeth, as she had
reason, resented very grievously; But at last in the Year 1560. upon a Treaty
at Edenborough, It was amongst other matters agreed, that the French King, and
his Wife Queen Mary, should henceforwards relinquish the Title and Arms of
England and Ireland. But when the same came to be confirmed in France, they
sought Evasions, and delayed so long, that in the interim King Francis the
Second, not being Eighteen years old, dyed, and left the Queen of Scots a Widow
of Nineteen, who thereupon resolved to leave France, and to return to her own
Kingdom of Scotland.

But Throgmorton, Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador, before she went, earnestly
pressed her to confirm the said Treaty of Edenborough, which she refused,
alleging, she must first consult with the Nobility of Scotland: This refusal
so nettled Queen Elizabeth, that she refused to grant her a safe Conduct for
her passage: However, taking the opportunity of a Fog, she set Sail from
Callice, and passing the Channel, arrived safely in Scotland: From thence she
sent Letters to Queen Elizabeth, promising all care to make and conserve Amity
with her; and requesting that a lasting Peace might be made between the two
Crowns. And in order thereunto desired, that Queen Elizabeth would in
Parliament declare her her next Heir, if she her self should have no issue.

This proposition startled Queen Elizabeth, who rather looked for the
confirmation of the Treaty of Edenborough, which she had so often promised; and
therefore returned Answer in these words, That as concerning the Succssion, she
hoped the Queen of Scotland would not by violence take away her Crown from her,
and her Children, if she had any: She promised not to derogate any thing of her
right unto the Crown of England, although she had claimed the Title and Arms of
England thorough the too much hasty ambition of other men; for which injury it
was meet that she made satisfaction. By setting down her Successor, she feared
lest their friendship should be rather dissevered than consolidated; for that
unto men established in Government, their Successors are always suspected and
hated: the people, such is their inconstancy upon a dislike of present things,
do look after the rising Sun, and forsake the Sun setting; and the Successors
designed cannot keepwithin the bounds of Justice and Truth, their own hopes,
and other men's lewd desires. Moreover, if she should confirm the Succession
unto her, she should thereby cut off the hope of her own security, and being
alive, hang her Winding Sheet before her own eyes; yea, make her own
Funeral-feast alive, and see the same.

But this Remonstrance took but little effect, and therefore sometime
afterward an Interview was projected to be had between the two Queens, but
after a long Treaty, relinquisht; the Scottish Queen refusing it, unless Queen
Elizabeth would adopt her her Daughter, or declare her her Heir apparent by
Authority of Parliament. This Queen Elizabeth would not consent to: but advised
her to a Marriage with Robert Dudely (who thereupon was made Earl of Leicester)
which Alliance the French railed upon as dishonorable; and as for her matching
with any Foreign Prince, the Earl of Murray, natural Brother to the Scots
Queen, diverted her from it, and proposed to her Henry Lord Darnly, Son to the
Earl of Lenox, whereunto both Love and Policy seemed to give their suffrages;
for as he was one of the most proper and goodly young Gentlemen in the world,
so likewise was he next Heir after her to the Imperial Crown of England; so
that she might at once gratify her Fancy, and sortifie her Title.

This Nobleman was born, and at this time resided in England, the Earl his
Father having upon the troubles in Scotland retreated thither in King Henry the
Eighth's time: And upon the first return of Queen Mary into Scotland, Queen
Elizabeth had confined both Father and Son for holding correspondence with her.
But after some time, first the Father, and afterward the Son, on several
specious pretenses, got leave to go into Scotland, promising to return within
such a Term.

Being there, a Marriage was quickly concluded and solemnized between the Queen
and this young Lord, at which Queen Elizabeth appeared much dissatisfied; nor
did their Nuptial Joys remain long un-eclips'd, but discontents (which as
easily climb to the glorious beds of Princes, as to the homely pallets of
Peasants) arose between them; whether it were, that he thought he had not
enough, or took upon him too much share in the Government, or on some more
private disgust, I determine not, being unwilling to follow the reports of
those prejudiced Authors who have sullied this great Princesses Fame, when the
respect due to the Honor of Ladies, especially the Majesty of a Crowned Head,
ought to have taught them more modesty. From what ever ground these animosities
sprung, they soon grew to such an unhappy height, that one Evening the King
attended with several others, rush't into the Queens Apartment, as she was at
Supper, and seizing upon one David Rizius (a Native of Piemont, by profession a
Musician, but for his Wit and Dexterity received into great favor with the
Queen, and made a kind of Secretary) they assaulted him with their naked
Swords; and dragging him to the door, gave him several mortal wounds, whereof
he instantly died. The Queen was then great with Child of him who was
afterward James the 1st, Monarch of Great Britain: And though Providence was
pleased to prevent her Miscarriage, yet the sight of so dismal a Tragedy could
not but surprise her with wonderful astonishment, insomuch that some
Philosophers will needs have it, that King James retained an aversion to the
sight of naked Weapons, and attribute the same to the impressions of this
unparellel'd violence.

Of which the King ('it is said) soon repented, and craved the Queens pardon,
charging Murray and Morton as the persons that instigated him thereunto. But
the King himself did not long survive this Assassination; for within a month or
two after, he himself in a tempestuous night was strangled in his bed, and then
his body cast forth into a Garden: Who were the Contrivers and Actors of his
murder, must perhaps remain a secret till the Universal Assizes shall disclose
all the wicked Policies of the world in their naked undisguised reality; Common
Fame laid it upon the Earl of Murray, base Brother to the Queen, a man subtle
and ambitious; and Morton, a great stickler in those times, and other their
Confederates. But they on the contrary charged it upon the Queen, though
without convincing proofs. Thuanus L. 40. Ad finem anni 1566, speaks as if the
Popes fingers were not altogether free from the fiains of this Princes Blood;
for says he -- Ad haec, Pontificis, and ut passim jactabatur Caroli Lotaringi
Cardinalis Literis Incitabantur, nam cum per eum a Pontifice petiissent
pecuniam ad Instaurandam majorum Religionem, Respor sum fuerat, frustra ipsos
Conari, nisi sublatis iis per quos stabat, ne res exitum jortiretur: They were
hereunto exited (as was commonly reported) by the Letters of the Pope, and the
Cardinal of Lorain; for when by him they desired money of the Pope to
re-establish the old Roman Religion, 'twas answered, that their endeavors were
vain, unless those were taken off through whose default it was that the thing
was not already accomplished -- perhaps his Holiness did not esteem the Lord
Darnly, then King, to be fierce and active enough for the business, for he is
noted to be a man of a soft temper, Gay and Amarous, not addicted to War, nor
Master of any extraordinary Politics.

This is certain, that soon after her Majesty was advised again to Marry, and
James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, being then much in her favor, and eminent for
his Valor, was recommended ('it is said, designedly by Murray and his party) as
a person most fit for her acceptance; and though he were more than suspected to
be concerned in the murder, yet being thereof in a pretended Legal manner
acquitted, and having obtained for that purpose a Divorce from his former Wife,
the Queen was prevailed with to accept him for her Husband, not without the
consent of many of the Nobility.

This caused a suspicion in many, that she was conscious to the murder (which
most Historians represent as the chief design of the Conspirators in promoting
of that unhappy Match); and these suspicions were so far improved, that quickly
after Arms were raised on that pretense, and Bothwell forced to fly, and the
Queen her self seized, and made Prisoner in Lechlevyn under the custody of
Murray's Mother, formerly a Mistress to James the 5th, where threatening to
prosecute her for Incontinency, and for the Kings murder, and for Tyranny, etc.
they at last wrought so far upon her, as to compel her to resign her Kingdom to
her Son, then scarce Thirteen months old, and to appoint Murray Regent during
his Minority. But after Eleven months Consinement, she made her escape, and
declaring, that these Concessions were extorted by Duress, and just fear,
raised an Army of 7000 men, which were defeated by Murray, and the Queen forced
to save her self by a flight of 60 Miles in one day to the house of the Lord
Heris, where dispairing of safety, and promising her self better entertainment
from Queen Elizabeth, than from her own Subjects, she from thence in a small
Bark, and with few friends, put to Sea, and Landed at Wickington in Cumberland,
May the 17th, 1568. and immediately dispatched Letters to the Queen of England,
desiring to be conducted to her presence; who in Answer, promised her
assistance according to the Equity of her Cause; but denied her Access, for
that she was held guilty of many Crimes, and ordered her to be conveyed to
Carlisle, as a place of safety; withal, writing to the Regent of Scotland, that
he should come in Person, or by sufficient Deputies, to answer the Queen of
Scots complaint against him and his accomplices, and render sufficient reasons
for deposing her, or otherwise she would espouse her cause, and with all the
force she could make, endeavor to resettle her in her Kingdom. Whereupon
Murray with seven more met at York several Noblemen commissionated by Queen
Flizabeth to hear and treat of the matter; amongst whom, Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk was the chief; and likewise the Bishop of Rosse, and others empowered
by the Scottish Queen, did there attend: but after a long Treaty they broke up,
and nothing was concluded.

At this Treaty a proposal was secretly made (some say by Murray, others by the
Bishop of Rosse) to the Duke of Norfolk to marry the Queen of Scots, which
proved fatal to him, as you will find by the following papers, containing his
Trial and Condemnation for the same. And also it was given out, that he had
passed away her Right to the Crown of England to a Foreigner, and that the same
was ratified at Rome; and Letters shown, wherein she accused Q. Eliz. for not
performing her promises to her; and boasted, of Succors she expected from
others; which was confirmed by a discovery made, That one Ridolph a Florentine
Merchant was employed by Pius the fifth the then Pope, to make a secret
Commotion of Papists in England, in her favor: Whereupon she was removed to a
place of greater security.

In the mean time Queen Eliz. had notice of the Intrigue between her and
Norfolk, upon which He was questioned; but promising to desist, and seeming to
slight that Alliance, was dismissed: But presently a Rebellion was raised in
the North by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, instigated by one
Nicholas Morton, a Popish Priest sent over by the Pope to pronounce Q. Eliz. an
Heretic, and to have lost on that account all right and sovereignty. And these
Popish Rebels proceeded to that outrage, that at Durham they tore in pieces all
the Bibles they could meet with. But finding themselves too weak to withstand
the Forces raised against them, fled without fighting; the first being betrayed
in Scotland, sent into England, and Beheaded at York, and the other died abroad
miserably. About the same time Murray, Regent of Scotland, upon a private
Grudge, was shot, as he Rid along the street, by one Hamilton, and the Regency
was conferred upon Matthew Earl of Lenox, the young Kings Granfather, he being
Father to the late murdered King, before his Marriage with the Queen, styled
the Lord Darnly.

Both the French and Spanish Kings were now urgent with Queen Elizabeth for the
Queen of Scots liberty; who made answer, That as she would omit nothing that
might serve for the reconciling the said Queen and her subjects; so she must
have leave to provide for her own and her peoples safety, as Nature, Reason,
and her own Honor required. Whereupon finding those Foreign applications
ineffectual, Domestic Plots were set on foot to effect it by force; and
amongst the rest, some eminent persons undertook it; but being discovered, were
soon apprehended, and some of the Conspirators executed.

Nor was it long, but the Duke being found by intercepted Letters
(notwithstanding his aforesaid promises) still to continue his affection to,
and correspondence with the Scottish Queen, was brought to his Trial (here
printed), and for the Crimes therein specified condemned and beheaded.

Some few days after his Execution, William Lord de la Ware and others were
sent to the Queen of Scots (who was then full of grief and sorrow for his
death; owning that a contract of Marriage had passed between him and her) to
expostulate with her, and charge her with diverse matters; as that she had
usurped the Title and Arms of the Realm of England, and had not renounced the
same, as she ought to have done by the Treaty of Edenbourgh: that she had
sought to Marry with the Duke of Norfolk (a Subject of England) without the
Queens privity; and to effect the same Marriage, had tried all means by her
Agents and Ministers, to rescue the said Duke out of Prison by force: that she
had raised the Rebellion in the North, and relieved the Rebles (after they were
put to flight) in Scotland, and the Low Countries: that she had by Ridolph the
Italian, importuned both the Pope and the King of Spain, and others, for
Foreign Forces to invade England: that she had conspired with several English
Subjects to take her out of Prison by force, and proclaim her Queen of England:
that she had received Letters from the Pope, wherein (to use his own words) he
promised to cherish her as the Hen does her Chickins, and to account those that
stood for her, the true Children of the Church. Lastly, that she had procured
the Popes Bull against the Queen, and had suffered her self publicly to be
styled Queen of England by her Ministers in Foreign Courts.

Whereunto protesting, First, That she was a free absolute Queen, and subject
to none, she with a settled countenance and courage answered:

1. That she had not usurped the Title and Arms of England, but that the King
of France, and her Husband, had imposed them upon her, being very young, and
under the direction of her Husband, and therefore not to be laid upon her for a
fault: and that as she did not after her Husband's death, so neither would she
claim them as long as Queen Elizabeth, or any Children she might have, should
live.

2. That she never imagined any detriment or hurt to the Queen by her Marriage
with the Duke of Norfolk, being persuaded it would be for the good of the
Commonwealth; and that she did not renounce it, because she had given her
Faith and Troth unto him.

3. That she willed the Duke by some means to get out of danger and Prison,
which she did out of the duty she owed to him as her Husband.

4. That she had not raised rebellion, nor was privy to the same, but was
always ready to reveal all attempts against the Queens life.

5. That she never relieved the English Rebels, only that in her Letters she
recommended the Countess of Northumberland to the Duke of Alva.

6. That she used Ridolph (whom she knew to be highly in the Popes favor) in
many matters, yet received no Letters from him.

7. That she never moved any to attempt her deliverance; yet that she willingly
gave ear unto them that offered their labor therein; and for that purpose,
that she communicated to Rolston and Hall a private Character.

8. That she had received sometimes Letters from the Pope, very pious and
consolatory, wherein were no such Expressions or Phrases.

9. That she procured not the Bull; that she only saw the Printed Copy thereof,
and when she had read it, she threw it into the fire.

10. That if any in Foreign parts writ, or named her otherwise than they ought,
they, and not she were to answer it.

11. That she never by Letters required aid of the Pope, or the King of Spain
to invade England, but only to be restored into her Kingdom by their means, and
not without the Queens privity.

12 But if any question or doubt be made of those Letters of effecting the
Marriage by force of Arms, she requested (since she was born of the Royal Blood
of England) that she might answer Personally in the next Parliament.

How far these specious Allegations were credited by Queen Elizabeth, we find
not; it is certain they produced little effect toward her delivery. But on the
contrary, it being about the same time discovered that she held Correspondence
with Spain, and that the Lord Seton who landed in Essex disguised like a
Mariner, had brought a promise of Aid to her from the Duke of Alva; she was
confined more strictly, and with greater Guard.

Likewise in Scotland, to prevent the Duke of Guises design, which was to make
use of the Duke of Lenox's favor with the King to withdraw his affection from
the English; the Earl of Gowry and others resolve by all means to remove Lenox
and the Earl of Arran from the King. To accomplish which, while Lenox was gone
from Perth (where the King then lay) to Edinburgh, and Arran also was absent,
the said Earl of Gowry, with the Earls of Mar and Lindsey, and others, take an
opportunity to invite the King to the Castle of Rewthen, and there detained
him, not permitting him to walk abroad, and removing all his trusty Servants,
cast Arran into Prison, enforced the King to call home the Earl of Angus, and
send away Lenox into France. As also by his Letters to Queen Elizabeth, to own
and approve of all these proceedings. Which were much regretted by the Queen
his Mother, who on this occasion wrote a long Letter to Queen Elizabeth,
lamenting her own and her Sons deplorable fortune, and did it so Pathetically,
that Queen Elizabeth was much affected with it, and a serious debate was moved
in her Council thereupon, and most of them inclined to set her at liberty on
these Terms and Conditions.

1. That she and her Son should promise to practice nothing hurtful to Q.
Elizabeth, and the Realm of England.

2. That she would voluntarily confess, that whatsoever was done by Francis the
Second, the French King her Husband, against Q. Elizabeth, was done against her
will, and that she should utterly disallow the same as unjust, by confirming
the Treaty of Edinburgh.

3. That she should condemn all the practices ever since that time, and
ingenuously renounce them.

4. She should bind her self not to practice any thing directly or indirectly
against the Government of the Realm of England in Ecclesiastical or Civil
affairs; but by all manner of means oppose her self, and resist such practisers
as public enemies.

5. That she shall challenge or claim no right unto her self in the Kingdom of
England during the Life of Queen Elizabeth, and that afterward she will submit
her right of Succession unto the Estates of England.

6. And to the end, that she may not hereafter use any cavil, and say, That she
condescended to these Conditions (being a Prisoner, and by coaction) she her
self should not only swear unto them, but also procure the Estates of Scotland
to confirm them by public Authority.

7. The King himself also should ratify them by Oath, and by writing.

8. And that Hostages should be given.

But these Consultations proved Abortive, the Scots rejecting them; and
besides, Queen Elizabeth had notice that Holt, an English Jesuit, was
sesecretly sent into Scotland, (not without the Scottish Queens privity, as was
suggested) to use means there for an Invasion of England. And indeed the Queen
of Scots was too much addicted to, and influenced by the Jesuits and their
Councils, who as they made use of her name to color their traitorous designs
against Queen Elizabeth, and therefore gave out, as if they had acted out of
pure zeal to the Family of the Stuarts (as many of them will boast to this very
day); yet it is plain, that in all these stirs they really minded nothing but
their own Interest; for when they met with so many disappointments in their
Plots, to bring the said Scottish Queen, before her time, to the English Crown;
and withal despaired of turning her Son, King James, to their Religion, they
presently began to start variety of new Titles, witness Parsons, alias
Doleman's Book of Succession, and other Pamphlets by them flung abroad about
those times: Nay, it is more than suspected, that as they egged on the Scottish
Queen to ill practices against Queen Elizabeth, so when they had done
(imitating their Father the Devil, who first tempts and then accuses), they
betrayed her too, by making a secret discovery of those very Conspiracies in
which they themselves had engaged her; and so were treacherously instrumental
to hasten her death, hoping to take off Queen Elizabeth, and put by King James,
and play a new Game, more for their advantage, with some other Pretender, as
will more fully appear by and by.

But to return in the mean time to our History: King James being, as you heard,
in little better Condition than that of a Prisoner to Earl Gowry and his
Confederates, or at least esteeming himself as such, on a sudden with a small
Company conveyed himself to the Castle of St. Andrews, being then about 18
years of Age, to whom several of the Nobility with armed Troops repaired; and
then he began to exercise his Royal Authority of himself, and declared in a
great Assembly of the States, the Force before upon him to have been
traitorously imposed, yet thought it most safe not to proceed with Rigor
against his Surprizers, only advising them to depart the Court, and promised
them pardon, if they would ask it within a time limited, which they declining,
fled some into England, and others into other parts, only Gowry attempting a
new Conspiracy, soon after lost his life.

It was now the year 1584. And in England diverse lewd Books were spread by the
Jesuits, and other Popish Factors, asserting, that Princes Excommunicated, as
Queen Elizabeth for sometime before had been by the Pope, were not to have any
Allegiance paid unto them, but ought to be deposed, etc. These Seeds soon
ripened into rank fruits of Treason and Rebellion, and had so far intoxicated
one Sommervile, a Popish Gentleman, that coming privately to Court, and full of
rage against all Protestants, he with his drawn Sword assaulted several
persons, and being apprehended, declared like a stout Roman Champion, that he
would murder the Queen with his own hands; whereupon he, and one Arden, an
ancient Warwickshire Gentleman, his Father in Law, were executed; but Hall, a
Priest, that excited them to this madness, got a Reprieve. Likewise one
Throgmorton, eldest Son of John Throgmorton, Chief Justice of Chester, was
discovered by intercepted Letters, directed to the Queen of Scots, to have
entertained Treasonable correspondencies with Popish Princes beyond the Seas,
and chiefly with the Guises, who had resolved to invade England, and free the
Queen of Scots: And for raising of money to carry on the work here, one Paget,
under the counterfeit name of Mope, was sent into Sussex, where the Forreiners
were first to Land; and to facilitate their purposes, he had prepared two
Catalogues, found in his Chests, one of the names and descriptions of all the
Ports of England; the other of the Nobilitry and Gentry that favored the
Romish Religion, and that he had communicated all this to Mendoza, the Spanish
Ambassador, then in England; whereupon he was condemned, and though he had
twice confessed the fact, yet (like our Modern Popish Traitors) at the Gallows
he stoutly denied all, and would needs be thought to dye as innocent as the
child unborn. However, Mendoza having thus violated, and forfeited the
Privilege of an Ambassador, was commanded forthwith to depart with shame, at
which the Spanish Court being dissatisfied, the Queen sent over Sir William
Wade to justify the Action: But the King of Spain not admitting him into his
presence, but slightingly putting him off to his Ministers, he in disdain
refused to communicate it at all, and so returned home unheard, whereby a
greater animosity arose between the two Crowns.

Nor were the Popish party less busy in fomenting disturbances in Ireland,
where Dr. Saunders, that had wrote several Pestilent Books, having drawn in the
Earl of Desmond to Rebellion, and finding him defeated, and his Head sent into
England, died miserably of famine, as he roamed up and down the Mountains,
guilty and desperate as Cain, fearing each man he met would deservedly slay
him. Likewise about the same time Providence was pleased in a wonderful manner
to make a discovery of some other practices in agitation against Queen
Elizabeth; for one Creighton, a Scottish Jesuit sailing in a small Vessel from
the Low Countries to Scotland, certain Sea-rovers of Holland (which then was
revolted and at enmity with the rest of the Subjects of the Spanish King)
happening to come up with them, took the said Ship; and though the Jesuit to
conceal his Instructions and mischievous errand, tore several of his Papers to
pieces, and flung them overboard, yet the wind miraculously (as he himself
confessed afterward) drove them back again, and cast them upon the Deck; which
the Hollanders perceiving, and imagining that they might be of consequence,
gathered them up carefully, and sent them to England, where by the great skill
and industry of Sir William Wade, they were so joined together again, that the
Contents were legible, and the Conspiracies on foot detected.

The good Subjects of England finding their Country in this danger from abroad,
and the life of their Queen (whereon the safety of their Religion and Liberties
did seem at that juncture wholly under God to depend) daily attempted by
various Plots and Machinations at home, all carried on by Papists out of a
prospect of a Popish Successor, did think fit of their own accord solemnly to
oblige themselves each to other for her safety, and to revenge her death on any
that should occasion it; which agreement they called an Association, and was
entered into by abundance of persons of all ranks and conditions throughout the
Nation. The Tenor whereof was as follows.

FOrasmuch as Almighty God has ordained Kings, Queens and Princes, to have
Dominion and Rule over all their Subjects, and to preserve them in the
possession, and observation of the true Christian Religion, according to his
holy word and commandment. And in like sort, That all Subjects should love,
fear and obey their Sovereign Princes, being Kings or Queens, to the utmost of
their power; at all times to withstand, pursue and suppress all manner of
persons that shall by any means intend and attempt any thing dangerous or
hurtful to the honor, state or persons of their Sovereigns.

Therefore we whose Names are or shall be subscribed to this Writing, being
natural-born subjects of this Realm of England, and having so Gracious a Lady,
our Sovereign Elizabeth by the Ordinance of God, our most rightful Queen,
Reigning over us these many years with great felicity, to our inestimable
comfort: And finding lately by diverse Depositions, Confessions, and sundry
Advertisements out of Foreign parts from credible persons, well known to her
Majesty's Council, and to diverse others, that for the furtherance and
advancement of some pretended Title to the Crown, it has been manifested, that
the Life of our Gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth has been most dangerously
designed against, to the peril of her person, if Almighty God her perpetual
Defender, of his mercy had not revealed and withstood the same. By whose life,
we, and all other her Majesty's true and loyal subjects, do enjoy all
inestimable benefit of peace in this Land: DO for the Reasons and Causes before
alleged, not only acknowledge our selves most justly bound with our Lives and
Goods for her defense, and in her safety to persecute, suppress and withstand
all such Intenders, and all other her Enemies, of what Nation, Condition, or
Degree whatsoever they shall be, or by what Council or Title they shall pretend
to be her Enemies, or to attempt any harm upon her person; but do further think
it our bounden duties, for the great benefit of peace, wealth, and Godly
Government, we have more plentifully received these many years under her
Majesty's Government, than any of our forefathers have done in any longer time
of any other Progenitors, Kings of this Realm; to declare, and by this writing
make manifest our bounden Duties to our Sovereign Lady for her safety.

And to that end, WE and every of us, first calling to witness the Name of
Almighty God, do voluntarily and most willingly bind our selves, every one of
us to the other, jointly and severally in the Band of one firm and loyal
Society; and do hereby vow and promise by the Majesty of Almighty God, That
with our whole Powers, Bodies, Lives and Goods, and with our Children and
Servants, we and every of us, will faithfully serve, and humbly obey our said
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, against all States, Dignities, and Earthly
Powers whatsoever, and will as well with our joint and particular forces during
our lives withstand, pursue and offend, as well by force of Arms, as by all
other means of revenge, all manner of persons, of whatsoever state they shall
be, and their Abettors, that shall attempt any act, or counsel or consent to
any thing that shall tend to the harm of her Majesty's Royal Person, and will
never desist from all manner of forcible pursuit against such persons, to the
utter extermination of them, their Counselors, Aiders and Abetters.

And that any such wicked attempt against her most Royal Person shall be taken
in hand, or procured, whereby any that have, may or shall pretend Fitle to come
to this Crown by the untimely death of her Majesty so wickedly procured (which
God of his mercy forbid) may be avenged, We do not only bind our selves both
jointly and severally never to allow, accept or favor any such pretended
Successor, by whom, or for whom any such detestable Act shall be attempted or
committed, as unworthy of all Government in any Christian Realm or Civil State:

But do also further vow and protest as we are most bound, and that in the
presence of the eternal and everlasting God, to prosecute such person or
persons to death, with our joint and particular forces, and to act the utmost
revenge upon them, that by any means we or any of us can devise and do, or
cause to be devised and done for their utter overthrow and extirpation.

And to the better corroboration of this our Loyal Band and Association, we do
also testify by this writing, that we do confirm the contents hereof by our
Oaths corporally taken upon the Holy Evangelists, with this express condition,
That no one of us shall for any respect of person or causes, or for fear, or
reward, separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution
thereof during our lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted and
suppressed as perjured persons, and as public enemies to God, our Queen, and to
our Native Country; to which punishment and pains we do voluntarily submit our
selves, and every of us, without benefit of any color and pretense.

In witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this writing
put our Hands and Seals; and shall be most ready to accept and admit any others
hereafter to this Society and Association.

Which Association, though entered into voluntarily, and by persons in their
private capacities, was so far from offending Queen Elizabeth, and the
Ministers of State in those times, or being looked upon as seditious, that in
the next Parliament the same, was confirmed and established by Law, as follows
Anno 27 Eliz. An Act for provision to be made for the security of the Queens
Majesty's most Royal person, and the continuance of the Realm in Peace.

FOrasmuch as the good felicity and comfort of the whole Estate of this Realm
consists only, (next under God) in the surety and preservation of the Queens
most Excellent Majesty; and for that it has manifestly appeared, that sundry
wicked Plots and means have of late been devised and laid, as well in foreign
parts beyond the Seas, as also within this Realm, to the great endangering of
her Highness most Royal Person, and to the utter ruin of the whole Commonweal,
if by Gods merciful Providence, the same had not been revealed. Therefore for
the preventing of such great perils as might hereafter otherwise grow by the
like detestable and devilish practices, at the humble suit, and earnest
petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same Parliament, Be it
Enacted and Ordained, If at any time after the end of this present Session of
Parliament, any open Invasion or Rebellion shall be bad or made, into or within
any of her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, or any act attempted, tending to the
hurt of her Majesty's most Royal Person by or for any person that shall or may
pretend Title to the Crown of this Realm after Her Majesty's decease; or if any
thing that he compassed or imagined, tending to the hurt of her Majesty's Royal
Person, by any person, or with the privity of any person that shall or may
pretend Title to the Crown of this Realm: THAT then by her Majesty's Commission
under her Great Seal, the Lords and other of her Highnesses Privy Council, and
such other Lords of Parliament to be named by her Majesty, as with the said
Privy Council shall come up to the number of four and twenty at the least,
having with them for their assistance in that behalf such of the Judges of the
Courts of Record at Westminster, as her Highness shall for that purpose assign
and appoint, or the more part of the same Council, Lords and Judges, shall by
virtue of the Act, have Authority to Examine all and every the offenses
aforesaid, and all circumstances thereof, and thereupon to give sentence or
judgment, as upon good proof the matter shall appear unto them. And that after
such sentence or judgment given, and declaration thereof made and published by
her Majesty's Proclamation under the Great Seal of England, all persons against
whom such sentence or judgment shall be so given and published, shall be
excluded and disabled for ever to have or claim, or to pretend to have or claim
the Crown of this Realm, or of any her Majesty's Dominions; any former Law, or
Statute whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that
thereupon all her Highnesses Subjects shall and may lawfully by virtue of this
Act, and her Majesty's direction in that behalf, by all forcible and possible
means pursue to death every such wicked person by whom or by whose means,
assent, or privity, any such Invasion or Rebellion shall be in form aforesaid
denounced to have been made, or such wicked act attempted, or other thing
compassed or imagined against her Majesty's Person, and all their Aiders,
Comforters and Abettors.

And if any such detestable act shall be executed against her Highness most
Royal Person, whereby her Majesty's Life shall be taken away (which God of his
great mercy forbid) that then every such person, by or for whom any such Act
shall be executed, and their Issues being any wise assenting or privy to the
same, shall by virtue of this Act be excluded and disabled for ever to have or
claim, or pretend to have or claim the said Crown of this Realm, or any other
her Highnesses Dominions, any former Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And that all the Subjects of this Realm, and all other her
Majesty's Dominions, shall and may lawfully by virtue of this Act, by all
forceable and possible means pursue to the death every such wicked person, by
whom or by whose means any such detestable fact shall be in form hereafter
expressed, denounced to have been committed, and also their Issues being any
assenting or privy to the same, and all their aiders, comforters and abettors
in that behalf.

And to the end that the intention of this Law may be effectually executed, if
her Majesty's Life be taken away by any violent or unnatural means (which God
defend:) Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Lords and
others, which shall be of her Majesty's Privy Council at the time of such her
decease, or the more part of the same Council, joining unto them for their
assistance Five other Earls, and Seven other Lords of Parliament at the least
(foreseeing, that none of the said Earls, Lords or Council be known to be
persons that may make any Title to the Crown,) those persons which were Chief
Justices of either Bench, Master of the Rolls and Chief Baron of the Exchequer
at the time of her Majesty's death, or in default of the said Justices, Master
of the Rolls, and Chief Baron, some other of those which were Justices of some
of the Courts of Records at Westminster at the time of her Highnesses decease,
to supply their places; or any Four and Twenty, or more of them, whereof Eight
to be Lords of the Parliament, not being of the Privy Council, shall to the
uttermost of their power and skill examine the cause and manner of such her
Majesty's death, and what persons shall be any way Guilty thereof, and all
circumstances concerning the same, according to the true meaning of this Act;
and thereupon shall by open Proclamation publish the same, and without any
delay by all forceable and possible means, prosecute to death all their Alders
and Abettors; and for the doing thereof, and for the withstanding and
suppressing all such power and force, as shall be any way levied or stirred in
disturbance of the due execution of this Law, shall by virtue of this Act, have
power and authority, not only to raise, and use such Forces, as shall in that
behalf be needful and convenient, but also to use all other means and things
possible and necessary for the maintenance of the same Forces, and prosecution
of the said Offenders; and if any such Power and Force shall be levied and
stirred in disturbance of the due execution of this Law, by any person that
shall, or may pretend any Title to the Crown of this Realm, whereby this Law
may not in all things be fully executed, according to the effect and true
meaning of the same; that then every such person shall by virtue of this Act be
therefore excluded, and disabled for ever to have, or claim, or to pretend to
have or claim the Crown of this Realm, or of any other Her Highnesses
Dominions, any former Law or Statute whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all, and every the
Subjects of all her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, shall to the uttermost of
their power aid and assist the said Council, and all other the Lords and other
persons to be adjoined to them for assistance, as is aforesaid, in all things
to be done, and executed according to the effect and intention of this Law; and
that no Subject of this Realm shall in any wise be impeached in Body, Land or
Goods, at any time hereafter, for any thing to be done or executed according to
the Tenor hereof, any Law or Statute heretofore made to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And whereas of late many of her Majesty's good and faithful Subjects have in
the Name of God, and with the Testimonies of good Consciences by one uniform
manner of writing under their hands and Seals, and by their several Oaths
voluntarily taken, joined themselves together in one Bond and Association, to
withstand, and revenge to the uttermost all such malicious actions and attempts
against her Majesty's most Royal Person: Now for the full explaining of all
such Ambiguities and Questions, as otherwise might happen to grow by reason of
any Sinister or wrong Construction, or Interpretation to be made or inferred
of, or upon the words, or meaning thereof; Be it declared and enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, that the same Association, and every
Article and Sentence therein contained, as well concerning the disallowing,
excluding, or disabling any person that may, or shall pretend any Title to come
to the Crown of this Realm, as also for the pursuing, and taking revenge of any
such wicked act or attempt as is mentioned in the same Association, shall, and
ought to be in all things expounded, and adjudged according to the true intent
and meaning of this Act, and not otherwise, nor against any other person or
persons.

The Scottish Queen was too quick sighted, not to perceive, that this
Association was an Arrow levelled principally against her; yet whether push't on
by the greatness of her spirit, or the blindness of her Fate, or rather seduced
by affording an ear as well to the treacherous counsel of her enemies, as unto
the pernicious devices of her friends, she was still busy in Intrigues for
procuring her Liberty; and particularly Queen Elizabeth had private
informations from one Heart, a Romish Priest, that Dr. Allen, a Popish Fugitive
(advanced by the Pope to the Cardinalate) for the Popish Ecclesiastics of
England, and Sir Francis Inglefeild for the Laity, and the Bishop of Rosse for
the Queen of Scotland, had unanimously undertaken, and with the authority of
the Pope, and consent of the King of Spain, decreed, that Q. Elizabeth should
be deposed, and the King of Scotland disinherited of the Kingdom of England, as
being both manifest and notorious Heretics, and the Queen of Scots to be
married to some Catholic Nobleman, who should be chosen King of England by the
English Catholics, and the Election ratified by the Pope, and the lawful issue
of this man by the Queen of Scotland to be declared Successors to the Crown,
etc.

But these were only remote and vnfledg'd projects: there was another dangerous
Conspiracy, somewhat of the same complexion, nearer hand, and almost ripened
for execution, which in the year 1586. happily for Queen Elizabeth, but as to
the Queen of Scots, fatally discovered; which in short was thus: One Gifford a
Dr. of Popish Divinity had persuaded one John Savage (a man of great courage
and blind zeal) that it was a meritorious work to take away the lives of
Princes excommunicated, who thereupon made a solemn Vow to kill Queen
Elizabeth. To render his attempt more feasible, and to rock the Queen and her
Council into security, that the danger might so much the more certainly
overwhelm them, by how much it was less apprehended, the Jesuits and Seminary
Priests published a Book, exhorting the Roman Catholics in England to attempt
nothing against their Prince, and to use only the Christian weapons, prayers
and tears, etc. In the mean time, Savage waiting his opportunity, one Ballard,
a Priest, that had been contriving in France with Mendoza, Paget and others,
about invading of England, came over as a Soldier, by the name of Captain
Foscu, and being not unacquainted with Savage's design, communicated the same
to Mr. Anthony Babington, a Derby-shire Gentleman, of an ancient Family, Rich,
very handsome, of an excellent Wit, Learned above his years, and a zealous
Papist, who having lately been abroad, the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Scottish
Queens Ambassador, had engaged him with continual applauses of that Queens
Virtue and Beauty, and of promises of honors and preferments from her,
obscurely intimating no less than hopes of Marriage, whereby the ambitious
young man resolved to run all adventures to render himself capable of her good
Graces; nor was that Queen wanting to give encouragement, by holding a
correspondence with him by Letters in Cipher, which though for some time
interrupted, by her removal from the Charge of the Earl of Shrewsbury to the
Custody of Amias Paulet and Sir Drew Drury, was yet renewed again some time
after, as by the Letters in the following Sheets appears.

Babington being thus informed of Savage's Vow, resolving to have the murder of
Queen Elizabeth effectually performed, would needs associate Five more with him
for that attempt, and also drew in diverse other Popish Gentlemen, no less fiery
zealous than himself, into the Conspiracy, as Edward Windsor, Brother to the
Lord Windsor, Thomas Salisbury, of a good Family in Denbyshire, Charles Tilney,
of an ancient worshipful House, the only hope of his Family, and one of the
Gentlemen-Pensioners to Queen Elizabeth (the last Two being lately reconciled
to the Church of Rome by the said Ballard), Chidiock Tichburn, of Hampshire,
Edward Abington, whose Father had been Cofferer to the Queen, Robert Gage, of
Surry, John Travers and John Charnock, of Lancashire, John Jones, whose Father
had been Tailor to Queen Mary, one Barnwell of an honorable Family in Ireland,
Henry Dun, a Clerk in the First-Fruits-Office, and several others; but those
that were to assassinate Queen Elizabeth, were the before-named, Savage,
Abington, Barnwell, Tilney and Tichburn, the Conspirators were all Sworn to
Secrecy, and had several Consults, as in Pauls-Church, St. Giles in the Fields,
and in diverse Taverns; and proceeded to that vanity, that they had also their
Pictures drawn to the Life, all in one Table, with Babington in the midst, thus
Circumscribed, Hi mihi sunt Comites, quos ipsa pericula jungunt.

But that Verse being thought too plain, they removed it, and instead thereof
inserted this Motto.

Quorsum haec, alio properantibus? The Plot being thus laid to murder Queen
Elizabeth, and at the same instant to free the Queen of Scots, Foreign Forces
to land, Rebels at home ready to join with them, and all things in so forward a
posture, it will be convenient to observe how this desperate Contrivance was
brought to naught: The beforementioned Gifford, the Priest, born in
Staffordshire, not far from Chartley, where the Queen of Scotland was kept,
was sent over about this time by the Fugitives into England, under the
counterfeit name of Luson, to remember Savage of his Oath, and secrerly to
convey Letters to and fro, between the Queen and her Correspondents, which for
some time he performed; for by corrupting a Brewer belonging to Amias Paulet,
at a hole in a Wall, into which a stone was put, so that it might be taken out,
he secretly sent in, and received back Letters; but the said Gifford, whether
troubled in conscience, or corrupted with bribes; or terrified through fear, or
(which I esteem more probable) appointed so to do, that he might precipitate
the Queen to destruction, disclosed the whole Intrigue to Secretary Walsingham,
and communicated to him all the Letters that either way he received, who
unsealed and Copied them, and then by the rare skill of one Phillips, found out
a Key to the Ciphers, and by the dexterity of one Gregory, sealed them up
again, so that they could not be perceived to have been opened, and then
dispatched them away, as directed.

Queen Elizabeth, by this means having notice of the storm that hung over her
head, thought fit to prevent it in time; and when Walsingham would have
suffered them to have proceeded further, the Queen refused, lest (as she said)
in not taking heed of danger when she might, she should seem more to tempt God
than to hope in him. Hereupon Babington and the rest were sought after, and
having in vain endeavored to abscond, were apprehended, and upon a fair Trial,
and their own Confessions, condemned and executed.

Hereupon Queen Elizabeth being much exasperated against the Queen of Scots,
caused her Cabinets and Papers to be seized, wherein many Letters were found,
and Copies of Letters both to and from Strangers, and also from diverse Noblemen
of England, which Queen Elizabeth prudently dissembled and buried in silence.
As for Gifford, who made the discovery, he was soon after sent into France,
under the notion of Banishment. Now that this Gifford might be set on work by
the Jesuits, is very suspicious; for it is very unlikely, that he who first
labored to persuade Savage of the lawfulness and merit of murdering of Queen
Elizabeth, and came over on purpose to remind him of that Vow, should all on a
sudden have so tender a Conscience, or so much love, forsooth, to his Prince
and Country, as of his own accord to discover the Intrigue, had he not a secret
design to manage thereby, which is more probable, because it is plain they were
now grown out of hope of restoring their Religion, either by the Queen of Scots
or her Son, and therefore began to set up a feigned Title for the King of
Spain, and employed one of their Society into England (as is affirmed by
Pasquier a French Author) to draw off the Gentry from her to the Spaniard, and
to thrust her headlong into these dangerous counsels, which brought her to her
end; and at the same time, lest the Guises her kindred should give her any
assistance, stirred them up to new enterprises against the King of Navarr, and
the Prince of Conde.

Nay, the Queen of Scots her self was not unacquainted with their designs to
set up the Spaniard; for amongst other things we find, she one time used these
words -- When I being in Prison, and languished with care, without hope of
Liberty, and there was not any more hope left for ever bringing to pass these
things, which very many expected of me in my sickness and declining age, many
thought it fit that the Succession of the Realm of England should be
established in the Spaniard, or in a Catholic English man; and a Book was
brought to prove the Right of the Spaniard; which being not admitted by me, I
offended many. -- History of the Life and Death of Mary Steuart Queen of
Scotland, dedicated to her Son King James, p. 400.

But leaving this Conjecture to the Judicious Reader, however it was designed,
the event proved Funerous to the Scottish Queen: for her Secretaries being
examined about the Papers found in her Closet, of their own accord
acknowledged, that these in her Name were of their hand-writings, but Indicted
by her in French, that she received Letters from Babington, and that they wrote
back by her commandment the Answers there found.

Hereupon the English Queen after some debate resolved to proceed against her
upon the before recited Act of 26th. of Eliz. But when it was said, That
according to the Formalities of Law she ought to be Tried at the Assizes by a
Country Jury, and to hold up her hand at the Bar, Queen Elizabeth would by no
means hear thereof, judging it very unbecoming her Royal Quality; and therefore
chose rather to issue forth a Commission to diverse Noblemen, and chief
Personages of the Realm, together with the Judges, etc. who met at
Fodringhay-Castle in Northamptonshire, (where she was then kept) on the 11th.
of October 1586. and proceeded as in the subsequent Papers is related.

And afterward, viz. the 25th. of the same Month, in the Star Chamber at
Westminster (to which time and place the Commissioners had adjourned
themselves) the sentence against her was pronounced and confirmed with the
Seals and Subscriptions of the Commissioners. Whereupon both the King of Scots,
and the French King, speedily sent their Ambassadors to intercede on her behalf
with Queen Elizabeth, using all persuasive Arguments; that natural affection in
the one, and likeness of Condition, and ancient friendship in the other could
suggest. But when the loud voice of necessity of State seemed to drown all
their Reasons, the French Ambassador l' Aubespine, resolves to prevent Blood
with Blood; (and to save the Queen of Scots life, contrives to take away Queen
Elizabeth's; and deals with one Mr. Stafford (whose Mother was of the
Bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth) about it, who having not an heart to act such a
Villainy himself, recommended one Moody a desperate Russian taken out of the
Common Goal, who for money undertook it. But then they could not agree in the
manner; Moody propounded Poison, or to lay a Bag of Gunpowder under the Queens
Bed, and suddenly fire it, (so that the Treason of that kind against King
James, was not altogether a new invention, but the Devil had long before
inspired some bloody Papists with the notion); but Trap the French Ambassadors
Secretary liked neither of there Expedients, but would have her killed as the
Prince of Orange was late before, who was shot into the Body with three
Bullets, by one Balthazar Gerard a Burgundian, instigated thereunto by the
Jesuits. But whilst they were th^^ consulting, Stafford discovers all,
whereupon Moody and Trap were apprehended, and confessed the whole Contrivance.
This fresh and dangerous Plot much startled Queen Elizabeth, who perceived that
her own Life could not be safe if she did not proceed to execute the Sentence
upon the Scottish Queen. For from the prospect of her succeeding to the Crown,
the Popish Conspirators laid the foundation of all their Traiterous practices.

Yet never did Clemency and good nature more bravely resist the charms of
Interest, and dread of danger, than in the noble breast of our Queen; for how
extremely loath she was to consent to the death of the Queen of Scots, appears
by the several Applications made by the Parliament to move her thereunto. As
first, at Richmond on the 12th. of Nov. Sergeant Puckering Speaker of the House
of Commons did in the name of that House represent unto her Majesty the diverse
apparent and imminent dangers that might grow to her Royal person, and to her
Realm from the Scottish Queen and her Adherents, if remedy were not provided,
which he delivered as follows.

First touching the danger of her Majesty's Person.

Both this Scottish Queen and her Favorers do think her to have Right not only
to succeed, but to enjoy your Crown in possession; and therefore as she is a
most Impatient Competitor, so will she not spare any means whatsoever that may
bereave us of your Majesty, the only impediment that she enjoys not her
desire.

2. She is obdurate in malice against your Royal Person, notwithstanding you
have showed her all favor and mercy, as well in preserving her Kingdom, as
saving her life, and salving her honor. And therefore there is no place for
mercy, since there is no hope she will desist from most wicked attempts, the
rather for that her malice appears such, that she makes (as it were) her
Testament of the same, to be executed after her death, and appoints her
Executors to perform it.

3. She openly and boldly professed it lawful for her to move Invasion upon
you; and therefore as of Invasion victory may ensue, and of victory the death
of the vanquished: so did she thereby not obscurely bewray, that she thought it
lawful for her to destroy your Sacred Person.

4. She thinks it not only lawful, but honorable also, and meritorious to take
your life from you, as being already deprived of your Crown by the
Excommunication of the Holy Father, and therefore it is like she will (as
hitherto she has done) continually seek it by whatsoever means.

5. That she is greedy of your Majesty's death, and preferred it before her own
life and safety. For in her direction to one of her late Accomplices, she advised
under covert terms that whatsoever should become of her, that Tragical
Execution should be performed on you.

Secondly, Touching the danger of the overthrow of the true Religion.

1. It is most perilous to spare her, that continually has sought the
overthrow and suppression of true Religion, infected with Popery from her
tender youth, and being after confederate in that Holy League when she came to
age, and ever since a professed enemy against the Truth.

2. She rests wholly upon Popish hopes to deliver and advance her, and is
thereby so devoted to that profession, that as well for satisfaction of others,
as for feeding of her own humor, she will supplant the Gospel, where and
whenever she may, which evil is so much the greater, and the more to be
avoided, as that it slays the very soul, and will spread it self not only
over England and Scotland, but also in those parts beyond Sea, where the Gospel
of God is maintained, the which cannot but be exceedingly weakened by the
defection of this Noble Island.

Thirdly, Touching the peril of the state of the Realm.

1. As the Lydians said, Unum Regem agnoscunt Lydi, duos autem tolerare non
possunt; so we say, Unicam Reginam Elizabethem agnoscunt Angli, duas autem
tolerare non possunt.

2. As she has already by her allurements brought to destruction more Noblemen
and their houses, together with a greater multitude of the Commons of this
Realm, during her being here, than she should have been able to do, if she had
been in possession of her own Crown, and armed in the Field against us: so will
she be the continual cause of the like spoils, to the greater loss and peril of
this Estate; and therefore this Realm neither can nor may endure her.

3. Again, She is the only hope of all discontented Subjects; she is the
foundation whereon all the evil-disposed do build; she is the Root from whence
all Rebellions and Treacheries do spring; and therefore whilst this hope
lasts, this foundation stands, and this Root lives, they will retain
heart, and set on foot all their devises against the Realm, which otherwise
will fall away, die, and come to nothing.

4. Mercy now in this case toward her, would in the end prove Cruelty against
us all, Nam est quaedam Crudelis Misericordia, and therefore to spare her is to
spill us.

5. Besides, It will exceedingly grieve, and in a manner deadly wound the
hearts of all good Subjects of your Land, if they shall see a Conspiracy so
horrible not condignly punished.

6. Thousands of your Majesty's most Liege and Loving Subjects of all sorts and
degrees, that in a tender zeal of your Majesty's safety, have most willingly
both by open Subscription and solemn Vow, entered into a firm and loyal
Association, and have thereby protested to pursue unto the death by all
forcible and possible means such as she is by just Sentence found to be; can
neither discharge their love, nor well save their Oaths, if your Majesty shall
keep her alive; of which burden your Majesty's Subjects are most desirous to be
relieved, as the same may be if Justice be done.

7. Lastly, Your Majesty's most loving and dutiful Commons doubt not, but as
your Majesty is duly exercised in reading the Book of God, so it will please
you to call to your Princely remembrance, how fearful the examples of Gods
vengeance be, that are to be found against King Saul for sparing King Agag, and
against King Ahab for saving the life of Benhadad; both which were by the just
Judgment of God deprived of their Kingdoms, for sparing those wicked Princes
whom God had delivered into their hands of purpose to be slain by them, as by
the Ministers of his Eternal and Divine Justice; wherein full wisely Solomon
proceeded to punishment when he took the life of his own natural elder Brother
Adonias, for the only intention of a Marriage that gave suspicion of Treason
against him.

Herein We your Majesty's most loving and dutiful Subjects earnestly depend
upon your Princely resolution, which we assure our selves shall be to God most
acceptable, and to us no other than the state of your Regal Authority may
afford us, and the approved Arguments of your tender care for our safety under
your Charge, does promise to our expectation.

To this Address the Queen returned Answer in a large Speech, soon after
Printed, and too long here to recite; but amongst other things she used these
expressions:

Albeit, I find my life has been dangerously sought, and my death contrived
without desert, yet I am therein so clear from malice, as I protest it is, and
has been to me the greatest grief, that one not different in Sex, of like
Estate, and near of kin, should fall into so great a crime: yea, I had so
little purpose to pursue her with malice, that as it is not unknown to some of
my Lords here, I secretly wrote her a Better upon the discovery of several
Treasons, that if she would privately acknowledge them by her Letters to my
self, she should never be called so publicly in question for them; neither did
I that to circumvent her, for I knew then as much as she could confess, and so
did I write. And if even yet, now that the matter is made but too apparent, I
thought she truly would repent (as perhaps she would easily appear in outward
show to do,) and that for her, none other would take the matter upon them, or
that but mine own life only were in danger, and not the whole estate of your
Religion and well doings; I protest I would most willingly pardon and remit
this offense. Or if by my death other Nations and Kingdoms might say, that this
Realm had attained an ever prosperous and flourishing Estate, I would (I assure
you) not desire to live, but gladly give my life, to the end it might procure
you a better Prince.

I am not unmindful of your Oath made in the Association, manifesting your
great good wills and affections, taken and entered into, upon good Conscience
and true knowledge of the guilt, for safety of my person, and conservation of my
life, done, I protest to God before I heard it, or ever thought of such a
matter, until a great number of hands, with many obligations, were showed me,
which as I do acknowledge as a perfect argument of your true hearts and great
zeal to my safety; so shall my bond be stronger tied to greater care for all
your good.

But forasmuch as this matter is rare, weighty and of great consequence, I
think you do not look for any present resolution; the rather for that, as it is
not my manner in matters of farless moment to give speedy answer without due
consideration; so in this of such importance, I think it very requisite with
earnest prayers to beseech the Divine Majesty so to illuminate my
understanding, and inspire me with his grace, as I may determine that which
shall serve to the establishment of his Church, preservation of your Estates,
and the prosperity of this Commonwealth under my charge, wherein (for that I
know delay is dangerous) you shall have with all convenience our resolution
delivered by our Message.

Soon after this, her Majesty sent to both Houses, earnestly charging them to
consider of some expedients, whereby she might spare the Scottish Queen, and
yet preserve her own Life and State; who having severally in their respective
Houses, and jointly at several Conferences debated the same, concluded, Nemine
contra dicente, That there was no other effectual means or expedient could be
sound out for continuance of the Christian Religion (I use herein their own
words,) quiet of the Realm, and safety of her Majesty's Person, than that which
was contained in their former Petition: Which was backed by another Speech of
the Speaker of the Commons, assigning, by the direction of the House, these
Reasons for such their resolution, viz.

That if her Majesty should be safe without taking away the life of the
Scottish Queen, the same were most probably, by one of these means following,
viz.

1. That happily she might be reclaimed, and become a Repentant-Convert,
assigning her Majesty's great mercy and favors in remitting her heinous
offenses, and by her Loyalty hereafter perform the fruits of such Conversion.

2. Or else, by a more straight Guard be so kept, as there should be no fear of
the like attempts hereafter.

3. Or that good assurance might be given by Oath, Bonds or Hostages, as
cautions for her good and loyal demeanor from henceforth.

4. Or, lastly, by Banishment, the Realm might be voided of her Person, and
thereby the perils further removed that grow to her Majesty by her Presence.

All which being duly pondered, did yet appear so light in all their Judgments,
that they durst not advise any security to rest in any, no not in all of them.
For,

1. Touching her Conversion, it was considered, That if Piety or Duty could
have restrained her from such heinous Attempts, there was cause enough
ministered to her on her Majesty's behalf, when she not only protected her
against the violence of her own Subjects, who pursued her to death by Justice,
but covered her Honor, when the same by public Fame was touched, and the very
Heinous and Capital Crimes objected against her before certain Commissary
Delegates assigned to examine the same; and spared her Life, when for her
former Conspiracies and Confederacies with the Northern Rebels, Her Highness
was with great Instance pressed by both Houses in the 14th year of her
Majesty's Reign, to do like justice upon her, as is now desired, and as her
Treasonable practices then had most justly deserved. And whereas the Penalty of
this Act sufficiently notified unto her, should have terrified her from so
wicked attempts; she has nevertheless insisted in her former practices, as a
person obdurate in Malice against her Majesty, and irrecoverable; so as there
was no probable hope of any Conversion, but rather great doubt and fear of
Relapse, forasmuch as she stood obstinately in the denial of matter most
evidently proved, and now most justly sentenced against her, and was not entered
into the first part of Repentance, the Recognition of her offense, and so much
the farther off from the true fruits that should accompany the same.

2. As for a surer Guard, and more strait Imprisonment, it was resolved, That
there was no security therein nor yet in the two other means propounded of
Bonds and Hostages: For as much as the same means that should be practiced to
take her Majesty's Life away (which God forbid), would aptly serve both for the
Delivery of her Person, and Release of the Bonds and Hostages that should be
given for Cautions in that behalf; which being unhappily achieved, and to our
irrepairable loss, who should sue the Bonds, or detain the Hostages? or being
detained, what proportion was there in Bonds or Hostages whatsoever, to
countervail the value of so precious and inestimable a Jewel, as her Majesty is
to this Realm?

3. But she will solemnly vow and take an Oath, that she will not attempt any
thing to the hurt of her Majesty's Person. She has already sundry times
falsified her Word, her Writing, and her Oath, and holds it for an Article of
Religion, That Faith is not to be holden with Heretics, of which sort she
accounts your Majesty and all the professers of the Gospel to be; and
therefore have we little reason to trust her in that, whereof she makes so
small a conscience.

4. As for Banishment, that were a stop a malo in pejus, to set her at liberty;
a thing so greatly desired and thirsted for by her Adherents, and by some
Princes her Allies, who sought her Enlargement chiefly to make her a Head to
set up against her Majesty in time of Invasion.

And therefore her Majesty's Death being so earnestly sought for Advancement of
this Competitor, Her Highness could not remain in quietness or security, if the
Scottish Queen should longer continue her Life.

Yet notwithstanding all these Applications and Reasons, the Queen suspended
her Resolution, and Answered this second Address with a Reserved Speech, which
at once expressed her Love and Tenderness to her Kinswoman, and her Regards to
the safety of her People; protesting, That she was so far from Cruelty, that
for her own Life she would not touch Hers; and that her Care had not been so
much how to preserve her self, as both, which she was sorry was become so hard,
or rather impossible; and therefore concluded, That as she conceived their
Consultations Wise, Honorable and Conscientious; so she desired for the
present to suspend her positive Answer, etc.

So far was this Pious Queen perplexed in this Affair, that she abandoned the
Comforts of Society, and would often sit solitary, without speaking a word to
any: But at last delivered to Davison, one of her Secretaries, a Warrant signed
with her own hand, for the Issuing a Commission under the Great Seal of
England, for the Queen of Scots Execution, that it might be ready upon any
Imminent danger; yet charging him not to acquaint any therewith. And the very
next day sent him a Countermand; but he then acquainted her Majesty, that the
Commission was already made, and passed the Seal; at which the Queen appeared
angry, and blamed him for his haste. And indeed he had Communicated the
business to several of the Council, and persuaded them, who were apt enough to
believe what they desired, that the Queen Commanded that it should be put in
Execution without delay. And so (having obtained such Warrant and Commission)
they without her Majesty's privity, sent down one Beal with Authority directed
to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, Darby and others, to see her Executed. Which
was performed accordingly; The Manner and Circumstances whereof, the Reader may
find in the ensuing Narrative.

She was put to Death the 18th of February, 1587. in the Six and fortieth year
of her Age, and 18th of her Confinement; her Body being Honorably Buried in
the Cathedeal of Peterborough; and from thence afterward removed by her Son
King James', and laid under a Royal Monument in King Henry the Seventh's
Chapel at Westminster.

Variously was this Action censured; and I shall only say, That though the
Physic was violent and extraordinary, yet it wrought a Cure, and preserved the
Body-politick from those Domestic Paroxisms of Treason and Rebellion, that
before daily disturbed and endangered it; for we do not find after that, any,
or at least very few Conspiracies carried on against the Queens Life, or the
Government, though she lived afterward between 14 and 15 years: For the
Spanish Invasion, though it happened two years after, was not only a thing
Foreign, but Contrived and Designed before the Queen of Scots Death.

And as for the Proceedings against the Earl of Arundel, the Crimes for which
he was prosecuted had their Rise likewise in precedent times: For first having
been questioned and confined to his House, and then set at Liberty, he
attempted to fly beyond Sea, and therefore was Committed to the Tower, not only
for the same, but likewise for Harboring Priests, and Corresponding with Allen
and Parsons the Jesuits, was fined 10000 Marks; and afterward continuing his
Disloyal practices, was for the Reasons in the following Papers specified,
Condemned; though by the Queens mercy Reprieved, and dyed naturally in the
Tower in the year 1595.

Two things further I must Remark: 1. What a strange Bias, and almost
prodigious Influence Popery has even on the best dispositions, prevailing so
far with this unfortunate Earl, that even contrary to Nature it self (and yet
bate but his Religion, he is Represented as a Good-natured man), He rejoiced
with hopes of the Ruin of his Country. 2ly, That if you look over the Lists
of the Lords Commissionated in these Transactions, you will find them to be of
great and ancient Houses; and though some of their Families have almost ever
since been of the Roman persuasion, yet they were then so well satisfied with
the Proceedings, that we meet not with One Voice pronouncing a Not Guilty in
all the three Trials.

History is one of the best Tutors of Policy, whereby the Ingenious will easily
perceive how far former Occurrences hold parallel with, or may be considered in
relation to Modern Affairs.

THE Reader may be pleased to correct the Errata's, p. 2. instead of 1588. the
year of the Marriage of the Queen of Scots, should be 1558. And in other places
the Names Gray for Gray, Perian for Periam, and some other literal mistakes and
faults, by the Context may easily be rectified or pardoned.

The whole Discourse of the Duke of Norfolks Arraignement the 17th day of
January, Anno 1571. in the 14th year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, etc.
FIrst the O yes was made by Littleton a Sergeant at Arms, and then
Proclamation Crier. Lo. Steward.
was made as follows: viz. My Lords grace the Queens Majesty's Commissioner
High Steward of England, does Charge every man to keep silence, and hear the
Queens Majesty's Commission Read; The same Commission was read by Mr. Sands
Clarke of the Crown, of the Kings Bench, the Test whereof was the 14th day of
February, Anno Elizabethoe Sands.
Reg. 14th, then was a large White Rod delivered to my Lord Steward by Garter,
Principal King at Arms, who held the same a while, Lo. Steward. Garter.
Norris. Sergeant at Arms. Call of the Court.
and after delivered it to Mr. Norris the Great Usher, who held the same all
the time of the Arraignement: Then was called Thomas Edwards Sergeant at Arms,
and willed to return his Writ, which being returned was read: Then was called
all the Earls, Vicounts, and Barons, summoned to appear there that day, and
every one to answer to their Names; the Earls and Lords that sat there that
day, were these following. viz. Earls, Vicount, Lords.


1. Reginald Gray Earl of Kent. 2. William Somerset Earl of Worcester. 3.
Thomas Ratlife Earl of Sussex. 4. Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington. 5. Ambrose
Dudly Earl of Warwick. 6. Francis Russel Earl of Bedford. 7. William Herbert
Earl of Penbroke. 8. Robert Dudly Earl of Leicester. 9. Edward Seymor Earl of
Hartford. 10. Walter Devereux Vicount Hereford. 11. Edward Fynes Lord Clinton.
12. William Howard Lord of Effingham. 13. William Cecil Lord Burleigh. 14.
Arthur Gray Lord Wilton. 15. James Blunt Lord Mountjoy. 16. William Lord Sands.
17. Thomas Lord Wentworth. 18. William Lord Borrough. 19. Lewis Lord Mordant.
20. John Pawlet Lord S. John. 21. Robert Lord Rich. 22. Roger Lord North. 23.
Edward Lord Chandois. 24. Oliver Lord S. John of Bletsoe. 25. Thomas Sackvile
Lord Buckhurst. 26. Lord De-La-Ware.
Nine Earls, One Vicount, and Sixteen Lords, in all Twenty Six.

Then was Robert Catlin Chief Justice of England, Commanded to return his
Precept, upon the peril should follow thereof, which was returned and read:
Then was called the Lieutenant of the Tower, to return his Lieutenant. Duke.
Precept and to bring forth his Prisoner Thomas Duke of Norfolk: Then was the
Duke brought to the Bar, being held between Sir Owin Hopton on the right hand,
and Sir Peter Carew on the left hand: And next unto Sir Peter, stood one
holding the Axe of the Tower with the Edge from Axe of the Tower.
the Duke: The Duke immediately at his coming to the Bar, viewed all the Lords
both on the Right hand, and on the left hand of the Lord Steward: Then the
Lieutenant delivered in the Precept which was Read: And then was Proclamation
made that every man should keep silence: And Mr. Sands spoke to the Prisoner in
this manner; Thomas Duke of Norfolk Proclamation. Sands.
late of Hemming Hall in the County of Norfolk hold up thy Hand, which done he
Read the Indictment, the Effect whereof was, That the 26th. day of September,
in the 11th: year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, and before and after, he did
Traitorously compact and imagine to deprive and destroy and to put to Death,
our Sovereign Lady the Queen; and to raise Rebellion, to subvert the
Commonwealth, and so stir up Forraigners to invade the Realm: And to raise War
against the Queen: For that he knew that Mary late Queen of Scotts to have
claimed the Crown of this Realm, and to have named her self Queen, and to have
born the Arms of the Queen without difference: He did the 24th day of
September, in the said 11th year without the consent of our said Queen, send
diverse Letters and Tokens to the said Scottish Queen, and lent her diverse
great sums of Money, and Received tokens of her, contrary to the Commandment
of the Queen, and contrary to his own submission and promise under his Hand and
Seal: And that he knowing the late Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland,
Norton, Markinfield Traitors.
and others, had levied War against the Queen; and had assembled unto them the
Number of four Thousand Persons; and that they the 12th day of December, in the
12th. year of her Majesty's Reign, fled into Scotland, and there were Received
by the Duke of Castiles Harolte, and the Lord Hume and others; and after being
pursued by the Earl of Sussex the sixth day of August, Earl of Sussex.
in the said 11th year, and before and after did send Money to them: And that he
being Adherent to Pius the Pope, Enemy to the Queen, the 10th. day of March,
in the 13th. year of the Reign of the Queen, did consent Radolph Pope King
Phillip. Duke of Alva. Queen of Scots, Three Letters.
and consult with Robert Radolphe Merchant Stranger and the Popes Factor to
have Money from the Pope, King Philip and the Duke of Alva, and that they
should send an Army to invade the Realm, and to deliver the Scottish Queen: And
further whereas the said Robert had written in the Name of the said Duke three
Letters. viz. One to the Pope, another to King Philip, and another to the Duke
of Alva: And the said Duke sent his Servant to the Ambassador of King Philip,
affirming that the same three Letters were by him allowed; and that they should
he taken as sent from him; which matter was so agreed to by the said Robert
Radolph, who delivered to the Duke of Norfolk Ciphers; whereof he carried one
Copy to Rome, whereby each might Certify others, likewise he inquired of the
said Duke what time the aid shall arise that shall be provided: And further,
the said Duke did Receive Letters from the Pope the 18th. day of April, in the
13th. year of the Queens Reign with Promise of the same aid; and that he did
also send Comfort and aid unto the Lord Harris and other the Queens Enemies.
Lord Harris.


Which Indictment being Read, Mr. Sands said to the Duke, how say Sands.
thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou Guilty of these Treasons or not Guilty?
Then said the Duke, the hearing of this Indictment gives me Duke.
occasion to make suite for a thing I meant not to have done, which is to have
Council assigned to me if the Law do permit: Then said Catlin, Catlin.
the Lord Chief Justice, you must have no Council: The Duke Answered, I Duke.
was told the Indictment was only touching matters contained in the 25th. of
Edward the Third; I have had very short warning, not past 14 hours, night and
all; and there be very many Circumstances of Treason, in which I must submit my
self to the Opinion of the Judges; I could not have Books, I must fight without
a Weapon: I have read of a Case of Humphry Humphry Stafford.
Stafford in the first of Henry the 7th. who in Case of Treason, had Council
Assigned unto him: Then said the Lord Dyer, the Case you speak of Henry 7th.
Lord Dyer.
was touching the pleading of a Sanctuary, whether he might Claim the Sanctuary
there by Prescription, but upon the point of Treason, he was put to Answer
without Council: Then said the Duke, I must submit Duke.
my self as you shall adjudge; I must plead for my Life, Goods, Lands and
Children, and for that I esteem most my Honesty, and to let Honor pass, my
blood will ask Vengeance, if I be Condemned unjustly; yet one suite I have to
the Judges, to tell me whether the Indictment be perfect in all or in part, and
to which Part I may Answer unto: Then said Catlin, the Causes being true, the
Indictment is sufficient: Then said the Duke, I would know if they be all
Treasons, for I have heard of a Case Catlin.
in Henry the Fourth, of the Lord Scroop: Then said Mr. Sands to the Duke.
Duke, how say thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk; art thou Guilty of these Sands.
Treasons or not Guilty? The Duke Answered, not Guilty: how will thou be Duke.
Sands. Duke.
Tried? by God and by my Peers; I am abashed said the Duke by these Treasons,
but yet comforted again by the graciousness of the Queen, in granting me my
Trial which the Laws do admit me, and it is as much as I can require; but yet
this suit I shall make to you my Lords Grace, that I may have Justice, and not
be over-laid; my Memory is evil of it self, and worse by evil usage since my
Imprisonment, I pray God I may forget it. And touching you my Peers, I account
my self happy that I shall be tried by you, into whose hands I dare put my
life, nay into the single hands of a great many of you. I know that you have
Religion, and will not burden your Consciences contrary to Law and Right; for
trusting to my Innocence, I would never take needless or cowardly flight; I
have that is wished for, and crave that with favor and Justice; yet I must
confess I have neglected my Duty in matters under Treason; and yet no part of
Treason: I desire that in these things my Offenses be not mixed with Treason.
Then said Mr. Barnham, the Queens Sergeant at Law, This Indictment Barnham.
contains three several matters of Treason: The first is the Deprivation of the
Queens Majesty: The second is the Relief of Rebels: The third is the Relief of
the Scots the Queens Enemies. To prove the first, there be two matters of one
fact declared in the said Indictment: First, that knowing the Scottish Queen to
have Claimed the Crown, he has attempted Marriage with her: Secondly, the
Conspiracy to procure Foreign Forces to invade the Realm, does prove him Guilty
of these Treasons. The Duke, interrupting him, said, Mr. Sergeant you begin as
though you would, in laying the Marriage and other things, which are not
Treason, Duke.
to my Charge, and exasperate the matters which be not Treason; you may do your
Duty, yet conscionably: and then, somewhat smiling, he said, I had almost
forgotten, a man suspected is half condemned. I have been charged with an Oath,
I protest I took the Oath but to part, and that I shall prove; I pray you lay
it not to my Discredit. Then said Sergeant Barnham, He that will marry one that
Claims the Crown, means to Barnham.
aspire to the same. This matter begun at the same time, as the Duke was one of
the Commissioners, for the hearing of the Cause betwixt the late Scottish
Queen, and the Lords of Scotland; at which time the Duke took an Oath to deal
directly therein, and to weigh uprightly both the occasions and answers;
wherein, notwitstanding, he dealt indirectly, and partially, thereby committing
Perjury, and disclosing the Queens Secrets, if he will deny it, then we will
prove it. Then said the Duke, The Case has diverse parts clean out of the
Compass of Treason. Then said Mr. Barnham, I require Duke. Barnham. Duke.
knowledge, if he knew the Claiming of the Crown? The Duke did here digress,
and answered not directly: Wherefore the Lord Steward said, Lord Steward.
Your Lordship must answer directly. And after upon the urging of Barnham, and
the Queens Attorney, The Duke confessed the Claim, but not the Continuance:
Then Barnham showed the continuance by her Refusal Barnham.
hitherto to acknowledge the Queens Majesty to be Lawful Queen, and that she
has not yet Renounced her Claim; and yet you have so far dealt with her as
being the Queens Commissioner to hear the matters, you opened to her the
occasions, you gave her instructions how she might deal, that the matters might
not come to light; and you conferred with the Bishop of Rosse about the same,
for proof whereof was showed the Examination of Rosse, taken the Sixth day of
November, 1571, declaring that the Duke uttered Bishop of Rosse,
unto him all that he understood of the matter, and promised what help he
could; but he spoke nothing of the Marriage, but referred all to Liddington,
who caused the Duke to stay the Conference, and showed her good will; And how
he was sent to accompany the Earl of Murrey, and to convey the Scottish Queens
Letters away, and to counterfeit others; and this was proved by a Letter of the
Bishop of Rosses to the Scottish Queen, where he showed, that the Duke did
Advertise him, that he went about to discredit the Scottish Queen, with the
people of England; that he might be the less able to attempt any thing against
the Queen of England.

To this matter the Duke answered at large, That Liddington only moved the
Marriage unto him, which he at that time refused, and that he Duke.
told the Bishop of Rosse, that he could not deal to take up the matter, and
therefore to what end should he utter any thing to him, he only showed it would
only turn to his dishonor; and that he should never be able to win it out: And
then he prayed that Rosse might be brought presently before him.

Then was showed a Letter of the Bishop of Rosses, wherein it was contained,
that whereas it was appointed, that the Earl of Murrey should have been
murdered in the North, going from Hampton Court to Scotland: Now because the
Duke had communed with the Earl of Murrey at Hampton Court, touching the same
matter; and had his Assent thereunto, the murder should be stayed: There was
also a Letter of the Dukes showed, moving the marriage at that time, and that
it should be for the benefit of the whole Island: And yet the Duke, when the
Rumor was spread that he went about to marry the Scottish Queen as one seeming
to be much offended therewith, came to the Queen and showed her thereof, and
found much fault with the said Rumor: and said he misliked her for her former
Life, And that the whole Revenue of the Crown of Scotland (the Charges
Deducted) was not so good as his living in England; and that he thought himself
as good a Prince in his bowling Alley at Norwich, as if he were King of
Scotland.

All this was affirmed by Mr. Barnham, That he heard the Queens Majesty her
self speak it, and by the Dukes Examination, taken the Sixth Affirmations of
Barnham.
day of November, 1571. It is evident.

Also he said it was further showed, that at Tichfield he had special
Commandment not to proceed in that Marriage any further; and that contrary to
that Commandment he had proceeded; and yet the Duke himself had conceived an
evil Opinion of her; and had declared unto Banister, that Banister.
he thought verily the Scottish Queen was privy to the murder of her Husband:
All these things were affirmed by Barnham, to prove that the proceeding in this
Marriage, could be for no other cause, but to Aspire to the Crown.

Then said the Duke, This Year is very far fetched to prove the deprivation
Duke.
of the Queen, and the destruction of her Person.

Then said Mr. Barnham, to come somewhat near, it is not unknown, that you have
gone about to procure it by force, and to have conspired to Barnham.
take the Tower; this being true, you must needs go about the destruction of
the Queens person: For the Jealousy of a Kingdom is such, as will not suffer
them to live, that would hinder the same: And at the same time the Duke
departed into Norfolk to levy a Force.

Also there was Read a Letter written by the Duke to the Scottish Queen, that
proved the Negotiating the said marriage.

And there was as also Read many ill Letters of the Scottish Queens sent to
Bothwell, whereby it could not be that he pretended the Marriage for love of
the Queen of Scots, but for the Crown of England.

As touching the taking of the Tower; the Duke said, that Owen Hopton Duke.
Owen Hopton Servant to a Noble man of the Realm. Earl of Penbrook.
came to him, and advised him to take the Tower, which he disliked.

Then said Barnham, why did you then afterward Consult with the Earl of
Penbrook, touching the same matter? Who discomforted you therein?

Then said the Duke, what do you gather thereof?

Barnham said, they use not to Cut Vines while they be green, that would have
Duke.
them grow again. Barnham.


There was also showed further, That whereas the Queens Majesty desired to have
the Scottish Queen, and certain Castles in her Possession, and the Rebels
delivered unto her: The Duke gave advise to the Scottish Queen to the contrary,
and against the Queen of England.

Also he was charged, That he went about to procure the Scottish Queen to be
stolen away, and that after his Submission, wherein he promised under his Hand
and Seal, never to deal in that matter of the Marriage again.

There was also showed a Provision, which he showed to one Robert Hickford,
Hickford.
which was proved by the Examination of Hickford, to whom he showed the same,
terming it a foolish Gawd.

Then said the Duke, you may perceive I did not esteem of it, when I Duke.
termed it a foolish Gawd.

Then was brought forth one Candish, who was Sworn in this manner. The Evidence
that you shall give to the Peers and Nobles here assembled, Candish his
Evidence.
shall be the Troth, and the whole Troth, so help you God, and the Holy
Contents of this Book.

The effect of his Evidence was, That being at South-Hampton with the Duke, and
walking in his Chamber, he gave advise to the Duke to travel for the Queens
good will in the Marriage of the Scottish Queen.

And the Duke answered He would have her, or else it should cost him his Duke.
Life.

And at another time the Lord Lomley being at Haywards place, and talking with
the Duke. Lord Lomley.


Then the Duke turned unto Candish, and asking him, saying, Can Duke.
thou accuse me of any thing, I defy thee to thy Teeth.

And he answered, That he would accuse him of nothing except it were about the
Marriage. And also the said Candish said. That the Duke at Candish.
Kemminghall when he went from the Charter House Churchyard, did say to the
said Candish, there was nothing to undo them, but the rising of the Northern
Lords, if they should then arise; and that the Duke did farther ask him if the
Queen were dead, and whether by means thereof he might procure his Uncle
Candish to be on his side.

These matters the Duke utterly denied, and declared of how small Credit the
said Candish was, and how he gave him money; and that he was of Duke.
no Estimation.

It was further showed how the Duke sent one Haber to the Earls, willing
Candish.
them not to rise, for if they did they were all undone.

There was also showed a Letter of the Scottish Queens writing to the Duke in
Ciphers, which was Read and Decyphered, which declared her sorrow upon a
Rumor, that the Earl of Northumberland was taken long before the rising. Earl
of Northumberland.


To all these matters the Duke answered, That it was unlikely that he should
thus proceed, if it were true that he were charged with the compassing Duke.
and imagining the Queens deprivation, and that the chiefest Evidence against
him was Rosse, who by Bracton ought not to be received as a Witness, nor to be
credited, and therefore no Evidence to prove any over-fact. Also he further
said, that Haber never came to the Earls of any such Message, and that he never
offered to fly, which he might have done, if he had thought himself Guilty. He
said also he never esteemed so of those two Earls, that he would trust them
with his Life; if they can prove any such thing, he would yield himself Guilty.

Then said Mr. Jarrat, the Queens Attorney General, you have heard the Attempt
of the Marriage, well and sufficiently proved. For the Jarrat.
first over-fact, wherein is proved the compassing of the deprivation of the
Queens Highness.

The Second over-fact is the dealing with the Pope, King Philip, and the Duke
of Alva, for the bringing in of a Power to land within this Realm, Pope, King
Philip, Duke of Alva.
which God has revealed wonderfully according to the saying nihil est tam
occultum quod non revelatur, when it was first opened, it came by six hundred
pounds Delivered and Sealed in a Bag to one of Shrewsbury, only for Fifty,
Pounds, who could not be in quiet until it was opened to some of the Council
that then by occasion were here in London.

The Queen and the Council understanding of the whole matter, and after by
occasion of Letters directed to 40. and 30.

But now it appears that by 40 the Duke is meant, and by 30 another noble man.

The Dukes Secretary dealing with Ranolph found the Ciphers hidden in the Tiles
of the House; and found it out by chance. Also a Letter Decyphered Dukes
Secretary.
by Hickford commanded by the Duke to to be burnt was found out under the Mat
going to the Dukes Chamber.

These Matters are to be proved by the Examination of those that are neither
indicted nor convicted of Treason.

The Duke hereunto made a large Answer: The effect was,

That it was a Course intended by others, which he wholly misliked; Duke.
and that they should be guilty of their own Treasons, and not to lay it on his
Shoulders, to ease themselves.

Then said Mr. Jarrat, you had Conference your self with Ranolph for Jarrat.
the bringing in of 10000 Men out of Flanders, to be landed at Harwich; whereof
3000 should be Horsemen of proof.

For proof whereof was read the Examination of Baker to the ninth Interrogative.

It was further showed, that Ranolph and he conferred about several Letters
touching the same matters.

The Letters were, one to King Phillip, and the other to the Duke of Alva.

And that Ranolph should send those Men, and return himself within six Weeks,
that the Duke, before the end of the Parliament, might confer with his Friends.

But when these Letters were made, the Duke would not subscribe unto them: and
then it was devised by Rosse, that the Duke should send Baker to the Spanish
Ambassador, to show him that the Duke was contented with those Letters, and
that they should pass as his, and that he did allow them as his own, and that
the Spanish Ambassador should certify him thereof.

Then said the Duke, My Memory is too weak to answer these many numbers of
matters: you of the Queen's Council have Notes of all things, Duke.
and I at a sudden must answer you all.

First, It is very unlikely I should deal with the Pope; I had rather be torn
with wild Horses than change my Faith.

The unlikeliness of Harwich may be sufficient matter to answer all. It is
known very well how hard it is for a Power to travel in that Country, which is
all Lanes, Ditches and Hedges. If I had gone about any such matter, I would
have made provision for Armor: I have not bestowed above ten pound in Armor
this ten years, except it were eight Corslets of proof; I have not two Barrels
of Gunpowder. All these things I would have provided if I had meant any such
things. Also, I would never have sent Baker of any such Message; but rather
Banister, who I trusted better than twenty Bakers.

There was then showed forth a Letter of the Bishop of Rosses to the Scottish A
Letter of the Bishop of Rosses.
Queen, which he writ since his Imprisonment: which opened the whole matter of
the former Discourse.

Then the Duke desired to see the Letter, for he doubted whether it was Duke.
his Hand.

To whom the Lord Steward spoke, and said; you need not doubt but Lord Steward.
that it is the Hand of Rosse.

There was also read a Letter of the Duke's to Bonells, written with Red A
Letter written in Red Oker.
Oker since the Duke came into the Tower; willing him to bury the Bag of
Letters which Barker had laid in a certain place, and to lay it on Rosse, whom
the Law could not touch, because he was an Ambassador.

The Duke answered, I received a Letter that I had accused diverse, and Duke.
that Letter was Answer to the same: and when I saw such searching, I gave
advice in that matter, for the avoiding of further trouble.

There was also another Letter of the Duke's, that he could be charged A Letter.
no further than consenting to that: therefore, if he loved his Life, he should
take heed whom he accused.

Mr. Bromley, the Queen's Solicitor General, showed Letters of Radolphe,
Bromley.
sent by Rosses Servant to Charles Bayliffe: by the which it appeared how the
Duke of Alva liked the matter, and how he enquired how far Harwich was from
London.

Also he showed the Pope's Letters, dated the fourth day of May, containing
Answer of the Letters sent by the Duke.

And he further opened, how the whole Course of Conspiracy was opened in
Antwerp to an Ambassador of a Foreign Prince, who thereof certified his Lord;
and that Foreign Prince brought the whole Discourse to the Queen's Majesty:
which, because it touched others as well as the Duke, it should be opened to
the Peers, when they were assembled together by those that were of the Queen's
Council.

Then Mr. Wilbrome made an excellent Discourse for the Credit of the
Depositions of Rosse, and other the Servants of the Duke. Wilbrome.


To which the Duke answered, That he could hardly come after so smooth a Tale
as the Attorney of the Court of Wards could tell. But yet, said he, Duke.
in all his Tale he touched nothing what Fear could do. And further cited
Bracton for the disproof of those Witnesses.

Catlin the Lord Chief Justice answered, that in such Cases and matters Catlin.
of Treason, the Depositions of Strangers might be taken; and it lay in the
Peers to credit the same.

Then they proceeded to the second Point of Treason contained in the
Indictment. Which was, to prove the Aid of the Rebels after they fled. Which
was proved by Order given by the Duke to distribute amongst them his great
Reward; whereof the Earl of Northumberland had part, and the Countess of
Northumberland and the residue had other parts.

Then was showed a Letter of the Countess of Northumberland of thanks A Letter.
for the same.

Then the Third Point of Treason was the Aiding of the Scottish Rebels, the
Queen's Enemies. Which was proved by a Letter written by the Duke to Banister;
and also, by the Examination of Banister, and the Delivery Banister.
of the Money to Brown of Shrewsbury, and the Earls Letter with the same.
Brown.


To which the Duke required the Opinion of the Judges, whether the Subjects of
another Prince, that Prince being in League with the Queen, may Duke.
be accounted the Queen's Enemies.

The Lord Catlin answered, that they might well enough; as the Queen Catlin.
may War with any Duke in France, and have Peace with the King.

Then said the Lord Steward to the Duke, Have you any thing else to Lord
Steward.
say.

Then said the Duke, I trust to Law and Right. Duke.


Then said the Lord Steward; Lieutenant of the Tower, withdraw your Prisoner
from us a while. Lord Steward. Lieutenant.


Then was O yes made, and Silence proclaimed, and the Lord Steward said: O yes.


You, my Lords here have heard, how that Thomas Duke of Norfolk has been Lord
Steward.
indicted of diverse Points of High Treason, and he has hereunto pleaded Not
Guilty, and did put himself upon the Trial of God and You his Peers. You are
now therefore to consider of his whole Indictment which you have heard, whether
he be Guilty, or not Guilty, and thereon say your minds upon your Honors and
Consciences. And so he willed them to depart together, and return so soon as
they could; and so they departed to a place for that purpose, where the
Chancery is kept, and there they conferred in the sight of all that were in the
Hall, and when they returned to sit in their places, the Earl of Shrewsbury
commanded the Duke to be had further out of hearing. Earl of Shrewsbury.


Then he asked the youngest Lord; how say you, my Lord De Laware, is Thomas
Duke of Norfolk Guilty of these Treasons that he has been Indicted of, yea, or
no, and he standing up in his place, answered Guilty; and the like question was
asked of all the Lords severally one after another, and every one answered
Guilty.

Then was the Lieutenant willed to bring his Prisoner to the Bar again,
Lieutenant.
who being put in his place,

The Lord Steward said: Thou, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, have been Indicted Lord
Steward.
of several points of High Treason, and have pleaded thereunto not Guilty, and
have put thy self upon Trial of God, and thy Peers, who have all found thee
Guilty; what can thou say, why Judgment should not be given accordingly.

The Duke answered, the Lords will be done; God be Judge between Duke.
me and my false accusers.

There was made a pawse a good while, and forthwith the edge of the Ax of the
Tower was turned toward him.

Then said Mr. Barnham to the Lord Steward, may it please your Grace to
understand how Thomas Duke of Norfolk has been Indicted of several Barnham.
Treasons, and has pleaded not Guilty, and did put himself upon Trial of the
Peers who have found him Guilty; I am therefore in the behalf of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen to pray Judgment.

Then said the Lord Steward, whereas thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk Lo. Steward.
have been Indicted of several Treosons, and have pleaded thereunto not Guilty;
and did put thy self upon Trial of thy Peers who have found thee Guilty.

Therefore the Court does award, That thou shall be had from hence to the
Tower, and from thence to be laid upon a Hurdle; and drawn through the midst of
the City to Tyburn and there be Hanged until thou be half dead, and then thy
bowels to be taken out and burned before thy Face, thy Head to be cut off, and
thy Body to be quartered, and thy Head and Quarters to be at Queens Majesty's
pleasure, and the Lord have have mercy on thy Soul.

Then said the Duke, You have said to me as unto a Traitor; but I Duke
trust to God and to the Queen; and forasmuch as I am excluded your company, I
trust to be where I shall find better company, I am at the point, I will never
sue for mercy: Yet one suit I have to you, my Lords, that it will please you to
move the Queens Majesty to be good to my poor Children and to my Servants, and
to pay my Debts.

Then the Lieutenant was commanded to have him away, and Proclaamation
Lieutenant.
was made that every man should depart in Gods Name, and the Peace of the
Queens Majesty: And then the Lord Steward brake his Rod, and so all ended,
1571. Lord Steward.


The Confession and End of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, beheaded at the Tower Hill
the Second Day of June, Anno Dom. 1572, as follows, etc.
IT is not rare, good People, to see a man come to die; although, thanks be to
God, since the beginning of the Queens Majesty's Reign, in this Duke.
place has not been any. But since it is my Fortune to be the first, I pray
God I may be the last: Such has been, and is the mercifulness of her Majesty,
whom God long preserve. You know I have been long looked for in this present
case of mine, diverse times in this place; but by her Majesty's Clemency
prolonged hitherto: It is not common to see a man of my Vocation to be a
Speaker: Nevertheless I will be brief, and gladly show you the Estate of those
offenses which my Conscience does burden me for: I have been found by my Peers
worthy of Death, whereof I do acquit them; for I come not hither to Justify my
self, neither yet to charge my Peers with Injustice; but rather submit my self
to this which God has prepared for me: And thus considering the weakness of my
Flesh and Blood, that at such time a man's senses will partly fail, I do mind to
divide my Speeches into three parts, desiring you to take it full and whole,
and not to tear it in pieces.

And first in dealing in matters temporal toward the Queen of Scots, I dealt
not as a good Subject, for that I made not the Queens Majesty Duke.
privy thereunto, which indeed I confess I ought not so to have done; for this
offense I was committed to this house [pointing to the Tower,] and upon my
humble submission delivered; then making promise to the Queens Majesty, (whom I
pray God long to prosper) never to deal in those matters again: But contrary to
my submission and Promise made to the Queens Majesty, abusing her Clemency
toward me; which has and does grieve me more than any one thing has done; I
dealt in this matter again, perfectly for saving my Life, and other Causes
which I could allege.

Here Mr. Sheriff Branch, standing by the Duke desired him very courteoussy to
make an end as short as might be, for the time did spend. Sheriff Branch.


Then the Duke beginning again said, it has been bruited, that I took my Oath
and received the Sacrament, that I should never deal in those matters again;
which is untrue, and yet the Oath too much.

Now Mr. Christopher one of the Officers hearing these words, desired the Duke
to be short: We are come hither said he, to see you put to Execution,
Christopher.
and we must not delay while these Speeches pass from you, for in this we
hazard our Lives.

Then the Duke said, I do not excuse my self; but I come to discharge my
Conscience and to acquit my Peers, and not to complain of any injustice, for I
have deserved this, and more a great deal; in that I have abused the Queens
Majesty's mercy toward me; whom once again with Hands lifted up, I pray God
long to Preserve and Reign over you, and that my death may be an end of all
troubles; and to Augment my fault, it is said I had familiarity with evil
dealers: Indeed I will confess and tell you that I never saw, nor never had
Conference, but once with one Radolph, and yet never against the Queens
Majesty, God is my Judge; although many lewd offers and motions were made to
me: For it is well known I had to do with him, by reason I was bound to him by
Recognisance for a great sum of Money, and for two Letters that came from the
Pope. I confess I did see them, the one Cyphered, the other Descyphered, I
never consented to them; neither was I consenting to the late Rebellion in the
North, notwithstanding I come not hither as unguilty.

To the second part, I know I have not only been thought to be a Papist, a
Duke.
favourer of Papists and a maintainer of them, God is my judge before whom I
stand (lifting up his Eyes) I thank God I was never a Papist since I knew what
Religion meant, but I did always detest Papistry, and all the vain Toys
thereof, embracing ever from the bottom of my Heart the true Religion of Jesus
Christ, trusting by the assurance of my Faith in his blood, that is my only
Redeemer and Savior: Indeed I must confess that I had Servants and Friends
that were Papists; But if thereby I have offended Gods Church, or any
Protestant, I desire God and them to forgive me.

Well now to the Third point wherein I am to show how much I am bound to the
Queens Majesty for her mercifulness toward me, in that her Majesty has
promised to be good and gracious to my poor Children. I remember good Father
Latimer making a Sermon in a more honorable place than this is, out of the
Pulpit, (neither do I compare my self to him) He said, That God did often times
take away a good and gracious Prince, for the sins and disobedience of his
Subjects, which God grant not to be in these days; but that it will please God
to continue and increase her Majesty's Years; yea, until the Worlds end, if it
be his blessed will and pleasure: You have a most gracious Queen as I must
needs confess, and also Godly Religion, therefore look that your Livings and
Conversations be answerable to the Religion of Christ, that proves you: That
God may prosper the Prince, overthrow the Pope, and maintain your Wealth and
Quietness. Let not my Person, good People, make my Speech worse; they that have
Factions (I speak not particularly but generally) let them beware they be given
over betimes; seek not to breviate Gods doings, lest God prevent yours.

And then the Sheriff hastening him, he turned to the People, and embracing Sir
Henry Lee, said, I have, and always have had as true a Heart to my Prince
Sheriff. Sir Henry Lee. Duke.
as ever any Subject has had. And so Sir Henry Lee staying him by the left
Arm, he kneeled down and asked the Queens Majesty forgiveness, and rising
again, he embraced Mr. Dean of Paul's with a cheerful Countenance, and
afterward for the most part shaking those that were on the Scaffold by Mr.
Dean of Paul's.
the hands, and desiring them to pray for him; amongst the rest, the
Executioner Executioner.
did on his knees desire forgiveness of his Death, who did very Courteously
forgive him; and put into the hand of the Executioner four Sovereigns of Gold
and Eighteen Shillings Six pence of Silver: This done the Duke kneeling Money.
down, and the Dean of Paul's with him, he made his Prayers to God, and reading
the 51 Psalm, saying on the last Verse saving one, which does say, and build up
the Walls of Jerusalem, he pawsed and said, the Walls of England, good Lord:
That Psalm finished, he began to read another, and at the Seventh Verse of the
Psalm; he pawsed and said, I had almost forgotten, but not too late, I ask all
the World forgiveness, and I forgive all the World: The Psalm and these words
finished, and other Prayers, he wrote one Prayer Counted in effect a Petition
to God, that his Faith now at his last hour might not fail, and finishing the
Prayer in these words, in Latin and English, saying: In manus tuus Domine
commendo Spiritum meum, Lord into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. He rose up and
pulled of his Velvet Gown, his Black Satin Doublet, and his Velvet Nightcap,
and gave them to His Apparel given to the Executioner.
the Executioner, and being in a White Fustian Wastcoat, he said to Mr. Dean of
Paul's, this is the White Satin Doublet I made to die in, which the Preacher
did speak of, and so kneeling down at the Block, he laid down himself, and did
rise again, and did lay the Straw and other things in such sort, Block.
as he might in a more convenient manner yield himself for the speedier
Execution; this done, his Eyes and Hands lifted up, Mr Dean desired the People
of silence, and said, Now all together with one voice, pray for him, saying,
Mr. Dean.
Lord Jesus receive thy Soul: The Duke yielding himself to the Block, refusing
to have any Hankerchief before his Eyes, his Head was by the singular dexterity
of the Executioner, with the appointed Ax at one Chop cut off, and showed to
all the People. Head cut off.


Thus he finished his Life, and afterward his Corpse were put into a Coffin
appertaining to Barking Church, with the Head also, and the Burial-Cloath laid
over him, and so was carried by four of the Lieutenants men, and was buried in
the Chapel of the Tower, by Mr. Dean of Paul's, 1572.

THE EXAMINATION OF MARY Queen of SCOTS, LYING AT Fotheringhay-Castle, BY THE
LORDS OF Her MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, AND OTHER COMMISSIONERS
Appointed for that purpose, for the Hearing of the same, Anno Dom. 1586, VIZ.
UPon Wednesday the twelfth of October, 1586. the Lords Commissioners for the
hearing of the Scottish Queen came to the Castle of Fotheringhay, in the County
of Northampton, about nine of the Clock in the Morning: at which time, in the
Chapel of the said Castle, the Dean of Peterborough preached before them. And
from thence they sent Sir Walter Mildmay and Sir Amias Pawlet, Governor of the
House, to the Scottish Queen, to know whether she would appear.

There was delivered unto her a Letter from Her Majesty to that effect. After
which Summons, she refused to appear; and so stood all that day, tho often
required thereunto by some of the Commissioners sent unto her.

Upon Thursday they went unto her, into her Lodging, the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Treasurer, the Earls or Oxford, Shrewsbury, Kent and Worcester, Viscount
Mountague, Lord Zouch, Gray and Lomley, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir James Acrofter,
Mr. Vice Chancellor, Sir Amias, Pawlet the two Chief Justices of England,
Doctor Dale and Doctor Ford, with Barker and Wheeler Notaries, who remained
with her almost two hours; signifying, that if she would not come forth before
the Commissioners, they would proceed against her according to their
Commission. But that whole day was spent in Council, and sending in unto her.

Upon Friday in the Morning she resolved to appear: And so, about nine of the
Clock came forth into the Presence Chamber prepared and hanged with Cloth (...)
^tate in the upper part; and down along both sides stood Forms covered with
Green for the Lords: first, Earls on the right side, and Barons on the left:
Somewhat below the midst of the Chamber was a Bar; within which Bar there was
set a Form for the Knights of the Privy Council, and before their Forms, a
Chair, with a Cushion and a Foot-carpet, for the Queen of Scots, directly
against the State. In the middle of the Chamber was a Table, whereat sat the
Queens Attorney and Solicitor, the Queens Sergeants, the Clerks of the Crown,
and the Notaries. Directly above that Table in the middle of the Chamber were
Forms set, whereon sat on the right side, the Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, the Lord Chief Baron, Doctor Dale and Doctor Ford: Over against them sat
the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Justice Clench, and Justice
Perrain: Below the Bar, such Gentlemen as came to see the Action.

The right side of the Lords. The left side of the Lords. 1. The Lord
Chancellor. 14. The Lord of Aburgevenny. 2. The Lord Treasurer. 15. The Lord
Zouch. 3. The Earl of Oxford. 16. The Lord Morley. 4. The Earl of Kent. 17. The
Lord Stafford. 5. The Earl of Darby. 18. The Lord Gray. 6. The Earl of
Shrewsbury. 19. The Lord Lomley. 7. The Earl of Worcester. 20. The Lord
Sturton. 8. The Earl of Rutland. 21. The Lord Sands. 9. The Earl of Comberland.
22. The Lord Wentworth. 10. The Earl of Warwick. 23. The Lord Mordaunt. 11. The
Earl of Lincoln. 24. The Lord St. John of Bletsoe. 12. The Earl of Penbrook.
25. The Lord Compton. 13. The Viscount Mountacue. 26. The Lord Cheyney.
Knights. Knights. 27. Sir Walter Mildmay. 29. Sir Francis Walsingham. 28. Sir
Ralph Sadler. 30. Sir Christopher Hatton. 31. Sir James Acrofte.

The Lords being thus sat, and all things ready, the Queen was brought First
day Lords sit Queen of Scots.
in, having a way, or Lane made from her Lodging Door, which was in the lower
Corner of the Chamber with Halberts.

She was in a black Gown covered over with a white Vail of Lawn; a very Her
attire.
tall and big woman, being lame, and supported by Melvin her Gentleman,
Supperted.
and her Physician, one of her Women carried up her Train, and three other
attended on her; one of her Servants brought her a Chair and a Cushion covered
with crimson Velvet, a little before her coming in, her Chair.
Chair was removed from the bottom of the Chamber to the upper part below the
State, and set as it were corner-wise toward the Lords and Barons.

Then silence being made, the Lord Chancellor stood up, and being uncovered,
he spoke to this effect. Silence, Lord Chancellor named, Sir Tho. Bromeley.


Madam, the Queen being strongly informed of sundry practices by you made
against her has caused this meeting, as has been signified unto you, you have
read the Queens Letters certifying the same, and I must say thus much unto you
from her Majesty's Mouth, that having born so many things at your hands, she
cannot forbear any longer to proceed against you; not for the peril may fall
upon her self, for God she trusts who has ever defended her, will still
deliver her from them.

But there depends more upon it, she sees that you are made a foundation of
all practices against her; and if she should forget it, she should neglect the
cause of God, and bear the Sword in vain; It is not Malice, Madam, nor regard
of her Person, that causes her to do it.

And albeit she might otherways proceed against you, yet she has dealt thus,
in honor toward you, that you should be heard and speak for your self.

The Queen answered to this effect, by way of Protestation, that Queen of Scots.
she was a free Prince and born a Queen, not Subject to any, but to God, to
whom she must give account, and therefore that her appearing should not be
either prejudicial, to Kings, or Princes, nor Allies nor her Son, and thereupon
desired an Act to be made, that is, to have such her Protest Registered by
Public Notaries, and required her own Servants to bear her witness of it.

The Lord Chancellor again protested against that Protestation, Lord
Chancellor.
That it should in no wise be prejudicial to the Queens Majesty, nor to the
Crown of England, and that they all on the behalf of her Majesty required the
same to be likewise enacted or Registered.

Then Mr. Powel Clerk of the Crown, read the Commission grounded Mr. Powel.
upon the Statute 27 Eliz.

The Commission being read, the Queen said, I protest that this Law is
insufficient, and therefore I cannot submit my self unto it. Then the Lord
Treasurer avouched and justified the Law to be sufficient to Lord Treasurer,
named Sir William Cecil. Queen of Scots.
proceed against her; To whom she replied, that the Law was not made against
her.

The Lord Treasurer said, we have Commission to proceed; and if Lo. Treasurer.
you will not hear, we will proceed against you herein.

Then she said, I will both hear and Answer. Qu. of Scots.


Then arose Sergeant Gaudy, and declared the Statute; and then inferred that
the Queen of Scots, there present had offended against both Sergeant Gaudy.
the Branches thereof, viz.

That she had been both privy to the Conspiracy of killing the Queens Majesty;
and also had her self practiced to compass the same; and so ripped up the whole
Complot from Ballard's first coming into this Ballard a Traitor.

Qu. of Scots.

Mr. Puckering. Babington a Traitor.

Qu. of Scots.


Realm.

When the Sergeant said, the Queen present was both a mover and a compasser,
she bowed her Body, and smiled.

Then Sergeant Puckering pursued the rest of Babington's Letters to her, and
her answer again.

The Queen answered, She never had seen Babington, nor ever had Speech with
him, nor ever received Letters from him, and that she could stop no man to go
beyond the Seas: But let any man (said she) in England, come and say, that I
ever did any thing against the Queens Life.

Then Sands the Clerk of the Crown read Babinton's Confession, and Sands,
Babington's Confession.
Sergeant Puckering opened the points.

The Queen said, That being kept from all Intelligence of her Friends Qu. of
Scots.
and of her Son, it may be she might desire Intelligence; but if any other man
has done, or practiced any thing, it is no matter to that purpose: There be
some that send me Letters, and I know them not, nor from whence they come.

The Clerk of the Crown read again Babington's Confession. Clerk of the Crown:
Qu. of Scots.

The Queen said again, I never wot of any such Letter.
Then was read the Letter of Anthony Babington.
To which she said, If Anthony Babington and all the world say it they lie; but
I would see my own Hand writing: And to Babington's Letters to her, she said, I
never saw that Letter, nor never heard of it.

The Lord Treasurer proved the receipt of Babington's Letter, and the Sergeant
showed an answer to Babington's Letter from her, in the same Lo. Treasurer
Sergeant Puckering.
Cipher, sent by a Serving man in a blew Coat; and so opened all the points of
her answer to Babington.

When mention was made of the Earl of Arundel, she wept and blubbered Qu. of
Scots.
out, saying, Woe is me that your House has suffered so much for my sake, and
after having blubbered a time, she said, if ever I made any such device against
the Queen my Sister, then I pray God I may never see his Face. I have written,
I confess, about my deliverance; as any Prince kept Captive as I am, might do;
but never against the Queen: I confess for the Catholics delivery from
Persecution, I will work, and if I could with my Blood save them from
destruction I would, and if it may be so, I pray you lay it upon me, and
therewith wept according to her guise.

The Lord Treasurer answered, saying, Madam, the Queen puts no man to Death for
his Conscience; but they might enjoy the Liberty of Lo. Treasurer.
their Conscience; if they would live as dutiful Subjects and therefore Madam
reform your opinion therein.

The Queen, said she had read it so in a Book.
The Lord Treasurer said, they that did write so, Madam, did write Qu. of
Scots. Lo. Treasurer.
that the Queen of England is no Queen.
Then she picked a quarrel against Mr. Secretary, that he had been Qu. of Scots.
her sore Enemy and her Son's, and had practiced with certain persons against
her; but said she, Mr. Walsingham, I think you are an honest man, and I pray
you say in the word of an honest man, whether you have been so unto me.

Mr. Secretary rose up and came to the end of the Table, standing Mr. Secretary
Walsingham.
in the midst before his seat saying, Madam. I stand charged by you, to have
practiced something against you: I call God and the World to Witness, I have
done nothing as a private man unworthy of an honest man, nor as a public
person unworthy of my calling, I protest before God, that as a Man careful of
my Mistresses safety, I have been curious; and if Ballard had offered me his
Service, I would have rewarded him: but if he were practiced with by me, why
did he not plead it for his Life?

Here again she wept. and protested that she would not make Ship wreck Queen of
Scots.
of her Soul in conspiring against her good Sister; and that those whom Mr.
Secretary had set over her as Spies, were Spies for her against him, and had
likewise told her things of him.

Then the Queen's Attorney proved that the Queen of Scots was privy to Queen's
Attorney.
the Conspiracy, and gave Instructions to her Secretary to write, by him
confessed upon Oath, without Constraint; some in Ciphers, and some translated,
according to her direction, into English, by Jaques Nave and Gilbert Curle.

The Queen's Solicitor proved both the Points of the Statute agreeing to
Queen's Solicitor.
the Points of the Commission.

First, That she was privy to the Conspiracy in that she received Babington's
Letters, wherein the Conspiracy was contained to kill the Queen: To which she
gave Answer, as has been deposed by her Secretaries; who, besides their Oaths
and voluntary Confession, did set down, according to their Memory, the Minutes
and Points of Babington's Letters to the Queen, and her Answer to Babington:
Wherein, especially, they remember the Points of the Conspiracy particularly
confessed also by Babington, before he was apprehended, and at large; when he
thought to have executed it, and been advanced by it. He also showed her
Letters and Answers to Ballard, Savadge and Tuchborne: and they confessed it.

Secondly, He proved that she her self did conspire and compass the Queens
Death; for, besides the approving of Babington's Plot, she adds in her own
Letters the Manner and Order of the Execution of this Designment.

The Secretaries, at the view of her Letters, do write thus; Per le express
Secretaries, Nave, Curle.
Commandment de la Royen ma Matresse, By the special Commandment of the Queen
my Mistress. Nave and Curle being asked whether it were their Hands. she
confessed that she knew it to be their Hands; and that Curle Queen of Scots
Confession.
was an honest Man, but she would not be judged by him; and that Nave was the
King's Secretary of France, and that he had been Secretary to the Cardinal of
Guyse.

But when she said she knew not Babington nor Ballard, my Lord Treasurer Lord
Treasurer.
said: Madam, I will tell you whom you know: You know Morgain, who hired Parry
to kill the Queen; and after you knew it, you gave him a Pension. Madam, you
give Pensions to Murderers.

Then she said, He has lost all for my sake; but you give Pentions in
Scotland, against me, to my Son. Queen of Scots.


The Lord Treasurer said, The Queen, because the Revenues of the Lord Treasurer.
Crown are diminished, gives the King a Benevolence, being her Kinsman.

The Second Day, at her first coming, she renewed her Protestation; Second Day,
Queen of Scots.
saying, I am A Sacred and Anointed Queen, and ought not to be judged by the
Law. I am A Free Prince, and owe no more to any Prince than they owe to me. I
come hither for the Justification of my Honor, and that which is laid to my
charge, that I should do against my Sister. Her Oration was very long, and of
many things.

I like not, said she, to take this Course; though I desire the Catholics
should be delivered out of their Persecution, I had rather play the part of
Hester than of Judith; to pray for my people, than to take any other way to
deliver my People. God forbid that I should deserve to be denied of Jesus
Christ before his Father. They gave it out that I was of no Religion; for there
was a time when I tendered my self, but they cared not for my Soul. But, my
Lords, when you have done all that you can, and put me from that I should have,
yet you shall not obtain your Cause of Mary Steward. And here she wept and
blubbered that they could not conceive her speech. I desire, said she, that
another Assembly may be called where She wept.
I may have my Council: I appeal to God first, who is the Just Judge; and She
desires another Assembly.
to Princes, my Allies.

Here my Lord Treasurer said; Madam, We have set down your Protestations under
a Notaries Hand, and we have protested that your Protestation Lord Treasurer.
be not prejudicial to the Crown of England.

The Queen said; Indeed, My Lord, you take no Commission but that Queen of
Scots.
may serve your own turn; you have done the worst you can: I have often
offered, if I might be at liberty, that I would do all duty and labor to
quench the Troubles that are made; but I could not be heard. I was made believe
that I should be at liberty, and I promised Hostages for my Security, my own
Son and my Cousin Guise his Son.

The Lord Treasurer answered, it is true the Queen was contented, and so was
the Council, you offered Hostages, as you say. But it is as true that Lord
Treasurer.
the Lords of Scotland would not consent that the King should come.

The Queen said, But I told you, that if I might be at liberty, I would Queen
of Scots.
effect it.

Madam, said the Lord Treasurer, the Queen shall set you at liberty, and you
shall seek her destruction: for all this practice of your Enlargement Lord
Treasurer.
was nothing else but a Plot against the Queen; for, even then, when it was
adoing, your Man Morgan hired Parry to kill the Queen. Morgan a Traitor hired
Parry to kill the Queen. Qu. of Scots. Ld. Treasurer. Qu. of Scots.


My Lord, quoth she, you are my Enemy.

No, said my Lord Treasurer, I am Enemy to the Queen's Enemies.

Was it not reported, said the Queen of Scots, that the Queen of England should
never be free from Practices until I were set at liberty? and I therefore
desired that the occasion might be taken away.

Then was read a Letter to Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador, wherein Mendoza.
she promised to give the King of Spain the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
if her Son would not be reclaimed from that Heresy wherein she said he was
misled.

There was also sent a Letter to Doctor Allin, wherein she calls him Dr.
Allin.
Reverend Father in God; and deals with him about the Invasion: and his
Letter to her also.

There was read her Letters to the Lord Paget, Charles Paget, and Lord Paget.
Charles Paget. Sir Francis Englefield.
Sir Francis Englefield: In every of which Letters she says, she has given
direction to the Catholics on this side for a Dispatch.

Here she being pressed with Truths of the Conspiracy, and because her own Man
had sworn it, she said, she thought he made no Conscience of an Qu. of Scots.
Oath given him.

Hereat the whole House murmured concerning the giving away the Murmuring of
the Lords.
Kingdom of England to the King of Spain: Writing to Mendoza, she advises him
thus; Let not this be known, for if it should, it would be, in France the Loss
of my Dowry, in Scotland the Breach with my Son, and in England my total
Destruction.

Here Mr. Solicitor remembered the Lords, that if a Foreign Prince had Mr.
Solicitor.
the Kingdom, as she would assign it, what should become of their Dignities and
Estates?

Madam, said my Lord Treasurer, The Succession of the Crown, whosoever has
it, cannot give it to a Foreign Prince; it must go, by the Laws Lo. Treasurer.
of the Realm, to a natural English Man born. Your Enemies in Scotland
threatened to kill you, and Her Majesty said she would then revenge it; and so
your Life was assured.

At her first rising up she talked long with the Lord Treasurer, coming to She
talks with the Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Secretary, and the
Earl of Warwick.
him to his Seat; after to Mr. Vice-chamberlain and Mr. Secretary; excusing her
self to them: and used great Insinuations to persuade them. She said to the
Earl of Warwick, that she had heard that he was an Honorable Gentleman;
desiring him not to believe all things he heard of her: and also she desired
him to commend her to my Lord of Leicester; saying, that she wished him good
Success in his Affairs. To the Judges and Lawyers she To the Judges and Lawyers.
said, I pray God bless me from you; you have sore Hands over them that be
under you. And to Mr. Phillips, Thou never read any good for me, and so Mr.
Phillips.
the Lords brake up their sitting on Saturday, October 15. 1586. at One of Lds.
break up.
the Clock in the Afternoon, and adjourned the Commission to the Star Chamber
The Court adjourned to the Star Chamber.
the 25th. of the same Month.

THE SCOTTISH QUEEN'S LETTER TO ANTHONY BABINGTON To Renew the Intelligence, as
follows: VIZ.
MY Very good Friend, albeit it be long since you Qu. of Scots Letter to
Anthony Babington.
heard from me, not more than I have done from you, it is against my Will; yet
would I not you should think I have in the mean while, nor ever will be
unmindful of the effectual affection you have showed heretofore toward all
that concerns me. I have understood, that upon the Renewing of your
Intelligence, there were addressed unto you, both from France and Scotland,
some Packets for me; I pray you, if any be come to your Hands, and be yet in
Place, to deliver them to the Bearer hereof, who will safely convey them unto
me; and I will pray to God for your Preservation.

Your Assured Good Friend, MARY REGINA.
June, the 28th. At Chartley.
ANTHONY BABINGTON (The Traytor's) LETTER Written by him to the SCOTTISH QUEEN,
As follows.
MOst Mighty, most Excellent, my Dread Sovereign Anthony Babington 's Letter to
the Scottish Queen.
Lady and Queen, unto whom I owe all Fidelity and Obedience; It may please your
Gracious Majesty to admit excuse of my long silence, and distance from those
dutiful Offices, intercepted upon the Remove of your Royal Person from the
ancient place of your Abode, to the Custody of a wicked Puritan, and mere
Lecestrain, a mortal Enemy both by Faith and Faction to Your Majesty and to the
Catholic Estate; I held the Hope of our Country's Weal depending (next under
God) upon the Life of Your Majesty, to be desperate, and thereupon resolved to
depart the Realm, determining to spend the remnant of my Life in such sollitary
sort as the miserable and wretched Estate of my Country does require; only
expecting, according to the just Judgment of God, the present Confusion
thereof; which God, for his Mercy sake, prevent. The which my purpose being in
Execution, and standing upon my Departure, there was addressed unto me, from
the Parts beyond the Seas, one Ballard, a Man of Nurture and Learning, and
Ballard a Traitor.
of singular Zeal to the Catholic Cause, and Your Majesty's Service. The Man
informed me of great Preparations by the Christian Princes, Your Majesty's
Allies, for the Deliverance of our Country from the extreme and miserable
Estate wherein for a long time it has remained. Which when I understood, my
Spiritual Desire was to advertise, by what means I might, with the hazard of my
Life, and all my Friends in general, do your Sacred Majesty one days good
Service. Whereupon, most dread Sovereign, according to the great care which
those Princes have of the preservation and safe deliverance of Your Majesty's
Sacred Person, I advised of means and considered of Circumstances accordingly,
to and with so many of the wisest and most trusty as with safety I might
commend the Secrecy thereof unto: I do find, by the Assistance of the Lord
Jesus, assurance of good Effect, and desired Fruit of your Travel. These things
are first to be advised in this great and honorable Action; upon issue of
which depends, not only the Life of Your Most Excellent Majesty, which God
long preserve, to your inestimable Comfort, and to the Salvation of English
Souls, and the Lives of all us, Actors therein; but also, the Honor and Weal
of our Country, far more dear than our Lives unto us, and the last hope ever to
recover the Faith of our Forefathers, and to redeem our selves from the
Servitude and Bondage which hereby heretofore has been imposed upon us with
the loss of many thousand Souls. First, in the assuring of Invasions,
sufficient strength on the Invaders parts to arrive are appointed, with a
strong Party at every place, to win with them, and warrant their Landing, the
Deliverance of Your Majesty, the Dispatch of the Usurping Competitors. For the
effecting of all, may it please Your Majesty to rely upon my Service, I protest
before the Almighty, who has long miraculously preserved Your Royal Person, no
doubt, to some universal Good, that what I have said shall be performed, or all
our Lives happily lost in the Execution thereof. Which Vow all the chief Actors
have taken solemnly; and are upon Assurance, by Your Majesty's to me, to
receive the Blessed Sacrament thereupon, either to prevail in the Churches
behalf and Your Majesty's, or fortunately to die for so honorable a Cause.
Now, for as much as Delays are extreme dangerous, it might please Your most
Excellent Majesty, by Your Wisdom to direct us, and by Your Princely Authority
to enable us; and such as may advance the Affairs: For, seeing there is not any
of the Nobility, at liberty, assured to Your Majesty in this desperate Service,
except unknown unto us; and seeing that it is very necessary that some there be
to become Heads to lead the Multitude, who are disposed by Nature, in this
Land, to follow Nobility: Considering withal, it does not only make the Commons
and Country to follow without Contradiction or Contention, which is ever found
in Equality; but also, does add great Courage to the Leaders. For which
necessary Regard, I would recommend some to Your Majesty as are fittest, in my
knowledge, to be Your Lieutenants, in the West Parts, in the North Parts,
South Wales and North Wales, the Countries of Lancaster, Darby and Stafford. In
all which Countries, Parties being already made, and Fidelity taken in Your
Majesty's Name, I hold them as most assured, and of undoubted Fidelity. My
self, with ten Gentlemen of Quality, will undertake the Delivery of Your Person
from the Hands of Your Enemies: And for the Dispatch of the Usurper, from
Obedience of whom, by executing her, we shall be made free, there be Six Noble
Gentlemen, all my private Friends, who, for the Zeal they bear to the Catholic
Cause, and Your Majesty's Service, will undertake the Tragical Execution. It
rests, that according to their infinite Deserts, and Your Majesty's Bounty,
their Heroical Attempts may be honorably rewarded in them, if they escape with
Life; or in their Posterity; and that so much, by Your Majesty's Authority, I
may be able to assure them. Now it remains only in Your Majesty's Wisdom that
it be reduced into Method, that Your happy Deliverance be first, for that
thereupon depends the only Good, and that the other Circumstances concur;
that the Untimely End of the one do not overthrow the rest. All which Your
Majesty,s wonderful Experience and Wisdom will dispose in so good manner, as I
doubt not, through God's Good Assistance, shall take deserved effect: for the
obtaining of which, every one of us shall think his Life most happily spent.
Upon the Twelfth Day of this Month I will be at Leitchfield, expecting Your
Majesty's Answers and Letters to execute what by them shall be commanded.

Your Majesty's Faithful Subject, and Sworn Servant, Anthony Babington.

The Answer of the Scottish Queen to a Letter written by Anthony Babington, the
Traitor, as follows:
TRusty and well-beloved! according to the zeal and entire affection The Queen
of Scots Letter to Anthony Babington the Traitor.
which I have known in you toward the Common Cause of Religion, and mine,
having always made account of you as a Principal and right Worthy member to be
employed both in the one and in the other; it has been no less Consolation
unto me to know your estate, as I have done by your last Letter, and to have
further means to renew my intelligence with you, than I have felt griefs all
this while past, to be without the same. I pray you therefore to write unto me
hereafter, so often as you can, of all Concurrants, which you may judge in any
sort importunate to the good of mine affairs, wherein I shall not fail to
correspond with all the care and diligence that shall be by possibility: For
diverse great and importunate Considerations, which were here too long to be
deducted, I cannot but greatly praise and commend your common desire to
prevent, in time, the designment of our enemies, for the extirpation of our
Religion out of this Realm, with the ruin of us all; for I have long ago showed
to the Foreign Catholic Princes, what they have done against the King of
Spain, and in the time King of Spain.
the Catholics here remaining, exposed to all persecutions and cruelty, do
daily diminish in number, forces, means, and power, so as if remedy be not
thereunto speedily provided, I fear not a little but that they shall become
altogether unable for ever to arise again to receive any aid at all whenever
it is offered. Then for my own part, I pray you assure our principal friends,
that albeit I had no particular interest in this case, that all that I may
pretend unto, being of no consideration to me in respect of the public good of
the State, I shall be always ready, and most willing to employ therein my life,
and all that I have, or may look for in this world. Now to ground substantially
this enterprise, and to bring it to good success, you must examine duly, First,
What Forces, as well on Foot as on Horse, you may raise among you all, and what
Captains you shall appoint for them in every Shire, in case a General cannot be
had. Secondly, Which Towns, Ports and Havens you may assure your selves, as
well on the North, West, and South, to receive succors, as well from the Low
Countries, Spain and France, as from other parts. Thirdly, What place you
esteem fittest, and of most advantage to assemble the principal Company of your
Forces at the same time, which would be compassed conform to the proportion of
your own. Fourthly, For how long Pay, and Munition, and Ports fittest for their
landing in this Realm, from the foresaid Three Foreign Countries. Fifthly, What
provision of Moneys and Armor, in case you should want, you would ask. Sixthly,
By what means do the 6. Gent. deliberate to proceed. Seventhly, The manner of
my getting forth of this hold. Which points having taken amongst you who are
the principal Actors, and also as few in number as you can; the best resolution
in my device is; That you impart the same, with all diligence, to Barnardin de
Mendossa, Ambassador Leiger for the King of Spain in France, who besides the
experience Barnardin de Mendossa, Ambassador to the King of Spain.
he has of the Estate on this side, I may assure you, will employ himself most
willingly: I shall not fail to write to him of the matter, with all the
recommendations I can, as also I shall do in any wise what shall be needful.
But you must take choice men for the managing of the affairs with the sail
Mendossa, and others out of the Realm, of some faithful and very seeret, both
in wisdom and personage, unto whom only you must commit your selves, to the end
things may be kept the more secret, which for your own security I commend to
your self. If your messenger bring you back again sure promise, and sufficient
assurance of the Succors which you demand, then thereafter (but not sooner, for
that it were in vain) take diligent order, that all those on your part make,
secretly as they can, provision of Armor, fit Horses, and ready money,
wherewith to hold themselves in a readiness to march so soon as it shall be
signified unto you by the Chief and Principal of every Shire: And for the
better coloring of the matter, reserving to the Principals the knowledge of the
ground of the enterprise, it shall be enough at the beginning to give it out to
the rest, that the said provisions are made only for the fortifying of your
selves, in case of need, against the Puritans of this Realm, the Principal
whereof having the chief Forces thereof in the Low Countries, as you may let
the bruit go, disguised, do seek the ruin and overthrow at their return home of
the Catholics, and to usurp the Crown, not only against me and all other
lawful pretenders thereto, but against their own Queen that now is, if she will
not altogether submit her self to their government. These precepts may serve to
sound and establish amongst all associations, or considerations general, as
done only for your preservation and defense, as well in Religion as lands,
lives and goods, against the oppression and contempts of the said Puritans,
without directly writing, or giving out any thing against the Queen, but rather
showing your selves willing to maintain her and her lawful heirs after her,
unnaming me. The affairs being thus prepared, and Forces in readiness, both
without and within the Realm, then shall it be time to set the Six Gent. on
work, taking good order upon the accomplishment of their discharges, I may be
suddenly transported out of this place, and meet without tarrying for the
arrival of the foreign aid, which then must be hastened with all diligence. Now
for that there can be no certain day appointed for the accomplishment of the
said Gentlemen's designment, to the end others may be in a readiness to take me
from hence, I would that the said Gent. had always about them, or at least at
Court, diverse and sundry scoutmen, furnished with good and speedy Horses, so
soon as the design shall be executed, to come with all diligence to advertise
me thereof, and those that shall be appointed for my transporting, to the end,
that immediately after they may be at the place of mine abode before my Keeper
can have advertisement of the execution of the said designment, or at the
least, before he can fortify himself within the house, or carry me out of the
same: It were necessary to dispatch two or three of the said advertisers by
diverse ways, to the end, if one be staid, the other may come through: At the
same instant it were needful also to assay to cut off the Posts ordinary ways.
This is the Plot that I think best for this enterprise, and the order whereby
we shall conduct the same for our common security: for stirring on this side
before you be sure of sufficient Foreign Forces, that were but for nothing to
put our selves in danger of following the miserable fortune of such as have
heretofore traveled in the like Actions: and if you take me out of this place,
be well assured to set me in the midst of a good Army, or some very good
strength, where I may safely stay till the assembly of your Forces, and arrival
of the said Foreign succors. It were sufficient cause given to the Queen in
catching me again, to enclose me in some hold, out of the which I should never
escape, if she did use me no worse; and to pursue with all extremity those that
assisted me, which would grieve me more than all the unhappiness might fall
upon my self. Earnestly as you can, look and take heed most carefully and
vigilantly to compass and assure all so well, that shall be necessary for the
effecting of the said enterprise, as with the grace of God you may bring the
same to happy end, remitting to the judgment of your principal friends on this
side, with whom you have to deal, therein to ordain and conclude upon this
present, which may serve you for an overture of such propositions as you shall
amongst you find best; and to your self in particular I refer the Gent.
aforementioned, to be assured of all that shall be requisite for the entire
execution of their good wills. I leave their common resolution to advice, in
case the design do not take hold, as may happen whether they will or no, do not
pursue my transport, and the execution of the rest of the enterprise. But if
the mishap should fall out, that you might not come by me, being set in the
Tower of London, or in any other strength, with strong guard; yet
notwithstanding, leave not for Gods sake to proceed in the enterprise, for I
shall at any time dye most contentedly, understanding of your delivery out of
the servitude wherein you are holden as Slaves; I shall assay, that at the same
time that the work shall be in hand, at that present to make the Catholics of
Scotland to arise, and put my Son into their hands, to the effect, that from
thence our enemies here may not prevail by any succor; I would also that some
stirring were in Ireland, and that it were labored to begin some time before
any thing be done here, and then that the Alarm might begin thereby on the flat
contrary side, that the stroke may come from your designs, to have some
General, or chief aid very permanent; and therefore were it good to send
obscurely for the purpose to the Earl of Arundell, or some of his brethren; and
likewise Earl of Arundel.

Young Earl of Northumberland.

Earl of Westmoreland.

Lord Paget.


to seek upon the young Earl of Northumberland, if he be at liberty from over
the Sea; the Earl of Westmoreland may be had, whose hand and name, you know,
may do much in the North parts; also the Lord Paget, of good ability in some
Shires thereabouts; both the one and the other may be had, amongst whom
secretly some more principal banished, may return, if the enterprise be once
resolute. The said Lord Paget is now in Spain, and may treat of all that, by
his brother Charles, directly by himself, Charles Paget.
you will commit unto him touching the affairs. Beware that none of your
messengers, that you send forth of the Realm, carry any Letters upon
themselves, but make their dispatches, and send them either after or before
them by some others. Take heed of Spies and false-brethren that are amongst
you, especially of your practice, already practiced by your enemies, for Beware
of Spies and falsebrethren.

Queen of Scots counsel to the Traitors.


your discovery, and in any case keep never a paper about you that may in any
sort do harm: for from like errors have come the Condemnation of all such as
have suffered heretofore, against whom otherwise nothing could justly have been
proved; discover as little as you can, your names and intentions to the French
Ambassador, now Leiger at London; for although, as I understand, he is a very
honest Gent. yet I fear his Master entertaineth a course far contrary to our
designment, which may move him to discover us, if he had any particular
knowledge thereof. All this while I have sued to change and remove from this
house; and for answer, the Castle of Dudley only has been named to serve the
turn; so as by approbation, about the end of Dudley Castle.
this Summer, I may go thither: therefore advise so soon as I shall be there,
what provision may be had about that part, for my escape from thence. If I stay
here, there is but one of these Three ways or means to be looked for. The
First, That at a certain day appointed for my walking abroad on horseback on
the Mores between this and Stafford, where ordinarily, you know, but few people
do pass, let Fifty or Threescore Horsemen, well Mounted and Armed come to take
me away, as they may easily, my Keeper having with him but XVIII. or XX.
Horses, with only Dogs. The Sccond means, To come at midnight, or soon after,
and set fire on the Barns and Stables, which you know are near the house, and
whilst my Guardians servants shall come forth to the fire, your company having
duly on a Mark whereby they may be known one from another, some of you may
surprise the house, where I hope, with the few servants I have about me, I
shall be able to give you correspondent aid. And the Third is, some there be
that bring Carts hither early in the morning; Three Carts may be so prepared,
that being in the midst of the great Gate, the Carts might fall down, or
overthrow; that thereupon you might come suddenly and make your selves Masters
of the house, and carry me suddenly away; so you might easily do before any
number of Soldiers, who lodge in sundry places forth of this place, some half a
Mile, and some a whole Mile, could come to relieve; whatsoever issue the matter
takes, I do, and shall think my self obliged, so long as I live, toward you
for the offers you make to hazard your self as you do for my deliverance, and
by any means that ever I may have, I shall do my endeavor to recognize by
effects your deserts; therein I have commanded a more ample Alphabet to be made
for you, which herewith you shall receive. God Almighty have you in his
protection.

Fail not to burn this privately and quickly.

Your assured Friend for ever Mary Regina.

A Letter written to Queen Elizabeth by Anthony Babington the Traitor, the
night before he was executed, for mercy and forgiveness, as follows:
MOst gracious Sovereign! if either bitter tears, or a pensive contrite
Babington's Letter to her Majesty for mercy.
heart and doleful sigh of a wretched sinner, might work any pity in your Royal
Breast, I would wring out of my dreined eyes, as much blood as in bewraying my
dreary Tragedy should lamentably bewail my fall, and somewhat, no doubt, move
you to compassion; but since hence there is no proportion betwixt the quantity
of my crime and any humane consideration, show, sweet Queen, some miracle upon
a wretch that lies prostrate in your prison, most grievously bewailing his
offense, and imploring such comfort at your anointed hands, as my poor Wives
misfortune does beg, my Child's innocence does crave, my guiltless Family does
wish, and my heinous treachery does less deserve; so shall your divine Mercy
make your glory shine as far above all Princes, as my most horrible practices
are detestable amongst your best Subjects, whom that you may long live, and
happily govern, I beseech the Mercy-maker to grant for his sweet Son's sake
Jesus Christ.

Your Majesty's unfortunate, because disloyal subject, Anthony Babington.

A Letter written by Chidiocke Tuchborne, the night before he died, unto his
Wife, as follows: viz. 1586.
MOst loving Wife, I commend me unto thee, and desire God to bless Tuchborne's
Letter to his Wife.
thee with all happiness: Pray for thy dead Husband, and be of good comfort,
for I hope, in Jesus Christ, this morning to see the face of my Maker and
Redeemer, in the most joyful Throne of his Kingdom. Commend me to all my
friends, and desire them to pray for me; and in all Charity to pardon me, if I
have offended them; commend me to my Six Sisters, poor desolate souls, advise
them to serve God, for without him no goodness is to be expected: were it
possible my little Sister Bab. the darling of my care, might be brought up, and
bred by thee, God would reward thee: But I do thee wrong, I confess, that have,
by my dissolute negligence, so little for thy self, to add further charge unto
thee. Dear Wife forgive me, that have by this means so much impoverished thy
fortunes: Patience and pardon, good Wife, I crave; make of these our
necessities a virtue, and lay no further burden upon my neck than already has
been. There be certain debts which I owe, and because I know not the order of
the Law, sithence it has taken from me all, forfeited by course of my offense,
to her Majesty; I cannot advise you to benefit me herein: But if there fall out
wherewith, let them be discharged for Gods sake: I will not that you trouble
your self with these matters, my own heart, but make it known to my Uncles, and
desire them, for the honor of God, and ease of their Nephews soul, to take
care of them, as they may, and especial care of my Sisters bringing up, the
burden whereof is now laid upon them. Now sweet Chick! what is left for me to
bestow on thee! a small Jointure, a slender recompense for thy deservings:
These Legacies following be thy own: God of his goodness give thee grace,
always to remain his true and faithful servant, and that through the merits of
his most blessed and bitter Passion, thou may become inheritrix of his
Kingdom, with the blessed woman in Heaven. Jesus give thee of his fear, and to
his glory all the benefits of this Transitory life; the Holy Ghost bless thee
with all necessaries for the weal of thy soul, in the world to come; where,
till it please Almighty God that I meet thee, farewell loving Wife, farewell, the
dearest to me on earth, farewell.

By the hand, from the heart of thy most loving, faithful Husband, Chidiocke
Tuchborne.

Certain Verses which the said Tuchborne the Traitor made of himself in the
Tower, the night before he suffered death.
MY prime of Youth is but a frost of Cares, Tuchborne's Verses.

My feast of Joy is but a dish of Pain:
My Crop of Corn is but a field of Tares,
And all my good is but vain hope of Gain.
The day is fled, and yet I saw no Sun;
And now I live, and now my life is done.
The Spring is past, and yet it has not sprung:
The Fruit is dead, and yet the Leaves are green:
My Youth is past, and yet I was but young;
I saw the world, and yet I was not seen.
My Thread is cut, and yet it is not spun.
And now I live, and now my life is done.
I sought for Death, and found it in my Womb;
I looked for Life, and saw it was a shade:
I trod the ground, and knew it was my Tomb;
And now I die, and now I am but made.
The Glass is full, and yet my Glass is run.
And now I live, and now my life is done.
The Examination of Ballard a Priest, Babington, Savidge, Barnwell, Tuchborn,
Tylney and Abbington (all executed for High Treason in Holborn-fields, upon a
large Scaffold, made with a high pair of Gallows) as by their own Confessions
may appear, and their several speeches at the place of Execution, the 20th of
September, 1586.
JOHN Ballard the Priest confessed that he had been a dealer in those matters,
September 20. 1586.
and that he was guilty of those things whereof he was Condemned, 1. Ballard.
which he protested was never enterprised by him upon any hope of preferment,
but only, as he said, for the advancement of true Religion. He craved pardon
and forgiveness of all persons, to whom his doings had been any scandal: and so
he made an end, making his prayers to himself in Latin, not asking her Majesty
forgiveness, otherwise than if he had offended: and so was executed.

Anthony Babington, Esquire also confessed, that he was come to die, as he had
deserved; howbeit he, as Ballard before, protested that he was not 2. Babington.
led into those Actions upon hope of preferment, or for any temporal respect;
nor had ever attempted them, but that he was persuaded by reasons alleged to
this effect, That it was a deed lawful and meritorious. He craved forgiveness
of all whom he had any way offended: he would gladly also have been resolved,
whether his lands should have been confiscate to her Majesty, or whether they
should descend to his brother: But howsoever his request was to the Lords, and
others the Commissioners there present, that consideration might be had of one
whose money he had received for lands, which he had passed no Fine for, for
which the conveyance was void in Law; he requested also, that consideration
might be had of a certain servant of his, whom he had sent for certain
Merchandise into the East Countries, who by his means was greatly impoverished;
for his Wife, he said, she had good friends, to whose consideration he would
leave her: And thus he finished, asking her Majesty forgiveness, and making his
prayers in Latin, and so was executed.

John Savidge, Gent. confessed his guilt, and said as the other two before,
that he did attempt it, for that, in Conscience, he thought it a deed
meritorious, 3. Savidge.
and a common good to the weal public, and for no private preferment: and so
was executed.

Robert Barnwell, Gent. confessed, that he was made acquainted with their
drifts, but denied that ever he consented, or could be, in Conscience, 4.
Barnwell.
persuaded, that it was a deed lawful; and being urged, that he came to the
Court to spy opportunities for the atchieving of their purposes, and that
being there, her Majesty observing his prying looks, acquainted before with
their intents, she prayed God that all were well. To this he answered, that it
was not unknown to diverse of the Council, that he had matters which he
solicited, which was the cause of his being there at that time; but I confess
(said he) at my return, Babington asked me what news; to whom I told, that her
Majesty had been abroad that day, with all the circumstances that I saw there;
and if I have offended her Majesty, I crave forgiveness; and assuredly, if the
sacrifice of my body might establish her Majesty in the true Religion, I would
most willingly offer it up. Then he prayed to himself in Latin, and was
executed.

Chidiocke Tuchborne, Esquire began to speak, as follows: viz. Countrymen 5.
Tuchborne.
and my dear friends! you expect I should speak something: I am a bad Orator,
and my Text is worse: It were in vain to enter into the discourse of the whole
matter for which I am brought hither, for that it has been revealed
heretofore, and is well known to the most of this company; Let me be a warning
to all young Gentlemen, especially generosis adolescentulis. I had a friend,
and a dear friend, of whom I made no small account, whose friendship has
brought me to this; he told me the whole matter, I cannot deny, as they had
laid it down to be done; but I always thought it impious, and denied to be a
dealer in it: but the regard of my friend caused me to be a man in whom the old
Proverb was verified, I was silent, and so consented. Before this thing
chanced, we lived together in most flourishing estate; Of whom went report in
the Strand, Fleetstreet, and elsewhere about London, but of Babington and
Tuchborne? no Threshold was of force to brave our Entry. Thus we lived, and
wanted nothing we could wish for; and God knows what less in my head than
matters of State. Now give me leave to declare the miseries I sustained after I
was acquainted with the Action, wherein I may justly compare my estate to that
of Adam 's, who could not abstain one thing forbidden, to enjoy all other
things the world could afford: the terror of Conscience awaited me. After I
considered the dangers whereinto I was fallen, I went to Sir John Peter's in
Essex, and appointed my horses should meet me at London, intending to go down
into the Country: I came to London, and there heard, that all was bewrayed;
whereupon, like Adam, we fled into the Woods to hide our selves, and there were
apprehended. My dear Countrymen! my sorrows may be your joy, yet mix your
smiles with tears, and pity my case; I am descended from an house, from two
hundred years before the Conquest, never stained till this my misfortune; I
have a Wife and one child, my Wife Agnes, my dear Wife, and there is my grief,
and six Sisters left on my hand; my poor servants, I know, their Master being
taken, were dispersed, for all which I do most heartily grieve; I expected some
favor, though I deserved nothing less, that the remainder of my years might in
some sort have recompensed my former guilt, which seeing I have missed, let me
now meditate upon the joys I hope to enjoy. Thus done, he prayed first in
Latin, and then in English, asking her Majesty, and all the world, heartily,
forgiveness, and that he hoped steadfastly, now at this his last hour, his faith
would not fail; and so was executed.

Charles Tylney said, I am a Catholic, and believe in Jesus Christ, and by 6.
Tylney.
his Passion I hope to be saved; and I confess, I can do nothing without him,
which opinion all Catholics firmly hold; and whereas they are thought to hold
the contrary, they are in that, as in all other things, greatly abused. To Dr.
White, seeming to School him in Points of Religion, differing from those which
he held, he spoke in an anger, I came hither to dye, Doctor, and not to argue.
He prayed in Latin for himself, and after he prayed for Queen Elizabeth, that
she might live long; and warned all young Gentlemen, of what degree or calling
soever, to take warning by him; and so he made an end, and was executed.

Edward Abbington said, I come hither to dye, holding all points firmly 7
Abbington.
that the Catholic Church does; and for the matters whereof I am condemned, I
confess all, saving the death of her Majesty, to the which I never consented.
He feared, as he said, great bloodshed in England before it were long: Sheriff
Ratliffe said, Abbington, see thou all these people, whose blood shall be
demanded at thy hands, if thou dying, conceal that which may turn to their
peril; therefore tell why, or which way such blood should be shed: he said, All
that I know, you have of record: and at last, said he, this Country is hated
of all Countries for her iniquity, and God loves it not; and being urged by Dr.
White, to be of a lively faith; he answered, he believed steadfastly in the
Catholic faith: the Doctor asked him, how he meant, for I fear me, said he,
thou deceivest thy self: he answered, That Faith and Religion which is holden,
almost, in all Christendom, except here in England. Thus done, he willed them
not to trouble him any longer with any more questions, but made his prayers to
himself in Latin, and so was executed.

The Examination of Salsbury, Done, Jones, Charnock, Travers, Gage and
Bellamy; all executed for High Treason in the place aforesaid (as by their own
Speeches and Confessions did appear): And also their several Speeches at the
place of Execution, the 21st of September, 1586. viz.
THomas Salsbury, Esquire said, Sithence it has pleased God to appoint 8. Salsbury
this place for my end, I thank his infinite goodness for the same; I confess
that I have deserved death, and that I have offended her Majesty, whom to
forgive me I heartily beseech, with all others whom I have any way offended; I
desire all true Catholics to pray for me; and I desire them, as I beseech God
they may, to endure with patience whatsoever shall be laid upon them, and never
to enter into any action of violence for remedy: then he said his prayers,
looking earnestly with his eyes to Heaven, and prayed in Latin a long while:
when he had thus done, he cried in Latin and English, Father forgive me; and so
was executed.

John Done, Yeoman, said, Do the people expect I should say any thing? I was
acquainted, I confess, with their practices, but I never did intend to be 9.
Done.
a dealer in them: Babingron oftentimes requested me to be one; and said for
that he loved me well, he would bestow me in one of the best Actions; which
should have been the delivery of the Queen of Scots, to which I could not for a
long time agree; at length, by many urgent persuasions he won me, so as I told
him, I would do my best: and being asked as he was ascending the Ladder,
whether he thought it lawful to kill her Majesty: he answered, No, no; for I
take her to be my lawful and natural Prince; and as Salsbury, he desired all
Catholics to endure with patience, and never to attempt any thing against her
Majesty, under whose Government he had lived quietly, until within these Ten
Weeks, that those things were first imparted unto him; and whereas he was
indebted to diverse, and diverse in like manner to him, he forgave all that was
owing to him, and craved forgiveness of what he owed: He desired God to forgive
Babington, the only cause of his fall and death; and was right sorry for a
Gentlewoman, one Mrs. Bellamy, at whose house he, with the rest, were relieved,
after they fled; he prayed God, whom he had chiefly offended, next her Majesty;
and last of all the people, forgiveness; saying, no soul was more sorrowful
than his, nor none more sinful; and prayed for her Majesty, wishing she might
live in all happiness, and after this life, be eternized in everlasting bliss;
and so he prayed in Latin and English, and was executed.

Edward Jones, said, I come hither to die, but how rightfully God knows; for
thus stands my case, At Trinity Term last, Mr. Salsbury made me acquainted 10.
Jones.
with their purposes: and for that he knew me to be well horsed, he thought me
as fit as any, to attempt the delivery of the Queen of Scots, and requested me
to be one, which I utterly denied, altogether misliking their practices, and
persuading him, by what means I might, from it; and told him, this was the
haughty and ambitious mind of Anthony Babington, which would be the destruction
of himself, and friends, whose company I wished him to refrain; and for that I
would have him out of his company, I have diverse times lent him money, and
pawned my Chain and Jewels to buy him necessaries, to go into the Country; and
whereas I had made conveyance of my lands to diverse uses, with some Annuities,
and placed my Wife with my friends, and given over housekeeping, and by reason
of my conscience, thought to live at ease; I called my servants together again,
and began to keep house more freshly than ever I did, only because I was weary
to see Salsbury 's straggling, and for that I was willing to keep him about
home; and never consented to any of his Treasons, but always advised him to
beware; for though I was, and am a Catholic, yet I took it to be a most wicked
act, to offer violence to my natural Prince. I did intend to go into Ireland
with Mr. Edward Fitton, and there to have served; until at length, very shortly
after, this my determinate mind being not settled, I received a Note of their
names, amongst whom was the name of my dear friend: Then I began to fear what
has happened; I heard that night he would be at my house; and indeed he came
thither about Twelve of the Clock, and the door being opened him, as he was
very familiar with me, he came running up to my Bedside with a candle in his
hand, which he took from one of my men, saluting me with these words, Ned Jones
how do thou? Ah! Tom, said I, art thou one of them that should have killed
the Queen; yea, said he; what meanest thou by that? see, and read this, said I,
giving him the Note wherein his name was; he seeing, turned about and said,
there be many Catholics in England as far in this Act as we are; the more the
worse, quoth I. Here is the sum of my fault, in which, I know I have offended
her Majesty, First, Because I did conceal it at London. And Lastly, Because I
did not apprehend my dear friend Tom, being in my house; for which fault I am
heartily sorry, and do ask her Majesty forgiveness. There is one thing wherein
I am to move you, concerning my debts; I have set them down so near as I could,
what they are: good Sir Francis Knowles, I shall entreat you to be a mean to
her Majesty, that there may be some care had of my Creditors and debtors.

The debts which I owe, do amount, in the whole, to 980. l.
The debts which are owing me, are 1600. l.
But who shall look into my Compting-house, shall find many of 100. l. 200. l.
or 300. l. whereof all is discharged, except of some 50. l. and some 40. l. and
such like, without any defeasance, and lie only in my credit; so that unless
some man of conscience enter into the Action of my Compting house, it is like
to be the utter undoing of a number; but God he knows my mind, and I hope it
shall not be laid to my charge; and so concluded with his prayers, first in
Latin, and then in English, that the people might better understand what he
prayed: and so was executed.

11. Charnocke.
John Charnocke, Gent. excuted. 12. Travers.
John Travers, Gent. executed. 13. Gaget
Robert Gage, Gent. executed. 14. Bellamy.
Jeremy Bellamy, Gent. executed.
Queen Elizabeth's Letter directed to Sir Amias Paulet, Knight, Keeper of the
Queen of Scots, at the Castle of Fotheringhay, viz.
AMias, my most faithful servant! God reward thee treble-fold in the Her
Majesty's Letter to Sir Amias Paulet.
double of thy most troublesome charge, so well discharged; if you knew, my
Amias, how kindly, besides dutifully, my grateful heart accepts your double
labors, and faithful actions, your wise orders, and safe regards, performed in
so dangerous a charge, it would ease your travel, and rejoice your heart, in
that I cannot balance, in any weight of my judgment, the value that I prise
you at, and suppose no treasure to countervail such faith; and shall condemn my
self, in that thought I never committed, if I reward not such deserts; yea let
me lack, when I most need, if I acknowledge not such a merit with a reward, not
omnibus datum; but let your wicked Murtheress know, how with hearty sorrow her
vile deserts compel these Orders; and bid her, from me, ask God forgiveness for
her treacherous dealing against my life many years, to the intolerable peril
of her own: and yet not content with so many forgivenesses, but must fall again
so horribly, far passing a woman's thought, much less a Princes; instead of
excusing whereof, not one can serve it, being so plainly confessed by the
Author of my guiltless death: let repentance take place, and let not the Feind
possess her, so that the better part be lost, which I pray, with hands lifted
up, to him that can both save and spill, with my most loving adieu, and prayer
for thy long life.

Your assured and loving Sovereign, as heart, by good desert, indureth,
Elizabeth Regina.

The Commission for executing the Queen of Scots.
ELIZABETH, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, etc. To
our trusty and well-beloved Cousins, George Earl of Sbrewsbury, Earl Marshal of
England, Henry Earl of Kent, Henry Earl of Darby, George Earl of Comberland,
and Henry Earl of Pembrook, greeting, etc. Whereas sithence the Sentence given
by you, and others of our Council, Nobility and Judges, against the Queen of
Scots, by the name of Mary, the Daughter of James the 5th, late King of Scots,
commonly called the Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, as to you is well
known; All the States in the last Parliament assembled, did not only
deliberately, by great advice, allow and approve the same Sentence as just and
honorable, but also with all humbleness, and earnestness possible, at sundry
times require, solicit, and press us to direct such further execution against
her Person, as they did adjudg her to have daily deserved; adding thereunto,
that the forbearing thereof, was, and would be daily certain and undoubted
danger, not only unto our own life, but also unto themselves, their posterity,
and the public estate of this Realm, as well for the Cause of the Gospel, and
true Religion of Christ, as for the Peace of the whole Realm: whereupon we did,
although the same were with some delay of time, publish the same sentence by
our Proclamation, yet hitherto have forborne to give direction for the further
satisfaction of the aforesaid most earnest requests, made by our said States of
our Parliament, whereby we do daily understand, by all sorts of our loving
subjects, both of our Nobility and Council, and also of the wisest, greatest,
and best devoted of all Subjects of inferior degrees, how greatly, and deeply
from the bottom of their hearts, they are grieved and afflicted with daily, yea
hourly fears of our life, and thereby consequently with a dreadful doubt and
expectation of the ruin of the present happy and godly estate of this Realm, if
we should forbear the further final execution, as it is deserved, and neglect
their general and continual requests, prayers, counsels and advices, and
thereupon contrary to our natural disposition in such case, being overcome with
the evident weight of their counsels, and their daily intercessions, importing
such a necessity, as appears, directly tending to the safety not only of our
self, but also to the weal of our whole Realm: We have condescended to suffer
Justice to take place; and for the execution thereof, upon the special trusty
experience and confidence which we have of your loyalties, faithfulness and
love, both toward our Person and the safety thereof, and also to your native
Countries, whereof you are most noble and principal members, we do will, and by
Warrant hereof do Authorize you, as soon as you shall have time convenient, to
repair to our Castle of Fotheringhay, where the said Queen of Scots is in
custody of our right trusty and faithful servant and Councellor, Sir Amias
Paulet, Knight; and then taking her into your charge, to cause by your
Commandment execution to be done upon her Person, in the presence of your
selves, and the aforesaid Sir Amias Paulet, and of such other Officers of
Justice as you shall command to attend upon you for that purpose; and the same
to be done in such manner and form, and at such time and place, and by such
persons, as to five, four or three of you shall be thought, by your
discretions, convenient, notwithstanding any Law, Statute or Ordinance to the
contrary: And these our Letters Patents, sealed with our great Seal of England,
shall be to you, and every of you, and to all persons that shall be present, or
that shall be, by you, commanded to do any thing appertaining to the aforesaid
execution, a full sufficient Warrant, and discharge for ever. And further, we
are also pleased and contented, and hereby we do will, command, and authorize
our Chancellor of England, at the requests of you all, and every of you, the
duplicate of our Letters Patents, to be to all purposes made, dated and sealed
with our great Seal of England, as these presents now are: In witness whereof,
we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Yeoven at our Manor of
Greenwich, the 1st day of February, in the 29th year of our Reign.

First, After she was brought down by the Sheriff, to the place prepared in the
Hall, for that purpose, by the commandment of the Earls of Shrewsbury Octavo
die Feb. 1586.
and Kent, her Majesty's Commission, aforesaid, was openly read: Then according
to a direction given to Dr. Fletcher, Dean of Peterborough, he was willed to
use some short and pithy Speech, which might tend to admonish her of the
nearness of her end, and the only means of salvation in Christ Jesus. As soon
as he began to speak, she interrupted him, saying, she was a Catholic, and
that it was but a folly, being so resolutely determined, as she was, to move
her otherwise, and that our prayers could do her little good.

On Wednesday, the 8th of February, 1586. there assembled at the Castle of
Fotheringhay, the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, with diverse Knights The
Assembly of the Lords at the death of the Queen of Scots.
and Gentlemen, Justices of Peace in the Counties there; and about Eight of the
Clock the Earls, and the Sheriff of the Shire, went up to the Scottish Queen,
whom they found praying on her knees, with her Gentlewomen and men; and the
Sheriff remembering her the time was at hand, she rose up, and said, she was
ready; then was she led, by the arms, from her Chamber, unto the Chamber of
Presence, where, with many exhortations to fear God, and live in obedience,
kissing her women, and giving her hand to her men to kiss, praying them all not
to sorrow, but to rejoice, and pray for her; she was brought down the Stairs by
two Soldiers; and being below, and looking back, she said she was evil
attended; and besought the Lords that she might, for womanhood sake, have two
of her women to wait upon her: they said, they were only withheld, for that it
was feared by their passionate crying they would much disquiet her spirit, and
disturb the execution: then she said, I will promise for them they will do
neither; so two, whom she willed, were brought in to her. Then she spoke much
to Melin, her man, and charged him, as he would answer before God, to deliver
her Speeches and Messages to her Son, in such sort as she did deliver them. All
which tended to will him to govern wisely, and in the fear of God; to take heed
to whom he betook his chiefest trust; and not to give occasions to be evil
thought on by the Queen of England, her good Sister: And to certify him, she
died a true Scot, true French, and true Catholic. And about 10 of the Clock
she was brought into the great Hall, where, in the midst of the Hall, and
against the Chimney (in which was a great fire) was a Scaffold set up of two
Foot high, and Twelve Foot broad, having two Steps to come up; about the
Scaffold went a Rail, half a Yard high round, covered with black Cotton, so was
her Stool, the Boards, and the Block, and a Pillow to kneel upon: There did sit
upon the Scaffold, the two Earls, the Sheriff stood, and the two Executiones:
When they were placed, Mr. Beale, Clerk of the Council did read her Majesty's
Commission aforesaid, under the great Seal: after which, the Dean of
Peterborough, by direction of the Lords, being provided, began to speak unto
her, for her better preparation, to die as a penitent Christian in the true
faith of Christ. But when he began his exhortation, she staid him immediately,
refusing to hear him, and said, she had nothing to do with him, nor he with
her, for she was settled in the Catholic Roman Faith, which she would die in.
Then the Earl of Kent willed Mr. Dean to pray for her, that if it might stand
with Gods Will, she might have her heart lightened with the true knowledge of
God, and die therein; which was pronounced by him accordingly, and followed of
the beholders: All which while, she having a Crucifix of white bone between her
hands, prayed in Latin very loud: prayer being ended, she kneeled down, and
prayed to this effect, for Christ's afflicted Church, and an end of their
troubles, for her Son, for the Queens Majesty that she might prosper, and serve
God; and confessed, that she hoped to be saved only by the blood of Jesus
Christ, at the foot of whose Crucifix she would shed her blood; that God would
avert his plagues from this Island, that God would give her grace and
forgiveness of her sins. Then she rose up, and was, by both the Executioners,
disrobed: She said, she was not wont to be undressed by such Grooms, and
desired to have two of her Gentlewomen to unrobe her; the which was granted,
and being stripped into her Petticoat; which being done, she kissed her women,
and willed them not to cry for her, but to rejoice; and lifted up her hand and
blessed them, and also her men, not standing far off. Then she kneeled down
most resolutely, without all fear of death; and after one of her women had knit
a Kerchew before her eyes, she spoke aloud the Psalm in Latin, In te Domine
confido, non confundor in eternum. Justitia tua libera me. Then lay she down,
and stretched out her body, and her neck upon the Block; she cried, In manus
tuus Domine, etc. and so received two strokes. The people cried, God save the
Queen, and so perish all Papists and her Majesty's enemies.

All things were taken from the Executioners, and not suffered to have so much
as the Aprons, before they were washed; the Blood, and Clothes, and whatsoever
was bloody, was burned in the fire made in the Chimney, in the Hall, and by the
Scaffold.

The whole discourse of the Arraignment of Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, the
18th day of April 1589. and in the 31st year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
FRom the outward Bar in the King's Bench, was there a Court made of Thirty Foot
square, within which was a Table of Twelve Foot square, The form of the
Scaffold.
covered with Green Cloth; and in the same Court were Benches to sit upon,
covered with Green Say; in the midst of the same Court, at the upper end, was
placed a Cloth of State, with a Chair and Cushion, for the Lord Steward; from
the midst of the same Court, to the midst of the Hall, was built a Gallery for
the Prisoner to come upon to the Court, in length One Hundred and Ten Foot, and
in breadth Fifteen Foot, and in height from the ground Six Foot, railed round
about, and going down with Seven Steps.

Between Eight and Nine of the Clock in the morning, the Earl of Derby, Earl of
Derby; Lord Steward.
Lord Steward his Grace, entered the Hall, attended on by diverse Noblemen and
Officers, Four Sergeants at Arms, with their Maces waiting before him; next
before his Grace the Earl of Oxford, Lord great Chamberlain of England. My Lord
of Derby's Grace being seated in his Chair of State, every Nobleman was placed
in his degree, by Garter King of Heraults.

At his Graces feet did sit Mr. Winckefield, one of her Majesty's
Gentlemen-Ushers, holding a long white Wand in his hand, being accompanied with
Mr. Norris Sergeant of the Garter.

Before them did sit Mr. Sands, Clerk of the Crown of the King's Bench.

Opposite against my Lord's Grace did sit the Queens Majesty's Learned Council.
viz.

1. Sejeant Puckering. 2. Sergeant Shettleworth. 3. Mr. Popham, the Queens
Attorney General. 4. Mr. Edgerton, the Queens Solicitor.
The Names of the Commissioners on the right hand, sitting upon a lower Bench,
under the Lords of the Jury.
1. SIR Francis Knowles, Knight, Treasurer of the Household. Commissioners on
the right hand.
2. Sir James Acrofte, Knight, Controler of the Household. 3. Sir John Parrat,
one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. 4. Mr. Woolley, Secretary
of the Latin tongue, of the Privy Council. 5. John Fortescue, Master of the
Wardrobe, and of the Privy Council. 6. Dr. Dale, one of the Masters of Request
to her Majesty. 7. William Fleetwood, Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of London.
8. Mr. Rockby, Master of Requests, and Master of St. Katherines.
The Names of the Comissioners on the left hand.
9. THE Lord Chief Justice of England. 10. The Master of the Rolls.
Commissioners on the left hand.
11. The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 12. The Lord Chief Baron of
the Exchequer. 13. Justice Perryman, of the Common Pleas. 14. Justice Gamdy, of
the Kings Bench.
The Sergeant at Arms, usually attendant on the Lord Chancellor, named Roger
Wood, was commanded to make on O Yes Three times. Roger Wood. Crier.


Then Mr. Sands, Clerk of the Crown read the Commission.

And Sir Francis Knowles, Knight, gave up the Verdict of the great Assize.
Verdict.


Then was called Matthew Spencer, Sergeant at Arms, to return his Precept, which
was returned and read.

After that, the Noblemen and Peers of the Jury, for his Trial, were severally
called by their Names, as follows:

1. William Lord Burleigh, Lord Treasurer of England. 2. Edward of Oxford, Lord
great Chamberlain of England. 3. William Lord Marquess of Winchester. 4. Henry
Earl of Kent. 5. Henry Earl of Sussex. 6. Henry Earl of Pembrook. 7. Edward
Earl of Hartford. 8. Henry Earl of Lincoln. 9. Henry Lord Hundsdon, Lord
Chamberlain of her Majesty's Household. 10. Peregrin Lord Willoby, and Earsby.
11. Lord Morley. 12. Lord Cobham. 13. Arthur Lord Gray. 14. Lord Darcy of the
North. 15. Lord Sands. 16. Lord Wentworth. 17. Lord Willoughby of Parham. 18.
Lord North. 19. Lord Rich. 20. Lord St. John of Bletsoe. 21. Lord Buckhurst.
22. Lord De La Ware. 23. Lord Norris.
Then the Lieftenant of the Tower was called to return his Precept, and to
bring forth his Prisoner, Philip Earl of Arundel. The Earl came into Lieftenant.
the Hall, being in a wrought Velvet Gown, furred about with Martins, laid
about with Gold Lace, and buttoned with Gold Buttons, a Black Satin Doublet, a
pair of Velvet Hose, and a long high Black Hat on his head; a very tall man,
looking somewhat Swarth-coloured. His Apparel.


Then was the Earl brought to the Bar, with the Axe carried before him by Mr.
Shelton, (Gent. Porter of the Tower) being accompanied with Prisoner brought to
the Bar.
Sir Owin Hopton, Knight, Lieftenant of the Tower, Sir Drew Drewry, Constable
of the Tower for the time, Mr. Henry Bronkard, and others.

At my Lord of Arundel his coming to the Bar, he made two Obeysances to the
State, and to the Nobles, and others there present.

Then did Mr. Sands, Clerk of the Crown, say, he was Indicted of several
Treasons, and said unto him,

Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, late of Arundel, in the County of Sussex, hold
up thy hand.

He held up his hand very high, saying, Here is as true a man's heart and hand,
as ever came into this Hall.

Mr. Sands then read the Indictment.
THat whereas diverse traitorous persons, in the parts beyond the Seas, being
Indictment.
natural English men, viz. Dr. Allen, Parsons, Champion, Mote, and diverse
others, have heretofore, diverse and sundry times, with sundry persons, as well
English men, as of other Countries, practiced to accomplish, and bring to pass
several dangerous and unnatural Treasons against the Queens Majesty, her Royal
Person, Crown and Dignity, viz. to subvert the State, invade the Realm, to set
up Catholic Religion, to raise Insurrections, etc. Amongst which number of
unnatural Traitors, the Earl of Arundel was well acquainted with that notorious
Traitor, Dr. Allen, by means of Bridges Weston, Ithell, and other Popish
Priests, with whom diverse times, sithence the 20th year of her Majesty's Reign,
he has had private and secret conference, and communication of several
Treasons; insomuch, that the Earl of Arundel did presently dispatch his several
Letters by Bridges aforesaid, to Dr. Allen, to wish him at any hand to do
something concerning the Cause Catholic; wherein he promised to perform any
thing that Dr. Allen should think fit for him to do. And whereas the 24th day
of April, in the 27th year of the Queens Reign, he was flying by Sea to Dr.
Allen, that Arch-Traitor, and that the Bishop of Rome and the King of Spain
were thereupon solicited by Allen aforesaid, to raise war against this Realm.
And whereas also the Earl of Arundel had understanding of a Bull that Sixtus
the fifth, Pope of that name, had sent into England for the excommunication of
her Majesty, and for the invading of the Realm, etc. And that at the Tower, the
21st of July, in the 30th year of her Majesty's Reign, he did imagine, with
other traitorous persons, that the Queen was an Heretic, and not worthy to
govern the Realm; and that he did move and procure one William Bennet, a
Seminary Priest, to say Mass for the happy success of the Spanish Fleet;
whereupon he had Mass, and did help to say Mass himself, to that purpose: And
having news of the conflict at Sea, betwixt the Spanish Fleet and the English,
he procured Sir Thomas Gerrard, and diverse others, then Prisoners in the Tower,
to say Mass with him for the fortunate success of Spain; and that he made a
prayer specially for that purpose, to be daily used and exercised amongst them.

HEreupon Mr. Sands asked the Earl of Arundel if he were guilty, or not guilty
of the several Treasons comprised in the said Indictment. Sands.


To this the Earl answered, he would fain know, whether the several points in
the Indictment contained, were but one Indictment yea or no. Earl.


The Judges satisfied him, it was but one Indictment, and a matter he need not
stand upon. Judges.


My Lord vouched a Case in Edw. 3. and in the end said, not guilty: and was
well content to be tried by his Peers, and liked the Trial well, that Earl.
he should be tried by such good Noblemen there present, that knew his Life:
He said he had been Prisoner four years, and 25 weeks close Prisoner, and that
he had been sick and weak, whereby his memory might fail him; and therefore
humbly desired my Lord Steward's Grace, making Three several Obeysances on both
knees, that he might be heard to make answer to every particular point.

My Lord Steward answered, that there was no other meaning, nor intent, Lo.
Steward.
and that he should be heard deliberately.

Then did Mr. Sergeant Puckering deliver to the Lords of the Jury, the
Puckering.
effect of the Indictment, and other Evidence at large, as follows:

First, that my Lord had private and secret Conference with Bridges aforesaid,
Conference with Traitors.
and diverse other Traitors, and Seminary Priests, and that he had written his
Letters to Dr. Allen to find which way he might further the Cause Catholic.

That he did Fast twenty-four hours, and prayed for the happy success of
Fasting and Prayer. Traitors that should kill the Queen.
the Spanish Fleet.

That Allen and others being arrant Traitors had taken order that in the 22d
year of her Majesty's Reign, there should be 50 men in privy Coats, and pocket
daggers to kill the Queen; and that one Pain, and one Elliot, were put in trust
to perform the same.

That my Lord was a Catholic, and favored their proceedings.

My Lord answered, he was no Catholic in the 22th. year of the Queens Earl.
Reign.

That he secretly was flying out of the Realm to Dr. Allen, being an His flying
out of the Realm. Throckmortons Opinion.
Arch-Traitor, which does argue my Lord to be no good Subject.

That Throckmorton practicing his Treasons by sounding the Ports, he did set
down in his Catalogue that a South-west wind would serve from Spain to Arundel
Castle in Sussex, and an Easterly wind from the Low Countries.

That in Throckmortons Catalogue of all the names, of all the Noblemen and
Gentlemen of every Shire that affects the Catholics, he began in Sussex, and
set down the Earl of Arundels Name the first.

That further, one Mott a Priest informed Throckmorton, that he was come Mott a
Priest.
over to sound the intents of the Earls of Arundel and Northumberland, and
others.

My Lord answered, when Mott was in Sussex, he never came there, but always
attended at Court. Earl.


Mr. Puckering said, the Traitors have a good Conceit of my Lord of Puckering.
Arundel, in knowing him to be affected to the Catholic Cause.

It was defined that the Catholic Cause was mere Treason.

Petro Paulo Rossetto came over to sound Noblemen and Gentlemen in England.

Then said my Lord, how prove you me to be a Traitor in these points? Earl.


Because, said Mr. Popham, you have confederated with Traitors by desiring
Popham.
Dr. Allen in your Letters to employ you any way that concerned the Cause
Catholic; because you have been reconciled to the Pope, and there was a Law
made in the 22d. year of this Queen, that whosoever was Reconciled to the Pope
from the obedience of the Queens Majesty, was in case of Treason.

My Lord confessed that Bridges did confess him, but not reconcile him in Earl.
any such sort, but only for absolution of his sins.

Mr. Popham charged him that he did once submit himself, but Sithence Popham.
fell from his submission, and therefore practiced new Treasons

He confessed he was acquainted with the Priests, and by two of them had been
absolved and confessed. Earl.


Sithence which time said, Mr. Popham he came to the Church, and fell to Popham.
the Catholic Cause again, which he cannot do by their Order, unless he be
Reconciled.

My Lord denied that ever he came to the Church after that time.

There was a Letter sent to the Queen of Scots by Morgan of France, in
Commendation of two Priests, wherein he says, one of them had reconciled
Morgan of France.
the Earl of Arundel.

Edmonds a Priest upon Examination said, that Reconciliation was odious.
Edmonds a Priest. Earl.


My Lord said, these be but Allegations and Circumstances, and that they ought
to be proved by two Witnesses.

It was justified he said once in the Star Chamber amongst the Lords there
assembled concerning a Libel there in Question, that whosoever was a Priest or
Papist, was an arrant Traitor.

Mr. Popham said, it was a coffeehouse made my Lord a Catholic, and Popham.
not Religion; and that he did disguise himself in shadow of Religion

There was a Picture showed that was found in my Lords Trunk, wherein Picture.
was painted a Hand bitten with a Serpent, shaking the Serpent into the fire,
about which was written this Poesy, quis contra nos? on the other side was
painted a Lion Rampant, with his Forces all bloody, with this Poesy, tamen
Leo: my Lord said, one Wilgrave his man gave him the same with a pair of
Hangers for a New years gift.

One Jonas Meridith being examined, etc. by way of Communication with a
Towns-man, who commended my Lord of Arundel for his forwardness, Meridith.
in that he had often observed my Lord at Paul's Cross.

This Jonas answered, that he knew he had often been at Pauls-Cross in the
Fore-noon, and has heard a Mass with him at the Charter House in the afternoon.

To this my Lord said nothing, but seemed to deny it.

My Lord being examined in the Tower of his sudden going away to Sea, Earl
he answered, to serve the Prince of Parma; or whither Dr. Allen should direct
him for the Cause Catholic.

My Lord said also, he was going away for fear of some Statute should be made
in the 22d. of this Queens Reign against the Catholics in that Parliament, and
that Dr. Allen advised him that he should not come over if he could tarry here
in any safety, because he might be the better able to make a Party in England
when they came.

Before my Lords going to Sea, he writ a Letter to be given the Queen after he
was gone, wherein he found fault with her hard dealing in giving countenance to
his Adversaries, and in disgracing him, and that he was discontented with the
Injustice of the Realm toward his great Grandfather, his Grandfather, and
his Father.

My Lord said, Hollinshead was faulty, for setting forth in his Chronicle, that
his Grandfather was attainted by Act of Parliament, but showed no Hollinshead.
cause wherefore.

He said in his Letter, his Grandfather was condemned for such trifies, that
the people standing by were amazed at it; he found fault also with the
proceedings against his Father.

Whereby it is apparent said Mr Popham, 'twas coffeehouse moved my Lord and
not Religion; and fearing lest his friends should think amiss of him, Popham.
he left a Copy of his Letter with Bridges a Traitor to be dispersed, to make
the Catholics to think well of him; for said Mr. Popham, being discontented,
he became a Catholic, and being so great a man he became a Captain of the
Catholics, which is as much as to be a Captain over Traitors.

A Counterfeit Letter was made 22 days before his going to Sea, directed to
one Baker at Linne, there being no such man abiding, wherein was signified A
Counterfe it Letter.
that my Lord was very hardly dealt withal by some of the Council, and that he
was gone into Sussex, and a farther Voyage, and that he would come home by
Norfolk.

This was a Counterfeit Letter, said Mr. Attorney, appointed by my Lord Mr.
Attorney.
to be dispersed, to make it known he was discontented.

Also Allen sent a Letter to the Queen of Scots in Ciphers, showing a great
party in England.

Allen sent my Lord word, if he did come over, he must take a greater Title
than that of Earl upon him, and therefore my Lord in this style, To Philip Duke
of Norfolk. Earl of Arundel.

Babington in his examination said, the Queen of Scots sent him word that the
Earl of Arundel was a fit man to be a chief Head for the Catholics. Babington.


Allen sent word to Rome, that the Bull which was last sent over into England,
Allen.
was at the Intercession of a great man in England.

My Lord (said Mr. Popham), was one of the principallest, and acquainted Popham.
thus far with Allen, Ergo, my Lord of Arundel, that great man.

Dr. Allen made a most villainous and slanderous Book, which was very hard to be
got, in which was contained, that the Earl of Arundel was a procurer of the
last Bull, and the procurer of the Invasion also; the Bull it self was some
part read, and the Book was part read also.

My Lord being charged on his confession, being examined why he would be ruled
thus by Dr. Allen, he excused it by saying, that he said he would Earl.
be ruled by Allen in all things, saving in that did concern her Majesty and
the State, and thereupon appealed to my Lord Chancellor, and Sir Walter
Mildmay, who were not present. Sir Christopher Hatton. Lord Chancellor;


The Book aforesaid intended that my Lord was a practiser with Allen about the
Invasion.

Then said my Lord, he would serve the Queen against all Princes, Pope, Earl.
or Potentates whatsoever.

The Queens Solicitor stood upon these points, and because it was proved Mr.
Solicitor.
that the Earl of Arundel would be ruled by Allen in any thing that should
concern the Catholic Cause.

And for that Dr. Allen has since that time practiced diverse monstrous
Treasons, and continually has built upon the help of some chief man in
England, there is none yet known of his degree, that has any thing to do with
Allen, and therefore my Lord must needs be culpable of all the Treasons Allen
has practiced and procured, in flying to Allen to serve the Prince of Parma,
ut antea.

My Lord was charged with relieving of diverse Traitors as Priests, and that he
did converse, and was confederate with diverse and sundry Traitors attainted,
indicted, and suspected, being Prisoners in the Tower, and that he had Mass in
the Tower, and that if the Spaniards should surprise the Tower, Sir Owen Hopton
should be put to the Rackhouse, Proved.


He was also charged, that diverse Papists, Seminaries, and such like, being
Prisoners in New gate, and other Prisons, reported that they hoped to see the
Earl of Arundel King of England, and that Cardinal Allen should direct the
Crown of England. Proved.


Before the coming of the Spaniards Fleet, when our Commissioners were in the
Low Countries, news was brought to the Tower that we should have peace betwixt
Spain and England, then would my Lord of Arundel be pensive.

When the Spanish Fleet was upon our Coast, and News was brought to the Tower,
that the Spaniards sped well, then the Earl would be merry.

Then when News came the English Fleet sped well, the Earl would be Proved.
sorry.

When News came the Spanish Fleet was come upon the Coast of Kent, Proved
my Lord said it is a great Wood, and a puissant Fleet, we shall have lusty
play shortly, I hope we shall plague them that have plagued us.

My Lord said, he would not fight against any that came to fight for the Proved.
Catholic Faith

He said, when the Spanish Fleet was at Sea he would have Three Masses a a day
for the happy success of Spain. 3 Masses a day Proved. Continual Prayer for
Spain.


He said also, he would have continual Prayer without ceasing for a time, for
the good success of Spain, viz. he would have every 24 hours 5 Priests to pray
two hours a piece for the defect of Laymen, and 14 Laymen to pray every one
an hour a piece for the happy and fortunate success of Spain. Proved.


He made himself a special Prayer for that purpose, and caused Copies thereof
in haste to be made. Proved.


Mr. Shelley then Prisoner in the Tower, told my Lord, that to exercise that
Prayer were dangerous, and wished my Lord to let it alone; Therefore Shelley.
my Lord called for the Copy of the Prayer again, and would not have it Copied.

He was charged that he did conjure Sir Thomas Gerrard Knight to keep Proved.
Sir Thomas Gerrard. Proved.
Counsel in all these matters before set down, who promised him, he would.

Bennet also promised to keep his Council, and diverse others.

Then were Sir Thomas Gerrard, Mr. Shelly, Bennet, the Priest, and diverse
Proved. Bennet. Prisoners removid.
others removed from the Tower to several other Prisons, and upon Examination
confessed all as aforesaid.

My Lord hearing all these matters laid hard against him by Mr. Solicitor,
grew into some Agony, and called for his Accusers face to face, which the
Learned Counsel did not yet yield unto. Earl.


He was likewise charged that he came once merely to Bennet the Priest in the
Tower, saying, Come Mr. Bennet, let us go pray that the Spaniards may beat down
London Bridge, and promised to give him a Damask Gown shortly, and that he
hoped to make him Dean of Paul's ere it were long; that the time of their
delivery was at hand, and willed them in any wise to be secret, for if he
should reveal these things, he would deny them to his face.

When News came to the Tower that the Spanish Fleet was driven away, my Lord
said, We are all undone, there is no hope for us this year, and the King of
Spain cannot provide such a power again this five or six years, The Earl is
sorry for this News.
some of us may be dead and rotten ere that time.

There were then brought into the Court viva voce upon their several Oaths
Anthony Hall, and Richard Young, a Justice of the Peace, who aimed something by
hearsay to the proof of the former matters. Witnesses.


Also Sir Thomas Gerrard, William Bennet, Tuchnon, Snoden, and Ithel, and
diverse others were closely kept in a place over the Kings Bench, closed in
Prisoners to witness,
with Arras, and were thereupon severally called into the Court viva voce, upon
their several Oaths to affirm that which is specified before Sithence Mr.
Solicitor began to speak, at this Mark Bennet the Priest was charged with a
Letter written to my Lord, wherein he should be sorry for the opening of these
matters as aforesaid against my Lord.

One Randal had writ this Letter in Bennets name, by advice of my Lord of
Arundel, to blind his practices; Bennet openly denied the writing of Lord Gray.
that Letter; whereupon my Lord Gray and my Lord Nroris, asked Bennet Lord
Norris.
if he knew of the Letter, yea or no? for their better evidence Bennet
confessed he had been moved to such a matter, but he did it not.

Against Sir Thomas Gerrard my Lord stood very stoutly in denial of what he
witnessed, willing him to look him in the face, and charging him as he would
answer before God, in whose presence he spoke, to tell nothing of him but
Truth: In Answer whereof, Sir Thomas referred himself to his Depositions before
read, to which he said he was sworn, yea, twice sworn.

There were called into the Court two Witnesses more, viz. one Walton, and one
Church, who justified Letters were brought from England to Walton, Church, and
Hill.
Rehnes, where they both were; which Letters were sent by one Hill, one of my
Lords Faction, that the Earl of Arundel should be General of the Catholics,
when the Tower should be surprised.

To Walton my Lord took exception, affirming, that he was a naughty, lewd
Fellow, who had sold that little Land he had to three several men, and of the
other Witnesses he said, that some were attainted, some Indicted, bad men and
Prisoners; and that their words were worth little credit.

Then said Mr. Popham, they were never tortured, but confessed all this Popham.
willingly, and they are such as you have accompanied.

Here ended every man his Speech, and the Noblemen and Peers of the Jury The
Jury.
went together.

My Lord humbly having submitted himself to the consideration of his Peers,
with protestation of Loyalty, the Lieutenant brought him from the Bar unto a
Seat near unto the Court of Common Pleas, where the Warders attended upon him.

My Lord Steward likewise withdrew himself a little while, as it seemed Lord
Steward.
to take some Refection, having all the day for the time of this business
forborne to eat any thing, and presently returned to his Seat of State.

Within one hour after, the Noblemen of the Jury came every one back, and were
again placed by Garter King of Heralds.

Then Mr. Sands asked every man of the Jury, severally, beginning at my Lord
Norris, the youngest Baron, and proceeding to my Lord Treasure the Foreman,
whether the Prisoner were guilty, yea, or no.

Which every one of them laying their hands upon their hearts, did protest
Verdict.
in their Consciences, and upon their honors, that he was guilty.

Then was the Lieutenant called to bring his Prisoner to the Bar, who was
brought accordingly, attended as before.

Then said Mr. Sands unto him, that he had been indicted of several Treasons,
Mr. Sands.
and that he had put himself upon the Trial of his Peers, who had found him
guilty, and therefore asked why Judgment should not be given against him.

Whereupon my Lord making three very low Obeysances upon his knees, Earl.
did humbly submit himself to my Lord Steward his Grace, and the favors of the
rest of the Nobles and Peers there present, and besought them to be Mediators
for him, that he might obtain at her Majesty's hands, to have order taken for
his debts, and to have Conference with his Officers, and to talk with his wife,
and to see his Infant, born after his Imprisonment, whom he had never seen.

Then my Lords Grace pronounced judgment, viz. that he should be conveyed to
the place from whence he came, and from thence to the place of Judgment.
Execution, and there to be hanged until he were half dead, his members to be
cut off, his bowels to be cast into the Fire, his head to be cut off, his
quarters to be divided into four several parts, and to be bestowed in four
several places; and so (said my Lord Steward) the Lord have mercy on thy Soul.

To this the Earl of Arundel said, as it were softly to himself, Fiat voluntas
Dei. And so having made a low Obeisance to the State, the Lieutenant took him
away, Mr. Shelton going before him with the Edge of the Axe toward him.

Then was there an O Yes made by the Sergeant at Arms, and the Court, together
with my Lord Stewards Commission dissolved; which done, my Lord of Darby took
the whitewand out of Mr. Winckfields hand, and broke the same in pieces, and
every man cried, God save the Queen.

FINIS.

