THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMY IN IRELAND. Declaring their Resolutions for a Free
Parliament, and the Re-admitting of all the Members secluded in 1648. and for
the establishing of a Learned and Orthodox Ministry, and their just Maintenance
by Tithes, and for the removing of all needless Impositions and Taxes, etc.

Together with, A Letter concerning the present Transactions there, directed to
a Friend in London.

Dated from Dublin February 18. 1659.

Entered in Stationers Hall according to order.

Printed at Dublin, and now reprinted at London, by S. Griffin, for John
Playford at his shop in the Temple near the Ch(...) (...)9.

A LETTER from DUBLIN To a Friend in LONDON.
Worthy Sir.
NOtwithstanding I have wrote to you by this very Post enclosed to my friend,
yet since its delivery into the Post House there having happened, sudden and
unexpected Changes which has not only retarded the usual pass of the Post but
much amused the people in this Nation. But as it has its original in Ireland,
yet does it chiefly concern England; It being intentionally to assert the
privileges of the Nations, in endeavoring to remove us out of that servitude
in which we have been for some years detained under: but Sir, not to keep you
in suspense, know that these persons here remonstrating were opposed by Sir
Har. Waller, with some other few Commanders, who with two Companies of Foot
secured Dublin Castle which was this day delivered into the hands of the
Remonstrators, as Sir Cha: Coote. Sir Theo. Jones, and the rest, I having
enclosed the Declaration; Sir, shall not need to give you any other further
account but that I am

Your Servant. W. G.
Dublin, Februory 18. 1659
The Declaration of the Army in Ireland; Dated from Dublin Feb. 16. 1659.
SInce the Authority of Parliament became openly violated, and that by their
own waged servants of the Army in England, by whom 41. of the Members of
Parliam. were torn from the Parliament House in December. 1648. and imprisoned,
and 160. other Members denied entrance into the House, and about 50. more
voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid violence, making in all of excluded
Members about 250. when the remaining Members charged the Army with the guilt
of that force, and sent to the then General of the Army for restitution of
those excluded Members, which was denied them, how many and manifold have been
the Miseries and Calamities under which these Nations have labored, and do
still labor, is evident to all equal minded men; The godly Ministers of the
Gospel despised, the Ministry it self vilified, Tithes and other means of their
maintenance (particularly in Ireland) taken from them and misapplied; The
Protestant Religion shaken and almost overturned, Anabaptists, Quakers, and
other Sectaries, set up and countenanced, Heresies and Schisms increased; The
Fundamental Laws of the Land trampled upon, and an Arbitrary Government
endeavored to be introduced; The Civil Rights, Properties, and Liberties of
the people, in their persons and Estates, broken in pieces; Impositions and
Taxes on the people without example laid, and increased in an excessive manner
and measure, whereby thousands of Families, have been ruined, and enforced to
beg their bread; Manufacture at home discouraged, Public Trade and Commerce
abroad interrupted; The Nations become deeply indebted, and generally
impoverished; the Reformed Protestant Churches abraad exposed to great danger,
wanting the wonted support of England, which (under God) was the Bulwork and
chief strength of the Protestant Religion throughout all Christendom; and
finally the English Nation (which was always deservedly) in so high honor and
estimation at home and abroad, as it was a bridle and terror to their Enemies,
and a countenance and support to their Friends and Allies, is now become (we
tremble and grieve to have so just cause to speak it) a scorn and derision to
all Nations round about us; and all this brought to pass to satisfy the
Avarice, Ambition, Lusts and Fears of a few inconsiderable persons of
Anabaptistical and other Fanatic Spirits, who have made it their business to
occasion still one trouble on the neck of another, so to embroyl and continue
the Nations in Division, War, and bloody Confusions, that sober men might not
have time or leisure (with maturity of judgment or Council) to look ino the
inwards of their designs or actings. And after we had beheld all this with
bleeding hearts, and calling to mind that when in December 1648 the said force
was put upon the Parliament, the then remaining Members sent sundry times to
the General to know why he imprisoned their Members, and desired him to set
them at liberty, which was not done, and we gathering from all this, that if
the House were once freed from the force of an Army, and they again restored to
Freedom and Liberty of sitting and acting, they would then upon the former
grounds (in conscience of their duties to God and their Country, and in
testimony of their resentment of that breach of privileges of the Parliament,
have taken into the House those excluded Members, and filled vacant places by
due and orderly elections of the people) and after so many years unhappy
interruption unite again in a Full and Free Parliament, (and there assert the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and Libertyes of the people, which from
the very beginning of the War of England, have been not the least ground of
their contest with the late King, and ever since; and join their councils and
endeavors for restoring these Nations to Peace and Tranquillity.

And thence it was, that on the 14 day of December 1659 several Officers of the
army here, on behalf of themselves and those under their commands, by their
joint Declaration, declared and published their steadfast resolutions to adhere
to the Parliament in the defense of its Privileges, and the just Rights and
Liberties of the people of these Nations as Men and Christians; In which
Declaration afterward concurred the whole Army of Ireland, but now finding
much contrary to our expectations, that when the Members of Parliament now
assembled at Westminster, were in December 1659. (by an extraordinary
providence) restored to their Freedom and Liberty of sitting and acting as in
Parliament; and that diverse of those formerly excluded Members of Parliamnet on
the 27. of December 1659. (as they had formerly done in May 1659.) offered
themselves to discharge their Trusts for the several Counties and places for
which they were elected, and formerly served; those their fellow Members
assembled at Westminster, did not only deny them admittance, but also voted
and ordered the utter exclusion of all the excluded Members with this further
addition, That none of them should be chosen in future Elections to sit in
Parliament, whereby they have by a more unnatural violence taken away from
above the one half of the people of England, their Representatives in
Parliament, and limited and abridged in a high degree the Liberty and Freedom
of the people in future Elections, which denial and order of theirs in a time
when they were under no force, is so much the more strange, in regard that in
December 1648. when they were under a force, they transferred that guilt from
themselves to the Army, and pretended a willingness to readmit those Members if
it were in their power as as is formerly mentioned.

And whereas Lt. Genesis Ludlow had placed in Ireland several Officers who are
Anabaptists, and persons of the like fanatique spirits, (many of whom had been
very active in the late conspiracies and actings of the factious part of the
Army in England, even against those members of Parliament now sitting at
Westminster, of which Officers so placed by Lt. Genesis Ludlow, it was found
necessary to purge the Army, and to put in their places persons more soberly
minded and well affected to the Parliament; yet after all that done, and after
Lt. Genesis Ludlow stood justly and deservedly charged wish High Treason, the said
Lt. Gen Ludlow himself, and some others of the like principles with him, were
by a report from the Council of State proposed to be appointed to govern not
only the Army, but also the whole Nation of Ireland, to the astonishment of the
people and Army here, to the unsetling of those persons so well deserving, to
the hazard of the peace of the Nation and Army, (and which is above all) to the
endangering even of Religion it self. And here it is observable that those
Members now sitting at Westminster by their Declaration of Ian. 23. 1659. since
their restitution to their pre^ent liberty of sitting) have published that
extravagant Councils and actions, have engaged the Nations in a great debt and
charge, which it seems necessitates their laying a new increase of charge on
the Nations, and yet so indulgent they are to those persons that in a high
degree created that necessity of so unreasonably charging the people, and whose
Estates might well bear a great part of that burden, as without so much as any
suit made to them by those Delinquents, they granted them indemnity for their
persons and Estates, whereby it seems the said Members now sitting at
Westminster, hold it fit that those who are of sober spirits, and offended not
the Parliament, should out of their Estates pay for those extravagant men's
Delinquencie, rather then the Delinquents themselves. And although the said Lt.
Genesis Ludlow, (and Miles Corbet Esquire together with Col. I. Jones and Col. Mat.
Thomlinson) stand impeached from hence most justly of High Treason, and that
charge against them being known to the House, and there remaining, yet they
have admitted two of those persons, namely the said Lt. Genesis Ludlow, and Miles
Corbet actually to sit in the said House.

And now the greatness of those miseries which have befallen these three
Nations in general, by such late actings in England, and those heightened with
many aggravations in the circumstances of them, (too many and too long to be
repeated) as it has begotten in us and in all good men in the three Nations
deep impression of astonishment and horror, so it is evident, that if it be any
longer continued, it will perpetually nourish dis-honour to God, grief to all
good men, and (we doubt and fear) utter infamy and destruction to the three
Nations.

In contemplation whereof, and considering how God has in his justice blasted
all attempts that since the year 1648. have been made for resetling of these
Nations in peace and tranquillity, and that after all the trials and various
changes of Government which we have in all that time with much long suffering
and patience endured, there is no way visible to us undrer Heaven whence
deliverance may probably be wrought or expected, but from the care and wisdom
of a Free and full Parliament in England, which (by the experience of all
former ages has been found the best and only expedient for providing remedies,
to be applied to so great and General mischiefs arising in Church or State. And
considering also that the marks of the true reformed Religion according to the
word of God, and of the fundamental Laws of the Land, and of our now dying
Liberties and Freedom, are not yet so utterly razed and defaced, but that some
footsteps do yet remain, so as (by the wisdom of a full and Free Parliament)
they may be again renewed and firmly re-established; and considering likewise
that our hopes of having the said excluded Members restored, and of new
elections to be made for vacant places, whereby there might be a full and Free
Parliament, as there was on the fifth day of December 1648, and the ancient and
long contested-for Liberties of the people might be asserted, are much contrary
to our expectations, and contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Land, and
indeed contrary to all justice and reason become frustrated; and considering
further how unjust and unreasonable a thing it is, that of above 500. Members,
whereof the Commons House of Parliament usually consisted, there were but 44 or
thereabouts, when that fatal vote passed for the keeping out the aforesaid
excluded Members, by the prevalency of a major part of the said 44 persons (not
much exceeding those who voted then on the contrary side,) which assumes to it
self the Supreme Authority, not only of England, but also of the three Nations,
without Precedent or example of any former age, here being above 250 which
stand eleven years excluded, without so much as the least offer of an
impeachment against them in all that time, which unexampled and unparalled
assumption in those men is not possible to continue but by the force of an Army
poisoned with Anabaptistical and corrupted principles, to the continual grief
and unsupportable burden and charge of the three Nations

And besides that act of the aforesaid persons chasing away (for so it now
appears) about 250. Members, of above 500 chosen by all the several parts of
England, according to the known Laws of the Land, to represent the whole Nation
in Parliament; and after the forcible exclusion of so many that the 44 persons
remaining (amongst whom we believe there are some worthy Patriots who are not
so fully concurring in the acting of the rest of their number, as violently
overvoted by them, which is a further aggravation of the others guilt) should
dare to usurp to themselves as is formerly mentioned contrary to all Laws, the
supreme power not only of England, but also of Ireland, and Scotland, is a
thing which none but conquerers or Tyrants would attempt, and in all
circumstances is so hideous and monstrous to be endured by a free people,
formerly famous to all the world for wisdom and valor as the English Nation
have been, as it will be incredible to all posterity.

And lastly considering that as in all ages, and more particularly since the
beginning of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, our brethren in England have
abundantly manifested a tender and compassionate sense of the condition of
Ireland, and were careful to relieve us in our lowest estate, as bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh; which we do, and shall ever acknowledge with
humble thankfulness, and (as a debt which we well know to be due from us to
them above all people in the world,) shall be for ever as tender of their
happiness and welfare as of our own, which indeed is involved in theirs, and
without whom Ireland cannot be happy. We therefore remaining constant in the
reasons of our said Declaration of the 14 of December 1659. for adhering to the
Parliament in defense of it is privileges, and the just Rights and Liberties of
these Nations; all which we see now are apparently more and more violated by
the not admission of the said excluded members, and by not filling the vacant
places, whereby the House might be full, and being freed from force, might
uninterruptedly act according to their judgments and consciences toward
resettling the peace of these Nations, which otherwise in all humane
probability can never be restored to peace and tranquillity.

We do therefore declare for a free and full Parrliament in England, consisting
not only of those that sat on the 11 of October 1659. but also of all such of
the members of Parliament imprisoned, excluded, or withdrawn in December 1648.
as are yet living; whom we desire may be restored to the freedom and liberty of
sitting, and acting according to the trusts committed to them by the several
Counties and places which did choose them, that so they may be no longer
debarred from discharging their said Trusts, and that vacant places may be
speedily supplied by free and due Elections of the people, yet so as none of
the persons to be admitted or elected be any of those who have been in Arms, or
otherwise ayding, abetting, or assisting the late King or his Son in the late
war against the Parliament; and that the House being so filled, may proceed
unanimously to consult the best means for resettling the peace of the Nations,
the re-establishment of true Religion, (the surest foundation, as of all
righteous Government, so of all the happiness of a Nation) the fundamental Laws
of the Land (whereby all men's rights and properties are preserved) and the
liberties and freedom of the people, which are supported by those Laws.

And for those ends, and in discharge of our duty to God and to our Country, We
do resolve (by the blessing of Almighty God) to join with all our Brethren in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, who have or shall join with us for the ends
aforesaid: and do resolve for the maintenance and preservation thereof to
hazard our Lives and Estates, and all that is dear to us: and we doubt no^ but
all our Brethren in the said Nations, who disdain to be made Slaves, will join
with us herein, as being with wisdom and reason desirous to deliver over to
their Posterity, that liberty and freedom, which was conveyed to them at so
dear a rate by our Ancestors: And then we trust, that by the great mercy of
God, will speedily follow a happy settlement of these yet miserable and
distracted Nations; and consequently that the true Protestant Religion in the
power and purity thereof may be established; the Godly, Learned and Orthodox
Ministers of the Gospel maintained by their Tithes, and other their accustomed
Rights; their persons supported and countenanced; the Universities and all
other Seminaries of Learning cherished; Heresies and S^^^^^ s^ppressed;
needless Impositions and Taxes on the people removed; and no charge to be laid
on any of the Nations without their own free consents, given by ^^eir
^^presentatives in their several and respective Parliaments, M^nufactu^^s, and
public Trade and Commerce, at home and abroad ad^anced; Ju^^^^e in its due and
wonted course administered; The just deb^s of ^^e Nati^n satisfied; The
Treasures and Revenews thereof preserved and returned to their right and proper
Channels; The arrears of the Army, and other public debts duly satisfied; The
Armies and Forces continued in due obedience to the supreme authority, and not
presume as some have done, to give Laws thereunto, which has been the root, of
a great part of our miseries; The Nations Enriched, United, Strengthened; The
Reformed Protestant Churches abroad supported and countenanced; The Honor of
the English Nation restored to the comfort of Friends and terror of Enemies;
The Plantation of Ireland in the Hands of Adventurers and Soldiers, and other
English and Protestants, Advanced as a further accession of honor and
greatness to the English Nation; And so by the blessing of God all will shortly
terminate in the glory of God, the peace and tranquillity of these Nations, the
strengthening of them against foraign invasion and intestine Rebellion, and the
comfort, contentment and satisfaction of all the good people in these Nations:
Which the Lord of his Mercy grant.

Dated at Dublin the 16. of Febr. 1659. Sir Cha. Coote Ea. Willi. C^^^^^^ld Sir
Theo ^ones Sir Oli. S. George Sir Hen. Ingoldsby Sir John King Col Chidley
Coote Col. John Cole Col Willi. Warden Col. Richard Coote Col. John Go^ges Col.
Hen. Owen L^^ Col. The Scot L^^ (...) W. Purefoy Lt. Col. Oliver Jo^^s Maj.
Them. Barrington Maj. Alex. Staples Maj. Rich. B^^gley Maj. George Pepper Lt.
Col. H. Smith^^ck Cap. Hen. Baker. Cap. Rob. s^^^ Ge^^^^ Cap Cha. W^^^^. Cap.
Adam (...). Col. (...) Barrow. Cap. S^^^ (...) Cap John Sal^ Cap. Simon Ga^^^
Col Cha. Blunt Col. Hen. Slade Cap. Ant. Stamp Cap. A^t Purefoy Cap. George S.
George Cap. Peter Purefoy Cap. Thomas Cu^e. C^p Them. Newco^^^ Cap. Thom.
N^^^^^^gh C^^ ^^en. Thrimpton Lt. ^^^gh. Clotworthy Lt. Peter Flower Lt. Her.
Langrish Lt. R^chard Morric^^ Lt. B^ian Jaques Lt. Richard Butler Lt. John
Ottway Lt. Thomas Evelin Lt. Th^mas Flint Lt. Ldw. Harrington Cornet A^t.
Usher. ^^rn. Donw. Prothero Cor. W. Pinsent. Ensigo John Head Tho. Sheppard
Mar. G. Qu. Mr. W. Flood John Pain Common.


FINIS.

