A TRUE RELATION OF A Devilish Attempt To Fire the Town of BARNET, In the
County of HARTFORD, On Thursday the 16th of this Instant October 1679.

In a Letter to a Friend in LONDON.

LONDON, ^^^^ed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1679.

A True Relation of an Attempt, to Fire the Town of BARNET.
SIR,
I Cannot excuse my self of acquainting you with a very late attempt of Firing
our Town of Barnet, which though but a little one was not beneath the Malice of
our known Aversaries, as your great and famous City neither was, nor is above
it. And though God has frustrated their design, yet the Eviction of it with so
much Evidence, will be of no small use to stop the Mouths of those, who decry
the belief of all such Attempts as ungrounded; the true Narrative is as
follows. On Thursday October 16 at Night, about one of the Clock, the Mistress
of one of the Houses attempted to be Fired, as she lay in her Bed, after a
little slumber, awakned, and supposed she smelled a smoke so unusual, as filled
her with suspicion of Fire to be in some place of the House. Upon this
occasion, some of the Family were raised to make a search; but all places being
searched where such a thing might be expected, nothing was found that could be
the least occasion of suspicion: But the smoke and the stench of it increasing,
confirmed the suspicion so, that they thought fit to awaken their next
Neighbor, and oblige him to search his House, and especially his Cellar, where
he sometimes dried Tobacco, and from whence they supposed the smell of the Fire
came. But after the strictest Examination, nothing could be found that might
give any satisfaction of the place where it was, though the symptoms of Fire so
much increased, as made it beyond doubt that they were in danger. At length one
going into a Shop next the Street, where never any Fire used to be made,
observed that in a corner about two or three foot from the Street, the smell
was hottest, and an apparent token that the Fire was not far off. Upon this,
diverse Neighbors being gathered together for their Assistance, both in the
search, and if there should be further occasion, for the quenching of it; some
of them brake down the Wall near to the Ground, which was of Wainscot and other
Boards. No sooner was this done, but the Nest was discovered, and there they
found a Fire kindled so far, that it had burnt a considerable part of the
Timber next adjoining, and within a few inches of the Deal-boards: But raking
the place (which was as you shall hear so unusual, and so unfit a place for
Fire, except upon an industrious Plot for Mischief) they found a considerable
quantity of Combustible Matter amassed together, partly burnt to Ashes, and
partly unconsumed: But there having been much Water thrown upon it, they could
not well discern what it was, but that the ground of it was Charcoal; and that
all Circumstances considered, it was beyond all dispute disposed there to fire
the whole Town; which Circumstances I shall exactly and faithfully relate, that
not only a due Conclusion, but also a due improvement may be made of it.

There is in Barnet a row of Houses, striking down from the Church to the
Marketplace, which divides the two great Streets, and is so posited, that
being Fired, it would be hard for either side of the Town to escape it. In this
Row, two of the most considerable Houses were so disjoined (having each of them
their proper Walls) that betwixt the Walls there was a Vacancy, but no larger
at the entrance than would admit with some difficulty of a Man's Arm to be
thrust in. Here it was (and as I said before, about two or three foot from the
Street) that the Fire, and the Combustible Matter was found, which was as far
inward as an Arm could reach from the Street side: But from within the Houses
there was no Passage to it; nor had there been any Fire in the foresaid Cellar,
many Months before. Upon the report of this, many Gentlemen, and others,
repaired to the place next Day to satisfy themselves of the truth of the
Matter related: And upon the most strict Examination of all particulars, there
were not any (though most averse from the belief of such designed, and wicked
Practices) but were fully convinced that it was an industrious Attempt to
consume the Town to Ashes.

Sir, I should not have given you the trouble of these Lines, but from the
sense of our duty to acknowledge the good Hand of God upon us, in so remarkable
a Deliverance: And although the success of this Mischievous Design might have
rendered our Narrative more affecting, and deplorable: Yet as the watchful Eye
of God over us to the preventing of the sad effects, is to us the greater
Mercy; so the wretched Contrivance, of more wretched Authors, is not unworthy
of your special notice. You have in this Evidence sufficient to possess you,
that the same Spirits which produced those many and dreadful Conflagrations, is
not yet dead, nor asleep; but attempting all manner of Ways to promote their
Hellish Interests, founded on the Ruins of all whom they are pleased to call
Heretics. And that all Protestants however distinguished, are equally
obnoxious to their Cruelties, is no matter of dispute with Men of a mean
Intelligence. I cannot pass by one circumstance of our Danger without a Remark.
The two Houses betwixt which this Fire was kindled, were inhabited, the one of
them by a strict observer of the present Rites of the Church of England; the
other by a Dissenter: But both of them Persons of a sober Life, and a general
good Reputation. But this is no matter of Consideration with our common
Adversaries the Papists (upon whom we may confidently, without
uncharitableness, charge the Fact) the Sacrifice of one, and the other; yea, one
and all is most grateful to them. It is rather my Wish than my Hope, that such
Minute Attempts upon such inconsiderable places as Barnet, should confine their
Malice, or that the disappointment should discourage them from far greater. It
is high time for all to be awakened, and you Citizens of London especially,
who, as you are looked on as the greatest Let to their Interest, so you are the
greatest Object of their Hatred and Conspiracies. But as hitherto, the Lord
has in a wonderful manner, in dispite of all Powers and Policies (befriending
them) detected, and prevented their Mischievous Devices: So let us, as our Duty
and Interest, stir up our selves to lay hold on Him by the Prayer of Faith, and
a holy Christian Life, that he may yet be Omniscient, and Almighty for us, and
against all those that rise up against us. We are Besotted, if such Instances
keep not alive the apprehensions of our Enemies Guilt, and our own Dangers. Let
us not be wanting to our selves, and God will be All-sufficient.

There were three Persons strangers suspected of this Fact, who came to a small
Inn in the Town requiring Lodging, but although they were promised
Entertainment, they departed before Bedtime, and it is not known that they
lodged that Night any where in the Town; but three such like Persons were seen
sculking not long before the Fire brake out, but not after. And for our parts
we keep no Watch, to Examine and Apprehend such Persons, it may be we may now
learn by our Danger, to be at the Charge of some better means for our Security.
Farewell.

Barnet, October. 20.1679. Yours, M. D.

FINIS.

