FRIENDLY ADVICE TO PROTESTANTS: OR, AN ESSAY TOWARD Comprehending and Uniting
OF ALL PROTESTANT DISSENTERS TO THE Church of England: HUMBLY Offered to the
Consideration of this present PARLIAMENT, as the best Expedient of this time to
secure the Safety, Honor, and Welfare of the KING and Kingdom

By a Sober Protestant.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Heyrick, and are to be Sold at his Shop, at
Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1680.

TO THE Courteous Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Entreat you to peruse with a mild, a moderate, and a Christian Temper, these
few sheets which have been thought fit to be recommended to the public view;
as well to give a full prospect of the Jesuitical Designs against us and our
Religion, as to persuade our Brethren to that Unity and Uniformity, which will
secure us against all their Hellish Attempts. This Invitation will appear so
much the more seasonable, because we are yet threatened with strong
Combinations, with mighty Conspiracies, with the Conjunction of Foreign Powers,
that promise to themselves the overthrow of Christ's Gospel and Truth amongst
us. Methinks that the greatness of the Common Danger in which we are all
concerned, should Alarm us into a compliance with one another, and oblige us to
join to maintain that Profession, which our Enemies jointly strike at: Methinks
their Policy should teach us, how to preserve our selves, and cause us to unite
also in Affections, in Gods Worship, in our Cares and Endeavors for the
Public Safety, for the prevention of their mischievous purposes, too much
encouraged by our groundless and unreasonable Divisions.

In this juncture of time, the Nations welfare and preservation has such a
dependency upon this Conjunction, that we can never expect it without this
reconciliation. It is the Unity of the people that will render us invincible,
and draw down upon our heads the Blessing of Heaven: The safest Defense of
States and Kingdoms. It will establish Religion upon an unmovable Basis, and
maintain the envied Hierarchy of our Church in the midst of all Disorders. It
will prevent many wicked Designs of the Pope and his bloody Agents, and silence
the jealousies and tumultuous fears that disturb our quiet. In a word, Unity in
Religion and Gods Worship, will preserve the Nations Peace from Foreign
Invasion, and Intestine discords. If therefore our Brethren of the same
Religion, who differ from us only in shadows, would hearken at last to this
Reconciliation, and join with us at least in outward appearance: If they would
consent to lay aside all prejudice and partiality, and banish from among us all
names of dissension, innumerable advantages would from thence proceed, and this
happy Conjunction would infallibly prove the most Invincible Bulwark of our
Church and Nation, against the malice of Hell, and the Popes fury. In order
thereunto, several particulars are here recommended to the public view, to
dispose men's minds for this blessed unity in Religion, and prepare them for a
Cure.

But as there are distempers which the Patients frowardness, and other
circumstances will not suffer to be healed by every common Physician, the grand
disease of our Nation is such, that only the Wisdom of our Superiors, can
complete the cure, and close up our bleeding wounds, torn and enlarged through
our Enemies subtle practices.

Several endeavors have been formerly made for the same purpose, but success
has not answered the expectations of good men, because their Judicious and
Religious proceedings have been frustrate, as some imagine, through the
unseasonableness and sharpness of the Remedies, or the untractableness of
interessed persons, or rather, through the secret Plots of our busy Enemies,
who lay in our bosoms, and had a finger in our actings of this nature.

But now these obstacles are partly removed, now the greatness of our danger
has alarmed many into a compliance with our Church, and begot in us an earnest
desire of a Conjunction, we only wait for an Invitation and the perfecting of
that Union, which will render us and our posterity happy for ever.

I shall desire from all True Protestants a favorable acceptance of, and a
charitable construction to these my endeavors, which I hope will prevail upon
men of calm spirits, and unbiassed judgments, my zeal and affection for the
service of my Country, and for the preservation of the true Religion, for which
I have been a sufferer, has encouraged me to this Attempt, Who knows, but that
these considerations that I here offer, may prevail upon many, may satisfy
their doubting Consciences, and oblige them to study for the future, Unity and
Peace? Who knows, but that a Person though in a mean Station, may contribute
something toward that Blessed Work of Uniting us and our Brethren together?
For it is the usual Method of Divine Providence, to make use of the unlikeliest
Agents, to bring to pass the great Designs, and the noble effects of his Power
and Wisdom, that the Glory might be ascribed to him alone, and that none might
partake with him in that which is all his due.

I beseech the God of all Wisdom, Unity and Peace, to unite us all together, to
reconcile our differences, te enlighten our understandings with his Truth,
sanctify our wills and affections with his Spirit of Love. I beseech His
Divine Majesty to preserve in health and prosperity, our gracious and religious
King, and bless the zealous endeavors of the wise and great Council of our
Nation, for his Glory and the Nations Welfare. This shall always be the Prayer
of

M. D.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Conspiracy and present Designs of the Popish Party in Europe,
against the Protestant Interest discovered, with the methods observed by them
to overthrow the Church of England. Page 1. CHAP. II. The danger of Division in
a Nation about matters of Religion, and what pernicious consequences it has
had in foreign Countries, and in this. 12 CHAP. III. That there is no
reasonable cause of dividing from our Church, and that the most scrupulous
Conscience may and ought to conform according to the Laws of God as well as
man. 20 CHAP. IV. The true causes why most part of our dissenting Brethren will
not join with us in the Worship of our God, enquired into. In what particulars
our differences chiefly consist, and their grand Objection Answered. 32 CHAP.
V. Seasonable and Christian Advices for our Nonconforming Brethren, who are
possessed with such strong prejudices against the Church of England, that they
cannot easily overcome them: and a Reconciliation proposed. 49 CHAP. VI. An
Exhortation to all the Learned, Pious, and Christian Teachers amongst our
Nonconforming Brethren, to prevent in time the Nations ruin, by an Unity with
us; and to lay aside all Prejudice and Partiality. 56
A SEASONABLE ADVICE TO ALL True Protestants IN ENGLAND, IN This present
posture of Affairs.
CHAP. I. The Conspiracy and present Designs of the Popish Party in Europe,
against the Protestant Interest discovered, with the methods observed by them
to overthrow the Church of England.
THE true Christian Faith in all Ages has been endangered by the cruelties and
furious persecutions of the Devil and his Hellish Agents. Since the Murder of
the Divine Author of this Excellent Religion, there is no Age nor Kingdom but
has seen multitudes of his sincere Followers, sent after their Good Master.
How furiously did the Pharisees rage against the Apostles! how barbarously did
they handle the first Christians! how many Consultations and Attempts to stifle
this Religion in its Infancy, in the Rivers and Torrents of the Blood of its
Professors! And when by S. Paul's Preaching the Truth was generally known and
embraced all over the Roman Empire, how many Massacres and Tragedies have been
acted upon Christians! As it is not possible to describe the inhumanities of
Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, and other Caesar's: it is impossible to declare the
number of Christ's Disciples, murdered in all parts of their Dominions, in
every Town and Hamlet, and in every Province, fire and sword, misery and
torments were the portions of all that were so bold as to own this sacred Name.

Afterward when by the goodness of God, the Roman Emperors began to open their
Eyes and perceive the Divinity of this Faith, when they began to draw the whole
World by their Religious Examples, to worship a Crucified Savior; the Devil
(whose Empire was thereby overthrown) took other measures, and an other course
to destroy Christianity, and hinder its progress amongst men. Instead of
opposing the whole Body of it, which had gained an invincible credit in the
World, he resolved to pick quarrels with some of its Doctrines, and to poison
the Hypocritical Professors, with such pernicious persuasions, as might spread
to the forming of a Party for himself. No sooner did the Primitive Christians
come out of the Heathenish Persecutions, but this grand Enemy of all Truth and
Piety advanced amongst them the Heresies of Arius, Apollinarius, Nestorius,
Novatus, Pelagius, and others of his Champions, who either by subtilty or
cruelty assaulted again Christ's Church afresh, and raised persecutions against
her in her very bowels. But Satan's Malice was never so remarkable, nor the
Sufferings of the Church never so many, nor the Plots and Combinations against
her never so frequent, under the Governments of the Jews and Romans; as they
have been since the Apostasy of the Roman Church from Christ's true Faith, and
its reception of the ancient Heresies. The Devils Throne established in the Old
Capitol, seems to be now transferred to the infamous Vatican of Rome, the
ancient abode of the Whores, and the now Seat of the Great Whore of Babylon:
Corn. Tacit. lib. 2. in fine Vitel. Imperij.
for from this place it is impossible to number the Decrees and Commissions
that have been sent to murder, destroy, burn, and overthrow Christ's true
Church on Earth. How many Wars have been kindled! how many Massacres acted! how
many Plots set on foot! how many Cruelties and Tragedies have proceeded from
the Resolutions and Orders of the Vatican? In all Ages and Kingdoms of our
Northern-World, the Roman Party was never wanting in any bloody Scene to
destroy Christ's Disciples. It is observable that for above seven hundred
years, there has scarce been a War in Europe, but the Pope of Rome has been
the first Contriver, and greatest Promoter of it, chiefly when Christ's Church
and People were concerned. For it has always been the Policy of the Roman
Court, when the Princes of Europe were grown so Rich or Great as to give them a
Jealousy, to stir them up by their Nuncios to some chargeable and dangerous
War, or to raise against them their discontented Neighbors. And since the
Reformation has separated from them a part of Europe, all the Protestant Blood
that has been spilt, may be charged upon the Pope and his Agents. How many
millions in France, Germany, Spain, and other parts of Europe have been slain
by the Papists! How many private Massacres and public Wars have been begun and
encouraged by them! I dare assert, and offer my self to prove from a certain
knowledge of the Histories of former Ages, that in this Northern World since
the first Reformation, the Pope and his Papists have been so great Enemies of
the Peace of Christendom, that there has been no War kindled, nor scarce any
Bloody Scene acted by any Authority, nor any noted Wickedness performed, but
the Pope had there a hand, and was concerned as one of the chief Actors. This
unreconcileable hatred which he bears to Christ's Church and his Gospel,
inrages him and all his restless Agents, against this flourishing and happy
Kingdom. Since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, how many hundred Plots
and Conspiracies have been set on foot by the Papists against the Lives of our
Kings and Princes, and the Peace of this Nation! This Land seems to have been
the chiefest Theater of their Cruelty and private Conspiracies. As soon as by
the Goodness of God one Plot is disappointed, another is immediately begun and
advanced, to trouble this Kingdom. I shall not mention here the former
Discoveries, that have been made of the Popes designs against us, of our danger
in Eighty Eight, of the Gunpowder-Plot, of our late Civil Wars, of our Royal
Martyrs Murder, of the Noble Blood that has been privately spilt, and of our
unreconcileable differences in Religion, known to be fomented by the Pope and
Papists, and many other of their contrivances within these few years, tending
to disquiet and disturb Christ's Church amongst us. I shall in this short Tract
give an Account only of the present designs of the Papists against the
Protestant Religion in Europe, from certain and well grounded Intelligence,
that I have had with worthy men of the Popish Religion, and the Acquaintance
that I have desired to get in the Affairs of Europe within these twenty years:
I shall here give a prospect of a private Consultation and a crafty
Contrivance, which has caused already much Christian Blood to be spilt in all
parts of Europe, and God knows how much more the carrying on of these designs
will cost: God knows what miseries and afflictions it will bring upon us. For
the prevention of the mischiefs intended against us in this Land, and our
Protestant Religion; I here offer this Discovery to the Public, or as much as
is necessary to be known. I pray God that our Brethren of the same Religion
would seriously consider it, so as to reunite again with us in the sincere
profession of the Truth and Worship of our God, that our Enemies may not
advantage themselves by our divisions; for this purpose I shall show what this
Popish Design is, by whom commenced, and who are chiefly concerned.

Alexander the Seventh, of the Family of Chigi was looked upon as one of the
greatest Politicians of his days. As soon as he was settled in his Papacy, he
sent his Nuncios into France, Germany and Spain, to reconcile the Popish
Princes, and to conclude between them such a League as that they might be able
to suppress the Calvinists at home, and oppose together the Turk abroad. The
differences between the French and the Spaniards were composed, by the Marriage
of the eldest Infanta of Spain with Lewis the Fourteenth, the youngest being
given to the Emperor, the Chief of the House of Austria. This Peace gave
leisure to the French Court, and an opportunity to the Pope and his Agents to
Work and Solicit the Ruin of the Protestants, by pulling down their Churches,
and denying them the privileges allowed them before. Several ways were then
proposed in the Assembly of Cardinals, answerable to the state of every
Kingdom. England was then groaning under the Tyranny of an Usurper dreadful to
all Europe; but a Religion was then here professed in opposition to Popery: The
Kings Majesty was in his Banishment. It was therefore resolved to get here such
an Interest in the Army and in the Land, as that the Papists might be able to
make a strong party, when time should serve: for that purpose, several Jesuits
were sent over to set up new Religions and divide the people amongst
themselves, and to join with the Army, into which they were admitted in Offices
of Trust under their usual disguises. A proposal had been made to our Gracious
Sovereign to draw him from the Truth, with large hopes of an universal
assistance of the foreign Papists, in such a case to settle him again in his
Throne: but he was not to be drawn to be the Popes Slave in hopes of a Crown,
nor to be persuaded to embrace such absurdities against his Conscience and
Reason. God therefore performed for him what his Enemies had but proposed, and
restored to him his inheritance, as a reward of his Fidelity to Truth, contrary
to the whole Worlds expectation. When the Court of Rome saw so great a
revolution in this Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion succeeding to the
former Anarchy in the Church, when they saw no hopes of that Change they wished
for, they sent as many Emissaries as they could to sow the seeds of division
amongst us and our brethren of the same persuasion, for the carrying on of
their damnable designs, the ruin of our Kingdom and Church; against which they
planted all their Engines. A Consultation was regularly had in London of the
most experienced and wisest Jesuits, who had intelligence with most parts of
the Kingdom, and knew by Letters the posture of all Affairs, and the Peoples
dispositions: The result was sent over to their General at Rome, and the
Assembly appointed there for English Affairs: From thence they received every
month new Orders how to proceed, which Orders they had a general Commission to
correct according to the unexpected accidents that might happen.

During the late Civil War and Usurpation, the Jesuit had got many Proselytes
to his Religion by drawing them from the Truth, or causing some to cast off all
respect of any other Religion, but that which their sordid Interest
recommended. The Wicked and Antichristian Principle of the former, and the
profaneness and licentiousness of the latter, made them both ready to embrace
Popery, as soon as it should appear with any credit amongst us; but all this
while the Knave lurked under the shape of an Anabaptist, of a Quaker, of a
Fift-Monarchy man, and sometimes for his Interest he would appear amongst the
Presbyterians and Independents. The severity of the ancient Laws, and the
Peoples general hatred of Popery and Jesuits, suffered him not to lift up his
Mask: therefore all his proceedings were private and secret, and under such
outward garbs, as hindered him from being visible to every eye.

But as soon as the Kings Majesty returned to his Crown and Kingdom, the
Jesuits and Papists were resolved to take other measures: The services of some
of their Party, and the Authority of Crowned Heads emboldned them to appear
amongst us with more Courage and less Fear of the Law, which by the King's
merciful temper was mitigated toward them, and they suffered to make
profession of their Religion without fear of punishment: All that they seemed
then to desire and pretend to was but the freedom to exercise their Religion,
but give the Devil an Inch and he will take an Ell. Their secret aim and
private contrivances have always tended to the overthrow of Church and State,
for the better carrying on of their purposes, they have endeavored to have all
the Interest they could make amongst the great ones.

There was then three obstacles to their grand Design not to be overcome on a
sudden: The Kings reality in the Protestant Profession, the Nations general
aversion for Popery, some out of Interest and for Fear of losing their
Impropriations and Abbey-Lands; others out of a principle of Religion, and the
third obstacle was the Parliaments Sincerity and Loyalty to God and their King.
To attempt openly to overcome these impediments was but a madness, which could
not turn but to their ruin. They found out a way to batter these invincible
Bulwarks, and if not to render them assaultable, at least to prevent the danger
they apprehended from thence, the Peoples aversion they took away by degrees,
by their officious and kind behavior, civil deportment, and usual professions
of fidelity to their Prince, and care of the public safety, honor and
happiness: by spreading abroad both in the Country and the City, Books of
their Religion with moderate Disputations and Refutations of ours, which they
gave to all that would hearken to them, or show them any countenance or
likelihood of embracing their ways: and by settling of Popish Schoolmasters in
every corner of the City, who endeavored if not to poison the Children with
their principles, at least to give them such a tincture of their Religion, as
might remove the natural aversion. They dealt with every one according to his
quality, disposition and place. To the Great and Noble they seemed to be true,
trusty and officious, to the meaner sort they appeared with hopes and promises
of advantage: and to all they discovered the Popish Religion under the
disguises of pleasure and profit; as many as were not well principled they
endeavored to debauch and corrupt, chiefly if they were in any place of trust,
that they might show themselves favorable to Popery and Papists. Some they
would recommend and promote to places of profit, to Offices and Employments in
Noble Families, and in the State; to others they would give moneys, and with
all persons they endeavored to ingratiate themselves: casting all the misery
and troubles of our Civil War upon Presbyterians, Reformation, and
Nonconformity, to render them the more odious to King and People. One thing
gave them a jealousy, and they were resolved to employ all their Skill and Art
to prevent it; That was a reconciliation between the Episcopal Party and the
moderate Non-Conformists, endeavored by the Kings Majesty, and desired by the
whole Nation. To hinder this conjunction, which doubtless would have proved
fatal to Popery in this Land, and break the neck of all their designs, they
labored to interpose between both, and to encourage the one in his stifness,
by buzing in the ears of the simpler sort the danger of unity, the corruption
in the Church, the glory of Constancy in Religion, and their engagements for
the Covenant: and by upbraiding the more knowing party with the Peoples
discourses of the Ministers bad Lives, unfaithfulness, unconstancy, and the
danger their Souls were in, if by their too hasty compliance to that which
their former Interest obliged them to exclaim against, they gave them a slender
Opinion and an Atheistical impression of Religion it self. To these they
represented Conformity as the most intolerable burden, and the heaviest yoke
could be imposed upon them by Authority; and our Religion of the Church of
England the nearest in affinity to Popery, full of Superstition, if not of
Idolatry. They accused all our zealous endeavors to bring the People to Unity,
to be Persecutions of the good Servants of God, and every step that we made was
slandered and discredited by these men who had a design to advantage themselves
by our Divisions. To the Governors in the Church and State they would exclaim
against the wickedness and danger of Conventicles and Nonconformity. They
represented all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as incouragers of our
dissensions by their Examples, and Government without Bishops; Calvin and all
his Calvinists were Traitors, Schismatics, Heretics, Enemies of the Public
Peace, promoters of Rebellion, insufferable in a Commonwealth, dangerous
Conspirators against the Kings Person and Government; and what not. With these
and such like Notions they infected the minds of many of our Clergy, with an
unjust prejudice against all the Religious Churches of God beyond the Seas, and
had not a very worthy Divine, [Dr. Durel,] cleared their innocence by
representing to the public, their disallowance of our frivolous discords, and
their acknowledgment of us for their Brethren, and our Liturgy and Government,
to be altogether agreeable with Gods Word and Will; we should have proceeded to
a public Excommunication. However these impressions given to the Rulers in
Church and State, cast oil into the fire, angered the minds of our zealous
Governors, and drew from them those severe resolutions which have increased
our discords, and caused many to imagine more in Nonconformity than really
there is, for as some sort of Wounds putrify and increase the more they are
handled, so the Divisions of our Church about quid dities, Indifferencies,
Trifles and Vanities, would have vanished by degrees the less we had minded
them. But as we had our Enemies on both sides acquainted with our temper and
interests, they would not suffer the one to conform, nor the others to admit
them upon more moderate terms, than a strict compliance with all the
inconsiderable punctilio's which the Public Peace and Gods Glory might easily
dispense with, as well as Religion, Government and Conformity it self. In all
the public Disputations too much Gall proceeded from the Jesuits hatred of us
both, and their apprehension of our sensibleness of our own Interest, and of an
union between those that differed for the most part but in shadows. However
they labored to raise such a mist between us and our Brethren, that we could
not see to join together in one body and worship. All this while they advanced
some of their own disguised fellows into Offices and Places of Trust; and when
they saw any person able to serve their turn, they would befriend him with
their assistance in his promotion, and discourage all other persons. When I
lived near London, a Jesuit an ingenious and a good Linguist, knowing my Skill
in that and other sorts of Learning, and how much I had been neglected in the
Church; though I had done good Service both at home and abroad, was sent
purposely to search into the Principles of my Religion, whether I would favor
Popery: could I have dissembled with him, I might have had a considerable
preferment by the Jesuits means, but I chose rather to abide in a mean
condition, and to be confined to the remotest wilderness of the Land, to a
small Vicarage of about sixty pounds per annum, there to bury my Talents, than
to employ them in the Service of the Devil and the Pope.

But all these endeavors at home, tended to the promotion, encouragement, and
increase of the Popish Religion, but amongst a few, and such as dared not to
discover what they were. And though it had got so much credit, that many
ingenious and good Protestants could not endure to hear the Pope or Papists
spoken against, or blamed for superstition, or any of their practices. This
could not bring to pass the grand Design without a more powerful endeavor, and
stronger assistances; for that purpose as soon as the Court of Rome was
perfectly reconciled with the French King, and that he had consented to
gratify them, to have the Monument of their Disgrace taken away, and all
remembrances of his Ambassadors affront and their weaknesses, pulled down in
Rome: they resolved to make use of his Assistance, and to govern all Europe, if
not all the World, by a Triumvirat. I shall not trouble my Reader with any part
of this Plot relating to Foreign Affairs, only as it looks upon us and concerns
us here in England.

It is sufficiently known that the Court of Rome pretends to an Universal
Monarchy, and to hold by the Power of the Keys what the same City governed
heretofore by the Sword. The Jesuits likewise have the same aim, but with a
pretended subordination to the Pope and his Authority; a mere pretense covered
over with the Oath of blind Obedience, for this crafty and devilish Society, if
it once get a Head will as easily forget their Allegiance to the Pope, as they
do now that to their most lawful Princes under God. But neither the Jesuits nor
the Pope of Rome, now that all their Cheats have been discovered to the World
in these latter Ages, through the Preaching of the Gospel, can carry on or
compass so great a Design without other assistance, therefore they resolved
together to employ the old Policy of the ancient Romans in Conquering Kingdoms,
which was to subdue them with their Weapons, and by the Courage of their own
Inhabitants.

Of all the Monarchs subject to the Roman See, in the end of Alexander's
Papacy, none seemed so powerful in men and money as the French: A young Prince
Lord of a flourishing Kingdom, and of a great Continent, but of an Aspiring
mind that would readily entertain the first proposals of larger Dominions, and
other Empires. Therefore the Jesuits and the Pope, agreed to tempt him with the
Glories of the World, and to make him the Universal Monarch, if he would
encourage the Popish Religion, and declare himself an Enemy to the Protestant
Profession in and out of his Kingdom. This same Proposal had been made to
Philip the Second of Spain, when that Kingdom was in its Grandeur; and in order
to its accomplishment, he gratified the Pope with the Expulsion and Banishment
of the Moors out of his Kingdom, with a Bloody War in the Low Countries, and
with the Massacre of his Eldest Son and Heir Don Carlos, a young Prince who
discovered his dislike of the Bloody Designs of the Papists of his days. But
since the States of Europe have labored to cut the Spaniards Short, and to
bring down their haughty pretensions, they have scarce been able to keep their
own without their Neighbors Charitable Assistance, much less to invade the
other Kingdoms and Territories of Europe, in gratification of the Court of
Rome. But the French Monarch esteemed the richest Prince of all Europe, raised
to a Powerful and Large Kingdom, was become dreadful to all his Neighbors
whiles he stood still. He seemed therefore to be the fittest Instrument to
carry on the Popish Designs in Europe and in England, and able to suppress the
Protestant Religion every where. This was the French aim in the last Dutch War,
as may appear by the words of their Ambassadors to all Popish Princes, chiefly
in Germany and Spain: And in consideration of this War, the Pope was willing to
gratify the French King in all his demands, in making those men Cardinals whom
he had recommended to him. And likewise to show his readiness to crush the
Protestant Party, the French King to please the Pope, has pulled down several
hundred Churches, and oppressed the Protestants of his Dominions contrary to
his former Grants and Promises. I could instance several known proofs of this
Agreement between the Pope, the Jesuits, and the French King, to govern the
World between them, and to assist one another in the subduing Europe, and in
Ruling it by this Triumvirat. The Pope was to have the Souls, and command the
Consciences of men to furnish him and his minions with what moneys they would
have. The French King was to Govern the Bodies and command their Estates. And
the Jesuits by a compliance with them both, were to have a large share in the
Conquered Countries and a great part in the Government of the World. The Dutch
a sturdy generation and powerful by Sea stood in their way, these must be
oppressed by a Nation no less valiant and strong: it was no difficult matter to
blow up the Coals and kindle a War. The uncivility of the former furnishing
daily causes of discontent to the latter; but when the growing greatness of the
French discovered to us our own danger, and that our Prince became the
Moderator of Peace and War, stopping this furious Champion in his full Career,
it is not to be imagined what displeasure the Popish Party conceived against
our King and Nation: what threatening speeches, what furious expressions dropped
from their mouths. The Emperor only and the Spaniard no Friend of the French
Greatness, would have been willing to assist the Pope, if only Religion had
been concerned; but when they had an inkling of the Triumvirat, and saw to what
all these proceedings would abutt, they chose rather to aid the Heretics
against their Pope, than to suffer them to incrcase their Enemies Power and
Greatness.

But seeing that Protestant England would not suffer the Pope and the French to
triumph over all their Neighbors, but give a check to their proceedings: a
Peace must be concluded with the Dutch Heretics, that they might have more
leisure to work mischief to and overthrow this strongest Bulwark of the
Protestant Religion. Open War was dangerous against a Nation so Courageous,
therefore private Plots and secret Conspiracies must do: They had no other way
but to cast us into a confusion by a sudden attempt, and the Massacre of our
Prince and of his Subjects; and to animate us one against another. The Father
must be stirred up against the Son, the Children must rise against their
Parents, Relations and Affinity, Consanguinity, and the ties of Friendship and
Blood must be all set aside to promote the Interest of this Catholic Religion,
and Holy Cause sanctified by the Popes Benediction.

The burning of the City of London could not destroy that Nest of Heretics,
they must there be all Massacred therefore in their famous City that is so soon
risen out of its Ashes to the wonder of the World. No pity nor compassion must
be had of innocent babes, who might one day revenge the murder of their
Parents, but they must all, the Mother and the Child, feel the strokes and
sharp swords of these zealous followers of Jesus, of these Roman Catholics and
Jesuits. But how far did their fury intend to run? God knows. Once the name of
a Protestant must not be left alive in all England: Blood and Rivers of Blood
must be spilt to make way for a Religious Generation of Jesuits, Franciscans,
Jacobins and other Friars to plant in this Land and secure it for the Pope
their Sovereign. Kings and Princes, Nobles and Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty,
must all be witnesses of their impartial zeal, the whole Nation must be
destroyed. O Inhumanity! O Hellish Fury! O unheard of Cruelty! Blessed be thy
Holy Name, O Lord our God, for the discovery of their malice and rage against
us, continue thy Protection to our gracious Prince, guard him by thine Almighty
Power, secure his person against all present and future Conspiracies, preserve
thy People and this Church, and send us all to be truly thankful, and to
reunite again in the sincere worship of thee the only true God, for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen. This Plot has been working many years and preparations
were making in all the Convents upon the Seacoasts of Spain and France,
chiefly of the Jesuits. But that which is the end of all this Discourse is,
that if we had not been divided in Religion the Papists would not have made
this attempt, and we should be infallibly secure from all future mischiefs,
(which they will yet endeavor to work amongst us) if we could be persuaded to
set aside all Partiality and Prejudice, and join together all unanimously in
the profession of one Religion, and in the same manner. This I shall prove in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. The danger of Division in a Nation about matters of Religion, and
what pernicious consequences it has had in foreign Countries, and in this.
THE chief intent of all Societies of men is Union, and the Public Security,
against all invasion and disorder, foreign and domestic. For that purpose we
gather together in one Body and under one Head: we bind our selves together
with Laws and Relations, we entertain a mutual correspondency amongst our
selves, and pretend all to promote the general good of the politic Body.
Nations are to be looked upon as large Families where the Universal Father, and
all the rest are members of the Family, highly concerned in one another good
and preservation. All the individuals are united in one public interest in the
happiness of the whole or division: therefore discord is an apparent enemy to
the Society, because it opposes the very intent of it, and lays open a Nation
to these following mischiefs, and to their dismal consequences.

I. It weakens the Society and People, and renders them less able to resist
their Enemies; It is not to be imagined what inconveniency a small division
will cause in a City or Commonwealth. As in the natural body a headache or a
light distemper renders the man feeble and not fit for action, so the public
divisions bring great impediments to those proceedings that would tend to the
Nations happiness, honor, safety and peace: and ought to be so much the more
odious the more a well compact and settled body in good order and temper is in a
thriving and prosperous condition.

II. It breeds discontents and disturbances at home, which if kept secret,
occasions murmurings and complaints amongst the inferiors, and many times when
they break out they raise Rebellions and Civil-Wars. for it is certain that
there can be no division or faction in a place but must proceed from and cause
discontent, hatred and variance, which commonly rob from us our inward and
outward peace. And though the Division may be only in some particular respects,
which may not hinder a correspondency in other public relations, that
correspondency can never be hearty, and those endeavors together cannot be so
successful and vigorous, when they proceed from parties, that entertain mutual
displeasures, especially in that very thing which is the greatest tie of all
human Societies, Religion.

III. It lays us open to all the attempts, contrivances and malicious designs
of our Enemies. How easy is it to ruin a divided party! to set and encourage
one faction against another! And though the division may observe some bounds,
and not proceed to that extremity to which it naturally tends, it cannot be
denied but that a crafty Enemy may easily advantage himself thereby, and work
the mischief if not the total overthrow of a divided People, for there are
always opportunities given for such wicked purposes by the discovery of this
weakness. In short, that Nation is in no small danger, and the mischiefs into
which it is likely to fall are innumerable, that is divided in such a manner,
that there is no hopes of union. Our Blessed Savior foretells the fate of that
Society or House, that it cannot stand, but must needs of its own accord fall
into ruin.

But of all divisions, those about Religion seem to be the most unnatural,
unreasonable and ominous: factions and parties in the State may be tolerated
when they aim not directly at the dissolution of Government, nor the discredit
or opposition of Authority; in such a case they are not so dangerous nor of
that ill consequence as to give us an hot Alarm. And though they may diminish
of that Love and Respect that is due to our Sovereign, by obliging us to prefer
an interest not agreeable with his and the Commonwealths, they are not so
criminal but they may correspond with our Allegiance to our Prince.

But divisions and factions in Religion in the same Nation, threaten us with
those unavoidable dangers, that make Governors take heed how they tolerate
that which is against all policy: chiefly in those Kingdoms as are surrounded
with watchful Enemies, that wait for such an opportunity to insinuate
themselves and undermine us. They tend to the dissolution of the Government,
the overthrow of the Laws, the introducing of all disorder in the State as well
as in the Church. They tend first to the contempt of Authority, and next to the
ruin of men's Bodies and Souls, leaving us naked to the first attempts of all
our spiritual and temporal Enemies, chiefly when that division which is envied
and aimed at, is so twisted with the Government of the Commonwealth, that
there is no dissolution of the one without the danger of the other; when all
the other divisions rise in opposition to it, and will admit of no compliance
with it, when openly and secretly they labor to discredit it and its lawful
proceedings, encouraging the Factious part to exclaim against it and its
injunctions, and to endeavor to draw away the people from their respect to it
and its way of worship: what rational Soul can tolerate so palpable an
opposition? What Governors in the State can suffer Religion to be contemned
and trodden under foot with a public allowance? Is it reasonable that such
dangerous factions should have the liberty to increase and act with the
sufferance of the Laws and of the public Authority? When all the actings and
distasts of these factions are not justifiable amongst men of reason, by the
Laws of God or the Laws of men, and all are grounded upon prejudices, mistakes
and misapprehensions, and such frivolous causes, as they will be one day
ashamed to own, when all masks and vizards shall be pulled off. Is it just that
the Rulers of the State in such a case should countenance such pernicious
proceedings, and give the stamp of Authority to Actions either ridiculous in
themselves, or dangerous to the People committed to their charge. The danger
may seem less when they are weak and inconsiderable, but little evils are to be
shunned and avoided as well as great, though they have not increased to an
head, they deserve no allowance, because they are not able to prevail upon the
sound part, but should be cured as speedily as may be; in the mean while for
the public peace and quiet, the execution of the Laws is suspended, and by the
wisdom of the Governors they are winked at, but all Factions are not to be
esteemed by what they can do, but by what they would do. Let the Principles of
those that are divided from us be enquired into, let the designs of their party
be examined, let their tempers and dispositions be tried by an impartial
scrutiny, and they themselves will discover so much danger to the Nation, and
find the Government and Kingdom threatened with such mischiefs, as that they
will have no reason to encourage such divisions, whereby their own peace and
safety is threatened as well as that of their Posterity. I know Conscience is
the grand Plea of all our dissenting Brethren; the Papist, he pleads Conscience
for the murder of Kings and Princes, and the advancing his Religion by Hellish
Plots and Contrivances. The Heathen he pleads Conscience in the worship of his
Idols. The Jew and the Mahumetan says he observes the Rules and Dictates of
his Conscience: and our Brethren have the same pretense in their mouths, for
their opposition of Lawful Authority, and their encouragement in their division
from us. But this plea that is so commonly used in the justifying of the
greatest villainies, causes us with good reason to suspect it in less matters.
Remember, O my Christian Brother and Sister, when thou shall appear before the
Impartial Tribunal of the Lord Jesus, this pretense of thy Conscience will not
be able to sanctify thee, and cause him to approve of Actions and Proceedings
directly opposite to his Word and Holy-Laws. Though it may blind thine own eyes
and cause thee to be more excusable before men, than if thou did act against
the solicitations of thy Conscience: it will never be able to oblige him to
allow of that which is evil in it self, to justify the guilty and condemn the
innocent. Take heed I beseech thee that what thou say is Conscience be not
invincible prejudice and hatred, or humor and groundless fancy, or it may be
something worse, that strong spirit of delusion unto which God delivers such as
will not be lovers of the Truth. For the better discovery of the mistakes of
thy Conscience in this particular, I beseech you my Christian Brethren, to
examine what mischiefs such division about Religion have caused already in
Foreign Nations and in this: the Histories of former Ages are full of sad
accidents, murders and wars, destructions and calamities of Countries caused
by the disputes about Religion.

The Kingdom of the Jews flourished and grew invincible under the Government of
David and his Posterity; so that all the Nations round about paid them Tribute.
They might have still continued in that happy condition, and been able to set
bounds to the spreading Empire of Babylon, had not Jeroboam under a pretense of
Religion divided the Kingdom and Nation of Israel, and to save the People the
trouble and expense of going up to Jerusalem, set up the Golden Calves in Dan
and Bethel. But how many evils did this division in Religion and Government
cause in that Land! They were subject to the affronts of every petty King and
contemptible Nation, and at last were overthrown by their Neighbors, and
themselves carried away into Captivity, with their Wives and Children.

After the Jews return from Babylon they grew numerous and strong in the Romans
time, and were able through their numbers and the resolation and courage which
the principle of Religion put into them, to command the East part of the World.
But what and how much woe and misery did their Factions and Sects draw upon
them! what sad Destructions not to be paralel'd in any other Nation! It was
openly confessed by Titus and their Roman Conquerors, that as their divisions
between their Princes gave Pompey footing in their Country, their divisions
had brought them to utter ruin, and unheard of miseries; for by this means they
became instrumental in their own overthrow, and did more mischief to themselves
than all the Armies of their Enemies. So that by Division in Religion, this
People of Israel, who were assisted by Gods Power and Protection, and favored
above all other Nations, brought themselves to be the scum of the World and
lost their Land, being dispersed into all parts and Kingdoms.

The fall of the Roman Empire was brought to pass by division; for that let in
the Huns, the Longobards, the Goths, Vandals, and Visigoths, and all the
Northern People into its fruitful borders. The Grecian Empire might have stood
upon its legs to this very day, had it not been for their senseless divisions
in Church and State. The Sects and Heresies of Arrius, Eunomius, Novatus,
Samosatenus and other busy-bodies, let in the Turk and his Mahomet, and in the
days of the Emperor Heraclius when men were so divided and had so disputed all
Religion and Truth out of doors, that the simpler and more ignorant sort knew
not which to choose, these wicked divisions gave an occasion to that Arabian
Impostor to set up a Religion of his own, which he recommended to them with the
inviting and pleasing Charms of pleasure and profit: Read but over the
divisions and disputes about Religion, in the Cities of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch, and in many other places of the East Countries, and examine
how many thousands have been destroyed! how many cruelties acted! how many
calamities brought upon the Inhabitants, through their endless discords in
Religion, and you will have cause to wonder at their madness, to strive for
that which forbids them to strive; and to fight for a Religion which disallows
all variance: You will have cause to wonder at their inhumanities and
extravagancies, they torment themselves for nothing, and shed their own blood
contrary to Reason and that Religion, for which they did so unadvisedly
contend. What is become of the Grecian Empire now! where are the flourishing
Churches of Christ of Asia and Africa! In what condition are the Christians of
those parts of the World! under how much misery, and under what cruel Tyranny
do they groan! The contemptible remains of all those Ancient Professors of our
Religion, are oppressed with the Turkish and Moorish Bondage. They have lost
all their honor and glory, their wealth, their privileges, their Country and
all their present happiness in this life, their Estates and their Children are
at their Conquerors pleasure. And though there are some yet professing
Christianity in those parts of the World, they differ in all respects so much
from what their Forefathers were in former Ages, that they are able to draw
tears from the most insensible Souls, when compared with them: as the building
of the second Temple did from the Jews returned from Babylon, when they saw how
differing it was from the Glory and Magnificence of the first Structure. And
all this has proceeded from this Wicked and Venomous Root, Division in
Religion.

Look into the latter Ages of the World, and see into what confusion these
divisions about Religion have cast Kingdoms and Cities. The Cities of Florence,
of Naples and Millain in Italy, have often been watered with the Blood of their
Noblest Inhabitants, which the divisions about Religion caused to be shed. The
grand disputes about the Guelfs and Gibbelins troubled all Europe, and
murdered more men than the cruelest Wars. In Germany what inhumanities have
been committed! In the Low Countries, how many Rivers of Christian Blood have
been spilt under the pretense of Religion! The Spanish Massacres, the Duke D'
Alva's Butcheries, are sufficiently known to all the World.

In Africa amongst the Moors and Arabians, the disputes about their Prophets
Impieties and their False Religion, has caused one of their own Writers to
say, Hali Ben-Hamet. a MS.
That there is nothing exasperares more the minds of men one against another,
than the differing persuasions in Religion. Another of their Authors complains
in this manner, O how furiously men are set against one another for such
matters as concern not the Prophets honor, nor the essential part of our
Religion! for in the late revolution of the Empire of Morocco, Religion was
pretended to deceive the People. In France the Factions of the Albi and Nigri,
and the furious transports of the Papists against the Reformed Professors, have
often exhausted the Blood and Treasure of that Kingdom. In Switzerland, how
many troubles arose from small divisions in Religion! In the United Provinces
in our late days, the refined Notions of Arminius, and the extravagancies of
the Anabaptists, had almost cast them into a Civil War. In France the hot
disputes between Amyraldus and Du Moulin had cantoned those poor Churches in
the midst of their Enemies, if moderate and wise men had not imposed a silence
and obliged them to be quiet. In Bohemia and Poland, what stirs and
disturbances have the Socinians raised! In Germany, and the Bishopric of
Munster, what wickednesses have not the Anabaptists committed! I should be
endless, if I reckoned up all the Mischiefs, Blood, Tumults, War and
Calamities, which small and inconsiderable disputes about Religion have brought
upon men in the Primitive Church, and in these latter days. Look only into our
own Nation, and consider the late Tragedies acted by our own Countrymen upon
the Person of their King and Nobles. Look into the cause of their unreasonable
fury, and you shall find nothing but their mistakes about Religion to have thus
transported and carried them to that excess of cruelty and rage. In Queen
Elizabeth's days the Separatists began to quarrel with our Discipline and
Government, and laid a foundation for the Brownists, the Familists, and their
Successors, to build their confused Babel. Their bold Pamphlets in the Queens
Reign, and in King James's time, threatened the Nation with the following
disturbances in the State. The restless Puritans were always bawling in the
Peoples ears against our Church and its Rulers, and what troubles did they not
breed! but all former disputes were but sports and plays to the late disputes
about Religion in our Royal Martyrs days; for it is observable that when men
have wearied themselves in disputing about trifles, they try the cause and
decide the difference a nearer way, with the dint of their sharp swords. This
was the end of our unhappy divisions, we remember yet the late Civil War, the
Calamity under which the Land groaned, the Disorders and Miseries that we and
our Families suffered. This my Brethren, proceeded from the same cause which
yet you are unadvisedly fond of, and embrace with an invincible tenacity. They
were at first discontented at our Church and Religious Worship, they exclaimed
continually against our formalities and practices; and differed from us in the
same punctilio's as some of you do. See the Kings Portraiture.
They were at first as modest in all their behavior toward us, desiring
nothing but liberty and freedom for themselves and their way of worship, but
when they had gathered into a head, their pretensions were so high that they
would oblige all men to conform and subscribe to all their irregularities and
extravagancies. I cannot call to mind the sad condition of our Church of
England in those unhappy days without Tears, when our Governors were deposed,
our Clergy banished with their Prince, our Nobility and Gentry sequestered, our
Laws obliged to submit to the power of the Sword, our Kingdom and Government in
the hands of lawless Tyrants; Sects and Divisions in Religion multiplying every
day, and rising out of the filthy spawn of the Jesuits, the wicked principles
which they spread amongst us to disturb us, and puzle the weaker sort in the
Notions of Religion. All these Evils with innumerable others, which we can
better remember than speak of, sprung from your Forefathers Nonconformity: And
will not their Chidren be better advised! will they wittingly draw again the
same danger upon their heads! will they not be persuaded to prevent such
mischiefs for the time to come! The burnt Child dreads the fire. We have been
already burnt and almost consumed in the hot fire of a Civil-War. Shall we cast
our selves again into it! or entertain the same causes that brought forth that
sad calamity! Our Enemies took occasion to blow up the coals into a grievous
flame, who knows but they are busily employed about the same wicked purposes,
and will cast us headlong into the same misery! why shall we be so foolish, so
mad, and such Enemies of the public and of our selves and posterity, as to
assist the Jesuits and Romanists in their grand design to ruin us and our
Nation! This proceeding of yours may seem very strange my Brethren, and may
cause a greater wonder when we have seriously considered and proved it to you.

CHAP. III. That there is no reasonable cause of dividing from our Church, and
that the most scrupulous Conscience may and ought to conform according to the
Laws of God as well as man.
HAD you as good and allowable causes to allege for your separation from us,
as we and our Forefathers had to depart out of the Idolatrous Church of Rome,
your zeal would deserve a commendation, and none could charge you with the
Crime of Schism or Faction. For in such a case you would have, in Conformity to
the Examples and Command of Christ and his holy Apostles, forsaken those who
had first forsaken him, and divided your selves from those abominations,
whereof the belief and practice can never consist with the Salvation of your
immortal Souls. But though we and our Church are falsely aspersed with Popery
and Popish Superstition, the Accusation is false, and so ill grounded, that it
would not deserve a refutation, were it not that this strange conceit is
greedily entertained by many of our Nonconforming Brethren. The accusation is
commonly delivered in gross, because there is none can justify this charge by
any particular instance. It is the common Practice and Art of Impostors and of
abusive Tongues, when they cannot make good the objected crime, to bring their
accusation in this manner, that their malice might be less discoverable, and
their charge more weighty. But why should we be declared to be Popishly
affected against our wills; we disown this charge as a grievous calumny, that
has no other foundation but the pride and unreconcileable hatred of our
Enemies. Did ever any Church write more smartly against the Pope and Papists,
than the Learned Divines of the Church of England? read over the thirty nine
Articles, and Bishop Jewel, and the Archbishop Laud against Fisher, and in
these our days read but the writings of these Learned Divines, of the present
Bishop of Lincoln, of Dr. Stilling fleet, and Dr. Pierce, and you shall find
that none professes to be greater enemies of Popery than we do. But methinks
that this late Popish Plot and all the Papists endeavors against the Church of
England, should justify us in the eyes of all the World better than any
Arguments can, that we are not Papists nor Popishly affected: can we think the
Papists, and Jesuits who are not so easily mistaken in their judgments of us,
would have laid a Train to blow us up, had we been on their side! can we think
them so blind that they cannot see their friends from their foes! would they
offer to burn, destroy and kill us, and our Children, were we so inclinable to
Popery, as our mistaken Brethren falsely conceive! what mad men are you Priests
and Jesuits, Popes and Cardinals of Rome, thus to conspire and spend so much
Treasure to destroy your own Brethren! Did you not understand all this while
that we were all agreed! and that we are so near related, that we may shake
hands! Why will you needs murder us and our Families for our Religion sake,
when we are as much or within a small matter as much Papists as you? I am
afraid I shall never be able to persuade neither the Pope, nor his Jesuits,
that we of the Church of England are such Friends of Popery, as you my
Nonconforming Brethren would have us to be. I shall be rather able to make
them take us for Turks and Jews, than Roman Catholics. Wherefore then will you
needs accuse us so falsely against all equity and probability? What do you find
of Popery in us and our Church? Is it the Government by Bishops and their
Suffragans? It is possible that this Order established in our Church may give
occasion to the weaker sort to look upon us near a kin in this respect, because
they are mistaken in the Notion of Popery, and in the chief and essential
properties of that Religion. God forbid that all Monarchical Government in Gods
Church on Earth, should be Popish and Antichristian. Then we must include the
Primitive Churches settled by the Apostles in Asia, and the East, under the
Government of Bishops, to be Popish also. Then the Grecian Church under the
Patriarch of Constantinople, The Egyptian under the Archbishop of Alexandria,
and the Antiochian, and Jerusalem Churches, and generally all the Churches of
Christ in Constantine's days and since, were Popish. Nay, all the Fathers, St.
Cyprian, St. Austin, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, were Papists as well as we
and our Bishops, by that reason. Hier. ad Macceb. and Aug. in Psalm 45.
For all their Churches were governed by Bishops, and a Monarchical Authority.
The Calvinists also whom you say are your nearest Brethren, are also Papists,
if this reason were good, for they wish that they might have Bishops to govern
them in their reformed Churches, and that it could consist with their safety in
the midst of their Enemies, to have the same form of Government, as we have
here in this Land. Examine but their Letters mentioned by Dr. Durel, and a
Letter of Peter Martyr to Beza, Peter Martyr, page 801.
at the end of his Common-places at his return from the Assembly of Poissy
concerning the Bishop of Troy in France, who embraced the Protestant Religion,
and was universally received and acknowledged by all the Calvinists in his
Diocese, Ministers and others, as their Lord and Bishop. And you will have no
cause to think them to be Enemies of Episcopacy, as the Papists and you would
persuade us, for diverse ends. But there is a vast difference in the point of
Church Government, between the Papists and us. They render Homage to the Pope
as the Supreme Lord of the Church on Earth, we acknowledge none but Christ, and
under him our Lawful Sovereign. They differ from us much in their Episcopal
Laws which savor of Tyranny, and are not so conducing to the Reformation of
men's manners, and the good of Christianity as ours. The Name, Prerogatives and
Honors of the Popish Bishops, are for the most part yet continued to our
Protestant Prelates, by the liberality of our Religious Kings. And is this the
cause that you accuse them of Popery? Do their Honors and Riches grieve you?
Are you displeased to see the Rulers of our Church appear with decency,
splendour, and the respect of their Country. I am persuaded that if the Kings
Majesty would take from them their Lordships, their Estates and Dignities, and
send our Bishops amongst you to beg their bread, as the Mendicant Friars of
Rome: though then they would be much more like the Papists, than they are at
present; you would scarce take the pains to accuse them for being Popishly
affected. But I have this Charitable opinion of you my Nonconforming Brethren,
that you would never have thought to accuse our Bishops and their Church
Government of Popery, had not the Jesuitical Party, that insinuate amongst you,
minded you of it for their own ends; and out of a displeasure to see the
excellent Order, Decency and Splendour of our Church free from the abominations
of Idolatry, and their Monkish absurdities.

But that you may not be so soon mistaken, my Brethren, in a matter of so great
a moment as Popery and Superstition is: I beseech you to understand what Popery
is, and what not, that you may not be so easily cosened and imposed upon by
your Enemies and ours in this Nation. Popery comprehends all those Heresies and
grievous Errors, which the Pope and the Court of Rome, have delivered as
Articles of Faith: by which the Popes Authority, or rather Tyranny is
established in the World, contrary to Gods Word and Glory, and the Salvation of
men's Souls. According to this definition, if our first Reformers had retained
the abuses of Popery, the Transubstantiaton, Purgatory, Images, the Merits of
Saints, Indulgences, Pardons, and such like follies, not warranted but contrary
to Christ's Doctrines and Christianity: you might then accuse us with reason,
of being guilty of Popery. But shall we for our Conformity to Christ's Commands,
and the Primitive Church in Discipline and Government, be accused by you of
Popery, and Antichristianism. What is there in our Government or Church, that
tends to promote the Popes Interest? or to draw men away from Christ, and our
dependency upon him and his merits? If something of the Civil Power be
entrusted in the hands of our Bishops, I hope none of you will presume to
appoint our Wise Princes, and Parliaments, whom they are to settle in Authority
under them. That proceeds from our Princes Will, who is Gods Vicegerent amongst
us.

For our Articles, our Catechism, our Rubric and way of Worship, is as free
from Popery as our Government, and Ecclesiastical Laws, For how can that be
Popish, which opposes all the Errors and Mistakes of the Papists, which
Teaches to implore Gods assistance and direction, against the Heresies and
Designs of the Pope; which was used in the Christian Church before ever the
Pope claimed an universal superintendency? How can that be Popish which agrees
with Gods Word, and the Doctrines and Practices of all the Reformed Churches,
Enemies of Popery? and which their most Judicious Divines embrace as most
consonant with Faith and Piety. Search into every thing Authorized in the
Church of England, and let the most refined Soul and quickest Eye, tell us
under what Ceremony, or in what Article of our Faith, or in what corner of our
Rubric, or in what part of our Devotions, they perceive any Color of Popish
Superstition. I dare affirm, and willl engage to prove, that most of our
Non-Conformists are far more Superstitious and Popish in their Belief and
Practice, than any in the Church of England. In those particulars in which your
Conformity is required, What is there of Popery, of Superstition, or contrary
to Reason or good manners? For if there be nothing to be excepted against; Why
will you not join with us your Brethren? You cannot be angry with Set Forms in
general, because Christ our Savior recommended one to us, as an Excellent
Pattern to draw ours by. You may be displeased at the reading of our Prayers,
but if you will shut your Eyes they may seem to you as good, as if they had
been pronounced memoriter. Grieve not to hear the same requests offered up, and
loath not the same Prayers which you hear so often, because you are pinched
with the same necessities every day, and stand in need of the same God, and the
same Blessings: and therefore may we offer up the same Prayer. In the matter of
our Prayers, if any of you will show us any thing contrary to Gods Will or
Word, we will correct and dash it out. Be not offended at the Cross in Baptism,
this was practiced in Christ's Church before ever Popery was known in the World,
and is a significant sign used by the Primitive Christians, to embolden and
encourage us betimes to wear and receive the marks in our bodies, of Christ's
Holy Religion. Be not offended at our outward Reverence, which we express at
the mentioning of the Name of Jesus: as we will not condemn you that omit this
respect, judge not us that observe it, nor any other outward Action of the
Assistants, will not be laid to your charge in the Public Service of God, if
you intend only Gods Honor. I know that mere Formality too visible in many of
our Conformists, and their apparent Contempt of the outward Devotions,
discovered in their Actions and Behavior, is a discredit to our Worshipping of
God, and a discouragement of our dissenting Brethren. As therefore they should
take heed how they lay such stumbling blocks in their way, the others should
remember not to interpret every thing at the worst sense, and not to be
distasted at the excellent Prayers of our Church, because of the profaneness of
some persons that assist at, or ought to be patterns of our Devotion and Piety.
Likewise in the renounding of the Covenant, why will thou be so scrupulous, or
rather headstrong, to maintain obstinately the lawfulness of that which the
Kings Majesty, and the Wise Council of our Nation, have pronounced to have been
an unlawful Oath, imposed upon the Subjects against the known Laws of the Land.
Have not we sufficiently seen the wicked sequels of this Engagement, or
Combination? The Fruits that this Tree has born, declare sufficiently the
Nature of it. We need not the Verdict of our Religious Governors, to understand
it to have been an unjust Action, contrary to our Laws and Liberties: for we
have seen our selves deprived thereby of both, by those very persons who
required it from us. Why must we yet continue in our mistakes? Neither are the
words of the renunciation so strict, but that any good Christian, who intends
but to demean himself quietly in the Government, may abjure the Covenant in the
manner appointed, for we do but say that there lies no obligation upon us, or
any other, to cause any stirs, rebellion or tumult, in Church or State. Did you
therefore understand what is desired from you, I cannot think but that every
one of you, that is a good Christian, would readily comply with so moderate a
reconciliation.

But this Abjuration concerns only those persons of you, that enter into
Offices and Employments in the Kingdom. And it is all the reason in the world,
that such as are entrusted with any public Charge, should promise, not to
cause any disturbance in that Government, in which they are employed, and by
which they are secured and their Estates from Invasion. Why must we be so fond
of a Scotch contrivance, put into their heads by Richelieu and the Jesuits,
whom he sent over purposely to overthrow the Glory of the Protestant Religion
in Europe, the Episcopacy of the Church of England, and to cast us into a
confusion, in revenge of our assisting them of Rochel against their Prince.

It may be the whiteness of the Surplice offends thy weak Stomach, or
Conscience; and keeps thee at a distance from our way of Worship. But consider,
my Brother or Sister, that Religion consists not in colors, and wearing of
Apparel: It concerns not thy Soul, if thou wearest in Gods Service, White,
Black, Green, Yellow or Red. If thou had not a prejudice against this
Garment, it would please thee as well as Black Gowns, and Cloaks with Capes.
But is it not a sad sign that such a trivial matter shall cause thee to cast
off all respect to thy God, and the Authority of thy Governors; and because of
a decent color and habit, which thou do but fancy to be unbeseeming, thou
shall refuse all Communion and Correspondency with thy Brethren on Earth, and I
am afraid in Heaven too: Rev. ix. 14. Chap. iii. 4, 5. Chap. vi. 11.
For they shall be all clothed in white Garments as Priests and Prophets, to
offer up continually, the Sacrifices of their Praises to God.

In short, for I am ashamed to mention and mind you, my Nonconforming
Brethren, of the usual Objections against us and our Conformity, and the
Childish causes alleged by some of you for your standing at a distance from
us, and refusing all Religious correspondency with us. I beseech you weigh them
all in equal Scales, without partiality or prejudice, and you will find no
reason to refuse Conformity with us. I desire you to consider, that if your
Children and Servants in your Families, did breed a disturbance amongst
themselves upon such weak grounds, and for such slight causes, did entertain
quarrels and disputes, to the disquieting of your Houses; would not you seek a
remedy with a Rod, to make them more peaceable, and would not you dismiss such
unruly Servants, and take in others of a quieter disposition? Would you not
endeavor to silence their bawling, and when they canton in your Families, and
divide it into parties in Contempt of your Authority and Commands, would you
not seek to bring them together, and oblige them by some way, to reunite in
One? This is the case of Christ's Church among us in England; I look upon the
Presbyterian and Independents chiefly with some other of the more moderate
Non-Conformists, to be our Brethren, belonging to the same Family, Christ our
Lord. for our Faith and Religion is the same in effect, most part of our
differences are but trivial, childish and unreasonable, about such things which
concern not the honor of the Lord of the Family, nor the public interest,
good, and preservation of it; when considered in themselves, And if there be
any difference in our Religion between them and us, it is in such matters as
may be easily reconciled when well sifted out, and are not of an absolute
necessity to the Salvation of men's Souls. Our happiness depends not upon
postures, gestures, garments, colors, forms, crosses, surplices, and other
such like things which are indifferent in themselves, and were they not
enjoined, might as well be omitted as observed. It is therefore a shame for you
to quarrel and break the Peace of Christ's Family, I mean his Church, about
such Trifles. No doubt but our wise Savior will take some course speedily, to
discover to us our error, and chastise us for such unreasonable dissensions in
such matters, as we may easily comply with one another. I know your common
Objection against us is, that in regard such Observances, Customs, and
Ceremonies, that breed a difference between us, are but trivial in themselves,
they should not be imposed upon you with that strictness. In Answer to this, I
entreat thee, my Brother, to consider three things: first, that a Conformity to
one way, one rule and manner in this Church is absolutely necessary, for how
unbeseeming a thing it is, that one Congregation should practice one thing,
another act in another manner; one Minister wear green, another yellow, another
black, another gray, another white. If in one place were all singing, in
another all preaching, in another all praying. How ridiculous would our Church
appear to all the foreign Nations, if these things were allowed by Authority?
It is therefore most certain that one way and one worshipping our God, is
absolutely needful and becoming the wisdom of our Nation. Secondly, consider
that the way and method established by the Governors in Church and State, is
not to be referred to the humor of every fancy, or of every dissatisfied and
private person: and that it is very reasonable in such cases, as all
acknowledge indifferent in themselves, when one way is to be chosen, and others
rejected, to take that which the public Authority approves of, and agrees with
their Judgment and Piety, whom God has established over us, and whose office
it is to appoint such things for us to observe and obey. Thirdly, consider that
trivial and indifferent things when stamped by the Authority of the Nation,
cease to be so, and become necessary to be observed. That which is indifferent
in it self, and but a trifle, is a greater invitation to you to practice it,
and renders your stifness more inexcusable, but in regard it is commanded by
Authority, I am bound to obey. The indifferency cease, and I should think it
a crime, and a breach of Gods Law, Of Obeying the Magistrate for Conscience
sake, If in things indifferent I preferred mine own partial humor, to the
Commands of my Prince and Governors. And wonder not if they require so strictly
thine obedience and mine to these orders, because in this licentious Age, men
of corrupt designs take any liberty to dispute against Authority, and contemn
its injunctions, under the pretense of Religion and Conscience. And because
this way and method seems to them the wisest, whom God has appointed over us
to prescribe it, in the worshipping of God and most agreeable with Gods Glory,
and the Nations Honor, Credit, and Advantage: Therefore there can be no
Superstition in them, to require our exact obedience to all the Rules which
they judge to be just and best befitting our Piety, and in us to yield it in
things indifferent in themselves, as some foolishly imagine.

In all other matters which give you a distaste, I know none but may be
comprehended under this notion, and be looked upon as trivial and indifferent
in themselves. The designed compendiousness of this Seasonable Advice suffers
me not to examine them all, nor to weigh all the objections that you are wont to
make in justification of your Nonconformity. But for those that relate to our
Prayers and public Liturgy: I refer you my Christian Brethren to a small
treatise now in the Press called the Christians Devotions and Directory in
these dangerous times, wherein I have labored to clear and blow away all those
mists that hide the truth from your discovery, and to give you satisfying
reasons for our practice, and for your benefit, with directions how you shall
be able to prevail upon your averseness, and bring your selves to receive a
real and an inward comfort from our way of worshipping. Unto the perusal of
that Treatise, I refer all those that would receive better satisfaction in
matters disputed amongst us.

Conformity, according to the Laws of the Land, is plainly required from every
person. To set up therefore Meeting Places in opposition to Authority, and the
Established Service of God; is an apparent breach of these Laws. To haunt and
frequent them under a pretense of receiving many Soul-comforts from the Learned
and Godly Sermons, and Exercises of Piety, in those prohibited Assemblies: is
not warrantable in the Minister nor his Auditory, according to the Laws of the
Nation. To withdraw from the Service of God under Episcopacy, and to leave off
the Assembling with our Neighbors in our ordinary Churches: To forbear from
Prayers, the Sermons of our Common Teachers, and the receiving of the Lords
Supper, and the other Acts of Nonconformity are likewise breaches of these
Laws of men, established by the Lawful Authority of the Nation, by the King and
Parliament, and are so well known to be so, that I shall not offer to prove it.

The greatest Question is, Whether these proceedings of the Non-Conformists, be
against Gods known Laws? I doubt not but they will all acknowledge that the
false Accusations, the wicked Surmises, the slanderous Reports, and the
pretended Crimes of Superstition, Idolatry, and their other uncharitable
Censures of us and our Worship, by which we are discredited, Gods Holy Name
abused, and the sincerity and integrity of our Christian Governors and
practices, misrepresented, are contrary to Gods Law. Thou shall not hear false
witness against thy Neighbor. Exodus xx Psalm. xxxiv. 13. 140. 11. Psalm. x. 18.
It is a great injustice for them in hopes of advancing the interest of their
Sects, to misconstrue our actions, to fasten upon us Crimes, to endeavor to
discredit us and our Profession; for besides the wrong done to us their
brethren, they blind the eyes, and lead into error and mistakes, many poor
ignorant and well meaning Souls, whereby true Religion is slighted, and Faction
and Schism kept up, to the destruction of many persons, and the dishonor of
our Reformation and Church.

But their other practices though never so well colored in the eyes of men
with pious pretenses, are contrary to Gods Laws as well as man's Decrees. That
this may better appear to you: consider these following and undeniable Truths,
gathered out of Holy Scripture.

I. That it is the duty of every Christian, to seek as well as to pray for the
Peace of Gods Church. Psalm cxxii. 6. To endeavor to be at peace with all that
profess Christianity in Truth. 1 Thessalonians. v. 13. That peace is a precious Jewel,
which we ought carefully to seek and to preserve. 1 Pet. iii. 11. That we
should abstain from all those practices that disturb our Brethrens Peace. Mark
v. 50. That we should follow after the things that make for Peace. Romans xiv.
19. That it is the property of heavenly wisdom, to be peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy. James iii. 17. And many other passages, call us to mind in all our
actions, the peace and public quiet of the Church and People where we live.
Now that Nonconformity has been the sad occasion of much disturbance in this
Nation, of Tumults and War, and that it continues to dissociate our minds and
interests one from another, to the general unquietness of this poor Church, is
that which none can well deny.

II. That all unnecessary and avoidable actions and proceedings, whereby
strife, debates, envy, hatred, malice and variance, are entertained amongst
men, are contrary to Gods Laws, and the Blessed Rules of the Gospel. That
teaches to be like minded one toward another, chiefly in matters of Religion,
Romans xv. 5. To consult in all our Actions, Love, Mercy and Charity, one toward
another. John xiii. 34. Which teaches us to suppress all distasts, and to study
to advance the universal unity of the Christians, amongst whom we live. 1 John
iii. 1. and to abstain from all actions whereby differences are maintained. 1
Cor. xiii. 4, 5, 6.

III. That we are to comply with all Rules, Rites and Ceremonies established in
the Church, if they be not directly against Gods Glory, or the Salvation of
Men's Souls: or, if they be not expressly forbidden in Gods Holy Word, or
contrary to it. This is confirmed to us by Christ's own Example, who conformed
to the harmless and indifferent Injunctions of Men, to avoid all singularity;
for in the Celebrating of the Paschal Lamb, he eat it not standing as Moses
commanded, but lying down upon a Couch, Matthew. xxvi. 20. Mark xiv. 18. He
caused a Hymn to be sung, which was a Jewish Ordinance. Christ also conformed
himself to the Synagogue-Worship established amongst the Jews by an Human
Authority, which our Blessed and peaceable Savior was so far from
disapproving, that he expressly tells his Disciples, that they who had made that
Ordinance sit in Moses Seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do. Matthew. xxiii. 2, 3. And in many other particulars of as
high an importance as those which cause you, my Nonconforming Brethren, to
separate from us, this Divine Savior teaches you by his good Example, to
avoid singularity, to observe the Rules and Orders appointed in the place where
you live; and not for such matters as endanger not in themselves your
Salvation, to cause that disturbance that will infallibly endanger the Churches
Peace and Unity, and beget in your Souls those passions, vices and distempers,
which are not agreeable with our Christian Religion, and present interest, or
our future hopes of Salvation.

IV. That all disobedience to the Magistrate in things not contrary to Gods
Word and Will, is unlawful and forbidden by S. Paul, Romans xiii. 1, 2. Let every
Soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the
powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. A passive obedience is not sufficient where an active is
required, and may and ought to be yielded. And though you do not actually
resist at present the Civil Magistrate, all Nonconformity is a kind of
resistance; take heed therefore that by this opposition, you render not your
selves liable to the Curse, and so deserving the Damnation that is so severely
threatened. In the third Chapter to Titus, verse the first, he desires him to
put his people in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work. And to the Hebrews St. Paul
speaks more pertinently to our purpose, Obey them that have rule over you,
and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that may do it
with joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. And St. Peter, 1
Epist. Chap. ii. verse. 13. calls upon you, to submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man without the exception or distinction of Civil or
Ecclesiastical matters, and that for the Lords sake, whether to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, for so is the Will of God. Are these Commands of
any force or Authority with you my Brethren? Are you not thereby required to
Conform to the Laws, Rules, and Constitutions of Gods Church amongst us,
enjoined by Authority? are not these Ordinances of Men which you ought to
submit to? Therefore none of you can refuse an obedience to them, without
violating Gods Laws, and breaking the Sacred Rules of the Gospel. I could
instance many other Examples, Precepts, Commands and Entreaties, out of Gods
Holy-Word directed to you, to wish, require, and desire you to be at Unity and
Conformity with us your Brethren, especially in the Public Worship of God; and
to set aside all prejudice and partiality, whereby you are hindered from seeing
and embracing the Truth. What is it therefore that keeps us at such a distance?
Is it your Consciences? How can your Consciences oppose Gods Word and Will? Is
it Conscience that obliges you to be irregular in your practices, and reject us
as Profane and Idolatrous, who labor in all respects, to be conformable to the
Holy Precepts of the Gospel? Is that Conscience in a word that teaches you to
be disobedient to the Laws of God and Man? And to breed a disturbance in a
Church and Kingdom for such frivolous and idle matters, to the encouraging of
our Enemies against us, to conspire the ruin of our King and Country? For Gods
sake as well as for your own sakes, and for Religions sake, and the happiness
of your Posterity, deceive not your selves, and think not to deceive God and
man with this childish and empty excuse. Let me tell you what I conceive to be
the true causes of your obstinate Nonconformity to the Church of England, for
the reasons commonly alleged of Conscience, of Popery, Superstition, and the
unjustifiableness of our Government and Liturgy by Gods Word, are but mere
pretenses and empty excuses, to cozen the weaker sort, and to color these
following causes of our unreasonable Nonconformity, in the Eyes of the World.

CHAP. IV. The true causes why most part of our dissenting Brethren will not
join with us in the Worship of our God, enquired into. In what particulars our
differences chiefly consist, and their grand Objection, Answered.
IT is the usual custom of all malcontents, to pretend one thing and to intend
another, and to veil over the foulest Actions with the most glorious covering,
in imitation of the grand Impostor who appears to us commonly in the garb of an
Angel of Light. Thus Korah and his rebellious Confederates, who separated
themselves from Moses and his Congregation, pretended the Peoples Holiness and
Privilege, and the Rulers Tyranny, for their dividing from them. Thus
Absalom's Ambition was veiled over with a desire of doing justice more
carefully to Gods People, and freeing them from a tedious Attendance at David's
Court. Thus Jeroboam the wicked Son of Nebat pretended the ease of the People
for his Idolatrous Worship. Thus the Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy, Anabaptists, and
many of the worser sort of Separatists, whose Souls and Understandings God has
given over to a strong spirit of delusion, to believe Lies and to work
Abominations, have their excuses for their own follies and errors, and to
justify their leaving of us. But these I judge for the most part to be in so
desperate a case, that without a Miracle of Grace, it is not possible to snatch
them out of the claws of that commanding Spirit that governs them. This advice
is designed for the perusal of a more moderate sort, and of more reasonable
Souls, more tractable and sociable, who embrace the same Faith with us, and
expect the same Salvation by the same means, the Merits of Christ and good
Works. These also have their pleas and excuses to hide that which is not
justifiable by Gods Word and right Reason, Their not Conforming with us in the
service of God and Duties of Religion. But whatever be their pretense, these
are the true causes of their obstinacy, and our unhappiness.

The first and chiefest are Prejudice and Partiality, proceeding from
Education, a long custom in, and an acquaintance with that irregular way, which
they are so fond of. These are wont strangely to prepossess men's minds, and
blind their judgments against the most apparent discoveries of Truth. The late
Usurpation and Anarchy in the Church, let in another Government, and other
Orders, unto which many that are accustomed, cannot so readily prevail upon
themselves to embrace, what they fancy to be contrary, chiefly in so delicate a
business as Religion, in which their sincerity makes them constant and faithful
to the meanest circumstance. But I would entreat you my Brethren to rectify
your mistakes by a diligent enquiry, for we desire you not to forsake your
Religion, but to profess the same according to that most excellent manner, that
the Wisest and most Religious Governors of our Kingdom, have thought fitting
to prescribe to us. Search into our Belief and Practices, and see that we agree
as well as you with the Holy Records of Gods Word, we have the same Faith, the
same Sacraments the same God and Savior, the same initiation, and we are
designed for the same End and Glory, what a pity it is that we should be
divided in the way! Besides, all the occasions of your prejudices proceed from
mistakes, and misapprehensions of us. Therefore for the prevention of this
evil, take not things too much upon trust, but give your selves the
satisfaction to examine our way, and the reasons we give for that which you
object against us; converse with us in our Devotions, and think not that you
shall be defiled to pray with us to the same God. If your tender Consciences
will suffer you to hearken to reason, and to associate your selves with us in
our Public Worship: I am persuaded that all prejudice and partiality will soon
vanish at the clear Sunshine of the Gospel preached, and sincerely taught
amongst us. You ought therefore to be jealous of that which seems to be your
Conscience, which is for the most part nothing but Humor, strengthened by a long
continuance. And if your Conscience has been wrought upon to act against
truth, good manners, the glory of God, and interest of Christian Religion, you
must labor by Prayer, and the assistance of others of your more enlightened
Brethren, to find out the mistakes of your deceived Conscience. For I cannot
conceive but that many of the well meaning people amongst you, are governed by
their Consciences, and frighted with secret remorses from the justest actions
agreeable to Gods will and word. For when an inveterate prejudice has
possessed the Souls of men, it blinds their judgments, it hardens their hearts,
it strengthens their resolutions, and causes Conscience it self to sooth them
up in their Error. So that they are not easily reconciled to the most apparent
Truths. An Example we have in the Pharisees of old, whose obstinacy in opposing
Christ and his Gospel is most remarkable; as therefore this plea is not allowed
by Gods word in such cases, I would advise every good Christian to have some
other reason ready for his Actions, than bare and naked Conscience, which is so
apt to deceive our selves and others in this corrupt Age.

II. Others of the simpler and more hypocritical sort, are kept in their
Nonconformity, by an inclination to singularity, and a desire to gain the
reputation of being more precise and more religious than their other
Neighbors; as if that were the only way to seem religious to men, to cast off
all respects to the Religion of the Country; as if they had no other means to
purchase this esteem, but by their contempt of the ordinary Acts of Devotion,
and of the Society in Gods worship, of the common people. This folly is
entertained by too many of those, who have more regard to the outward garb,
than to the inward reality, and are more afraid of defiling themselves with
other men's sins than their own. These pretend the wickedness of the times, the
viciousness of such as assist at Prayers, and public Acts of Piety: and it may
be the Ministers weakness in manners and abilities, as just causes of their
separation from us, however they think thereby to answer their end, to oblige
others to look upon them as more Holy and Angelical than those, whom they
despise, whiles their hearts are full of hatred, malice, envy, pride, vanity,
and many times you may perceive in them the Devil of Hypocrisy, that has a
worldly interest to manage by this fond conceit of preciseness, with which the
poor Soul endeavors to deceive it self and others, for that intent as the
boasting Pharisee of the Gospel. To cure this kind of Lunaticism in Religion. I
would advise the distempered to seek but into their own Souls, and understand
themselves better, and it may be they would find there more cause to lament at
their own corruption, than to exclaim against the viciousness of others; I
would advise them to take heed of being more severe against their sinful
Brethren than God, and to consider that by partaking with the vilest of men in
Holy Duties, thou art not partakers of their negligence, profaneness, and other
Crimes, unless thou followest their vicious Examples: That thy Piety and
Humility will be so much the more acceptable to thy God, and pleasing to men in
a public Congregation, the more it excels the rest of the Assistants: That
other men's unworthiness should be so far from scaring thee from performing
thine obligations to God and his Church, that it should animate thee the more
with an inclination to promote Gods glory, and keep up his worship in the eyes
of the world, with that due respect and reverence, which other men neglect in
their constant attendance upon this Holy Ordinance: And that it is a most
ridiculous persuasion, to fancy thy self able to obtain the esteem of Holiness,
by the omission of the duties of Religion, and by a scornful neglect of the
encouragements of Holiness and Piety.

III. Another cause of many of our Brethrens refusing a Conformity with us in
our worshipping of God, is a too zealous affection for a Party, or for the Name
of a Party unto which they have devoted themselves. This factious humor
proceeds out of some displeasure conceived against us, our persons or our way,
or out of a propensity for that Party which they embrace in opposition to us.
And many times they are so fond and blind, that they give not themselves the
trouble to examine the differences between us, but resolutely embrace Presbytery
or Independency, and addict themselves to these empty names for no other cause
nor reason, but because they have an inclination for the Sect, or only for the
Name of the Sect. I dare appeal to the judgment and inquiry of the more
reasonable persons amongst them, whether this be not the cause of the
separation of many from us? I am persuaded that most of them know no real
difference between us and them, but only in the outward form and garb; they
understand not what Presbytery and Independency are, and yet they are in
appearance such rigid Presbyterians and Independents in their outward
behavior, that by no means will they be persuaded to comply with us in the
least punctilio. These are commonly the greatest Enemies of Unity, who are thus
led on by blindness and ignorance. They are the most unreconcileable slanderers
of our Worship and Government; upbraiding us with the Ministers viciousness,
the Peoples formality, and other trivial matters, which discover more hatred
than reason, in their carriage to us. To this kind of Nonconforming Brethren,
whom St. Paul checks for their carnality, I recommend that Christian
moderation, which the same Apostle wishes to the Corinthians and his other
Disciples, and to remember that their furious Devotion for their several
parties, agrees not with that Devotion, which they should have for Peace, for
Religion, for their Christ and his Interest. That their espousing of a Factior,
divorces them from this good Savior, and renders their Souls unfit for a
Communion with him here, or hereafter. And that they show themselves to be the
greatest Enemies of Truth and Concord, when they thus engage themselves
desperately in the encouraging of a Party, without understanding the depth and
designs of it. No doubt but if these men had but as sincere an inclination for
Truth, and the Public Peace, they would be as averse to their Sects, as they
are now forward to promote the interest of them.

IV. Another sort are preingaged by a worldly interest, and kept from a
compliance with us, for fear of crossing or losing that advantage which they
reap from a Nonconformity, or from their Acquaintance with the
Non-Conformists. Too many I understand are kept from hearkening to their Reason
and Knowledge, of the Lawfulness of our Worship, and their Duty to God and Man;
by that bewitching thing Seeming Interest. But such men value more their
present profit than their future hopes, and prefer the vanities of the Earth,
to the unspeakable advantages of Heaven, which they might reasonably expect
from an obedience to Gods Laws. Their condition I reckon to be very desperate;
for however they may look upon this Sin with contempt, or think their refusal
of joining with us deserves less blame, because they side with our Brethren of
the same Religion, yet in regard that they stand in opposition to us, and
division is thereby encouraged in Christ's Church. This their sin of
Nonconformity is so much the more heinous, because they know their Duty, and
refuse to practice it, for fear of parting with an advantage which they might
probably lose, did they forsake their Faction and Party. I would entreat these
men to weigh the words of our Savior, directed to such Idolaters of worldly
interest: He that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which
is in Heaven. And to remember that Christ is seemingly denied, when we refuse
Communion with such, whom we know to be real Christians, and a compliance with
that Lawful Worship, which is agreeable with his Word and Will.

V. Another hinderance to the Nonconformity of some of the more Learned and
Wiser sort, are those who either think themselves so or desire to be so
esteemed, is Shame. The shame and reproach of the world, which they justly
deserve for complying too much with the irregularities of former times, causes
them to continue constant in their Errors, for fear of confessing their
guiltiness by a change, though for the better. I conceive that their judgments
were then overruled by the Authority and Current of the times, and persuaded
to condemn that Government and Worship, which Rebellion was resolved to pull
down, being insensibly drawn in to side with that Enemy of our Laws and
Liberties. Now therefore, that this same Government and Worship is by Gods good
providence reestablished; they are ashamed to confess their former weakness, to
discover any unsetledness in their minds; they choose for this purpose rather
to persist in their mistakes, than to acknowledge them by a recantation. Such
men consider not that obstinacy in Errors is a great aggravation of a Crime,
and that to confirm now wilfully and resolutely, in opposition to Law, and the
dictates of their Conscience, what the necessity of the times forced them to
subscribe to, is a most heinous sin, near related to that of the Holy Ghost.
However our Savior Christ highly condemns such men, in the Gospel according to
S. John, Chapter xii. verse. 43. For loving more the praise of men, than the praise
of God. For having a greater regard to the approbation of their former
disciples, than to be approved of by God, for their ready compliance with their
duty and his Divine Laws. Truth is to be always acknowledged by all the
Disciples of Truth, and may be denied in little matters as well as in great;
but in matters of Religion, of the public Peace, of the Service of God, and
the Unity of Christ's Church, every Truth is of a great importance; to stand
stiffly in the denial of it, to refuse a compliance with it, to oppose it
obstinately, and continue in that opposition till death, is a wickedness that I
judge to be unpardonable before God, as it is inexcusable before men. Such
persons to save their credit, care not how they damn their Souls: and for fear
of the reproach of men, run themselves into the danger of forfeiting their God
and happiness, together with their interest in his Church by a wilful
separation. I entreat these my Brethren to take heed how they deny, or oppose
that which they know to be Just or True, for the God of Truth is a revenger of
all opposition to it. A small liberty that men give themselves in an error or a
vice, hardens them in it, and draws them insensibly into greater and more
heinous, and the longer men continue in them, the less able they are to repent
and amend.

VI. Some of the wiser sort were first persuaded to oppose the Church of
Englaad, and to refuse Conformity to its late establishment, because they had
been fierce and unadvised disputers and contemners of it, during the late
Usurpation. And now they would not comply, not so much for fear of reproach as
the former, but for fear of endangering the Faith of their disciples, or for
fear of prejudicing their esteem of Religion, by showing so great a readiness
to comply with the times; for they imagine that their peoplewill be apt to
suspect the truth of Christianity, when they who are the chief Teachers of it,
discover any unconstancy in the most visible part of it, which is Gods Public
Worship. The apprehension therefore of doing that which might bring an open
scandal to Religion, prevailed upon some of the more conscientious Teachers, of
the Presbyterian and Independent parties, to refuse Conformity to the
reestablishment of the Church of England. These seem to be more excusable than
any of the rest, because their care of Religion obliged them to refuse a
compliance, together with the mistakes of their Congregations, for though they
found nothing in the Government of the Church by Bishops, and in the things
enjoined, but what they could readily embrace, as agreeing with Piety and good
manners, and the exactest Rules of Gods Holy Word: yet because those whose
Souls and Consciences, they were to have a regard to in all their actions, were
prepossessed by the wickedness of former times, with such invincible mistakes
against this Church, that they could not be persuaded out of them upon a
sudden; if all their Teachers had forsaken them at the alteration of the
Government, they might have endangered the interest of Religion in their Souls,
and given them strange prejudices against the Holiness and Purity of
Christianity, especially in these profane days, in which men are too apt to
imagine it only a Politic Contrivance: and the rather they would have
entertained this wicked conceit of Gods Religion and Truth, if their Teachers,
whom they looked upon as their Examples of Piety, and men of great Learning for
the most part, should have entertained without any demur, those very things
which they or others, but a few years before exclaimed against as impious and
idolatrous, and were generally believed to be so. The People who commonly take
things upon trust, without giving themselves the time to examine their mistakes,
would have wondered to see men so unconstant in their behavior, so changeable
for the present advantages of life, to embrace such seeming impieties,
repugnant to their blinded Consciences. Therefore they thought they could do no
less than comply with their Peoples weakness, rather than with the Authority of
the Nation; and chiefly because their People expressed a willingness to supply
their necessities by their liberal contributions. The Holy Apostles of our
Savior Christ, seemed to have been in the same case after the preaching of the
Gospel, the Converted Jews were willing to embrace Christ and his Doctrine, but
the Laws of Moses they were not willing to forsake, because they and their
whole Nation had so great a Devotion for those Ceremonies, which they looked
upon, to be perpetual and obligatory to their Nation, in regard of Gods
Covenant: that they could not be induced to neglect them, though Christ and his
Apostles had showed them the intent of them all, which was but to keep them in
expectation of their Saviors coming, and the Revelation of the Gospel
Mysteries. But when the Apostles saw no possibility of drawing the Jews from
their Mosaical Observances, they connived at them, who embraced Christianity,
and took that course which might further their acceptance of Christ's Religion.
So far were they from dissuading them from it, that they themselves yielded to
all such observances, that they might not seandalize the rest, though they were
fully acquainted with their insignificancy. By this compliance with the Nations
mistakes and the Peoples weakness, which they were resolved to continue till
Christianity had gained a sufficient credit amongst them: they minded two
things, First, The avoiding of all Controversies and dissensions, which might
have risen to disturb the Public Welfare, from the Pharisees extraordinary
Devotion for their Law. Secondly, The taking away of that, which would have
proved the greatest obstacle amongst the Jews to the progress of Christ's
Religion, if its first reception had commanded them to forsake Moses and his
Ordinances, by which the Priestly Order was maintained in its splendour. But for
the better encouragement of Christians, they suffered Moses to usher in Christ,
and the People to profess Judaism and Christianity together, before they would
venture, to call them away from those carnal Ceremonies, which ended at Christ's
Death and Passion. In process of time, St. Paul to the Hebrews shows them their
emptiness and insignificancy, and advises them at last, to leave the shadows,
seeing they enjoyed the Substance and the Body.

I could heartily wish, that as many of the Learned and Conscientious Teachers
as amongst our Nonconforming Brethren, have imitated the Apostles in their
compliance with the peoples weakness, for the avoiding of Scandal and Religions
sake: would now at last imitate them in their second endeavors, to undeceive
their people, now that they are all so well acquainted with us and our worship
by several Disputations; that none but those whose Eyes are wilfully shut, can
conceive any such uncharitable opinion of us; That we are Popish and
Superstitious in the Service of God. Now that they all see that the Pope creeps
not in amongst them under our white Surplices, and is not hidden under our
supposed Altars, nor that our Religious Prayers usher not in the Antichristian
Mass. Now that the Holiness of our Religion, the significancy of our
Ceremonies, the Integrity of our Laws: In a word the Excellency of our Church
Order and Worship, are visible to all the Nation: It would become the Wisdom
and Christianity of those Learned and Wise Teachers of the Presbyterian and
Independent parties, to perfect what is already begun, and to encourage an
union with us. The same care of Religion which obliged them first to comply
with their Peoples mistakes, calls them now to persuade them out of them, lest
these mistakes should gangrene in their Souls through their encouragement, and
turn to the subversion of our Church, and the Protestant Religion in this
Nation. I am certain that now Christianity and the Souls of these men, are in
greater danger through your compliance with them, my reverend Brethren, than
they would be if you did gently deal with them, to show them the lawfulness of
our practices and worship, and persuade them by word and deed to join with the
approved forms and established Service of God in this Nation. For now their
obstinacy is no longer weakness but wilfulness, no longer Conscience but
Resolution and Aversion. You know sufficiently how dangerous it is to nourish
them up in an abhorrency of Truth, and to encourage them in a displeasure
against the Professors of it. You know how contrary to the blessed disposition
of Christ's Disciples, their temper is, who are not to be reconciled with us and
their own duty, by all the Reasons and Commands of God and Man. You know, and
may easily discover in your usual hearers, if you please to give your selves
the trouble, several wicked vices, as pride, selfconceitedness, hypocrisy,
hatred, malice, envy, etc. which their Nonconformity alone has bred and
nourished in their Souls. You know that the blessed rules of the Gospel, and
the sweet temper of Christ's Religion, requires from you another disposition,
and other carriage than many of you, and most of your followers expressed to us
your Brethren, and your Christian Governors. If you have a sincere regard to
Religion, and a desire to advance Gods Glory on Earth; you will at last
endeavor a reconciliation, for fear of the mischiefs which our separation from
one another is like to bring upon us all. Remember that a compliance with your
Peoples Nonconformity, is no longer seasonable, in regard of the obstinacy of
those that continue in it against all Law and Reason. You have sufficiently
complied with their humors, do you now comply with your obligations to God, and
Man: you have had a care of the salvation of their Souls, now look to the
preservation of your own, and run not your selves into the remediless sin of a
wilful denial and opposition of God truth to the last. The Apostles in their
yielding to the Jewish mistakes, labored always to make them sensible of their
Error, by minding them still that Moses Ceremonies were not needful to be
observed, and at last told them plainly, That they were a denial of Christ's
coming in the Flesh. Galat.
It would become your Learning and Integrity, my reverend Brethren, to deal
thus plainly with your Congregations; if you would be true followers of the
Holy Apostles. Tell them that Conformity to the Church of England is no such a
Crime as they have imagined, that they are bound to obey Man's Laws when they
are not contrary to the Commands of the Gospel; That they should be reconciled
with our Worship and Church, and strive to Conform as near as they can to what
is required from them; Tell them that Schism and Separation from the approved
way, is a grievous sin. That their Souls are in danger of Damnation by
resisting and disobeying the lawful Commands of their Superiors under God. That
they should take heed of not persisting obstinately in their errors, and not to
refuse obedience to the least Command of the Gospel when discovered to them.
Tell them to be more in love with Truth than with Faction, more desirous of
meeting with the rest of their Brethren in Gods Worship, than fond of their
private and unlawful meetings, where the Gospel may be Preached, it is true,
because it is in opposition to their other Brethren, and to the Authority of
the Nation, they are not warrantable by Gods Word. Tell them in short, that the
Blessed Gospel of our Savior as well as his Interest and our Glory, requires
us all to join and unite together in all Acts of Piety on Earth, that we may
avoid the Devils temptations and be more fit to unite together in Heaven, to
sing oraises to our great God and Redeemer. Our Blessed Savior, who is dead
for you as well as for us, and is gone to prepare a place for us in the
glorious Mansions of Eternity; intends not to receive you by your selves, and
appoint your aboads distinct from the rest of Christians: why are you so
serupulous or so superstitious, as for trivial matters now to divide from us in
that Worship which is to prepare us for Gods presence. O my Brethren, did we
but consider how ridiculous our Nation appear; to our Neighbors, and to the
Blessed Angels above, and how pleasing our Divisions are to our Enemies of
Rome, we should doubtless blush for shame to have hitherto encouraged a
separation so childish and ill grounded, for no other cause but the humor and
mistakes of the vulgar sort, seeing that it renders us liable to the reproach
of Men and Angels, and causes us all to be in danger of the ruin of our
worldly interest, and what mischiefs it causes to the Souls of men do you
judge. If the respect to Religion be pretended, examine whether this pretense
can avail against an apparent Duty, or excuse you from a submission to the Laws
of God and Man, examine whether at present you draw not more evil upon the heads
of your Followers, and Religion it self, by an opposition to Conformity, than
you would by yielding to Reason and Law, and to your Christian obligations.

I know that some profane and vicious persons refuse to be conformable for
other reasons, because they have cast off all respects for their God and
Religion. I know the Jesuits and the disguised Papists amongst you, will not
Conform to our Church, but exclaim against our Religious Worship, because they
have a wicked design to manage the ruin of the Nation: But I intend not these
lines for their benefit and perusal, but only for such of our Nonconforming
Brethren, whose hearts God may at last move with a sense of their duty to join
with us in Gods Service. They that hereafter shall refuse, and continue in an
obstinate refusal, and in their usual clamors against us may justly be
suspected for Papists, or some hired to promote the Jesuitical design, the
overthrow of Church and State. Were the differences in Religion between us in
the Fundamentals, a Separation would be well grounded. But we all agree in the
chief Articles of our Faith, we embrace together the same Religion and Belief,
we worship the same one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and expect Salvation
through the Merits of a Crucified Christ, we subscribe to the same Covenant of
Grace, and acknowledge but two Sacraments as Seals, we look upon the Holy
Scriptures, as the only infallible Rule of our Faith and Practice; In a word we
agree in all the essential parts of the Christian Religion, many of the
circumstances in which we disagree are so inconsiderable, that if we had not an
earnest desire to contend, they would not be able to cause any dispute, much
less to disturb the public peace.

The chief differences are about Church Government, and Gods Public Worship,
for the latter they are so frivolous, idle and impertinent, that I shall say no
more in vindication of our practices, than has been already said, but for the
Government we agree in the chief Principles and Maxims, though we differ in the
conclusion. For we all say that in all Church Governments amongst Christians,
that there is a regard to be had to the Models allowed of and appointed by the
Holy Apostles and Primitive Fathers, That the Rules of the Gospel ought not to
be opposed but obeyed in the prescribing of Laws for the preservation of
Christian Societies. That in all Church Government there is a special regard to
be had to the end of all Government, which is the safety of the whole to keep
it from the attempts of all Enemies and dangers. That this may cause a variety
in Kingdoms and Nations, agreeable to the Government in the State, to the
nature and inclinations of the people and several other circumstances which are
to be weighed in this Case. That a Government established in a Nation by the
public Authority, if not contrary to Gods Word and Will, ought not to be
resisted by Christian Subjects. That every individual Believer must not presume
to censure and murmur against the appointed Order in Church or State, or meddle
with the Princes Office and Power. That the Government in the Church belongs to
the Sovereign Prince under God, as well as in the State: and that it is a
dangerous presumption for every private person to venture to contradict the
Laws, which such Lawful Princes think convenient in their wisdom to settle in a
Church: in these and such like truths, I suppose most of our Nonconforming
Brethren will agree with us. But nevertheless, the Presbyterian will be
governed by his Presbytery and Lay Elders, in a subordination to Assemblies and
Synods. The Independent will acknowledge no Orders in the Church but what are
appointed in his Congregation, and both refuse Obedience to Episcopal
Authority, though suitable to the former Rules and Maxims: Episcopacy
recommends to us in Gods Church a Monarchical Authority, Presbytery would have
an Aristocratical mixed with Democracy, the Independent pleads for a
Democratical. To what purpose is this ado about Government? it concerns not
our Salvation in case we behave our selves justly, righteously, and soberly, in
this present world: in case we can but lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. As this is the chief duty of every individual Christian,
it should be our endeavor and purpose in all our actions. The Presbyterian
forsook Episcopacy, and thought to mend his condition under that Government, he
gave an Example to the Independent to forsake Presbytery with hopes of living
with more ease in a new Government, never heard of in the Primitive Church,
unless it be amongst Heretics and Enemies of Gods Truth, for the establishing
of this strange Order in this Church, they lay down most dangerous Doctrines,
contrary to Gods Word and all Reason; for instance, That every Christian upon
the account of being so, a real Christian, a good man, and a Believer, may be
no member of Christ's visible Church, and is not bound to join in external
Communion with it where it may be had. Separation no Schism, in opposition to
an excellent Sermon of that Worthy Divine, Mr. Sharp.
That a suspicion or a bare persuasion of sin in the public practices
commanded by Authority, is sufficient to free both Minister and People from
their Obedience, and License them to Act contrary to the same. That Christians
are not subject to Ecclesiastical Laws, unless they be contained in the Holy
Scripture. That men may be Christians without any subjection to Authority, or
dependency upon Christ's Church. And such like Doctrines directly contrary to
Christ's great design in man's Redemption, which S. Paul tells us was Union,
Ephesians ii. 16.
That he might reconcile all unto God in one Body by the Cross. I would have
these my Brethren know, that as man was created in respect to a Society, he is
also redeemed with the same relation, for we cannot think that this good
Savior has freed him from sin and the Devils power, to live by himself for
ever as a wild Anchoret in the Desert, and Mountains; he has enlightened his
followers with that spirit, and given them those principles that tend to Union
and Communion. Therefore St. Paul says, in 1 Cor. xiv. 33. That God is not the
Author of Confusion but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, What
means the Apostle by Peace? is it that every individual Christian should be
scattered upon the face of the Earth, and upon the least suspicion or ill
grounded prejudice abominate all correspondency in the Public Worship of God,
that he should look upon his brethren redeemed by the same blood, governed by
the same spirit, and animated with the same hopes, with a supercilious
countenance, and fly from them as from a Wolf or a Devil. Yet these are the
consequences of some of the Independent principles. But I suppose it no
difficult matter to reclaim most of them from such pernicious opinions, which
have proved as destructive to their private Congregations, as they have to the
Church of England, for they tend to encourage disorder, and to license men to
cast off all respects to all Governors and Government of what sort soever. But
methinks if we had that honor for our Nation as becomes us, and as other
people have for theirs, we should not be more fond of the new modes in
Government and Gods Worship recommended to us by our Neighbors, and imposed
upon us by a Scotch Frolic, than of the ancient and wise method and Government
established amongst us by our Forefathers. Why must the new fangles and
fashions of strangers affect us more than the discreet constructions of our own
Christian Rulers? Though the people of our Nation alter often their habits,
methinks in so serious a business as Religion, Government and Gods Worship, we
should not be so changeable as we are in our apparel.

I know the rigid Independents are accused for denying the appointed
maintenance to Ministers, Tithes, the encouragement of Learning and Gods
Service; they are accused for not allowing any set forms of Prayer, not so much
as the Lords Prayer, for not admitting any to the Ordinances but such as are of
their own fraternity, for denying the Magistrates Power over the Godly, for
allowing the killing of all opposers. See Mr. Baily's Dissuasive from the
Errors of the times.
But these wicked Doctrines I suppose are not maintained by the most moderate
Independents, who differ from us chiefly in the Government of the Church: in
all other things it is likely that they may be brought to comply with us,
though at present they give themselves the liberty to abuse and carp at many
other innocent circumstances of the Religion and Worship of the Church of
England.

I find my self engaged in this place to give a Reply to a grand Objection
against this Advice, and call to Conformity which seems to be allowed by St.
Paul, in his Fourteenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, and which is
commonly pleaded as an excuse by our Non Conforming Brethren. That they
extremely suspect our practices and worship to be sinful, and therefore they
are not bound to act against a doubting Conscience, by joining with us in that
which they conceive to be unlawful. Agreeable to S. Paul's words in another
occasion and case, He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not
of faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

This passage is but a weak Plea for Nonconformity in England, for the Romans
case and ours differ in these particulars. Their Controversies were concerning
the abolished Ceremonies of the Jews, or the profane practices of the Heathen
Idolaters, ours are about the Lawful, Decent, and Religious Ceremonies of
Christians. Their Controversies were about such matter, as were in themselves
scandalous, as eating of things sacrificed to Idols, partaking with the
Idolaters in a Heathen Temple, or observing the Fasti and Nefasti, days of good
or ill luck, according to the Roman persuasion: but our Disputes are for such
things as all acknowledge to be harmless and innocent. The Romans were newly
Converted to Christianity, and therefore many weak in Faith were not to be
discouraged by the liberty other men allowed themselves, we in England
methinks, should be well grounded and settled in the Christian Religion, and not
to be discouraged from its Profession by every trifle. The things in
Controversy were never enjoined, or looked upon by the Rulers of that Church
as fit to be practiced, and of any decency in Gods Worship, our matters in
dispute are approved by the Authority of the Nation, and every true hearted
English Soul, is bound by the undeniable Laws of God as well as by Man's Laws,
and for the credit of the Nation, as well as for the preserving of public
Peace and Unity, to Submit and Conform. Do you think in Conscience, that in our
case if S. Paul did live amongst us, that he would bid you not Conform, Because
you are damned if you Conform doubting. He that tells you in the former
Chapter, verse. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high
things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.
And in the fifteenth Chapter, verse. 5. Be ye like minded one toward another,
that ye way with one mind and with one mouth glorify God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Think ye that he would have opened so wide a gap to
Nonconformity, and to the sinister designs of Apostats and Heretics. Think ye
that he would have given this liberty to disturb the Churches Peace, to these
Sons of Tumult and Division, to tell them that a groundless suspicion of sin in
the practices of the Church, or the bare pretense is sufficient to justify
their irregularities, disorders, schisms, separation and disobedience to the
Commands of their Superiors, He that tells you that ye must needs be subject
for Conscience sake, would he have said that a naked excuse, or a mere
immagination of sin in the things enjoined, frees you from all subjection, and
gives you liberty to disobey the Magistrate in indifferent mattres. Are you to
prefer your wilful suspicions or groundless fancies, to the declarations of
your Brethren and Christian Rulers, to imagine sin in that which they think not
only lawful, but also needful to be practiced. This General Rule Whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin, verse. 23. is misapplied to our case, and is not to be
allowed as a lawful excuse for the omission of an apparent duty, for there are
none of our Non-Conformists but might easily attain to that Knowledge and
Faith, which might justify their Unity with us. Were they living amongst the
Canibals or in the darkness of Popery, or Heathenish Idolatry, where none were
able to remove their doubts, to satisfy their minds, and inform their
Consciences, this plea might be so long allowable till they were able to gain
more knowledge. Calig. aut in Sole, Quinctil.
But for them to shut their eyes to all the beams of light, and their ears to
all the Reasons, Arguments, and Persuasions, of the Doctors of the Church of
England, and to say we are blind, we don't believe, we are not persuaded, and
therefore our Conformity without Faith would be a sin, is a most ridiculous
pretense, unto which mere necessity drives them who are obstinately resolved to
the contrary. Suppose a Heathen or a Papist should have had the same advantages
as you have to understand the Truth, and as strong invitations to make
profession of the Gospel, would you allow them this pretense to excuse
themselves from embracing the Gospel? Why did not the Presbyterians and
Independents approve of this Plea in those whom they cast out of their
Assemblies for Religions sake, and would not admit them to communion? Men must
take heed in this corrupt Age, of such general Rules which the Devil is wont to
wrest, to promote his own wicked purpose. But in this case you will say what
shall we do? what course shall we take? for our Consciences have gotten such a
command over us and our judgments through such like persuasions, that we can
enjoy no peace within our breasts, if we comply with you, in things so contrary
to our principles. We are as much afraid to hear your prayers, as to worship
before an Idol of Stone or Timber, to see a white Surplice, as to assist at
Mass, to have a Cross upon our Childrens foreheads as to receive the marks of
the Beast: In a word, we are as much afraid to submit our selves to your
Worship and the Government of Bishops, as to Apostatize from Christ, and
forsake Christianity. This fear and these persuasions cannot easily be
overcome, what advice therefore would you give us that we in this case, might
take that Course, which may agree in some respects with our obligations to our
Superiors, and favor us a little in our weakness, that we may not do any thing
to disturb the peace of our Consciences, which you say are misled.

CHAP. V. Seasonable and Christian Advices for our Nonconforming Brethren, who
are possessed with such strong prejudices against the Church of England, that
they cannot easily overcome them: and a Reconciliation proposed.
I Will freely grant what you would have us believe, that you are afraid by a
compliance with our Church to wound your Consciences, or to act contrary to
your persuasion, which you think to be well grounded: and that by such a
proceeding you should disturb the quiet of your Souls, as when Conscientious
men commit a sin against Gods Laws. Yet my Brethren in this case your resolved
Nonconformity is not warrantable, nor agreeing with Christian prudence,
because your Superiors to whose Judgments, Reason and Duty, teaches you to
yield a little, condemns it as prejudicial to the public: and because it is so
apparently destructive to Peace and all Christian virtues which Unity and
Uniformity in Religion are wont to nourish in a Society. Therefore in this case
for your own quiet and the public Peace, I advise you my Brethren to observe a
medium between a strict Conformity and a Nonconformity, until such time as you
can be better informed, and to practice these following Rules, which will
infallibly give your Souls and Consciences satisfaction, and answer in some
respects your obligations to your Superiors under God, as well as secure the
public peace of the Church. However I am certain you are bound by Gods Holy
Word to observe these Rules; that though the case were as you suspect, I am
certain, that if you will govern your selves by them, your Nonconformity, will
be less dangerous to your Souls, more excusable before God, and less hurtful to
the Nation.

I. Abstain from all disrespectful words, slanderous reports, base aspersions,
and railing accusations, and unworthy imputations of our Government, Worship
and Orders of the Church. Suffer not your suspicions of sin to break out into
an open injustice and filthy language. If your judgments be infected, defile
not your tongues with the same pollution. Let a Christian moderation bridle in
that liberty, which men commonly give themselves, of speaking any thing against
that which they cannot fancy, and let not your mistakes appear farther than
your own Souls. This restraint is most just, reasonable, and agreeing with the
passages of Gods Blessed Word, for it is but just that you should abstain from
abusing that Church and Government, which secures your Lives and Estates, from
which your Forefathers and many of you, have received the advantage of being
Christians; It was a great ingratitude in one of the Sons of Noah, to reveal
and sport himself with the sight of his Fathers Nakedness. It is as great an
ingratitude in the English Subjects, and deserves as severe a Curse, to blaze
abroad and delight to publish in every Company the suspected nakedness of their
Mother the Church of Eagland, from whose Breasts they have sucked many
benefits. It is very remarkable that when the Children of Israel were going
into the Land of Canaan, to live amongst the Heathens, God gave them this
Commandment for the preservation of the public Peace of his People, which
would have been broken, if they had by their unhandsom Language, stirred up the
Heathens jealousy for the Honor of their Gods. Thou shall not revile the
Gods, nor curse the Rulers of they People. Exodus xxii. 28. They differed in
essential matters of Religion, yet God would not suffer his People to rail
against those false Divinities, lest that might disquiet and disturb the
public tranquillity. And for that very cause when the Jews were in Captivity
in Babylon, Jeremiah sent them a Letter by Gods Command, To seek the peace of
the City whither they were carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for
it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jerem. xxix. 7. The Jews were
Gods People, the Babylonians were Idolaters, yet God would not suffer them to
defame or speak any thing, which might hinder the peace of that Kingdom.
Likewise it was observed by the Town Clerk of Ephesus, in his harangue to the
People in their uproar, That the Christians were neither Robbers of Churches,
nor yet Blasphemers of the Goddess Diana. Acts xix. 37. And the Heathens could
commend the Christians for their moderation, and discretion in this respect.
Justin Martyr.
And is it just, that you my Brethren, should be continually reviling and
blaspheming that Worship and Religion, whereof the establishment renders ye
quiet in the possession of your Estates: That Religion and Worship, against
which you have nothing but Suspicions, and not such Allegations as the Jews had
against the Babylonish, and as the Christians had against the Heathenish
Religion. Our Peace I confess is not disturbed in that manner as theirs had
been, had they treated the Heathens as many of you do us, for you have to deal
with those Christians, that look upon you as Brethren, and can suffer affronts
and disgraces with patience, but our moderation excuses not the violent and
uncharitable expressions and blasphemies too much in use amongst the
indiscreetest of our dissenting Brethren. Whatever therefore be your thoughts
and suspicions of us, let your words be modest, and let them favor of that
Christian Charity which we should entertain for one another.

II. Seek not to propagate your displeasures against our Church and Worship,
nor to gain Proselytes to your Sects. You have but suspicions of sin to lay to
our Charge, no real Accusations, no open Idolatry, nor plain Superstition to
fasten upon our Church and Worship: though this suspicion as you pretend, is
sufficient to excuse your Nonconformity, it may not have the same effect upon
others; that which is but a suspicion in you, shall assuredly be an Article of
Faith in a Disciple, for Error like the Snow-balls increases the farther it
goes. Education and Custom will cause your Children to abominate, what you look
upon to be tolerable, if you bring them up in an aversion for it. It is
observed concerning heretics and mistakes in Religion, that their Disciples
were far more the Children of Hell than their Masters, and more violent and
more extravagant in their deviations from the Truth. Matt. xxxiii. 15.
It is therefore very dangerous to draw into the same groundless suspicions
unexperienced Souls, who are apt to improve mistakes to the disturbance of the
public and their own damnation: If therefore you will not be in love with your
prejudices, take heed how you bring up your Children in such persuasions, as
may hasten their ruin and the Nations calamities. And if you cannot prevail
upon your selves to forsake your opinions, be not so fond of your distemper to
communicate it to others, but encourage them in the performance of their duties.

III. Give not credit too unadvisedly to the ill reports that concern the
Church and its Government, for there is nothing that increases so much the
displeasure against it, as that wicked policy of our Adversaries. They
misrepresent us to the people, and deal with us as the Jesuits in Spain do with
the Protestants condemned to the fire, they cloth them with Paper Coats and
Caps, all covered over with shapes of Devils and strange chimera's to render
them more frightful to the vulgar sort: thus do our subtle enemies cover us
over with the figures of Devils, Idolatry, Superstition and Crimes, which when
well examined will appear to be only the effects of their malice rather than
expressions of our deservings.

IV. Search with diligence into the differences between us, take the assistance
of Gods Holy Word, inquire into our Practices and Belief, and by Prayer
endeavor to understand the Truth, that you may learn to practice it. We dare
appeal to the Judgments of the most moderate of you, we are no such Idolaters
as some would have. There is nothing of Superstition enjoined in our Church: we
will be tried by Gods Word, and the sound interpretation of the Holy Fathers,
Read over Mr. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy, commended by our Royal Martyr.
Read his Opinion of our Church Worship and Government in his incomparable Book.
His judgment is worthy to be looked upon. I have ever esteemed, says he, the
Church of England the best Profession of Religion, because it comes nearest to
Gods Word for Doctrine, and to the Primitive Examples for Government. In a
Letter to the Prince of Wales.
Read Bishop Bancroft, Downham, Hall, Bilson, and Dr. Tailor against
Presbytery, in Vindication of the Church of England, Read our later
Disputations about the matters in question between us, etc.

V. Draw as near to us in your Religious Worship, as your Consciences will
suffer you, endeavor to assist at Prayers, and if you can have no Devotion
inwardly, however express outwardly that respect, that is due to your God whom
we adore. Whatever you pretend, I cannot think any of you so extraordinary
mistaken as to think that a Crime, which we reckon a Duty, and so Superstitious
as to scruple at an attendance with us in our Service of God. If therefore you
be willing to attain to a freedom from all those niceties, and fears, be
frequent at the public Prayers of the Church. If you cannot at first have any
Devotion, this frequentation will soon bring you to a right relish of those
Petitions, and that way of Worship, and the sooner, if you will observe the
motions of the Body enjoined in the Common Prayer; for this submission and this
custom will have a speedy influence upon your minds, and cause your Souls to
join in the same respects to God. Certain it is that the nearness of relation
between the Soul and the Body, will beget a mutual compliance between the
Actions of the one and the Affections of the other; so that the often
practicing of things must needs reconcile us to those performances, and remove
the strongest prejudices which are not grounded in reason, nor strengthened by
Divine Revelation, nor any worldly interest, which in this cause ought to have
no hand. If therefore any weak Brother cannot at present comply with the
Devotions of the Church of England, if he finds an inward repugnancy for our
public Prayers, which hinders him from receiving that benefit and comfort
thereby intended: Let him follow and try my advice but a few months, let him
force his Body to observe all the motions of respect commanded in the Rubric:
let him stand up when we give glory to God and sing forth his praises; let him
kneel in Prayer, and outwardly observe a due Reverence, and he shall find that
his former aversion will insensibly wear away, and by degrees he will bring his
Soul to a hearty and Religious compliance with our godly Forms of Prayer, which
before he could never use with any satisfaction to his mind: He shall find his
unhappy humor of discontent evaporate it self, and his Body draw after the Soul
and its faculties to a sincere worshipping of our good God, in the manner that
is practiced amongst us. This and many other directions to this same purpose I
recommend to your perusal, my Brethren, who are willing to be cured of all
prejudice against our Church and Worship, you shall find them in my Christians
Devotions and Directory, now in the Press.

However I would advise you, for your own and the Churches Peace, to draw as
near as you can to us, and be frequent in the offering up of the Prayers of the
Church, for this prepinquity will both acquaint you with the innocence of our
practices, and free you from all those idle and needless apprehensions of sin,
which a distance from us begets and nourishes in your minds.

Many other Seasonable Advices I could give you to the same purpose, but the
compendiousness of this Tract suffers me not to enlarge.

If you were desirous of a reconciliation, there are ways to be found out to
bring us all together: And though we stand at such a distance, and entertain
such unreasonable animosities against one another persons and practices, I
dare engage to offer to you my Brethren, such proposals as may agree with most
of your Conscriences, and with the honor of our Church, and the Majesty of our
Laws, with a little mitigation. Our Governors no doubt will be willing to
embrace such amongst you as lead a good Life, and to encourage your Conformity
by all possible means. Neglect not this motion but answer is with a Christian
compliance. You shall find us all both Clergy and People, ready to receive you,
for we have in this Nation such Worthy, Wise, Learned, and Christian Rulers in
the Church, as no Nation can show the like: nor was ever our Church better
furnished with able Divines, skilled in all kind of Learning, nor more,
remarkable for their Wisdom, Piety, and Moderation. You shall find our Bishops
for the Public Peace of the Church, ready to condescend to your weakness in
all such things, as shall agree with their Consciences, the honor and good of
the Church, and the preservation of his Majesty's Authority.

This Nation was never blessed with a more merciful, mild and more gracious
Prince, more willing to be governed by Law and Reason, an Enemy of blood and
violence. You see that he bears with your infirmities, suffers you to take that
liberty in matters of Religion, which the severity of the Law condemns. His
goodness and excellent disposition is an invitation to you: Abuse not his Royal
Favors to your own prejudice and the public wrong; Let his Reign be Blessed
with an accommodation of those differences, which have involved us already in
unspeakable Miseries and woeful Tragedies.

Some of our Governors need not be advised to a Christian moderation, and a
kind reception of the weak Brethren. This Noble and Seasonable Virtue has
gained the greatest part of considerable Towns to Conformity, and won them the
esteem of all their people. The present Bishop of Bath and Wells, by a kind and
generous behavior, has done much good in Taunton, amongst the Nonconformists.
For though it is not safe to comply with Schism and Faction, by falling away
from our Duty, and the observance of the Laws, there is a wise behavior in
requiring obedience with meekness and Christian complacency, which prevails
more upon the minds of men, than that furious zeal which would have fire to
come down from Heaven upon all opposers.

I dare engage to you, my Nonconforming Brethren, if you will discover the
least forwardness to this blessed Union: All the Bishops, Clergy, and good
People of the Land will rejoice, and that such conditions shall be granted to
you, which Reason, Conscience, and your own Interest will require you to
accept. O that you would therefore all desire and seek for this Union with us
in Gods Holy Worship, and thereby secure the public Peace of the Church, the
prosperity of your King and Country, from all wicked attempts of Barbarous
Enemies. O that you would but prefer this your interest of your Soul and Body,
and the indispensable obligations to the Laws, to your own unadvised phancies
or the jealousies of blinded and deluded Consciences.

I shall therefore conclude this Seasonable Advice, with an Address, to you the
Chief Leaders and Teachers of these our Brethren.

CHAP. VI. An Exhortation to all the Learned, Pious, and Christian Teachers
amongst our Nonconforming Brethren, to prevent in time the Nations ruin, by an
Unity with us; and to lay aside all Prejudice and Partiality.
WE look upon many of you to be men of great Learning, and Exemplary Piety,
some of you by your Religious Works, have gained an esteem amongst all the
Reformed Churches: your Lives are said to be answerable to your Doctrines. Mr.
Baxter's Works.
Many are enlightened, instructed, and persuaded from sin by your Teaching: as
therefore a Roman said of a good man on the contrary side, Vtinam, I could
repeat the word a thousand times, Vtinam noster esses, would to God that you
and we were but one, would to God that you would join with us, and be persuaded
to unite in one Religion and Worship.

The multitudes that throng at your Assemblies, look upon you also to be men
that make Conscience of your ways. By your Preaching they see that you are not
ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Revealed Will of God. What can they
conclude from hence, and your abhorrency of us, but that you must be more
quick-sighted than they are, to spy an Error in our Worship and Prayers,
something of Idolatry, and unlawful to practice, which causes you to separate
from us for fear of a defilement. I know several persons that this
consideration alone has prejudiced so far against us, that they have told me
and cannot be persuaded to the contrary, that there must needs be something of
Superstition in our Church, for otherwise so many Learned men would never stand
at such a distance from us, others have cast all the fault upon your
Consciences, as if your Consciences my Reverend Brethren, were to be blinded
and mistaken in so plain and clear a business; What is free for me to practice,
some have said to me, it may be other men's Consciences cannot allow. Your pious
behavior, and good lives in the eyes of the world, strengthens them in this
charitable opinion of you, and sinister opinion of us and of our Church, so
that they look upon us as formalists, temporisers, men-pleasers, worldlings,
and our Rulers as Persecutors, to Enact those just Laws, which tend to the
preservation of the Nations Peace, and Honor. For Gods sake begin now to
undeceive them, suffer not your people to continue for ever in their dangerous
mistakes, which nourishes envy, hatred, malice, displeasure, and keeps them in
that heinous and crying Sin before God Schism, which caused once the Earth to
open her infernal jaws to devour the first Authors of it alive. Numbers xvi.


Your Danger I conceive is greater than theirs; for all the sins that they are
guilty of by their separation, and the vices nourished in them by this
division, will be charged upon you by our great Judge at the last Tribunal. And
why will you load your selves with other men's Crimes? Have you not miscarriages
enough of your own to Answer for? Were it not for you and your Religious
Carriage, all your people would be easily persuaded to listen to Reason and
their Duty to the Church. But as you have hitherto kept up the Faction for
Reasons that we may chance to be ignorant of; Now let me tell you, that you
endanger both the Bodies and the Souls, the present and the future interest of
your Congregations: If you will yet stiffly refuse a Compliance and an Union
with us your Brethren. You see the condition of this Nation, the malice and
designs of our Enemies, the danger that hangs over our heads; you see what
advantage our divisions in Religion are likely to give them, how they endeavor
to keep us asunder, and laugh at our follies and needless dissensions: why will
you befriend the Pope and his Papists? why will you yield them your assistance,
and employ your Gifts and Talents, to advance Popery amongst us, and ruin your
People and their Posterity? Don't you think, that these quarrels between
Protestants, have increased the number of Atheists and Papists? It has been
the usual reason employed by their Jesuits to delude poor Souls into their
Damnable Religion, to tell them, that we amongst our selves were not well
agreed, what Religion to choose; and that those of the Reformed Religion were
always jangling about Fundamentals. And how many profane and loose persons
have been glad to catch at this occasion, to excuse themselves from observing
the Laws of God.

Besides, consider what danger those poor Souls are in that are your auditors,
whom though their conversation is plausible before men, the Devil holds fast by
those stroug bands of iniquity, prejudice, pride, singularity, hatred, envy,
schism, etc. and drags to Eternal damnation without Repentance and the Merits
of a good Savior. Open your Eyes therefore my Beloved Brethren, look to your
own, your Congregations, the Nations, and the public danger: and the Lord of
his Mercy open your Hearts to have some compassion of them and your selves,
that you may bring a speedy remedy to these distempers in the Church, which
will never be cured withou you.

I commend the Jesuits in China, for their wisdom and discretion in complying
and joining with the Protestant Merchants in all Duties of Religion, and they
with the Jesuits in the parts of Gods Worship which are lawful, however they
abstain from all Disputes, and Quarrels about Christian Religion, before the
Brahmans and the Heathens, lest that the differences in Religion might not
appear to them and hinder their embracing Christianity. Cannot we observe the
same policy? we have much more reason than they, our differences are not
considerable. Cease therefore to canton your selves, and keep up your Factions.
Why will you for worldly interest or any carnal end, bring Christ's Church in
England to utter ruin? If you cannot be sensible of the Nations danger, by that
which I have already represented, Consider that in the late hurly burly in the
West, upon a false Alarm of the French being landed upon the Coast of
Dorset-shire, some of the fiercest Presbyterians and Independents, or such at
least as pretended that Religion to excuse themselves from an attendance upon
the Public Ordinance, had combined together to plunder the Houses of Rich
Ministers, Gentlemen and Wealthy Farmers, if there had been any Truth in the
Invasion.

My Reverend Brethren, I beseech you for the Lords sake, consider seriously
this particular, that will discover to you the present dispositions of our
dissenting Brethren, and the future dangers of their Dividing from our Church.
Animosity is increased to that height in their Souls, that the Blessed Rules of
the Gospel are not regarded, that the Laws Human and Divine will be trampled
under foot, that Plunder, Robberies, and Massacres, will be the end of your
teaching many of them not to join with us. I cannot think that any of you will
approve of such wickednesses as these, yet these you may see to be the fruits
of our Divisions in frivolous matters of Religion. I know your zealous Teaching
has had better effects upon more Conscientious Souls: but under the Skirts of
your Sects, you know many Hypocrites and Villains shroud themselves, to act
their evil purposes under a more plausible Covert. Harbor not such Enemies as
these, encourage them not in their dissenting from us, but lead them by your
Examples and Teaching, at least to an Obedience to our Laws and Government in
the Church and State, and to an outward Conformity to the Worship of our God
amongst us, according to St. Paul's Exhortation to you, in the Second of his
Epistle to the Philippians: If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies;
Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind.

THE END.

