THE DECLARATION of Colonel Rich's Regiment.

With the Engagement they have Entered into.

ALSO Major Braman's Letter to Lieutenant Colonel Lagoe, upon their going into
PORTSMOUTH.

To which is added another Letter sent from Major Braman to a Friend of his in
London.

London, Printed by T. M. for Livewell Chapman, at his shop in Pope's Head
Alley, 1659.

The Declaration of Coll. Riche's Regiment.
Dearly beloved Brethren, Friends and Fellow Soldiers; Wisdom is justified
of her children, and we therefore hope shall not be condemned by you; We cannot
but believe concerning you, that the same trouble and perplexity of spirit
has possessed you as our selves; and the same enquires, after our good old
Cause, has been in you as in us; and we humbly hope, that the God of all our
mercies, whose will we desire to follow in all things, will show you as
(blessed be his Name) he has done us, what is our duty in this dark Day. We
have, as you, silently sat down and seen a lawful Authority, yea, that very
Parliament, that raised and maintained us, after all the eminent and honorable
Services done for God and their Generations, kicked out of their Seats with
contempt and scorn: At which time we desire to remember to our own shame, that
our poor native Country, notwithstanding their feirce intestine wars and
trouble, just gone over its head, was so settled and composed, that hardly
could be perceived the Tract of that trouble they passed through; our Trade
quick and flourishing, and such abundant blessing from above, that the Poor
were satisfied with bread in that plenty, that neither we nor our Fathers has
seen the people of God countenanced and encouraged, growing up in union in all
parts, and the public enemy desponding, At this juncture, we say, when England
thus flourished, Ireland reduced, and Scotland Conquered, the Dane, Dutch and
French afraid of our Fleets, and begging amity with us; and we a terror to all
the Nations round about, and when we were constantly paid before it was due,
and our Navy not a penny in Arrears; we Jeserum like waxed fat and kicked
against our dear God and those glorious Instruments in his hands; and suffered
our selves, through want of courage (forgetting conscience and our Duty) to be
led to the emposing an Arbitrary Power over our selves and the Freeborn People
of England; by which means our Fleets are lost and lessened, our Trade decayed
and ruined, our poor Country wasted and impoverished, the Poor starved, the
Land unsettled, the Soldiers unpaid, the People of God rent and divided,
public enemies encouraged, and we become a derision to them we were a terror
too: We say having run our selves and poor Nation, from such a happy
settlement, into such throngs of exegencies and distresses, from which we could
no way imaginable extricate our selves, and save the people thereof from
inevitable ruin and distraction. But the calling in that famous Long
Parliament, we so wickedly and unworthily had turned out, which accordingly was
done; and they no sooner sat again, but the ancient Presence of our blessed
God, appeared for them as formerly, and while they were intent upon their
Generation-Work of laying foundations, for future Settlement, seeking out ways
to satisfy the Army, greatning the Navy, propagating Trade, etc. But that old
spirit of Pride, Disobedience and Ambition sought occasion; First, to quarrel,
then interrupt their Power again, to the utter exposing of that just and
righteous Cause and Interest to an unavoidable ruin and destruction. And as if
one former apostasy which we pretended to repent of, had not been sufficient to
have attracted the hate and obloquie of God and all good men; They have run us
into a Second evil, of a far greater magnitude than the former, and have
emproved our easiness and aptness to follow them implicitly, so as that they
have brought us point blanck against our very Cause and Company, and in the
face of the Sun, do Command us to sheath our Swords in the bowels of the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, against which never any yet lift up their
hands prospered; and to take away the blood of our dear Brethren old and
faithful friends, and as a Cheat, to compass their designs the better, they
would engage us to blood against this Parliament, under pretense of calling
another. As if any Parliament could take the like care of us, both as Soldiers
and Englishmen, as they whose Army we are, for you cannot but take notice, that
all Parliaments, that ever yet has been in the intervales of this, were never
friends, but enemies to the Army, this being most obvious to us, and we hope to
you, we cannot but acquaint you with our Resolutions, which is, that as the
Army in Scotland, the Fleet unanimously, our brethren at London, and Col.
Berries Regiment have Declared against this repeated Apostasy; and for the
famous Long Parliament; So we in honor, duty and conscience are bound with
Swords in our hands to assert their just, and lawful Power, so often
acknowledged by our selves, against all that shall oppose it, Us, or any that
have or do appear therefore. There being no other expedient to expiate our
guilt, appease our God, pacify our Conscience, clear our Reputations, to keep
true to our Promises and Engagements, to Cement Gods People, to satisfy the
Souldery, to settle the Nation, and to give us the Fruit of all the Blood
spilt, Treasury spent, Prayers put up, Tears poured out, in which we hope, we
shall have your cheerful concurrence, and that you will not suffer your selves
to be led any longer against your true Interests both as men and Christians:
Such of your Officers as shall join with us in the work, we desire may have
double Honor; but such as shall persuade you to persist in their Apostasy, we
hope, you will as we shall do, displace as persons perfideous and treacherous
to God and their Trusts: Thus have we nakedly and freely unbosomed our selves,
and broken the Ice, we shall now leave all to him, who is able to set your
Duty home upon your hearts, and save by few as by many, before whom we have
mutablie Engaged our selves to Live and Dye together; which Resolution the
Frowns nor Flatteries of none shall make us to recede from; and in him rest
dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, yours and the Commonwealths Friends and
Servants.

We have enclosed sent you the Copy of our Engagement, subscribed by all, none
dissenting; we also desire you to elect two of each Company to treat with the
like number elected out of each Troop, to carry on the work.

The Engagement.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, do solemnly in the sight of God; whose
we are, and who knows our hearts, in our present undertaking, engage that we
will Adventure for each other to the last drop of our Bloods in the just
defense of the Parliament, against our consents most violently and
treacherously interrupted; and for that good and common intrest so long
contended for; and do once again say that we will neither divide nor suffer our
selves to be divided till the liberties both civil and Christian of all men be
full settled and secured, and from this our engagment neither by Art nor arms,
will we be withdrawn, till we die. Testified in the presence of him who is able
to make us do valiantly, on whom alone we desire to depend, and who we humbly
hope will issue our undertakings so as glory will redound to him: and such good
to present and future generations, as babes unborne may bless us for,

Portsdown, December. 20. 1659.
Major Braymans Letter to Lieutenant Colonel Lago.
BY Order from the Commissioners, by Authority of Parliament I am to Randesvows
my Colonels Regiment at Portsdown this day, and in obedience thereto, am upon
my march; I am also commanded to send to them for farther Orders. I therefore
desire all stops may be removed between them and me, that I may know and
execute their commands, if you shall refuse, I shall march my Troops and
endeavor by other ways to do my duty. I desire no blood may be effused, if
there be, conscience and your Commission, will first accuse, and then condemn
you: I nor those with me, having nothing upon our hearts but a healing that
Breach that is rejoiced at, by none but them that seek your Ruin as well as
ours, and an earnest desire that all heats and Animosities between the
Parliament and their Army may be forgotten and forgiven, which shall be no more
heartily pursued by you than Sirs,

Havant December. 20. 11. clock, 1659. Your Friend and Servant John Braman
I desire you would communicate this to our dear Brethren, Fellow Friends and
Soldiers with you and expect your speedy answer.

Superscribed for Leiutenant Colonel Lagoe at Cosiam.



A letter from Major Brayman to a friend of his in London.
My dear friend,
BEcause no reputation's so clear, nor act so honest, but envy will attempt to
detract: I thought good to give you the trouble of a right understanding, to
the end you may assoile me from Mr. Needham's charge that I foresee will
furiously come upon me: My principle you know: Nor did I ever endeavor to
abscond it. Equal and universal Liberty, you are my witness I have loved.
And never yet thought my little all too much to venture for it: the paucity of
its owners is matter of sorrow. But can never make him vary that eyes his duty.
What you believed others feared concerning me; that I was guilty of that
capital Crime, of being constant and Faithful to my Trust: a sin that ever
yet stuck as close to me as my shirt; and therefore our Commander in chief here
gave me the benefit of an easy bed, at a convenient distance, till I deemed it
necessary to draw somewhat nearer him; which I did yesterday, with my Colonels
Troop Merimans and my own; and from Havant sent him the enclosed. But it found
him absent: for in the morning an hour or two before, two or three ^ouldiers
went from my troops, to the Leagure with the enclosed Resolution and
Engagement, one to each Company, which the Lieutenant Colonel understanding,
whether he thought he could not weather the Point, or what other reason he best
knows: But as I said, he took an occasion to be absent: After my letter I
marched for Portsdown, dismounted Barrington, and secured Ducket, and took
their Troops with me, who willingly followed; I spoke one word or two to the
troops, desired them to consult with their Conscience, and resolve either to
own the true Interest they had fought and bled for; or use their Liberty
otherwise. But as with one mouth, they cried all, all, to the enclosed
Engagement (which if you judge necessary may be made more public) I then
imediately marched: But the Foot before we came at them, had took up their
Resolution, they would not fight us, and were marching with their Colors for
Portsmouth, where they now are; the Officers have liberty to return if they
please: Not one Musket was fired on either side, which truly I judge a signal
mercy; and certainly it is instructive, and does tell us, that our duty is to
pursue peace with each other and not war; which was the main improvement I
begged of our Commissioners to make of this mercy: For though my blood and
hundred else is too imcompetent for that precious Cause of God, and our
generation: Yet a composure by us is rather coveted; nor shall any blood be
spilt by us, can we conserve our Cause without it: Pretty contradictory and
inconsistant are the objections of well minded people; one cries out the
Parliament was infringing liberty of Conscience, another places this Objection,
that they were too much enlarging it; Christ eat and drank, John did neither,
yet a Devil, and as bad were they both, in the esteem of most; and truly
prejudice, nor desire of Dominion can scarcely be pleased. I would not
willingly judge the generation of the just; though I see they are preyed upon,
and loose their own reputation, and bring a reproach on that blessed name they
profess, to lift up and exalt poor mortal changeable Creatures: whereas if
things not persons were more respected by us; we should look a little more
before we leap, and not umbrage unhandsome acts, under a Christian Visor. I
speak it not to upbraid, but wish I could convince any of this error: but he
that believes makes not have; God has his season, to work his will in: I wish
we may be found waiting upon him in well doing, and I doubt not then, but the
issue of this sad affair will bring peace and settlement to these poor
distracted Nations, Then which nothing is more coveted by,

Petersfeild, December. 21. 59. Dear sir, Your Affection and faithful servant,
J. Braman.

FINIS.

