A Declaration from the People of God, Called, QUAKERS, AGAINST All Seditious
Conventicles, and dangerous Practices of any who under color or pretense of
tender Conscience, have, or may contrive Insurrections; the said People being
clear from all such things, in the sight of God, Angels and Men.
WHereas there is lately published an Act, entitled, An Act to prevent and
supress Seditious Conventicles; The words in the Preamble of which Act are as
follows, "For providing further and ^^^ore^^^eds rem^d es against the growing
and dangerous practices of (...) Sectaries, and other disloyal Persons; who
under pretense ^ of tender Consciences have, or may at their Meetings contrive
Insur^^ction^ (as late experience has shown.)

THe People of God in scorn called Quakers, are all free and clear from th^se
Actions above, or before mentioned, and it does not concern them, for Quakers
Meetings ^^e not seditious Conventicles, and therefore ought not to be
suppre^t; neither have been, or are our Practice^ dangerous, but have always
been found peaceable, and clear of such things; and though we have been accused
as Plotters, etc. and though we have been numbered amongst seditious Persons,
yet nothing of that kind could ever be justly charged or proved against us. And
as for the word, Disloyal to the King. We have always paid our Taxes, and
Assesments, and other Dues, and Duties, more th^n any People according to our
abilities; and so the thing that belongs to Caesar we give to Caesar, and that
which belongs to God we give to God, his Worship in Spirit and Truth, which is
his Due: and we have kept our Meetings on our parts peaceably, who have been
gathered together by the Lord, in the Name of Jesus. And we do not meet
together under a color, or pretense of tender Consciences to plot, and
contrive Insurrections against the King, but meet together in the Power and
Spirit of the Lord, without any such pretense, but in reallity to Worship and
Glorify God in our Bodies, Souls, and Spirits, which are his; and for so doing
it has cost many of our Friends and Brethren their lives, by imprisonment,
exile, and otherwise; neither dare we forsake the assemblings of our selves
together, as the manner of some was, etc. And ^^r meetings have been peaceable
all along on our account, though rude People have come, and railed against us,
and abused us. And our Principle is, and ever was against such practices as
Sedition, or contriving Insurrections, but it leads us to the peaceable Truth,
and to seek the peace of all men, and to Christ Jesus who is the Way to God,
who is the Author of Peace: And so we are by Christ Jesus taught to deny all
Sedition, Conspiracy, and Insurrection, and he does teach us to deny all such
things, who was before all such things, and seditious Sects were, and will be
when they are all gone, for he is the same to day, yesterday and for ever.

And if any should pretend tenderness of Conscience, and Religious exercise,
and under that color intend a quite contrary thing, as to contrive
Insurrections, etc. this is gross hypocrisy and dissimulation, which our Souls
ever did, and do abhor, and deny; and such are unlawful Meetings: And were not
the Magistrates, as Mayors, Justices, and other Officers, etc. enjoined by
their Oaths before, to look after the preservation of the peace, against all
such seditious Meetings, as much as this Act does require?

And if any Magistrate should take hold upon any that are innocent of these
Actions mentioned in the Title and Preamble of the Act, Then, whether or no
(the innocent Person being defamed, besides his suffering, and spoiling of his
good) the Lord will not take notice to defend the Innocent, and judge for such
things.

Now if four besides the Family may meet that are seditious spirits, may not
many such little Meetings do more hurt then if there were two or three hundred
together? for then they may speak out their minds to one another, which they
could not before hundreds of mixed People. Now if Caesar must have his Due, must
we not meet together to give God his due.

And if such an Act should have been made by the Jews in the days of Christ,
would it not have taken hold of Christ, and his Apostles? for had not he twelve
with him, and seventy, and sometimes hundreds, and thousands: And was there not
many Sects amongst the Jews, yet all professed God? And are there not several
Sects in Turkey? do not Jews, and Turks, and Christians keep their Meetings on
several days distinct? And in the Mogul's Country, are there not several
Religions? And in Germany, and the low Countries, and in many parts of
Christendom, and other parts of the World are there not several Religions? and
yet they have their peaceable liberty. And did not God let Adam have liberty in
the Earth? and Abraham let Ishmael have liberty of the Wilderness? So why
should not they have liber^^ that be Innocent, to wait upon, and worship God,
who are clear from Sedition, and contriving Insurrection under pretense of
tender Consciences, for any pretense whatsoever? concerning which we that are
called Quakers can say in the Presence of God, we are free and clear from, and
testify to all men, though we have been so accused, and have been tried by
imprisonment to death, and banishment, and spoiling of Goods, yet were always
innocent, and so we are the same to this day, who do exercise a good
Conscience toward God, and toward all men.

And are any to be credibly informed against or suppressed, but such as are known
to be seditious, and are of that Spirit, that under a pretense of tender
Conscience plot and contrive Insurrections? If so, Then whether innocent and
peaceable People, that meet really to worship God in the Spirit, and in the
Peaceable Truth (which all plotting is out of) these are concerned according to
the title and reason of this Act.

And whether the Liturgy does not allow of People to meet together, to worship
God in Spirit and Truth, without limitation of Time, Place or Number? For ought
not men at all times, and in all places to perform their bounden duty to God,
and to pray to him, and to give thanks for his Benefits, which they daily
receive? And does not the Lord say, In every place Offerings shall be offered
to my Name, Mal. 1. And does not the Apostle say, I will that men pray every
where, lifting up holy Hands without wrath and doubting. And does not the
Apostle say, As every man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one
to another, at good Stewards of the manifold Graces of God, Pet. 4 10. And did
not Christ to encourage his little Flock, say, Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my Name, I am in the midst of them: Not limitting them to
that number, and no more, as you may see how Christianity after spread, as the
Epistles to the Churches declare. So this is not to hinder them that be
peaceable in Christ Jesus, from meeting either in a Barn, House, Field,
Backside, or any other place; for they met thousands with him in the
Wilderness. And does not the Prophet say, The holy One must not be limited?
And does not the Liturgy allow of the same Worship, and Meetings as the holy
Scriptures allow of?

A Postscript.
The Terms of the Title and Preamble, Explained.
SEditious, is, Contentious, Factious, loving Discord.

Conventicle, is, A little private Assembly, commonly for ill, (commonly so
taken, the Doors being shut) [defined by the Law] such, wherein many do impart
to others their meaning, to kill a man, etc. as also where Conspiracies,
Confederacies are; See Lamb. 173, 177.

And such are unlawful Assemblies, or Conventicles, as consist of a number of
People, gathered together disorderly, for the cause of some one, or of a few
Persons that are Riots, against which these Statutes were provided, 13 H. 5.
cap. 8, 19. and 19 H. 7. cap. 13. and before them were the Statute of Nort. 2
E. 3. cap. 3. laid upon them, 2 R. 2. cap. 6.

Seditious Conventicles, are little private factious Assemblies, where Discord,
Rebellion or Insurrection is contrived, plotted, designed or intended.

Disloyal Persons are, such as are Treacherous, Traiterous, False, Deceitful,
Breakers of Promise, and the like.

Seditious Sectaries, are taken for such people as are Factious and Rebellious,
being of a different Profession from the ancient Truth; or such as therein are
divided into Sides, and Parties, following such as are Leaders in Faction,
Rebellion and Schism.

From all these evil things, the People of God, called Quakers, are clear, and
freed by the Power of God, which was before all such things were; who are
Professors of Christ Jesus, the ancient Truth, before Sects were.

So our desires are in tenderness to all Magistrates, for their good, that they
may put a difference between the Precious and the Vile, and such as serves God,
and such as serves him not; and so that they all in the pure Wisdom of God from
above may mind, and take notice of these things, from them that desires the
Kings, and their everlasting good and prosperity in the Truth, which the Devil
is out of.


