A Declaration of several Officers of the Army in Ireland, on behalf of
themselves and those under their Commands, holding forth their steadfast
resolutions to adhere to the Parliament in defense of its privileges; and the
just Rights and Libertyes of the People of these Nations as Men and Christians.
Whereas by divine permission (either for the punishment of the high
provocations of these sinfully backsliding Nations, or for the discovery and
prevention of the disturbers of the peace of this our Israel; God thereby
making way to settle his people upon foundations of holiness, rightousness and
peace) a new interruption has been put upon the Parliament by some Officers of
the Army in England, notwithstanding their solemn engagements to the contrary,
to the amazement of the people of these three Nations, the hazard of public
peace, the discouraging and sadning the hearts of the godly and well affected,
the obstructing of reformation, the giving advantage to foreign and domestic
enemies, and the exposing the lives, estates, liberties of all blood, rapine
and slavery: We upon a sad sense of present threatening calamities, having
sought the Lord in trembling ^^d much fear, do find it our duty to declare, and
we do through the grace and strength of God (we trust) conscienti^^sly resolve,
I. That through the Lords assistance we will in all simplicity of heart remain
firm in our obedience to the trust reposed in us, by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, so sinfully interrupted
heretofore, so solemnly of late restored again by our brethren of the Army in
England, and to whom we have as it were bu^ yesterday by his Excellency Lt.
General LUDLOW our Commander in chief, professed our obedience by promises,
subscriptions, and other sober acknowledgments, which (as we own there is a God
in Heaven) we take our selves deeply obliged to pursue. II. That we shall not
suffer our selves to be any manner of way divided one from another, or from any
of our Brethren of the Armies that shall continue their faithfulness to the
trust reposed in them by the Parliament, or from any that shall return to yield
obedience thereunto, for which in much love and tenderness toward them we
shall use our utmost endeavors. III. That we shall by all good means labor
the settling and maintaining a Godly, learned and faithful Ministry in these
three Nations, with due encouragement to the universityes and Schools of good
literature, that they may be Nurseryes of Piety, Learning and Godlyness. IIII.
That we will as God shall enable us use our utmost endeavors to detect and
suppress all enemies at home and abroad, that shall attempt to disturb the
P^a^e of this or of the other Nations, either by introducing and setting up the
interest of any single person whatsoever, or through turbulency of spirit shall
foment any confusions to the indangering the Peace of th^s Commonwealth. V.
That it is not our intention to impose upon any tender Consciences, being
otherwise sound in the fundamentals of Religion. And Lastly, We do Declare,
(...) ^e shall to our utmost, protect all such who do at present adhere unto
us. And shall also endeavor that due ^^cou^age^^n^ may be given to such
whether Officers or Soldiers formerly of the Army, who either have or shall
join with us in this undertaking.


Dated at Dublin Castle the 14. of December 1659. Har. Waller, W. Moore, John
Bridges, Edw. Warren, Maurice Fenton, Abel Warren, John Warren, Tho. Dancer,
John ^eonar, W. Warden, Theoph. Sandford, John Cole, Theoph. Jones, Henry
Whalley, Nic. Kempston, Dan. Lisle, Edm. Temple, James Hana, John Thompson,
Tho. Hopkins, Rich* Nun, Rob. Cook


ORdered by the Council of Officers met at Dublin Castle the day abovewritten,
that the foregoing Declaration with the Names hereunder written be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Dublin the 14. of December 1659. Signed in the name and upon the desire of the
said Council of Officers. Har. Waller.

DVBLIN, Printed by William, ^^^en, Anno Domini 1659.


