An ANTIDOTE against the Infection of the Jacobites, occasioned by the last
Papers of Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkins, Mr. Cranburne, etc. who pretend
to die in the Communion of the Church of England.
By a Minister of the Church of England.
OUR Nation has as much Reason to take heed of the wicked Principles of these
deluded and Jacobite Martyrs, as to abhor their barbarous and abominable
Designs and Practices; and the rather, because they are recommended to the
Public by that Consideration that Men commonly have for the last Expressions
of Persons departing to another State, who in that Moment are not suspected of
Hypocrisy, or to conceal the real Sentiments of their Mind when they are to
appear before a God of Sincerity and Truth. But we find by old and late
Experience, that some Men will continue in the Justincation of their greatest
Villainies at the Hour of Death, and proclaim at the Gallows a Vindication of
the worst of Crimes. Lest therefore the devilish Mistakes and Delusions of
these Traitors should have any Influence upon the Living, I suppose some
Considerations may be seasonable to be recommended to the Public to prevent
the Mischiefs of a farther Infection, and to oblige us all that are true
Englishmen, and of the Church of England, to be steady and faithful to the
Cause of God and our holy Religion, in opposition to the Madness of their
Diabolical Principles.

It may seem very strange at the reading of their Papers, That Members of our
excellent Communion, instructed in the blessed Rules of Christianity,
acquainted with the Transactions and Passages of former Years, of English
Blood, of Estates and Birth, should be so much misled by a strong Spirit of
Delusion, as to believe the Restoration of a Popish King, a declared Enemy of
their Religion, Laws and Liberties, and that by the French Tyrannical Power, to
be their Duty, and agreeable with the Laws of our Kingdom; or to believe and
publicly to own the treacherous and base Murdering of an anointed and crowned
Head in Possession of the Government, nay, such an one who spends himself and
Estate, and exposes his Person for the Preservation of our Religion and Peace,
and thereby to involve their Native Country in Blood and Ruin, to be the Cause
of God and true Religion. Certainly Men must be divested of all Reason as well
as Humanity, to suffer themselves to be carried away to such apparent
Wickedness. Certainly there is an invincible Spirit of Malice and Error that
possesses this separate Party, that has divided it self from our Church and
Communion: and, as I have taken notice, looks upon the rest with a strong
Aversion, being deceived by the foolish Doctrines cried up and encouraged by
the sinister Designs of the former Reigns, and which leads them thus
blindfolded to such terrible Mischiefs.

Never Principles more abominable than these which are expressed in these
Papers, were ever published by Papists, Turks, Infidels, or the worst of Men:
Never any more pernicious to the public Safety either of Church or State. No
wonder if such Men make no Conscience of Assassinations, Parricides, Murders,
and delivering their Nation and Kindred to the base Tyranny of a foreign Power,
who are persuaded that God and Religion, and the Laws of the Realm, do engage
them to all this Villainy.

Pray let every one judge of these Jacobite Principles, which are to be gathered
from the Papers and Actions of these Traitors. I shall reduce them to these six
or seven.

1. That Subjects are always bound to Duty and Allegiance to a Prince, tho
departed to our Enemies, and in an active War to inslave and ruin his Subjects
and Country. 2. That no foreign nor domestic Power can alienate our
Allegiance: The Meaning in relation to us is, That no Obedience nor Allegiance
is to be paid to our present King that protects us, tho the Laws and the
public Interest require it. 3. That it is justifiable, and their Duty, to
endeavor to restore the late King by Assassinations, Cruelty, and the visible
Destruction of their Kindred and Nation. 4. That to murder our present King,
introduce Popery with King James, and assist foreign Forces to invade us, is
the Cause of God and true Religion. 5. That the Loyalty of the Church of
England does oblige its Members to sacrifice all Interests of God, Religion,
Laws and Liberties, Kindred and Nation, to the Pleasure, Dominion and
Advancement of one Man, tho a sworn Enemy to its Profession. 6. That this
Nation is guilty of Rebellion and Perjury in the late Revolution. 7. That
Hypocrisy, Dissimulation, the Concealment of this Cause of God, and the taking
of an Oath of Fidelity to the present Government, is practicable, and may
consist with a constant persisting and remaining in the real Interests of the
late King.
These are the Bedlam-Principles which obliged these Men to such desperate
Attempts, and hardened them against the Danger of assassinating a Prince in the
middle of his Guards. This is the Belief of the Jacobite Party, which makes
them plot against the present Government, uneasy and restless until they draw
upon themselves and us utter Ruin, and the Calamities of an intestine War.

In answer to the first. It is generally allowed and owned by Men of Reason and
Conscience, of all Nations, that the Duties of a King and his Subjects are
Relatives; that the latter supposes the former; that the Obligations of
natural Allegiance, and of our former Oaths, are conditional and temporary, and
are not binding for ever; and that in di^^rs Cases Subjects are freed from
their Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, particularly in this Case, where a
King has acted contrary to his Coronation Oath, to overthrow the Fundamental
Laws and Constitutions of the Government, endeavored the Subversion of
Religion, the Worship of God, and to introduce the Abominations of Idolatry,
where a King has endeavored t^ enslave his Subjects to his tyrannical Will,
forcing his Judges to subscribe to such Articles as were designed to disannul
all Order and Equity amongst us, and chiefly in this case, when he is departed
to our sworn Enemies, and is in an active War assisting them with his Counsel,
Troops, and Associates, and is so far from protecting our Persons and Estates,
that he breathes nothing but Vengeance against us and our Religion: Witness his
Words to one of his Courtiers at Dublin, when a faithful Protestant Jacob^^e
was recommended to his Service, that he hated the Name of a Protestant, and
chiefly a Protestant of the Church of England. Pray consider what Protection
and Favor the Professors of our Religion are to expect from him, who already
has been so false and ungrateful to the Members of the Church of England. In
his Brother's time they would not su^^er the Bill of Exclusion to pass, they
put the Crown upon his Head, they supported his Interest against the Duke of
Monmouth, they were constant and faithful to him, tho of another Persuasion.
But in requital of all their good Offices he has rewarded them with Frowns and
Scorn, with Imprisonment of their Bishops with the violent Invasion of the
Rights of their Colleges, with the Discountenance of their Persons, and with
Threats of greater Mischiefs. And since his Exile he is grown more fierce and
unreconcileable to the Members of our Church, tho never so sincere to his
Cause: Witness the unhappy Fates of Sir James Montgomery, Madam Ashton, and
many more, whose Loss of Estates and Country for his sake, could not persuade
this bigoted Prince to show them the least Favor, or to admit them to his
Service without a public Abjuration of their God and Religion. Never any
Romish or Heathen Persecutor was ever more resolved to destroy our Church, and
the sincere Professors of it. Never any bore a greater Antipathy, and was more
violent against us, than is the late King James; and does our former
Obligations to him as Subjects bind us to cast away our selves and the whole
Nation to his merciless Fury, and oblige us to a constant Allegiance to such an
one, to an open Enemy? What Methods have other Nations taken in such a case?
When Sigismund King of Sweden, a Papist Prince, succeeded to the Crown, he
swore to maintain the Laws and Religion of the Country; but when he began to
impose and bring in the Romish Superstitions, the States of the Realm banished
him, and chose in his stead Duke Charles his Cousin, the Father of Gustavns
Adolphus, who warred against him and the Poles his Subjects, and never would
admit him again. The French Nation would never receive Henry 4. as their lawful
King, but were resolved to elect another, until their Laws and Religion were
secured from a Change by an Abjuration of that Prince's former Profession, and
a public Compliance with that which was generally professed in the Country.
The whole Kingdom, and all Men in it, are concerned by the Laws of God and
Nature in the Preservation of themselves from Ruin and Destruction. And
Government was not intended for the Advantage only of the Prince, and to
gratify his Lust and Pleasure, but for the Benefit of the whole Society that
are to look to themselves when a Prince designs to betray them to the Power and
Tyranny of their Enemies, no Man by any Obligations of former Loyalty and
Allegiance being bound to destroy himself, much less the Body of a Kingdom. And
there is a greater Duty that we owe to the public Community that we belong to,
than to any particular Member, tho the Head. And all our natural Obligations to
a Prince, tho confirmed by Oaths, are always in reference to the Good, Peace,
Happiness and Prosperity of the Body Politic, unto which the Prince himself
ought, as diverse have done in former Ages, to sacrifice himself and Fortune.

2. That no foreign nor domestic Power can alienate our Allegiance. The
Meaning, in relation to us, is, That no Obedience nor Allegiance is to be paid
to our present King that protects us, tho the Laws and the public Interest
require it: That our Governors could not lawfully demand that Security from
us, to swear to bear true Faith and Allegiance to K. W. and Q. M. Certainly the
Government, as it is now established, ought in reason to secure it self from
the Designs of ill Men, and no Method more moderate, nor Oath more favorable,
could be contrived, than that which was imposed upon us, whatever Construction
is given to it by these Zealots for the Rights of the late K. J. it obliging us
to nothing but a quiet and peaceable Behavior, and ties our Tongues and Hands
that they might not plot and conspire against the Government of this present
King. And is there any thing more reasonable than this Law? Shall such Men live
amongst us? Shall they enjoy the favorable Countenance of the Government?
Shall they be protected in their Lives and Estates? and shall they be allowed
at the same time to endeavor the Ruin of King and Kingdom? I cannot in so
short a Compass examine what Allegiance is due to the Kings of England; how
much we are bound in Duty to such a King who has forsaken us, and joined
himself to our Enemies; what Power is in our Parliaments to require a new Oath
of Allegiance? Whether it may not be as lawful for the Chieftains of our
Politic Body to alienate our Allegiance from him who has alienated all Duty
and Kindness from us, and whose Religion forbids him to keep any Faith with us
Heretics, but binds him to destroy us with Fire and Sword. I know some will
say, that Men by Religion don't forseit their natural Rights; and that K. J.
was thereby entitled to our Allegiance, and had a natural Right to govern us.
Grant this, and a great deal more; but now that he cease to govern and
protect us, and instead of being our King, he is become a desperate Enemy;
shall our former Allegiance to him hinder us from seeking to be sheltered by
another? The Self-Preservation of a Kingdom is a natural Law that puts a great
Difference between the Rights of a private Man and that of a public Person,
whose Right to our Allegiance is not to be allowed to overthrow and ruin a
whole Kingdom.

3. That it is justifiable, and their Duty, to endeavor to restore the late
King, etc. This is affirmed in relation to this grievous Plot of assassinating
K. W. of inviting over a foreign Power, etc. to vindicate the Justice of the
horrid Treason in the Eyes of our English World. Pray let considerate Men take
notice how unchristian and barbarous is this Principle. Pray let them see the
bloody Disposition of these furious and Apostate Members of the Church of
England, how unreasonable and cruel are their Tempers?

The Restoration of King James in the Eyes of the sober Part of the Nation, is
looked upon as one of the greatest Mischiefs that can befall us, and our
Christian World, in this juncture of Affairs, and must needs be followed either
by an universal Apostasy from the Reformed Religion, together with the Loss of
the Liberties of Europe, or an universal Persecution and Oppression of all
honest and good Men, who will be forced to yield to the Pleasure of the French
Tyrant, and the Romish Cruelty. It is a Folly to think otherwise of the
Conjunction of the Forces of these three Kingdoms with the Power of Frame.
Besides, it has been long ago resolved by K. L. and K. J. to drive on this
wicked Design together. When K. J. withdrew to Brussels in his Brother's time,
he passed from thence to Paris incognito, and was admitted to a long
Consultation and secret Council, where the hastening of the Death of K. C. was
resolved, who was a Bar to their base Purposes: and immediately followed the
violent Persecution of the French Protestants. And the Jesuits were so
confident of Success, that they published to the World, that within 20 Years
not one would be found in Europe to own the Protestant Name. Some Years before
a Nobleman of Provence, of the Reformed Religion, who had been successful in
Oliver's time in an Embassy for the Protestants, (his Name was Monsieur Roux,
or the Marquess de Marsilli) came over to K. C. to desire his Mediation with
the French King, and persuade him to be more favorable to the Hugonot Party.
He applied himself to the then D. of Y. who under the Disguise of a Church-of-
England-man received the Sacrament with his Brother at Whitehall. He promised
him all Favor, Protection, and Kindness, but instead of that betrayed the poor
Man and his Errand to Colbert the French Ambassador, who was placed behind the
Hangings in the Duke's Chamber, with others, to hear the Complaints of the
French Churches, which were so far from making any Impression upon the Court of
England, that this their Envoy being here threatened to be killed, his Estate
confiscated to the French King, he retreated toward Switzerland, and in the
Dukedom of Burgundy was violently taken by the French King's Appointment,
carried to Paris, and there broken upon the Wheel by the Procurement of the
late King, then Duke of York. Pray open your Eyes, ye blind and bewitched
Adorers of K. J. so zealous for his Restoration; and see by this Man's Fate
what we may reasonably expect from K. James's Faith and Kindness. And do ye
judge this to be your Duty, and justifiable, to restore him to that Power which
he has already abused, and stained with innocent Blood more than once, and
will infallibly abuse it again, to your Destruction, and the Destruction of our
Religion and Kingdom? How ungrateful are you for God's great Mercy in
delivering of us from such a Prince? Was it St. Peter's Duty to return into
Herod's Fetters when freed by an Angel? Was it justifiable in the Israelites to
go back into Egypt, when delivered from Pharaoh's Bondage by the Power of
Heaven? And is it justifiable in you to restore an idolatrous Prince to a
Throne from which he is excluded by the Hand of God, and by the Approbation of
the best of the Nation? Into what Calamities had we been brought, if he had had
Power to proceed as he began? What unthankful Wretches are ye for this great
Mercy both to God and our present King, who hazarded all for your Advantage and
Safety? And what, is it your Duty to restore the late King by basely murdering
of such an obliging Prince? The End that you propose to your selves is
abominable, and the Means worse. And can such a black Treason, aggravated by
such heinous Circumstances, be justifiable, and your Duty? Never exclaim
against the Gunpowder-Traitors, nor Ravaillacs, nor the Clements. This Act or
Design of the Jacobites is more devilish, and a Crime of a deeper Die than
theirs ever was. Neither did they justify their Murders and wicked Purposes
with the Pretenses of Duty, as you do.

4. The fourth Principle appears as horrid as the former, and bespeaks you to
have neither Reason nor Christianity, nor the Sense of Duty or of Interest in
you; that to murder our present King, introduce Popery with K. James, and
assist foreign Forces to invade us, is the Cause of God and true Religion. Was
there ever any such Persuasion entertained by Men? Did ever any judge, that the
Overthrow of their Religion was their Duty; that the Destruction of God's
Interest in the World, and the Promotion of the De^i^'s, was a Cause that God
did approve of; that the Ruin of their native Country by foreign Forces was
God's Cause, and agreeable with Law and Equity? Codrus King of Athens offered
himself to Death to save his City from the Enemies Power. Themistocles poisoned
himself that his Country might not be invaded by the Persians. And all the
moral Heathens looked upon it as their Dut^ to sacrifice themselves, to drive
off a foreign Power from their native Soil. And do you think it your Daty to
deliver your Country and Relations into the Hands of the French? Miserable
Wretches! What do you meat? What Advantage do ye propose to your selves? The
Duke of Mantua in 1588, told a Papist and English Commander, that his Sword
knew no Difference between a Protestant and a Papi^^. And that Italian General
who was in^ited into Mantua by the Guelfs, and had a Gate betrayed by them into
his Hands, when he plundered without Exception both Factions, they complained
of his false Dealing; but he returned them this Answer, That their Persons
indeed were Guelfs ^d Friends, but their Riches, Goods and Estates were
Gibe^^^^^, and of the contrary F^. The same Treatment you must expect from your
French Friends when they come in with K. James: You must expect to lose your
Liberties and Estates with your Country, to be transported and treated at the
Pleasure of the Conqueror; and you to be looked upon as the basest of Men by
those whom you design to assist to invade us.

5. For the fifth Principle, it is so ridiculous, and so full of Contradiction,
as well as the rest, that I leave it to the Examination of the sober Reader to
pass t^ the sixth; That this Nation is guilty of Rebellion and Perjury by the
late Revolution; for this is the Meaning of that Clause of Sir J. F's Prayer,
Deliver this Nation from the Guilt of Rebellion, Blood and Perjury. Wicked and
uncharitable Souls! I would have you know, that such of us as have complied
with, and sworn to support the present Government, are far from being guilty
either of Rebellion to K. James, or the Crime of Perjury; for whilst he
continued with us, and was our Governor. none more obedient and faithful to
him than we were; and tho he acted so directly contrary ^^ his Coronation Oath,
to his repeated Protestation before the Council, of supporting the Church of
England, and maintaining our Liberties and Laws, yet we who are truly Members
of the Church of England, thought it our Daty to be quiet, and yield unto him
all lawful Obedience; never plotted against his Government, as you do against
this, but patiently waited for the Salvation of God, which was brought to pass
by his mighty Power. But is our Compliance with this viable Act of divine
Providence a Rebellion against K. James? It is a Madness for you to charge us
with it. We should be Rebels to the public Interest and Safety of the Kingdom;
we should be guilty of the highest Ingratitude to our good God; we should be
unworthy of his former Care and Mercy, as well as unthankful to his Agent and
Minister, if we did not assist and help the present King with our uttermost
Endeavors. But how can you fasten upon us the odd Crime of Perjury, for our
Oath of Fidelity unto K. William; whose Person and Government we are resolved
to maintain and pray for, being thereunto bound by all the Obligations of
Reason, Religion, and Conscience, and shall not be frighted from our Duty by
your wicked and uncharitable Censures? But ^ray who is most guilty of Perjury;
some of you who know that you are in the Interests of the late King, and yet
have sworn, as Sir W. P. did, to be faithful to King William, and nevertheless
plot and conspire against his Person and Government? This is Dissimulation,
Hypocrisy and Perjury with a witness. This is to act against all Conscience and
Morality. And dare such People pretend themselves to be Members of the Church
of England? a Church so excellent in its Constitution, so agreeable with
primitive Christianity, hating all Blood, Treason Hypocrisy and Baseness, tho
for the Advancement of the greatest Good, and the Promotion of the best Cause:
A Church that practices and recommends the Rules of Charity to all Men,
Humility, Patience, Meekness and Moderation: A Church that never was stained
with the Blood of Princes, tho desperate Enemies, nor with Conspiracy and
Rebellion, but obliges its Members to be obedient, peaceable and useful under
the Governments appointed by God. You therefore, my Fellow Subjects, who are
really Disciples and Members of such a Church, withdraw your selves from the
Tents and Society of these wicked Men, of these deluded and bloody Jacobites.
Let us unanimously associate in the Defense of our Government and King, whom
God preserve from Enemies at home and abroad, and send him Victory and Success.
Amen.

M. I

London, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul'
Churchyard. MDCXCVI.


