THE DECLARATION OF THE REBELS Now in Arms in the WEST of SCOTLAND.
AS it is not unknown to a great part of the World how happy the Church of
Scotland was, whi^st they enjoyed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in purity and
power; Of the which we have been deplorably deprived by the Re-establishment of
Prelacy: So it is evident not only to impartial persons, but to professed
Enemies, with what unparalled patience and constancy the People of God have
endured all the Cruelty, Injustice and Oppression that the Will and Malice of
Prelates and Malignants could invent and exercise. And being most unwilling to
act any thing which might import opposition to lawful Authority, or engage the
Kingdoms in War, although we have all along been groaning under, the
over-turning the work of Reformation, corruptions of Doctrine, slighting of
Worship, despising of Ordinances, the changing of the ancient Church Discipline
and Government, thrusting out of so many of our faithful Ministers from their
Charges, Confining, straightly Imprisoning, Exiling, yea and putting to death
many of them, and intruding upon their Flocks a Company of insufficient and
scandalous Persons, and Fining, Confining, Imprisoning, Torturing, Tormenting,
Scourging and Stigmatizing poor People, Plundering their Goods, Quartering upon
them rude Soldiers, Selling their Persons to Foreign Plantations, Horning and
Inter-communing many of both, whereby great numbers in every corner of the Land
were forced to leave their Dwellings Wives, Children and Relations, and made to
wander as Pilgrims, still in hazard of their Lives, none daring to reset,
harbor of supply, (though starving) or so much as to speak to them, even upon
Death bed, without making themselves obnoxious to the same punishments; and
these things acted under color of Law, in effect ^ending to ba^nish, not only
all sense of Religion, but also to extinguish N^tural Affection, even amongst
persons of the nearest Relation: And likewise groaning under the intolerable
Yoke of oppression in our Civil Interests, our Bodies, Liberties and Estates;
so that all manner of Outrages have been most arbitrarily exercised upon Us
through a tract of several Years pas^; particularly in the Year 1678. by
sending among us an Armed Host of Barbarous Savages contrary to all Law and
Humanity; and by laying on us several Impositions and Taxes, as formerly, so of
late by a Meeting of Pre-limited and overawed Members in the Convention of
Estates in July 1678. for keeping up of an Armed Force entrusted (as to a great
part of it) into the hands of avowed Papists, or Favorers of them; by whom
sundry Invasions have been made upon us, and most exorbitant Abuses, and
incredible Insolences committed against us; And we being continually sought
after while Meeting in Houses for Divine Worship, Ministers and People
frequently apprehended, and most rigorously used; And so being necessitated to
attend the Lords Ordinances in Fields, in the most Desert places; And there
also often hunted out, and assaulted, to the effusion of out Blood, and killing
of some, whereby we were inevitably constrained either to defend our selves by
Arms at these Meetings, or to be altogether deprived of the Gospel preached by
the Faithful Ministers, and made absolute Slaves. At one of which Meetings upon
the First day of June instant, being the Lord's Day, Captain Graham of
Claverhouse being Warranted by a late Proclamation to kill whomsoever he found
in Arms at Field-Conventicles making Resistance, did furiously assault the
People assembled; And further to provoke, did cruelly bind like Beasts, a
Minister, with some others, whom he had that very same morning found in Houses:
And several being killed on both sides; They knowing certainly, that by Law
they behoved (if apprehended) to die: They did stand to their own Defense, and
continue together; and thereafter many of our Friends and Countrymen being
under the same Oppression expecting the same measure, did freely offer their
assistance. We therefore thus inevitably, and of absolute necessity forced to
take this last Remedy; (The Magistrates having shut the Door by a Law against
Application, that whatever our Grievances be, either in things Civil or Sacred
we have not the privilege of a Supplicant,) do judge our selves bound to
Declare; That these, with many other horrid Grievances in Church and State,
(which we purpose to manifest more fully hereafter,) are the true Causes of
this our lawful and innocent Self Defense. And we do most solemnly in the
presence of Almighty God the searcher of all Hearts, Declare; That the true
Reasons of our continuing in Arms heartily and sincerely are these; 1. The
Defending and Securing of the True Protestant Religion, and Presbyterian
Government, founded upon the Word of God, and summarily comprehended in our
Confessions of Faith, and Catechisms, and established by the Laws of this Land;
To which, King, Nobles, and People are solemnly Sworn and engaged in our
National and Solemn League and Covenant; and more particularly, the Defending
and Mantaining the Kingly Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ over his Church
against all sinful Supremacy Derogatory thereto, and incroaching thereupon. 2.
The Preserving and Defending the Kings Majesty, his Person and Authority in the
Preservation and Defense of that true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom;
That the World may bear Witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty; And that
we have no Thought nor Intention to diminish His just Power and Greatness. 3.
The obtaining of a Free and unlimited Parliament; And a Free General Assembly,
in order to the Redressing our foresaid Grievances, for preventing the Eminent
Danger of Popery, and Extirpating of Prelacy from amongst Us.


This therefore being the Cause we appear for; and resolve in Gods great name
to own, hereby homologating all the Testimonies of faithful sufferers for the
Truth in Scotland these Eighteen years by gone: We humbly request the Kings
Majesty would restore all things as he found them, when God brought him home to
His Crown and Kingdoms; and if that cannot be obtained, then we heartily and
humbly invite, entreat, beseech and obtest in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, all
who are under the same bonds with us, to occurr in the Defense of this Common
Cause and Interest: And that they will not stand still and see not only us
oppressed, but this foresaid Cause ruined; Adversaries highly and proudly
infult against God, and all good men, Friends of the Truth discouraged: Yea,
the Protestant Cause in Britain and Ireland, and even your selves within a
little time made a prey of, or else forced when we are broken (which the good
Lord prevent) dreadfully to wrong your Consciences, finally because we desire
no man's hurt or blood. We request our Countrymen, now the standing Forces of
this Kingdom, some of them being our Friends and Kinsmen, not to Fight against
us, least in so doing they be f^und Fighting against the Lord, whose Cause and
Quarrel we are sure he will own, and signally Countenance, seeing we Fight
under his Banner who is the Lord of Hosts.


