A LETTER To the Most Illustrious Lord, The Count of Hohenlo, One of the
Imperial Generals.

Written by a Gentleman in the Army of Count Serini before Canisia.

Concerning the RENEGADES amongst the TURKS.

Put into English by a Person of Quality.

With Allowance,

June 10. 1664. ROGER LE STRANGE.



LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne, 1664.

My LORD,
SInce your generous Humor leads you to oblige without either hope of desire of
a return, finding my self in the number of those whose obligations can never be
cancelled. I have endeavored, by this paper Mercury to testify to your
Lordship how willingly I would catch at any opportunity to show my self
grateful, though I cannot quit scores. I remember when I had last the honor of
your converse, you were lamenting the fate of Christendom, that nothing should
be so destructive of her interest, as a sort of people that falling into the
hands of Infidels, either through cowardice, or ambition quit the reverence
they owe to the blessed Jesus, and renounce a Religion as glorious in its
Author, as eternal in its Verity, and surely the complaint was so just, that I
dare say upon the strictest enquiry into the many Enemies that continually
watch for the ruin of Europe, we shall find no such Arguses as the Renegades,
who having once become banquerout in Religion* account it glorious to show
their passion for their new embraced in pieties, and in their hatred to their
once fellow Christians, outvie ever natural Turks. The truth of this I have
sufficiently experimented since my coming before Canisia, in which place a
considerable number of these monsters are amongst some of the prisoners we have
taken, I have met with here and there one of good judgment in affairs, who
have assured me that the most considerable persons, and such as are able to
give Christianity the most deadly blow are the Renegades now in pay with the
Turk; Italians, French, Germans, Spaniards, English, etc. who being well
skilled in the military part of the Mathematics (of which, and all other
Species of good Learning the Turks are wholly ignorant) have ever the charge of
the Artillery, are the Demons that show them the Modern way of attaquing
places, and the newest mode of regulating Armies amongst us, and indeed teach
them all the Warlike Inventions which the most refined Wits have studied and
happily brought to perfection: Nay one of them in pursuance of a large
discourse he made me of the damage and injuries these Vipers do to
Christendom, did not stick to affirm, that a Renegade in high esteem with this
Prime Vizier, was the grand Spring that put the Turks in motion now against
the Emperor; and (besides the allegation of the differences Christian Princes
foment amongst themselves) by other arguments more pleasing to the Turkish
Gusto, pleaded the Necessity in point of Honor, and Facility in point of
Success, if the War were once commenced. Neither is it, my Lord incredible,
that the Turk with so great a power should like a flood come in upon us at the
persuasions of these kind of men; for upon the same account he formerly
undertook such expeditions. Sultan Soliman would rather have contented himself
with the delights of his Seraglio, then ever attempted to besiege Malta with
such a numerous Army, had not the charms of the Renegade Piali pusht him upon
that design. Yea Mahomet the second would not have besieged Rhodes (where it
pleased God to signalize the bravery of the Christians in raising that siege)
had not the Renegades persuaded him, and in particular one Anthony Meligabi a
Native of that very Isle, the perfile whereof he gave to the Sultan: And I must
needs say, they have rendered the Ottoman Family and Empire so many meritorious
services, that a great part of their Grandeur must be acknowledged the effect
of their Counsel and Courage. I shall take liberty to look back into former
times and give your most Excellent Lordship a summary account of their
Enterprises. I will begin with Ibraim Bassa, so fatal to our Hungary. This
grand Personage heing a Child of Tribute;) for the Turk all over his Dominions,
takes one in three from the Christians) was a Native of Parga, a Village of
Greece, between the City of St. Maur and Corfeu; and being a youth of a comely
presence and noble spirit, was sent to the Service of Solomon the Second in the
life of his Father Selim; this young Prince being then at Adrinopolis: the
Turkish Emperors having a Custom to bring up their Children out of the
Seraglio, and Briantine Port whether they are never brought, until the decease
of their Father. Ibraim grew not so fast in years, as he towred up in the
favor of Solomon; and seemed to be the Soul, that gave life and motion to this
Prince, who no sooner mounted the Emperial Throne, but he heaped so many
honors and favors upon this Creature of his, that the world might easily
judge, he intended him for that Colosse, on whose shoulders he resolved to lay
the burden of that vast State: Now he is Grand Vizier, and Lieutenant General
of the Empire; who being a great Soldier, and incomparable Statesman, put his
Master upon those heroic actions that made our Hungary and the Isle of Rhodes,
the just subjects of his Magnificent triumphs. To whose courage do the Turks
owe the Cities and Kingdoms of Tunis and Algier, but to Ariadeno Barbarossa a
Greek Renegade and Native of Metelin? and who so bravely defended the City of
Algier in the year 1541. when the glorious Emperor Charles V. besieged it, but
Assan Aga a Native or Sardignia? It was close begirt by Sea and Land with a
potent Army, and yet he had the fortune to repel all the Impressions made by so
many excellent Cavaliers, and see them sent to their last home. I might here
mention that famous Captain Scipio Cigale, son of the Viscount Cigale, who
passing out of Sicily into Spain, was taken prisoner, and carried to
Constantinople; where renouncing his Religion, he grew into so great esteem
with the Sultan, that he raised him to the Dignity of a Bassa, and made him
General of diverse great Armies, with which he enlarged the Ottoman Territories,
and his own Reputation. But I shall content my self with the Actions and
Fortunes of that great Renegade Nasuff, so famous in this Century, and nigher
your Lordships memory; this Nasuff was the son of a Greek Priest about
Salonica, who being brought young to Constantinople, so well managed his
Fortune that at 25 years of Age he was employed in the overseeing a Mosque,
which the Sultaness caused to be built, and having fortunately performed that
office, by her had the charge of the Seraglio given him, and all her domestic
affairs: But here he stopped not, for being the child of Fortune, and destined
to the highest Honors and Employs, she quickly brought him to the knowledge of
Sultan Hohmet the first, who from Offices in his Seraglio, advanced him to be
Bassa of Aleppo, and dignified him with the Government of Mesopotamia; yea the
Emperor finding him to be one of a designing spirit, and ambitious to
undertake great things, after the death of Serdar Bassa, gave him his Estate,
and made him grand Vizier; and that he might have opportunity to show his
address and courage in Military expeditions, made him General of his Army
against the Persians, who were so beaten by him, that they were enforced to sue
for a Peace as dishonorable to themselves, as advantageous to the Turks. Thus
encircled with the beams of glory and honor, he enters Constantinople,
receiving the plaudit of the Grandees of the Port; and as a further accession
to his felicities, one of the Sultans daughters in marriage; but in fine, this
Ingrate hoping to make himself Sovereign of Mesopotamia, in reward of his
perfidiousness had all his greatness choked with a Bow-string. Thus my Lord, I
have given you some small remarques of the services formerly performed by these
Renegades to the Ottoman Empire, and can we think they are less active now? No,
no, the same maxims that lead them in the last Age to the prosecution of the
most infamous designs, survive in the breasts of these, who conscious to
themselves of the highest crimes, think there is no safety but in continuing to
be still worse. We had been masters of Canisia before now, had these serpents
left their hissing, and continual sollicitings to endure the utmost extremity
rather then yield; yea the most Intelligent persons I can any where encounter
assure me, the last year the Turks had not been so cruel where they came, had
not these devils (like so many Mufties) persuaded the natural Turks (and for
that no great store of Rhetoric was requisite) that Christians were the best
Victimes they could offer up to their Prophet Mahomet. The truth is, that
Impostor having taught in his Alchoran that his Law was to be planted with
Sword in hand, there are no such people in the world to put that doctrine in
practice as these Renegades, who having quitted a Religion innocent and pure,
and such as bids the Sword to be sheathed; are the readiest to commit all kind
of cruelties and murders, having a religious pretense to justify them: So that
(my Lord) it will concern all Christian Princes to watch narrowly these
Phaetons, that have already fired so great a part of Christendom, and will
undoubtedly endeavor to proceed further, if by severe animadversions they be
not frighted from joining with those professed enemies of Christianity; for it is
certain, many of these Renegades now in Command, are such as voluntarily and at
years of discretion espoused that Interest. To conclude, That God Almighty
would favorably shine on the Empire, and give all Christian Monarchs a
resolution to combine against the common Enemy, and amongst the many brave
persons that fight under the Banner of the Cross, preserve your Excellency,
shall be the prayer of

From Canisia, May, 15th Still. Nov. 1664. Most Illustrious Lord, Your most
humble and faithful Servant, N. R. D.


