A Declaration for Ireland, Or no DECLARATION, The way to reduce that Kingdom
to the Obedience of the Crown of ENGLAND.
With Reasons wherefore the Despoiled Protestants should receive some
Reparation out of the Forfeited Lands of the Irish Papists now in Rebellion.
Licensed

September 2. 1689. J. F.

SIR,
ACcording to your desire, I herein freely give you my thought of that great
Question which so much concerns the King, his Government, and the Protestant
Interest, which is the readiest way to reduce the Kingdom of Ireland, Is a
Declaration, or no Declaration? I^ a Declaration, shall it consist all of Terms
or Tenders of Grace and Favor on laying down of Arms, which seems to have
obtained the Approbation of some? Or shall there be instances of Justice made,
by excepting the chiefest and most notorious of those of the Irish Papists now
in Rebellion? which seems to be the general sense and humble desires of the
Protestant Lords and Gentlemen of Ireland.

And I humbly conceive, with submission to better Judgments, and the resolves
of our Superiors, that a Declaration is necessary for these Reasons.

First, If no Declaration go with the Army, this will make all the whole Nation
of the Irish, as well those who are not of the Army, as those who are, alike
desperate, and that by no means seems advisable, for they are too many. They
will be all desperate, because by the cunning of the Priests they have all been
involved in Guilt, all Armed that came to Mass, and all engaged in the
Plundering and Robbing of the Protestants; and being thus conserous to
themselves, and persuaded by the Priests and Gentry, that there is no Mercy to
be expected for them, there being no assurance of protection or encouragement
for them to continue in their Dwellings and Occupations. Hereupon the
Husbandman, Ploughman and Labourer, with what little Corn or Cattle they have
will fly before the English Army into the Irish Quarters, and unto Bogs and
Mountains, and such great numbers betake themselves to the Towns (as in the
former War) that by their multitude a Famine will soon come amongst them; and
that probably as heretofore be followed with a Plague; The consequence of which
will be not only the present wasting and depopulating of the Country; but for
many years the same will continue Untilled, and there will be a scarcity of
Corn, for it is the Irish that do Plough three parts of four, if not more of the
three Provinces, and one half at least of the fourth; and it is but some of the
best of the English in the Country do Plough only for their own use, and the
meaner sort of Protestants cannot fare so hardly (as the Irish, who live upon
Milks and Potatoes,) as to be able to raise any Rent by Ploughing, Corn being
so cheap in that Kingdom, there being so much more Land than Inhabitants. But
also the Nobility and Gentry will not for many years to come be able to raise
their Rents unto half the value their Estates yielded them of late years,
except those Farmers and Ploughmen of the Irish be taken into protection, and
retained in their Dwelling and Occupations by a Declaration.

Secondly, A Declaration is necessary to assure the greatest part of those who
are in Arms, of mercy and protection on their submission, there being no
Assurance now remaining to them from the Declaration of Feb. 22. 1685. which
they rejected, and having no certainty of their lives, but that they may escape
for their number, and they may not, but be destroyed, which they have deserved.
This uncertainty, and the guilt they have contracted by Robberies, etc. will
keep them in^ire in their resistance to the la^t.

Thirdly, A Declaration is necessary for the encouragement of the Protestants,
that they may see His Majesty's care for their Restoration to their Estates,
and for some reparation for their losses, who otherwise are utterly consumed
and irreparably beggared, and in vain is it for such to return and endeavor to
plant Ireland, but must continue Servants or Beggars here in England, except
they are relieved and ass^ted out of the forfeited Lands.

As to the second Question, I humbly conceive some instances of Justice must be
made, and some o^ the Chief excepted from their Estates for these Reasons.

Omitting several Arguments that have been discoursed of; as the reasonableness
of discouraging future Rebellions; and that this will not obtain the end
intended, of reducing that Kingdom; for the Estated Men, who have armed all the
rest, may lay down their Arms, and others carry on the War with greater vigor,
etc. I humbly conceive,

1. It Is not for the Kings Honor a second time to prostitute His Grace and
Mercy in a general Offer, to all without exception.

2. This His Majesty's Lenity will but make them more insolent (as in all Ages)
instances have been given, and more may, for let none persuade the King that
there ever was the least spark of good Nature or Ingenuity appearing in the
Irish Nation, or that any thing but the dread of a terrible revenge from God
and Man keeps those Bloody Irish Papists from a general Massacre of all the
Protestants within their power, or that they ever made other use of all the
Grace and Favor by which they have had Honors and Estates conferr^d upon them
by the Crown of England (after they have been Conquered and Subdued; but to
take hold of the first opportunity they ever have to murder and destroy the
English and Protestants, and to cast off the Government of England, and every
time by a more universal and malicious Rebellion than the former, and they will
construe this to be out of fear, or the urgency of His Majesty's Affairs which
proceeds from the greatness and goodness of His Royal Heart toward those who
have plunged themselves in this general Rebellion.

3. If they are not now weakened in their Estates, and the Protestants by those
Estates in some measure repaired and strengthened; I mean those who are
consumed by this late Rebellion (their substance for the most part consisting
in Stock) His Majesty's Revenue will not recover in many years sufficient to
maintain an Army to defend that Kingdom: and next, no Militia will be to assist
the standing Army in that Country for many years.

1. His Majesty's Revenue will not recover to any considerable degree for many
years, for it was this sort of English Farmers, who stock^ng their Land with
Sheep and black Cattle, (as the Irish generally followed the Plough) traded
with their Wool, their Butter and Cheese, their Hides, Beef and Tallow, which
with Leather, are the staple Commodities of the Kingdom, and the subject matter
of the Trade and Exportations, which being answer with Importations of other
Commodities of Wine, Cloth, Silk, Stuff, Grocery Wares, and other Goods from
England, were the Fund of His Majesty's Revenue of the Customs and Excise, all
which Goods for Exportation are consumed by these Robbers, and the vast Armies
raised in Ireland by Tyrconnel and his Adherents.

But may not this loss be soon made up by others as English and Dutch? etc.

I answer, Strangers to the Country, and to the Nature of the Soil, know not
how to turn them, they will find it difficult to pay the Quitrent or Crown Re^^
in most places, it is grown into a Proverb, That a man must be undone in
Ireland before he thrives, even those who bring good Stocks with them out of
England. So necessary is experience in the Climate, Soil, Trade, Markets,
manner of Living, etc. besides the right and property by Lease is Vested in
these consumed and despoiled Protestants and those of them who have not Leases
of their Lands at easy Rents, such as they way be able to raise out of their
Farms, (when as^ed by the Forfeited Lands) will look upon themselves as
intituted in Conscience and Equity to have preference to the Tenancy of their
Lands and Abatements of their Rents to such an easy rate as they may be able
to pay the same, until the Kingdom be better planted, and Trade improved.
Besides French and Dutch are for Manufactures, which is the Form of Trading,
and most desirable; but the^e despoi^ed Protestants are conversant in
Commodities that are the matter of Trade, and matter must always of necessity
precede form.

2. Without these despoiled Protestants be assisted by the Forfeited Lands in
their Planting, and Stocking of the Country, there can be no considerable
Militia in the Kingdom of Ireland for several years, (for these men the Body of
the Militia, and especially of the Horse, the Landed men were generally
Officers these in one County made 22 or 23 Troops of Horse, and throughout the
Kingdom between 4 and 5000 Horse, besides 13 or 14000 Foot; now instead of
Horse, Arms and Accoutrements, they want Bread, and will not have Shoes to walk
on Foot, except assisted and provided out of the Forfeited Lands.

The consequence of this want of Revenue in Ireland, and of a considerable
Militia of the Inhabitants is evident, that the charge and burden of an Army
to retain that Kingdom (when it is gotten to the Crown of England, must wholly
he upon the Kingdom of England, and this may bring His Majesty's Affairs into
disorder, and in a little time prove very burdensome to the people of England;
and as f^r want of a Revenue in Ireland, England must be at double the charge
to pay the Army in Ireland; So for want of the Militia, such as formerly they
h^d, the King must have double the number of men in the Standing Army to
preserve that Kingdom; and in a word, the King must be at near four times more
charge in maintaining His Army in Ireland, unless this course be taken in
restoring and repairing the despoiled Protestants, and with them the Revenue
and Militia of that Kingdom. Besides as it is the best Husbandry in his Majesty
thus to dispose of the Forfeited Lands, and will turn to His Majesty's great
and speedy advantage, so there is a kind of Justice that these consumed
Protestants should be repaired out of the Forfeited Lands to His Majesty in
this Rebellion. For this reason, that besides they are the Martyrs and
Sufferers for all the Protestants of the thee Kingdoms, they have been
destroyed by those very men who were Owners of these Forfeited Lands; for they
have armed the Soldiers and the Rabble, and incourag^d them to Plunder and
Rob, to provide for the Armies these Forfeiting Persons raised, and undertook
to maintain for three Months, and the only Fund they had for so doing was the
Substance and Stocks of these despoiled Protestants, now seeing the Protestants
cannot Sue these Forfeiting Persons at Law, or if they could, their Estates
being Forfeited cannot be liable to their Judgments and Executions in the Kings
Hands can there be any thing more equitable, if not just, than that some
reparation and satisfaction be made these despoiled Protestants out of the
Estates of those that spoiled them, etc. From these considerations amongst many
others it appears it is necessary and just the King should except the Chief and
most Notorious of the Irish Rebels, or else these men shall have no Fund for
any satisfaction, and next, that some part of the Forfeited Lands as may be
advised by Parliament may go toward such their reparation. But who are those
most notorious Persons? and why these named more than others?

I answer; The Lords of the Council publicly appointed the Lords and Gentlemen
of Ireland to bring in a List, for that they best were acquainted with the
persons, and what they have done to deserve to be excepted; hereupon these
Lords and Gentlemen to the number of many Grand-juries have Publicly and
Unanimously [two or three dissenting] agreed to return this list, and have left
out others, in order to raise a lealousy amongst them to the intent to divide
them thereby, and those who are omitted may be in a capacity to do considerable
service, to instance a few, the Earl of Clanrickard about Galway, the Earl of
Tyrone about Waterford, Lord Brittas near Lymmerick, Lord Nettervil near
Droghedah, and many more. They have named none but those of whose carriage and
deportment they have receive evidence from several of their number and although
his Majesty and Council unto whom all must be humbly submitted, may omit all or
alter them as they think fit, yet there seems these reasons to the contrary,
and to hold to this number in the presented List.

First, It is most certain this work will never be so indifferently and
impartially done again, either for his Majesty's service, or general
satisfaction: For that List which was made immediately upon the Lords and
Gentlemen parting from the Council Chamger, was done without design, or
particular pique; but those who were named were known to all the Assembly to be
the chief Ringleaders in this mischievous Rebellion, and their particular
actions related by those present, without any time to deliberate on any
sinister design.

Secondly, The King will avoid troublesome Importunities, and those about him
undesirable Reflections; and if the chiefest should be omitted who have been
most malicious and destructive of the Protestants, the same may be resented by
the Parliament in Ireland, as a great Grievance, and beget ill Blood, if not
troublesome Remonstrances and Addresses.

To instance, the Two Chief amongst them (next Tyrconnel) are the Earl of
Clancarty in the one end of Ireland, and the Earl of Antrim in the other; these
two having the greatest Estates, and the most Followers, and Dependants, and
Tenants, have raised the most Men, and despoiled more of the English and
Protestants than twenty others; and especially the former. Now it is whispered,
this is a young Man, and has an excellent Mother; his Mothers Estate will not
be touched; but he is not so young, but he has been guilty of a barbarous
Murder; is an Apostate from his Religion that he was bred in under his good
Mother and the Bishop of Oxford; has followed his grand Father; and his Uncle,
and exceeded them in their persecution and destruction of the Protestants,
merely for being Protestants. These Families were the chief Actors in the
bloody and fatal Rebellion in 1641 have received Honors and Estates since more
than their own, and are capable at any time to do more mischief than 20 other
Noblemen who may be named; and shall their Malice and Cruelty be let loose a
third time to worry the Protestants, and manage another Rebellion within the
memory of Man? God forbid, may the King forbid it, and the Lords of his
Council, and all good Protestants must needs say, Amen. To conclude that I may
keep within the bounds of a letter to may observation, this is the Universal
Groan of the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, and I make no doubt but
in all the applications and importunities in favor of the Irish, his Majesty
will remember this one great and necessary Truth;

That if the King and his Council [upon this General Rebellion and Universal
Revolt from the Crown of England] do not take the Advantage effectually to
weaken the Irish Popish Interest in Ireland;

The Protestants there will ever hereafter live in extremest dread and danger,
and consequently none will reside there who can have Bread in any other Country
with security, and the King and Kingdom of England be never freed from infinite
CHARGE and TROUBLE, infinite EXPENSE of BLOOD and TREASURE, by which the whole
Protestant Interest will be s;o effectually weakened, that it will be ALWAYS in
hazard of a TOTAL Subversion and Destruction. Yours, etc.

Since the writing this Letter, I met with a Pamphlet (Licensed the 30th of
August) with an Immodest Reflection on the Lords and Gentlemen, to whom the
forming of a Declaration was referred, which if it be not an Arrow drawn out of
a Popish Quiver, it is feathered with Pride and ill Nature.

And how frivolous is that Exception, that they have not consulted those
Noblemen and Gentlemen of Ireland, who are now hazarding their Lives in that
service; it being impossible to consult their persons? It Is evident they have
their Interest; for who will be so desirous as those honorable Lords and
Gentlemen, to gain some Interest in Ireland worthy their great hazards; or who
have more reason than the Parliament and People of England, to expect some
further Assurance of that Kingdom that may be worthy of their vast Expense of
Blood and Treasure? And would not (as our Reflector) that the Irish inricht and
made strong with the Spoils of the Protestants (the greatest number of whom
they have utterly beggared) may have it in their power to lay down for the
present, and take up their Arms again as soon as the French, on pretense of the
late King, or the Prince of Wales may offer an opportunity; and then all the
Hazards, Charges and Expenses will be cast away to no purpose, as often
heretofore has been: After which the Protestant Interest must again win
Ireland, whatever it cost, of lose England.

Published by Rich. Janeway in Queens-Head-Ally in Paternoster Row, 1689.


