A DECLARATION OF THE Congregational Ministers, In and about London, AGAINST
Antinomian Errors, AND Ignorant and Scandalous Persons Intruding themselves
into the MINISTRY. The SECOND EDITION; to which is Added, The Testimony of some
of the said Ministers.

LONDON, Printed for John Hartley over against Gray's- Inn, in Holborn. MDCXCIX.

IT having been Reported, and Industriously spread abroad, That the Declaration
against Antinomian Errors, etc. was not Considered, and Approved of by the
Congregational Ministers in, and about this City, (which is in manifest
Contradiction to the Title Page, and Preface;) We, whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, to the end the Truth of Matter of Fact may Appear to the Conviction
of Every Reader, do Declare, That, (Excepting Two or Three Ministers, who go
under the same Denomination with us, to whom we thought not fit to Communicate
the said Declaration) All the Pastors of Congregational Churches, in, and about
this City, did Consider, and Unanimously Express their Approbation of it.

London, Feb. 23. 1699. Geo. Griffith. Matthew. Mead. Stephen Lobb. Richard
Tailor. John Nesbitt.


THE PREFACE.
SOME of us, a while after the Heads of Agreement were Assented unto by the
United Ministers in 91, Apprehending that the Doctrines of Christ's
Satisfaction, and our Justification, were in Danger, 'twas in a Brotherly way
Endeavored, that they might be Explained, and Owned as commonly held by the
Reformed: And, after some considerable Time, ( wherein 'twas once hoped, there
had been a Sincere Renunciation of the Errors, which too soon appeared to be
otherwise) a Paper, containing a Right State of these Articles, and a Disowning
the Opposite Opinions, was sent unto, and Joyfully Received by us, as what was
Adjusted to Remove the Offense; but, at last, laid aside for Another Paper that
Increased the Dissatisfaction.

Matters lying thus for several Months, the First Paper, with a brief Account
of what had been done toward a Conciliation came to light, and thereupon we
were surprised with an Accusation, not against a Person or two of Our Way only,
but against Us more generally; and although the Charge was, of our being Tainted
with Antinomian Errors, yet was it not sent unto, nor seen by us, but in a
Public Print; wherein we were treated, not as Brethren, but in a Way very
Uncommon, perhaps without a President by One of those Nine who had Subscribed
that First Paper, and in Conjunction with others, sent it to us in a Letter,
Pressing us to Accept of it, as an Expedient for Accommodation.

When we considered the Nature of this Charge, and under what Countenance (
according to the Representation given of it in Print) it appeared, we had
Reason to think, that if our Accusers themselves did not, yet the other
Brethren would upon Reflection, judge it to be both Equal and Fair, that they
who were in a Regular, and Christian Manner, first Accused, should Vindicate
themselves, before they expected any thing of that kind from us: Yea more, that
seeing they did so very well know our Principles to be Orthodox and Sound, they
would clear themselves from having any Hand in the Accusation, if not save us
this Trouble, by Testifying their Dislike of those Unjust Aspersions cast upon
us, by some of their own Way, in Point of Discipline.

But having waited a long while, and nothing more done than the continuing the
Clamor of our being Antinomians, we have made the ensuing Declaration, which
has been Confidered and Approved of by us, [ viz. The Ministers of the
Congregational Persuasion, in and about this City,] wherein we have been more
full than our Accusers have, in their Propositions, desired us to be.

Now having thus Discharged our selves from the Groundless Accusations which
have been against us, on the one Extreme, we cannot but at the same time
express our Dislike of those Hurtful Errors about Christ's Satisfaction, and
our Justification on the Other; Particularly, such as are in the Writings of
Mr. B -- r, and his Followers; wishing, That what Persons soever have been
charged, would Declare their true Sense, to the End we may know how to carry it
toward them in the Exercise of Forbearance. For, although we do with Luther,
think Truth to be of so Inestimable a Value, That it is better Heaven and Earth
be Blended together in Confusion, than that the least Dust thereof should
Perish: And that therefore it ought earnestly to be Contended for; yet do we
very consistently Agree with the Elders and Messengers at the Savoy; who, in
the Preface to our Confession declared, That amongst all Christian States and
Churches, there ought to be vouchsafed a Forbearance and Mutual Indulgence unto
Saints of all Persuasions, that keep unto, and hold fast the Necessary
Foundations of Faith and Holiness, in all other Matters Extra-Fundamental,
whether of Faith or Order, p. 6. 7. And seeing our Governors have by a Law
Tolerated us, we judge our selves the more obliged to bear with, and Exercise
that Compassion and Tenderness toward our Fellow Servants, which we have had
from our Superiors.

Our Prayer unto God is, That the same Mind be in all, which was in Christ
Jesus, that nothing be done through Strife, and Vain Glory, but in Lowliness of
Mind.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. Line 7. for easy, read easily; l. 17. read, some of us expressed a;
p. 32. l. 7. read, whereof.

A DECLARATION, etc.
Although the Elders and Messengers of Congregational Churches, who met in the
Year 1658. at the Savoy, after they had (as themselves express it) sailed
through an Aestuation, Fluxes and Refluxes of great Variety of Spirits,
Doctrines, and Opinions which have been Accompanied in their several Seasons,
with Powerful Persuasions and Temptations, to Seduce those of our way, did
Declare their Faith, in the same Substance for matter, yea Words for the most
Part, which other Churches, and Assemblies Reputed the most Orthodox, have done
before them, expressing their Approvall of the Confession of the Assembly at
Westminster, and holding forth a Professed Opposition to the Common Errors, and
Heresies of those times; And, although our Brethren in New England, who for the
Substance, Assented fully to the Assemblies Confession, Zealously oppugned the
Wild Notions of the Antinomians; And also, tho we our selves have frequently
Signified our Approbation of the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England,
and the aforesaid Confessions, and many of our way have not only Preached, but
Written against them, and never has a Book Containing Errors of that or any
other sort, been sent forth under the Countenance of an Attestation of it is
Soundness subscribed by any Number of us, and although our Orthodoxy be so
manifest that we cannot want a Witness of it in the Consciences of our
Accusers, yet to the Dishonor of God, and the Reproach of that Holy
Profession, which we, with the rest of sound Protestants, make of the Truth,
and in contradiction to the plainest Evidence, are we traduced for being
Antinomians, and several upon this account pressed against their Attendance on
our Ministry; Whereupon, in Faithfuness unto God, and Compassion to the Souls
of Men, as well as for the Clearing our selves from such groundless, false and
injurious Imputations, we have thought it expedient to give a just
Representation of our Principles in these Points.

But to prevent Mistakes, We desire it may be observed, that our Design is not
to profess our Dislike of every Doctrine, to which the Name of Antinomian has
been given: For we know, that not only Bellarmine, with sundry Papists; but the
Socinians, and other Erroneous Persons among our Accusers, too near a kin unto
them, have branded some of the most Important Truths of the Gospel, defended by
the Reformed against the Insults of the Jesuits and their Abettors, as
Antinomian; Nor indeed can we look on the Errors falsely said to be held by
us, as Opinions that have found so much Reputation, as to gain any Number of
Learned Men to support them, they being for the most part the Offspring of the
Brains of some Popish and other Heretical Writers, who, in their Disputes with
Protestants, have first affirmed 'em to be Consequences, easily deduced from
Principles, entertained by us, and then represented as Doctrines, which we have
espoused.

But, yet several of 'em have had Parents to own and cherish them; and have not
been misnamed, which nevertheless we shall consider only as charged upon us;
and endeavor to show, not only, that we never entertained, or gave countenance
unto them, but, that in our Writings, and by the Articles and Confessions,
which we have deliberately and readily subscribed unto, we have, from time to
time, Publicly given our Testimony against them; whereby it will appear; that
as there has not been the least Color or Pretense for our Accusers, so boldly
to Publish their Insinuations and Charges against us, so it must be
acknowledged, that there is somewhat at bottom, not obvious to every one's
View, that influences them hereunto; which, whether it be the more easy to
conceal; and under a Covert, the more effectually to instill and propagate
Errors of an Arminian Nature and Tendency, we leave to Impartial Observers to
determine; who, we doubt not, will soon be convinced, that what is here
suggested is too True, seeing they did not lay Antinomian Errors to our
Charge, until we expressed our Dissatisfaction about their Arminian and other
hurtful Opinions.

But what Judgment soever any shall pass on their Methods and Designs, we will
set down the Errors, they say we Hold, and show How and Where we have
witnessed against them.

The ERRORS.
. 1. That the Eternal Decree gives such an Existence to the Justification of
the Elect, as makes their Estate, whilst in Unbelief to be the same as when
they do believe, in all respects, save only as to the Manifestation; and that
there is no other Justification by Faith, but what is in their Consciences.. 2.
That the Elect, considered as in their Natural Estate, or as in the first Adam,
are not under the Denunciation of Wrath by the Law, as well as other
Unbelieving and Impenitent Sinners are.. That pardoned Sin is no Sin, and
therefore God cannot see Sin in his People, to be displeased with them for their
Sins; nor does God express his Fatherly Displeasure against them by any
Afflictions laid upon them.. 4. That Believers are not bound to Confess, or
mourn over Sin, as committed by them; or pray for pardon of Sin, in making
daily Acknowledgment of a Need of it, because 'twas pardoned before committed,
and pardoned Sin is no Sin.. 5. That Believers ought not to be afraid of
committing Sin, because their Sins can do them no hurt.. 6. That they must do
no good Work, or Duty, for their own benefit, nor with an Eye unto their own
Salvation.. 7. Believers not having in themselves an Ability to do good Works,
are not bound to perform any good Duty, unless excited thereunto by a special
Motion of the Spirit.. 8. That Sanctification, evidenced by the Spirit of God
to their Consciences, is not a Sign, Mark, or Evidence of their Justification;
and that Marks and Signs for the trial of a Believer's Faith, are of no use:
For, Faith lying in a full Persuasion, and Assurance, that their Persons were
Actually Justified, and Pardoned in Christ, it is a Sin to Question, Whether
they do Savingly believe, or no?. 9. That Gospel Ministers are not to Preach
the Law, in its Commands, and Curses, to convince Men of their need of Christ;
nor are Believers obliged to Regard the Law, as delivered by Moses; nor as
Externally propounded; nor are they bound when they commit Sin, to look to the
Law for further Discoveries, and Convictions of the remaining Corruptions that
are in them; because by the Gospel, its Obligations are dissolved.. 10. That
Ministers of the Gospel ought not to propound the Offers of Salvation unto all
those to whom God calls them to Preach, seriously Inviting them to Improve the
Means of Grace, that they may be Saved; and assuring them in the way of their
Ministerial Duty of the Salvation of all such as believe in Christ, because
they want Ability to close with the Offer; and all shall not be saved.. 11.
That by God's laying our Sins upon Christ, he became every way as sinful as we;
and we every way as Righteous and Holy as he; and that therefore Persons may
expect to be pardoned whilst they continue in a State of Unbelief and
Impenitence; and that continued Repentance and Holiness, are not in the Nature
of the Thing; nor by the Constitution of the Gospel, necessary to our being
possessed of Eternal Life.
The Opposition we have made unto these Errors, may be seen in our Confession
at the Savoy, as also in the Writings of our Brethren, both at Home, and in
New England; particularly in the Books of the Celebrated Dr. Goodwin, and Dr.
Owen, as we will distinctly evince by opposing to these Errors what is
delivered in the foresaid Confession, and Writings.

The First and Second Errors.
1. That the Eternal Decree gives such a Real Existence to the Justification of
the Elect, as makes their State, whilst in Unbelief, to be the same as when
they do believe, in all Respects save as to Manifestation, and that there is no
other Justification by Faith, but what is in their Consciences.

2. That the Elect, considered as in their Natural Estate, or as in the First
Adam, are not under the Denunciation of Wrath by the Law, as well as other
Unbelieving, and Impenitent Sinners.

Our Opposition.
1. That there is a Difference between the Estate of the Elect, whilst in
Unbelief, and when Believers, besides what is manifestative to their
Consciences.

2. That before they believe they are not Personally, and Actually Justified in
the Court of Heaven, but by believing they are so Justified.

1. The Learned Dr. Goodwin, in the Fourth Volume of his Works, about the
Objects, and Acts of Justifying Faith, Part 1. Book 1. Chap. 15. has in the
following Words, given our true and Genuine Sense about this Important Point:
For there he Discoursing of Justification from Eternity, and in Christ, says;
We are in our own Persons, made True Owners and Injoyers of Justification, at
that Instant when we first Believe; which Act is the Completion, and
Accomplishment of the former, and is that Great and Famous Justification by
Faith, which the Scripture so much Inculcates, and almost only mentions, yea,
and so speaks of it, as if we were not Justified at all till then: So 1 Cor.
6.9. Such were some of you, but now ye are Sanctified, now ye are Justified;
which before they were not -- And therefore before Faith, the Scripture
Pronounces the very Elect, even those whom Christ Died for, Children of Wrath
as well as others, till they Believe, Ephesians. 2.3. So as when we were said to be
Justified by Faith, it is not only because then Faith Apprehends that
Justification which was in God's Breast before, and that then we are Justified
merely in Ford Conscientiae, tho we were in Foro Dei, as much as ever (as some
express it;) But further it must be said, that even in Foro Dei, in God's
Court, and according to the Judgment of that Open Court, which God has set up
in his Word, and according to the Proceedings of his Word, (which is the Rule
he professes to Judge Men by, and therein he keeps to the Rule of his Word, as
Christ says, I Judge no Man; but the Word which I speak, shall Judge you, John
12.47, 48.) God does Judge and Pronounce his Elect Ungodly, and Vnjustified,
till they Believe; yea, and by the Spirit of Bondage he Testifies to their
Consciences, that before Faith they are Ungodly, and Vnjustified, and Children
of Wrath: If it were not a Real Truth, the Spirit of God would not evidence
this to them.

2. What Dr. Goodwin here affirms, is consonant to what it is declared, in the
Savoy Confession: For, in Cap. 11.. 4. it is thus. God did from all Eternity
Decree to Justify all the Elect, and Christ did, in the fullness of Time, Die
for their Sins, and rise again for their Justification: Nevertheless they are
not Justified Personally, until the Holy Spirit does in due time actually Apply
Christ unto them. And, as in Cap. 3.. 6. They having fallen in Adam, are by
their Original, and Actual Sins Bound over to the Wrath of God, and Curse of
the Law, and are made subject to Death, with all Miseries, Spiritual, Temporal
and Eternal. So, Cap. 6.. 6. Thus they continue, till they are Effectually
called; as in Cap. 10.. 1. All those, whom God has Predestined unto Life,
and only those he is pleased in his Appointed time effectually to call by his
Word and Spirit out of that State of Sin and Death, in which they are by
Nature, to Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ. Besides, as it is expressly said
Cap. 1.. 4. That they are not Personally Justified till Christ be Actually
Applied unto them: So in the same Chap.. 1. it is declared, That those whom God
effectually calls, he also Freely Justifies -- by Imputing Christ's Active
Obedience unto the whole Law, and Passive Obedience in his Death for their
whole and sole Righteousness; they Receiving and Resting on him, and his
Righteousness by Faith. And in the very next Section; Faith thus Receiving and
Resting on Christ, and his Righteousness is the alone Instrument of
Justification; yet it is not alone in the Person Justified, but is ever
accompanied with all other Saving Graces; and is no Dead Faith, but works by
Love.

The Third and Fourth Errors.
3. That Pardoned Sin is no Sin; and therefore God cannot see Sin in his People
to be Displeased with them for their Sins; nor does God express his Fatherly
Displeasure against them by any Afflictions laid upon them.

4. That Believers are not Bound to Confess, or Mourn over Sin, as committed by
them, or Pray for Pardon of Sin, in making a Daily Acknowledgment of a Need of
it, because 'twas Pardoned before committed, and Pardoned Sin is no Sin.

Our Opposition.
We have always held:

1. That Pardoned, yea, Mortified Sins, are truly and properly Sins. 2. That
God sees the Sins of his own People, and is Displeased with them for their
Sins. 3. That when Believers do sin, it is their Duty to humble themselves,
Confess their Sins, and pray for Pardon.
The Declaration of our Faith, at the Savoy, is so distinct, and full against
these Errors, that whoever will consult the following Passages taken out of
it, cannot but think himself bound in Conscience to own our Orthodoxy: For, in
Cap. 6.. 4. we affirm, That the Corruption of Nature, during this Life, does
remain in those that are Regenerated; and although it be through Christ Pardoned
and Mortified, yet both it self, and all the Motions thereof, are Truly and
Properly Sin. In Cap. 11.. 5. God does continue to Forgive the Sins of those
that are Justified; and although they can never fall from the State of
Justification; yet they may by their Sins fall under God's Fatherly
Displeasure; and in that Condition, they have not usually the Light of his
Countenance Restored unto them, until they humble themselves, Confess their
Sins, Beg Pardon, and Renew their Faith and Repentance. In Cap. 15. 2, 3.
Whereas there is none that does Good, and Sins not, and the best of Men may
through the Power and Deceitfulness of their Corruptions, dwelling in them,
with the Prevalency of Temptation, fall into Great Sins and Provocations; God
has, in the Covenant of Grace, mercifully provided, that Believers so Sinning,
and Falling, be Renewed through Repentance unto Salvation. That this Saving
Repentance is an Evangelical Grace, whereby a Person being by the Holy Ghost
made sensible of the manifold Evils of his Sin, does by Faith in Christ Humble
himself for it, with Godly Sorrow, Detestation of it, and Self Abhorrency,
Praying for Pardon, and Strength of Grace, etc.

The Fifth Error.
5. That Believers ought not to be afaid of committing Sin, because their Sins
can do them no hurt.

Our Opposition.
If the Sins of Believers do Impair their Graces and Comforts; harden their
Hearts, wound their Consciences, hurt and scandalize others, Grieve God's Holy
Spirit, Expose to his Fatherly Displeasure, and bring Temporal Judgments too
upon them; then surely their Sins hurt them, and they should be Afraid to
commit them; and if we have declared thus much in our Confession, it is
sufficient to clear us from this Imputation. And that we have freely and
readily owned thus much, is plain from what is in Cap. 5.. 5. The Most Wise and
Gracious God does oftentimes leave for a Season, his own Children, to Manifold
Temptations, and the Corruptions of their own Hearts, to Chastise them for
their former Sins, or to Discover to them the hidden strength of Corruption and
Deceitfulness of their Hearts, that they may be Humbled -- and to make them
more Watchful against all Future Occasions of Sin. -- In Cap. 17. 3. And tho
they may -- fall into Grievous Sins, and for a time continue therein, whereby
they Incur God's Displeasure, and Grieve his Holy Spirit, come to have their
Graces and Comforts Impaired, have their Hearts Hardened, and their Consciences
Wounded, Hurt and Scandalize others, and bring Temporal Judgments upon them
Selves; yet they are, and shall be kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation. What can be more opposite unto this Error?

The Sixth Error.
6. That they must do no Good Work, or Duty, for their own Benefit; or with an
Eye to their own Salvation.

Our Opposition.
That Believers must do good Works, expecting Blessings in the performance
thereof. So in Chap. 19.. 6. Although True Believers be not under the Law, as a
Covenant of Works -- yet is it of great use to them, as well as to others, in
that, as a Rule of Life informing them of the Will of God and their Duty, it
Directs, and Binds them to walk accordingly. -- The Promises of it in like
manner show them God's Approbation of Obedience, and what Blessings they may
Expect upon the Performance thereof, although not as Due to them by the Law, as a
Covenant of Works; so as a Man's Doing Good, and Reforming from Evil, because
the Law Encourages to the One, and Deterreth from the other, is no Evidence of
his being under the Law, and not under Grace. And. 7. Neither are the
forementioned Uses of the Law, contrary to the Graces of the Gospel, but do
sweetly Comply with it, the Spirit of Christ Subduing and Enabling the Will of
Man to do that freely and cheerfully, which the Will of God Revealed in the
Law, Required to be done. And in Cap. 16.. 6. The Persons of Believers being
Accepted through Christ, their Good Works also are Accepted in him -- God
looking upon them in his Son, is Pleased to Accept and Reward that which is
Sincere, although accompanied with many Weaknesses and Imperfections.

The Seventh Error.
7. Believers not having in themselves an Ability to do Good Works, are not
Bound to Perform any good Duty, unless Excited thereunto by a special Motion of
the Spirit.

Our Opposition.
We have fully Declared our selves against this Error, in Cap. 16.. 3. Their
Ability to do Good Works, is not at all in themselves, but wholly from the
Spirit of Christ -- yet are they not hereupon to grow Negligent, as if they
were not Bound to Perform any Duty, unless upon a Special Motion of the Spirit;
but they ought to be Diligent in Stirring up the Grace of God that is in them.

The Eighth Error.
8. That Sanctification, evidenced by the Spirit of God to their Consciences,
is not a Sign, Mark, or Evidence of their Justification; and that Marks and
Signs for the Trial of a Believer's Faith, are of no use. For Faith lying in a
Full Persuasion and Assurance, that their Persons were Actually Justified and
Pardoned in Christ, it is a Sin to Question, Whether they do Savingly Believe,
or no?

Our Opposition.
It has been our constant Judgment.

1. That saving Faith lies not in a Full Persuasion and Assurance that our
Sins are Actually Pardoned.

2. That Marks and Signs for the Trials of our Spiritual Estate, are Useful,
and to be sought after.

3. That Sanctification, evidenced by the Spirit of God to our Consciences, is
a certain Sign, and Mark of our Justification.

To the First, the Judicious Dr. Goodwin has in his Vol. 4. Part 2. Lib. 2.
Cap. 1. delivered our True Sense, when he says, That that Act of Faith which
Justifies a Sinner, is Distinct from knowing he has Eternal Life, and may
therefore be without it, because it does not necessarily contain Prevailing
Assurance in it. By Prevailing Assurance, I mean such an Assurance, as
overpowreth Doubts and Sense to the contrary, so as in the Believer's Knowledge
he is able to say, Christ is mine, and my Sins are Forgiven; such an Assurance,
whereby Man is a Conqueror, as Paul speaks Romans 8.37. Amongst the several
Reasons he gives to prove that True Faith may be without such Assurance, he
presses this, viz. Wicked Men are not bound immediately to have Assurance, and
therefore it is not the Essential Act wherein Faith consists. They are
Condemned you know, for not Believing: Now, if the First Act of Faith commanded
were to believe that Christ is mine, and that my Sins are Forgiven, how could a
Man in the State of Nature be Bound to it? For such an Assurance of Christ's
being his, is not a Truth in the State wherein he stands, but yet he is every
Hour bound to come to Christ as the Fountain of Life, and cast himself on him
for his Pardon.

What the Doctor here delivers is agreeable to what is in our Confession,
which has two distinct Chapters, the 14th about saving Faith, and the 18th of
the Assurance of Grace and Salvation; giving distinct Definitions of each, and
clearing it; that Assurance is not an Essential of Saving Faith, and that Faith
does not, in all, grow up to the Attainment of a Full Assurance, affirming,
That the principal Acts of saving Faith are Accepting, Receiving, and Resting
upon Christ alone for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, by
Virtue of the Covenant of Grace,. 2. And chap. 18.. 3. This Infallible
Assurance does not belong to the Essence of Faith, but that a True Believer may
wait long, and Conflict with many Difficulties before he be Partaker of it.

To the second and third, Dr. Goodwin, in the Place but now cited, cap. 5.
goes on to consider, What the Apostle John has written, that may help a
Believer to this Assurance; what Directions, what Helps, what Evidence he has
described, whereby he may come to be Assured -- it directs them to two
Trinities of Witnesses, where three are in Heaven, and three on Earth: For I
take it, that all these six Witnesses have their Evidence set to one Record;
both that Christ is the Fountain of Life, and that God has given to a Believer
Eternal Life. And a little after the Doctor insists on Sanctification as the
second Witness on Earth. The second Witness (says he) is the Work and Workings
of Sanctification, [Water] the Believer finds that closing thus with Christ
changes him, Renews him, washes him from the Power of Sin, puts a new Spirit
and Principle into him -- Every Grace is a stream in him, and all his Graces do
Testify, also if they be observed: Read this Epistle of John, you will find he
cuts this Water into many Rills and Signs, in every of which as so many Signs,
Believers may see and have some Evidence of their Estates. So far the Doctor,
who still keeps close unto our Confession; in which, particularly chap. 18.. 1.
it is said, Although Temporary Believers, and other Unregenerate Men may vainly
deceive themselves with false Hopes and Carnal Presumptions of being in the
Favor of God, and State of Salvation, which Hope of theirs shall Perish: Thus
they show what false Hopes and carnal Presumptions some Unregenerate Men may
have. To which they add,. 3. That a Believer being enabled by the Spirit to
know the Things which are freely given him of God, he may, (without
Extraordinary Revelation) in the Right use of ordinary Means attain thereunto:
And therefore it is the Duty of every one to give all Diligence to make his
Calling and Election sure; which (as in. 1, 2.) cannot be but by Endeavoring
to Walk in all Good Conscience before the Lord Jesus. For, This Certainty is
not a bare Conjectural and Probable Persuasion, grounded upon a Fallible Hope,
but an Infallible Assurance of Faith, founded on the Blood and Righteousness of
Christ, revealed in the Gospel; and also upon the Inward Evidence of those
Graces, unto which Promises are made, and on the Immediate Witness of the
Spirit, Testifying our Adoption, and as a Fruit thereof leaving the Heart more
Humble and Holy. And in cap. 6.2. Good Works done in Obedience to God's
Commandments, are the Fruits and Evidences of a True and Lively Faith, and by
them Believers -- strengthen their Assurance.

The Ninth Error.
9. That Gospel Ministers are not to Preach the Law in its Commands and Curses,
to convince Men of their need of Christ; nor are Believers obliged to regard
the Law as delivered by Moses, nor as Externally propounded; nor are they
Bound, when they commit Sin, to look to the Law for further Discoveries and
Convictions of the remaining Corruptions that are in them, because by the
Gospel its Obligations are Dissolved.

Our Opposition.
We hold, 1. That the Law delivered by Moses, continues in its Commands and
Curses, Vndissolv'd.

2. That it is still of use to convince of Sin, that we may see a need of
Christ, and therefore is to be Preached and Externally propounded; and we are
to look unto it.

To the First, It Is very expressly declared in our Confession, cap. 19.. 2. That
the Law written in the Heart, continued to be a perfect Rule of Righteousness
after the Fall of Man, and was delivered by God upon Mount Sinai, in Ten
Commandments, and written in Two Tables -- commonly called the Moral-Law, 3.
And in. 5. The Moral-Law does for ever Bind all, as well Justified Persons as
others, to the Obedience thereof; and that not only in regard to the Matter
contained in it, but also in respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who
gave it: Neither did Christ in the Gospel any way Dissolve, but much strengthen
this Obligation.

To the Second, In this Chap.. 6. Although True Believers be not under this Law as
a Covenant of Works, to be thereby Justified, or Condemned; yet it is of Great
Use to them, as well as to Others, in that as a Rule of Life, Informing them of
the Will of God, and their Duty, it Directs and Binds them to Walk accordingly,
discovering also the Sinful Pollutions of their Nature, Hearts and Lives, so as
Examining themselves thereby, they may come to further Conviction of
Humiliation for, and Hatred against Sin, together with a Clearer Sight of the
Need they have of Christ, and the Perfection of his Obedience: It is likewise
of use to the Regenerate, to Restrain their Corruptions, in that it forbids
Sin, and the Threatenings of it serve to show what even their Sins deserve, etc.

To what is here declared, let us add what is in cap. 15.. 5. and 'twill
appear, that it must be Understood of Preaching; for it is there said, That
although there is no Sin so small, but it deserves Damnation; yet there is no Sin
so great that it shall bring Damnation to them that truly Repent; which makes
the constant Preaching of Repentance necessary; for, there can be no Preaching
Repentance, as described in this cap.. 3. but by Preaching the Law, as it is
useful to Convince of Sin for Humiliation, etc.

Before we proceed to the Tenth Error, we must, if we will Impartially deliver
the Truth about the standing Obligation of the Law, declare with the Learned
Dr. Owen, in his Treatise of Justification, p. 201. That that is an
Antinomianism of the worst sort, and most derogatory to the Law of God; which
Affirms it to be divested of its Power, to Oblige unto Perfect Obedience, so as
that what is not so, shall (as it were, in despite of the Law) be Accepted as
if it were so, unto the End, for which the Law Requires it. There is no Medium,
but that either the Law is utterly Abolished, and so there is no Sin; for where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression; or it must be Allowed to require
the same Obedience that it did at its first Institution, and unto the same
degree. Thus much we thought needful to mention, that whilst we are declaring
our selves against those Errors which are commonly called Antinomian, the
worst Part of Real Antinomianism might not escape the mention of our Abhorring
it; which yet some of our Accusers are for.

The Tenth Error.
10. That Ministers of the Gospel ought not to propound the Offers of Salvation
unto all those to whom God calls them to Preach; seriously Inviting them to
Improve the Means of Grace, that they may be Saved; and assuring them in the
way of their Ministerial Duty of the Salvation of all such as believe in
Christ, because they want Ability to close with the Offer; and all shall not be
saved.

Our Opposition.
That tho Men want Ability to Believe Savingly, yet it is the Duty of Gospel
Ministers to make the Offer, and Testify unto them, That whoever Believes and
Repents, shall be Saved; and that it is the Peoples Duty to make use of their
Natural Faculties, with such External Means and Workings of the Spirit, as God
Affords them, that they may Believe, Repent, and be Saved.

Dr. Goodwin, in Vol. 4. Part 2. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. is very positive, That tho
Faith be a Difficult Work, yet we ought to use our Endeavors to Believe. As,
1: To cleanse our Hands and Hearts, taking heed of Hindrances and Impediments,
which may hinder God's working it, or Provoke him to leave off the Work: To
Refrain all ill Company -- and all Sins of what kind soever, which grieve the
Spirit. Thus the Apostle, Heb. 12.1. -- 2. Men may Endeavor to be Humbled for
their Sins, and take such Considerations into their Hearts, as may serve to
Humble them; which tho it is not Faith, nor Works, Faith yet leads to it, James
4.3 3. There are Duties and Ordinances God has appointed, in which to bring
our Hearts before him, James 4.8. -- And this also Men may do; they may come
unto God and Present their Souls before him by Prayer; by Hearing the Word, by
good Conference, by Reading, etc. -- But 5. Further, Souls humbled are to
attempt the Exercise of the very Act of Believing: That is, they are to take
Promises into their Thoughts, and to bring their Hearts to them, to look up to
Christ, and consider his Fullness, and attempt to lay hold upon him -- We have
an express place for this Heb. 4.11. -- v. 16. The Apostle bids them come to
the Throne of Grace, that they may obtain Mercy; those, that had not yet
obtained it, must come that they may obtain it. But you will say, We cannot
come: Why come, says he, to obtain Help it self, in the next Words. So Heb.
12.2. He Exhorts them to look to Jesus the Beginner of their Faith, as well as
the Finisher. And my Reasons why Men are to Endeavor, and Attempt the
Immediate Acts of Believing, are, 1. Because God commands Men to believe and to
come to Christ, 1 John 3.23. -- My Unability to do it aright, hinders not, nor
frees me from Attempting to do it, and Reaching as far as I can. -- 2. If
Ministers are to present Promises and Motives unto Men, then those
Considerations, Motives, etc. which the Ministers of the Word are to present to
Hearers and Humbled Souls to beget Faith in them, humbled Souls may, and ought
with Application to consider alone, and digest and Exercise Thoughts of Faith
about, Heb. 4.12. And tho it be true, that but some shall enter in, yet the
Promise is Indefinitely made to all, ver. 6. And upon that Ground, ver. 11. he
Exhorts all to Labor after Faith, to look up to Jesus, as the Author of Faith
-- And God does often Engraft true Thoughts of Faith upon the Notions we had
being Unbelievers, and changes them into true Thoughts of Faith, whilst we are
Thinking them.

Now herein also the Doctor kept to our Confession: For in Cap. 7.. 3. it is
thus. Man by his Fall having made himself Incapable of Life by that Covenant [
viz. of Works;] the Lord was pleased to make a Second, commonly called, the
Covenant of Grace, wherein He Freely Offers unto Sinners, Life and Salvation
by Jesus Christ, Requiring of Them, Faith in Him, that they may be Saved.

The Eleventh Error.
11. That by God's laying our Sins upon Christ he became every way as sinful as
we; and we every way as Righteous and Holy as He; and that therefore Persons
may expect to be Pardoned whilst they continue in a State of Unbelief and
Impenitence; and that continued Repentance and Holiness, are not in the Nature
of the Thing, nor by the Constitution of the Gospel necessary to our being
possessed of Eternal Life.

Our Opposition.
That we may deliver our true Sense in this great Point, we declare,

1. That our Sins were not laid upon Christ, as to make him every way as Sinful
as we,

2. That we are not every way as Righteous as Christ.

3. That none may expect to be Pardoned in a State of Unbelief,

4. That continued Repentance with Holiness, are necessary to our Possession of
Eternal Life.

To the First, That our Sins were not so laid upon Christ, as to make him every
way as sinful as we are. For, if Christ had been as completely, fully, and
every way as sinful as we are, he would have been Inherently sinful, and
Filthy, which cannot, without the Guilt of Blasphemy, be Asserted.

That it is expressly Affirmed by the Holy Ghost in Scripture. (1.) Typically, in
the Escape Goat, that all their Transgressions, in all their Sins, were put upon
Christ, Levit. 16.21, 22. And, (2.) In the Prophecy of Isa. 53.6. The Lord
has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all. And (3.) In the New Testament, The
Lord made him who knew no Sin, to be Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. and a Curse, Gal.
3.13. which we firmly believe to be true, and necessary to the Lord Jesus
Christ's making a True, Proper, and Full Satisfaction for our Sins to the Law,
and Punishing Justice of God; yet we do most sincerely declare,

1. That when it is said, Our Iniquities, all our Transgressions in all our Sins
were put upon Christ, it is not to be understood, as if Jesus Christ did
Actually commit those Sins, which were laid upon him; or that God did look upon
him under the Consideration of his being the Committer of them.

2. Nothing is more Absolutely true (as Dr. Owen expresses it, of Justif. p.
283.) Nothing is more Sacredly, or Assuredly Believed by us; than that Nothing
which Christ did or suffered, nothing that he undertook, or underwent, did, or
could constitute him Inherently, or thereon Personally a Sinner -- That Christ
should Admit of any thing of Sin, in himself, as it is absolutely inconsistent
with the Hypostatical Union; so it would render him unmeet for all other Duties
of his Office, Heb. 7.25, 26.

3. There can be no laying of our Sins on Christ, so as to make him Inherently
Polluted, or Morally Unclean in himself, but by a Physical, or Natural
Translation, or Transfusion of our Sin into him, for it would include an
Inclination in him to Sin, which as it is both Naturally and Spiritually
impossible; so is it Blasphemous to suppose; wherefore,

4. Our Sins were, in no other Sense laid upon Christ than by Imputation; and
touching the Imputation of our Sins to Christ, we farther declare.

1. That tho God himself has said Christ was made Sin, and a Curse for us, and
it is manifest, that 'twas by Imputation, yet as Dr. Goodwin, Vol. 3. of
Christ's Mediation, Lib. 5. cap. 1. page 195. We had need take them in a Right
Sense, or else they will be Blasphemy in our Thoughts. -- Although Christ was made
Sin, yet in that he was freely made so, therefore that Imputation stained not
him nor his Nature, but he Remained Holy, Undefiled, and Separate from Sinners,
wherefore as the Doctor goes on.

2. To free your Thoughts form the least Mistake, the Imputation of our Sins to
Christ, is not such as that whereby Adam's Sin was Imputed unto us. -- For tho
that Sin of his was but Imputedly made ours, yet so as we being One in Him, are
truly said to have sinned in him, Romans 5.12. and so it stained and depraved us,
his Posterity: But of Christ we must Abhor to think so. He was not made Sin in
Us, but for us. He was not in us, nor Descended from us, nor Sinned in us, as
we are in Adam Descended from him, and sinned in him.

3. There is (as Dr. Owen has it) a great Difference between the Imputation of
our Sin to Christ, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us: So
that he cannot be said to be made a Sinner by our Sin, as we are made Righteous
by his Righteousness. Dr. Goodwin gives this Reason for it: His Righteousness
is so Imputed unto us, as we by reason of that Covenant between God and Him,
may be said to have Fulfilled the Law in him, and the Law is said to be
fulfilled in us, because we were in him. But it cannot be said in any sense, He
was made Sin in us, but for us only. For, tho we were in him, yet not He in us.
The Root bears the Branches, and not the Branches the Root. So the Doctor. To
which we add, That Christ was a Public Person to us, but not we to him: And
the Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made Sin for us, we made Righteousness [not
for, but] in Him.

4. We hold no other Imputation of our Sins to Christ, than what is commonly
received by Protestants, and Inculcated by our Ablest Divines at Home and
Abroad in their Writings against Papists and Socinians, which is, That by the
Imputation of our Sins unto Christ, he became Accountable unto God for them; He
was made under that Law we violated, and our Guilt was charged upon him; yea,
our Sins were the Proper Meritorious Cause of his Sufferings, and his
Sufferings a proper Punishment for our Sins, as a Learned Divine of the Church
of England, Dr. South.
in his 3d. Vol. of Sermons, p. 488. God, in the whole Procedure of Christ's
Sufferings, must be considered as a Judge Exacting, and Christ as a Person
paying down a Recompense or Satisfaction for Sin. For, tho Christ was as Pure
and Undefiled with the least Spot of Sin, as Purity and Innocence it self, yet
he was pleased to make himself the Greatest Sinner in the World, by Imputation,
and rendering himself a Surety Responsible for our Debts. For as it is said, 2
Cor. 5.21. He who knew no Sin, was made Sin for us. When the Justice of God was
lifting up the Sword of Vengeance over our Heads, Christ snatched us away from
the Blow, and substituted his own Body in our Room, to receive the whole Stroke
of that Dreadful Retribution Inflicted by the Hand of an Angry Omnipotence.
Thus far this Learned Doctor. In opposition hereunto, Bellarmine says, That by
the Imputation of Sin unto Christ, he must be Polluted; and thence be
Denominated a Sinner in every kind: To which the Answer of Dr. Owen, p. 277. is
full. This would (says he) be true, if our Sins could be Communicated unto
Christ by Transfusion, so as to be his Inherently. But their being so only by
Imputation, gives no countenance to any such Pretense. However, there is a
Notion of Legal Uncleanness, where there is no Inherent Defilement, Numb. 16.7,
8.

The Second, That we are not every way as Righteous as Christ.

That we are made Righteous in Christ by Imputation of his Righteousness unto
us, is what we firmly Believe. And whereas the Jesuit objects against this
Doctrine, That then we are as Righteous as Christ himself, because we are
Righteous with his Righteousness. Dr. Owen with good Reason replies. To say We
are as Righteous as Christ, is to make a Comparison between the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, and our Personal Righteousness, if the Comparison be
of Things of the same kind. But this is Foolish and Impious; for
notwithstanding all our Personal Righteousness, we are sinful; He knew no Sin.
And, if the Comparison be between Christ's Personal Inherent Righteousness, and
Righteousness Imputed unto us: Inhaesion, and Imputation being things of diverse
kinds, it is fond, and of no Consequence. Christ was Actively Righteous, we are
Passively so. When our Sin was Imputed unto Him, He did not thereby become a
Sinner, as we are; Actively and Inherently a Sinner, but Passively only, and in
God's Estimation. As He was made Sin, yet knew no Sin, so we are made
Righteous, yet are sinful in our selves. Of Justify, p. 509. or as Dr. Crew of
Justif. Ed. 2. p. 96. We are as Righteous, Christ need to make us before God.

3. That none may expect to be Pardoned in a State of Unbelief and Impenitence.

We have, by referring our selves to the Assemblies Confession, constantly
owned thus much, as well as by our Preaching and Writings. In the Confession of
the Assembly it is said, cap. 15.. 3. Although Repentance be not to be rested in,
as any Satisfaction for Sin, or any Cause of the Pardon thereof, which is the
Act of God's Free Grace in Christ, yet is it of such Necessity to all Sinners,
that none may expect Pardon without it.

The Fourth, That continued Repentance and Holiness are necessary to our
Possession of Eternal Life, for without it we cannot see God.

Our Confession at the Savoy fully Asserts, cap. 15.. 4. That Repentance is to
be continued through the whole Course of our Lives, upon the account of the
Body of Death, and the Motions thereof. And in cap. 13.. 1. They who are
effectually called -- are also further Sanctified, Really and Personally -- by
his Word and Spirit dwelling in them; the Dominion of the whole Body of Sin is
destroyed, and the several Lusts thereof are more and more weakened and
mortified; and they more and more Quickened and Strengthened in all Saving
Graces, to the Practice of all true Holiness, without which no Man shall see
the Lord.

These Things we Offer to be considered, that it may appear, to the Conviction
of all, that our Soundness in the Faith, and Agreement with the Reformed
Churches is so very Conspicuous and Manifest, that it cannot but Surprise and
Astonish the Vnprejudiced to hear any Accusing us, and move them to conclude,
That our Accusers themselves believe not the Truth of their own Charge; but
have brought it against us, to the End they may the more effectually divert
from an observing how, and after what manner they insinuate and spread their
own Erroneous Opinions.

In this Apprehension many will be confirmed when they consider, that the
Matters charged upon us, are not only without the least color of Reason, but
most contrary to our known and avowed Principles. Nor has there been any thing
offered, that we know of, to countenance this Accusation, but the raising
Another, which has as little Truth, and no more ground for it, than the former;
which is, That we Encourage Ignorant Persons, and Men of no good Report to
enter on the Ministry, who make it their Business to Preach up the Errors
charged upon us, which we would never have done, had we not favored their
Notions: To which we Reply.

1. That touching Men's entering on the Ministry, we yield no more than other
Protestant Churches, such as the Churches of Scotland, Holland and England,
have hitherto done, viz. That Men of Sound Knowledge in the Substantials of
Religion; Discreet, Holy, and Humble; whose Hearts God Inclines to the Work of
the Ministry, tho they have not had the Advantages of Eminency in the Academick
Learning, or any considerable skill in Philosophy, yet when the State of the
Churches, and some special Circumstances in regard to their Opportunity of
Service and Usefulness, require it, may enter on this Holy Work in an Orderly
way with Approbation.

2. We do also declare, That they who enter on the Ministry, ought ordinarily
to be endued with a competent Measure of Learning, (which is necessary for the
Defense of Truth against subtle Adversaries) as well as with other Ministerial
Gifts: And that they may obtain this Qualification, they ought to use those
Helps that are most proper in order thereunto. In this we Agree with Dr.
Goodwin; who in Vol. 4. of Church Governm. L. 7. Cap. 3. says. There is a
Generation of Men that are against Acquired Knowledge; or that which is sought
out by Study, or received from others; and would have all Infused. Now
consider, Timothy had the main and chief of his Knowledge this way, 1 Timothy
3.14. Continue thou in the Things thou have Learned -- Knowing of whom thou
have Learned them. He had Learned them of Paul. -- Daniel, tho a Prophet,
understood by Books, cap. 9.2. And whereas some Men are for Preaching only
Extempore, and without Study, Paul bids Timothy Meditate and Study, and give
his Mind wholly to these Things.

3. Our Sense in these Particulars, is fully delivered in the late Heads of
Agreement; to which those of us, who Assented thereunto, do still Adhere, as we
do also, to the whole and every Branch of it, notwithstanding the many Reports
to the contrary, made by them, who have represented us as Violaters of it; who
know how easily they might remove what has of late hindered our meeting with
them. For, by declaring their dislike of those Errors, which, under the Covert
of their Names have been, and still are spread Abroad; and by Asserting the
Doctrine of the Reformed in the Articles of Christ's Satisfaction; and our
Justification by his Righteousness, as Explained by our greatest Divines, and
as sent unto us by some Eminent Brethren of their own Number, they would have
laid a good Foundation for a Composure.

4. We do also declare, That as we count none meet to Dispense the Oracles of
God to others, who are not themselves Qualified for Communion in all
Ordinances; in like manner their joining themselves to a particular Church of
Christ, would be a good Expedient to prevent Ignorant and Rash Intruders into
the Ministry; seeing then, if any Unfit for this Holy Office, should presume to
enter upon it, they might be Proceeded against in a Church Way; which could be
no sooner signified to them, amongst whom these Ignorant Persons Preach, than
they would meet with Just Discouragement from their Godly and more Prudent
Hearers: And we do esteem it the Duty of Particular Churches, and their
Officers, to take special Care, that none of their Communion, who are not
Qualified, do enter on this Work, without their Orderly Dealing with them, for
so great a Presumption.

5. We cannot be Just to the Truth as to Matter of Fact, nor to our selves,
unless we declare, That notwithstanding the severe Charges of this Nature, cast
upon us, no Scandalous Persons have gone out from amongst us into the Ministry;
and since this Liberty, there have more Unqualified Persons broke out of the
Congregations of every other Persuasion, than out of ours, in this City. And
the true Reason why the most of them, who thrust themselves into the Ministry,
Assume the Name of Congregational, is not that they were of us, or went out by
our Encouragement, but because such are the Circumstances of Dissenting
Churches at this time, as makes them Congregational, although our Accusers do now
so vehemently cry down the Name. And we have been, and now are, so Dissatisfied
with such Men's Intruding themselves into this Holy Function, that when such
from the Country made Application to us for our Countenance, we Unanimously
agreed, That none, who gave not good Satisfaction of their Abilities for the
Ministry, should have any Encouragement from us. In a Word.

6. We having freely delivered our True Sentiments in these Points, as we have
fully declared against the aforesaid Errors in Doctrinals; so we do hereby
express our Dislike, and Witness against all Ignorant and Scandalous Persons
entering on the Ministry: And we do, in the Bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Pray and Beseech all such as fear God, That they give not the least
Encouragement to the Preaching of Men, either Ignorant or Erroneous in the
Great Articles of Faith, or Scandalous in their Lives and Conversations, or
otherwise Unmeet for this Holy Employment, lest they bring the Guilt of these
Men's Sins on their own Souls.

FINIS.

