LICENSED,

March 8. 1690. J. FRASER.

THE MEMOIRES OF Monsieur DEAGEANT: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added A Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign.

Faithfully Translated out of the French Original.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Baily, 1690.

THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Memoires need no other plausible Character to recommend them to
the favor of the English Reader, than that they contain matters of singular
Importance, managed with all imaginable Secresy and Art; whereof this Nation
had no small concern then, and may have no less reason to be informed of now:
there is the more credit to be given them, in regard they were written by the
Person that was the chief Contriver and Manager of all the Intrigues and Plots
that were then formed to ruin the Protestant Interest in France, and to
supplant the same in England; and for the particular information of the
Cardinal of Richelieu, when he entered upon the public administration of the
Affairs of France, whose private Favorite the Author was. We have two
illustrious Instances of the indefatigable Industry of the Romish party in
those Days hardly to be paralelled elsewhere; one in the Person of a French
Hugonot Minister, who being a Man of Intrigue and Ambition, and having credit
with some great Men of his Party, was prevailed on by the fair Promises, and
plausible Insinuations of the Romish Emissaries, to abjure the Protestant
Religion, and embrace that of Rome, and yet obtained a Dispensation from Rome
to continue in the Prosession of the Protestant Religion, and Exercise of his
Pastoral Function toward his Congregation for several Years, on purpose to
betray all their Counsels and Designs. The other is of the Duke of Buckingham's
being reconciled to the Church of Rome, notwithstanding his continuing
afterward in the Profession of the Religion of the Church of England. The
whole Negotiation of the Archbishop of Embrun, who came privately over into
England about the latter end of King James the First his Reign, to obtain a
Toleration for Popery, you will find at large at the end of the Book; together
with some Letters that past betwixt the Duke of Buckingham and the said
Archbishop, in relation to that Design.

Besides, this Book in the Original is become very scarce, and hardly to be
found at Paris; and I know that it has been sold for a Pistole, when it could
be met with.

The Memoires of Monsieur Deageant, containing the most secret Negotiations and
Affairs in France, etc.
SInce I never designed to commit to Writing any thing concerning the
remarkable Occurrences in the Affairs of this Kingdom, that happened during the
time of my Employment therein; after my retirement from the Court in the Year,
1619. For several Reasons I burnt all the Papers that might be of use to me in
preserving the Memory of those Passages that I had seen and been conversant in,
because I believed that I should never have any further occasion for them,
especially since I had firmly resolved for the future to lay aside all Thoughts
of being engaged in Matters of the like nature. Insomuch that it will be
impossible for me to make a Relation so perfect and exact as I could wish,
which I have been nevertheless commanded to do by my Lord Cardinal of
Richelieu, and whereas I can refuse nothing on behalf of his Eminency that lies
in my Power to perform, without transgressing by a manifest ingratitude against
those Obligations that are common to me with all the rest of my Countrymen, as
also against those particular Engagements that I lie under for many Favors
received by me from his incomparable Generosity; I would therefore make it my
most humble Request to him, graciously to admit the same Reasons that have
formerly passed for a lawful Excuse on occasion of the like Commands that his
Lordship has formerly been pleased to lay upon me.

That I may not waste Paper to no purpose, and to avoid tediousness in the
description of those things that are commonly known, or have been already
brought to light. I presume his Eminency will be satisfied if I only produce
here those Particulars that my Memory can recollect, which have not as yet been
mentioned by any that I know, and whereof (as I believe) few Persons have been
informed.

About the end of the preceding Reign, I began to be employed as well in the
managing of Dispatches, as in the Transaction of some important Affairs, but
because I was afterward discharged from that Office, and I have since made but
little or no Reflection thereon, I am not able to relate any thing very
considerable; although in reading what may be Written concerning those Times,
or in discoursing with any that shall have a mind to compose an History of
them, I could give sufficient Light as to those Particulars that fall within
the compass of my Knowledge, of which there might be some doubt.

Amongst other Employments at that time, it was my business to make Private
Payments to several Persons as well French Men as Foreigners that served the
late King in his Grand Design, which he was just about putting in Execution at
that very instant when he was unfortunately snatched away from France by that
execrable and ever to be deplored Attempt. And because, as I imagined, he would
not that any of his Ministers of State, not even the Sr. Beringuew the Elder,
who was his Treasurer as to his more Private and Domestic Expenses, should
know all the particular Circumstances of this Design, His Majesty would often
in Playing, put the Gold that belonged to the Game into his Pocket, and
secretly convey it into my hands; sometimes also I was commanded to go and
receive certain Sums of Money from Monsieur de Villeroy, who in giving them to
me never failed to tell me, You may assure the King that I have not enquired
how you are to dispose of this Cash: By which I judged that he knew nothing of
my Employment.

During that time Monsieur de Lesdiguiers being come to Court, the late King
Communicated his Designs to him, and told him that he intended to give him the
Command of an Army, which being joined with the Forces of the Duke of Savoy
should make an Inroad into Italy, and that he was resolved to appear in Person
at the head of Another, that was prepared to Invade Flanders and Germany, where
some Enterprises were to be performed on certain considerable Places: Moreover
his Majesty was pleased to show him the Platforms thereof, and required all
those that brought them, and were employed in these Affairs, to declare in his
presence the means that they propounded as most effectual to put them in
Execution.

Monsieur de Lesdiguiers approved of these measures that his Majesty had taken,
and declared that they might prove successful, and that a trial ought to be
made; but he was of Opinion, that the King should lead in Person his principal
Forces into Spain, the Conquest whereof he judged to be more easy and
profitable than that which his Majesty undertook; and thus (said he) by
wounding the Beast to the Heart, you may overthrow him, and having subdued him,
you may be assured that all that depend on, or are protected by him, will soon
after fall under the Power of your Arms: Whereas on the contrary as long as the
Spaniards shall remain in praise at home, they will be always able to raise
Obstacles and great Obstructions against all the Enterprises that you may
elsewhere attempt on the Estates that are under their Dominion, or those whom
they shall think fit to defend. He added further, that with an Army of thirty
Thousand Men well disciplined and maintained complete, he might perform this
Conquest, that there would be no Sieges of Places to stop his Progress, and
that there could be but three Battles fought at most, in which his Majesty
(according to all appearance) would obtain the Victory, since his Soldiers
that were Old and well Exercised in Martial Discipline, would encounter with
those that were raw and that had very little Experience in Arms, and whose
Hands were weakened, and their Courage rendered effeminate with Peace, which
they had so long enjoyed in Spain.

The greatest difficulty that seemed to oppose this Advice, and which has been
always objected, whenever a Proposal was made to carry any Forces into Spain,
consisted in the want of Victuals and other things necessary, proceeding from
the Barrenness of most part of the Countries through which they must pass: But
Monsieur de Lesdiguiers made his Majesty sensible that this defect might be
supplied, by causing the Army to be attended with a sufficient number of
Vessels or Carriages laden with all sorts of Provisions requisite for Men and
Horses, and there were certain Persons that would engage to furnish them
therewith whithersoever they should march by Sea or Land, provided that the
Road might be kept open and free, which ought also to be done for their own
Security.

The late Duke of Savoy was one of the chief Incendiaries of this War, he
pretended that the Estates that belonged to the Spaniards in Italy might be
subdued with a great deal of ease; and for his part he made thesedemands, that
he should have the Possession of Bresse, which he called the Little Meadow;
that he should not be molested in making himself Master of Geneva; that he
should be assisted in Conquering the Franche County; and that the Marriage
should be concluded, which was afterward solemnized: The King agreed to this
last Proposition, but to none of the others, since he did not intend to give
him so much as one Foot of Ground on this side the Mountains. On the contrary
his Majesty desired to have Savoy, and to extend the Dominions of this Duke
further in Italy, by causing him to be Proclaimed King of Lombardy, and by this
means to satisfy his Ambition that aspired to the Royal Dignity. There were
Articles drawn up between them to this Effect, which might be retrieved, and
thereby the particulars of this Treaty might more fully appear.

In the midst of so many great Designs that caused all Europe to be Astonished,
and in the most flourishing Prosperity of the Affairs of this Great Monarch,
the Rochellers had the boldness to undertake an Attempt on the City of Brovage,
and put themselves in a condition to Execute it: their Project was to cause two
Ships full of Armed Men, to get into the Harbor of the said City at break of
Day, who under color of Merchants that had Goods to Unload, were to seize on
the little Door of the Port, which for the convenience of Traffic was usually
opened early in the Morning, some hours before the great Gates: from thence
they intended to rush into the City, to make themselves Masters thereof, and to
put to the Sword all they met, the Rochellers having promised speedily to send
them a Supply of Soldiers, that might be sufficient to assist them to obtain
the entire Possession of the Place, and to maintain it. According to this
Agreement the two Ships being Arrived at the Port at the hour prefixed, found
themselves disappointed, for the Gate was not unlocked all that Morning, by
reason that the Governor of the Place had the Night before, received an
Account by a Courier of the execrable Murder Committed on the Person of the
late King: Insomuch that these Undertakers having waited till Eight of the
Clock, and fearing lest they should be discovered, were forced to retire, and
not long after, were informed of the cause that the Gates were not opened. An
Ingenious Statesman of Rochel, who acted in this Design, and was on Board one
of the two Vessels, being some Years after, through my persuasion, converted to
the Catholic Religion, revealed this Plot to me, and besides gave other very
good Advice, that has since proved advantageous to the Service of the King now
happily Reigning: He also proposed a way to surprise Rochel, which might have
succeeded, if it had been well managed, as shall be shown in its due place, but
the glory of Conquering this Proud and in appearance Invincible City was
reserved for his Majesty and the Prudent and Generous Conduct of his Principal
Minister of State, who in personal Abilities and Success, has far surpassed
all those that ever had any share in the Administration of the Affairs of this
Kingdom.

In the Year, 1615. A little after the departure of the King in his Journey to
Guienne, one Mrs. Holeman an Ancient Widow came to enquire for me at my House,
to desire me to go and discourse with a certain Nun, who had some Matters of
Consequence to impart to me; whereupon offering to go along with her
immediately, she brought me to this Religious Person, who told me privately
that although I did not know her, and she was not conversant in the Affairs of
the World, nevertheless knowing that I could discreetly manage one of such
importance as this that now happened, she committed it to my Care, assuring me
that one named Goillier, commonly called Moutorier, who pretended to be a
Physician, and whom she described to me to be a perfect Atheist, given up to
all manner of Vices and Debauchery, of a Ruddy Complexion, Red Hair, of a tall
Stature, and of a robust and strong Body, aged about Fifty Years, in a mean
Habit, wearing amongst other Clothes, an old black Serge Cloak dawbed with
abundance of Laces, had a Design upon the Life of Monsieur the King's Brother:
and that if I did not soon find out some means to prevent this wicked Attempt,
it were to be feared lest this vile Wretch should give the fatal blow; however,
she charged me to proceed with this Caution, that no mention should be made of
her; otherwise she would deny that she ever told me any thing, and I would be
the cause of many Misfortunes that might ensue. This was sufficient to puzzle
and disturb a more acute and discerning Brain than mine; insomuch that I
remained very much perplexed and confused with the thoughts of this Matter and
in enquiring into the means how to acquit my self well therein without trouble.
I considered that to hinder so pernicious a Design from taking Effect, it was
necessary to discover it to the Council that was left at Paris, that in so
doing enquiry would be made into the grounds of the Report, that I should be
thereupon urged to give an account whence it came, that in declaring it I
should act directly contrary to the prohibition, and should run the risque of
being left destitute and discredited as the Party had protested to me, that in
concealing her Name, I might be esteemed as a Calumniator, or a Person void of
Understanding, and that on the other side if I should be altogether silent, the
horrid Fact might be Committed, and I might be one day accused for neglecting
an opportunity of diverting so lamentable a Disaster, and might also thereby
incur a very great Danger. Amidst these and a many other such like
Considerations too tedious here to rehearse, I thought it convenient to feign,
that about Nine of the Clock at Night, when I was gone home, as I was standing
on the Threshold of my Door, and talking with some Neighbors, I was accosted
by an unknown Person who spoke thus, I have sought for you several Hours upon
an extraordinary occasion, and then related the same Particulars, whereof the
Religious Woman had informed me: which I caused to repeat often, that I might
remember, and afterward Write them down, he added that he could not discover
himself for certain Reasons, but however if I neglected to take care of this
Matter, he would accuse me hereafter before the King.

The next day early in the Morning I went to seek Mr. Arnaud Intendant of the
Treasury, who was one of those that were left for the Council at Paris, to whom
I represented the passages of this counterfeit rencounter, and propounded them
to him as true: We resolved together, to Cause the Council to be forthwith
assembled, to deliberate on the report that I had made: Who all agreed to lay a
charge on me in the first place, secretly to give notice to the Principle
Attendants about the Prince, to take an extraordinary care of his Person, and
Secondly to cause the Man that had been described to me, to be apprehended if I
could find him there, to this end three Officers were deputed to assist me: His
Highness then lodged in the Hostel de Montmorency, and had for his Guard one of
the Companies of his Majesty's Regiment of Guards, under the Command of
Monsieur de Mauson: He was the first that I met, whom I acquainted with the
Orders I had received, and as I was giving him a Description of the Person, he
suddenly told me, It is above eight days ago since this Rascal would have
intruded himself into my Company, which I would never permit, because he had a
very bad Physiognomy, and this Morning I saw the Cooks drive him out of the
Kitchen with sticks. We went thither immediately to hear what news we could;
the Cooks informed us that some days were passed since this base Fellow came
into the Kitchen, and drawing near to the fire, said that the extreme necessity
to which he was reduced, constrained him to beg somewhat of them to eat.

All that day and the next I remained in the Prince's Apartments, and not
having seen the Man, I repaired to the Nun, to whom I gave an account of my
Proceedings, complaining that not being able to find the Person whom she had
represented to me, it would be thought that I had imposed on the Council; she
answered that I was not diligent enough in searching after him, and that the
first time that I went into the Hostel de Montmorency with the Soldiers he
perceived us, and suspecting lest we should have an intent to seize him, as we
entered at one door, went out at another, and was gone to hide himself in the
Arsenal, where a Woman that Lodged in a little House that was above the Dancing
Hall, had conveyed him into a Garret.

Upon this advice, a Nephew of the Captain of the Guard, who was his Lieutenant
and (as I think) named Adomville, a Person of great Courage and Resolution, was
ordered to attend, and to go with a certain Number of Soldiers at Ten of the
Clock at Night to seize this Man in the Arsenal: He came and knocked at the
Woman's Door, who refused to open it, though she was commanded in the Kings name,
insomuch that they broke it, and being come up into the Chamber wherein they
were told that this miscreant lay, they found him under a great consternation,
holding his Breeches in his hand, with one Leg therein, not being able to put
in the other, he was so much affrighted, and moreover without saying so much as
one word to him, he cried out, I never had any design upon the Life of the
King, nor upon that of the Prince. The Lieutenant of the Guard Advancing, said,
why do you tell us this? We do not only think of you, we do not search for you.
And in taking his Breeches to help him to put them on, he laid his hand on a
great Knife in the form of a Baggonet, the edge whereof was exceeding sharp,
being pointed like the Tongue of a Serpent and could cut on both sides, this
was hid within the folds of his Breeches that were very large and stuffed with
Hair, as the Fashion was to wear them sometime before; another Knife of the
same sort was also found on the other side, and being demanded what he intended
to do with them, he repeated the abovesaid words, that it was not his intention
to kill the King nor the Prince. They searched his Pockets, out of which was
taken a Bottle filled with a certain composition that was made of the most
subtle and penetrating sort of Poison, which the said Lieutenant immediately
perceived, and told him saying, you cannot have all these tools but for some
ill purpose. No (replied he) I would entreat you to believe that I never had a
Design to Poison the King nor the Prince, but being by Profession a Physician,
I make use of these Druggs, to prepare good Medicines; and as for the Knives
that you found, I always carry them about me, because being poor and indigent I
am forced to Beg in the Convents, where I receive Charity, and have occasion
to cut the Bread and Victuals that are given to me. He was carried to the
Bastile, where the Bottle was exposed to view; which certainly contained a rank
and subtle Poison, and was made so that it might be easily taken out. The
Council gave notice to his Majesty of what had passed, and desired to know his
Commands thereupon: In the mean time this Wretch laid violent hands upon
himself in the Bastile, as I have been since informed. The second time that I
saw the Nun, she advised me also to declare that the Garrison of Soissons had
undertaken an enterprise, on a certain Night to seize on the Treasurers that
lodged in the quarter of the Celestins at Paris, with their Goods and every
thing of value that they had in their Houses: The Plot was thus laid, a
sufficient number of Men unknown without any Arms, but their Swords, were to be
introduced into the City, and in the Evening appointed for the Execution, a
Boat privately Laden with Arms, was to be brought on the River to the Port St.
Paul, which about midnight were to be taken by the said Persons, who having
accomplished their design, were to retire through the Mell with their Prisoners
and Booty, and to repair to the other side of the Bulwark, where Horses were
prepared ready for them, to carry all to Soissons, under the Guard of a
Detachment of Troopers ordered to attend for that purpose. Monsieur de
Liancourt Governor of Paris, who received an intimation of this project,
discovered the truth thereof, and prevented it from taking effect: I shall
leave it to the judgment of those that are more capable than I am, to determine
where this Religious Woman had these two pieces of Intelligence, since I never
had the Curiosity nor Ability to penetrate into this matter.

A little after the time that the Prince was Arrested, and diverse of the
Princes and Nobility had withdrawn themselves to Soissons, with an intent to
make War; a certain Person whose name could not be known, left at the House of
a Gentleman, who had the Honor sometimes to attend the King, and in whom his
Majesty was pleased to confide, a Packet containing three Letters, one for the
Queen Mother, the other for the Princes at Soissons, and the third for this
Private Gentleman; they were all three open, written in a fair French
Character, without Date or Superscription, and in a good Style, though some
words had a little relish of the Cloister, the two Principal contained several
weighty Reasons enforced with passages of the Holy Scriptures, and with
Examples taken out of profane History; the Packet was fastened with Spanish
Wax, without the Impression of any Seal; The Letter directed to the Gentleman,
charged him with a commination of great Penalties in case he neglected it, to
cause that for the Princes to be sent to them by what means he thought
convenient, and to deliver the other to the Queen Mother with his own hands,
entreating her to read it in private, and deliberately to consider the Contents
without communicating it to any, especially to the Party that was more
particularly concerned therein, and after she had perused it, that she would be
pleased to restore it to the Bearer.

The Letter written to the Princes, contained several very sound and cogent
Arguments, to convince them that their Arms were unjust, that they would give
an opportunity to Foreigners, that were Enemies to the K^^gdom to endeavor to
destroy it, and would furnish the Protestants with a pretense vigorously to
Prosecute their Designs, to the great damage of the Catholic Religion, and of
the State; but if these considerations and those of their own safety could not
prevail with them, to return to their duty; they would certainly perish in
their Attempts, because God had taken a particular Care of the King, and
promised to Crown the innocence and candor of his disposition with good
success.

As for the Letter directed to the Queen Mother, it represented to her the many
Favors she had received from the Divine Goodness, the little Care she took to
demean herself according to the intent of them, and the neglect and aversness
she showed to see much good Council that has been offered to her, to follow
the pernicious Advice of certain Parasites, that had no other end but to
advance their own Private Interests and Fortunes, to the ruin of the State, and
even of her Royal Person, whom they betrayed: The Particulars were not
specified, but it was apparent that the Marshal D'Ancre and his Wife were
principally aimed at in these Reflections, several miscarriages in the
Government of Public Affairs were also enumerated, and the disorders that had
already happened, as also those that might be expected, unless they were
speedily prevented.

If my Memory fails me not, these were the Remedies propounded in this Letter,
in the first place the Queen was exhorted to augment her Devotions in Divine
Service, and to the Practice of good Works, to cause Prayers to be frequently
made, especially at Paris, to give order that young Children of Twelve Years
old and under should be exercised therein, and that a Solemn Procession should
be made, and to take care that the Holy Sacrament be better Administered, than
it has been in the most part of the Towns and Villages of this Kingdom, and
that by this means God would divert the evils with which she was threatened in
particular, otherwise she would suddenly feel the effects of his displeasure;
it was moreover alleged that in observing the abovementioned directions,
chiefly those relating to the Holy Sacrament, she would soon see the mavelous
Fruits thereof throughout all France.

Secondly, The Tenor of this Letter was to persuade the Queen without any
farther delay, to permit the King to Act in the Administration of the
Government, for this was a thing that he expected, though he did not seem to
desire it; but it she refused to do it, this alone would be sufficient to
involve her in extreme troubles and Calamities, and to overturn the Kingdom
which was already embroiled with commotions in all Paris apparently under
pretense that the King was ^ept from the knowledge of the Affairs of the State.

The third Remedy proposed, was to send back into their own Country the two
occasions of scandal, who were the cause of the general discontent, and served
as a color to the Insurrection of the Nobility and People; that there were
good reasons to persuade them to retire, viz. That for the future they might
not only be permitted to enjoy the great Possessions that they had acquired,
but might also have more given them, that the King would willingly grant this,
and that thus these two Persons might happily make use of their good Fortune,
whereas on the contrary, if the Queen should obstinately persist in upholding
them, she would 'ere long with regret see them miserably perishing in her
presence, and falling into a condition that she has not yet foreseen, would
prove an example of the vengeance of Almighty God, who has threatened that the
Child shall rise up against the Mother, and the Mother against the Child, to
the great detriment of the Nation, and to the manifest Peril of Religion
throughout all Europe, I remember that at the end of the Letter there was this
Passage, that in case the Queen took up a resolution to follow these wholesome
Admonitions and Councels, the Person that gave them, would apply himself more
particularly to her Majesty, and would lay down such methods for the easy
performance thereof, that the Success of these Affairs should far surpass the
expectation of the most judicious and clear-cited Politicians.

As soon as the Packet was delivered to the Gentleman to whom it was directed,
he brought it to the King, who commanded him to read it in his presence, being
assisted only with Monsieur de Luines: his Majesty thought fit that the Letter
for the Princess should be detained, and that the other for the Queen Mother,
should be carried to her, without declaring that he had had any Information
thereof. The Bearer acquainted her Majesty that he had a Paper of great
Importance to show her and that it was desired to be kept Secret, whereupon she
ordered him to attend her with it at Supper-time, when she would retire alone
into her little Closet, there she caused it to be read, and as they were almost
at the end, the King come to visit the Queen, she took that opportunity to keep
the Letter, saying that she would finish the perusal thereof, and take it into
consideration at Night as she went to Bed, and would restore it the next
Morning. It has been since reported, that it was given into the hands of her
Confessor, and afterward into those of Madam d'Ancre where it remained.

Some time had passed since the King declared his Opinion to those Counselors
in whom he could chiefly confide, and signified how much he was displeased at
the form of Government then used, especially at the little regard that was had
to his Person, and because they would not suffer him to interpose in any part
of the Important Transactions of his Kingdom that had revolted in several
Places. And diverse Methods were already proposed to provide a Remedy against
these Disorders, but because it was most certain that his Majesty inclined to
try the most gentle means rather than to proceed to Extremities, the Bearer of
the Letter received a great charge to entreat the Queen Mother (as he did as
much as possibly he could) to weigh the Reasons therein contained, to endeavor
to induce her to embrace the wholesome Advice that was offered to her, for the
King was persuaded, that if she could but once resolve to remove the Marshal
d'Ancre and his Wife, she would readily hearken to such Proposals as should be
judged most convenient for the Regulation of the Affairs of the State.

Although the Letter produced not the desired Effect with Respect to the
Queen Mother, yet it wrought otherwise with the King, for it exasperated his
Spirit, and animated him to consider more than he had done formerly; how to
find out proper Expedients as well to stop the course of those Commotions that
were already raised, and threatened to overwhelm the Nation, as to take the
Reins of the Government of his Kingdom in his own Hands, and to Establish good
Rules for the Administration of Public Affairs, that were hitherto managed
altogether by the Passions and particular Interests of the Marshal d'Ancre; who
though he came not into repute, but through the means of the great Influence
his Wife had obtained over the Queen Mother; nevertheless would not permit her
Majesty any longer to have a share in the Government, nay presumed so far as to
give orders and to dispose of several things without giving an account or so
much as speaking to her thereof.

Several Conferences were privately holden in the Kings presence on this
subject by Persons who were so much the less to be suspected, because they were
then in little or no Esteem: It may be affirmed as a truth that his Majesty in
all these Consultations expressed an ardent desire to take upon himself the
Government of his Kingdom, and seemed to be highly offended that they continued
to keep him at a distance, and strove to render him more and more contemptible,
insomuch that he incessantly urged his particular Friends (to take such
Measures as they should think most proper, to satisfy his desire, and speedily
to put them in Execution: several Methods were thereupon proposed, of all which
none judged with so much Prudence, so discreetly managed the Secret, nor
proceeded with so much constancy and resolution in bringing the Matter to
perfection, as his Majesty.

The first way that was tried according to his Advice was taken from the means
that had been exhibited to the Queen Mother in the above mentioned Letter, viz.
to cause the Marshal d'Ancre and his Wife to retire into Italy, upon Condition
that they should not only enjoy all the Goods that they had acquired in France,
but should also receive more from his Majesty: The Bishop of Carcassone who was
then at Court with other Deputies of Languedoc, was under color employed
herein, and without knowing the Kings Design, was persuaded to take an
opportunity to discourse the Queen in Private, and in acquainting her with the
Circumstances of his Negotiation, to lay down such Reasons as might prevail
with her to consent to this retreat, and to represent the apparent
Inconveniences that would otherwise ensue: He discharged this trust very
prudently, having urged such cogent and pathetical Arguments to the Queen,
which she afterward repeated to Madam d'Ancre, that both seemed to be inclined
to yield thereto: and from that time the latter began to convey part of her
Goods to Florence, and to cause almost all her Movables to be packed up, in
order to be sent after them the same way: But as for the Marshal, the King was
informed, that he thought himself arrived to that height of Power, that none
durst attempt any thing against him, and that with the Assistance of Spain
which he had solicited, he might be in a Capacity to usurp part of the
Kingdom; therefore he arrogantly rejected this wholesome Proposition; and it was
then reported that he used such scornful Expressions to his Wife and some of
his Confederates, that have since quitted his Interests, as if he intended to
show to what degree of Grandeur Fortune alone was able to exalt a Man.

Before it was thought fit to proceed to extremities and violent ways to effect
the Change that was desired by the King, and which the most part of his
Subjects waited for with great impatience, a debate arose, whether his Majesty
should openly declare to the Queen his Mother, that he intended to take care of
the Government of his Kingdom himself, and for the future to cause all Affairs
of the State to be transacted according to his Directions and good Councels,
and should immediately Command the Marshal d'Ancre and his Wife to depart into
their own Country: But for as much as all the Royal Power was then in their
Hands and only the Name of a King remained to his Majesty, and in regard that
by reason of the inordinate Ambition of the Marshal and his Wife, his Majesty
and the State would be exposed to great danger in taking this course, it was
resolved to find out some other means that might be more safe.

Diverse Expedients being afterward propounded, at last it was agreed to
examine which of these two ought to be chosen, either that the King should give
orders to some of his faithful Friends to kill the Marshal, and to confiscate
the Goods of his Wife, or to send her to Florence, or otherwise to impeach them
in Parliament: the King and most of them that had the Honor to be of his
Council in this occasion, did not approve of the first Method, but concluded to
make use of the latter, and so much the rather, because that besides that it
was without Violence and according to the ordinary Rules of Justice, his
Majesty was assured that in the Papers of the Marshal and his Wife, amongst
other things, sufficient Evidence would be found to prove the secret
Correspondence that they had maintained with Foreigners to the Damage of the
State: Whereupon the King resolved to cause the said Marshal d'Ancre to be
Arrested, and immediately to be committed with his Wife into the Custody of the
Parliament in order to their Trial; and his Majesty intended at the same time
to entreat the Queen his Mother to vouchsafe to permit him to take the
Government of his Kingdom upon himself, and to endeavor to rescue it from that
eminent Danger wherein it was fallen through the pernicious Councils of the
Marshal and his Wife, and by the means of the outrageous and insatiable
Ambition. And to the end that the King might be firmly established in the
Exercise of his Royal Power, and that on this account the Male contents which
were very numerous, might be all reduced to their Obedience, it was ordered
that the Queen should also be desired to make choice of one of her own, or of
the Kings Houses, at a little distance from Paris to reside therein for some
Months, during which time the King might be settled in the absolute Possession
of his Kingdom, and afterward would send for her to take the second Place in
his Council, in which it was determined to recall the Ancient Ministers of the
late King his Father that had been laid aside, and to expel the greatest part
of those that were thought to be introduced by the Marshal d'Ancre and his
Wife: it was also concluded that Monsieur de Vitry, Captain of his Majesty's
Life-Guards should be employed to Arrest the Marshal d'Ancre: but that no
notice should be given him thereof till a few days before the Execution,
however Monsieur de Luines failed not to discover the Design to him. It is most
certain, and I know his Majesty cannot but remember, that my Lord Cardinal and
Duke of Richelieu then Bishop of Lusson and Secretary of State for Military and
Foreign Affairs, discharged that Office with so much Judgment and Integrity,
and gave such signal Proofs of his Affection and Fidelity to his Majesty's
Service and the public Good of the Kingdom, that he received great
Satisfaction, and was fully persuaded that in keeping him near his Person, he
might reap extraordinary Advantages from his good Conduct, insomuch that he
resolved to retain him and to dismiss the other Ministers that were employed
with him.

This Council being taken was not so soon put in Execution as well because the
time was not proper for such an undertaking, as by Reason of the fear with
which some of the principal Agents were possessed, lest the event should not
happen according to their expectation, this caused them often to doubt and to
alter their measures, insomuch that without giving any notice to the King, nor
to those Persons that remained constant with his Majesty in the Resolution that
had been taken, they agreed to attend him about Midnight, and to persuade him
that for the Security of his Person it was necessary for him to depart that
very hour and to get into Soissons, which was then besieged by his Army
commanded by the Duke of Angoulesme, that he should there declare his
Intentions and should publicly act as a King. To this end on the 14th. day of
March, 1617. about Six of the Clock in the Evening Monsieur de Luines commanded
the Officers of the great and little Stables in the Kings Name to make ready
all the Horses against Midnight, and took so little care to conceal the cause
of this Order that the chief Groom of the great Horse-Guard knew the
Particulars, who soon revealed them to one of his Friends, that had been (as I
think) a Lieutenant at the Siege of Clermont and at that time lived with
Monsieur Mangot Keeper of the Seals, whom he also acquainted with what had been
declared to him.

I accidentally, and, as I believe, very opportunely met with him when he
received this News which he imparted to me, and desired to know my Opinion, for
upon consideration of what might happen he seemed to be much perplexed, whether
he should disclose the Matter to the Queen Mother or not, I agreed with him
that it was convenient to be silent, and promised immediately to endeavor to
discover the truth, and if possible to frustrate the Design, in case I could
find that it was really intended. However Monsieur de Luines denied that there
was any such thing in agitation, but being urged, confessed it, and would have
persuaded me to approve it, and instantly to go with him to cause the King to
resolve upon it; But there were so many and weighty Reasons such alleged
against this ill-digested Proposition that it was laid aside, whereupon having
given M. Mangot an account, we persisted in our first determination not to
mention it to any. After the Kings inclinations were sought in relation to this
project, I know not whether it would have been attempted if he had consented to
it, but I was informed that his Majesty soon rejected it, declaring that he
would not depart from the resolution that had been taken in his Presence.

Although secrecy is the very life of great enterprises, and ought to have been
carefully observed in this, by reason of the inevitable dangers that the
Persons engaged, as also the whole Kingdom, would be exposed to, if it should
be discovered; nevertheless many that conversed with M. de Luines, some of whom
had advised him to this design, were informed by him what measures and
resolutions were taken: On the other side M. de Vitry having declared to his
neighbors and intimate acquaintance, and they again to others, it was so far
divulged, that it became the common discourse throughout all Paris, as a thing
that was ready to be put in execution. One Trevail, whom we shall have occasion
to mention hereafter, was one of those to whom M. de Luines had revealed it,
and he communicated it to the Chancellor de Sillery whose Pensioner he was, and
who furnished him with notions and opinions to be imparted to M. de Luines, but
so dexterously, that if the matter came to light, he could not be convicted of
having any hand therein; M. de Villeroy and President Jeanin acted the same
Part, with the intelligence that they in like manner had received from others
that weretheir particular Friends, and indeed all three were continually upon
the Watch, to get some advantage by this revolution in case it happened
according to their expectation.

However it is certain that none of their expedients were Practiced, because
they spoke obscurely, and as it were through a Pipe, and the design was made so
public, that it came to the Ears of the Queen Mother, and to those of the
Marshal and his Wife, and of some other Ministers of State, but they did not
seem much to regard it, as well because they did not imagine that they that
attended the King, were potent enough to undertake such an enterprise, as by
reason of the orders that his Majesty had given on this occasion, for he had
subtily introduced into the Presence of the Queen his Mother two Familiar
Friends of M. de Luines, who igning to give her an account of all that was
transacted by him, told her that diverse Persons had made Propositions to him,
to drive out the Marshal and his Wife together with the new Ministers of State,
to recall the old Counselors, and to cause the King to take upon him the
Administration of the Government; but that M. de Luines through their Advice,
had rejected all these vain projections, which he durst not venture to attempt,
besides that he desired to Advance his Fortune in a fair way under the
Protection of the Queen, that had already conferred many Favors upon him on
several occasions.

As for the King, I am certain that none can truly boast that they received the
least intimation from him, by which it might be inferred that he had any
thoughts tending to such a design, or that he had so earnest a desire to Act as
a real King: on the contrary having taken a resolution ever since the first
conference, that was managed on this Subject in his Presence, to conceal his
intentions, he affected to be employed in Exercise and Divertisements, not
agreeable to his Dignity and Disposition, demeaning himself after so close and
subtle a manner, that none could discern his dissimulation; only the Sieur
Bellier an ingenious and valiant Gentleman of Dauphine, who ^as lately come out
of his own Country, having observed his Majesty, advised one of his Friends
that had some interest in the Fortune of the Marshal, to take care of himself,
for the King under the color of mean Actions, with which he passed away the
time, did undoubtedly cover some design of a change, and being thus persuaded,
in regard that he was not in Favor with the Marshal, he thought fit constantly
to wait on his Majesty, to serve him as an opportunity should be offered, and
indeed without having any knowledge ^f the Affairs in Agitation, he was with
him when the Marshal was killed, as shall be showed hereafter.

The Marshal d'Ancre had taken a journey into Normandy, intending to reside
there for some time. As well to cause the Fortifications of Quilleboeus to be
finished, which he had undertaken for several considerations well known, as to
dispatch certain Affairs that he had at Roven, and to take necessary measures
for the securing of of that City and some other Places, that he thought to be
advantageous to his design; but his Majesty of whom he had taken leave for a
long time seeing him come back so suddenly, and at unawares without being sent
for, and without any apparent reason of so precipitate a return, was easily
persuaded to believe, that he came upon the Advice of his Wife or of some of
his confederates, because certain Persons since his departure had taken upon
them to inform the Queen, that the King intended to act himself, and to cause
the Marshal and his Wife to be removed, as being the principal cause of the
present Commotions, that were ready to invade all the Parts of the Kingdom.

The King having embraced this opinion, judged that if he did not take care to
prevent his further Progress, he might attempt to deprive him of the means that
he had proposed to stop the course of his irregular and violent Proceedings, to
take the Government of the Kingdom into his own hands, and to put an end to the
disorders that were caused therein by his exorbitant ambition: therefore his
Majesty urged his faithful Friends to prepare all things that were requisite
for the immediate executing of the resolution that had been formerly taken.

They were but few in number that were privy to this design, though after it
was accomplished, many gained advantages thereby, the Sieur de Modennes, a
Kinsman of M. de Luines, who was then at Court knew nothing of it, till a few
hours before it was put in execution: however some yet doubted and urged the
former Advice that the King ought to go to Soissons, but the same reasons that
had been already opposed, caused it to be again exploded, insomuch that it was
concluded to proceed without further delay.

From Sunday at Night, to Monday the 24th of April 1617. M. de Luines, M. de
Vitry and some other that were employed in this Affair, took care to give
notice to their most intimate Friends that were Men of courage, and well
affected to his Majesty's Person, to come into the Court of the Louvre between
the hours of eight and nine in the Morning, on occasion of a pretended quarrel;
but the real intent was to make use of them in case of any uproar or tumult,
because the Marshal d'Ancre was always accompanied with a very strong Guard;
and that these Persons appearing in the Court, might not afford any cause of
suspicion to the Marshal, the Commissioners of the Registry -- were appointed
to be Assembled in the Council Chamger on Monday Morning to the end, that the
great Train of Attendants that are usually gathered together at such a time,
might serve to conceal the others that were ordered to be present. The King
gave it out that he had taken a Purge, that the Great Gate of the Louvre might
be kept shut, and the little door only opened, that by this means the whole
retinue of the Marshal d'Ancre, might be prevented from following him: the
Sentinels were assisted with certain resolute and valiant Persons, who upon a
Word given, were to seize on a dozen of Halbards, that were under some pretense
brought into a little Chamber near the Gate, and were to be commanded by a
Gentleman that was privy to the design: Commeillan Lieutenant of the Gate was
charged to attend there, and to open the Great Gate when the Marshal came, but
as soon as he was passed to shut it, saying that he would open the lesser,
which nevertheless he should keep locked, till he had received Orders to open it.

About Ten of the Clock, the Marshal came, whose Train reached from the Gate of
his own House to that of the Louvre, which was opened after the manner above
related, and over which a Man stood, who, as soon as the Marshal had entered,
made three Flourishes with his Hat, at this Signal, which was agreed upon,
Commeillan shut the Gate, and at the same time M. de Vitry who was on the
Stairs of the Switiers Hall, came down accompanied with some of his Kinsmen and
other Gentlemen and Officers of his Majesty's Lifeguard, to seize on the
Person of the Marshal d'Ancre, when he had met him at the Pont Dormant, he
said, I Arrest you in the Kings Name: Who me? replied the Marshal: whereupon in
that very moment, one of his retinue having laid his hand on his Sword, was the
cause that three Pistols were discharged: with which the Marshal d'Ancre was
shot dead, and fell to the Ground: immediately there arose a great noise in the
Louvre, and the most part of the Gentlemen that were in the Court, not knowing
the true cause of their being ordered to attend, and hearing the report of the
Pistols, and the People crying kill* kill, drew their Swords, one amongst them
being very much affrighted, went up to the Kings Chamber, who was ready
dressed, and told him that the Marshal d'Ancre was missed; and that he came
thither with his Sword in his hand, thinking it necessary to provide for the
safety of his Majesty's Person; it is certain that without any consternation he
demanded his Sword, and seeing the abovementioned Sieur d'Belier near him,
whom he knew to be a Gentleman of extraordinary judgment, experience and
valor, spoke to him saying, M. d'Belier, What course must be taken? This is
necessary to be done (said he) since your Majesty appears with so much courage
and resolution, go to them, and run them through the Belly, that all Paris may
see whether they dare resist you. Thereupon his Majesty with his Sword at his
side came as far as the Great Hall, and having instantly shown himself at the
Windows; there arose a great Acclamation, the multitude crying, God save the
King, with which the whole Louvre resounded. The occurrences that happened
afterward being sufficiently known, and printed in several places, it would be
needless to insist on those particulars, I shall only add, that the King had no
Guards left except one Company of the Sieur Fouville, part of which was then
upon duty and being chosen by the Marshal d'Ancre, it was feared least they
should depend on his interests, which was the reason that his Majesty did not
think fit, to employ them in this conjuncture, nevertheless he was afterward
informed that they had no correspondence with him. Certain Colonels and
Captains of the Quarters of the City, even those that were near the Louvre,
were engaged and promised to cause the Soldiers under their command to take up
Arms in his Majesty's Service, in case there should be occasion, they were
disposed there, under color, that for default of a Regiment of Guards, the
King desired to be guarded by the Parisians, upon an information that he
received, that some enterprise was intended to be executed in the Louvre:
Orders were also given to Seal up every thing in the Marshals House, and to set
Guards for that purpose: but some being more diligent in managing their own
Private Affairs, than in discharging the trust committed to them, and being
enticed by one of his Footmen, with the Bait of a few pieces of Gold, were so
eager after the Money; that the sellow took an opportunity to escape in the
Night with the Trunk, wherein his Masters Private Papers and Writings were
contained, and amongst the rest those that related to his Secret Correspondence
with Foreigners.

Although the King had conceived no bad opinion of the other Ministers of
State, and he had been assured that they were not the least concerned in the
sinister designs of the Marshal d'Ancre, nevertheless to gain more reputation
to the new Scene of Affairs, which his Majesty was about to introduce, he
thought fit to recall the Ancient Counselors, that had served under the Late
King his Father, whom the Marshal d'Ancre and his Wife had caused to be
dismissed, viz M. d'Sillery the Chancellor, M. de Vair Keeper of the Seals, M.
de Villeroy Secretary of State, and the President Jeanin, Super-Intendant of
the Treasury. They were commanded to hold a Counsel the same day, where his
Majesty was pleased to declare his Intentions, that my Lord Cardinal then
Bishop of Lusson, should continue in the exercise of his Office, in regard of
the assurance he had of his affection, fidelity and extraordinary abilities,
having ordered him to attend in the Counsel to that purpose: The old Statesmen
foreseeing that since his clear and piercing judgment far excelled theirs, they
would be no longer esteemed as the Oracles of the State as they desired to be
reputed, raised all the obstructions (...) they could invent, and though the
King remained firm on his behalf, nevertheless for certain considerations that
his eminency can better reveal than any other, he declared that he would not
promptorily insist on this point, but would choose rather to serve in some
other Capacity.

The King considering that the Queen his Mother was discontented with what had
passed, and even with the desire that he had signified to her, that she would
vouchsafe to permit him during some months, to manage his Affairs alone, and
that to appease her Passion, to give her such Advice as was necessary for the
good of the Kingdom, and to maintain a good correspondence between their
Majesty's, none was so proper and capable as his Eminencv, desired him to
reside near her, which he accented, but upon condition, that it should not be
expected from him to espy out her actions, not to divulge those Passages that
might happen, in conversing with her; for his Eminency avouched, That if he
found that his good Counsel was not embraced, and that any measures were taken,
with which his Majesty should have just cause to be displeased, he would soon
withdraw himself into his Bishop-rick; these last words spoken with a good
intent, served nevertheless as a pretense for those that envied his virtue, to
procure him to be removed, as shall be observed in its due place.

From that time his Eminency was alone employed to manage the Affairs that
passed between their Majesty's, and digested the matter of the expressions that
were delivered by them, when the Queen Mother departed for Blois, which were
written in a more elegant style and more judiciously, than those that are
produced in the French Mercury, perhaps if enquiry were made, they might be
recovered, since there were several Copies of them taken.

Before the Queen went from Paris on her journey to Blois, one called Travail
who has been above mentioned, made application to the Secretary of the
Marquess de Bressieax, who was at that time Principal Master of the Horse to
her Majesty, and endeavored to prevail with him to persuade his Master, to
cause her to be Poisoned, Monsieur Deageant who suspected the intreagues of
this Travail, having perceived that they had talked together a long while,
enquired of the Secretary what was the Subject of their Discourse, who related
it to him, and he immediately went and acquainted the King with it, who caused
him to be sent to the Parliament, where he was tried, and was confronted with
Monsieur de Luines to whom he had imparted something of this design, as also
with Monsieur de Bressieux and his Secretary, the latter was obliged to appear
because his Secretary had discovered the wicked intentions of Travail.

A little after that time a Gentleman named Gign^er, practiced one of the most
cunning and artificial cheats that can be imagined, with a design to advance
his fortune thereby, being a Person of a most subtle and crafty disposition.
An Uncle of his, was Lieutenant of a Company of Guards belonging to the Duke of
Vendome, and had served him in the last Wars of the Princess, through his means
this Gignier ingratiated himself with the Duke of Vendome, and the other
Princes and Lords that had withdrawn themselves from Court, and were pursued by
the Kings Forces. After their reconciliation with his Majesty Gignier being
introduced into the Presence of Monsieur de Luines, made a very formal and
plausible relation to him, that he had obtained the favor of all these Princes
and Lords, insomuch that they did not conceal their secrets from him, and that
although his Majesty had laid so great an obligation on them, in receiving them
so graciously, and restoring them all to their Offices; nevertheless they
ceased not to have a watchful Eye, to find out an opportunity to accomplish
their ambitious enterprises by raising commotions in the Kingdom; but if
Monsieur de Luines, to whose interests he promised entirely to devote himself,
would confide in him, and should think it convenient that in keeping a good
correspondence with these Lords, he should discourse their actions and
in^entions, in order to give him an account thereof, he would acknowledge in
process of time, that his service would prove not a little advantageous to his
Majesty, as also to himself in particular: On the other side he affected to
appear an intimate friend of Monsieur de Luines, and endeavored to persuade
these Princes and Lords to believe it, with a promise to serve them especially
the Duke of Vendome, whom he saw oftener than the others; by this artifice, he
began to make a discovery of them to Monsieur de Luines and of him to them, but
he enjoined both the one and the others to dissemble what they knew, and to
take no more notice of one another, than they formerly used to do, till the
proper time that he should declare to them; afterward esteeming that he had
caused a strong suspicion and jealousy between them, and having prepared
diverse inventions to cover his wicked devices, he came one day pretending to be
in a great fright, to find out Monsieur de Luines, and told him that he had one
of the greatest, most dangerous and most cruel designs to disclose to him that
ever was contrived in France; but he demanded two things, one was that he
should not communicate what he had revealed to him, to any, not so much as to
Monsieur Deageant, who was then employed in managing the principal
transactions, and the other, that he should be assured that after he had given
some light into this conspiracy, he should be established in the Government of
Calais, or of some other Seaport Town, for the security of his Person, and
should be gratifyed with an hundred thousand Crowns, as a means whereby to
Advance his Family; having obtained a grant of this recompense, he informed
Monsieur de Luines, that a Plot was laid between the Cardinal of Guise, the
Dukes of Cheureuse, Maine Vendome, Nevers, Longueville and Bouillon, in which
they had engaged Monsieur de Coeuvres, President le Jay, and some other Lords
and Gentlemen whom he named, that their first enterprise was to put to death
Monsieur de Luines and Monsieur Deageant, to banish all the other Ministers of
State, to seize on the King, to recall the Queen Mother in his Majesty's name,
to get the Power into their own hands, and afterward to take Possession of the
Provinces, which were to be divided amongst them, and that some had proceeded
so far, that if the King endeavored to make any resistance, he should be
destroyed. He further assured Monsieur de Luines, that these Gentlemen or the
greater part of them, were often privately assembled together sometimes in one
place, and sometimes in another, to confer about their design, and that he
being admitted into their consult, knew all their resolutions, and would
faithfully relate them to him. Thus he entertained him with such discourses for
several days, pretending diverse meetings, and at last to remove all doubts and
scruples that might arise, he advised him to choose some friend in whom he
could confide, to the end that he might introduce him at a time appointed
without acquainting him with the cause, and might show him these Lords or part
of them, going privily in the night to their convention: But he himself was the
sole manager that brought them together, sometimes under a pretense to converse
with certain Ladies, whom he caused to be there present, and sometimes inviting
them to play at some game, and that it might seem more probable that there was
such a design, he ordered the Affairs after such a manner, that these
Assemblies were always holden in the night, and that those that appeared
therein, came alone, and were perceived at a considerable distance from the
House, into which they entered through several Doors. The Person whom Monsieur
de Luines deputed, assured him that he had seen them twice, according to the
same circumstances as Gignier had related.

On a certain day he desired his Uncle the Lieutenant of the Duke of Vendom's
Company of Guards, to send him two of his Soldiers, whom he knew to be
resolute sellows: he gave to each of them a Pisto ready charged, primed and
cockt, and placed them at the bottom of the Stairs of the Louvre, requiring
them to wait there, till he should bring them further Orders from the Officer,
he told them also that he intended that they should go a Hunting along with
him, having set them in this posture, he came as it were amaz^d to Monsieur de
L^ines, and declared that he certainly knew that two Sentinel were appointed to
kill him and Monsieur Deageant, if he were with him when he went to Dine in the
great Hall near the Counsel Chamber, that at the same time, several Gentlemen
were ordered to facilitate their retreat through the Court of the Kitchens, in
the House of the Duke of Vendome, where there was a private passage; but you
must be content (said he to Monsieur de Luines) if I only show you these two
Soldiers, with their Pistols in their hands ready to discharge, neither must
you ask them any other question but this, whether they do not belong to the
Duke of Vendome. He had moreover desired those that belonged to the retinue of
the said Duke, who was then with the King in the Louvre, to attend at the
bottom of the Stairs, which they also did, whereupon he showed all these things
to Monsieur de Luines exactly as he had described them, which he might very
easily do, since he himself had disposed them in this order. He persuaded him
that it was not convenient as yet to Arrest these Soldiers, that he could take
them up when he pleased, and that if they were seized, the Gentlemen believing
their designs to be divulged would hasten the execution of them, and would take
such measures as might prevent these being apprehended and entangled all at
once as it were in one Net; as he had Advised. From that very hour he
continually solicited Monsieur de Luines, who having according to his promise
kept the secret for some time, and indeed too long, at last revealed it to
Monsieur Deageant, that he might find out some Means to frustrate these
dangerous machinations without communicating them to the other Ministers,
because Gignier had represented them all as guilty, by reason of the particular
affection that they bore to some of the Lords of the Conspiracy. Deageant told
him, that the relation he had exhibited to him, carried an appearance of some
ill design, but that he could scarce believe that it was intended to be
undertaken; that it was to be feared least some deceit should lie hid at the
bottom, that the Affair being of that consequence, it required a diligent
security, and ought to be more thoroughly examined; in the mean time he
concluded that they should stand on their Guard, without showing the least sign
of distrust or suspicion. He desired to hear Gignier himself, being of opinion
that from his mouth, and by his contenance and demeanor, he might better judge
of the truth of what he affirmed.

Gignier refused at several times to discover himself to Monsieur Deageant, but
having considered that Monsieur de Luines had revealed the whole Matter to him,
and would not proceed without his Assistance, he agreed to see him privately in
one of the Chambers of the Tuilleries, and desired to be excused on the account
that he had entreated Monsieur de Luines, not to declare this Secret to him,
because he did not think him to be his Friend, but upon the assurance that
Monsieur de Luines had given him to the contrary, he was resolved to open his
Heart to him, and to conceal nothing relating to this Affair, in which he told
him that his Life was concerned, since the Conspirators intended to begin their
Enterprise with his Murder whom they esteemed the only Person that could
prevent the Execution thereof; he assured him that one named Fiesque a Bastard
of that Family, who was then Gentleman of the Horse to the Queen Regent, and
was one of the familiar acquaintance of Monsieur de Luines, treacherously
betrayed him, though he had never so good an Opinion of his Fidelity, was
appointed to commit this execrable Assassionate. It was true indeed that
Monsieur Deageant, was informed some days ago that this Fiesque waited for him
in the Night, being well mounted on a good Horse with a pair of Pistols, to
kill him as he was going out of the Louvre, from whence he never departed till
Mid night; it is certain also that he was seen twice in this posture, and that
he had given it out publicly enough, that he was an Enemy to Deageant, without
alleging any other Cause but that he was, as it were, the Gardiners dog that
would not eat the Cabbidge, nor suffer others to touch it, adding that several
Persons of diverse Ranks and Conditions, had bound themselves with an Oath to
destroy him. Gignier having thus used various Exprestions and Insinuations
tending to obtain the good Opinion of Monsieur Deageant, related to him all
that he had discovered to Monsieur de Luines concerning this Enterprise and the
Circumstances thereof. Insomuch that there seemed to be a great probability of
his Asseverations, which he concluded with Reasons to persuade him that all the
Lords that he had named ought to be forthwith secured in the Bastile, amongst
whom he reckoned M. de Guise, affirming that after much Solicitation he at
last entered into the Conspiracy. Deageant feigning entirely to give credit to
all that he had said, left him in hopes that he would 'ere long procure the
recompense for him that he expected, and charged him to persevere in his care
and diligence in this Affair; Nevertheless he remained firm in his first
Opinion, that there was a greater appearance of a Cheat than of Truth in this
Matter.

At another time Gignier came and gave Information that these Gentlemen began
to suspect lest some one that was Privy to their Conspiracy should divulge it,
and that they had taken a resolution not to Write one to another any longer,
but to confide only in a few chosen Persons, by whom they would maintain a
Correspondence for the future, without assembling together any more as they had
formerly done, fearing lest these, frequent meetings should cause them to be
discovered: Moreover he added that the principal Lords had caused Rings to be
made for every one of them, on which were enchased Stones of a dark green
Color, and certain particular Characters Engraved, these were also to be given
to such as had engaged themselves in their Design, as a Mark that they might be
trusted: He avouched that some of them had these Rings on their Fingers, and on
a certain Morning he brought one of them, saying, that it belonged to the Duke
of Vendome; that he had found it on his Toylet, and that he must restore it the
next day before he rise, lest he should perceive that it had been taken away:
The Figure of it was immediately drawn, by which another was made after the
same manner.

When he saw any of these Gentlemen assembled in the Louvre, he would soon
intrude into their Company, pretending to impart some Secret to them, and
afterward would come to Monsieur de Luines and Monsieur Deageant to tell them
that they had discoursed of their Conspiracy. He would often appear with a very
sad Countenance, because so little care was taken to provide for the Safety of
the King's Person and his Kingdom, and to preserve the Lives of Monsieur de
Luines and Monsieur Deageant, and in regard (as he said) the danger was
apparent, for he expected every hour when the Design was put in Execution,
since all things we^e already prepared in order to it, ^e would sometimes stamp
with his Feer, and tear off the Hair of his Head, as it were in a Rage, because
they had exposed him to such Perils, by neglecting to follow his advice.

It was not thought convenient to give the King any account of this Affair till
necessity required it, lest it should cause him to be troubled or disturbed; he
was only entreated to vouchsafe to choose Six Gentlemen of good repute, three of
whom should constantly wait on him whithersoever he should go, to hinder any
unknown Person from accosting him; one of these Attendants was ordered to keep
his Eyes continually fixed on his Majesty, and the two others on those that came
near him.

The Baptizing of one of the Duke of Vendome's Children, to whom the King had
engaged himself to stand as Godfather, gave Gignier a fair opportunity to set
so good a Color on his Cheat, that he thought it would pass for an undoubted
truth. The day was appointed, and the Duke had caused to be prepared a very
magnificent Entertainment at his House, for his Majesty had promised to go
thither with an intention to divert himself: the day before, in the Evening
Gignier came to Monsieur de Luines and Monsieur Deageant, and with Oaths,
Imprecations, and very persuasive Arguments, assured them that the Conspirators
had resolved to Poison the King, and to kill Monsieur de Luines, at the
Collation, and had given it out that the latter should neither eat nor drink
there, for they intended to cause him to be assassinated with Halbards by
French Soldiers in the habit of Switzers. He protested thereupon that if all
these Lords were not apprehended that Night or the next Morning, he would
depart, to avoid the Storm that was ready to break over their Heads.

It was thought necessary at that time to unfold the Matter to some of the
other Ministers of State. Monsieur de Vair Keeper of the Seals, was one against
whom Gignier had made no objection, therefore it was communicated to him, and
he also undertook to discourse with him, who palliated his Cheat so
artificially, that he took upon him to accuse Monsieur Deageant as having been
too remiss and negligent in discovering and preventing this Conspiracy; but
after he had heard his Reasons given by the latter, he was satisfied, since
care had been taken of the principal Point, which was the preservation of his
Majesty's Person. Monsieur de Luines and Monsieur Deageant resolved to acquaint
the King with what had passed, and to entreat him to feign that he intended to
be present the next day at the Baptizing of the Child, but really to decline it
by making a show of being indisposed; however no notice of this was given to
Gignier. Some hours before that appointed for the Administration of the
Baptism, the King went to hear Vespers at Feillans, where about the end of the
Service he counterfeited a Fit of the Colic so dexterously that in a moment his
Face began to wax Pale; they that were near him, said, that he was taken very
ill, to whom he replied, No, this is nothing, let not a word be spoken of it,
for I intend to see the Child baptized and afterward to go to the Collation:
His Majesty's chief Physician was immediately sent for, who having received a
private Intimation, felt his Pulse and seemed to be displeased that he had been
left there so long; The Duke of Vendome came thither and entreated the King to
vouchsafe that the Solemnity of the Baptism should be deferred to some other
time, alleging that his Majesty's Health was more precious than all things in
the World; not long after he was put into a Coach and carried to the Louvre,
where he took a Clyster, and the next day a little Physic, according to the
Method that had been already permeditated.

The Duke of Vendome having perceived that the Kings Indisposition lasted but a
little while, inferred from thence and from some coldness that he thought he
had observed in his Majesty's deportment toward him, that he was suspected,
and that there was some what more than ordinary in agitation, that might prove
to his Prejudice; therefore he endeavored to penetrate into it, and on a
certain day as he happened to discourse with his Lieutenant, Gigniers Uncle
about this Matter, he replied that he was very much afraid least his Nephew
should have contrived some ill Design, and declared that he had told him some
days ago, that he should very suddenly obtain great Riches and Preferment, and
should be made Governor of one of the strong Places of the Kingdom, the
Lieutenancy whereof he desired him to accept, and that he had borrowed of him
two Soldiers of the Guards, as has been abovementioned, who at their return,
related to him the Circumstances of the Force, that he had caused them to act
with their Pistols in the Louvre; upon this intelligence the Duke reflecting on
diverse Actions that Gignier had lately performed with respect to him and the
other Lords, was easily persuaded that he had done him an Injury; in so much
that about Eleven of the Clock at Night he found out Monsieur de Luines and
Monsieur Deageant in the Louvre, to whom he represented that he understood that
one Gignier had maliciously charged him with being engaged in a most wicked and
horrid Conspiracy, that he was ready to clear himself before the King; the
Parliament and wheresoever necessity required, and that he came on purpose to
commit himself into his Majesty's Hands, with a request that Gignier might be
Arrested in order to be confronted with him. Having considered the Artifices
that he had made use of, he acknowledged that he and the others that were
falsely accused, had Reason to applaud their good Conduct, it being probable
that they had all resolved to defend themselves. Gignier was lately Married at
Paris when an Officer of the Guard was ordered to apprehend him, and to bring
him into the Prison that belonged to the Palace, he had promised on the next
day to seize on a certain Fellow that in the habit of a Cordelier endeavored
to raise a Commotion in the Kingdom, but it was thought fit rather to lose the
opportunity of taking him, than to neglect the means of discovering this
Imposture, and of vindicating the innocence of the Duke of Vendome, which could
not be done but from the Mouth of the Calumniator, who hearing that his
Intrigues were divulged might take an occasion to fly from Justice.

At his first Interrogatory in the Parliament, he freely confessed the Cheat,
and thereupon had his Head cut off according to their Decree: I should not have
enlarged so much on this Narrative, were it not that an account of this Fact
has been Printed altogether different from what happened, and therefore I
thought it convenient (if it deserved any place in History) to exhibit a true
Relation thereof.

But to return to the Affairs relating to the Queen Mother; it is most certain
that as long as his Eminency remained with her, and the prudent Industry of
Monsieur de Luines prevented the Operation of the Poison that was diffused
abroad, a good Correspondence was maintained between their Majesty's, who
studied altogether how they might express one to another the mutual Testimonies
of respect and kindness. But the latter having withdrawn himself by degrees
from Monsieur Deageant who gave him good Advice, and being led away as well by
the persuasions of other Ministers, every one of whom in particular strove to
obtain his Favor with a Design to Rule according to their own Passions, as by
the pernicious Councels of diverse private Persons who endeavored to Embroil
the State, that they might advance their Fortunes by the means of some public
Dissension or Change; the good Orders that had been instituted for the
Administration of Affairs, and chiefly for the preservation of the Union
between their Majesty's began by little and little to be laid aside; insomuch
that by the Artifices of such Incendiaries those Jealousies were kindled
between them, that broke out in a flame within a few Months after.

To this end the Table of the Wolf was put in Practice: For although Monsieur
Deageant had no other prospect but the Service of his Majesty, the propagation
of Religion, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the particular good of Monsieur de
Luines, nevertheless he was discharged from the managing of public
Transactions, and forasmuch as during his Employment therein he had always
clearly represented to the King, the Intentions that were daily practiced, to
cause him to suspect the Negotiations of his Eminency with the Queen Mother, he
was no sooner removed from the Council, but they that envyed him on the one
side, and they that designed to hinder the Reunion of their Majesty's on the
other, acted their parts with double diligence, sometimes they forged Letters,
and sometimes they introduced their Emissaries to persuade the King to lose the
good Opinion that he had conceived of his Eminency; however it is certain that
his Majesty retained so high an Esteem for hi^, that all these Efforts could
not produce the Effect that was expected.

At last an accidental opportunity was offered which served to accomplish their
Design; a Letter from one of the abovementioned Emissaries was read in the
Council of the Dispatches, which pretended to give an account of some of the
secret and sinister Practices of his Eminency, and that he had engaged a Party
of Soldiers for the Queen Mother in Pictou; the Ancient Ministers of State
failed not immediately to take a resolution to advise the King in the Council
that was to be holden at eleven of the Clock in his presence, that his Eminency
ought to be removed from the Queen; indeed they left no stone unturned to this
end, but were not able to effect it: but it happened that Monsieur de
Chateauneuf the Elder, who was in the Council of the Dispatches, not being
privy to the Secret, believed that the Motion that had been made, would be
approved by his Majesty; which was the occasion that he went on Foot from the
Louvre to his own House, and meeting with the late Monsieur de Richelieu
acquainted him with what was concluded thereupon. It was thought that Monsieur
de Richilieu wrote to his Eminency to advice him to avoid the Storm by retiring
of his own accord, which he did. Upon the account of this and of the
protestation that he had made to the King when he thought fit to appoint him to
reside with the Queen Mother, viz. That if he perceived that she intended to
adhere to evil Councils, and would not be diverted from them, he would withdraw
himself without making any mention thereof; those Persons that had undertaken
to supplant him, told the King that his retreat after this manner made it
apparent enough that the Queen Mother intended to cause Arms to be taken up
against his Majesty; Moreover they forged false Relations of the Actions of his
Eminency, and there being none to discover their Artifices, they counterfeited
a Letter that ordered him to depart to Avignon.

The Queen Mother who remained at Blois in expectation of the performance of
the Promises that had been made to her, that she should be readmitted in a
little time into the Kings Presence and Councils (as it was without doubt his
Majesty's intention) seeing all these Proceedings, concluded not without some
grounds that she was deceived, and that-they that were about the King intended
to destroy her, insomuch that under this imagination being destitute of the
good Councils that were given her by his Eminency, she sought for some means to
put her self in such a Condition as to be able to get an Advantage over those
whom she took to be her Adversaries, amongst the discontented Party, and
amongst those whom she thought she had more particularly obliged. Instead of
the advice of the Cardinal of Richelieu, she made use of that of the Abbot of
Roueelay, who induced her to proceed to extremities, against the King and to
diminish the high Esteem that she had always expressed of his Eminencies
Fidelity and Generosity, whose approach he dreaded being very sensible that it
would be impossible for him to resist the force of his incomparable Judgment
that far excelled his. He caused also the Bishop Elect of Besiers to lose her
Favor, pretending that he endeavored to delude her, though he was altogether
innocent. Thus several Factions arose in the Kingdom, which coming to the Kings
Ear, obliged him to stand on his Guard, and to set a watch over the Actions of
those to whom the Queen his Mother had made application, and of those whom (as
he was informed) she had employed in her Design; She was offended at this, and
complained thereof to his Majesty, who endeavored by all possible means to
divert her from these Thoughts, and to persuade her to that which was true,
that he desired nothing more ardently than their Reunion and good
Correspondence.

Several of those that had obtained the Kings Favor, finding that they could
not acquire so much power over the Inclinations of Monsieur de Luines as they
desired, and consequently could not obtain a greater Influence over his
Majesty; attempted to render Monsieur de Luines more and more odious to the
Queen Mother, although during the time that I was conversant there, I never
observed that he deserved it: they imagined that if they ruined him under the
name of the Queen Mother and promoted her return, she would think her self
obliged to them, and would choose rather to see them near the King than all the
rest, many others that were desirous of Novelty and Change were engaged in this
Project to the same end.

Some have published that the Princes that were retired from the Court; against
whom the Kings Forces were employed, were privy to the Design contrived against
the Marshal d'Ancre and underhand solicited the Execution; however it is most
true that they had no knowledge thereof, and that if they had not readily
returned to their Duty, his Majesty was resolved to continue to prosecute them
with War, and to Command his Army in Person; but immediately after the Death of
the Marshal de Ancre, some of their Kindred made most humble Submissions to his
Majesty on their behalf: And whereas they proposed a certain Treaty, that they
might enjoy the benefit thereof, as has been practiced in former
Insurrections; his Majesty was graciously pleased to answer, that if they would
become Obedient and Loyal Subjects for the future, he would receive them with
open Arms, would Pardon them, and would make them sensible of the Effects of
his Munificence, according as they should render themselves worthy thereof by
their Actions: His Majesty required them too, without delay to meet, him at
Bois de Vincennes; but they made some difficulty at first to appear there,
fearing lest they should be seized, but being assured by his Royal Word to the
contrary, they surmounted this fear, and having according to the Kings Command
dismissed all the Forces that they had raised they came and begged his
Majesty's Pardon on their Knees; who afterward disbanded his Armies, reserving
only fifteen Thousand Men for the relief of Verseil which belonged to the Duke
of Savoy, and was besieged by the Spaniards to whom it was formerly left as a
Prey through the Artifices of the Marshal de Ancre and his Wife.

The King prepared a stock to defray the Charges of this Army that was ready to
March, for Three Months, and caused it to be returned by Bills of Exchange to
Lions, according to the desire of the Treasurer at War; the Duke of Angouleine
was Commander in chief, who being urged to depart with all speed, because
Verseil was reduced to great extremity, replied, that as soon as the Money was
ready at Lions, he would ride Post thither, and declared that although good Bills
of Exchange had been drawn, nevertheless he was informed that there was
something that retarded the Payment: The Treasurer at War was thereupon ordered
to attend in the Council, where he affirmed that the Cash was ready at Lions;
to know the truth, a Post was immediately dispatched, who found the Bills of
Exchange accepted, and the Money ready to be counted before it was demanded;
the King having received this Advice, gave notice thereof to the Duke of
Angouleine, who persisted in averring that his Majesty was deceived in this
Point: The Treasurer was again Summoned to appear, and charged to give a true
account of this Matter, otherwise the King would send him to the Parliament to
be tried: Upon this he whispered in the Ear of one of his Majesty's Privv
Counselors and told him that the Money indeed was ready at Lions; but that
some of the other Ministers had enjoined him to use these delays, after enquiry
it was found to be true. Their excuse was, that seeing this Affair so
vehemently prosecuted, and fearing least a War should break forth between the
two Crowns of France and Spain they had taken this course, upon the promise
that the Duke of Monteleon, the King of Spain's Ambassador in France, had given
them, That as soon as the City should be delivered into the hands of the
Spaniards, they would restore it at the instance of his Majesty, his Master
being obliged to this only in vindication of his Honor, that was engaged in
the taking of this Place, since (as he affirmed) the Duke of Savoy had begun
the Quarrel. Thus for want of the Assistance of France, Verseil was surrendered
upon Composition to the Besiegers, who kept it so long, contrary to the
Treaties and Artieles of Capitulation that were then made, that none expected
ever to see it again in the hands of the Duke of Savoy. I shall not here
enlarge on the several Embassies and Negotiations that were managed on this
account, since that may be better performed by another hand: And as for the
restitution of the Place to his Highness of Savoy, Father Joseph can give a
more certain Relation thereof than any, since it was restored upon his
Mediation, at a time (as I have said) when every one despaired, even the
Ancient Ministers of State themselves.

The Agent of the Duke of Florence was one of those that were engaged in the
Cabal at Court addicted to the Interests of the Queen Mother or rather of those
that endeavored under her name to cause some Commotion in the Kingdom, who
amongst others had two Florentine Young Men named Syti for his Emissaties that
had been in the Service of Madam d'Ancre. It was well known that he practiced
some ill Offices, and tho his Proceedings were diligently observed, yet nothing
could be discovered but by accidental Event: One day he sent by a Messenger of
Nancy a large Packet in which were contained Letters for the Duchess of
Lorrain and some others with whom he maintained a Correspondence, together with
certain Memorials in which were specified the Names of several Persons that (as
he said) were gained by the care of the Queen Mother, some of whom were near
the King, and were in Credit with Monsieur de Luines; mention was also made
therein of the Services of the two Brothers Syti and of one called Durand: the
Messenger was charged that if he were pursued, he should secretly convey his
Packet into some Bush, and afterward should go, and take it again; it
happened that being on the Highway that botders on the River Marne near Lagny,
he saw certain Horsemen riding a pace after him, and thinking to hide his
Packet securely, he thrust it so far through a Thicket that it fell into the
River, afterward without regarding what became of it he turned out of the
Road, and fled for fear of being taken: Monsieur de Marcheville as he was
traveling from Paris to Lorrain saw this Packet floating on the Water, and
caused it to be taken up by one of his Footmen; the Superscription being so
wet that it could not easily be discerned to whom it was directed, he imagined
that it was for Monsieur Deageant, therefore he immediately dispatched the same
Laquey that had taken it out of the Water to carry it to him: M. Deageant soon
found that it was directed to Persons that were suspected, and that the
Superscription was Written by the younger Syti, whose hand he knew, having
formerly recovered some of his Writings upon the Suspicion that happened
concerning him and his Brother: He brought it to the King who caused it to be
read in his presence, as also the Letters and Memorials therein enclosed, and
forthwith summoned the Ministers of State to meet and deliberate thereupon.

At the same time, and very opportunely, certain Merchants of Provence came to
make a complaint to his Majesty, that the Duke of Florence had caused two great
Vessels that belonged to them laden with Corn to be seized in the Port of
Legorn by way of reprisal on occasion of two little Barks, which he said, were
taken from some of his Subjects by the French on the coast of Provence. It was
resolved in the Council to send for the Agent of Florence, under color of some
Matters of Importance that they had received orders from the King to
communicate to him; he soon appeared there, and his Majesty having withdrawn
himself, as he entered into the Council-Hall, every one rose up as if they
intended to depart; he made his Complements to the Company, which were returned
to him, and then M. de Vair, Keeper of the Seals, the Chancellor de Sillery
being absent, spoke to him to this effect, Sir, the King has commanded us to
send for you to acquaint you that he has thought it very strange that your
Master should be so bold as to take upon him to seize on two French Vessels at
Legorn by way of reprisal, since he is not ignorant that such Practices are not
usual between such petty Princes as he, and so potent a King as his Majesty,
that it was very extraordinary, that after he had thus violated the respect due
to his Majesty, he has not used any of the Solemnities requisite and customary
in Reprisals; that the King being justly offended at such Proceedings, was
resolved to cause him to repent it 'ere long; and that upon this account, his
Majesty being no longer able to confide in the Duke of Florence, nor
consequently in his Agents, required him to depart that day from Paris and in
three days after out of the Kingdom. The Agent replied, that he knew nothing of
this reprisal, but that he was very certain that his Master wanted neither
Respect nor Affection to the King, and that if time were allowed him to
dispatch a Courier to him, he promised that he should bring all manner of
satisfaction to his Majesty: Monsieur du Vair told him, that the Kings Orders
must be obeyed, thereupon he went on that very day to Nancy, where he sojourned
a great while, continuing his former Practices that he had began in France.

Information had been given by the Syti's, that the Sieur de Bournonville,
Brother to the Baron de Persan Governor of the Bastile, had delivered certain
dispatches to a man that went often and privately, from Paris to Blois; who was
afterward discovered and taken, being charged with Letters and Memorials
written by Monsieur Barbin, then Prisoner in the Bastile, to the Queen Mother,
describing the measures that she ought to take to regain her Authority with the
King and to destroy those that had obtained a share in his Counsels, and that
might be able to oppose this design. This was the cause that the Officer of the
Guard was commanded to go into the Bastile, under pretense to speak with
another Prisoner, where on a sudden according to the Orders that he had
received in Writing, he caused the Door of the Sieur Barbin's Chamber to be
opened, that he might enter and seize on his Papers, and found him with other
Memorials on the same Subject, as the former but much larger: As soon as he
perceived that the Officer took them away, he cried out, Alas! I am undone, he
that has been my only support, will see in these Papers what pains I have
taken to destroy him, but it was to serve my Mistress. These Writings being
examined in the Council, it appeared that Burnonville had suffered himself to
be corrupted, that he took care of the Letters that the Sieur Barbin sent out
of the Bastile, and received those that were directed to him: It was also
inferred from thence, that the Baron de Persan and his Family were engaged in
the Service of the Queen Mother, however the King was satisfied with taking
from him the Government of the Bastile; But as for Bournonville against whom
there were undoubted Proofs, he thought fit to order him to be committed into
the hand of justice to be brought to his Trial before the Grand Council, that
his Majesty had appointed to this end, as also to try the others that were
discovered to be of the same Faction, as well by the Papers of the Seiur
Barbin, as by the dispatches of the Agent of Florence abovementioned, viz. The
Sieur de Marsillac, Le See formerly Secretary to the Queen, the two Brothers
named Syti, and Durand a Parisian, whom Monsieur de Luines had introduced into
the Kings Presence, to compose the Verses of the Balls, by whose appointment he
received two thousand Livers as a reward.

According to the decree made by the Grand Council, Marsillac and Le See on
whose behalf Madam de Luines very much interceded, were acquitted; the Sieur
Barbin was condemned to perpetual banishment out of the Kingdom; the Younger
Syti received Sentence to be Hanged, and his Elder Brother, and Durand to make
public reparation, and afterward to be broken alive on a Wheel; These two last
had each of them an infamous Libel about them, written with their own hands
against his Majesty's Sacred Person, in which Durand omitted nothing that might
serve to represent him as the most cruel and abominable Prince that ever lived;
the Elder Syti finding it too harsh, had mollified it a little, however he was
thought worthy of the punishment to which he was adjudged: but they had not
time to Publish this Scandalous Pamphlet. Amongst Durands Papers were found
Letters that assured him of the Office of Secretary to the Queen Mother, who
was highly extolled therein; nevertheless it was believed that she had not read
them, and that she never would have consented, that they should after so base a
manner, sully the Honor of the King her Son, whom all Men acknowledged as one
of the most pious, most just and most Excellent Princes that ever wore a Crown.

As for what relates to the Duke of Florence, a show was made of an intention
to invade his Country, and he began to be afraid of a Storm, when he heard that
Orders were sent to Monsieur de Lesdiguiers, to be ready to command an Army of
twenty thousand men in Italy, that vast sums of money were provided to set out
a considerable number of Ships at Marseilles, and that Monsieur de Guise was
already departed to go on Board as Admiral, and to Act according to his
Majesty's Orders: Insomuch that to allay this Tempest, he dispatched the
Chevalier Guidy with great diligence to the King, to excuse himself on the
account of what had passed to the prejudice of the Merchants of Provence, of
which he protested that he was altogether ignorant, till he had received an
information thereof in a Letter from his Agent, laying the fault on certain
Officers, whom he had for that reason caused to be put in Prison: The Chevalier
Guidy brought the Merchants along with him to testify to his Majesty, that not
only the Vessels and Merchandises were restored to them, but that they were
also satisfied in full for all charges, damages and interests, and that they
were paid for the expenses of their journey to the Court: The Fleet that was
prepared by Monsieur de Guise, served to clear the Coasts of Provence of the
Pirates of Algier, that intercepted their commerce; and indeed this was the
true reason that such a fund was appropriated for their maintenance.

The Incendiaries of the Court having, as has been already observed,
exasperated the mind of the Queen with two different passions distrust and
anger, made use of the Proceedings above-related, to cause an absolute
inflammation therein; And she so easily received these ill impressions, that
she suffered the Intelligences and Plots that were already promoted in the
Kingdom under her name, daily to increase, and intended to take a resolution to
withdraw her self privately from Blois, and to raise a Party in the Nation by
the Power of which she was persuaded, to hope to be re-established at Court,
with all the Authority in which she had been heretofore invested.

The King being informed of these artifices, took all possible care to prevent
the effect, and to give a true account of his intentions to the Queen his
Mother, which were certainly so full of sincerity, and so well known to those,
whom he employed in these important and most secret Affairs, that none durst
make the least motion to him, that never so little reflected on the honor and
respect that he required should be rendered to her, or that tended in any
manner whatsoever to interrupt the good correspondence, that he desired to
preserve with her Majesty; It is also true that none of them at that time were
inclined to the contrary, at last the King seeing that all his endeavors
proved ineffectual, sent Monsieur de Roissy, an Ancient Counselor of State, to
reside with her, for these two ends, one of which was to use his utmost efforts
to disperse those mists of suspicion that were cast before her Eyes, and to
dis-intangle her from those perplexities, in which she had involved herself by
harkening to those evil counsels, that were continually proposed to her; and
the other was, to have a watchful eye over the actions of those that came near
her Person, to suggest them to her; His Majesty also commanded certain Troops
of Horse to be put into a Garrison near Blois, to keep those in awe that should
attempt to remove the Queen from thence.

These Orders, and in a Word, all the Kings Actions relating to the Queen his
Mother, even those that turned to her greatest advantage and were apparently
most innocent, were nevertheless converted by the factious, into so many
firebrarnds to inflame her anger: But for as much as they saw that their Plots
were discovered, as soon as they were contrived, and that all the projects that
they could invent, were always frustrated with prudence and great Moderation,
they imagined that this proceeded chiefly from the vigilance, industry and care
of Monsieur Deageant, and took a resolution amongst themselves to set all their
Engines at Work, either to remove or to destroy him. There were two Parties,
that for some time, were engaged in the like enterprises; one of which
consisted of several Persons who being intimate with Monsieur de Luines, were
persuaded that if they could induce him to discredit and expel Deageant, they
might afterward rule him as they pleased, and might thereby insinuate
themselves into the Kings favor even to the detriment of Monsieur de Luines:
The other was managed by the Duke de Monteleon, the Spanish Ambassador, who had
his Emissaries at Court, some of whom were in so great repute with Monsieur de
Luines, by the means of diverse secret Springs, that although by the Letters
dispatched from Spain to the Duke de Monteleon, that were intercepted, and by
large Memorials that were sent to him, the whole intrigue was laid open to
Monsieur de Luines, nevertheless he suffered himself to be deluded by it. These
Memorials were composed after so curious and artificial a manner that Monsieur
Deageant, who knew the disposition of Monsieur de Luines, that was already
inspired with jealousy by reason of the great trust and confidence that the
King had put in him, easily judged what would be the event. He acquainted him
with his thoughts thereupon, and freely protested to him that he was about to
consider in good earnest how he might retreat, as he afterward did, assuring
him, that if he desired to remove him, he would not oppose it, provided that he
took care that his Conscience and Honor might not be interested therein. He
performed his promise to him in this particular; for about three Months after,
Monsieur de Luines having told him, that the Ancient Ministers of State, and
all the chief of his Family, Kindred and Acquaintance had conceived an extreme
aversion and displeasure against him, and that they threatened to abandon him,
if he did not depart from his interest; advised him to forbear coming into the
Privy Council, and that of the dispatches only for fifteen days; in which he
would use his endeavors to take away these jealousies, earnestly entreating
him in the mean time not to declare it to the King, because he was unwilling
that it should come to his Ear, least his Majesty should be provoked against
the Ministers and this might cause a Division in the Council. This Artifice was
too gross not be perceived, and it was apparent enough that the design was,
whilst he abstained from public Employments, to slander and accuse him falsely
before the King: Nothing was left undone to procure this effect; but his
Majesty's generosity was so great, that he could not be prevailed with to
discard a Servant against whom he found nothing alleged, but what proceeded
from envy or malice, and one that could not be charged with any Mif-demeanour.
However Monsieur Deageant, who observed on the one side that he was too weak to
withstand the shock of so many, and such powerful Enemies that opposed him, and
on the other, that Monsieur de Luines had by degrees declined to hearken to his
Advice, to follow that which was suggested to him according to the different
Passions of those that constantly beset him, for the most part to the damage of
the State, judged rightly, that if he should continue in the Execution of his
Office, he would be accounted responsable for all miscarriages that might
happen, though he had no hand in them, these considerations obliged him not
only to yield to the proportions of Monsieur de Luines, but also to assure him
that he intended for the future altogether to desist from the transaction of
any Affairs of State, having nevertheless represented to him diverse weighty
reasons to convince him that (as he had formerly told him) he had suffered
himself to be surprised by those that were his own Enemies, disturbers of the
Peace of the Kingdom, and disaffected to his Majesty's Service, who might
perhaps at some other time require of him an account of several important
negotiations that he had almost brought to perfection, and would be lost
through his retreat; some of which shall be hereafter related in their proper
place.

At that very instant Monsieur Deageant, forbore to appear in Council and to
transact any Affairs, and had also withdrawn himself from Court; but Monsieur
de Luines, who had concealed this Plot from the King, caused him to believe
that he had voluntarily absented himself by reason of the jealousy of the
Ministers, till he could find out some means to compose the differences that
arose amongst them: And therefore fearing if Deageant should altogether quit
his Employment, least his Majesty should discover his design and might take
notice thereof, he desired him to remain at Court, and to see him at the usual
hours: He treated him after this manner, that the King might believe that he
was always present, and had a hand in all public transactions, whilst he
endeavored to persuade him to give his consent that he might be removed.

The King by his prudent and generous conduct had extended his reputation very
far, he was loved by good Men, and feared by evil; his thoughts and actions
were wholly bent to propagate Religion, to cause justice to Reign, to repair
the Ruins of the State, to Establish Peace therein and to impart it to those
Neighbors that were in trouble: But the Devil, the Enemy of good Works,
perceiving that these proceedings tended to the destruction of his Kingdom in
Europe, to put a stop to this Course, stirred up the abovementioned factions
and conspiracies, that after diverse manners changed the Scene of Affairs, and
which is worse, caused several attempts to be made upon his Majesty's Sacred
Person; he instilled into the mind of a Young Man a Native of Cahors (whose
name was concealed, because he was descended from an Honorable Family that was
well-effected to the King's Service,) most wicked and damnable designs, to
Execute which, he came to Paris, and was thus discovered: On Easter day in the
Morning in the Year 1618. This Young Man went into the Convent of the
Cordeliers, and enquired whether there were amongst them any Fathers of the
Province of Guienne, thereupon one was showed to him in the infirmery, named
Arnoux; he accosted him, and after some discourse, desired him to hear him in
Confession, in which he accused himself, saying, that he had some thoughts that
he should be well pleased if the King, Queen and Monsieur the Kings Brother
were dead, and that he had a mind, if it seemed good to him, to kill them and
three other Princes. These were the very Words that the Cordelier caused him to
repeat to him upon the spot, telling him that before he gave him absolution, he
would consider them well, and would talk with him in particular about them,
which he did at first in the Cloister, and afterward in his Chamber where he
brought him, and there having fully examined him concerning this Diabolical
Imagination, he found that he was a Person capable of committing all manner of
wickedness, and that instead of showing any contrition for so abominable a
thought, he seemed always obstinately to persist therein. This good Friar
fearing least some mischief might ensue, if it were not prevented, entreated
him to tarry a little in the Chamber, whilst he went into the Library to turn
over certain Casuists, in order to resolve his doubts on the Subject of his
Confession: He took this opportunity to acquaint Monsieur Deageant with what
had happened, relating to him (as he said) not that which had been spoken in
Confession, because that was forbidden, but several passages that he had heard
from the Mouth of this Young Man in other discourses with him: Monsieur
Deageant after he had commended his zeal, desired him to go and entertain him,
and to invite him to dinner in his own Chamber, or if he refused it, to
accompany him to his Lodgings, till an Officer were sent to apprehend him. The
Ministers of State were immediately assembled, and according to their Advice
this Young Man was put into the Bastile, and in a Chest that was in the Chamber
where he lay, his Confession was found containing these wicked thoughts, with
several other horrible abominations, which being viewed by the Privy
Counselors, they considered that forasmuch as there was no other Proof against
him but his own Confession, and the report of the Confessor, they ought on
several accounts to act circumspectly in such Cases, and fearing on the other
side least the King should be troubled, and it should be made known to the
World that any had conspired against his life, they thought it convenient to
keep him a close Prisoner, and that no rumor should be spread abroad touching
this matter. They to whose custody he was committed, and that observed his
behavior, reported that he would often talk like a mad man, and one that was
desperately intent upon some mischief. Monsieur Deageant, being soon after
discharged from the managing of Public Affairs, this as well as many others,
was neglected; insomuch that the Ministers without recollecting (as is to be
supposed) the cause of his confinement, and without enquiring into it, ordered
him to be set at liberty, as also were some others that were imprisoned in the
same place on slight occasions. They repented it afterward, being informed who
he was, and would have caused him to be taken again, but to no purpose. On the
third day in Easter, the Cordelier that had discovered him, was (as is thought)
Poisoned in the Convent, the Physicians with whose Advice he was carefully
assisted, observed all the signs of a subtle Poison, that would soon have
dispatched him, if he had not been of a very strong constitution, and had not
found such speedy and effectual relief: As soon as he was cured, he was sent
back again into his Convent, and during the Seige of Montauban, he served as an
Almoner, where he fell sick and dyed.

The Devil having failed in this attempt resolved 'ere long to try another.
Amongst the Pages of the lesser Stables, there was one for whom the King had a
more particular respect, and who upon this account attended on Horseback almost
always when his Majesty went a Hunting. The Master of the Horse having on a
certain day, ordered him to mount according to the usual custom, he fell a
weeping and entreated him that he would be pleased to excuse him, affirming
that ever since the last time that they Hunted, he was troubled with somewhat
that incessantly urged him to kill the King, that the more he strove to resist
this temptation, the more he was tormented with it, without being able to
sleep, or to enjoy any peace in his mind; and that he had had recourse to
Prayer, Confession and the Sacrament, but could not get rid of a thought, that
he detested as much as Hell it self: He fell on his knees at his feet,
beseeching him to take care of him, and not to permit him to come near the
King, least the evil Spirit should compel him to commit the execrable Fact to
which he was prompted against his Will: The Master of the Horse caused him to
be examined by two learned Divines, and a Physician to discover whether this
perturbation might not proceed from Melancholy; they avouched the contrary, and
that the Page appeared to be of a good natural constitution, devout and sound
in body and mind, his imagination only excepted, that was hurt by the malignant
suggestion of the Devil with whom he seemed to be possessed; he afterward came
and made a report thereof to a private Assembly of the Ministers of State, who
were of opinion that no mention ought to be made of this Affair, for the same
reasons that have been produced in the Preceding Paragraph, and that the Page
should be committed to the custody of some Person appointed to conduct him to
the Citadel of Calais, where the Governor was to be commanded to entertain
him, and not to permit him to depart till he had received further orders; this
was put in execution, and I know not what became of him since, because I had
retired from the Court.

About the same time a certain French Man, that had lived in Spain about
fourteen Years came from Portugal to the Court, and made application to
Monsieur de Luxemburg lately Deceased, the Brother of Monsieur de Luines, whom
he acquainted that he came on purpose to give information of a matter that he
thought was of great consequence in relation to the Kings Person; affirming,
that being very intimate with the Governor of a Seaport Town, the name of
which I do not remember, this Man believing him to be a Spaniard, had often
showed him an Indian Youth that had a Steel Cross bow, so little that it might
be put into his Pocket, which he could draw so dextroufly, that he never failed
to shoot twenty or twenty five shot within the compass of a penny, with a sharp
Arrow that entered with great force, and very far into the board that was set
up as a mark, and that he was employed at other times in learning Languages,
and more especially the French above all others, without permitting him to go
out of the Fortress, nor so much as out of the Tower, where six Soldiers were
appointed for his Guard: This giving him an occasion to suspect that there was
some sinister design in agitation against his Country, excited in him a desire
to penetrate into it as far as he could; insomuch that being on a certain day
in the Indians Chamber with the Governors Secretary (who as his Master had
done, took him to be a native of Spain) and having asked him what they intended
to do with this Foreigner that was kept there so long; he replied, that it was
better to maintain one desperate and resolute Traitor than a great Army, that
such a one usually did more execution, and did not cost so much; and that he
could not be ignorant, that this was a Maxim of the Spanish Politics.
Therefore from this and from other passages that he observed elsewhere, he
concluded it to be an undoubted truth, that the Indian was thus exercised and
guarded, that he might be hereafter employed to perpetrate some villainous
enterprise in France: He earnestly insisted that this ma^ter should not be
communicated to the Kings Council, only to some of them in private, whose
fidelity and capacity was well known, and that if some one were chosen that
might be trusted, and that could speak the Spanish Tongue fluently, he could
prevail so far as to cause him to be admitted into the Garrison of the
Fortress, and perhaps into the Guard of the Indian's Tower, where he might see
the truth of that which he had related, and that they might advise together
concerning the measures that were to be taken to destroy this Man; in case they
could perceive that any progress had been made in the design, for which he
judged that he was entertained after this manner; thereupon such a Person was
provided as he required, who was furnished with a peculiar Cyphet or Character
to write down the particulars that he should observe concerning these
occurrences; he sent diverse Letters that confirmed all that the other had
reported, and urged with much importunity that this Indian ought to be
dispatched, and that it might be easily effected with a little Money, by the
means of some of those that belonged to his Guard; this was not long after
actually put in execution: A Gentleman that faithfully served the King in
Spain, was charged to observe these transactions, and gave an account that the
two Men that were sent thither, had punctually performed their promise: I can
certainly avouch the truth of this Affair, since the sums of Money that were
paid to keep it secret were taken out of my Chest a considerable part of which
is yet due to me, because I was dismissed from the managing of public
Negotiations, during the time that this was in agitation.

Before I proceed to discourse of those passages that came to my knowledge,
after I was thus discharged (...) my Employment, I thought it not amiss
succinctly to relate some particulars touching Foreign Affairs, a true account
of which perhaps has not been exhibited elsewhere: It is certain that when the
King took the Reins of the Government of his Kingdom into his own hands, the
Court of Rome inclined more to the side of Spain, than to that of France;
Cardinal Bourguere the Popes Nephew privately encouraged this party against
ours, and to engage himself therein, concluded with the Spanish Ambassador the
Marriage of the Prince de Sulmone which has been since consummated. Monsieur
Deageant perceiving that they to whom the administration of the transactions
abroad, was committed, did not Advise the King to get an interest at this
Court, that was always able to cause notable revolutions in the Affairs of
Christendom, entreated his Majesty to permit him to endeavor to accomplish a
design that he had contrived for this purpose: He was so fortunate as to obtain
a considerable esteem with the Pope and the Cardinal his Nephew; and Cardinal
Bentivoglio, being then in France, wrought good impressions upon them by his
dispatches; which procured him great Credit, and very much facilitated his
enterprise, he was also favored with the great reputation that the King daily
acquired, and by the refusal of the Spaniards to restore Verseil, contrary to
the re-iterated promises that they had made, by the Treaties that were
concluded through the Mediation of the Pope and his Majesty, from whence the
Court of Rome inferred, that the Spaniards designed to enlarge their Dominions
in Italy, to the damage of the other Potentates, and particularly of his
Holiness. Thereupon a Treaty of Alliance was promoted between the House of
Bourguere and that of France, and to make it more firm and durable a match was
propounded between the Duke of Sulmone and Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who was
afterward Married to the Duke de la Valette. This overture being made to
Cardinal Bourguere, and several reasons and advantages represented that were
proper to persuade him; he declared that he did not dislike the Proposition,
that he would communicate it to his Holiness, and that he would in the mean
time hold the Marriage in suspense that was Prosecuted by the Ambassador of
Spain, between the Prince de Sulmone, and the party whom he has since taken to
Wife: But that he was obliged to say that France would not reap the Fruits that
they expected from this Treaty, though it should succeed, unless the consent of
Cardinal Aldobrandini could be obtained, whose power equalled, if not
surpassed, that of the House of Bourguere; that he would not fail to join with
Spain, as soon as he should see this union proposed; that the number of the
Cardinals of his Faction, being augmented with those that were the Subjects of
Spain, would always prevail in the Conclave and in the Consistory; and
therefore that they would be continually opposed and overpowered,
notwithstanding all that might happen to the advantage of France, whereas if
the King could unite these two Powers, nothing could hinder him for the suture,
from obtaining all manner of Credit and Power in the Court of Rome, even to
that degree, that when the Pope should dye, he might cause one to be chosen of
the French Nation. A promise was made to him, to make an attempt upon the hopes
of good success; and he was assured, that it should be his own fault, if his
party were not strengthened with his Majesty's Authority against that of Spain
and the Family of Aldobrandini that was almost extinct.

A Marriage was then treated between Monsieur the Prince of Piedmont and Madam
the Kings Sister; Monsieur Deageant was one of those whom his Majesty thought
fit to employ more particularly therein, who took this opportunity to persuade
the Duke of Savoy to endeavor to engage Cardinal Aldobrandini in the French
Interests, without declaring to him any thing that had passed between him and
Cardinal Bourguere; he was further urged with the hopes that by effecting this,
he might cause himself to be elected King of the Romans, and from thence might
be advanced to the Empire. James I. late King of Great Britain instead of
inciting the Prince Palatine his Son-in-Law, dissuaded him from it, and was of
opinion that the Duke of Savoy ought rather to be regarded. One of the English
Ministers of State imparted this to Monsieur Deageant, that he might inform the
King thereof, and might induce him to prosecute this Design, as being the best
and most sure means to pull down the House of Austria, to establish Peace
amongst the Estates of Europe, and to prevent the Commotions that were ready to
break forth in Germany.

This Proposition was approved by the Duke of Savoy, who wanted neither Courage
nor Ambition: he therefore resolved to solicit Cardinal Aldobrandini on this
account and promised much from the strict Amity and Friendship that was betwixt
them, but he feared least he should meet with some difficulty therein, because
this Cardinal, as to his present Condition at Rome, was able to hold the
Balance even in the Conclave and in the Consistory; but that he might be
over-matched by the Faction of Bourguere; that would be fortified with the
Spaniards as soon as they should see him inclined to France; which was the same
consideration that had restrained Bourguere with respect to Aldobrandini as
has been already observed. A promise was thereupon made to the said Duke that
all possible Efforts should be used to gain Cardinal Bourgu^re.

It has been above related that M. Deageant contrived an Enterprise against
Rochel with an Officer that had the charge of the Fortifications of that City;
this Man had given Information to the Inhabitants, that for the security of the
Place it was necessary to raise a Bulwark on that side next the Harbor, and
having received orders to take care that a good quantity of Earth should be
carried thither, for that purpose, left a space open through which seven Men
might enter in front, this gap was filled up at Night with a few Turfs that
might be easily trampled upon and overturned; but that he might gain time to
prepare all things requisite for the Execution of this Design, he prolonged the
finishing of this Work. Another Inhabitant of Rochel that guarded the Tower of
the Lantern on the same side, treated in like manner with Monsieur Deageant at
the same time, to open a passage into the City, which he had cut through the
Stones and afterward filled with Earth, and was so wide that two Men might
march therein in front: The other Officer and he, without knowing one another
Intentions insisted, that the King having put a strong Garrison into Fort
Jews, that was near the City, might re-enforce it as occasion required, and
might without any difficulty at the return of the tide, cause a detatchment of
a considerable number of Soldiers that might be sufficient to perform this
Enterprise, to advance by the way that they should show, without being
perceived by the Sentinels. Monsieur Deageant to be assured of this, sent an
Engineer in whom he could confide, that at two several Nights entered through
the above mentioned Passages, and reported that the project was infallible, and
not long after acquainted the King and Monfieur de Luines with it: Thereupon a
debate arose in the Privy Council, whether in case an opportunity should be
offered to surprise Rochel, the King should lay hold on it, and it was carried
in the affirmative, though at that time there was a full Peace, since the
Rockellers as to their particular were continually Factious and in Rebellion.
There were none then privy to the Design, but the King, Monsieur de Luines, the
two Undertakers, the Workman that was sent to view the Places, and Monsieur
Deageant: but afterward Monsieur de Luines persuaded the Person that managed
the Affair at the Tower of the Lantern to introduce Monsieur de Auriac
Quartermaster of the Army lately deceased, to see whether it could be
effected, forbidding him to make any mention thereof to Monsieur Deageant:
Monsieur de Auriac declared, that he had seen every thing after the same manner
as was represented, but that so many Soldiers as would be requisite to take the
City, could not pass through that Tower, unless the other Attempt were
vigorously prosecuted at the same time; this difficulty arose by reason of the
absence of the other Officer, who was in Rochel and had treated with none but
Monsieur Deageant, without whom Monsieur de Luines intended that these
Enterprises should be performed, that the Honor of them might be attributed to
him; he feared also if any success should happen upon the Negotiation of
Monsieur Deageant, lest he should obtain further Credit and Favor with the
King. Thus all proceedings in this Matter being delayed, no other Effect was
produced but the Death of him that acted at the Tower by the Lantern, who being
sent into the City of Monsieur de Luines to endeavor to induce the Officer to
treat with none but him, and to desist from conferring any longer with Monsieur
Deageant, was discovered, upon the advice that a certain noble Man to whom
Monsieur de Luines had revealed this Design, had given to the Mayor; insomuch
that he was Condemned and Executed; Upon this account the Officer fled, and
having related all these Circumstances to Monsieur Deageant, departed to Rome,
not thinking himself safe in France. The Jealousy of Monsieur de Luines, and
the removing of Monsieur Deageant were the only Obstacles that hindered the
King from becoming absolute Master of Rochel at that time.

During the Employment of Monsieur Deageant, no other Affairs of consequence
were transacted in Italy, but that of the Duke of Florence above mentioned; the
Marriage of the Prince of Piedmont; the difference between the Dukes of Savoy
and Mantua, of which the King was Arbitrator, and the Accommodation between the
King of Spain and the Duke of Savoy; And it would be needless for me to enlarge
on them, since there are many that are able to produce larger Memorials than I
can; as for the last, Father Joseph can give a true account thereof, since he
was sent into Spain on purpose to cause the Treaty to be put in Execution, that
was made for the restitution of Verseil.

I shall only add one particular passage that happened to my Knowledge, which
perhaps may be thought worth the observing, Cardinal Ludovisio, who was
afterward promoted to the Pontificate, negotiated for the Pope in the
aforesaid Accommodation, and Monsieur de Lesdiguiers was one of those whom the
King had employed therein: The Treaty being concluded, Monsieur de Lesdiguiers
went to take leave of the Cardinal, and amongst other Complements, wished him
the the Mitre; he smiled and made him this answer, Will you promise me to
become a Catholic when I shall be Pope? Yes certainly, replied Monsieur de
Lesdiguiers, who seeing him very Ancient, and the last of the Cardinals could
not imagine that he could attain to this Supreme Dignity; however in a little
time he was placed in St. Peter's Chair, and long after dispatched a Brief to
Monsieur de Lesdiguiers to put him in mind of his promise, to perform which he
was already inclined, as shall be hereafter observed; he sent an answer to this
Brief, full of respect, and even made use of the terms of most Holy Father and
his Holiness, notwithstanding the Remonstrances that the Deputies of the
Reformed Religion, and the Consistory of Lions from whence he wrote, exhibited
to him on this occasion.

There were also certain Treaties in agitation concerning the Affairs of the
Valtoline, which were disannulled by the Venetians at the very first overture,
but because I knew not the succeeding Events I shall make no mention of them
here; And as for Spain, excepting the Transactions that related to the
composing of the differences between them and the Duke of Savoy, there was no
other matter of moment depending between the two Crowns, and Peace has been
maintained in despite of the mutual Antipathies of of these two Nations one
against another, and the different Interests of their Kings.

There arose about that time a certain contest with England; the Ambassador of
France was come back and left le Cler his Secretary to act in his stead, who
proceeded so far, that a resolution was taken to treat him somewhat severely,
he thereupon withdrew himself, and having sent an express to the King of what
passed; he received a Command to find out some means to return, which he
afterward did; there was also an Ambassador from England with the King, who
upon notice that the other of France was in the Kingdom, gave orders that he
should speedily depart, since, contrary to the Law of Nations, his Master had
abused his. The Duke of Savoy who kept a good Correspondence in England, and
treated there about the Marriage of his Son, hoping that these two Kings being
united together, would assist him much in obtaining the Crown, that had been
propounded to him, interposed, and took much pains to reconcile them, since
their differences were produced on a very slight occasion.

The principal difficulty consisted in this Point, which of them should first
send his Ambassador. The King alleged that since there was no composition
between the two Crowns touching precedence, the English having always yielded
it to the French, and the King of England having obliged his Majesty to recall
his Agent, it belonged to him to send his Ambassador first into France: The
King of England did not dispute about the matter of Composition, but pretended
that he had not treated the Agent of France after so rude a manner, that he
ought to have withdrawn himself; that he was highly offended that his was sent
back without any lawful Cause, and that this offense could not be redressed but
by sending a French Ambassador to excuse it after the arrival of whom he would
cause his to depart. At last it was agreed that the two Kings should nominate
their respective Ambassadors, that the English should first pass over the Sea,
and that as soon as he had given notice of his Arrival in France, the King
should order his to set forward; the first being very active, made so great
haste, that as soon as he landed in France, he traveled to the Court, and
remained there some time before the later began his Journey.

An amicable Correspondence has been since maintained between the two Crowns.
The King of England upon the recommendation of our King did often mitigate and
abate the ordinary rigorous proceedings against the Roman Catholics in that
Country: He was also very well pleased with the Propositions that were
privately offered to him on behalf of his Majesty, tending to reunite him to
the bosom of the Church: insomuch, that after some reiterated Conferences that
were managed to that effect in the King's Presence, without communicating any
thing thereof in his Council, lest the effect being made known, should be
obstructed or prevented, the Archbishop of Embrun made a Voyage into England,
as it were without any design, in the habit, and under the name of a Counselor
in the Parliament of Grenoble, whom curiosity had induced to see England: he
had no sooner set his foot on Land at Dover, but the Duke of Buckingham came to
meet him, and having saluted him, whispered him thus in the Ear; Sir, You that
call your self a Counselor of Grenoble, being the Archbishop of Embrun, are
very welcome into these Dominions: you need not change your Name, nor conceal
your Quality; for you shall receive nothing but Honor here, and especially
from the King my Master, who has a very particular esteem for you. Indeed, the
King of England treated him very honorably, granted him several Favors in
behalf of the Catholics, and even permitted him to administer the Sacrament of
Confirmation to them in the House of the Ambassador of France, where there was
a great Court, the doors being open. There were near eighteen thousand persons
that received this Sacrament, without having any thing said to them, in the
Entry, at the Door, or elsewhere; although there was a great concourse of the
English people in the street, that saw this Ceremony performed. During the time
that he resided there, he had several Conferences with the King; who being
satisfied as to all the points in Controversy, wrote a large Letter to the
Pope, by a Catholic Gentleman his Subject, whom he privily sent to him on
purpose, in which he acknowledged him as the Vicar General of Jesus Christ on
Earth, as the Universal Father of the Christians, and the chief of all
Catholics, assuring him, that after he had taken care of those things to which
he had agreed, he would openly declare himself; in the mean time he promised
not to suffer any search to be made in his Kingdom after Priests that were sent
by his Holiness or the most Christian King, provided they were not Jesuits, in
whom he protested that he could not confide for diverse Reasons; principally
because he accounted them as the Authors of the Gunpowder Treason, by which
they had designed to blow him up as he sat in the Parliament House: In his
Letter amongst other things, he entreated the Pope to vouchsafe that the Goods
of the Church that were entered into the Patrimony of the principal Families of
England should not be taken from them; but on the contrary, that they should be
permitted to possess them, because otherwise great troubles and commotions
would ensue; he affirmed moreover, that nothing could detain him from making a
public Profession of the Catholic Religion immediately, but the desire he had
to gain the King of Denmark his Brother-in-law, whom he had to that end, but
under another pretense, solicited to come over into England, where he hoped to
convert him: that by doing this he should be able to establish peace in his
Dominions, which otherwise could hardly be maintained; and that they two being
joined together in the same design, would draw after them almost all the
Northern Countries: The Duke of Buckingham and the Gentleman whom he sent to
Rome, were the only persons that were his Subjects to whom he discoursed these
Intentions: The Duke had promised to follow him, and indeed made a considerable
progress therein; but the Death of King James that happened during this
Negotiation prevented the effect, at which his Holiness and the King were very
much troubled.

The King of Great Britain always showed a great aversion to the design of the
Prince Palatine his Son-in-law, and an extreme desire to cause the Duke of
Savoy to be made King of the Romans; he solicited M. Deageant during his
Employment at Court to endeavor to incite the King to this, and to persuade
him to make use of his Interest with the Electoral Princes that were his
Friends, as he intended to do with those that were his, promising also to raise
Forces to assist him in his Election and Enstalment.

The Affairs of the Low Countries remained in their ordinary course: It is true
indeed, that the Spaniards in Flanders had determined to renew an old Quarrel
by digging a certain Channel over Calais, in those Lands that were in dispute
between the two Estates; but the King opposed it, declaring that he would
hinder the work by force of Arms: some Conferences were holden on this account
by the neighboring Officers on both sides, but they took no effect; however
the Spaniards desisted from their Undertaking. The King of Sweden obtained
leave of the King to levy certain French Troops for his Service, that were
employed in the War, in which he was then engaged.

The Duke of Lorrain, who was as yet only Prince of Vaudemont, resided some
time at Court, where he received all manner of demonstrations of the King's
Favor and good Will, who defended him in a Quarrel that arose between him and
the Count of Soissons, and took a particular care of all his Affairs; in so much
that when he proposed to marry the Heiress of Lorrain, His Majesty afforded him
his assistance, tho some were of a contrary Opinion: indeed no Opportunity was
offered wherein he could oblige him, but he did it affectionately, being very
much inclined to love him. However, Divine Justice has permitted him to be
punished for his unparalled ingratitude to the King almost as soon as he had
arrived to the highest pitch of his power: The D. of Vaudemont his Father, who
never was well affected to France, very early implanted the seeds of those
pernicious Principles in his mind, that have since produced such bitter fruits
in his Family, and have at last been the cause of its ruin.

As for the Affairs of Germany, when the King took on himself the
Administration of the Government of his Kingdom, they were sufficiently
embroiled; the two Parties, the Catholic and the Protestant, had already
harassed one another in several places; the Duke of Bavaria hoped to attain to
the Empire, being animated by the Counsel of the Jesuits, who to that end had
advised him to engage in his Interest the principal Officers that had served
the Emperor, and were lately disbanded; as also to cause all necessary
provisions to be made for the execution of this Design. The Prince Palatine on
the other side, being excited by his own Ambition, and by the greatest part of
the Protestants, and very much importuned by the Duke of Bouillon, suffered
himself to be decoyed with the same project of aspiring to the Empire, and
prosecuted it vigorously: Both Parties seeing France enjoying a profound Peace,
and their King ready to mount on Horseback, to turn the Scales to the side
that he should think fit to favor, diligently sought to make an Alliance with
him: The King's Council was divided thereupon; some thought it convenient that
he should promote the Enterprise of the Duke of Bavaria, nevertheless without
declaring it openly: Others on the contrary, were of Opinion that he ought to
remain Neuter, and with the Forces that he had in the Field to march toward
Metz, that appearing formidable to both Parties, he might be ready to lay hold
on all advantages that should be offered, which consisted amongst other things
in counter-ballancing the House of Austria, that apparently designed to exalt
it self to the detriment of all the Potentates of Europe; and in case matters
should be disposed to a Peace, in endeavoring to become Arbitrator thereof.

Moreover, there happened another occasion that required the King's Presence at
Metz, an Information had been given of the secret Correspondence between M.
d'Espernon and the Queen Mother, that was at last made manifest by her
departure from Blois: It was known also that the Duke of Bouillon had promised
to join with that Party, and that under color of fortifying the Garrison of
Metz, he intended to cause Soldiers to be admitted therein, to the end that in
the midst of the Combustions that he saw were ready to break forth, with the
assistance of them and some other Inhabitants that were at his Devotion, he
might attempt to make himself Master of the place, to annex it to the
Principality of Sedan; insomuch that the King to secure this City, and to
rescue it from the power of those that were very industrious in strengthening
themselves in their Conspiracies against him, was resolved to proceed to the
execution of an infallible Enterprise, that had been projected at that time
when M. d'Espernon began first to be suspected; in order to the performance of
which, certain Troops were quartered near that City under another pretense.
This Stratagem was then very privately managed, for the King and one of his
Privy Counselors were only privy to it, his Majesty not being willing to
discover it even to M. de Luines; Because (said he) he knew not how to keep a
Secret.

Amongst the Nobility that adhered to the Factions that were raised in the
Kingdom under the name of the Queen Mother, endeavors were used to introduce
the whole Body, or at least the principal Members of the Professors of the
Reformed Religion, who were always very watchful to take advantages upon any
dissension in the State. This was the cause that detained the King in Paris or
the places adjacent, and prevented his Journey to Metz, fearing lest the
Incendiaries should grow more numerous and potent in his absence

The Artifices of those that favored these Conspiracies, and others that made
use of them to ruin M. de Luines, and to get into his place, prevailed so far
over him as to persuade him to believe, that every thing that was told him
concerning them, was frivolous and that there were no such Plots in Agitation:
Insomuch, that ten days before the Queen Mother went from Blois, M. Deageant,
who (as has been said) had no share in the transaction of Affairs, but
remained as yet in Paris, according to the desire of M. du Luines, having
brought to him an Information that he had received from a Gentleman of good
Credit, concerning the design of this departure, and the manner how it was to
be performed; he despised it, saying it was a Dream and a Chimera: However, M.
Deageant failed not after four days were passed to give him a new Account, that
came from another person of Quality his intimate Friend, and one that was very
well affected to the King's Service, who had hearkened to the Enterprise, with
an intent rather to be serviceable in revealing it, than to do any mischief:
But M. du Luines treated him in this Rencounter, after the same manner as he
had done in the preceding, being possessed with an Opinion that had been
wrought on his mind, that Deageant had invented this piece of News to procure
some advantage to himself, and to endeavor by this means to recover his
favor. M. Deageant had a just cause to be offended, if his affection to his
Master's service, and to the particular welfare of M. de Luines, with whom he
had lived in strict Amity, had not restrained him; but preferring his Duty
before any other resentment, he insisted as much as possibly he could, to
persuade him to advise the King to prevent (as he might easily do) an action
that would infallibly kindle a Civil War; but perceiving that he could not
convince him of the Truth of this Relation, he urged him at least for his own
Security to propound it to the Council that was to be assembled at that very
hour, because otherwise the Counselors themselves would be the first that
should accuse him of Negligence, in case the Enterprise should take effect. He
promised to do it, and at the breaking up of this Council that was holden at
Paris, he told him that all the Ministers were imposed on in this matter, and
that they ought not to be any longer amuzed thereby.

The Gentleman that had sent the second Advice, seeing that it was not
regarded, and being credibly informed of the resolution that was taken for the
departure of the Queen Mother from the Castle of Blois, with the Retinue,
Order, Manner and other particular Circumstances of the Action, rode Post
himself, to give a certain account thereof, thinking that his Words would be
more prevalent than his Letters: He arrived on the Thursday preceding the
abovementioned Departure. M. Deageant brought him to St. Germain, whither the
King was gone to divert himself for some Days with Walking, and presented him
before M. de Luines, who would not so much as hear him, although he offered to
undergo any Punishment that should be inflicted on him, if he could not
justify every Particular that he had averred.

The Truth soon appeared, for on the Saturday following, about three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, the Sieur de Pre, a Gentleman that belonged to the
King, and had a House at Blois, brought the News that between Friday Night and
Saturday Morning the Queen Mother was removed after the same manner as had been
described to M. de Luines, who was now very much perplexed, being sensible that
this Device was principally contrived against him; and that the Ministers of
State, and the most part of the other Persons that had dissuaded him from
hearkening to this Advice, did not bear that cordial and sincere Affection to
him as he imagined. It is also certain that some desired to see the Queen
invested with the full Authority that she had formerly enjoyed at Court,
provided that they might rule under her Name, as they hoped to do; and that
others earnestly expected some Change in hopes to advance their Fortune, there
being very few that preferred the Kings Interest and the common Good of the
State, before their own private Gain. Upon these Considerations M. de Luines
began to acknowledge the Damage that had accrued to the King's Affairs, and to
himself in particular, by being so easily induced to withdraw M. Deageant from
the transacting of public Negociations, and took a Resolution on this occasion
to re-establish him; but having discoursed with him touching his Intentions; he
excused himself altogether, as he often did afterward, when he caused him to
be solicited by diverse worthy Persons, some of whom are yet living: however he
promised that he would never refuse to serve him in particular on any occasion,
when it should lie in his power, as he did very advantageously even in the
accommodation between the King and the Queen his Mother.

On Sunday Morning the King returned to Paris, and caused his Council to be
assembled to consult what was to be done in this Conjuncture. It was resolved
that forasmuch as this was the first considerable Enterprise that he had
undertaken since he had taken upon himself the absolute Government of his
Kingdom, to come off honorably and to strike a terror into the Hearts of the
Rebels, he ought to raise a great Army, and to appear himself at the Head
thereof: That it was necessary to this end to levy about an hundred thousand
Men, to be employed in securing the Provinces, and that the greatest part of
the Army that was to be commanded by his Majesty in Person, should immediately
go and besiege the Place where the Queen and her Abettors should be retired. Of
all these Forces, only fifteen hundred Men under the Command of M. du Maine
were allotted to preserve Guienne, tho that Province was most to be feared, by
reason of the Correspondence that the Queen Mother and M. d'Espernon had
therein at that time, more than in any other of the Kingdom.

The King would not declare his Opinion in this Council, but making a show to
all that were then present, that he approved their Advice, he resolved to
examine this Affair privately and more exactly than he had done, and to find
out better Expedients than those that had been esteemed as the most safe. His
Majesty was very sensible that they that had made this Overture, had Intentions
that were not conformable to his; for (as he asterwards expressed his Mind to
one of his Counselors) if he had consented to act according to this
Determination, he would thereby have given time and means to a growing Party to
advance, and to become so powerful that it would be an exceeding difficult
matter to subdue them; in regard the full term of six Months would be expired
before Provision could be made to begin to levy the Forces that were agreed
upon, there being then no Cash in the Treasury, nor any way to raise such
considerable Sums, but by issuing out new Edicts that must be enrolled in the
Sovereign Courts, which would be an Undertaking of no small consequence, and
could not easily be performed: thus the whole Year would be passed before this
vast Army could be in a condition to march into the Field, and the Summer being
spent in making Levies, and the Winter drawing near, the King would be forced
either to treat, or to disband part of his Troops, or at least to put them in
Garrisons, and perhaps might be perplexed in taking other Measures, to furnish
a new supply of Money to maintain them, or to prepare them for action against
the next Spring. In the mean time, it is not to be imagined that the
Ringleaders of the Faction, whose Fingers already itched to venture on some
Attempt, would remain idle, or would let slip so fair an opportunity to take
all manner of Advantages. Upon these and several other Considerations that his
Majesty often revolved in his Mind, on this occasion, he took a resolution at
last to try another Method, viz. to endeavor speedily to procure an
Accommodation with the Queen his Mother, by offering to her reasonable
Satisfaction, and such as might consist with the Safety of the Kingdom;
nevertheless, without neglecting the means, readily to put himself into such a
state as to be able to maintain his Authority by force of Arms, in case
necessity required it; but he intended to do this after another manner
altogether different from that which had been concluded in the Council: For
instead of that great Army that he was advised to command in Person, he
purposed to make use of M. du Maine Governor of Guienne, who at that time was
very well affected to his Majesty's Interest, and had a great Antipathy against
the Queen Mother, from whom he had received an Injury, and against M.
d'Espernon, that had molested him in his Government. The King had determined to
send him Commissions immediately to raise an Army of fifteen thousand Men upon
his own Credit, expecting till the necessary Sums of Money could be returned,
with Orders to march near the Place where the principal Forces of the
Confederates should be posted, to the end that they might shut them up so close
that they might not be able to extend or disperse themselves further; and that
by this Diligence those might be restrained that should attempt to join their
Party. But because M. d'Espernon was the only Person, amongst the Nobility of
the Kingdom, that had appeared in this Design, his Majesty resolved to take
away from him the means of prosecuting it, by seizing on the Places of which he
was Governor, and that might make any considerable Resistance.

Before the Departure of the Queen Mother from Blois, the King upon the advice
that he had received concerning the practices of the Duke of Espernon, had
already secretly secured Xaintes and Boulongne; and had hearkened to a Proposal
that some of the Inhabitants of Metz had made to him in order to the taking of
the City, and to another that a private Person had offered to surprise the
Citadel; both these Projects seemed to be infallible, therefore his Majesty had
under a certain Pretense, commanded about three thousand five hundred Men to
advance that Way, as has been abovementioned: and had taken a Resolution to
go in Person at the head of his Troops to see these Enterprises performed; but
to prevent all Suspicion he designed to go with great expedition to the place
where the Queen his Mother had retired, and to send his Messengers before, to
give the necessary Orders at Paris: But instead of taking this Road, feigning
to have received an Information at Night, that obliged him speedily to repair
to the Frontiers of Champagne, he would turn short and march directly to Metz;
he considered that in taking possession of this City, and on the other side in
causing M. du Maine to block up Angoulesme, that was the only Place that was
secured for M d'Espernon, and into which he foresaw that the Queen his Mother
might be conveyed; he would soon compel him to submit to his Clemency. Besides
this, his Majesty judged that his appearing at Metz with an Army, would procure
him other Advantages amongst the German Princes, that all had an Eye upon him
as being able to turn the Balance of their Affairs; as it has been above
observed.

The King having made these Preparations for his Journey, without waiting for
Money to be raised by way of Edict, as had been proposed to him, took up
certain Sums upon his own Credit at Paris to defray the most necessary and
urgent Expenses; and made a show as if he intended to follow the Advice of his
Counselors, excepting in two Particulars; one was, That M. du Maine ought to
be furnished with a greater Army than was agreed upon, in regard that he was to
sustain the principal weight of the War; and the other, That he thought fit to
appoint Commissioners to treat with the Queen. His Majesty sent M. de Schomberg
to his Government of la March, with Orders to assemble his Tenants and
Vassals, to endeavor to seize on Luzarche that was in the Possession of M.
d'Espernon, and to take care to keep all that Province within the bounds of
their Duty: on the other side, he pressed M. du Maine to hasten his Levies, to
march with the Forces that he had already got together, and to encamp before
Angoulesme, into which City, his Majesty was lately informed that the Queen his
Mother and M. d'Espernon had retreated.

The Malcontents were not a little surprised to see all these Commands no
sooner given but performed, and understood that the King managed his Affairs
after another manner than they imagined, or at least otherwise than some that
were near him had persuaded them to believe; insomuch that they were glad to
hear of the Embassy that was prepared to be sent to the Queen Mother tending to
an Accommodation, and hoped that these things that they could not obtain by
Force, would be in part granted in the Treaty, promising themselves much from
the favor of some of the Ministers of State, and from the Weakness and
Indiscretion of the others. But the King perceiving that his Service was not
performed as it ought to be, not by reason of any connivance or default of the
Cardinal of Rochefoucaut and of M. de Bethunes, whom he had deputed as
Commissioners, but through the Artifices of some of those that managed the
Dispatches; cast his Eyes upon M. de Berulle, chief of the Fathers of the
Oratory, whom he knew to be in good repute with the Queen his Mother, as also
with M. d'Espernon, and employed him secrerly to treat with the Queen; to this
end his Majesty caused the Memorials that were prepared in the Council to be
brought to him, as it were to be perused by the Commissioners, and commanded M.
Deageant to draw up certain particular Instructions, by the means of which and
of several other Dispatches, and after many Messages too and fro, the
accommodation was at last agreed upon, through the mediation of the said Sieur
de Berulle, who afterward communicated his Negotiation to the Commissioners.

During these Transactions there were many Letters written on both sides, and
diverse Actions happened, on which I shall not insist, because they are commonly
known, and have been mentioned by several Writers: I shall only add, that the
King having declared to M. de Luines the Project concerning Metz that he had
devised without him, because (as his Majesty had said) he could not keep a
Secret, he acquainted a certain Person with it, who having discovered it to the
Cardinal of Guise, he speedily gave notice thereof to M. de Valette, whom his
Father had left to command in Metz; he immediately caused all the Inhabitants
to be disarmed, the greatest part of whom were privy to the Design: However
they had foreseen this Accident, and had provided a Magazine of Arms, that they
kept in a private place; insomuch that notwithstanding their being disarmed,
one of those that managed the Enterprise, came and told the King, that if it
pleased his Majesty to cause it to be put in Execution, they had still
sufficient means left by which they could infallibly make themselves Masters of
the City; and the Person that undertook the Affair of the Citadel assured him
also on his behalf, that it might be easily accomplished: but as the King was
just ready to depart on his Journey, he was informed by a Courier sent on
purpose, that the secret Magazine of Arms of the Inhabitants was discovered,
that they were taken from them, and that the Garrison was re-enforc'd after such
a manner, that it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to cause this
Design to take effect. It was known that the second disarming proceeded from
the same original as the first, which obliged his Majesty, according to the
advice of some of his particular Servants, principally to incline to an
Acccommodation, since it was apparent from the premises, that if he designed to
engage in war, he would not be so faithfully served therein as he expected.

But because M. de Berulle in his Negotiation, met with new difficulties every
day, proceeding from the artifice of the Abbot of Roucelay, and some others
that had obtained credit with the Queen, since the departure of his Eminency,
the King took a resolution to recall him: the Jealousy of the Ministers of
State had caused him to retire to Avignon, being enjoined not to stir from
thence without his Majesty's Order, who was not ignorant that they would use
their utmost efforts to hinder his Reestablishment; therefore he thought fit to
employ M. Deageant alone in the affair, whom he commanded to compose a Letter,
which his Majesty signed, and added four or five lines with his own Hand; the
Tenor of which was, That he acknowledged, that the Cardinal during his
residence with the Queen his Mother had by his wholesome Admonitions and
prudent Conduct, gained an Influence over her Mind, and had respectively served
their Majesty's, by frustrating all the Attemps that were made to increase
their differences, that he earnestly desired to see him with her again, to give
her better Counsel than that which was continually suggested to her; and to
that end he exhorted him by the Affection that he always bore to the Welfare
of their Majesty's and the State, to appear speedily before the Queen, and to
endeavor to make her sensible of the great Inclination he had to honor her,
and to give her all the satisfaction that she could reasonably expect; since he
never had any Intention to the contrary. This Letter was delivered to M. du
Tremblay, the Governer of the Bastille, with a passport importing a command to
all, to permit him to pass freely, as also the Horsemen that were ordered to
conduct him from Provence to Court, with a Prohibition, forbidding any to
molest them, or so much as to enquire who they were.

Notwithstanding this Passport, M. d'Alincourt, who very well knew the temper
of the Ministers, to some of whom he was allied, and doubting lest this Journey
should be made without their advice, thought fit to stop his Eminency at Lions,
till he had received other express order from the King: But when he had shown
him the very Letter that he had written to him, in which he saw his Majesty's
Hand, he excused himself, and set his Eminency at liberty, insomuch that in a
few days he arrived at Angoulesme, where all manner of Artifices were
practiced, to cause him to be suspected by the Queen Mother: But at last
yielding to the sincerity of his Counsels and Actions, being also assured
elsewhere by M. de Berulle, that she ought not to expect that the difference
could be composed, unless she re-established him in the same favor and credit
to which she had formerly admited him, and seeing herself in a condition to be
compelled e're long to submit to any Law that should be imposed on her, the
Party to whom she had adhered, not being able to protect her, nor to rescue her
from the Troubles, and unhappy Circumstances wherein they had involved her, she
resolved to banish them from her Presence, and freely to entertain his
Eminency, who delayed not to find out expedients to remove the difficulties
that obstructed the Accommodation, which was at last concluded as has been
above related.

Upon the Notice that M. d'Alincourt had sent by the Post to one of the
Ministers concerning his Eminency's Journey, and the Memorials that were
delivered to him, his Letter was read in the Council of the Dispatches, where
the matter was aggravated after such a manner, that the Counselors, the
Secretaries of State, and those of the King's Cabinet were engaged in it, with
an intent to excite them all against M. Deageant, whom they knew that his
Majesty had employed on this occasion: The Chancellor was desired to discourse
with him somewhat sharply about it for two ends; one was to cause him to
disapprove his Eminency's Journey, and to advise him to banish him to Rome: the
other to persuade him to abandon M. Deageant, who was represented to him as
guilty of High Treason against the State, in performing this piece of Service.
At the breaking up of the Council of the Dispatches, the Ministers being
departed into the King's Closet, the Chancellor began to speak on the subject
of his Commission, saying that the Lords of the Council having deliberately
considered the contents of M. d'Alincourt's Letter, had judged that he that had
induced his Majesty to consent to his Eminency's Journey, and had prepared the
Dispatch, deserved immediately to be sent to the Galleys, without any form of
Process or Trial: But the King interrupting him declared, that all the
Proceedings in that Affair, were directed according to his order, and for his
service, and forbad any mention to be made thereof to him for the future, under
the penalty of his High Displeasure; insomuch that none durst persist in
importuning him at that time. It is true indeed, that nothing was omitted that
might incline M. de Luines to suspect this Action, from whom the King had
dexterously and prudently concealed it, till it was accomplished; and to incite
him without further delay to destroy, or at least to banish M. Deageant for
ever from the Court, since it was apparent that although he was removed from
the Council, and from the transaction of Affairs, nevertheless he desisted not
from undertaking those of the greatest Importance, without giving him the lest
account thereof. From that very time the Prosecutions that had been raised
against him were continually promoted, and never ceased since, tho he retired
as far as possibly he could, and demeaned himself with the greatest Integrity.

M. de Luines was also disposed to gratify the Ministers in this respect, but
he forbore to use his utmost efforts till the Treaty was concluded with the
Queen Mother, in which he was serviceable to him, even as to his own
particular; for as much as it had been made appear to him by certain Memorials,
and by a Dispatch sent by some of the Counselors that was intercepted, that
they endeavored to procrastinate this Treaty, till they had found out some
means to procure his ruin and disgrace, whom they strove to render odious to
her Majesty.

During this Treaty, the Prince solicited more earnesly than he had hitherto
done to be released from Bois de Vincennes, where he was confined; fearing lest
if the Queen, who had caused him to be apprehended, should be near the King,
she might also give order for his Banishment. The Queen on the other side,
understanding the Inclination of the Court to grant the Prince's request, was
apt to to believe that if he were dismissed, he might oppose the Treaty, and
prevent her Return to his Majesty. Moreover that which increased her suspicion
was the extraordinary kindness that M. de Luines and his Brothers openly
professed for the Prince, being allured by the fair promises that he had made
to them, and by the Marriage of his Sister, the Widow of the deceased Prince of
Orange with the younger, at present Duke of Chaunes; insomuch that the Queen
sent a message to the King by M. de Berulle, to entreat him that the Prince
should not be set at Liberty, till she had represented to him by word of Mouth
the reason, that had induced her to consent to his Imprisonment; to which she
declared, that she was not excited by any private Animosity or Passion, but
only by the great desire she had to preserve his Majesty's Authority, which was
now so well established, that there was no ground or fear lest any one should
presume to make an attempt against it. The King had determined long ago to
release the Prince, and had not deferred it, only to maintain his Royal Power,
and to avoid an occasion of offending the Queen his Mother; his Intention being
to take the first opportunity that should be offered, to compose the difference
between them, and by this means to remove every thing that might disturb the
Peace of his Kingdom. To this purpose, his Majesty caused the Prince to be
informed, that he was willing to give him satisfaction, but that for the
advantage of his Affairs, it was necessary for him patiently to wait till the
Treaty should be concluded with the Queen his Mother; and that his liberty
should be obtained through his Mediation, because he desired to reconcile them:
He also promised to the Queen, by Letters and by M. de Berulle, that the Prince
should not be acquitted but upon her instance, and after she had been with him:
this was again confirmed by other Letters, and (as I think) by one of the
private Articles of the Treaty.

Thereupon, the Queen being assured of the Accomplishment of the Promises that
had been made to her, traveled from Angoulesme to Tours, where it was agreed
that she should go to meet the King, who was ready to receive her with all the
Demonstrations of joy and respect that can be imagined; but before he
proceeded, he sent M. de Luines to congratulate her, at a House two or three
miles distant from Tours; where after mutual Compliments they fell into
discourse, and M. de Luines declared to her Majesty, that the King had
commanded him to acquaint her, that he had granted to the Prince his Liberty:
She was surpised at this word, and believed that since they began so soon to
act contrary to what had been promised, they designed to treat her otherwise
than she expected, and to set up the Prince in opposition to her; insomuch that
retiring into her Chamber, she disclosed her mind to some of her Friends, and
demanded of them whether she should turn back again by the same way that she
came; they replied that she was too far advanced, and though she was never so
desirous to retreat, yet she could not, since she was surrounded on all sides
with the King's Forces, and had nothing in possession but the House, therefore
she ought to run the hazard, and to appear with a stern Countenance, and an
undaunted Courage.

This Rencounter being soon made known to the vigilant Spies of the Court, they
inferred from thence, that the good Correspondence between their Majesty's
would not be of long duration, and that the jealousy and mistrust, with which
the Queen Mother was possessed, would oblige her to raise another Faction: The
Malcontents excited her to it from the very first day that she appeared at
Court; and perceiving that M. du Main, who was come to see the King, and
expected at his arrival to be received with extraordinary Caresses, for the
many signal Services that he performed in the Conjuncture, was very much
dissatisfied at the coolness and indifferency, with which M. de Luines
entertained him; as also the Nobility that were with him, and that had assisted
him, immediately took that opportunity to attack him on the weak side, and to
engage him in the party of the Queen, that daily increased after this manner;
till at last the Animosities broke forth in a second taking up of Arms, that
might have been foreseen and prevented if due care had been taken, and, if the
greater part of those, in whom M. de Luines confided, had not been more
industrious in promoting his Ruin than his continuance in Favor and Reputation.

It has been already observed that M. de Luines, though he withdrew his
Affection from M. Deageant, and removed him from the Council, and from his
Employment, had nevertheless entreated him not to retire from Court, till the
Treaty with the Queen Mother, in which he was very serviceable to him for the
reasons above produced, should be finished. Moreover the Ministers could never
forgive him the Trespass that he had committed against them, in his undertaking
at the return of his Eminency. Father Arnoux the King's Confesser, having
obtained a share in the dispatching of public Negociations, thought that he
could not be well settled therein as long as Deageant remained at Court;
therefore he became one of his most violent and powerful Persecuters. And M. de
Luines was persuaded that he was enlightened from above, especially as to what
concerned the Transaction of the Affairs of State. These potent Adversaries
being animated with envy and jealousy, together with several others that
compared Deageant to the Gardiner's Dog, and were desirous to see him
altogether discharged, hoping to reap some advantage thereby, at last obliged
M. de Luines to resolve on the next day after the arrival of the Queen Mother,
to cause M. de Luxemberg his Brother, to tell him ruggedly enough, that he
should retire into Dauphine with such orders as he should prescribe to him: for
he had in the preceding Evening represented to the King, that he was of
opinion, that his Meditation with M. de Lesdiguieres was very necessary at that
time, to engage him in his Majesty's Service, and to prevent him from adhereing
to the Factions of those of the Reformed Religion, that were then very
predominant. The Ministers and others, according to whose advice M. de Luines
acted in this respect in the Council that was holden that day, and afterward
in private, had intimated to his Majesty the great danger that was ready to
hang over their heads by the means of M. de Lesdiguiers, and had often
suggested to him, that in case he should take part with the Protestants, as he
seemed to be inclined to it, he would be able to weigh down the Balance, and
to overturn the whole Kingdom, and that they knew no other Expedient by which
he might be secured, but through the Intercession of M. Deageant, in whom he
very much confided. This pretense was made use of, in hopes that they might
thereby prevail with the King to consent to his Banishment, which all their
Artifices, Insinuations and ill Offices could never as yet procure: M. Deageant
was not so hated, but that he had some Friends left in the Council and near his
Majesty, that discovered the fraud to him which he already acknowledged, as
being visible enough. Nevertheless not to diminish (as perhaps he might have
done) the Reputation and Grandeur of M. de Luines, with whom he had lived in
strict amity, and that had very lately protested to him, that he should always
esteem him as a fourth Brother, he disposed himself to yield to that which was
required of him, and so much the more willingly, in regard that he had never
coveted great Employments, and because he judged that in this that was proposed
to him, though it were only a pretense, yet he might take an occasion to
perform good Service, as it afterward happened.

The most part of those that were not concerned in the Conspiracy that was
formed against him, seeing him depart from the Court in their Majesty's Favor,
caressed and complemented by almost all the Grandees, Favorites and Ministers,
without being charged with any Misdemeanour or Default, accounted his Removing
to be feigned and affected; however it was well, and although to obtain it they
had made use of a color at pleasure, nevertheless Divine Providence, that
usually disposes matters to an end altogether different from that which is
intended by men, extracted sweet fruits from this bitter root to the benefit of
the Church and State; for it is most certain, and it may be averred without
vanity, that he found means to be very instrumental in the Conversion of M. de
Lesdiguieres. The King had given him a Letter of Credit very express and
written with his own Hand to M. de Lesdiguiers, and M. de Luines had also done
the like with a charge to use his utmost efforts to hinder him from joining
with the Factions, and to endeavor to oblige him to take a resolution to
embrace the Catholic Religion, under an assurance, that if he did so, the King
would bestow upon him the Office of Constable of France, that should be renewed
to this end.

M. Deageant encouraged in this Commission by the happy success that attends
all his Majesty's good inclinations, and incited by the extreme Affection that
he always bore to his Service, being arrived in Dauphine, used all means that
he judged proper to satisfy his Desires and Commands, and by certain Springs
and Methods, the rehearsal of which would be too tedious, he wrought such an
Impression in a little time on the mind of M. de Lesdiguieres, even beyond what
was expected, that he obtained a promise of him that he would communicate to
him all the Dispatches and all the verbal Propositions that should be proposed
to him by those of the Reformed Religion, and would return no Answer to them
but by his Advice, insomuch that he oftentimes prepared the Original Acts;
which succeeded amongst other Occurrencies, very profitably in the Deputation
that the General Assembly of the Protestants at Loudren sent to him, with the
consent of the Noblemen and principal Officers, offering to make him
Generalissimo of all their Forces, and promising to furnish him with an Army of
Twenty Thousand men, and with a Sallary of One Hundred Thousand Crowns per
annum, the payment of which should be secured to him in any Protestant City of
Europe that he should choose: For instead of accepting the Proposals he
protested by word of mouth to the Deputies, and by a Letter to the Assembly,
that he was resolved to remain in his Majesty's Service; and that if they did
not behave themselves as they ought, and as he exhorted them, since they had no
Lawful Grounds to take up Arms, he would make use of all that was in his power
to reduce them to Reason, and to maintain his Majesty's Authority; but if they
would hearken to better Counsel than that to which he saw them inclined, and
would return to their Duty, he would endeavor to obtain of the Kings
Generosity, all that they could in reason expect; offering to take a Journey to
Court to this purpose, in case they desired it. Furthermore after some
Conferences that were adjusted by M. Deageant touching certain Points of
Controversy, on which M. de Lesdiguieres chiefly insisted, he gained a promise
from him to be converted, and that in so doing, he would put out of all the
Places that he possessed in Dauphine and out of Villemur near Thoulouse, the
Governer and Soldiers of the Protestant Religion, whom he had established
therein and would for the future admit none but Catholics, to such Offices and
into his House: But forasmuch as he knew that there were in those Places and
near his Person a considerable number of Servants very zealous in their
Persuasion, that might undertake some Attempt against him, if they should smell
out his Design, he desired that it might be kept secret, till his Majesty
should think it convenient for him to make open Profession of the Catholic
Religion; at which time he should have prepared all things requisite for the
securing of the Province: M. Deageant having confirmed him in this Resolution,
and perceiving that he studied by what means he should effect it, gave notice
thereof to the King and to M. de Luines, and by his Dispatches enjoined
Secrecy, as absolutely necessary in this Affair, and so much urged by M. de
Lesdiguieres, that he had declared, that unless it were carefully observed he
would proceed no further: When this Dispatch was brought to the Court; the King
showed an extreme satisfaction therein, and was pleased to write to M.
Deageant, as also did M. de Luines, that he had performed a signal piece of
Service; but that his Majesty judged that the Conversion of M. de Luines ought
to be deferred for some time, because he intended to employ him in procuring
the Separation of the Assembly of Loudren, foreseeing that their long
Consultations would produce some sudden Commotion.

To this end the King wrote to him, ordering him to repair to the Court with
all possible diligence, and required M. Deageant to accompany him. But as soon
as the Protestants in Dauphine, that endeavored to divert him from his
Majesty's Service and to engage him in the Faction, understood his Resolutions,
and saw that he continually preached to them nothing but Obedience to their
Sovereign's Commands, they devised an Artifice to cause him to distrust and to
hinder the prosecution of his intended Journey. A certain Gentleman amongst
them visited his Kinsman and Neighbor being a Catholic and a Person of
Quality, and having bound him with an Oath to keep secret whatsoever he should
discover to him, and to be content only to provide for the Safety of his own
Family, he feigned that the Grandees of the Reformed Religion in that Country
being assisted with those of Vivarez and Sevennes had conspired to massacre the
Catholics of Dauphine, and to begin with the Nobility; and that to prefix the
time and to give the necessary Orders, an Assembly was to be holden upon such a
day and in such a place, in which he should be present; adding that M. de
Lesdiguieres consented to it, who judged that this effusion of Blood was
requisite to make himself absolute Master of Dauphine; that all the fair words
that he had given to M. Deageant, and all the appearances of Affection that he
showed to his Majesty's Service, were only so many pretenses to cover his
design; and the better to color this invention, the Hugonot Gentlemen
persuaded his Catholic Kinsman firmly to believe that this Convention was
certainly to meet, after the same manner as he had informed him.

The Authors of this Contrivance, imagined that the promised Secrecy would not
be observed, as indeed they intended that it should not, and doubted not but
that the Catholic Gentleman would immediately communicate what he had heard to
a competent number of the most eminent Persons amongst the Catholics, who
would infallibly assemble together to take proper measures for their own
security, without acquainting M. de Lesdiguieres, who was represented as privy
to the Conspiracy. The Protestant Gentleman, that had given this false
Information, from that time narrowly wathed all the Actions and Journeys of his
Kinsman and of the other Catholic Gentlemen, to whom he thought that the
Affair would be disclosed that he might learn where their Assembly should be
gathered together; and might instantly give notice thereof to M. de
Lesdiguieres declaring to him that it was determined that as soon as he was
arrived at Paris, the Catholics should take up Arms, should fall upon the
Protestants, and should attempt to seize on the Places that were in his
Possession, being assured that the King's intention was to cause him to be sent
Prisoner to the Bastille. They hoped by this Device to prevent his Journey, and
to strike two strokes at once; one of which was that M. de Lesdiguieres taking
no care to disperse the Assembly of Loudren, it might still subsist, and might
make Preparations for a War, which was the chief aim of these Incendiaries; and
the other, that acting contrary to the King's Commands and to the Promise that
he had made to go to the Court, he might be suspected by his Majesty, and that
from thence Jealousies might be raised and fomented on both sides, which might
give them an opportunity afterward easily to make him sensible, that his
Preservation absolutely depended on his Union with the Party in which he had
advanced his Fortune: their Design was also to endeavor to exasperate him so
far against the Catholics under the pretense of their above mentioned
Convention, that he might proceed to treat them severely, which might be the
occasion of the beginning of those Commotions that they so fervently desired.

Many of the principal Catholic Gentlemen, that were advertised of the
Information that was given by the Protestant Gentlemen, met at Valentinois,
under color of a visit, to consult together: The Conclusion of their Debates
was only this, that every one in particular should use all possible diligence
to penetrate into the Design, and if there was any probability thereof, that
they should give notice one to another; that they might reassemble in greater
numbers, and advise concerning the means that should be judged most proper for
their Preservation: but in the mean time, that they should be always vigilant
without making any show of the least suspicion. During these Transactions the
Hugonot Gentleman, who was very industrious in laying hold on an opportunity to
palliate his deceit, took four ot five Persons of different conditions, but of
the same Religion, whom he caused to observe this Assembly, and went with them
immediately to acquaint M. de Lesdiguieres, naming to him all those that had
been seen going to and fro, and urging all the Arguments that he could invent,
to inspire him with Jealousy, and to make his asseverations appear to him as
true, according to his premeditated project: which has been above related.

This Plot was so artificially contrived, that M. de Lesdiguieres, giving
credit to the report of the Protestant Gentleman that managed it, resolved not
to depart, but to stand on his guard, and to take care of his own Affairs,
being confirmed in the Resolution by diverse Letters, that were written to him
from the Court, importing that he was summoned thither only to be taken
Prisoner. M. Deageant, who did not forsake him, seeing him extremely pensive,
and perceiving that the Zealots of the Faction, that a little before appeared
with a sad dejected Countenance, because they could not engage M. de
Lesdiguieres in the Rebellion, began to prick up their Ears, to speak haughtily
and openly to scoff at him, judged that some evil Genius had obstructed his
Negotiation: But to find out the truth of the matter, he accosted M. de
Lesdiguieres, declaring that he was very sorry to see him so much oppressed
with Melancholy, and that he concealed the cause from him, fearing lest he
should distrust his Conduct: nevertheless he solemnly protested to him, that he
had never failed to demonstrate the sincerity of the Affection that he had
professed to him; and that if any had persuaded him to the contrary, and had
wrought an ill Impression on his mind with respect to the King, he could easily
resolve his Doubts, and remove all Scruples and Suspicions, entreating him
moreover to consider that the great number of envious Persons, that could not
endure to see him so far advanced in his Majesty's Esteem and Favor, would
leave no stone unturned to cause him to fall from thence, and to involve him in
the mischiess that usually attend popular Tumults and Insurrections. But on
whatsoever side M. Deageant turned himself, it was impossible to extort any
thing from him, but that he labored under certain Distempers of old Age that
irritated his Spirits, and caused him to be thus disturbed.

M. Deageant had some time ago, gained a Minister of the Province of Languedoc,
who was one of the chief Agents in the Affairs and Conspiracies of the
Protestants, and very much esteemed by M. de Lesdiguieres: he had also secretly
procured his Conversion, and obtained a Brief from Rome, the Tenor of which
was, That although he were received into the Bosom of the Church, yet he was
permitted to continue the exercise of his Ministerial Function amongst the
Protestants for the space of three years, provided he delivered nothing in his
Sermons contrary to the true Catholic Faith, and did not administer the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. This Brief was granted, that the Minister might
remain in his Employment, and might discover the Plots that were contrived in
the Kingdom, in which Office he performed very remarkable Services. M. Deageant
had diverse Letters from those that managed the Transactions at the Court, that
they had no better nor more certain Intelligence concerning the Proceedings of
the Protestants, than that which he had given them, and which he had received
partly from M. de Lesdiguieres, but more from this Minister, and several others
with whom he kept a Corresponcence; therefore he sent for him, and exhorted him
to enquire as well amongst the most active of the Party, as of M. de
Lesdiguieres himself, in what condition he was, and what was the occasion of
his being more pensive than ordinarily he used to be. It was not long e're he
understood all the Circumstances of the Intrigue, and the end to which it
tended; and having informed M. Deageant thereof they resolved, that to oblige
M. de Lesdiguieres to declare his thoughts freely, and to put him in mind of
satisfying the King's desire, he should feign that he came on purpose to
represent to him, that forasmuch as their Assembly of Loudren was inclined to
War, and in regard that their Churches not being in a capacity (according to
his opinion) to maintain it, nor any Foreigners able to assist them, nothing
could be expected but Ruin and Desolation; he ought on the account of the
Intrest that he had in the cause, and of his affection to the welfare of their
Churches, to employ his Credit with the King, and his Authority with the
Assembly, by some good Expedients to prevent the dismal Effects of so
pernicious a Counsel. M. de Lesdiguieres without giving him time to finish his
discourse, replied, That he was disposed to go to the Court for this very
purpose, but that some particulars had been related to him, that had caused him
to change his Resolution, that no Propositions of an Accommodation ought any
longer to be considered, but that they ought in good earnest to prepare to
defend themselves with their Arms, since it was for the cause of their
Religion. The Minister urged him to explain his meaning, and having at length
discovered that he had certainly taken the above mentioned Artifices for an
undoubted truth, he undeceived him by revealing the truth of the matter,
according to the account that was given him by one of the Authors, being the
same person from whom M. de Lesdiguires had received an Intimation thereof, and
that had caused him to be thus perplexed.

After this Conference, M. Deageant being instructed by the Minister, who
acquainted him with what had passed, presented himself before M. de
Lesdiguieres, whom he found with a more clear and serene Countenance than on
the preceding days; he managed him after such a manner, that at last he
confessed, that the occasion of his trouble was the news that he had heard
concerning the Assembly of the Catholic Gentlemen, and the resolutions that he
was told were taken therein, but that he was very lately informed by a
Minister, one of his particular Friends, that this Device was invented by some
of the Reformed Religion, on purpose to hinder his Journey; however he affirmed
that he was ready to depart, were it not that although this Assembly were not
gathered together upon an ill design, nevertheless he feared, lest any
mis-carriage should happen in his absence, if the jealousies raised on both
sides were not dispersed. To this end M. Deageant took such care that the
greatest part of the Catholic Gentlemen that had been in this Convention,
appeared before M. de Lesdiguieres at Grenoble, and there gave him so much
light into the matter, joined with reiterated protestations of their Innocence,
that he was satisfied.

There remained then another difficulty as to his departure, which was very
much importuned by the Court; but he desired that M. Deageant, who was ordered
to accompany him in his Journey, should reside still in the Country, because he
judged that his presence and mediation would be very necessary to keep every
one within the bounds of his duty; he chiefly insisted on this, fearing lest
upon the continuance of the above said Assembly, some disturbance or combustion
should arise. As he was at Lions going out of his Chamber to proceed in his
Journey, his Servants and Baggage being sent before, a Gentleman that the late
M. de Nemours had dispatched to him in post, delivered a Letter of Credence to
him on his behalf, demanded audience of him in private, and told him that
having not long ago attended his Master in the Louvre, he then saw him in the
little Closset, into which he durst not enter; but finding that of the Books
open, he went into it out of curiosity, wherein he had no sooner set his soot,
but he heard the King's voice, who came thither, and that being surprised with
fear, lest he should be found there alone, he hid himself behind one of the
Tapestry Hangings, from whence he saw Father Arnoux, and M. de Luines, who were
alone in the King's presence, declaring to his Majesty that it was very good
News that they had lately received concerning the certainty of the Departure of
M. de Lesdiguieres, that as soon as he was arrived he ought without any delay to
be put into the Bastille; and that M. de Luines had said, That it was a
Resolution taken for the Advantage of his Majesty's Affairs, which there was no
probability that he would oppose: after this they all retired without
perceiving him, and he knowing the Affection that his Master M. de Nemours bore
to him, could not but acquaint him with what he had heard, and immediately
received Orders to take Post, to give him an Account thereof. This Information,
that was apparently devised with an intent to frustrate the good Effects that
they foresaw would ensue upon the Journey and Intercession of M. de
Lesdiguieres for the Separation of the Assembly of Loudren on which depended
Peace or a Civil War, obliged him again to mistrust, and to revolve in his mind
that there might be some truth in that which they would so lately have
persuaded him to be a Cheat in Dauphine: upon these imaginations he determined
to return. M. Deageant seeing this sudden change, perceived that some new
Artifice had operated, and having urged him thereupon and found the cause,
easily persuaded him to examine the truth of the matter, by reasons drawn from
the concomitant Circumstances, and amongst others, by induceing him to
recollect, that the Closet of Books was surrounded with Presses that were fixed
to the wall, the Tapestry being between both, after such a manner that there
was not room enough to hide a Cat.

Being thus re-assured, he continued to prosecure his Journey, which succeeded
so happily, that through his mediation, and that of the Marshal de Chastillon,
the Assembly of Loudren was dissolved to the King's satisfaction.

During his Residence at the Court, no mention was made to him concerning the
overture that M. Deageant was ordered to make to him, he was only told in
taking leave, that every thing that had been promised should be effectually
performed at his return to Danphine, and that all necessary Expedients should
be exhibited to him by M. Deageant, who nevertheless received but one Letter,
in which was contained a command to continue his Negotiations with M. de
Lesdiguieres, and to obtain of him a new promise of his Conversion upon a
second offer of the Office of Constable; in order to which, due preparations
should be made as soon as the Affairs depending should be brought to
perfection, according to the King's desire: M. Deageant finding no alteration
as to the compact that was already made between him, and M. de Lesdiguieres,
where of he had given an account, confirmed it by another Dispatch, alleging
that it should be certainly put in execution on any day that his Majesty should
think fit to prescribe, provided that the matter were hitherto kept secret, for
the Reasons that he had formerly written, and have been above specified.

But instead of Secresy, the Contents of M. Deageant's Dispatches were
published at Court, and the renewing of the Office of Constable in favor of M.
de Lesdiguieres was publicly proclaimed, as well in consideration of his
extraordinary Merits and Virtue, as of his Conversion: The Ev^nt soon made it
appear to what end this Transaction was divulged, the concealment of which was
expressly recommended for several Reasons relating to the nature of the thing
and his Majesty's Service. This News being spread abroad the most part of the
Foreign Protestant Princes, the Nobility of the Kingdom that prosessed the
Reformed Religion, and almost all their Churches sent Letters to M. de
Lesdiguieres, and neglected no means that they thought proper to dissuade him
from changing his Religion, nay several Catholics also assured him, that the
Propositions that has been offered to him were only Snares to entangle and
destroy him. His intimate Friends and Servants, that before only suspected, not
daring to enquire into this matter, ceased not continually to importune him,
and all being joined together, so disturbed his Mind, that he remained in
doubt, being inclined rather to adhere more firmly to the Faction, than to
withdraw himself from it. Whilst M. Deageant endeavored to remedy this Evil,
the consequence of which he very much feared, the Marquess de Bressieux arrived
from the Court, and delivered to M. de Lesdiguieres a Letter of Credence from
the King, and another from M. de Luines, acquainting him that he was sent on
purpose to treat with him about a Business of great Importance, and therefore
he demanded a private Audience. M. de Lesdiguieres having thereupon ordered one
of his Attendants to call M. Deageant, he desired that he might be heard alone,
because he was forbid to communicate his Commission to any but him: M. de
Lesdiguieres replied, that he would then advise him to say nothing, for since
he knew M. Deageant his good Friend to be an upright Man, and very well
affected to the King's Service, he should impart to him whatsoever he declared,
and should take his advice therein. The Marquess de Bressieux seeing him
obstinate in this Resolution, told him, that he did not think that M. Deageant
ought in the least to be mistrusted, and that he would not refuse to discourse
in his presence; but because he had accidentally met with him at his arrival,
and had concealed from him the occasion of his Journey, he was desirous to see
him before his Audience, to induce him to facilitate his Negotiation. Any one
but M. Deageant would have been offended to see the manner of the Proceedings
of those that sent him, and instead of promoting his Treaty, would have
obstructed it as much as possibly he could; nevertheless he promised to assist
him therein. The Commission of the Marquess de Bressieux being opened to M. de
Lesdiguieres, there was nothing contained therein but a proposal of the Office
of Constable, in case he should turn Catholic, which was the same Affair that
M. Deageant had long ago negociated with him, whereof he had often and very
lately given notice, that M. de Lesdiguieres had consented to it, and which he
himself had confirmed to his Majesty and to M. de Luines, as well by word of
Mouth in his last Journey from the Court, as since by Letters, having engaged
his credit to accomplish all that had been agreed upon between him and M.
Deageant in his Majesty's behalf. M. de Lesdiguieres perceiving that nothing
was propounded to him but what had been already concluded, judged that their
Intention was to mock him, and absolutely rejected the Overtures that were made
to him, protesting that if his Majesty questioned in the least his unmovable
Affection and constant Fidelity to his Service, in the Religion that he
professed; he was ready to abandon all his Offices, and to retire into any of
the Protestant Cities being the Allies of France, that his Majesty should think
fit to appoint: this he enforced with several Expressions, which argued that he
was touched to the quick. It was M. Deageant's part to appease this Passion, as
he did within few days to that degree, that he obliged him to sign certain
Articles that he had prepared concerning all the points that had been already
agreed upon, as also to vouchsafe that the Marquess de Bressieux should be
Mediator in this Transaction, since he was content to be serviceable therein,
without pretending to any particular Interest. Thus the Marquess de Bressieux
thinking to gain the sole credit and reputation in these Proceedings, returned
to the Court carrying the Letters of M. de Lesdiguieres and M. Deageant,
together with a Copy of the abovementioned Articles, the Original of which
remained in the Hands of the latter; and promised to come again very speedily,
laden with Dispatches and necessary Orders for the performance of the
Agreement: But he was very much amazed that after he had made a Report of the
Success of his Negotiation, no further mention was made to him thereof,
especially when he understood that M. de Bullion was sent to manage it after
another manner.

Although the Expedition of the Marquess de Bressieux ought to have been kept
secret, as it had been advised, unless other designs were in agitation
altogether different from those that were pretended: Nevertheless his Papers
were read in a full Council, and it was determined that the Office of a
Constable that was vacant by the Death of the Constable of Montmorency should
be re-established; but instead of the Grant that was promised to be made in
favor of M. de Lesdiguieres, a Breviate only was ordered to be drawn up in his
Name, which was sent to him by M. de Bullion, who was enjoined to present it to
him, and to persuade him at the same time to entreat the King to bestow it on
M. de Luines, and to be content for his own part with the Office of Marshal
General of the Armies, and a Pension of Eighteen Thousand Livres per Mensem,
without being obliged to turn Catholic. M. de Bullion whether he had any
particular instructions or otherwise, intended also to treat with him
privately; but M. de Lesdiguieres declared to him as he had done to the
Marquess de Bressieux, that he would disclose every thing to M. Deageant, and
would follow his Advice; upon this account he was sent for at the first
Audience of M. de Bullion, in which he only discoursed concerning his
Conversion and the accomplishment of all those things that were already
concluded, without speaking so much as one word relating to the principal cause
of his Journey: But having found an opportunity to talk with him apart, he
represented it to him, and propounded a strick Alliance between him and M. de
Luines, which was to be bound with the Marriage of M. de Canaples his Grandson
with Madam de Combalet the Niece of M de Luines. M. de Lesdiguieres demanded
some time to consider of it, and took an occasion to confer two or three hours
with M. Deageant on the subject of these new Overtures, at which he was very
much incensed, being astonished that after his Conversion had been so long
solicited, and he had been prevailed with so far as to promote it, a
Declaration should now be made to him that it was convenient for him to remain
in the Religion that he professed; from whence he inferred all the ill
consequences that can be imagined. M. Deageant, though he was not a little
surprised at such a proposition, yet considering that if M. de Lesdiguieres
should reject it, such discontents and suspicious might ensue as would be
sufficient to withdraw him from the King's Service, his fidelity and adherence
to which was at that time necessary, produced several solid and cogent
Arguments in opposition to those that M. de Luines had objected to him, as he
afterward declared his Mind to Monsieur de Bullion, and concealed not from
him, that he had been confirmed in this Opinion by the Counsel of M. Deageant.
As Soon as notice thereof was given at Court M. de Lesdiguieres was ordered to
repair thither, and M. de Bullion and M. Deageant were commanded to accompany
him. The King seemed earnestly to desire this Journey as well on the account of
M. de Bullion's Dispatch, as to take the advice of M. de Lesdiguieres upon the
Design that the Protestants had devised to cause a General Assembly to meet at
Rochel without his Majesty's leave, and contrary to his Prohibition, which they
actually accomplished, and from whence ensued the War that the King brought to
so happy and glorious an end.

Monsieur de Lesdiguieres before his departure in his Journey, and at his
arrival at Paris received several Informations that all the honor and profit
that had been proposed to him would cease in the Imprisonment of his Person in
the Bastille during the remainder of his Life, and although the greater part
knew that there was no such thing intended, and only gave out this Intelligence
with a Design to corrupt him, nevertheless there was somewhat of truth and
reality, of which M. Deageant had an intimation; for it was resolved in a Privy
Council of some particular Ministers of State, to arrest M. de Lesdiguieres,
and to proclaim War against all the Protestants, who were represented to M. de
Luines as so weak and unable to make any considerable Resistance, that within a
year they might be easily suppressed; it was alleged that this would be the
only means to advance his Glory, and to make it appear to all men that the King
had deservedly conferred on him the Office of Constable, which they had advised
him to assume to himself. M. Deageant entreated him to hearken to what he had
to offer to his consideration on this account, and calling him aside into a
little Closet persuaded him to take Pen, Ink and Paper, and caused him to draw
from this affair a great number of Consequences that were almost all necessary,
and tended to dangerous precipices, that threatened the ruin of the King's
Person, the Catholic Religion, the Kingdom, and his Family in particular. So
many inconveniences (said he thereupon) were not foreseen, but howsoever it
may happen, the Dice are cast, and there is such a progress made in this
Enterprise, that they were obliged to run the hazard. M. Deageant was not able
entirely to dissuade him from prosecuting the War, though he assured him that
by the measures that he had taken with M. de Lesdiguieres, preparations were
made to gain more advantages over the Protestants in six months without drawing
the Sword, than could be obtained in many years by all the King's Forces. At
length he compelled him to condescend to the performance of the last promises
that were made to M. de Lesdiguieres by M. de Bullion, that he should be
employed in the Armies, that he should be honorably treated* and that instead
of denouncing War against the Protestants, it should be only declared against
the Factious and Rebellious, forasmuch as that first Declaration would
necessarily force all those of that Religion to defend themselves, and would
stir up the foreign Protestant Princes to assist them, but this would destroy
them after such a manner, that none but those, that were purely factious and
that had nothing to lofe, would be willing to be accounted as Rebels.

All sorts of Artifices were used as well with the King as M. de Luines to
excite them to explode this proposition, and to adhere to the former, as also
to cause M. Deageant to be esteemed as the greatest Heretic and most
disaffected to his Majesty's Service that ever was in the Kingdom: but their
Attempts were vain, for his Majesty was inclined to follow the advice that was
most gentle, most certain and the least dangerous, to which all those that had
regard only to the King's Service voluntarily subscribed, insomuch that the
Declaration was published on the fourth day of April 1621. with a resolution
that in case the Assembly of Rochel would not disperse themselves, and refused
to accept the offers and reasonable Proposals that were made to them through
the mediation of M. de Lesdiguieres, his Majesty should march on that side with
his Army to reduce the Rebels to Obedience.

Nothing could be added to the care that M. de Lesdiguieres took to oblige them
to return to their duty, whereof I can speak as knowing it by experience,
because I prepared all the Letters, Memorials and Instructions for those that
were sent to them at several times, who were Persons whom I chose being well
affected to his Majesty's Service. But when he saw that the Assembly rejected
all his good Counsels and proceeded to extremity, he advised the King to
prepare to go and chastise them, and offered to serve him in person with all
that belonged to him. This Resolution being made known to the General Deputies
of the Protestants, the Sieur de Favas who was one of them, entreated him to
make use of his interest to procure the deferring of these proceedings for
eight or ten days, in which he would endeavor to persuade the Assembly to
submit upon the terms and conditions that had been offered to them, and engaged
himself to effect it: His Majesty was willing to grant this time, nevertheless
he ordered his Troops to march, and resided at Fontainbleau expecting the event
of this Journey, from which he hoped for so much the greater success, in regard
that ample provision was made for the gratifying of the Sieur de Favas in case
he should perform what he had promised: But he neglected it and on the contrary
took upon him the Office of Admiral on the other side, and abode in Rochel.

As Soon as the King was informed thereof, he went forward on the way, and being
arrived at Tours held a Council to consult what was convenient to be done, and
especially whether he should pass through Saumur or not, it was carried in the
Affirmative; but to take away all suspicion from the Sieur au Pl^ssis, the King
was advised not to ^odge in the Castle; but within a few hours after, his
Majesty having conferred with one of his particular Servants changed his
Opinion, and dispatched the Sieur du Hallier Captain of his Guards to prepare
Lodgings for him in the Castle, that were already provided in the City, having
also ordered M. de Lesdiguieres to advance, and with him M. de Bullion and M.
Deageant, to treat friendly with him concerning this Affair: The Garrison was
sent into one of his Houses, and it was agreed with him that the Place should
be committed for some time to the custody of the Count de Sault, who was not as
yet a Catholic, and afterward should be restored into the Hands of the Sieur
du Plessis: it is certain that if it had not been secured, there was a Design,
as soon as the King should depart, to introduce a competent number of the
Protestant Soldiers to keep it to block up that Passage from his Majesty's
Forces, and to facilitate the Approach of the Supplies that the Rebels waited
for from this Side of the River Croire. Some Persons that were intimate with M.
du Plessis favored this Enterprise (as it was thought) contrary to his
Intention.

I shall not here enlarge on the remaining Circumstances of his Majesty's
Journey, because I had no knowledge of those Particulars, since I was not
admitted into the Council, and kept no Correspondence with M. de Luines, tho he
often complemented me after an extraordinary manner: I shall only observe that
they that had given their advice to use the most violent means, perceiving that
M. de Luines was dissuaded from it (as it has been above represented)
prevailed with him by diverse Stratagems, daily to take measures contrary to his
Promise, and rending to soment the Jealousies already raised, and consequently
to encourage the Insurrections and Riots of the Protestant Party: to prove this
I need only to mention the Transactions, to the prejudice of the Capitulation,
at St. Jean d'Angely, at Ponts, at Clerac and other places.

There happened amongst others a remarkable Occurrence at the Siege of St. Jean
d'Angely, that was sufficient to frustrate the King's Journey and Design, if
God (the visible Protector of his Majesty's Undertakings) had not prevented the
Mischiefs that would otherwise have ensued: The King removed from the first
Lodgings that were provided for him at that Siege; and to be nearer the Place,
took others in St. Julien, where M. de Lesdiguieres was already posted. On a
certain Day, as Father Arnoux gave Audience after Dinner to several Persons, a
Gentleman, whom Madam de Lesdiguieres had sent to treat with him about a
business relating to her, entered and advanced very near him without being
perceived, because he sat with his Back toward the Door, discoursing with a
Bishop: He reported that he heard this Prelat commending Father Arnoux for the
good Counsels that he had given to the King, and especially for two Motions
that were made being attributed to him alone, one of which was, That he had
incited his Majesty to undertake so just a War as that which was now begun; and
the other, That he had drawn M. de Lesdiguieres to the Court, who was the only
Person that was able to stop the Progress of his Majesty's Arms: at which Words
this Father answered aloud, We have caught the subtle Fox, and he shall never
escape out of our Hands. The Gentleman having observed this Passage retired
without speaking to Father Arnoux, and related to M. de Lesdiguieres the
Circumstances of this Rencounter: who was not as yet so perfectly recovered
from his Indisposition that was caused by the Jealousies and Fears of being
apprehended, but that this Blow galled the Wound afresh; insomuch that being
very melancholy, he retreated apart to consider by what means he might make his
Escape: the most part of the Noblemen, that were then at Court, knew in less
than two Hours that these Words had been spoken by Father Arnoux, and heard by
a Gentleman that belonged to M. de Lesdiguieres's Family, and instantly came to
him to exhort him to withdraw himself privately, and to get into some place of
Safety, offering to assist him as far as lay in their Power; and M. de
Montmorency freely proposed to accompany him in person. He thereupon had
recourse to some of his Retinue, that were zealous Promoters of the Faction,
and urged him to go directly to Rochell; but having ruminated and pondered in
his mind every thing that had been represented to him on this Occasion, he took
a Resolution to depart at midnight toward Dauphine, and to take the road
through Auvergne, judging, that being furnished with about two thousand Men,
being part of the Army of which he was assured, that should follow him
wheresoever he went, and by the help of those Protestant Forces that he should
gather by the way, and others that would come from Dauphine to meet him, he
might pass without any Impediment or Molestation. M. Deageant, who (as has
been above said) never lost the sight of him, but continually attended him
according to the express Orders that he had received from the King, having
observed an extraordinary hurrying to and fro that Afternoon, and that the
Countenance of M. de Lesdiguieres was suddenly changed, as soon as he could get
an Oppotunity to talk with him privately, he urged him to declare whether he
were well in Health, or whether he had received any News that had troubled him:
at last having thoroughly questioned and examined him, he disclosed the whole
Matter. Therefore knowing that the King had so great an Esteem for M. de
Lesdiguieres, that he always rejected such Propositions as tended to the lest
Severity (...) him; and considering on the other side the great Damage to which
his Majesty's Affairs would be obnoxious, if M. de Lesdiguieres should retreat
after this manner, he propounded to him all the Reasons that he thought to be
most proper to give him full Satisfaction; and desired him to condescend so far
as to permit him to go to the King and M. de Luines on this account, promising
that if he could discover that there was any Design to offer him any Injury, he
would freely declare it to him, and would be Partaker of the same Fortune with
him, since he had honored him so far as to come upon the Assurance that he had
given him on behalf of his Majesty.

Thus M. Deageant having acquainted the King with all that had passed, his
Majesty showed his high displeasure and indignation at the occasions of
Suspicion that were so often given to this good Man; If I could believe (said
he) that any should presume to abuse him, I would rather lose my Crown than
suffer it: bring him to me that I may certify him by Word of Mouth. This was
immediately done, insomuch that Monsieur de Lesdiguieres, that had a great
Affection for his Majesty's Person, returned very well satisfied, and
constantly waited on the King at the Siege of Montauban, where they began again
to make Parties against him; some continually buzzed the King in the Ear that
he doted, and others that he held correspondence with those of Montauban and
the rest of the Rebels, and that they were informed by him of every thing that
was performed in his Majesty's Army, and all concluded that he ought to be
seized; but I can certainly avouch, as being well assured of this Truth, that
he served his Majesty faithfully, and was so much concerned for the taking of
that Place, that he sought all possible means to effect it: I was the Bearer,
at five several times, of as many Directions that he sent to the King, by what
means he might reduce the City. All competent Judges, that understand the Art
of War, and were not possessed with Passion, were agreed as to this Point; and
have since affirmed, that if his Instructions had been followed, without doubt
the King would not have been compelled, as he was, to raise the Siege. I am
persuaded that if M. de Luines had been of the same Opinion, he would have had
a greater Deference to the known Experience of M. de Lesdiguieres; for
notwithstanding what was maliciously reported of him, that he was not willing
that Montauban should be taken; on the account of his particular Interest, it
is most true that he was extremely displeased that the Attempt proved
ineffectual. M. de Luines was so far pre-engaged by certain Persons, some of
whom (as I have already said) intended to bring matters to the utmost
Extremity, and others to cause him to commit some Fault that they might thereby
take an occasion to ruin him, that he hearkened to no Counsels but theirs; to
this very purpose they so often inculcated to him the necessity of the
Imprisonment of M. de Lesdiguieres, that he was in a manner sorced to yield to
their Persuasions, which was the reason that to find means to avoid this
Compulsion, he was not sorry when he heard that M. de Mombrun, whom the
Assembly of Rochel had chosen Lieutenant General of the Churches in Dauphine,
had taken the Field with an Army that alarmed all those Countries, because he
thought that his Adversaries would be easily induced to defer their Persecution
till some other more convenient time; and to consent that he should be sent
into Dauphine to appease these new Tumults. The King was advised at the end of
the Siege of Montauban to return to Paris by the way of Languedoc, because the
Rebels not having an opportunity to fortify their Places, would be easily
reduced to their Obedience by his Majesty, as he passed, without striking a
stroke; whereas if he gave them time to work therein, he would afterward find
it very difficult to suppress them. Thereupon an Assembly of all the Noblemen
of the Court, and of all those that belonged to the Council of War and that of
State, were gathered together, wherein this Affair was debated, and it was
unanimously concluded, that the return through Languedoc was necessary, and
would be apparently most advantageous. The Council being adjourned, and the
Sieur de Blainville, who was not as yet admitted into it, and the Sieur le
Maine Baron of Chab^n Adjutant-General appearing, M. de Luines desired them to
declare their Opinion concerning their Determination, who being both instructed
in this Matter, gave advice contrary to what had been agreed upon with the
general Approbation and Consent of the Convention, which prevailed so far that
the King took the nearest Road to Paris, to the great Detriment of his
Majesty's Proceedings; for it is certain that no City durst then shut up their
Gates against him: but in the following Year, having gained time to fortify
themselves, they compelled him to bring an Army against them at the cost of
vast Expenses and Inconveniences, that subdued but very few Places; and the
rest obliged him to undertake another Journey that proved more successful than
the former, since he finished the War and happily overthrew this Monster of
Sedition and Rebellion, that had so long raged in France.

When M. de Lesdiguieres had obtained leave to return into Dauphine to suppress
the Insurrections of the Protestants, the King thought fit to order M. de
Bullion to attend him, and commanded M. Deageant who had not stirred from him
for the space of about two Years, to wait upon his Majesty for the future, and
to serve him as occasion required: this redoubled the Jealousies of his Enemies
who persecuted him incessantly; tho to avoid their Fury he kept himself at as
great a distance as he could from the King's Person, and from public
Negociations, without entering into any of the Councils, notwithstanding the new
Orders that were lately given by his Majesty that he should be readmitted into
the same Station and Privileges that he had heretofore enjoyed. At the Arrival
of M. de Lesdiguieres in Dauphine every one laid down his Arms; but the Rebels
of Languedoc having taken the advantage of the time that was left them, in
making good all the Passes and Forts, and seeing the King removed far from
them, began to lift up their Horns ravaging and plundering the Country, and in
diverse places treated the Catholics very severely, which obliged the King to
resolve to march thither in the Spring; and because the Inhabitants of Bays and
le Poussin, who took part with the Malcontents, obstructed the Communication
of the Rhone, which was necessary for the convenience of the Army that his
Majesty intended to lead into Languedoc; he commanded M. de Lesd^guieres to
raise Forces to besiege these two Places, and to keep the Rhone clear, having
appointed that one moiety of the Charges should be supplied out of the
Treasury, and the other raised in Dauphine: but for want of Money or otherwise,
these Levies proceeded very slowly, tho the King had given express Orders that
they should be dispatched with all possible Expedition. At last perceiving the
Season to decline, and the Progress that the Rebels had made in Gascony and
Languedoc; he sent M. Deageant in post to hasten the execution of his Commands,
and to accompany M. de Lesdiguieres with M. de Bullion. M. de Lesdiguieres at
that time erected a Bridge of Boats over the Rhone, which was an attempt
formerly esteemed exceeding difficult, and almost impossible by reason of the
violence of the Stream; took possession of the two Places above mentioned, and
kept the Passages open on the side of the River. And his Majesty having in this
Journey reduced several Cities to their Duty, went to besiege Montpelier.

During this Siege, the particular case of M. de Lesdiguieres was considered in
the Privy Council; it was represented to the King, that in the state wherein he
was at present, he could not be assured of his fidelity and constancy; for if
he should turn his coat, and should hearken to the advantageous Propositions
that were daily offered to him by the Protestants, as it might happen, he would
so considerably strengthen the Factious Party, that his Majesty would hardly be
able to overcome them; and therefore that there were but two Expedients to
prevent these ill Consequences, either to cut off his Head, or to engage him
more firmly in his Majesty's Service, by giving him the Office of Constable
upon condition that he should change his Religion, which if he refused to do,
he ought immediately to be dispatched out of the way. It was concluded to try
the more gentle way, and instructions were drawn up and directed to M. de
Bullion with a Duplicate for M. Deageant, tending to persuade M. de
Lesdiguieres to finish his Conversion, to which the Office of Constable was
annexed: He seemed at first to scruple it, but M. Deageant having put him in
mind of the promise that he had formerly made, and signed it with his own hand,
and being fully satisfied as to the controversial points that were in dispute
between the two Churches, he freely offered to yield an entire obedience to all
that his Majesty required of him, and within a few days after made public
Profession of the Catholic Religion at Grenoble in the presence of the
Archbishop of Embrun, and at the same time was invested with the Office of
Constable, and with the Order of the Holy Ghost. Afterward he went to meet the
King at the Camp before Montpelier, and was very serviceable in the reduceing
of that Place, that might have cost his Majesty a great deal more trouble. I
was there taken sick with a disease that lasted eighteen months, the greatest
Extremity of which being abated, when the King prepared to return to Paris, he
was pleased to command me to follow him: nevertheless during that time I almost
continually kept my Bed and Chamber, which is the cause that I can give no
account of what passed afterward, since I had no knowledge of the ensuing
Transactions and Occurrences.

There were diverse Changes and Revolutions at Court, and the Ministers of State
often played at fast and loose, endeavoring to supplant one another: The
Marquess de la Vieuille was the chief amongst them, that in caressing me was
the Author of most of the injuries and persecutions that were raised against
me, and I cannot tell for what reason; for to my knowledge, I never offended
him, and always retired as much as I could from the King's Presence, and from
the Affairs of State: his ill will induced him so far, that the King having
ordered the Marshal d'Ornano to be put into the Bastille for disobeying the
Command that his Majesty had given him, to repair to his Government of St.
Esprit, he caused my name to be incerted in the Warrant; the Courier, that
brought it from Compeigne, where the Court then resided, having declared this
to the Deputy of the Sieur Almeras Postmaster General, as he received his
Ticket to provide Horses, the Deputy informed his Master thereof, and he
revealed it to M. de Guise who being with the King, that often laughed at his
extravagant humors, told him, that His Majesty had given an occasion to the
Marshal d'Ornano, and Deageant to run mad, since he had caused them to be
confined in the Bastille. Deageant! (replied the King) there was no such thing
intended. It is certainly so, (said M. de Guise) for here stands Almeras, who
told me that his Deputy received the news from the Courier that carried the
Order. His Majesty thereupon gave signal demonstrations of his Generosity and
Justice, which being made known to the Marquess de Vieuille obliged him to
dispatch another Warrant, that only mentioned the Marshal d'Ornano, and to send
back speedily to countermand the first. That I might absolutely get clear from
the Encumbrances and Fatigue of public Negotiations, I had by degrees
withdrawn my self from the Conversation of M. de Lesdiguieres, and forbore to
follow the Retinue of the Court any longer, with an intention as soon as I had
settled my domestic Affairs in Paris, to retreat for altogether.

The Marquess de la Vieuille very much feared, lest the Cardinal of Richelieu
should approach near the King, and should be present at the Consultations; and
perceiving that his Majesty desired to strengthen the Privy Council with some
persons endued with extraordinary Judgment and Prudence, he endeavored to
introduce one of his Creatures; but having received a repulse he took another
course, which was this: he represented to his Majesty, that M. de Lesdiguieres,
(with whom he contracted a strict friendship) ought always to posses one of
the principal Places in the Council, and that by reason of his deafness, some
one should be admitted with him, to repeat to him the Propositions that should
be made therein, and named one of his particular Friends, whom he affirmed to
be better qualified for this Office than M. de Bullion, to whose discredit he
spoke many things to dissuade his Majesty from confiding in him: nevertheless
he rejected this second Proposal, and within a few days after, discoursing on
this subject with the Constable de Lesdiguieres, he told him that he intended
to re-establish me in my former Employment, and that instead of M. de Bullion I
should constantly attend him in the Council, and other places where his
Majesty's Affairs were transacted. M. de Lesdiguieres without offering me any
Injury, made use of his interest in favor of M. de Bullion, to procure him to
be preferred before me, as he ingenuously confessed to me; for indeed he was
more worthy, and I believe that M. de Lesdiguieres would have met with no
difficulty in this point, were it not for the kindness that the Marquess de la
Ui^uille had lately showed to M. de Bullion. However it were, the Constable de
Lesd^guieres by the King's express Command sent a Courier to me with a Letter,
that ordered me to depart instantly with my Equipage, and to come to meet his
Majesty at Compiegne, never to leave him for the future.

I proceeded in my Journey, but without any Equipage, determining to use my
utmost Efforts to avoid this new Promotion that was contrary to my Resolution.
The King was on that day a hunting, and I saw the Constable de Lesdiguieres
first, who acquainted me with his Majesty's Pleasure, and enjoined me in his
Name immediately to prepare Memorials and Instructions for M. de Bethunes, whom
the King designed to send Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome on several
occasions, and chiefly about the Affair of the Valtoline that was then most
urgent. Afterward I went to see some of my Friends that had free Access to the
King, that I might be informed of the present state of Affairs, and to entreat
them to lay down before his Majesty such Reasons as I should exhibit to excuse
me from this Employment: They described to me all the particular Transactions
at Court, and affirmed that the design of the Marquess de la Vieuille was to
establish himself in the Reputation and Authority that he had already acquired,
to remove all those that were able to oppose him or might eclipse his Glory, to
enter into a strict Alliance with the Constable, by the means of the marriage
of his Daughter with the Count de Sault, and to bring the President le Jay into
the number of the Ministers of State, in hopes that he might cause the Seals to
fall into his Hands. But because he feared above all things, lest the
Queen Mother should at last prevail with the King to admit the Cardinal of
Richelieu into the Council, and to a share in the Administration of public
Negociations, he endeavored continually to render him odious to his Majesty,
whom he solicited to oblige him to reside at Rome, alleging that the
Queen Mother would not be much offended at it, provided that the Sieur Barbin,
who was banished into Flanders, were restored to her: I understood also, that
to meet with less opposition in his Attempts, knowing that the Queen Mother was
retired from the Louvre to Luxemburg, with an intent to take Physic during
fifteen Days; he had persuaded the King to go to Compeigne hoping that there,
in her Majest'ys Absence, he might easily accomplish his Enterprise. And as for
my own particular, finding that he could not divert the King from the
Resolution that he had taken to make use of my Service, he thought it
convenient to engage M. de Toiras on his side, telling him that he would assist
him to procure this Office for the Sieur de Clare Intendant of the Treasury,
his intimate Friend; they both attempted this, but in vain.

The King being come home from hunting, was pleased to honor me so far as to
confirm what the Constable had imparted to me on his behalf, and commanded me
to dispatch the Instructions of M. de Bethunes, because his Journey required
all the Expedition imaginable; I excused my self as well, because I had no
Lodgings, Paper, nor other things necessary for such a Work, as on the account
of what I had heard (which was very true) that the Marquess de la Vieuille,
having taken out of the Hands of the Sieur Herbaut all the Papers relating to
this Negotiation, without which it was impossible to proceed, was gone to Paris
to seek for some assistance to digest them, and to hinder me from undertaking
this Business; thus I obtained leave of his Majesty to return thither to fetch
my little Furniture, intending nevertheless to defer it as long as I could, to
find out some means to prevent my being again involved in the multiplicity of
intricate Affairs, wherein I saw that it was impossible for me to subsist, tho
I should be inclined to it. M. de Bullion cannot but remember that I gave him
notice of the Calumnies that were raised against him, with a design to remove
him, that he might take care to prevent the Effect, as he afterward did by his
prudent and vigilant Conduct. As Soon as I arrived at Paris, I desired the Sieur
de Tremblay at present Governer of the Bastille, whom I knew to be intimate
with the Cardinal of Richelieu, speedily to inform him of the Devices that I
had heard were contrived against him; I declared also that unless some means
were used to induce the Queen Mother, who intended to begin her course of
Physic on the next day, instantly to repair to Compeigne; it was to be feared
lest his Enemies should prevail, and consequently the King and the State would
be deprived of the Advantages which his Majesty's faithful Servants, that had
any knowledge of his Eminency's excellent Qualifications and Endowments,
expected upon his entry into the Council, which had already been proposed to
him. I thought it not convenient to give this account to his Eminency my self,
because I knew that all my Actions were strictly observed, neither did I ever
much study my one profit: however the Queen Mother went on that very day to the
Louvre, where she lay, and the next morning departed to Compeigne being
accompanied with his Eminency, who within a few days after was admitted to the
Ministry to the great benefit of the King and Kingdom.

His Eminency knows better than any the Negociations that were afterward
managed not only in France, but also in all the most considerable places of
Christendom; neither can a perfect Relation of those Occurrences be composed
without his instructions. As for my own particular, since I had no share
therein, and was not very curious in enquiring into other men's business, I
could hardly get intelligence of what passed in the lower sphere of the Court;
therefore I shall only mention some few Transactions, in which my Enemies
falsely reported that I was concerned, against the King's Service, and perhaps
his Eminency will not take it amiss that I discover the truth, which without
doubt has been always concealed from him: to give a clearer light into this
matter I shall relate all the circumstances thereof from the beginning. Above a
year had passed since I withdrew my self from the Court, and was continually
employed in the dispatching of my private Affairs at Paris, in order to my
total retreat, when the late Marshal d'Effiat came to my House and commanded me
in his Eminency's Name to endeavor to decipher certain obscure propositions,
that the Flemmings had exhibited to him for the promoting of Trade and
Commerce; and in case I could pick out the meaning, to prepare the necessary
expedients: I had formerly applied my self to the study of things of the like
nature, insomuch that it cost me less pains and trouble in apprehending the
intention of these Flemmings, and joining their propositions to the particular
knowledge that I had acquired, I drew up a method, by which according to my
weak judgment such a commerce might easily be established, as with little or no
charge would far surpass all others in Europe; and the King would thereby
become Master of the Seas: some time was spent in this laborious Work, during
which the Marshal d'Effiat came often to confer with me, and to urge the
expedition thereof on behalf of his Eminency. One day as I read to him what I
had composed, and being come to a Passage relating to a certain Right of
Arrearage that belonged to the Marshal d'Ornano, from which the Merchants
desired to be exempted; he told me that it ought to be reserved to him, and
desired me to give him notice to meet at my house the next day about the same
hour, that they might discourse together on this subject: they came thither at
the time appointed, and I can certainly affirm that the Marshal d'Ornano never
set his foot within my door since I desisted from managing of public affairs,
because he bore no very good will toward me: there the Marshal d'Effiat
contracted great familiarity with him, and promised that he would take care
that his right of Arrearage should be preserved. Within a few days after, his
Majesty being departed to Fontainbleau, and his Eminency to Fleury, the Marshal
d'Effiat required me in his name to introduce the Flemmings into his presence,
and to bring all that I had prepared on account of the propounded Commerce: his
Eminency having perused my Work, and heard the Merchants in particular was
exceeding well satisfied with the proceedings, ordered them for the future to
apply themselves to none but me; and enjoined me to finish other dispatches
that were requisite for the accomplishment of this design. Being returned to
Paris, the Marshal d'Effiat commanded me, as it were in his Eminency's name,
immediately to endeavor to persuade Monsieur the King's Brother to depart to
Fontainbleau, according to the desire of the King and the Queen Mother, without
refisting any longer* as he had done, being excited (as it was thought) by
certain factious Incendiaries, that designed to detain him at Paris that they
might engage him in their Cabals: I excused my self alleging that I had no
access to him, and that a whole year being passed, since I forbore to frequent
the Court, I had an opportunity to speak with his Highness but once, which
happened six months ago, when I met him walking in the Tuilleries; and the more
I strove to avoid it, the more he urged me, affirming that it would be esteemed
as a signal piece of service: at last he was content that I should only go and
make an attempt. Thereupon I solicited the Marshal d'Ornano, insomuch that he
offered several Arguments to the Prince to induce him to give their Majesty's
the satisfaction that they desired in this respect, which proved so effectual,
that his Highness went the same day, and lodged at Fontainbleau.

About that time I was informed that the Abbot Feuquan, l' Anglois his Brother,
and one Ferrier lately deceased, formerly a Minister of State, who for some
months almost continually attended the Marshal d'Effiat, and others that had
free access to the Cardinal of Richelieu, had conceived great jealousies,
because his Eminency had employed me in the abovementioned affair, and had
openly commended my Work after a very extraordinary manner; and that every one
of them fearing lest if he should keep me near his Person, their devices might
be frustrated, they all conspired together to procure my ruin, of which I ought
to have been aware, and to have stood on my guard; but since I had no other aim
but to obey his Eminency's Command relating to the matter of Commerce then in
agitation, which being finished, as it almost was, as far as it depended on my
part to perform, I intended to retire. However my misfortune was so great, that
I neglected to follow the advice that was given me, since if I had mentioned
but one word to his Eminency, perhaps the King's Justice and his would not have
been prevented, as it is probable that it was in this case; for within a few
days after, as I was putting the last hand to the second Memorial that his
Eminency had desired, that I might deliver it to him the next day at Fleury,
according to the order that I had received from the Marshal d'Effiat in his
name, I was carried Prisoner to the Bastille, where I have been confined, with
a great deal of rigor during four years and seven months, being shut up close
for a good part of that time, without liberty to take the least Air, though I
was certainly informed that his Eminency had wrote at two several times that I
should be permitted to walk abroad; the effect of which privilege my Enemies
hindered by their Artifices, which they also made use of, to sow dissensions in
my Family, that apparently caused the Death of my Wife, and the loss of the
greatest part of my Estate, that I had acquired with much labor and industry
during the term of thirty years.

In this condition I diligently examined my Conscience, but could not find that
I had offended any but God alone, in thought, word, or deed. Having committed
no action that might give a just cause of complaint, since I had for a long
time before taken care to do nothing that might be the occasion of the least
suspicion, therefore I was apt to believe that the abovementioned jealousies
had mainly operated in this unfortunate conjuncture: I was informed by some,
that my Antagonists to accomplish their designs had animated the Queen Mother
against me, although in serving the King I was always very careful lest I
should displease her, as appears from the preceding Relation: Whilst I
revolved these things in my mind a certain debauched young man, that had been
an Augustine Friar, afterward was admitted into the Oratory, and at last
associated himself with the Libertins of the Court pretending to be an Abbot,
being committed to the Bastille for his Crimes, and lodging in a Room over
mine, gave me an account that he had been employed to cause me to be put into
this place, after this manner; At first a Letter of Complements, that I had
written to Madame de Lesdiguieres, was produced, to the intent that he might
forge another like it, for he had a singular faculty in counterfeiting all
sorts of hands; but he desired to be excused, because he thought mine was very
difficult to be imitated, for several reasons that he alleged: after this
denial, he was told that he ought at least to depose, that for three months
together he had seen me going at midnight without a light and only attended
with a little Page into the Chamber of Monsicur the King's Brother, as also the
Sieur de Modene, and that we remained shut up there above an hour; to this he
replied that he was unwilling to mention M. de Modene, by reason that he being
esteemed as a man of no great judgment, it would not be thought probable that
he should contrive any Plots; but this could not be affirmed of M. Deageant,
however since he knew him only by hear say and not by sight, he feared lest he
should be compelled to justify these Depositions face to face before a
Magistrate: upon these difficulties it was agreed, that he should only declare
the matter privately to the King, the Queen Mother, the Cardinal of Richelieu,
and the Lord Keeper of the Seals, having received a promise, that effectual
care should be taken to prevent his being confronted. The Abbot Fcuquan and l'
Anglois his Brother informed me of diverse other circumstances when they were
brought into the Bastille, the former being lodged in a Chamber next to mine:
insomuch that we could discourse one with another at certain hours though we
were closely locked up: They confessed to me that they were the persons that
prepared the Bill of Indictment in order to my Examination, without specifying
the particulars of my accusation, lest the truth should be thereby discovered;
for if they had been exhibited to me I could have very easily demonstrated my
innocence, by proving that I had no Footmen but such as were biger than my
self; that it was above a year ago since I stirred beyond the bounds of the
street where I lived, after seven of the Clock in the Evening, and that the
Watch was set every Night either at my house, or at that of my Brother-in-law
over against it, where they remained usually till one of the Clock in the
Morning and never found me absent so much as once. Praised be God for all; and
may he vouchsafe of his Infinite Mercy, not to impute to my Calumniation the
evils that they have caused me to suffer, but to forgive them this and all
their other Offenses.

Perhaps this Digression concerning my own particular Affairs may be accounted
very tedious and extravagant; but I humbly entreat his Eminency to excuse this
boldness, since it proceeds from the extreme desire that I have always had,
that he should be informed of my innocence, and of the forgeries that have been
invented to withdraw me from the honor of his favor and protection, as also
to procure my ruin: But all these attempts, or any other that hereafter may be
put in practice to this effect, shall never be able in the least to divert me
from the affection and service that I owed to him, and have long since
prosessed; neither shall they hinder me from continuing the Prayers that I
daily put up to the Throne of Grace, for the preservation of his health for
many years, and for the happy success of his generous Enterprises.

Whilst these Memorials were in the Press, one of my Friends having showed to
me the Relation that the Archbishop of Embrun composed for the use of the
Cardinal of Richelieu, concerning his Voyage into England; I thought it would
not be amiss to insert it here, since it confirms one of the most considerable
Passages related by M. Deageant touching the inclination of James I. King of
great Britain to embrace the Roman Catholic Religion; I have hereunto annexed
the Duke of Buckingham's two Letters on this subject, and the little Summary of
the Negociations of the said Archbishop, which was adjoined at the end of this
Relation.

The Letter of the Cardinal of Richelieu, to the Archbishop of Embrun.
SIR,
HAving called to mind the Voyage, that you took some years ago into England, I
could not forbear to lay hold on this opportunity, to desire you to let me know
whether you were sent thither by the King, or whether you went of your own
accord, and to what end, as also whether there were certainly at that time any
Negotiation depending between his Holiness, and the King of Great Britain
concerning his Conversion; You will very much oblige me in giving an account of
all those particulars, that you shall judge worthy to be observed on this
subject, assureing you in the mean time, that whenever an occasion shall be
offered to demonstrate my affection to you, you shall find that I am,

Paris Febr. 19. 1635. SIR,Your most Affectioned Brother to serve you, The
Cardinal of Richelieu.


THE RELATION OF WILLIAM D'HUGUES Archbishop of EMBRUN.
IN the year 1624. the Ambassadors of England on the account of the Treaty of
Marriage between the Sister of the King of France, and the Prince of Wales,
being arrived at Compienne where his Majesty then resided, a certain English
Catholic Gentleman came to me to deliver a Letter from a Scotch Friar of the
Order of St. Francis; who had formerly received some favors from me in Italy,
and at my instance was employed by Pope Paul V. in the English Mission: the
Letter of this Religious Person, contained many particulars relateing to the
lamentable Condition of the poor Catholics in England; as also a
Recommendation of this Gentleman, who gave me a very large Account of all
things, and showed to me the printed Copies of diverse Acts made in England
against the Catholics; insomuch, that I acquired a perfect knowledge of their
Persecutions, of the little support that France offered to them, and of the
general complaint that they had made thereupon, even to that degree, that they
had sent a Relation to Rome, wherein they Remonstrated, how much the
Proceedings of their King on their behalf, during the Negotiation of the
Marriage with Spain, differed from his Deportment toward them, since the
Overtures of the Marriage with France by the Fryer's Letter, and by the
discourse of this Gentleman. I was earnestly entreated in the name of all the
principal Catholics of England, to represent their miseries to the King, and
to make him sensible of the little relief that they received from his
Generosity.

I thought my self obliged to relate the whole matter to the King, which I took
an opportunity to do very fully one morning a little after he rose, and
declared to him, how much the Complaints of the English Catholics contributed
to cause an ill opinion amongst foreign Estates, as to the point of his
Majesty's Piety and Zeal, how much it would obstruct the gaining of the
dispensation at Rome, and that it was much to be wished that his Majesty had an
Agent in England, that might be able particularly to give some consolation and
satisfaction to the Catholics: I was patiently heard; but all the answer that
I could then obtain, was, that I should attend the next day at the same hour;
being come then at the time appointed, the King told me that he had considered
every thing that I had propounded to him, and that he should be very glad to
find out a proper Person to be sent for this purpose, but he knew not on whom
to cast his Eye; after this reply, and other discourses on this subject, I took
the liberty to acquaint him, that if his Majesty thought me capable to
undertake this Affair, and would vouchsafe to give me a Commission, I would
very willingly go as a private Gentleman, judging that as such I might more
easily act, than as one that bears a public Character. Thus it was sufficient
for me, that his Majesty wrote to M. de Effiat, that I should go thither to
take a view of that Country, which was the only part of Europe, that I had not
as yet seen, that it was by his leave, and that he recommended me to him.
Moreover I insisted, that this manner of negociating had always been very
agreeable to me, and that through the Grace of God I had often obtained good
success therein: For in several Voyages, as I visited my Order, I took an
occasion, even by the special Command of the late King, to make application to
diverse Princes of Christendom, and dispatched many important Affairs, that in
appearance seemed to be transacted merely upon my motion, and amongst others
the League of all the Princes of Italy with the late King, and that of the
Princes of Germany, to cause Matthias King of Hungary to be elected King of the
Romans, against the open Opposition that the Spaniards made in favor of the
Archduke Leopold: to this the King replied, that he was not ignorant thereof,
and that he did not only consent that I should undertake this Voyage, but that
he very much desired it, and the next day at Mass his Majesty did me the honor
to acquaint me that he had commanded M. de la Villeauclerce to prepare my
Dispatch, and ordered me to go and take it: He told me the same thing two Days
after, seeing me again at Mass; and urged me to depart, which I did with all
possible Expedition.

As Soon as I was arrived at Dover, the Friar that had written to me came to see
me, having received notice of my Voyage by the Gentleman that carried his
Letter, and entreated me in the name of all the Catholics to take Lodgings at
London in a private House, and not to reside with the Ambassador, that they
might have a more easy and private access to me. I traveled thither under the
name of a Counselor of the Parliament of Grenoble, who had been at all the
Courts of the Christian Princes, except that of England, and soon met with the
Duke of Buckingham, by whom I was immediately discovered; for he told me that
one of the Physicians of the King of England, a Native of Germany, being lately
come from France, had reported to His Majesty that he had seen the Archbishop
of Embrun at Dover, in a different Habit from that which he used to wear in
France, whom he had known long ago, having observed him at Rome when he was
General of the Cordeliers, at Prague and in Poland; and that the King was very
desirous to see me, and to be informed of the design of my coming into England:
to this end he desired me to rely on him, and freely to declare my Mind, which
I did, being persuaded that since he was the Principal Minister of State, I
ought to confide in him: afterward he asked me several Questions concerning
diverse Negociations which the Physician had related that I had transacted in
Germany, and having given him a satisfactory Account thereof I perceived in him
a good Disposition to hearken to whatsoever I should propound, and was also
confirmed in this Opinion by his Mother, and by the Earl of Rutland his
Father-in-Law, that were almost the first Persons with whom I became acquainted
at London; by them and their Confessors I was instructed in all the particular
Circumstances that ought to be observed in treating with the King of England,
and with the said Duke of Buckingham, for the Consolation of the Catholics:
Not long after his Grace appointed me instantly to depart to Royston, where the
Court then was, to see the King; he conducted me thither himself, and
introduced me into his Majesty's Presence, who being in his bed indisposed with
the Gout entertained me very graciously, and ordered the Duke of Buckingham to
hear every thing that I should say: After several general Discourses, that
lasted above two hours, relating to the Voyages and Treaties, which he told me
that he had heard that I had dispatched in Germany, and especially that of the
King of Hungary, concerning which he was pleased to enquire of me very
particularly, at last he began of his own accord to insist on the point of the
Marriage; whereupon I represented to him the necessity of removing the
Obstacles that were raised by the Spaniards at Rome, and the measures that
ought to be taken to effect it, and that to obtain success therein, it was
expedient that the grievances of the Catholics should be redressed; on which
Subject I discoursed very fully, and indeed all that I said to him was so
favorably accepted, that I could not but acknowledge the peculiar Providence of
God on this Occasion; for at this first meeting I prevailed so far, that Orders
were given to release many Catholics out of Prison, in London and other
Places, that the execution of many Laws against them was suspended, and that I
was permitted to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation at London; where
during the time of my residence in that City, above ten thousand English
Catholics received this Sacrament from my Hands, at which their Enemies were
extremely offended, and complained thereof to the King, but to no purpose, for
his Majesty answered them that I did nothing contrary to his Pleasure.

At this time, and at all others, wherein I had the honor to see this King, he
was so well pleased with my Propositions, that he freely disclosed his Thoughts
to me; and if M. d'Effiat were now living, he would be my Witness that this
good Prince did plainly make it appear, that he delighted in conversing with
me: In our Conferences he told me, that next to the Happiness he wished for, to
be allied with France, he desired to be revenged on the Spaniards for the
Injury that they had offered to him, rehearsing to me all the Particulars
thereof with great Indignation; to which he added the Interests of his
Son-in-Law, who was (said he) as it were banished into Holland with abundance
of Children. I instantly replied upon this last Expression, and acquainted him,
that to recover the Palatinate it was requisite that the two Crowns of France
and England should be united, with a firm Resolution to weaken the Power of
Spain, and to this end to enter into a League with the Princes of Italy; who
(as I verily believed) since they had formerly made an Alliance with France
alone, in the time of the late King, would be so much the more willing to do
the like again, when they saw that England was also engaged, with whom the Pope
would easily be persuaded to join, since he had reason to fear least the
Spaniards should one day force him to submit to their Yoke: but to procure this
Union he ought to assure the Pope and the other Princes, that the Catholic
Religion should be indemnified; upon this I proposed many Expedients which
pleased him extremely, as the Duke of Buckingham afterward related to me.

In exhibiting the methods to attain Union, I took an Opportunity to represent
to him, that Liberty of Conscience in England would be one of the the most
effectual means to give full Satisfaction to the Pope and the Catholic
Princes; thereupon the King putting his Hand on mine, spoke these Words, I
plainly see that you are the Person appointed by God, in whom I ought to
confide and to reveal the Secrets of my Heart; afterward he very freely
acknowledged the good opinion that he had conceived of the Catholic Faith, and
so particularly that he omitted nothing; protesting to me, that during his
Minority his Tutors having perceived his Inclination to that Religion, he run
great hazard of being assassinated. As to this Liberty of Conscience, he
professed, that he intended long ago to grant it in his Dominions, and that
for this very purpose he designed to summon an Assembly of Prelates and other
learned Men of England, together with an equal number of Foreigners, and on
the Decisions therein concluded to found the said Liberty, adding that he had
already determined what Persons should be chosen amongst the English, and that
if the Assembly could not meet at Dover, he would consent that it should be
holden at Boulagne, as soon as he should be in a condition to rely on the King
of France, by the means of the Marriage, to which he had agreed on his part;
and to procure these good Effects, he thought it convenient that after the
Consummation thereof, I should return into England under the pretense of
accompanying the Princess, at which time he would deliver to me two Letters
written with his own Hand, one for the King and the other for the Pope,
containing his generous Resolutions; he would also give me a distinct Memorial
concerning his Intentions, which I should prepare, and he would sign, to the
end that being furnished with these Dispatches I should go to Rome under color
of visiting the Apostolic See, where I should treat with the Pope alone, for
whom he said that he had a great Affection and Respect, ever since he
understood that he had composed Verses in his Youth on the violent Death of the
late Queen of Scotland his Mother, in commendation of her and of the Family of
the Stuarts, which he showed to me. He was pleased further to declare, that in
case I returned from Rome with his Holiness's Approbation of the said
Convention, he would cause it forthwith to be assembled, whereupon
extraordinary and admirable Events would ensue; but before he proceeded to
discover his purpose as to his own Person, he would negociate with the
Protestant Princes of Germany, and with the principal Puritan Lords of England
and Scotland, and promised that all things should tend to an happy end, and to
the great advantage of the Catholic Church. This is the substance of all our
Discourses at several times on this Subject: but for a Testimony of the Trust
that this King reposed in me, I shall here insert the particulars of my
Transactions on account of the Marriage.

A considerable Progress being made in this Negotiation, the Duke of Buckingham
arrived near London, and from one of his Houses wrote to M. d'Effiat that he
was ready to treat with him about a new Affair, desiring him to come thither
and to bring me along with him: We went accordingly, and the Duke told us that
the King remembering the Delays and Artifices of the Spaniards to hinder the
procuring of the dispensation during the Treaty with them, was sensible that
they would endeavor much more to cause it to be refused at the solicitation of
France, that he was resolved not to incurr the danger of a second Affront, and
that for this reason it was necessary that the King of France should permit the
Marriage to be celebrated before the Dispensation; for he was informed that an
Absolution for Actions already committed was more easily to be obtained at
Rome, than a Dispensation to do them: Upon this the Ambassador alleged two
Points, first that the King his Master had altogether as much Power at the
Court of Rome as the King of Spain, and secondly that his Most Christian
Majesty would very willingly grant this Demand; however I seemed not to approve
the last Answer, which the Duke of Buckingham soon perceived, and taking an
occasion after Dinner to show me his House he desired me to explain my meaning
at large as to this Particular; which I did, and enumerated to him diverse
Inconveniences very prejudicial to England, that would ensue upon the
Consummation of this Marriage without a Dispensation, together with the
examples of several Princes; insisting that this would grievously offend the
Pope, that no favor could afterward be expected from him; and that by this
means the good Designs, that the King of Great Br^tain intended to prosecute,
would be frustrated; besides I believed that the King of France would never
consent to it. The Duke having heard me replied, that since he distrusted his
own Ability to relate to the King all the Arguments that I had produced, he
would entreat me as soon as I should come to London to compose a Letter
containing these Reasons, and to direct it to him, which he would show to his
Majesty, and thereby supply the defect of his Memory; he recommended this
matter very earnestly to my Care, and assured me that till it were performed
nothing would be concluded.

We parted after this manner, and as we returned to London, M. d'Effiat told me
that the Duke had promised to come to Town within four or five Days, and to
bring the final Resolution; but this time being expired, and the Duke not
appearing, M. d'Effiat grew impatient, and resolved to ride post to him. I had
then finished my Letter, and delivered it into his Hands; but he met his Grace
that very day in his Journey to London, and came back along with him, where
being arrived at Night, M. d'Effia^ immediately dispatched a Messenger to give
me notice that I should repair to his Lodgings the next Morning at Sunrising,
and that the Duke of Buckingham would be there to determine all things: I
failed not to attend at the Hour appointed, when M. d'Effiat acquainted me that
the Duke at their first meeting had enquired of him concerning my Health, and
whether I had written to him, that he instantly gave him my Letter, and
perceived by his Countenance that he was well pleased. After we had waited
about two Hours his Secretary came, and approaching M. d'Effiat told him with a
loud Voice that I might hear, that the Duke had at Midnight received an
express Letter from the King by an extraordinary Courier, with strict Orders
that he should without delay take post to meet him, and that afterward he
would return to London; having delivered this Message he complemented us in his
Name and took his leave; at which M. d'Effiat was extremely incensed, and said,
that he would write to the King to give him an accouns of the perfidiousness of
the English, and that he ought no longer to confide in them: I entreated him to
forbear, and to have a little patience till matters might be accommodated, and
retired to my own Lodgings, where within a few Hours after I understood that he
had already sent a Dispatch to the King; thereupon doubting lest in the heat of
his Passion he should have affirmed that the Negotiation was quite broken off,
and having an opportunity to make use of the same Courier, that had given
notice to me of his Departure, and of the Packet that was delivered to him by
M. d'Effiat, I immediately wrote a little Note to the Cardinal of Richelieu, in
which I assured him that the Affair was not desperate, tho perhaps it might be
otherwise represented to the King; and that I hoped that in less than eight
Days all things would be concluded to his Majesty's Satisfaction: his Eminency
received my Letter, and I have been since informed by the late Marshal de
Schomberg that it was read in a full Council and in the King's Presence.

Not many days passed e're the Duke of Buckingham wrote to me, that he had
presented my Letter to the King, and that his Majesty referred himself wholly
to me, whether I thought fit that the Dispensation should preceed the
Celebration of the Marriage or not, provided that Delays were avoided: I have
his Letter in my custody that clearly demonstrates how far the King and he
relied on me in the managing of this Affair, as appears also by other Letters
that I have, and by the Commission that his Majesty of Great Britain gave me to
write to Rome to facilitate the said Dispensation, the Original of which I have
in my Hands, together with the Additions written by the Duke of Buckingham, and
dictated by the King, which plainly show his Majesty's good Inclinations to
embrace the Catholic Faith. Afterward when the Duke came to London, all
things were concluded according to the effects that ensued. These Proceedings
being thus far advanced I returned into France; but before my departure from
London, the Duke of Buckingham desired me in the King's Name, to commit the
principal matters to writing that related to the Spaniards, and to the Union
that had been proposed, which I did and sent them to him.

As Soon as I arrived in France, I gave a particular account to the King of all
things that I had performed in my Voyage; who was pleased to signify unto me
that he was very well satisfied with the good designs of the King of Great
Britain, and declared that a Report was already spread abroad in France, that I
treated with that King about his Conversion, and that several Persons had
informed him thereof; I replied that there were the same Suspicions in the
Court of England; that the King of Great Britain had earnestly enjoined me to
keep the matter secret, and that therefore I was obliged to beseech his Majesty
to do the like, which he promised me very affectionately; but all these
generous Resolutions were made void by the Death of the King of England, the
first News whereof was brought to me at Mass, by the King himself, who
expressed his Regret in these Words, All our Hopes of England are lost; and
seeing me surprised he told me that their King was dead. I shall only add that
I received the marks of the extraordinary Kindness and Esteem that the King of
Great Britain professed to me in France as well as in England; for when I went
to visit his Ambassadors at Paris, they showed to me one of his Letters:
wherein he ordered them in express terms to account me as his good and faithful
Friend, which was not a little serviceable in obliging them to surmount the
Difficulties and Scruples that they had raised on the occasision of certain
conditions mentioned in the Dispensation, insomuch that I treated with them
concerning this Affair very fully and effectually, at the request of Father
Berulle. I could produce other Testimonies of the like nature, but not thinking
it necessary, I shall finish this Relation with the last Transaction that I
managed with the Duke of Buckingham during his residence at Paris; wherein I
persuaded him to use his endeavors to prevail with his new King to keep a good
correspondence with the Pope, and to that end to maintain a trusty Catholic
Agent at Rome; but he desired that the King should first propound it, therefore
I discoursed with his Majesty on this Subject, who gave his consent, and
ordered me to impart it to Monsieur Tronson, that he might put him in mind
thereof on the Road, as he accompanied the Queen of England, which I believe
that the King may remember.

Given at Embrun, March 3. 1635.

I have here inserted an Addition that I made to the abovesaid Relation, and
which was also sent to the Cardinal of Richelieu.

The Duke of Buckingham relating to me the particular Circumstances of the
Negotiation with the Spaniards, during the abode of the Prince of Wales at
Madrid, informed me, that the said Prince having instantly demanded to be
admitted into the company of the Infanta, and to discourse with her, was
repulsed, and told that this could not be granted, unless he would first make
profession of the Catholic Religion in the presence of at least six or seven
Witnesses, to which they endeavored to persuade him with all the Artifices
imaginable, but could not obtain their desire: nevertheless he was permitted to
write to her, as he did at several times, and received an answer, which the
Prince believed to be written with the hand of the Infanta, but it appeared
afterward to be composed by one of her Ladies of Honor; for upon the
embarking of the Prince for England, Cardinal Sapata that attended him
according to the order of the King of Spain, delivered a Packet to him sealed
up, which being opened in the Vessel, there were found therein all the Letters
written by him to the Infanta, folded up and sealed as he sent them. He
acquainted me also, that within a few days before my arrival, Don Carlo Coloma
Ambassador extraordinary from Spain had used his utmost Endeavors to induce
him to believe that the difficulties that were raised at Rome in granting the
Dispensation, proceeded not from the instance nor consent of the King his
Master; therefore he offered and insisted very much thereupon, that if his
Majesty would defer the concluding of the agreement with France for six months,
he would procure the said Dispensation, and would religiously observe every
Article contained in the Conditions of their Alliance that was treated in
Spain, viz: To restore the Palatinate; to send considerable Supplies for the
recovery of Guienne and Normandy; to permit a free Passage and Commerce to the
East and West Indies; and other particulars: In opposition to these Proposals I
represented to him diverse Reasons taken from the very Discourses that he had
rehearsed to me, and from the Intrigues of the Spaniards already mentioned by
him; insomuch that he was convinced that all these new Offers were only so many
fraudulent Artifices; by which nevertheless he confirmed that the King was
moved: I gave notice thereof to M. d'Effiat, who had already perceived somewhat
in the Audiences that he had obtained of his Majesty, and desired me to search
into the truth of the matter, as I afterward did; for which Service he
protested that he was very much obliged to me.

Amongst these Discourses he showed to me a Letter that the Prince Palatin had
written to him from the Hague, in which he entreated him to take care that this
Condition should be inserted in the Treaty, and to disannul it in case the
Spaniards refused to restore the Palatinate, and as an acknowledgment of this
favor, and also as a testimony of the perpetual Friendship that he intended to
contract with the said Duke, he proposed that his Daughter (who nevertheless
was not above seven years old) should be instantly married to his Grace's
eldest Son, to which I perceived that the Duke was much inclined; for he told
me that the King was not very averse from it: However having desired him to
refer this matter to me, and to hear my Opinion, I alleged to him so many
Reasons, that his Majesty resolved not to oppose the rupture any longer, and
the Duke not to consent to this Marriage, and both determined to conclude that
of France with England; and this is the meaning of these Words in his Grace's
Letter, bearing date the 9th of November, the Copy whereof I have here annexed,
[But the care of this great Affair to which you have incited me.] The English
Catholics having penetrated into the progress that was made, and well knowing
his Majesty's Discourses on my behalf; the deliverance of so many Catholics
that were in Prison, and the liberty that I had taken (which was a thing never
seen in England since Heresy prevailed in that Country) to administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation in London, sent an Express thereof to Rome; at which
the Spaniards being enraged, took an occasion to slander me with so many
Artifices and false Insinuations that they exasperated the Pope against me,
under diverse pretenses, viz. That I went into England without the knowledge of
his Nuntio; that I had confirmed People there without a License; and that I had
visited Persons of the highest Rank in that Kingdom, notwithstanding that they
were Heretics, even the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl of Mansfield:
insomuch that I was obliged at my return into France to write an Apology, which
I sent to Rome, to represent to that Court, that since I had diligently
endeavored to prevent a rupture between France and Spain, and that this
Marriage should not be celebrated without a Dispensation; I ought rather to be
commended than blamed for performing such Actions: but not long after, I
received an answer from M. de Bethunes, that the Pope being informed of all the
circumstances of this Negotiation, was very well satisfied with my Conduct; I
also sent the Copies of several Letters of the Duke of Buckingham, of M.
d'Effiat Ambassador in England, and of M. de Bethunes Ambassador of Rome, which
confirm all the principal matters contained in this Relation: But that the
Letters of M. d'Effiat may be more clearly understood, I ought to add, that I
wrote to him concerning the malicious Accusations and Devices that were
contrived against me, and entreated him to give an account thereof to the King
of Great Britain; this is the tenor of his first Letter.

Moreover the King of England abhorred the Jesuits to that degree, that he not
only declared that he would never consent, that the Confessor of the Princess
should be of that Order, nor that any one of them should belong to her retinue;
but his Majesty was also pleased to command me to desire the King France to
change his Confessor, affirming, that this would be necessary for the
Prosecution of the Designs that we had agreed upon, and would be very
advantageous with respect to the Protestant Princes. Father Jaquinot coming to
see me at Paris, acquainted me, that he was appointed to go into England with
the Princess, and entreated me to give a good Character of his person in that
Country; thereupon I freely professed to him, urging several reasons, that he
would not be well received there, since I believed that he would not be
suffered to appear, that he would be sent back again, and that this would
produce great dissentions between these two Crowns; nevertheless to satisfy
him, I wrote to M. de Effiat what he had told me, and what answer I had given;
and upon this account he sent me the Letter that the Duke of Buckingham had
written to him, as the result of his third Letter, wherein he discourses on
the same Subject, and declares that he intended to deliver my Letters to me
himself, that they might be burnt.

A Letter of the Duke of Buckingham, to the Archbishop of Embrun.
SIR,
THe Hopes that I have to see you very suddenly detain me from rendering to you
the due Testimony of my Gratitude, being extremely ambitious of the Honor to
embrace you at London, and pay my Respects and Thanks to you for the great
Esteem and Affection that you have expressed to me, and for the satisfaction
that you have given to me in your Letters: But the care of this great Affair,
to which you have incited me with cogent Arguments, obliges me to wave all
Ceremonies, and to hasten our Master in bringing this Work to perfection; to
which I am more inclined than to any other thing in the World, and which at
present is so far advanced, that nothing seems to be wanting but your
Bencdiction, which I also beg for myself, and invite you hither to bestow
another here; the lasting marks whereof shall for ever remain in my Family: The
ardent desire of this Benefit has caused me to forget the difficulty of the
journey, and your trouble; but not in the lest the acknowledgments that I shall
owe to you, and the obligation that I shall thereby receive: In the mean time I
remain,

At Newhall, November. 9. 1624. SIR, Your most Affectionate and Humble Servant G.
BUCKINGHAM.


Another Letter by the same Hand to the same Person.
SIR,
I Tender to You my most hearty Thanks for communicating your Sentiments, and
for the Kindness from whence it proceeds: The Liberty that you have commanded
me to take, and the certain Knowledge that I have of the good Affection and
Inclination of my Master have emboldened me to alter two Passages in your
judicious and most elegant Letter, which otherwise I durst not have presumed to
touch; and therefore hoping that you will esteem it as a Design to serve you I
shall only endeavor to put you in mind how necessary it is to expedite the
Marriage, leaving it to your mature deliberation whether it be requisite that
the Dispensation should preceed or follow it: if you find that there is any
probability of dispatch at Rome, I think the Marriage need not be so much
hastened: but if procrastinations and delays be intended, it would be most
convenient according to my opinion to resolve on the accomplishment thereof,
and afterward to expect the Dispensation; for it is easily to be imagined that
his Majesty cannot with any satisfaction remain long in suspense by reason of
the joy and delight that he promises to himself in the Issue of this excellent
Prince his only Son; forasmuch as this is an Affair on which depend innumerable
Considerations of the greatest Importance. You have already seen that the
Treaty of Marriage with Spain has failed, and if this should not succeed
(which God forbid) there would be no Grounds, nor Hopes for the future, to
treat with any Prince whatsoever of the Roman Catholic Religion; from whence
it would most certainly follow, that all the Mitigations and Overtures made in
favor of the Roman Catholic: in these Kingdoms would soon cease; the general
Peace of Christendom would be in apparent danger; and the Union of the Forces
of these two Crowns being dissolved, no means could be found to establish such
a Correspondence and assurance of mutual Supplies as might be able to oppose
any exorbitant and ambitious Power that might arise: and if for default of the
issue of so excellent a Prince these Crowns should fall into the possession of
a Daughter and her Children, their Number would increase so far as to become
burdensome to these Kingdoms; and their Education might cause many Changes,
according to the opinion of those that have conceived great Hopes in the
consummation of the Marriage between his Royal Highness and the Princess Mary.
This is a consequence that your Discretion has already foreseen, having
strictly examined all the Arguments that can be proposed on this Subject;
insomuch that I shall altogether rely on your Judgment and Mediation to procure
all the Expedition that can be imagined, and to confirm, and (if it were
possible) to increase the Reputation that you have gained not only with the
King my Master, but also amongst all those that have the Honor to know you;
who are very sensible that you are endowed with extraordinary Prudence,
Integrity and Charity, to which I again recommend these Affairs: and daily
praying to God for your Prosperity I shall remain in the indissoluble bonds and
obligations, wherein your Virtue has engaged me,

At Newmarket November. 15. 1624. SIR, Your most Affectionate and Humble Servant
G. BUCKINGHAM.


Pray be pleased to excuse the writing of the Alterations in your Letter; for
to keep it secret, I did not think it convenient to make use of any other Hand
but my own.

THe Archbishop of Embrun by many signal Services, that he performed in France
before he was General of the Order of Sr. Francis, rendered himself
considerable in the Esteem of the deceased King Henry the Great through the
means of his Ambassadors, that informed his Majesty of his Person and
extraordinary Qualifications; insomuch that being made General of his Order,
and the opportunities of continuing these Services being more frequent, he
acted so prudently, and pleased the King so far, that his Majesty from that
time imparted to him his most important Enterprises, and employed him in making
a League Offensive and Defensive with all the Princes of Italy against Spain;
in which he obtained good Success in the prosecution of the King's Orders, and
his Majesty was so well satisfied with his Transactions, that he resolved to
make use of him again for the same purpose in Germany against the House of
Austria: thereupon having acquainted him with his Pleasure, he judged that he
might gain greater Advantages if his Negotiation were private, and persuaded
the King to vouchsafe that he should go under color of visiting the Provinces
of his Order in Germany; and to palliate his Design he furnished himself with
diverse Dispatches and Commissions from the Pope: thus under this pretense after
he had received Instructions from the King, that were delivered to him by M. de
Champigny his Ambassador at Venice, he departed into Germany, traveled through
the whole Country, and passed even as far as Transylvania and Poland,
proceeding everywhere according to the King's Orders; the chief of which were
to divide the House of Austria, and at length to take away the Empire from
them, and to put it into the Hands of some other Family in Germany.

To facilitate the procuring of this Division there happened two favorable
Occasions; First the Discord between Matthias King of Hungary the Emperor's
Brother, and the Archduke Leopold his young Nephew; both pretending to a Right
to be Elected King of the Romans: Secondly the Indignation of Matthias because
the Emperor his Brother preferred his Nephew Leopold before him. These
Advantages were so well prosecuted, that upon the Propositions that the said
Archbishop offered to Matthias of the assistence of the Forces of France, that
should be re-enforced with those of the Electors of Triers and Palatin, whom he
very much distrusted, he abandoned the Interests of his own Family, and
resolved to enter into League with the King of France; and even obliged the
Archbishop to go into Transylvania to engage Bethlehem Gabor. The Project of
withdrawing the Empire from the House of Austria was principally grounded on
this Division; for Matthias was already advanced in years, and was not married,
therefore when he should be created Emperor, either he would have no Children;
or if he had any, he could not leave them capable to possess the Empire at his
Death: on this account it was very probable that it might be easily transmitted
into another Family; and this was the most powerful Motive to induce the
Princes of Germany to unite with the King, and to make a League Offensive and
Defensive with him. After the Archbishop had concluded this Alliance in
Germany he returned into France, and passed through the Low Countries; where to
conceal his Negotiations with the Infanta and Nuncio of Flanders he continued
to make use of the Instructions that he had received from his Holiness.

About the end of the year 1609. he arrived at Paris, where he gave an account
to the King of every thing that he had performed, and delivered to him the
Memorials and Certificates relating to these Transactions: but the King thought
fit to employ him again in the League of Italy, to cause the Princes to consent
to, and to sign certain new Articles that his Majesty had added. He might
justly boast that the King was very well satisfied with his Endeavors; and if
the late Queen Mother were living, she would be a sufficient Witness of the
Kindness and Respect that his Majesty expressed toward him: He resided about
two months at Court, and three days before he took his leave the King himself
told him, that he was resolved to cause him to be promoted to the Dignity of a
Cardinal, not at his Nomination, but as it were upon the Pope's own
Inclination, that he might not be suspected by the other Princes; and that he
might not lose the great Credit and Reputation that he had acquired amongst
them; Monsieur de Villeroy confirmed this to him at his Departure: and indeed
being arrived at Rome, he was informed by Monsieur de Breues, the Ambassador of
France, that he had Orders to solicit it, and that the Pope was willing to give
his consent, but the Effect was frustrated by the unfortunate and lamentable
Accident of the King's Murder; nevertheless his Holiness declared to him that
he intended to persist in his Purpose; and it was generally reported that he
would be one of the five Cardinals that were to be created in the Month of
August 1621, but it happened otherwise; for the Procurator-General of his Order
was made Cardinal in his stead, and on the very same Evening after this
Promotion Cardinal Melliny came to acquaint him that the Pope was obliged to
change his Resolution, because the Ministers of Spain having penetrated into
his Intentions had insisted, that if his Holiness made a Frenchman Cardinal
without the Nomination of his King, he ought also to advance a Spaniard after
the same manner, making great Protestations if he should act to the contrary.

Some time after, the Archbishopric of Embrun was given to him, which caused
him to return into France, and being arrived at the Court to take the Oath of
Allegiance in the King's Presence, he represented to the Queen-Regent the small
Revenue that belonged to his Archbishopric, which did not amount to above two
thousand Crowns, being abstracted from the Charges and great Salaries that were
annexed to it; as it appeared by the computation that the Commissioners of the
Regalia had made thereof: Her Majesty replied thereupon, that she thought that
she had been assured that it was worth much more: However remembering that
Monsieur de Breues had written to her, that the Kings of Hungary and Poland had
importuned him to abide in their Dominions, and more especially that the Count
de Castres, Viceroy of Naples, had offered to him the Coadjutorship of the
Archbishopric of Taranto, to which appertained a Revenue of twenty thousand
Crowns, the Archbishop whereof was his near Kinsman, and died within six
Months after; she immediately commanded Monsieur de Villeroy to treat with
Monsieur de Crequy concerning the augmenting of this Pension with a thousand
Crowns, that should be taken out of his Archbishopric; and promised to pay
the extinction in ready Money: Moreover, she was pleased to order the said
Sieur de Villeroy to put her in mind of the Archbishop in case of any Vacancy;
Her Majesty also further expressed her good will in sending him into Spain,
where he resided by her special Command at the time of the Marriages, to
observe the Actions of the Spaniards on the account of this Alliance, and
principally the Duke de Lerme, with whom he was particularly acquainted, as
also with many other Noblemen of Spain, that he had known in Italy: But all
these Favors that he received from the Queen, suddenly ceased upon the great
Revolutions that happened at Court. This Journey was the cause of another that
he took into Piedmont; for the Duke of Savoy being informed by his Ambassador
in Spain of the frequent Conferences that this Archbishop held with the Duke
de Lerme, and how much he was esteemed by the said Duke, interceded with the
Marshal de Lesdiguieres to persuade him to go into Piedmont: insomuch that he
went thither with the King's Approbation; and it may be certainly affirmed,
that he laid the first Foundation of the Peace that was afterward concluded,
by the means of a large Letter in form of a Relation that he wrote to the Duke
de Lerme, containing the Reasons that might induce Spain to incline to this
Treaty. Notwithstanding all these Journeys and vast Expenses he did not neglect
his Bishopric; for he reestablished therein several Rights that had been lost
in the time of the Wars, redeemed five Territories and diverse other Demesns
that had been alienated, and after this manner increased the Revenue of the
said Archbishopric; but all this could not be effected without a great deal
of Trouble and Charge, since he was forced to sue for it, and to obtain almost
30 several Decrees. It is no less true that he found his Archi-Episcopal House
so ruined, it being burnt by the Huguenots, that at his arrival at Embrun he
was constrained to take Lodgings for his Family in the City; nevertheless he
restored it to so good a Condition that the late King and most of the principal
Nobility of France have lodged there, and have given him very great
Commendations on this Account: Moreover he has expended considerable Sums of
Money in diverse Journeys that he undertook at the command, and in the Service
of the late King, and never was reimbursed to the value of one Penny.

When he was at Paris, about the beginning of the Year 1620, the King at the
persuasion of Monsieur de Luines, having told him that he desired to see all
the Papers, Letters and Instructions that he had received from the late King
Henry the Great relating to his Negociations in Italy and Germany, he sent one
of his Servants to Embrun to fetch the said Papers, amongst which was the
League offensive and defensive that he had transacted with the Princes of
Italy; having presented the Copy of the said League and other Memorials to the
late King, his Majesty commanded him with his own Mouth to deliver them to M.
de Luines; which he did, but could never recover them out of his Hands: for
after the death of the said Monsieur de Luines, the late King at his request,
ordered Monsieur de Tronson to demand them of Monsieur de Modene, who replied
that he had seen them, but that he knew not how they were disposed. It is well
known what Advantages accrued to the State upon the Conversion of the late
Constable de Lesdiguieres, which was accomplished with great applause by the
said Arch Bishop, who having insinuated himself into the Mind of this Noble
Lord continually solicited him to take this good resolution; Monsieur de
Puisieux, whom he acquainted with these Particulars, has given a testimony
thereof in his Letter that he sent to him, which is also confirmed in another
written by the King on the subject of this Conversion. According to his
Majesty's Order, he accompanied the Constable at the Siege of Montpelier, and
constantly attended him until the Month of January 1624, when he received a
Letter from the King, importing an express Command that he should come unto
him; as soon as he appeared at Court, his Majesty imparted to him the desire
that he had to send him into Italy, to treat with the Princes as he had
formerly done on the behalf of King Henry the Great against Spain: But the time
not being convenient for such a Negotiation; he ingeniously propounded his
Reasons to the King, which his Majesty approved, and declared to him his
Satisfaction therein.

Not long after, the King appointed him to go into England; concerning which
Voyage he has already composed a Relation for the use of the Cardinal of
Richelieu, who wrote to him on purpose to desire it. It is certain that in this
Voyage he was very serviceable in concluding the Marriage that was once broken
off: It is no less true that he acquired much Credit and Reputation with King
James I. to that degree, that he not only obtained a permission to administer
the Sacrament of Confirmation in London, where above twelve thousand English
Catholics received it from his hands, and were thereby comforted and
strengthened; but he also persuaded that Prince very much to incline toward a
Conversion; and if he had not died so suddenly, the good Effects thereof would
have appeared: the Duke of Buckingham's Letters may serve as a sufficient
Testimony of all these Circumstances, which are specified at large in the above
mentioned Relation. The late King was fully informed concerning these
Transactions, insomuch that besides the Satisfaction that he expressed to him
in particular, he designed to nominate him to the Cardinalship, and signified
his Intentions to Cardinal Bagny then Nuncio in France, who returning to Rome
revealed it to the said Archbishop at Avignon.

But at this time (as heretofore) the King's generous Inclinations to promote
the Archbishop proved ineffectuall; nevertheless he always persevered to
serve his Majesty with his Person and small Estate; neither could extraordinary
Expenses nor great Dangers divert him from this Resolution: for in the year
1630. the late King having ordered him to take care of the Passage of the
Troops through his Diocese, and to furnish them with Provisions, Ammunition,
and other things requisite for the Subsistence of the Army that was to march
into Italy. Although this obliged him to disburse vast Sums of Money, and to
incurr extreme Perils, since the Plague raged everywhere throughout his whole
Diocese, so violently that his Almoner and Gentleman Usher fell sick in his own
House; however he remained always near the Highway to provide all things
necessary: this may be evidently proved by the Letters of the late King and the
Cardinal of Richelieu; as also by those of the Marshal de Montmorency, de
Schomberg, de la Force and d'Effiat. Moreover he performed other remarkable
Services when the King's Forces took Pignerol; for the Archbishop being
informed that the Duke of Savoy intended to put a strong Garrison into his Fort
of Lauret in the Valley of Barcelona very near the Roads that lead to Provence
and Dauphine, through which all the Provisions and military Ammunition were to
be conveyed; to the end that they might make Incursions and seize on the
Wagons and Carriages; and might by this means reduce the Army to the utmost
Extremity: He gave notice thereof to the Cardinal, by the Sieur d'Hugues his
Nephew, at present Agent General of the Clergy of France, whom he sent to him
on purpose: The Cardinal did not neglect this Advice, but immediately
dispatched Monsieur de Montreal, Quartermaster, and the Abbot de Beauvau at
present Bishop of Nante, who with all possible speed repaired to Embrun, with
Orders to do whatsoever the Archbishop should think convenient on this
occasion, who declared his opinion, gave to them the Sieur Baron d'Hugues his
other Nephew, and afforded all manner of Assistance, insomuch that the Fort was
attacked, and the Garrison compelled to surrender.

FINIS.

