A DECLARATION Of the proceedings in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, CONCERNING Their
Native and Dread Sovereign, Charles Stuart, late King of England; And a Message
to His Highness the Prince of Wales.

WITH The Declaration of the Marquis of Argyle, and General Leven, concerning
the Prince, and their Resolution to oppose the bringing in of the Royal Party.

ALSO, A Letter from the Presbyterian Ministers in the Kingdom of England, to
their Brethren of Scotland, touching the Parliament and Army.

And the Answer of the Ministers of Scotland thereunto.

Enclosed in a Letter from the City of York, to a Gentleman resident in the
City of London.

Imprimatur,

THEODORE JENNINGS.

Imprinted at London for R.VV. MDCXLIX.

A Declaration from the North, containing the proceedings of the Kingdom of
Scotland, in reference to the late King of England, and the Prince of Wales.
Honored Sir,
Whereas the children of prey, and men lately under the pillar and Cloud of
hope, of dividing the spoil of this miserable kingdom, when it should be
reduced from under the Iron of enslaving Tyranny and Oppression (between which
sad condition, and it, there was even now but one step) should again rise up
with passionate outcries, and be ready to curse the army and their
proceedings, and ecchoing forth their poisonous and inveterate ladguage
throughout several corners of this Northern Climate, for alienating and
withdrawing the hearts of the people from their due and lawful Obedience to
the supreme power, and representative Body of this Nation.

But what these meure, are quires no great matter of wonder, or much
observation, their actions being apparent to the world, and appearing visible,
written in Characters of innocent Blood, and all their designs, plots and
practices tending only to the erecting and upholding of a tyrannical and
arbytrary Government, who have bing reat promoters of the late wars against the
parl. and kingdom (being of the royal Faction) and are now again thirsting
after the blood of the Righteous, their present actions being suitable to their
former, importing the same justification in these their evil and wicked
Designs, as appears by their present complottings and underhand listings in
several parts of Westmerland and Cumberland, using all means possible to
disturb and inflame the peace of the Kingdom, and Jack Presbyter (we hear) has
sent a Declaratory Letter to his beloved Jockie (viz. the Clergy) Humbly
imploring the sad and bleeding condition of the Church of England, occasioned
by the present Reformation, by taking off Tithes, and purging of their fat In
comes, Requiring their present aid and assistance, for redeeming of their
liberties, etc.

In consideration whereof, we hear that their confiding Brethren do concur with
them in their desires, and have returned answer,

That they will leave no means unassayed for restoration of them to their
former rights and customs, and restoring of the Church of England to its
former splendour and glory; and indeed, they have made a fair progress in order
thereunto; for they begin to open in pulpit, like so many Beagles after their
game, stirring up the people to rise as one man, for defense of the Kingly
power, Monarchical government, and the solemn League and Covenant. But I am
confident, that upon their advance to the English Confines, most of the
inhabitants in these parts will generally rise as one man for the parliament
and army.

By an Express from Barwick, it is advertized, That there is a design
agitating in Scotland amongst the great Ones, to invite the Prince of Wales
into that Kingdom, and (it is reported) that they are determined to send a
message to his Highness, the abstract and sum whereof, is said to be as
follows:

That whereas upon mature deliberation and consideration of the present
proceedings in the Kingdom of Englaad, in relation to the trial of their most
gracious and dread Sovereign, and conceiving there is an intent to cut off the
Kingly power, and to extirpate the splendour of Monarchical Government; in
consideration whereof, and out of their loyalty to the same, they humbly
beseech His Highness to repair into his Fathers Native Kingdom, protesting to
sacrifice lives and fortunes in the ^efence of his Royal person, and
preservation of his just Rights and privlledges, etc.

But there are diverse of the ^onest party in that Kingdom, who have declared
against this grerogative Design; and we hear that the Marq. of Argyle, Genesis
Leven, and others, have also declared their descent thereto, which was in these
words,

That we shall to the utmost of our lives and fortunes, endeavor the
preservation of peace and amity between the two Kingdoms of Scotland and
England, and that we do utterly detest and denounce against the bringing in of
the malignant and adverse party into this Kingdom, conceiving it to be very
prejudicial and destructive to the peace and tranquillity of this Kirk and
Kingdom, and that we shall with the hazard of lives and fortunes, endeavor a
right understanding between both Nations, against all Dividers and Opposers
whatsoever.

This honorable dissent of these two noble Patriots, does much eclipse and
obstruct the present proceedings in Scotland; and its believed, they will be
twice ad^^'d before they enter into an Engagement, the burnt Child dreading the
fire. Our Forces go on very succesfully against the Enemy at Pontefract, which
is all at present, from

York 30 Jan. 1648. Your devoted servant, H. WILSON.

Several precepts from the late King of England.
I Shall be very little heard of any body here. J shall therefore speak a word
unto you here, indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think that
holding my peace, would make some men think I did submit to the guilt, as well
as to the punnishment, but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to cl^ar my self both as an honest man, and as a good King, and a
good Christian. I shall begin first upon my innocence, in troth I think it not
very needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the World knows that I
never did begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to
witness, to whom I must shortly make an account, that I never did intend to
incroach upon their Privileges they began upon me, it is the Militia they
began upon, they confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for
to have it from me, and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of
Commissions, of their Commissions and mine, and likewise o the Declarations,
will see clearly that they began these unhappy troubles not I, so that as the
guilt of these Enormous crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God
will clear me of it, I will not, I am in charity; God forbid that I should lay
it upon the two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope
they are free of this guilt, for I do believe that ill instruments between them
and me has been the chief cause of all this blood shed; so that by way of
speaking, as I find my self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may
too: yet for all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as to
say, that Gods Judgments are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by
u^ just Sentence, that is ordinary; I will only say this; that an unjust
Sentence (meaning the Earl of Strafford) that I suffered to take effect is
punished now, by an unjust Sentence upon me; that is, so far I have said to
show you that I am an innocent man. Now for to show you that I am a good
Christian: I hope there is (pointing to Dr. Juxon) a good man that will bear me
witness, that I have forgiven all the world; and even those that in
particular, have been the chief causers of my death; who they are God knows,
I do not desire to know, I pray God for give them, But this is not all, my
Charity must go farther, J wish that they may repent, for they have committed a
great sin in that particular J pray God with st. Stephen that this be not laid
to their charge; nay, not only so, but that they may take the right way to the
peace of the Kingdom, for my ^^^^ty commands me not only to forgive particular
men, but my charity commands to the last gasp, the peace of the Kingdom: So
(sirs) J do wish with all my soul, and J do hope there is (turning to some that
wro^^) some here will carry it further, that they may endeavor the Kingdoms
peace. Now J must show you both how you are out of the way; and will put you in
a way; first; you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have
had as yet as J could find by any, thing is in the way of conquest, Now sir.
for to put you in the way, belive it you will never do right, nor God will
never prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is my
successors) and the people their due? J am a: much for them as any of you: You
must give, God his due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to his
Scripture) which is now out of order. For to set you in away particularly now J
cannot but only this, a national synod freely called, freely debating among
themselves, must settle this, when every opinion is truly heard. For King,
indeed J will not, (then turning to a Gentleman that touched the Ax, said, hurt
not the Ax that may hurt me (meaning if he did blunt the edge) for the King:
the Laws of the Land will clearly instrvct you for that; therefore because it
concerns my own particular, J only give you a touch of it. For the people, And
truly I desire Liberty and freedom as much as any body whomsoever,: but J must
tell you, that their Liberty, and their freedom, consists in having of
governmen^; those laws by which life and their goods, may be most their own. It
is not for having share in government (sir) that is noting pertaining to them,
A subject and a sovereign are clean disterent things, and therefore, until
they do that, J mean, that you do put the people in that Liberty as J say,
certainly they will never enjoy themselves. sirs, it was for this that I am
come here: If I would have given way to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws
changed according to the power of the sword, I needed not to have come here,
and therefore I tell you, (and I pray to God it be not laid to your charge)
That I am the Martyr of the People. In Troth Sirs, I shall not hold you much
longer, for I will only say this to you, That in truth I could have desired
some little time l^nger, because that I would have put this that J have said in
a little more order, and a little better digested then J have done, and
therefore J hope you will excuse me. J have delivered my Conscience, J pray God
that you do take those courses that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and
your own salvations. Doctor Juxon, Will your Majesty (though it may be very
well known your Majesty's affections to Religion, yet it may be expacted that
you should) say somewhat for the worlds satisfaction.

King. I thank you very nery heartily (my Lord) for that had almost forgotten
it. In Troth Sirs, My Con^c ence in Religion, I think is very well known to all
the World, and therefore. I declare before you all, that I die a Christian
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I sound it left me by
my Father; and this honest man (pointing to Dr. Juxon) I think will witness
it. Then turning to the Officers said, Sirs, excuse me for this same. I have a
good cause, and I have a gracious God; I will say no more. Then the King called
to Dr. Juxson for his Night, Cap, and having put it on, he said to the
Executioner, Does my hair taouble you? who desired him to put it all under his
Cap, which the King did accordingly, by the help of the Executioner and the
Bishop, and theing turning to Dr. Juxson, I have a good Cause, and a gracious
God on my side.

Dr. Juxson. There is but one stage more. This stage is turbulent and
troublesome; it is a short one: But you may consider it will soon carry you a
very great way, it will carry you from Earth to Heaven, and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial, joy, and comfort. King. I got from a
corruptible, to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance can be, no
disturbance in the world.

Dr. Juxon, You are changed from a Temporal to an eternal Crown; a good
exchange. The King then said to the Executioner, is my Hair well: then the King
took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr. Juxson saying,
Remember me to my Son Charles. Then the King put off his Dublet, and being in
his Wastecoat, put his Cloak on again: then looking upon the block, said to the
Executioner, you must set it fast. Executioner, It is fast Sir.

King. It might have been a little higher. Executioner. It can be no higher
Sir. King. When I put out my hands this way, then -- stretching them our. After
that, having said two or three words (as he stood) to himself with hands and
eyes lifted up immediately stooping down, laid his Neck upon the Block: And then
the Executioner again putting his Hair under his Cap, the King said (thinking
he had bin going to strike) stay for the sign. Execut. Yes, I will, and it
please your Majesty. And after a very little pawse, the King stretching forth
his hands, the Executioner at one blow, severed his head from his Body.

FINIS.

