A DEBATE UPON THE QUAERIE, WHETHER A King Elected and Declared by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at Westminster 22 of January
1688. coming to and Consulting with the said Lords and Commons; does not make
as complete a Parliament, and Legislative power, and authority; to all intents
and purposes, as if the said King should cause new Summons to be given and new
Elections to be made by Writs.
THAT the Highest and Supreme Court of this Nation (according to it is ancient
constitution) is the Parliament, I need not now labor to make out; the present
business being to find out and discover the substantial and real parts of a
Parliament, for thereby shall we be satisfied touching the question in hand.

A Parliament (as Sir Edward Coke in his Jurisdiction of Courts fol. 1. tells
us) consists of the Kings Majesty (sitting there as in his Politic Capacity)
and of the three Estates of the Realm (that is to say) 1st. The Lords
Spiritual, as Archbishops and Bishops: 2dly, The Lords Temporal, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons: 3dly, The Commons of the Realm, (that
is) Knights of Sheers, Citizens and Burgesses.

As to the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, Sir Edward Coke in the same place
tells us, that every one of them being of full age when a Parliament is to be
held, ought of right to have a Writ of Summons to come to that Parliament. As
to the Commons, he says, they are respectively elected by the Shires or
Counties, Cities and Buroughs by force of the Kings Writs. Crompton in his
Jurisdiction of Courts fol. 1. says, the High Court of Parliament is the
Highest Court in England, wherein the King himself sits in person; and comes
thither at the beginning of the Parliament, and at the end thereof, and at any
other time when it pleases him during the Parliament.

To this Court come all the Lords of Parliament, as well Spiritual as Temporal,
and are severally summoned thither by the Kings Writ.

There is a Writ also sent to every Sheriff of England and Wales to elect
Knights for Parliament, etc. Says that Author.

But the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster 22 of January 88. were not
summoned thither by the Kings Writ, and therefore, as is objected, though the
King afterward comes to them, yet such King, Lords and Commons cannot be a
Parliament.

In answer to which, and to demonstrate whether upon the Kings coming to, and
consulting with them, the King and them make a Parliament, I must premise, that
in extraordinary cases, such as of which there is no direct Example, we must
take our directions from the Resolutions and Practices in such Cases as come
nearest and are most like to them; and by Consequences from thence make our
Resolutions as may be most agreeable to Reason.

It is generally admitted, that in an Hereditary Kingdom, if the King should
die without any Heir either Lineal or Collateral, the Crown in that case would
devolve, or as it were escheate to the whole People and Nation; and that
hereupon the Estates and Representatives of such a Nation may dispose of the
Crown to whom they please, or quite alter and change the Government into what
form they think fit.

This has been frequently adjudged and practiced, one Instance whereof was in
the Emperor Charles the Gross, who dying without any Heir, the Kingdoms which
were under him, did severally choose themselves Kings: France chose Charles the
Simple; In Italy some chose Berengarius, and some Guido; and the Germans chose
Arnolph Duke of Bavaria for their Emperor. Ferdinand King of Portugal dying
without lawful Heir, the Estates of that Kingdom assembled themselves at
Coimbre, and elected John the late Kings Bastard for their King, and in their
Decree of Election it is recited, that King Ferdinand died without any lawful
Issue or Kindred, whereby according to the Law of Nations, it was lawful for
them to choose who they pleased for their King or Governor.

In like manner, it is where a King does abandon, forsake or desert his
Government, by going out or flying out of his Kingdom without appointing any
Guardian to protect and take care of his People in his absence, whereby the
Throne is become vacant; in such a case, the Estates of such a People may
appoint another King or Governor.

And to come close to our present Case; King James the Second whether out of
fear, or for what other reason it is not material, but away he goes or rather
flies out of his Kingdom; abandons, forsakes and leaves his people unguarded
and undefended, at the Mercy of a Foreign Army, even in the Heart of the
Country; without so much as leaving a Guardian or Great Seal behind him: His
great Officers and Ministers of State flying some one way and some another.
What could then be done but was then done? viz. Several of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, many of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of a former
Parliament; the Aldermen and diverse Common Council of our Capital City of
London, addressed themselves to his Highness the Prince of Orange, desired him
to take upon him the Administration of Public Affairs both Civil and Military,
for the Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties,
and of the Peace of the Nation, until the then intended Convention of the three
Estates or great Council of the Realm: they also desired his Highness to send
Letters subscribed by himself to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal that were
Protestants to meet on the said 22 of January at Westminster, the Summons to
Parliament being always omitted to known Popish Lords since the Test-Act. And
they desired his Highness to send the like Letters to the several Shires,
Counties, Universities, Cities, Buroughs and Cinque Ports of the Nation, for
Electing of such number of persons to represent them, and to meet on the said
22 of January, for the purposes aforesaid, as of right were to be sent to
Parliaments, with directions that such Elections should be made by such persons
only as according to the ancient Custom and Laws, of right ought to choose
Members for Parliament: And accordingly such Letters were sent, and due notice
given, and Elections accordingly were made, and the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so elected met on the said 22
of January: And after mature and deliberate Consideration, they Resolved, That
the Prince and Princess of Orange should be King and Queen of England, etc. for
their natural lives and life of the longer Liver of them, and that the sole and
full (...) of the Regal Power be in the Prince only, in the name of both.

Now after the Prince and Princess of Orange are proclaimed King and Queen of
England as aforesaid, and he comes and Consults with the three Estates so
assembled, I would fain know what is wanting in that Assembly to make them a
full and complete Parliament; or what can be had more than is in this
Convention of King, Lords and Commons, if the said King should issue out Writs
for calling a new Parliament? Certainly nothing more can be had material to the
Essence of a Parliament.

If the substantial parts of a Parliament be, and consist of an Assembly or
Convention or Meeting together of the King and the three Estates, as I have
showed that it is out of the best Authorities we have, the difference of the
Lords and Commons being called by Writ or by Letter is nothing material since
both Writ and Letter are to the same effect; and in some ancient Records it is
mentioned that Parliaments should be summoned by Letters, particularly in King
John's great Charter in the 17 year of his Reign, he promises to summon the
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, etc. per Literas nostras by our Letters. Orig. Jud. 17.

The Prince of Orange's not being King at the time of his sending forth his
Letters matters not, for he was the Person to whom the Administration of the
Government was then committed.

It is evident, that in many Parliaments it was not so material how the King,
Lords and Commons came together, as that they were together.

I dare appeal to any man, if the manner of Calling together the three Estates
of the Realm by the Prince of Orange's Letters was not a much fairer
proceeding, considering the state of Affairs, as to the Calling of them
together, then was in several Cases wherein they were never doubted, to be a
Parliament when joined with a King. I shall instance only a few of many that
might be named.

Edward the Second being imprisoned by his Queen, Son and Nobles, they issue
forth Writs in the Imprisoned Kings Name to summon the Lords, and to choose
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to meet at Westminster 16 of Jan. 1325. This
one would think was pretty hard, and an absolute force upon the King by making
use of his Name against his Will, so that it could not be said to be his Act;
yet the Lords and Commons being met they deposed Edward the Second, and
declared his Son Edward King, and this new King, and the Lords and Commons, so
(as I may say) irregularly convened together, made several Acts of Parliament,
and have been ever since adjudged a good Parliament to all intents and purposes
without any subsequent Act of Confirmation.

In like manner Rich. 2. being taken Prisoner by Henry Duke of Lancaster, the
Duke issues forth Writs in the Kings Name (the King then in Prison) to summon
the Lords and to elect Representatives for the People, to meet at Westminster
13 of Sept. 1399. These being met by this irregular Summons they depose Richard
the Second, and declare the Duke of Lancaster King; and that new King and the
Lords and Commons so irregularly convened, being joined together, were and are
to this day adjudged, deemed and taken to be a good Parliament to all intents
and purposes without any Act of Confirmation by any subsequent Parliament.

The Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster 25 of April 1660. were convened
by Writs in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, who were
Usurpers; yet when King Charles the Second came to them, and they received him
as King, he and they together were adjudged a Parliament and they Enacted that
they should be so taken, and they made many Laws, which immediately were put in
execution; and they continued as a Parliament, until 29 of December following,
which was for above eight Months; but indeed most or all those Acts were
afterward confirmed by a subsequent Parliament convened by the Kings Writs in
May 1661. but that Confirmation, according to many good Judgments, was rather
to satisfy some Scrupulosity than out of necessity, most of the said Acts
having in a great measure had their Effects before the subsequent confirming
Parliament began.

If upon the Prince of Orange's being declared and Proclaimed King he comes to
the Convention of Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster: If the same
number of Lords be summoned thither that of Right ought to be summoned to
Parliment, if the same number of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses be duly
chosen, as ought to be chosen, to represent in Parliament, then consequently
there are all the Substantial and Essential parts of a Parliament met together,
and being so, where is the Necessity, where is the Advantage, where is the
Prudence to dissolve these and thereby give new trouble of new Summons, of new
Elections, lose a great deal of time, suffer irrecoverable loss and damage to
Ireland and our Allies abroad; and after all, at the next meeting, be but where
we now are, as to the Essential parts of a Parliament, there being nothing more
to be had at any other time, but what we have already.

I can see no material difference as to the making of a Parliament, whether the
King come to the Lords and Commons being assembled together and join with them,
or the King by his Writ or Letters call them to him: and therefore I conclude,
if the Prince of Orange after he is Declared and Proclaimed King does come to
the Lords and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, and advise with them, in
that instant that the King so comes and advises with them, they will be as good
a Parliament, as if he should issue out new Writs of Summons, and they should
meet again by force thereof.

FINIS.

