His Excellence Sr. Tho: Fairfax General of the, Army etc:



A DECLARATION FROM Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The Army under his Command.

As it was humbly tendered to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament: As also to the Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council of the City of London.

Concerning the just and fundamental Rights and Liberties of themselves and
the Kingdom: With some humble Proposals and Desires.

PRinted by the special appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
Soldiery of the Army under his Command.

St. Albons, June 14. 1647. Signed by me, JOHN RUSHVVORTH.

Imprinted at London, for L. Chapman, and L. Blacklocke. 1647.

A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his
Command, humbly tendered to the PARLIAMENT, concerning the just and
fundamental Rights and Liberties of themselves and the Kingdom, with some
humble proposalls and desires.
THat we may be no longer the dis-satisfaction of our friends, the subject of
our ^^emies malice to work jealosies and mis-representations upon, and the
suspicion if not astonishment of many in (...)ome in our late or present
trans-actions and conduc(...)n^sle, we shall in all faithfulness and
cleareness pros^sse, and declare unto you those things which have of late
portracted and hindered our disbanding, the present grievances which possess
our Army and are yet enremedied, with our desire as to the complete settlement
of the liberties and peace of the Kingdom, which is that blessing of God then
which nothing is more dear to us, or more precious in our thoughts, we having
hitherto thought all our present enjoyments, whether of life or livelihood, or
nearest relations, a price but sufficient to the purchase of so rich a
blessing, that we, and all the freeborne people of this Nation may sit down in
quiet under our Vines, and under the glorious administrations of Justice and
Righteousness, and in full possession of those fundamental rights and
liberties without which we can have little hopes as to humane considerations,
to enjoy either any comforts of life, or so much as life it self, but at the
pleasures of men, ruling merely according to will and power. It cannot be
unknown what has passed betwixt the Parliament and the Army as to the service
of Ireland; by all which together with the like proceedings against the Army,
in relation to their Petition and grievances, all men may judge what has
hindered the Army from a ready engagement in that service, and without further
Account or Apology as to that partieular, then what those passages and
proceedings themselves already made public do afford; we do appeal to your
selves, whether those courses to which the Parliament has by the designs and
practice of some been drawn, have rationally tended to induce a cheerful and
unanimous undertaking of the Army to that service, or rather break and pull
the Army in pieces with discontents and dishonor, and to put such
disobligations and provocations upon it as might drive it into distemper, and
indeed discourage both this Army and other Soldiers from any further
engagement in the Parliaments service: And we wish all men would with us upon
the whole carriage seriously consider, whether in the intentions of those who
have by false informations, and mis-representations put the Parliament upon
such ways: The timely and effectual relief of Ireland seem really to have
been intended, or rather (with the breaking or disbanding of this Army) to draw
together or raise such other Forces, and of such a temper as might serve to
some desperate and destructive designs in England, which (besides the probable
suspicions from their carriage of the business, we have before hand, in the
transaction thereof, had more then hints of such a design, by clear
expressions to that purpose, from many of those Offiers of the Army, that have
been persuaded, and appeared most forward to engage for Ireland on the terms
proposed. And that such a design has all along been driven, seems now too
evident by the present disposing of those Forces that have been engaged for
Ireland by the endeavor of some to gain a power from the Parliament, of
ordering those Forces for some Service in England, and by the private listings
of men for service here, without any public Authority of Parliament; And (all
this) by the same persons who have all along appeared most active and violent
in the late proceedings against the Army.

As to the just discontents and dis-satisfaction of the Army, in relation to
their grievances, and their noncomplyance to the late Orders for Soldiers
disbanding by peece-meale, before more full and equal satisfaction were given
to the whole; We desire you to look back to the Papers already published of
the grievances themselves, the Narrative of the Officers, and to the latter
Papers from the General Council of War at Bury, and the late general
Rendezvouze near Newmarket; and (we think your late resuming the
consideration of those things (as to a further satisfaction) does much justify
the defires and proceedings of the Army in those past particulars hitherto. And
though (had we (upon our first addresses) for our undoubled Rights and dues)
found a free and candid reception, with a just consideration, and a reasonable
satisfaction, or at least an ingenious Answer therein; We should have been
easily satisfiable to have abated or forborne much of our dues, and not to have
inquired into, or considered (so far as we have) either the possibilities
there are for more present satisfaction of Arreares, or the credit of future
securities proposed; yet since upon those former addresses, we have found such
hard dealing (as in the said Papers is set forth, and those additionall (though
hitherto but partial satisfaction) coming so hardly as they have, we find no
obliging reasons in the least, to decline or recede from what is our due, but
rather still to adhere unto our desires of full and equal satisfaction in all
the things mentioned in the aforesaid Papers, not only in behalf of our
selves and the Army, but also of the whole Soldiery through out the Kingdom,
who have concurred, or shall concur with us in the same desires, and to all
our former desires. As Soldiers we cannot but add this, wherein we find our
selves so nearly concerned in point of Justice and Reputation, that more care,
and a stricter course may be taken for good, all Articies granted upon
surrendors, according to the ture intent and meaning of them; as also for
remedy and reparation, in case of any breach (and this) without those delays
which diverse have found as prejudicial to them, or more then if they had been
totally denied the performance of them. Nor will it now (we hope) seem strange
or unseasonable to rational and honest men, who consider the consequence of
our present case, and their own and the Kingdoms, as well as our future
concernments in point of right, freedom, peace and safety, if from a deep
sense of the high consequence of our present case, both to our selves (in
future) and all other people, we shall before Disbanding proceed in our own
and the Kingdoms behalf to propound, and plead for some provision for our and
the Kingdoms satisfaction, and future security in relation to those things,
especially considering that we were not a mere mercinary Army, hired to serve
any Arbitrary power of Estate, but called forth and conjured by the several
Declarations of Parliament, for the defense of our own and the peoples Rights
and Liberties, and so we took up Arms in Judgment and conscience to those
ends, and have so continued them, and are resolved according to your first just
defires in your Declarations, and such principles as we have received from your
frequent informations, and our own common sense concerning those our
fundamental Rights and Liberties, to effect and vindicate the just power and
right of this Kingdom in Parliaments for those common ends promised against
all Arbitrary power, violence and oppression, and all particular parties or
interests whatsoever, the said Declarations still directing us to the equitable
sense of all Laws and Constitutions, as dispensing with the very letters of
the same, and being supreme to it, when the safety and preservation of all is
concerned, and assuring us that all authority is fundamentally sealed in the
Office, and but ministerially in the Persons; neither do, or will these our
proceedings (as we are fully and in conscience persuaded) amount to any thing
not warrantable before God and men, being thus far much short of the common
proceedings in other Nations, to things of an higher nature then we have yet
appeared to: and we cannot but be sensible of the great complplaints that have
been made to us generally in the Kingdom, from the people where we march, by
Petition, and otherwise of Arbitrarinesse and injustice to their great and
insupportable oppressions.

And truly such Kingdoms as have according both to the Law of Nature and
Nations, appeared to the vindication and defense of their just Rights and
Liberties have proceeded much higher, as our Brethren of Scotland, who in the
first beginning of these late differences, associated in Covenant from the very
same Grounds and Principles, having no visible sorme either of Parliament or
King to countenance them, and as they were therein inftituted and protected by
their own and this Kingdom also, so we justly shall expect to be.

We need not mention the State of the Nether-Lands, the Portugalls, and others,
all proceeding upon the same Principles of Right and Freedom, and accordingly
the Parliament has Declared it no resisting of Majestracy to side with the
just Principles, and Law of Nature and Nations, being that Law upon which we
have assisted you, and that the Soldiery may lawsully hold the hands of that
General who will turn his Cannon against his Army on purpose to destroy them:
the Seamen, the hands of that Pilot who wilfully runs the Ship upon the rock
(as our Brethren of Scotland argued) and such were the proceedings of our
Ancestors of famous memory, to the purchasing of such Rights and Liberties as
they have enjoyed through the price of their blood, and we both by that and the
latter blood of our dearest friends and fellow Soldiers, all the hazard of our
own do lay claim unto.

Nor is that supreme end (the glory of God) wanting in these cases to set a
price upon all such proceedings of righteousness and justice, it being one
witness of God in the world to carry on a testimony against the injustine and
unrighteousness of men, and against the miscartiages of Governments, when
corrupted or declining from their primitive and original glory.

These things we mention but to compare proceedings, and to show that we are so
much the more justifiable and warrantable in what we do; by how much we come
short of that height and measure of proceedings, which the people in free
Kingdoms and Nations have formerly practiced.

Now having thus far cleared our way in this business, we shall provide to
propound such things as we do humbly desire for the serling and securing of our
own and the Kingdoms peace and safety, as follows:

1. That the Houses may be speedily purged of such Members, as for their
Delinquency, or for corruptions or abuse to the State, or undue election, ought
not to sit there; whereof the late election in Cornwall, Wales, and other parts
of the Kingdom afford too many examples, to the great prejudice of the peoples
freedom, in the said Elections.

2. That those persons who have in the late unjust and high proceedings against
the Army, appeared to have the will, the confidence, credit, and power, to
abuse the Parliament and the Army, and endanger the Kingdom in the carrying on
such things against us (while an Army) may be some way speedily disabled from
doing the like or worse to us (who disbanded and dispearst, and in the
condition of private men) or to other the free borne people of England, in the
same condition with us: And that (for that purpose) the same persons may not
continue in the same power (especially) as our and the Kingdoms Judges in the
Highest Trust, but may be made incapable thereof for futute.

And if it be questioned who these are, we thought not fit particularly to name
them in this our Representation to you, but shall very speedily give in their
names, and before long shall offer what we have to say against them to your
Commissioners: wherein we hope so to carry our selves, as that the world shall
see we aim at nothing of private revenge or animosities, but that Justice may
have a free course, and the Kingdom be eased and secured, by disinabling such
men at least from places of Judicature, who desiring to advantage or set up
themselves and their party in a general confusion, have endeavored to put the
Kingdom into a new flame of War, then which nothing is more abhorrent to us.

But because neither the granting of these alone would be sufficient to secure
our own and the Kingdoms Right, Liberties and Safety, either for the present
Age or posterity: Nor would our proposal of this singly be free from the
scandal and appearance of Faction or Design only to weaken one party (under
the notion of unjust or tyrannical) that we may advance another which may be
imagined more our own) We therefore Declare, That indeed we cannot but wish
that such men, and such only might be preferred to the great power and trust
of the Commonwealth, as are approved at least for Moral Righteousness; and of
such, we cannot but in our wishes prefer those that appear acted thereunto by a
principle of Conscience and Religion in them: And accordingly we do and ever
shall bless God for those many such Worthies, who through his providence have
been chosen into this Parliament, and to such men's endeavors under God) we
cannot but attribute that Vindication in part of the peoples Rights and
Liberties, and those beginnings of a just Reformation, which the first
proceedings of this Parliament appeared to have driven at and tended to, though
of late obstructed, or rather diverted to other ends and interests, by the
prevailing of other persons of other principles and conditions.

But yet we are so far from designing or complying to have an absolute or
Arbitrary power fixed or settled for continuance, in any persons what soever, as
that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have it so in the
persons of any whom we could most confide in, or who should appear most of our
own Opinions or Principles, or whom we might have personal assurance of, or
interest in; but we do and shall much rather wish, That the Authority of this
Kingdom in Parliaments rightly constituted (that is) freely, equally and
successively chosen, according to its original intention, may ever stand and
have its course. And therefore we shall apply our desires chiefly to such
things, as (^y having Parliaments settled in such a right constitution) may give
most hopes of Justice and Righteousness to flow down eqully to all in that its
ancient channel, without any Overtures tending either to overthrow that
foundation of Order and Government in this Kingdom, or to ingross that power
for perpetuity into the hands of any particular persons or party whatsoever;
and for that purpose, though as we have found it doubted by many men (minding
sincerely the public good, but not weighing so fully all consequences of
things) it may, and is not unlike to prove, That upon the ending of this
Parliament, and the Election of new, the constitution of succeeding Parliaments
(as to the persons elected) may prove for the worse many ways; yet since
neither in the present purging of this Parliament, nor in the Election of new,
we cannot promise to our selves or to the Kingdom an assurance of Justice, or
other positive good, from the hands of men, but those who for present appear
most righteous and most for common good (having an unlimited power fixed in
them during life or pleasure) in time may become corrupt, or settle into
parties or Factions; or on the other side, in the case of new Elections, those
that should so succeed may prove as bad or worse then the former: We therefore
humbly conceive, That (of two inconveniences the less being to be chosen) the
main things to be intended in this case (and beyond which humane providence
cannot reach, as to any assurance of positive good) seems to be this; viz. To
provide, that however unjust or corrupt the persons of Parliament Men in
present or future may prove, or whatever ill they may do to particular parties,
or to the whole in particular things, during their respective terms or periods,
yet they shall not have the temptation or advantage of an unlimited power fixed
in them during their own pleasures, whereby to perpetuate Injustice and
Oppression upon any without end or remedy, or to advance and uphold any one
particular Party, Faction or Interest whatsoever, to the oppression or
prejudice of the Community, and the inslaving of the Kingdom unto all
posterity; but that these people may have an equal hope or possibility (if they
have made an ill choice at one time to amend it in another) and themselves may
be in a capacity to taste of Subjection as well as Rule, and may so be inclined
to consider of other men's cases, as what may come to be their own. This we
speak as in relation to the House of Commons, as being entrusted on the peoples
behalf for their interest in that great and Supreme power of the Commonwealth,
(viz. The Legislative power* with the power of final Judgment) which being in
its own nature so Arbitrary, and in a manner unlimited (unless in point of time)
is most unfit and dangerous, as to the peoples interest, to be sixth in the
persons of the same men during life or their own pleasure; neither by the
original constitution of this State was it or ought it to continue so, nor does
it where ever it is and continue so, render that State any better then a mere
Tyranny, or the people subjected to it any better then Vassals; but in all
States where there is any face of common Freedom, and particularly in this
State of ENGLAND, as is most evident both by many Positive Laws (and Ancient
constant Customs) the People have a Right to new and successive Elections unto
that great and Supreme Trast, at certain periods of time, which is so Essential
and Fundamental to their Freedom, as it cannot or ought not to be denied them
or withheld from their, and without which the House of Commons is of very
little concernment to the Interest of the Commons of England: Yet in this we
would not be misunderstood, in the least to blame those Worthies of both
Houses, whose zeal to vindicate the Liberties of this Nation, did procure that
Act for continuance of this Parliament, whereby it was secured from being
dissolved at the Kings pleasure, as former Parliaments have been, and reduced
to such a certainty as might enable them the better to assert and vindicate the
Liberties of this Nation, immediately before so highly invaded, and then also
so much endangered; and these we take to be the principal ends and grounds for
which in that exigency of time and affairs it was promised, and to which we
acknowledge it has happily been made use of: But we cannot think it was by
those Worthies intended, or ought to be made use of, to the perpetuating of
that Supreme Trust and Power in the persons of any during their own pleasures,
or to the debarring of the People from their right of Elections totally new,
when those Dangers or Exigencies were past, and the Affairs and Safety of the
Commonwealth would admit of such a change.

Having thus cleared our Grounds and Intentions, as we hope, from all scruples
or misunderstandings; in what follows we shall proceed further to propose, what
we humbly desire for the settling and securing of our own and the Kingdoms
Rights and Liberties (through the blessing of God to Posterity) and therefore,
upon all the grounds premised, we further humbly desire as follows:

3. That some determinate period of time may be set, for the continuance of
this and future Parliaments, beyond which none shall continue, and upon which
new Writs may of course issue out, and new Elections successively take place,
according to the intent of the Bill for Triennial Parliaments.

And herein we would not be misunderstood, to desire a present or sudden
dissolution of this Parliament, but only (as is expressed before) That some
certain period may be set for the determining of it, so as it may not remain
(as now) continuable for ever, or during the pleasure of the present Members:
And we should desire, That the period to be now set for ending this Parliament,
may be such as may give sufficient time for provision of what is wanting, and
necessary to be passed in point of Just Reformation, and for further securing
the Rights, Liberties, and settling the Peace of the Kingdom; In order to which
we further humbly offer:

4. That secure provision may be made for the continuance of future
Parliaments, so as they may not be adjournable or dissolvable at the Kings
pleasure, or any other ways, then by their own consent, during their respective
periods, but at those periods each Parliament to determine of course, as
before: This we desire may be now provided for (if it may be) so as to put it
out of all dispute for future, though we think of right it ought not to have
been otherwise before.

And thus a firm foundation being said in the Authority and Constitution of
Parliament, for the hopes at least of Common and Equal Right and Freedom to our
selves, and all the Freeborn People of this Land; We shall for our parts freely
and cheerfully commit our stock or share of Interest in this Kingdom into this
common Botton of Parliaments; and though it may (for our particulars) go ill
with us in one voyage, yet we shall thus hope (if right be with us) to fare
better in another: These things we desire may be provided for by Bill or
Ordinance of Parliament, to which the Royal Assent may be desired; and when His
Majesty in these things, and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament,
necessary for securing the Rights and Liberties of the People, and for settling
the Militia and Peace of the Kingdom, shall have given his Concurrence, to put
them past all dispute; We shall then desire, That the Rights of His Majesty and
His Posterity may be considered of, and settled in all things, so far as may
consist with the Right and Freedom of the Subject, and with the security of the
same for future.

5. We desire, That the Rights and Freedom of the People to represent, by way
of humble Petition to the Parliament, their Grievances in such things as cannot
otherwise be remedied, then by Parliament, may be cleared and vindicated: That
all such Grievances of the People may be freely received and admitted into
consideration, and put into an equitable and speedy way to be heard, examined
and redressed (if they appear real) And that in such things for which men have
remedy by Law, they may be freely left to the benefit of Law, and the regulated
course of Justice, without interruption or check from the Parliament, except in
case of things done upon the Exigency of War, or for the service and benefit of
the Parliament and Kingdom, in relation to the War, or otherwise, in due
pursuance and execution of Ordinances or Orders of Parliament.

More particularly under this Head we cannot but desire, That all such as are
imprisoned for any pretended Misdemenor, may be put into a speedy way for a
just Hearing and Trial, and such as shall appear to have been unjustly and
unduly imprisoned, may (with their liberties) have some reasonable reparation,
according to their sufferings, and the demerit of their oppressors.

6. That the large Powers given to Committees or Deputy Lieutenants, during the
late times of War and Distraction, may be speedily taken into consideration,
That such of those Powers as appear not necessary to be continued, may be taken
away, and such of them as are necessary, be put into a regulated way, and left
to as little Arbitraryness as the nature and necessity of the things wherein
they are conversant will bear.

7. We could wish that the Kingdom might both be righted, and publicly
satisfied in point of Accounts for the vast sums that have been levied and
paid, as also in diverse other things wherein the Commonwealth may be conceived
to have been wronged or abused; But we are loath to press any thing that may
tend to lengthen out further disputes or contestations, but rather such as may
tend to a speedy and general composure and quieting of men's minds in order to
Peace: For which purpose we further propose,

8. That (pablique Justice being first satisfied by some few examples to
Posterity, out of the worst of excepted persons and other Delinquents having
past their compositions) some course may be taken (by an Act of Oclivion or
otherwise) whereby the seeds of future War or Fewds, either to the present age
or posterity may the better be taken away, by easing that sense of present, and
satisfying those fears of future ruin or undoing to persons or families, which
may drive men into any desperate ways ^or self-preservation or remedy; and by
taking away the private remembrances and distinctions of parties, as far as may
stand with safety to the Rights and Li^erties we have hitherto fought for.

There are besides these, many particular things which we could wish to be
done, and some to be undone, all in order still to the same ends of Common
Right, Freedom, Peace and Safety: but these proposals aforegoing present, being
the principal things we bottom and in^^st upon, we shall (as we have said
before, for out puts) acquiesce for other particulars to the Wisdom and Justice
of Parliament.

And whereas it has been suggested or suspected, That in our late or present
proceedings, our design is to overthrow Presbytery, or hinder the setlement
thereof, and to have the Independent Government set up, we do clearly disclaim
and disavow any such de^gn: we only desire, That according to the Declaration
(promising a provision for tender Consciences) there may some effectual course
be taken according to the intent thereof, and that such, who upon conscientious
grounds may differ from the established Forms, may not for that be debarred
from the common Rights, Liberties or Benefits belonging equally to all, as men
and members of the Commonwealth, while they live soberly, honestly, and
inoffensively toward others, and peaceably and faithfully toward the State.

We have thus freely and clearly decalred the depth and bottoms of our hearts
and desires, in order to the Rights, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdom;
wherein we appeal to all men, whether we seek any thing of advantage to our
selves, or any particular party what ever, to the prejudice of the whole; and
whether the things we wish and seek, do not equally concern and conduce to the
good of all in common, with our selves: According to the sincerity of our
desires and intentions, wherein (as we have already found the concurrent sense
of the people in diverse Counties, by their Petitions to the General, expressing
their deep resentment of these things, and pressing us to stand for the
interest of the Kingdom therein, so) we shall wish and expect to find the
unanimous concurrence of all others, who are equally concerned with us in these
things, and wish well to the Public.

And so (trusting in the mercy and goodness of God, to pass by and help any
failings or infirmities of ours, in the carriage or proceedings hereupon) we
shall humbly cast our selves and the business upon his good pleasure, depending
only on his presence and blessing for an happy issue, to the Peace and good of
this poor Kingdom: In the accomplishment whereof, we desire and hope, That God
will make you blessed instruments.

By the appointment of his Excellency. Sir Tho: Fairfax, and Soldiers of the
Army under his Command.

S. Albans, June 14. 1647. Signed by me JOHN RUSHWORTH.

FINIS.

