A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY OF ENGLAND, Upon their March into SCOTLAND.

AS ALSO, A Letter of his EXCELLENCY the Lord General CROMWELL, To the
General Assembly of the Kirk of SCOTLAND.

Together with a Vindication of the aforesaid Declaration, from the
uncharitable Constructions, odious Imputations, and scandalous Aspersions of
the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, in their Reply thereto.

And an Answer of the Under-officers and Soldiers of the Army, to a Paper
directed to them from the people of SCOTLAND.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, 1650.

A DECLARATION of the ARMY of England, upon their march into Scotland.
To all that are Saints, and Partakers of the Faith of GODS Elect in Scotland.
WE the Army of England, do from the bottom of our Hearts wish l ke Mercy and
Truth, Light and Liberty with our selves, from God our Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Alth^ugh we have no cause to doubt, but that the Declaration of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, bearing date the 26. of June, 1650. and
published, to manifest to the World the Justice and Necessity of sending their
Army into Scotland, may satisfy all impartial and uninterested men in all the
Nations round about us (the matters of Fact therein contained being true, and
the Conclusions made from thence, and the Resolutions thereupon taken,
agreeable to the Principles of Religion, Nature and Nations) and therefore it
may seem to some, if not improper, yet superfluous, for us their Army to say
any more: Yet however, out of our tenderness toward you, whom we look upon as
our Brethren, and our desire to make a distinction and separation of you from
the rest, as who through the cunning practices of some wicked and designing
men, biased by particular Interests, or for want of a true and right
Information, and Representation of the great and wonderful Transactions wrought
amongst us, and brought to pass by the mere finger of our GOD, may possibly be
scandalized at some late actions in England, and thereby be involved in that
common Cause, so much from Heaven declared against, by blasting all persons and
parties that at any time, in the least, under what pretense or disguise soever
engaged therein, and so with them to become partakers of their Miseries.

We have therefore thought fit to speak to some particulars, and that as in the
presence of the Lord, (to whose Grace, and in the dread of whose Name we do
most humbly Appeal, and who (should we come to a day of Engagement) will be a
sore witness against us, if we utter these things in hypocrisy, and not out
of bowels of love, to persuade the Hearts and Consciences of those that are
godly in Scotland) that so they may be withdrawn from partaking in the sin and
punishment of evil doers: or that, at least, we might exonerate our selves
before God and Man, do Remonstrate as follows:

And for as much as we believe many godly people in Scotland are not satisfied
with the proceedings of this Nation concerning the death of the late King, the
rejection of his Issue, the change of the Government, and several actions
conversant thereabout. Although it cannot be supposed that we shall in this
Paper meet with all Objections that may be made, (these very particulars alone
requiring more lines then we intend in the whole) Yet we briefly say, That we
were engaged in a War with the said King, for the Defense of our Religion and
Liberties; and how many times Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace
were offered to him, and how often he refused to consent thereto, you well
know, which according to humane account he might have closed with, had not the
righteous God, who knows the deceitful heart of man, and is the Preserver of
Mankind, (especially of his people) in his secret judgment, denied him a
heart to assent thereto. By which Refusals he made it appear, That nothing
less would satisfy, then to have it in his own power to destroy Religion and
Liberties, the subversion whereof he had so often attempted: That He was a man
guilty of more Innocent Blood in England, Ireland and Scotland, even of those
he ought to have preserved, as a Father his Children, then any of his
Predecessors, or (we think) then any History mentions, the guilt whereof he
brought upon his Family by solemn Appeals to God: That the Son did tread in the
Fathers steps, and pursue his Designs, destructive to Religion and Liberty:
That a party in Parliament, false to God and to their trust, were willing, and
did endeavor to betray the Cause into the late Kings hands: That a remaining
number in Parliament, desiring to be true to God, and to the People that
intru^^ed them, (out of Integrity of Heart, and fearing that the high
Displeasure of God would fall upon them if they had not done it*) did bring to
Justice and cause to be executed, the said King; did reject the Person now with
you, did lay aside the House of Lord, (an Estate not representing the People,
nor trusted with their Liberties, yet at that time very forward to give up the
Peoples Rights, and obstruct what might save them, and always apt enough to
join with Kingly Interest against the Peoples Liberties, whereof we wish you
have not the like sad experience) and did, for the good of the People, resolve
the Government into a Commonwealth. And having done all this, that they are not
accountable to any other Nation, ^s sufficient to say to you, except it be to
exci^e you to rejoice in this wonderful work of God, and to be thankful to him
for so much Deliverance as you have thereby, and leave the rest to the State of
England, to whom it does only and properly belong, who have manifested their
regular proceedings therein, according to the true and equitable ^ntent of the
constitution of England, and the Representors of the People in Parliament, in
their several and respective Declarations, if they be looked into, to wh ch we
refer you. Besides, it is worthy consideration, with how many Providence this
Series of Action has been blessed, which would require a Volumn to recount.

If Treaties be urged against us, It is easy to say by whom they were broken,
and how eminently, even by the then full authority of the Parliament of
Scotland, and the Invasion by Duke Hamilton, and yet that not the first breach
neither. And if it be sa^d, That has been procested against, and revoked
since; We ask, Does that make up the breach, so as to challenge England still
upon Agreements and Articles; you know, as to Right it does not, except you
suppose that England made their bargain so, That Scotland might break, and
England remain bound; whereas it is a known Law of Nations, That in the breach
of the League by the one party, the other is no long^r obliged.

If the Covenant be alleged against us, this may be said by us with honesty
and clearness, Religion having therein the first place, civil Liberties the
next, the Kings Interest and constitution of Parliament the last, and these
with subordination one to another: The Covenant tied us to preserve Religion
and Liberty, as the ends of it, even when these were inconsistent with the
preservation of the Kings Interest, and the frame of Parliament; because when
the means and the end cannot both be enjoyed together, the end is to be
preferred before the means. Now that there was a real inconsistencie between
the end and the means, and that the le^^er did fight against the greater, is
your own judgment who a Book of yours, called, A necessary and seasonable
Testimony against Toleration, say thus of the two Houses, page 12. And
doubtless, the Lord is highly displeased with their Proceedings in the Treaty
at Newport, in reference to Religion and Covenant: concerning which, they
accepeed of such Concessions from His Majesty, as being acquiesced in, were
dangerous and destructive to both. Had we not then appeared against these
Concessions, and l^kewise against those of both Houses who acquiesced in them,
had not Religion and Liberty both been destroyed? which now by the blessing of
God are preserved. And if that action concerning the Parliament deserve a
Charge, yet least of all from your selves, who when you saw the Parliament
which sent Duke Hamilton with an Army into England, proceed in ways destructive
to Religion and Liberty, you countenanced and acted with those that rose up for
public Safety, though cont^ary to Acts of Parliament, and called a new one,
excluding whom you thought fit: all which was done by virtue and autho^itie
from the Committee of Estates then sitting at Edinburgh, which indeed was no
Committee (if you respect formalities) (the breach whereof you so often charge
upon us) being constituted of such persons, as by Act of the fore going
Parliament, had not legal right to fit or act therein; they not having taken
the Oath (for faithful discharge of the Trust reposed in them, in reference to
the late Engagement against England, enjoined by that Parliament to be taken by
every Member of the Committee at his first sitting, or else to have no place or
vote therein, as is fully set down in the Commission for the constituting of
that Committee of Estates. We could more particularly set forth how the
Committee of Estates there sitting, according to the literal sense of the before
mentioned Commission, was broken and driven away, by that force raised and
acted by you as aforesaid: but we spare, not seeking to justify our actions by
yours, but to show, that you have done the same things for preservation of
Religion and Liberty, which you so highly charge as evil upon us. And
therefore, we further desire you seriously to consider, That the inconsistencie
of our Religion and Liberties, with the Kings Interest and former constitution
of Parliament, did not arise from our jealousies or pretenses, but from the
hardness of the Kings heart, and the backsliding of the greater part of those
that were entrusted in the Parliament, by their acquiescing in those
Concessions, and endeavoring immediately to bring in the King upon them. We
therefore reckon it no breach, but a Religious keeping of the Covenant
according to the equity thereof; when our Parliament for Religion and Liberties
sake, and the Interest of the People, did remove the King and Kingship: As also
we assert our selves Keepers of the Covenant, when the competition has been
between the form and substance, if we have altered some forms of the Government
in part, for the substance sake.

As for the Presbyterial, or any other form of Church Government, they are not
by the Covenant to be imposed by force; yet we do, a d are ready to ^mbrace so
much as does or shall be made appear to us to be according to the Word of God.
Are we to be dealt withal as Enemies, because we come not to your way? Is all
Religion wrapped up in that, or any one Form? Does that name, or things, g^ve the
difference between those that are the Members of Christ, and those that are
not? We think ^ot so. We say, Faith working by love, is the true Character of a
Christian; and, God as our witness, in whomsoever we see any thing of Christ
to be, there we reckon our duty to love, waiting for a more plentiful effusion
of the Spirit of God to make all those Christians, who by the malice of the
World are diversified, and by their own carnal mindedness do diversifie
themselves by several Names of Reproach, to be of one heart and one mind
worshipping God with one consent. We are desirous, That those who are for the
Presbyterial Government, should have all freedom to enjoy it; and are
persuaded, That if it be so much of God, as some affirm, if God be trusted with
his own means, which is his word powerful^y and effectually preached, without a
too busy meddling with, or engaging the Author ties of the World, it is able to
accomplish his good pleasure upon the minds of men, to produce and establ sh h
s purposes in the World, concerning the Government of his Church. And as for
the Blasphemies and Heresies wherewith some Stat^sts amongst you have labored
to brand us, We ca^ say, That we do own those sound Grounds and Principles of
the Christian Religion, preached and held by the general^ty of godly Ministers
and Christians of these later times; alhorring from our hearts, and being ready
to bear our witness against any d^testable Blasphemies and Herenes la^^ly broken
out amongst us; we have already punished some amongst us for Blasphemy, and
are further ready to do it; but how un^^genuously we have bin dealt with by
some amongst you, and of our own Countrymen^, in heaping Calumnies upon our
heads, ^o render us vile and odious to our Bre hren, yea and the whole world,
we leave ^o God to judge, who w ll, we trust, in due ^ime make these things
manifest. But were Presbytery thus to be contested for, and that in u^holding
it, all religion did, and would flourish; yet, how improbabl^ it is, That the
course taken by those in Author ty with you, will produce the things you desire
(to say no more) let your own experiences a little mind you.

What pretenders were some Lords and other persons in the North of Ireland,
whilst they mi^gled the Presbyterian with the Kingly I^terest; and the
Ministers by their preaching, seduced the people from their Obedience to
England, under the same pretense; But no sooner had those persons got the power
into their own hands, but they shook off the Ministers, by threatenings, causing
some of them to quite the country, and in general, discouraging the exercise
of the Government there, declaring plainly by their actions, that it was but a
device to draw on the Royal Interest; and those very persons that did get
power into their hands under those pretenses, immediately joined with Owen Roe
O Neal, and those bloody Irish Rebels upon the Kingly Interest. It will not be
unfit to mind you also, how the Nobility and some of the Ministers of
Scotland, Preaching, and crying up a War against England, under pretense of the
Covevant, did thereby lay the foundation to Duke Hamiltons getting the command
of that Army, who over-numbring them in Parliament, power and friends, and by
the advantage of Malignants, thrust all that you could call the good party, out
of Power and Authority, himself getting the command of that Army into England,
and leaving his brother and other Kindred in power in Scotland: Thus upon the
same ground and pretense, to carry on the Kingly Interest, have you been twice
deceived; and now he is brought in among you, who has turned every stone, and
tried all Friends and Allies in Foreign parts, endeavored commotions at home
by his wicked and Malignant Instruments, commissioned Rupert, the French, and
all that Pyraticall Generation, who do spoil, take, plunder and destroy our
Ships and Trade at Sea, and all to the end he might destroy the people of God,
and the peace of the Three Nations: And now being by his Mother, and the Popish
Interests abroad councelled thereto, has made a compliance with you, as his
last refuge, who, even whilst he was treating with you, had his heart set upon
Montrosse and his Accomplices (writing Letters, and sending particular Orders
to him) and upon his Popish Army in Ireland, to whom he had given Commissions,
and whom he still owned as his faithful Subjects, notwithstanding all the
Innocent Blood by them shed; and would never be induced to comply, or close
with the Covenant and Presbytery, till utterly disappointed of all those his
Malignant and Popish hopes and confidences.

Is there not now just cause for all good men, with you, to fear, that one so
bred, so engaged and interested, and merely in such a way coming in to you,
does but warch his opportunity (to speak nothing of the weight of the Blood of
Saints under the Altar, erying still for Vengeance upon him and that Family)
till by his influence upon your Army (which you know how composed) he may gain
his ends upon you; and how likewise the generality of the people of Scotland
are affected, is, not unworthy of your most serious consideration, nor of a
friendly intimation from us.

But that which most awakens us, is, That notwithstanding all this, and all the
wrongs done to England from Scotland, they refuse to do us right; so that what
wrongs soever we have, or shall sustain, must be without remedy, and we also
without security for the future; as is sufficiently expostulated in the
Parliament of Englands Declaration aforementioned, and the seeds laid of a
perpetual War, by taking our grand Enemy into your Bosoms, and your engagement
to Him, in the late Treaty with Him, to restore Him to the possession of
England and Ireland; and therefore we call Heaven and Earth to witness,
Whether or no, we have not cause to defend our selves by hindering the present
power of Scotland, from taking their time and advantage to impose thus upon us:
And whether they have now any just reason to wonder at the approach of an Army
to their borders, and the taking some of their Ships by ours; yea, whether our
coming into Scotland with an Army, upon so clear a ground, be any other, then a
just and necessary defense of our selves, for preservation of those rights and
Liberties, which divine Providence has throu^h the expense of so much blood
and treasure given us, and those amongst you have engaged, they will if they
can wrest from us, unless it must be taken for granted, That the Parliament of
England ought to sit still and be silent, whilst their ruin is contrived,
their Friends and Brethren destroyed by Sea and Land, whom in Conscience and
Duty, both before God and Man, they ought to preserve.

And now we come to speak to all those who are within the compass of the Title
of this Declaration that we undertake this business in the fear of God, with
bowels full love, yea, full of pity to the Inhabitants of the Country; and if
it shall please God to make Scotland sensible of the wrongs done to us, and to
give to the Commonwealth of England a satisfying security against future
injuries, we shall rejoice. But if that may not be obtained, we shall desire
such as fear God, not to join or have to do with those who are the Authors and
Actors of so much evil and mischief against their Neighbors. And we dare say,
to the praise of God, That that which moves us to this great undertaking, is
not any reliance upon the arm of flesh, or being lifted up with the remembrance
of former successes, or the desire of accomplishing any designs of our own that
we have forelaid, but the full assurance we have that our cause is just and
righteous in the sight of God, looking at all precedent changes, and the
successes that have produced them, not as the work of the policy or strength of
man, but as the eminent actings of the Providence and Power of God, to bring
forth his good will and pleasure, concerning the things which he has
determined in the world. And we are confident, that as he has hitherto
gloriously appeared, so he will still, bearing witness to the righteousness
of this Cause, in great mercy and pity of the infirmities and failings of us
his poor Creatures. And we do most humbly implore his divine Majesty to give a
merciful testimony, whether the actings of diverse men amongst you have not
proceeded from worldly interests, together with the rancor and bitterness of
their sp^rits, who we fear through envy at Instruments, have refused to
acknowledge his hand and goodness in the accomplishment of these great
changes; and whether ours have not come from the simplicity of our and other
his poor servants hearts, who we trust, have desired (though in the midst of
manifold weaknesses) to follow him in integrity, through difficult paths,
having nothing but danger and ruin appearing to the flesh, and little to
encourage us, saving those signal manifestations of his presence in those high
acts of his Providence, and the fear of his Name, lest he going before, we
should not follow.

And this we can further add, That nothing is so predominant within us (next
to our duty to God, nor to betray a cause, to which he so much witnessed) as
the love we have toward those that fear God there, who may possibly suffer
through their own mistakes, or our disability to distingish in a common
calamity, of which Christian love, we hope we gave some proof and testimony,
when we were last in Scotland with this Army; and were by God made
isntrumental, to break the power of those that then oppressed the Godly party
there, and were then ready at their desire to do every thing on their behalf,
which might put them into the seat of Authority and Power, whose consciences
knows this is true, and for which, this late Act of Engagement to their new
King against England, is no good requital, nor their heaping upon us the
reproach of a Sectarian Army, a Christian dealing; all which we do with
comfort commend to God, and can notwithstanding all this, say, By the Grace of
God, we can forgive and forget those things, and can, and do desire of God,
that the precious in Scotland, may be separated from the vile, which is the end
of this our Paper. And to the truth of this, let the God of Heaven in his great
mercy, pardoning our weaknesses, judge of us when we come to meet our Enemies
in the field; if through the perverseness of any in Authority with you, God
shall please to order the decision of this Controversy by the Sword, which we
from our hearts, bes^ech the Lord to avert, and to give you the like Christian
and Brotherly affection toward us, which we by Gods grace bear toward you.

Signed in the name, and by the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell, and his Council of Officers. JOH. RUSHWORTH, Secretary.

To the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland: Or, in case of their not
Sitting, To the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland.
SIRS,
YOur Answer to the Declaration of the Army we have seen: Some godly Ministers
with us, did compose a R^ply, which I thought fit to fend you. That you or we,
in these great transactions, answer the will and mind of GOD: it is only from
his grace and mercy to us; and therefore having said (as in our Papers) we
commit the issue thereof to him who disposes all things; assuring you that we
have light and comfort increasing upon us day by day and are persuaded before
it be long, the Lord will manif^st his good pleasure, so that all shall see him,
and his people shall say, This is the Lords work, and it is mavelous in our
eyes: This is the day that the Lord has made we will be glad and rejoice
therein.

Only give me leave to say in a word, you take upon you to judge us in the
things of our God, though you know us not; though in the things we have said
unto you (in that which is entitled the Armies Declaration) we have spoken our
hearts, as in the sight of the Lord who has tried us: and by your hard and
subtle words you have begotten prejudice in those who do too much (in matters
of conscience, wherein every soul is to answer for it self to God) depend upon
you, so that some have already followed you to the breathing out of their
souls, others continue still in the way wherein they are led by you (we fear)
to their own ruin: and no marvel, if you deal thus with us, when indeed you
can find in your hearts to conceal the Papers we have sent you, from your own
people, who might see and understand the bowels of our affections to them,
especially such among them as fear the Lord. Send as many of your Papers as you
please amongst ours, they have free passage, I fear them not; what is of God ^n
them, would it might be embraced and received.

One of them lately sent, directed to the Underofficers and Soldiers in the
English Army, has begotten from them an answer, which they desired me to send
you, not a crafty politic one, but a plain simple spiritual one, such as it
is God knows, and God also will in due time make manifest, and do we multiply
these things as men? or do we them for the Lord Christ and his peoples sakes?

Indeed we are not, through the grace of God, afraid of your numbers, nor
confident in our selves. We could (I pray God you do not think we boast) meet
your Army, or what you have to bring against us. We have given (humbly we speak
it before our God, in whom all our hope is) some proof, that thoughts of that
kind prevail not upon us. The Lord has not hid his face from us since our
approach so near unto you, your own guilt is too much for you to bear, bring
not upon your selves the blood of Innocent men, deceived with pretenses of King
and Covenant, from whose eyes you hide a better knowledge: I am persuaded that
diverse of you, who lead the People, have labored to build your selves in these
things, wherein you have censured others, and established your selves upon the
Word of God. Is it therefore infallibly agreeable to the Word of God all that
you say?

I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken:
Precept may be upon Precept, Line may be upon Line, and yet the Word of the
Lord may be to some a word of Judgment, that they may fall backward and be
broken, and be snared, and be taken: There may be a spiritual fullness, which
the world may call drunkenness, as in the second of the Acts: there may be as
well a carnal confidence, upon mis-understood, and mis-applyed Precepts, which
may be called Spiritual Drunkenness, there may be a Covenant made with Death
and Hell, (I will not say yours was so) but judge if such things have a
politic aim, to avoid the overflowing scourge, or to accomplish worldly
interests: and if therein we have confederated with wicked and carnal men, and
have respect, or otherwise drawn in to associate with us, whether this be a
Covenant of God and spiritual bethink your selves, we hope we do. I pray you
read the 28. of Esaiah, from the 5. to the 15. and do not scorn to know, that
it is the Spirit that quickens and gives life, and the Lord give you and us
understanding to do that which i^ wel-pleasing in his sight, committing you to
the Grace of God, I rest, Your humble Servant

Muscleborough 3. Aug. 1650. O. CROMWELL.

A Vindication of the Declaration of the Army of ENGLAND, upon their March into
SCOTLAND, from the uncharitable Constructions, odious Imputations, and
scandalous Aspersions of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, in
their Reply thereunto.
THe Declaration of the Army, concerning their Expedition into Scotland, having
received an Answer from the General Assembly of the Kirk of that Nation,
suitable to that spirit, which of late has wrought effectually in those
Assemblies, for the prosecution of an Interest by them espoused, evidently
destructive to the power and purity of the Gospel, Liberty, and Safety of both
Nations, being filled with calumnious Reproaches and Insinuations, false and
mistaken Narrations, suited to a subtle carrying on of a corrupt and desperate
Design, without manifestation of any great respect had unto truth, sincerity
and simplicity of Spirit, (although not without many fears of ineffectualnesse,
as to the change of their minds from their mistakes and confidences) yet we
could not but judge it a duty, to remark the strange workings of fleshly
Wisdom, which it is filled with from one end to another; committing the issue
to the searcher of hearts, who judges righteously.

In the entrance of their Reply, having prefaced it with a supposed Duty (as
such things as this, will easily appear to be to persons so engaged) they
reflect upon the title of the Declaration, which they undertake to oppose, and
thence deduce a twofold Inference; First, That the Army looks upon themselves
as Saints: Secondly, That they suppose the number of Saints in Scotland not to
be very great. Doubtless it argues an assured confidence, (and that perhaps
upon former experiences) that their Dictates shall be received with an
implicit consent, by those whom they labor to deceive; when in the very
entrance, they hold out such groundless Deductions, as both these must needs
appear to be, to all that shall but only view the Inscription of that
Declaration. When men are bound to believe the General Assembly before their
own eyes and sense, such Imposit^ons may pass; and we know not in what state
(as to this) things are for the present in Scotland: For our part, as we see
neither of them i^ the direction mentioned, so we are not without good
assurance of the first, as to that part of the Army with whom they have to do
in this Reply; and for the latt^r, heartily pray, if it be so indeed, That in
Gods due time it may be otherwise. And as we are no way moved with that
breathing of the Spirit, which acts in the Assembly, charging the ways of the
Army, as the issues of delusion, or rashness, and scandalous to the Gospel
(such terms being always in readiness for the use of all sorts of Assemblies)
so we suppose, That the testimony of the numerousnesse of the Saints amongst
them, might have been spared, until the practice of the power of godliness
had laid a conviction upon their Neighbors, to have gone before them therein.

The sense of the Saints that are there, concerning the proceedings of the
Army, we have indeed reason to suppose to be harsh, and unanswerable to men of
that heavenly call; and that because they have too much captivated themselves
to receive in upon trust, such injurious and false Representations, as in these
Papers are made of them and their ways, without inquiry into the reality of
things: For deliverance from which bondage of spirit, we desire seriously to
commend them to the goodness of God, and that in the use of Ordinances, and
Government of Jesus Christ, which we pray, That the General Assembly may
neither slight nor despise.

Their Christian desire of Mercy, Truth and Light, to all the Saints of
Scotland, is in the next place retorted, with a charge of Error, Darkness, and
Looseness, upon them that hold it out. To assume the title of Orthodoxy and
soundness of opinion to men's selves; and upon that account, to charge others
with Errors and Darkness, has been found in all ages, so great an advantage
to any party whatsoever, that has assumed it, that it were strange if the
General Assembly should not use the same weapon to smite those withal, whom
they seek to render odious, and destroy. But to flourish it perpetually upon
all occasions, without giving any one instance of any one Error maintained by
them whom they so charge, or holding out no other rule to judge darkness and
error by, but their own Dictates and Determinations, is a course not a little
savoring of that wisdom which is not from above.

The reference unto the Declaration of the Parliament, which nextly, they reply
unto, is passed over with a Magisteriall charge of the matter of that
Declaration, to be false in fact, unjust in Law, with sundry other such
expressions, as is evident they want not at any time, when Truth and Reason may
not be at hand.

But is it false in fact, that the Nation of Scotland, breaking all Treaties,
Covenants and Contracts between themselves and England, invaded us with a
powerful Army, to the hazard of our Lives, Liberties and Religion? Is it false
in fact, that the Commissioners of Scotland to^k upon them, to protest against
the proceedings of the supreme Power of he Nation of England, and labored to
withdraw the people from their obedience? Is it false in fact, that the
Parliament of Scotland have taken home into their bosom, him, who is the
engaged enemy of this Nation, and in present actual hostility against it? Is
it false in fact, that they have promised to use their endeavors to restore
him, to that which they call his Right in England, which cannot be effected
without the ruin of the Commonwealth? Are these and the like falsities in
fact? Or are not those men infatuated with a strange confidence of the
stupidity of the residue of men, that they dare so affirm?

Is it unjust in Law, that damage being done by any, reparation and
satisfaction should be required of them? Is it unjust in Law, for supreme
Magistrates to demand that by force and war, which is denied by Treaties in
Peace? Is it against the Law of Nature and Nations, that Treaties and Compacts
being voluntarily entered into by several parties; the Essentials of such
Treaties and Contracts being infringed and violated by the one party, that the
other thereby should be set at liberty, and be free? Is it against the Law of
Nature and Nations, that the supreme Power of the Nation, though changed into
the hands of others, should be responsible for the miscarriages and damages
done by the former persons enjoying that same Authority? Is it contrary to the
Law of Nature and Nations, for a people to seek their own preservation, by
preventing others from taking their advantages and opportunities, who, they are
fully assured, do seek and aim at their ruin?

Truly we cannot but wonder, that men professing themselves Representators of
so eminent a Church, should be so carried away with the love of corrupt and
carnal Interest, as to assert with confidence such notorious and palpable
falsities. The Lord, we hope, will teach them more the fear of his great and
dreadful Name, whereof they often solemnly make mention in this their Paper,
before such things as these have wrought their ruin.

In the third Page, they put it out of all question, That the late King was
obstinate in an evil way, and that he was guilty of more innocent blood in
England, Ireland and Scotland, then any of his Predecessors, And could this
Land be expiated from blood, without revenging it upon the guilty Author of its
shedding? Have not the Scots more then once, for less crimes, taken off their
Kings? etc. The Lord lay it seriously to their hearts, whether they do well to
cry Murder, Murder, and stir up all to revenge the death of him, whom
themselves acknowledge guilty of shedding the blood of so many Thousand
Innocents. And for the noncompliance of that Nation with the King in any of
his undertakings, the invasion in Forty Eight, with sundry actings of the
Commissioners and Assemblies for diverse years, will not allow us to give credit
unto.

In the next place, they say, They will not question what the Parliament of
both Kingdoms, in a case of insuperable necessity, might have done for the
peoples safety (as to the taking off the King) nor the righteous jndgement of
God, in executing wrath upon him; so evidently granting, that indeed they might
have done it. The truth is, the Parliament of England never needed; never owned
the Authoritat ve concurrence of the Parliament of Scotland, for the disposal
of those things which concern the Peoples safety: And therefore this is to be
put out of question, as to that Parliament alone: The encroaching of the
Scottish Nation for an influence of Authority upon the Government of England,
being by them justly abhorred. Let now the Assembly view their own Concessions,
The King was guilty of more blood in England, Scotland, and Ireland, then any
of his Predecessors: he was obstinate in an evil way: in case of insuperable
necessity, for the peoples safety, the Parliament might take him away: the
judgment of God in executing wrath upon him, was righteous: there was a party
in Parliamont false to God and their trust, who did endeavor to betray the
Cause into the late Kings hand, Page the 5. (Notwithstanding his obstinacy in
blood-guiltinesse, and ways of destruction to the Nation) who alone were
restrained from sitting in the House: And we know not any thing, if they have
not justified the whole proceedings of the Parliament and Army in reference to
the late King.

That there was another way for the restraining of him, so to obtain the
peoples safety: as we found it otherwise by our experience under the Scottish
Invasion, and our own intestine insurrections during his restraint: so are not
the Assembly of the Kirk, either compe^ent or entrusted Juges of what may
consist with the safety of the people of England, nor is it any inducement to
us to give up our selves to their determination for the future, by finding them
perverted by their interest to this strange assertion: That a man guilty of a
world of innocent blood, obstinate in his way, and that way inconsistent with
the peoples safety, obnoxious for blood, to the righteous judgment and wrath
of God, ought to be preserved through disadvantages, even to the peoples ruin.

What security was given to Scotland, for the safety of the Kings Person by
the Parliament of England, which they mention at present, we know not, but are
assured, that to preserve himself against their invasions, and the
insurrections by them st^rred up and fomented, they were driven to the jeopard
of the wel-being of the whole Nation; and (had not God marvellously appeared
for them) had perished therew thal: But he who gave them deliverance from their
ruin, so deeply contrived and desperately endeavored, did thereby also free
them from any obligation unto them, who had so designed, and almost effectually
procured that their ruin and destruction. And that no concernment of the
Kingdom of Scotland, in the Person of the King would have any influence into
the Parliaments disposal of the affairs of England for the safety of the people
thereof, has been Remonstrated by that Parliament though never answered by
Scotland. Let the Assembly also consider, what Treaties and Advisoes they have
had with England about the instating of their new King; and they cannot but
suppose, that the principle of all their actings in reference to us, will be
evident to all, (to wit) That by Treaties and Covenants they may do what they
please: we must, what they will enjoin us.

That which follows, is an Apology for their new King, with such a Confession
in his behalf, of his ill beginning to pursue destructive Designs, as we fear
they have scarce obtained from himself, since his coming amongst them: neither
do their expressions of wishing he may be humbled, and not being without hope
that he may endeavor firmly to promove the ends of the Covenant, hold out any
great confidence in the Assembly of any such towardliness as yet discovered in
him, as should make them engage into such expressions, as might be retorted on
them, in case of proceeding upon insuperable necessity: But that we may not
think they have no Arguments to press his reception upon this Nation, besides
his own great engagement into evil, and their small hopes of his being better,
they add sundry Reasons, why it was not well done to reject him, and change
the Government.

Amongst these, the Right of his Inheritance has the first place, which we
affirm, not only to be none originally without the consent of the Nation, but
also to be justly forfeited by his own and Fathers destructive engagements
against the Commonwealth. And therefore we know not of any duty we owe unto him
(which they secondly name) more then to any other engaged enemy of the Land:
Nor must the compassion of his breeding, being for a great part of his days in
the blood and spoil of our dearest Relations, outweigh the safety of the
people, and the interest of the Saints of God, altogether inconsistent with his
Rule and Government amongst us. That we might have had the like Success with
Scotland upon the like Application to him, perhaps we do not doubt; but yet
unless we can be persuaded, that there is a desirableness in giving up all that
is dear to us, to the enraged cruelty of an enemy, we cannot suffer this to
stand as a Motive to his Reception: And if Scotland find not the truth of this
they may thank some others besides themselves. In the mean time, none truly are
so fit to Prognosticate of Calamities to ensue upon our change of Government,
as they who resolve and intend to be the Authors of those Calamities.

That any honest Members of Parliament, who did ever truly mind Religion and
Liberty are now sufferers in England, we do not know; but that not any
suffers for his trust to Religion and Liberty, we are fully assured: The
great suffering of Restraint which some, formerly Members, do now undergo,
being only on those whom in the following words you grant to have endeavored
the betraying of the Cause into the hand of the late King: The effecting
whereof, though too many of the State of Scotland did also what in them lay
pursue, yet we cannot but rejoice that through the good providence of God, the
Net is broken, and we a^e escaped.

That sl^ight touch, which in the following ^ords they give of the Reasons of
the proceeding of Parliament and Army in the change of Government, yields not
an advantage seriously to remark any thing of concernment thereabouts: Give the
Assembly leave to call the Parliament of England Vsurpe^s, in their own Nation,
to judge of their call to any acting, to determine of the equity and reality of
the Constitution of the Government of England, to falsify notoriously in
matter of Fact and R^ght, affirming that the Army by violence did kit the King,
that the first motion in the House to the change of Government, was from their
violence; that the Parliament, if destitute of some of their Members, does not
Repr^sent the whole People; and to intermix all these Censures and Falsities,
with reviling and reproaching eloquence, and no doubt they will carry the Cause
in hand.

For the equal Representative, which they affirm never durst be ventured upon
to this day: If we should suspend our thoghts concerning it, until the Kingdom
of Scotland do give us an example thereof: in all probability it might be more
Remote from accomplishment, then we hope it is, or desire it should be.

Besides, these things relate not much unto the present difference and state of
Affairs: the sole cause of their wrath and Indignation at present against us,
being only this, That after they have endeavored our destruction, by an
Hostile Invasion, refused to Treat about satisfaction (p^etending they ^re not
the persons that did it, when it was done by the Parliament of Scotland, which
the present Powers are, and no other appears to have it demanded from) stirred
up by all mea^s possible the people of England to Sed^tions and Insurrections,
laid foundations of another Inv^sion (undenyably manife^^ed by their
Principles, Practices and Engagements, not directly denied by themselves in any
of these Papers) that we would seek by the goodness of God to prevent them from
destroying us, and the Interest of the Lord Christ in our Nation, by not
waiting until their own preparations at home, their Kings endeavors abroad,
and the zeal of their Boatfeau's and Bellows of Sedition amongst our selves,
should all be ripened to an unresistible L^undation of War and Misery upon us:
hinc illae Lachrymae: hence is the Assemblies sorrow and trouble, that the Lord
should put it into ou^ hearts to Ward ou^ selves through his Providence and
Protection, from the snare and ev^l their Kirk and State have contrived for us:
And hence it is, that the Declaration of the Army, written as in the presence
of God, drawn out from sincerity and compassion, consented unto, and attended
with ma^y Prayers and Tears, has received such a Return of Calumnious
Reproaches, false Accusations, evil Surmisings, un-Christian Censurings, as if
the Assembly were all sat down in the seat of the Scornful.

We confess series of Providence whereby God has blessed our Affairs, is
often in our mouths, and we trust far oftener in our hearts: And certainly, we
could not but judge our selves far worse (if it be possible) then the Assembly
strive to represent us, should we not continually own those most signal
Providence of our gracious God, whereby he has owned and been present with us,
in all our straights and undertakings; and we are fully assured, That he knows
how to vindicate his Name and Glory, when the works that he has wrought are
not considered, and men will not see when his hand is lifted up.

If when we have waited on the Lord, sought his presence and direction with all
our hearts, rolling our selves upon his Arm, he has appeared for us, with us,
delivered us out of snares, led us in paths we had not known, in Peace and
Safety; destroying our enemies with his own right hand, giving us eyes to see,
and hearts to acknowledge all this: if then we may not rejoice in the operation
of his hands, commit our way to him, embrace his love, and quiet our spirits in
his Wisdom and Goodness: we would desire the Assembly of the Ki^k, from the Word
of Truth, and the practice of the Saints of God that were before us, to
convince us of our Error and M^stake: otherwise it is not their most
unchristian compar^ng of the Providence of God toward Turk and Pope, with his
special respect to them that wait for him, and know his Name, leaning upon him
as a Father in Jesus Christ; nor yet a bare false affirmation, That we rest
upon Providence, because destitute of other Rules that shall take us off from
speaking well of the Name of our God, and rejoicing in those things and ways
wherein he has been our Guide and Deliverer.

There are indeed many secret and hidden causes, that prevail with the Sons of
men, to slight the Appearings of God in his Providence: and we cannot but fear,
That on^ main and chief one of them (to wit) The carrying on of Affairs by
corrupt and carnal Policies, in the pursuit of Selfish Interests, does possess
much the minds of the Rul^^g party now in Scotland: for this we need no other
demonstration, then the late Transactions in reference to the bringing in of
their King; wherein the Shiftings, Juglings, empty Pret^nces, ambiguous
Expressions and Engagements, that have carried it to the ^ssue where it now is
(they supposing they have their King, and their King supposing he has them)
cannot easily be paralleld: For the main of it, we know what their Endeavors
were, to carry it on as a work of Darkness; yet so many particulars have
broken forth into light, as will one day be a testimony of deep Hypocrisy and
Selfishnesse in those, whose profession required the contrary: All which
delusory Pretenses, violent Actings of a prevailing Faction, Hypocritical
colors, to inveigle the hearts of a party in England, will in due time be
manifested by undeniable Instances.

When men are carried on in such crooked paths as these, their Spirits cannot
but be prejudiced against single eying of providentiall Dispensations: Though
we no way question, but that if the Lord in his Infinite Wisdom and
Sovereignty, should think meet to cast in any Success upon the undertakings of
the Scottish Nation, the General Assembly of the Kirk would be as ready as
formerly they have been, to bless themselves in their ways from thence, and
assume that libe^ty which they deny to others; unless perhaps their
Deliverance should come by such a hand, as that which they had from the
Hamiltonian party; which, though it be the bottom of their present Power and
Rule, yet could not obtain a Day of Acknowledgment unto the Lord, until
wra^ped up in a Bundle with a small Success against a Tumult raised by
Middleton, that the Instruments of their Deliverance might not receive the
least mention from them before the Lord.

There are two or three other things that deserve to be Noted by themselves,
being mentioned or hinted in sundry places in these Declarations; as, First,
the Oppression of sundry persons, for their Consciences, and in their Estates,
in England: And is it for the General Assembly of Scotland to lay this cha ge
against us? Does any Nation under Heaven bind and oppress the Consciences of
men beyond them? Or is there the least Truth in this charge? Have not the
persons int^mated the utmost extent of Liberty, for the exercise of the whole
Compass of Religion? And if any are thought to be oppressed, by being
restrained from venting Sedition and Rehell^on, we shall not desire that
Addition to their suffer^ngs, which we are fully assured would be laid upon any
persons that should be engaged in the like practices in Scotland.

Another thing is, their general waving of the charge of an intended Invasion
upon England, whereof in sum they affirm, That notwithstanding their Engagement
made to their King, of endeavoring his Restoration there, they never once
intended it, unless it was determined lawful by the Parliament and General
Asslmbly. And was there ever such a ridiculous Evasion invented by men
professing honesty? Are they charged to intend a new War upon us, against the
judgment of the Kirk and State? And do not the principles they own and act by,
in reference to us, declare evidently what their judgments are? They have
engaged to their King, to use al lawful means to restore him; they deny a
Treaty to be such a means, boasting to their King, That they have refused it;
they profess the Parliament of the Common-weaalth to be Usurpers, deny all
their Authority: And yet these men intend not an I vasion? Did they think to
compass the whole Design by Insurrections amongst our selves, making way to
their ends by the blood of others; Or have they dispensed with themselves to
say what they please, so t may be for the advantage of the Kirk and State of
Scotland?

The business of Religion shall be spoken unto in its proper place, only in
general we cannot but observe, That the near approaches which are made in
Scotland to Spiritual Tyranny and outward Violence, to the utter ruin of the
most Conscientious Dissenters in the least, with slavish ignorance in the
people, which for the present yield them outward Peace and Conformity, not
unlike that under the Inquisition, are undesireable paterns for our imitation,
nor certainly are comprised within the verge of the Covenant.

It is of all things most strange to us, That they and their Statesmen should
devise a Covenant to secure Religion and Liberty, and now are acting as fast as
they can to hazard Religion and Liberty, to secure that C^venant: We mean that
part of it which concerns the King and frame of Parliament. This is a strange
abuse of the glor ous Name of God, under color of Religion, to prise a
Covenant in the Letter of it, so as thereby to destroy the ends for which it
was made; as if their Resolution were rather to lose Religion and Liberty, then
not to have a King both of England and Scotland, to hold up that carnal
Interest which is their greatest darling: Which King, though he be but a Ward
to the Committee of Estates in Scotland, yet must needs be allowed a Negative
voice in the Legislative power in England, and so much Arbitrary power besides,
as may at all times greaten the power and riches of the Scottish Lords. Is it
not most strange, that the Covenant should be so much in their mouths and pens,
and so little in their actions? who while they did but the other day declaim so
much against Ma ignancy, as a great and dangerous sin, have now pulled in the
head of Malignants, as appears by his Commissions given to Papists, and such as
never came so much as formally under their Covenant: And who is so Malignant
still, that they dare not trust him, farther then some Lords his Keepers will
suffer him to go: Was not Duke Hamiltons taking of the Covenant enough with
them, to invest him with power to ^estroy the Covenant? And can the Vizard of
their Kings taking the Covenant, persuade any man of common unde^stand^^g, that
he will either support their Ki^k or Covenant longer, then t^ll they have by
one means or other (if not prevented by us) furn^shed him with a Covenanting
Army of his own Principles? and then they will find they will be twice catched
in a Not of their own making, which they laid for others. Are not his present
Darling-companions which he brought from beyond Seas, Prince Rupert, Ormond,
and his Fathers and Mothe^s Confederates in England, still the only men, that
if he were foot-loose he would embrace? If they will needs blind their eyes,
and hearden their hearts, we bless our heavenly Father, that he has opened
our eyes, to see things that do belong unto our peace, according to the
di^ection of his holy Word.

But now to their Charge upon the Army, as to the Covenant, they say, It did
not appear that Religion and Civil Liberty was inconsistent with the frame of
Parliament, and that their words in their own Book did prove no more; but, That
the then actings and the frame of Parliament were inconsistent. Be it so: This
is sufficient to justify our proceedings; if all their Liberties in Scotland
had but one Neck and their Hea^sman stood ready, after Sentenc^ given upon
them, to ^ut it off, would not they then immediately either hold his hands,
(...) give all for gone?

Whereas they say, Was there no other way to help the irregularity of these
proceedings? If they had known any, it had bin as easy to have named it, as to
have asked the question: But for ou^ parts, we knew no other way. Had not the
Army appeared in that nick of time, against the consenters to the Propositions
at Newport, Religion and Liberty had been irrecoverably lost, as far as we can
understand: Our consciences bear us witness, we did with exactness keep the
Covenant, in excluding those we did.

They say further, The Army took away altogether the lawful Power: we cannot
believe them til they prove it, there being now and always a lawful Power in
the Commons of England sitting in Parliament. And as for those that acquiesced
in destructive Propositions, were they any more a lawful Power, then Duke
Hamiltons Faction in their Parliament? or if they will have the excluded
Members lawful Powers, what did we more then they, that put ^he opp^site party
out of power, so soon as they could by our Assistance?

That which they say concerning the Armies Proposals, That they were
destructive, and yet they would not have thought it a fit Remedy for any to
have destroyed them? We reply First, they were but Proposals for C^nsideration,
not determinations, as those Votes upon the Propositions were, and so there was
no need of any Remedy against them, but Advice. Secondly, if the Lord had so
far left them, as to have made any conc^usions with the King upon those
Proposals, our ju^gement is (as their Repentance has already witn^ssed) they
would have accounted it a great Mercy, by any Power to have been restrained.

They further demand, If Liberty be preserved, how comes it then to pass, that
so many groan under the yoke of their Oppressions? Has there been at any time
a greater thraldom in England, then that every man must be bound to swear an
Oath, etc? To this we say, We know of no such Oath that is to be Sworn, the
Engagement being a bare Promise, and no more; and here we are sure their charge
is false in fact: And how this Engagement is a yoke of Op^ression, we see not,
when it is only a Prom^se; To be faithful to the Commonwealth, and the
Preservers of our Liberties and Lives, which those that are excluded would have
destroyed: Nor can we understand how this is a maintaining of unlawful
Usurpations, when two of the three coordinate Powers did oppose, and at length
exclude the King, who was the third Estate, for Maladministration: You had
your hand in the work, to assist the two Houses so to do; and when one of the
three Estates excluded two (viz.) the King and Lords, for their conjunction in
the destructive Propositions at Newport, what Usurpation was this in one of the
three Estates, more then was formerly in the other two?

As for the Burdens you speak of, as an Impeachment of civil Liberties, It is
the great grief of the Parliament, that they are necessitated to lay any
Burdens: Yet we may desire you to remember, They lay those Burdens in an
equal proportion, upon their own, as well as other men's Estates; and we cannot
but wonder, that they should be challenged by you for this, the little finger
of your Lords upon your people, and which we with much bitterness call to
mind, upon ours also, having been heavier then the Loins of our Parliament.

Religion, you say, is trodden under foot, lies in the dust, is despised, as of
no value. How unbrotherly, unchristian and false a charge this is, the Acts of
Parliament lat^ly made against Adultery, Incest, against Swearing and
Blasphemy, and the Acts for the strict keeping of the Sabbath, and for the
better propagation of the Gospel in several parts of our Nation, will be a
sufficient evidence; We take Religion to be a worshipp^ng of God according to
his Word, walking in our conversations according to the Gospel, attending upon
the publ que Ordinances of the Word preached, public and private Prayer and
Sacraments, when administered according to the Gospel: In which, to be
conversant with Humility: Faith and Reverence, ^s the practice of the Army.

That Religion is trodden under foot, and despised of many, as we acknowledge
it, so we desire to make it the matter of continual mourning: And we think we
may without presumption speak it to the glory of the free and rich Grace of God
in Jesus Christ, That as much of the Spirit of Christ, and the power of
Godliness is given out in England, as in any Nation of the world we know of.

And give us leave to ask you of Scotland, who alone would seem to be true
Reformers, whether we have any such National sins as the compulsive joining
together of the precious with the vile, in the Administration of the Seals of
the Covenant of Grace; or the corrupt and forcible Constitution of the matter
of your Churches, making them up of people grossly ignorant, and very scandalous
in their Lives and Conversations, and in many places having Elders little
better qualified.

Page 9. they say, though they endeavor to justify their actings against the
Army and Parliament of England, by the proceedings of this Kingdom, yet there
is a large difference in many particulars. There is such an agreement in those
particulars they rehearse, as makes these proceedings justifiable upon their
grounds.

1. There was a considerable part of the lawful: Authority of England acted in
these Proceedings: was not a House of Commons a considerable part. 2. Many of
the best affected, and most godly People in the Land consented thereunto: and
when the two Housos acted without the King, there was but a Party of the People
did consent. 3. A considerable number of Orthodox and Godly Ministers went
along in those Resolutions, and you know, the plurality of the Ministers never
went along with the two Houses in their opposition to the King: And if it be
true that they say, that their whole Kirk consented to your ways, how came it
to pass so many Ministers were excluded from their places for accession to
Duke Hamiltons Engagement? 4. This was no protecting or promoting any Design
against Religion or Government, but the carrying on of Reformation of Religion
and Government, according to the Word of God. 5. We know of no new power set
up, but the continuance of the old, they having only excluded such as were
false to their trust, as you excluded Duke Hamiltons Faction.
Page 10. As for what concerns the Presbyterial Government, whether it be to be
imposed, or left free according to the Covenant: they decline that Debate, or
rather defer it, till they are in better condition to prosecute such an
Argument, and then there is no doubt, but their Principles and Professions will
lead them thereunto: Having declared the principal end of their assistant
Forces formerly sent to England, to be Reformation in Religion, which in a
Scottish Construction must needs be Presbyterial Government; but because they
insist not upon it, we shall also leave it, and joynwith them in that undeniable
position, That by Covenant we are obliged to a Government according to the Word
of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches; but we cannot hold pace
with them, when they say, That by a Synod of Divines sitting in England, it
has been made appear, that the Presbyterial Government in the Scottish
Latitude, and only it, has its foundation upon the Word of God: That Synod,
though they have gone far enough, yet are not so through paced in that
business, but cautelously express themselves in many parts of the Presbyterial
Government, by saying, Things may be done according to the Rule; which either
signifies nothing, or else this; that sometimes they may not.

They further say, That Preaching the Word of God, is not the only means
appointed by him to accomplish his pleasure upon the minds of men, to produce
and establish his purposes in the world concerning Church Government. Certainly
in the best estate of the Church, which we conceive to be the times of the
Apostles, it was the only and sufficient means; but yet we deny not but the
Magistrate owes a duty to the Church and Ordinances of God, which is to
preserve the Liberty and outward Peace of them, which the present Government of
England, notwithstanding all Oblatrations, ceases not to do.

Whereas the Army is charged with dealing with the Scots as Enemies, and
invading them because they came not to their way; doubtless, the Army moves not
upon that Princi^le, but this rather, That they will not suffer England to hold
on in their own way of a Commonwealth, but have entertained a pretender to the
Government of this Nation, after all his own and Fathers forfeitures, and that
upon condition of using all means which they shall judge lawful for the
restoring him to the Possession thereof; which when they shall accomplish, we
shall have little reason to expect, but that Religion and Liberty so much
contested for, will be made a Sacrifice to Royal Malignancy: As for the terms
of Usurpation, and insolency, we shall only say this, They are so much in the
thoughts and actions of them that writ them, that its no wonder that their pen
misses them not.

And whereas the Army is charged as Enemies to Uniformity, notwithst^nding the
professed desires of Unity amongst Christians, and that their way and practices
have brought forth this unparalleld diversity of Opinions: who knows not but
that it has been very usual in all times of Reformation^, especially when the
Reformation is carried on by War, for Truth and Error, Liberty and
Licentiousness, to creep in at the same door? and if the Army have too much
indulged those differences, what hinders but that they may now see (and we, by
some late proceedings amongst them, know they do see) the evil of it, and are
real in their desires after a Spiritual Unity, though not altogether a Scottish
Uniformity. ^he Army declares likewise, that all who are for a Presbyterial
Government, may have freedom to enjoy it, only not wi^h a Scottish Formality,
which is an absolute Independency on the Civil Power; which how it consists
with that in the precedent page, where the Magistrate is required to lay out
his Power for purging and settling of Ordinances, as well as preserving of them,
let wise men judge; as for their keeping Courts and Jurisdictions (though they
be not very Canonical Expressions, yet) no doubt, but that they may do that
also over such as give up themselves that way; but if nothing will serve them,
but to be universal Bishops, and challenge a general Supremacy over all the
Churches of Christ, from giving our consents to any such Usurpations, we desire
to be excused. As for the displacing of any Presbyterially affected, from
Offices of Trust in England: It ^s denied that upon the Account of Presbytery
any are displaced, though it may be, some have been upon the ground of Faction
and Disturbance, which cleaves too close to many of that Profession.

The twelfth Page, is a bitter Pill wrapped up in a little Sugar, and its best to
swallow it at once; They profess to take no delight to charge any with
Blasphemies and Heresies, who are not guilty of them: What men do ordinar ly
and upon slight occasions, they may be supposed to delight in; but what more
usual then for all the Scottish Papers, to Brand the whole Army with the Name
of Sectaries, and maintainers of all Heresies? whereas Charity and Justice must
needs make some distinction, and though they disclaim all uningenuous dealing
in their charges of the Army, yet what can be imagined further from Ingenuity;
then to put evil Constructions upon good Actions, as they do, in saying that
the exemplary punishments they exercise upon a few, are rather for stopping of
mouths, then out of zeal to God.

The thirteenth speaks of a sedulous endeavor in the Armies Declaration, to
raise jealousies betwixt a good People and their King, and those who exercise
his Authority: This is too poor a Design for men of Noble and Courageous
Spirits, who scorn such a practice, any further then it may really tend to the
disintangling of honest and wel-minded men, from those plausible and politic
snares, which great men use to lay for their Inferiors, thereby to serve their
ends upon them: but its believed, much more pains of that kind will not be
taken: Si populus vult decipi decipiatur: Toward the end of the same Page,
there is a denial of the Ministers of Scotland, laying the Foundation of the
Hamiltonian Invasion, but doubtless they had a strong Influence into it, daily
exasperating the People against the Authority in England, and the Army that
supported it, whereby the People were easily ind^ced to believe, it was good
service to destroy them. And the Kirk^t self (notwithstanding all its pretended
Innocence) did both principle and p ovoke hem to a War, and did withdraw from
that War upon those terms, only that their advice would not be taken in stating
the case, and bounding the Admission of men to Employment, which the Civil
Power thought to be their proper work.

The fourteenth has a matter of Astonishment: and what is the matter? First,
That the Army should profess love, and yet make War; Is it not as possible to
have peace in the heart, and War in the hand, as to have War in Intention, and
Peace in Expression, which is too usual? Scotland has some Testimony of their
Love and Bowels in (48) and is it so great a wonder they should continue until
(50?) And there is no such contradictio^ as is supposed, betwixt their
Compassion and this Invasion (as you call it, but they Prevention) when the end
of it is the preservation of the Liberty of the people of God (so much
endangered by the present practices of Scotland) and the carrying of it on is
intended to be with all possible distinction of, and favor to those that are
godly and faithful among them.

As for their carriage to England, by which they aggravate this unkindness;
we well remember it, but spare to speak of it, unless it be lawful to compare
it to that of the Poet: Mulier formosa superne, turpiter atrum desinit in
piscem. For to let pass what formerly has passed, it is to be believed, that
if they proceed in this present Design of bringing in their King upon us, they
will blot out not only their own former Merit, but undo the noble
Archievements of all English Patriots and Parliaments, in this and former
Generations; we know how easy it is to raise a Monarchical Spirit, but how
hard to keep it within the Circle?

They likewise wonder at the Assertion of the Justice of the Cause, and the
Appeals upon it, which is no more (at most) then that Confidence admires
confidence.

And now having (as they think) sufficiently baited the first Declaration, they
will not suffer a little harmless Paper, sent in by the Army to undeceive the
people (who were possessed, that not Men, but Monsters were coming in among
them, from whom nothing was to be expected, but utter desolation) to go
unpunished; and truly, they do chastise it with Scorpions: And when they can
find little or nothing to say against the Matter, they fall violently upon the
persons.

The first and hottest charge is, Covenant Breaking: To that we may say, That
some supposed Breaches will be found a real keeping of it, as to the ends of
it (viz.) Religion and Liberty; and for the Unio^ betwixt the N^tions, which
themselves have broken, we offered to have it redintegrated by Treaty, which
the Scots refused: And to deny conjunction with them under their King, is no
more breach of Union, then their refusal to join with England in the way of a
Commonwealth: We have not found Kings such good Instruments of Union as is
pretended.

The next charge is, Their refusing to walk by the Word of God, and being led
by pretended Lights and P^ovidences. This they disclaim, and acknowledge the
Word to be their counselor: Though they cannot so slightly look upon the
Providence of God as the Scots do, seeing the Works of God have a language as
well as his Word, which the Israelites are blamed for not understanding Psalm.
106.

The third goes deep, even to the heart, and charges them, That their Purposes
and Intentions are not for the Honor of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, but
for some concernments of their own: and a goodly Argument is there added to
prove it, because they pretend Liberty and common Safety. This is so
impertinent and injurious, that to slight it is the best Answer, unless we
should thus retort it, The purpose of the Scots is not for public Liberty and
common Safety, but something that concerns themselves; and therefore the great
wheel of their Design, is, A Pretense of Religion and Reformation.

The next is like unto it, charging them with A seeming holiness, and a real
treading under foot the Truth and Ordinances of God; giving us full assurance,
That Conscience, and a Christian spirit, were very little consulted withal in
this Reply, in comparison of that cursed Maxim, C^lumniare fortiter aliquid
adhaerebit; which seems to be the sole Rule walked by, by them: All the
particulars of this parting charge being the issues of Envy, Uncharitableness
and Evil speaking.

Neither is the fifth of any better temper then those before, about their
conjunction with all sorts of persons, for the pursuit of common Safety and
Liberty; and therefore, bearing with different Judgments and Opinions in the
things of God, which being charged on them, by those who have actually closed
with him, and admitted him to the Exercise of Regal Power, amongst them, by
whom are employed all sorts of profligate wretches, blood-guilty Rebels, Popish
Idolators, with whom the Assembly of the Kirk is now in actual conjunction for
the pursuit of one Design, is not of any great weight unto us; and as we could
easily discharge them of this Imputation, so far as to take off all just
offense, yet we cannot but declare, That we think it much better to
exercise-mutuall forbearance in some lesser Differences, whilst the foundation
is held and kept entire, then to have amongst us an outward Uniformity, as the
issue of an Ecclesiastical Tyranny, which we wish the Assembly to free their
Kirk and Nation in.

Further, The Army has neither usurped on, or trodden under foot the Ancient
Government of England, which in the sixth place is charged on them, but in their
places have assisted to remove all Usurpations upon the Liberty of the People
of England, restoring it into the hands of the Peoples Trustees, to whom of
Right it does belong, actually leaving it instated in the hands of that
Parliament, wherein it was at the beginning of these troubles

And as to the moulding of Scotland to the same frame, mentioned in the last
place; the truth is, That saving the earnest desire of our Souls, that all who
belong to Christ ^n that Nation, may enjoy the Liberties and Privileges
purchased for them by Christ, with our own Security from designed Evils, We
should be very indifferent, into what mould or fashion that Nation be framed.

Thus having laid open the manifold Mistakes, Falsities, unjust Charges,
politic Insinuations, unchristian Censurings, and the like, not only
Ungospel-like carriages, but also uncivil Railings of this Paper of the
General Assembly, We shall close with our hearty Suppli^^t^ons, That the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would in his due time cast down all the
earthly combinations of all sorts of men, that set up themselves and their own
corrupted Interest, in the room of that Scepter of Righteousness, which he
has given into the hands of his Son.

With this foregoing, we have also seen an Answer of the General Assembly, to
the Declaration of the Parliament of England, which also in due time, the Lord
assisting, shall receive a full Reply.

That an Ecclesiastical Assembly, conveened for the Reiglement of the House of
God, should account it their duty, as such, to put forth Manifesto's, and make
Reply's to States and Armies, in things of Civil Concernment, relating to the
public Affairs of Nations, would seem strange unto us, were we not in some
measure acquainted with the Constitution, actings, and assumed Power of the
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, which make them justly to be recko^ed to have
a place among the Powers of this world, and therefore called to this Employment.

But that such a Frame and Structure of Ecclesiastical Authority, as is at
present in Scotland erected, such Administrations of Censures, with corporal
Penalties, and an absolute subserviency of the Secular Power of their Nation,
for their pursuit and setting on, that such a worldly Jurisdiction over the men
of the world, as is there exercised amongst them, is the genuine issue of
Reformation, according to the Word of God, we are not as yet able to apprehend;
rather it seems to savor of the old Babylonish Leaven, which in due time the
Lord will remove: And we profess sincerely, That although our hearts have been
often pained within us, for the many Errors and Misperswasions about the things
of God, with Blasphemies and Reproaches of his Name, that have broken forth
amongst us (which we hope, through his goodness, are already in a great
measure abated) yet we cannot apprehend any such danger from them to the true
Interest of the Lord Christ and the Gospel, as from such Political
Combinations, to persecute and destroy all breaking forth of Light and Truth
that suit not their present apprehension. Is it not from the misguiding of such
an Interest, that their Kings taking the Covenant, is cried up as such an
acceptable Service and Worship of God, when their own hearts know full well,
That he submitted unto it, as a hard Imposition in a Civil Treaty, for the
change of his condition from Banishment unto a Crown; which, whither it may be
looked on as the performance of a Duty in a Gospel-way, We doubt not but the
Assembly will one day be able to d^scern.

To the People of SCOTLAND, (Especially to those amongst them that know and
fear the Lord) from whom yesterday we received a Paper, Entitled, From the
People of Scotland, To the Underofficers and Soldiers of the English Army, We
the Underofficers and Soldiers of the English Army, do send greeting.
AT the beginning of the late great and wonderful workings of God in these two
Nations of England and Scotland, we the Underofficers and Soldiers of the
English Army now in Scotland, were most of us (if not all) men of private
Callings, and not at all interested in matters of Public and State affairs;
but yet very many of us in whom the Lord had begun to reveal himself in the
face of Jesus Christ, were sensible of the Antichristian Tyranny that was
exercised by the late King, and his Prelates, over the Consciences, Bodies, and
Estates of the true spiritual Church of Jesus Christ, namely those that were
born again, and united to him by his Spirit, who were then by that
Antichristian Crew, termed Puritans, Sectaries, Schismatics, etc. and for not
conforming to all the Canons and Ordinances of their National Church, were
frequently imprisoned, banished, and otherwise grievously molested at the
pleasure of those that then ruled amongst us. Under these sad sufferings of the
People of God, our souls mourned, and understanding by the manifold gracious
promises in the Word of God, that a time of Deliverance was to be expected to
the Church of Christ, and Destruction and ruin to Babylon, our hearts,
together with all the truly godly in England, were exceedingly stirred up to
pray to the Lord even day and night, that he would arise to destroy Antichrist,
and save his People: Whilst this spirit of prayer was poured forth upon Gods
People in England, Attempts were made upon Scotland, to bring them to a
conformity in Religious worship, by endeavoring to impose upon them a Popish
Service Book, which was through the great goodness of God by his People in
Scotland rejected, which made the wrath of the late King, and his Prelates, wax
so hot against them, that Scotland (...) ^erve it self, but by coming into
England (...) the godly in England did not then count an Inva^^on to destroy
E^gland (no more than they do this our present march for the ruin of Scotland)
but rejoiced to see some appearing against that Antichristian power that had
persecuted the Saints, and were assured that the Lord was come forth to answer
the many prayers and tears that were then poured fort^ for that purpose. And
therefore, so far as we had a^y opportunity, further^d the designs of that Army,
some of us hazarding ou lives by spreading their Book, entitled, The Scots
Intentions and pleading for the lawfulness of their proceedings. Let us
remember how the Lord was pleased graciously to ^nswer the prayers of his
P^op^^ at that time in their de^^^^rance from the Army aised by the (...) King
and his Prelates, for the destruction of all the People of G d in England and
Scotland, in so much that soon after, Scotland sits in peace, enjoyi^^ their
former Liberties, without being imposed upon by the Antichristian Prelacie in
England and England obtains a Parliament, to whom they have opportunity to
complain of their grievances; and, through the great goodness of God, so
constituted, that grievances are heard, and Overtures made by them to the late
King for their redress, which was so irksome to his oppressing, tyrannical and
bloody spirit, that he again betakes himself to overthrow the Pa liament by
force: and to that end entertains the Officers of the Army that had gone forth
against our Brethren of Scotland, and withdrawing himself from his Parliament,
an appearance of a Civil War begins, which being made known to us, the
Inferior Officers and Soldiers of this Army (then in our private callings) we
found our hearts extraordinarily stirred up by the Lord, to assist the
Parliament against the King, being abundantly satisfied in our Judgments and
consciences, that we were called forth by the Lord to be instrumental to bring
about that which was our cont^nual prayer to God (viz.) the destruction of
Antichrist, and the deliverance of his Church and People. And upon this simple
account, we engaged, not knowing the deep Policies of worldly Statesmen, and
have ever since hazarded our lives in the hie places of the field, (where we
have seen the wonders of the Lord) against all the opposers of this Work of of
Jesus Christ, whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way
plain before us. And having these things singly ^n our eye, namely the
destruction of Antichrist, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the
deliverance and (...) Church in the establishment of his Ordinanc^^ among^^
the^, in purity, according to his Word, and the just Civil Liberties of English
men, We did many of us rejoice at the Covenant, because we found in it a strain
to these ends. Although some being more enlightened, did apprehend it to be so
mixed with worldly interest, that they justly feared that the interest of Jesus
Christ would be only pretended to, and the interest of this World, yea of
Antichrist himself, carried on under a vizard, as we have since had abundant
experience of, which has made us, we confess, not to Idolize the Covenant (as
we fear too many do) though we trust it will appear before God, Angels and Men,
that we shall ever pursue its true and lawful ends, according to the plain and
candide meaning thereof, though we do not upon every occasion urge the Covenant
(as we see every party, though as far different as Light and Darkness, is apt to
do) the Lord having by his Word and by his Spirit convinced us of our duty
therein, though there had been no such Covenant at all entered into.

But when we saw that under the pretense of the Covenant, A Corrupt party in
Parl^ament, by their worldly policy, after the War was ended in England, and
the late Kings Party subdued, with the loss of thousands of the lives of
Saints (whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord) did endeavor to set
up the King upon his own terms, and with him to establish a National
Church Government, not in all things agreeabl^ to the word of God, but
destructive to the just Liberties of the true spiritual Church of Christ, which
he has by his own most precious Blood purchased for them, and is now come
forth to bestow upon them, which did sufficiently demonstrate it self by the de
lings of the then Master Builders, with the Churches of Jesus Christ in and
about London, that were then threatened to be dissolv^d, and Laws making for
preventing the Communion of Saints with one another, except only in that one
public Form then about to be established, to the great astonishment of many
of us, that had lifted up o^t hands to God, and sworn to endeavor a
Reformation according to the Word of God; and therefore after much waiting upon
G^d by prayer, and examining our own hearts about the ends and s^ cerity
thereof, we were abundantly satisfied, that it was not only lawful, but our
duty to keep our Arms in our hands, till the ends beforementioned (...) to
that purpose the Army whereof we (...) and, did march up to London to propose
to the (...) establishment, that might be more forth carrying on of the (...)
of Religion and Liberty, and though therein we were not at that time
successful, yet most wonderfully and graciously preserved by the Lord, and
extraordinarily convinced (after much seeking the face of God) that our failing
was in endeavoring to set up the King, upon any terms; he being a man of so
much blood, that the Lord would have no peace with him, nor any that should go
about to establish him. Whereupon after his own hardened heart had hindered him
from yielding to any overtures that were made to him by the Parliament, through
whom all the Armies Proposals were to be tend ered, And a second War more
dangerous then the former contrived by him, and his son now with you, together
with those in Scotland, that hated us of the Army of England, under the name of
Sectaries, being by the unspeakeable goodness and mighty power of God waded
through, and a second testimony given from heaven to justify the proceedings of
his poor servants against that bloody Antichristian brood, though with the
loss of many precious Saints, we were then powerfully convinced, that the
Lords purpose was to deal with the late King as a man of blood, and being
persuaded in our Consciences, that he and his Monarchy was one of the ten
horns of of the beast spoken off, Revel. 17.12, 13, 14, 15. and being
witnesses to so much of the innocent blood of the Saints that he had shed in
supporting the beast, and considering the loud cries of the souls of the Saints
under the Altar, we were extraordinarily carried forth to desire Justice upon
the King that man of blood; and to that purpose petitioned our superior
Officers and the Parliament to bring him to justice, which accordingly, by a
high hand of providence, was brought to pass, which Act we are confident the
Lord will own in preserving the Commonwealth of England, against all Kingdoms
and Nations, that shall adventure to meddle with them upon that account. When
God executes his judgments upon malefactors, let none go about to resist when
he brings forth those his enemies, that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be King
in the midst of his Saints, and breaks them in pieces like a Potters vessel.
Let not Scotland, nor any other Nation say, what do thou. We fear they have
been too busy already; the Lord that sees the secrets of all hearts knows the
compliance of Scotland with the late Kings issue now with you, was in order to
disturb the Peace of England, for being Gods (...) bloody Tyrant, and a
supporter of the throne of the (...)* but blessed be the Lord, the crafty are
taken, in their own snare, England sits in peace, whilst Scotland receives
into their chief City their new King, at the very hour wherein an Army that had
marched three hundred miles, is facing them at the very gates; we wish our
Brethren of Scotland (especially those that truly fear the Lord) would
consider these things, and not slight the providence of God so much as they
do; when Scotland chose new gods, and would have a King out of a Family that
God has rejected, then was War in the gates: and though we do not think
providence alone a sufficient rule for Gods people to walk by, yet we do know
that the Lord speaks to his people by his providence, as well as by his word;
and he is angry with his people that does not take notice thereof, and
promises blessing to those that do, Psalm. 107. and the latter end.

And here give us leave (not in a boasting spirit, but with meekness and fear)
to tell you that we are persuaded we are poor unworthy Instruments in Gods hand
to break his enemies, and preserve his people. You have acknowledged us in your
own Papers, to be a rod of Iron to dash in pieces the Malignants, but withal,
say, we must now be broken in pieces because we now set our selves against the
lot of Gods Inheritance. Let us here speak for our selves, yea the Lord speak
for us, who knows our hearts and all our ways, we value the Churches of Jesus
Christ, who are the lot of Gods Inheritance, ten thousand times above our own
lives. Yea we do bless the Lord, we are not only a rod of Iron to dash the
common enemies in pieces, but also a hedge (though unworthy) about Christ's
Vineyard; and if we know our own hearts, where ever the lot of Gods Inheritance
shall appear to be found in Scotland, we shall think it our duty to the utmost
hazard of our lives to preserve the same. But if there be any that have taken
counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed whom the Lord has
decreed to set upon his holy hill of Sion, we are persuaded the Lord has
brought us hither as Instruments through which he will speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. We desire it may be known to you
our Brethren of Scotland, that we are not soldiers of fortune, we are not
merely the servants of men, we have not only proclaimed Jesus Christ the King
of Saints, to be our King by profession, but desire to submit to him upon his
own terms, and to admit him to the exercise (...) in our hearts, and to follow
him wheresoever he (...) of his own good will entered into a Covenant of Grace
(...) of Saints, and be assured it is he tha^ leads us into Scotland, as he
has done in England and Ireland, and therefore we do in the spirit of
brotherly love, and of the fear of the Lord, beseech you to look about you, for
our Lord Jesus is coming amongst you as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap,
and blessed are those in whom the least dram of sincerity shall be found.

We have seen a Paper directed to us from the people of Scotland, which has
bin publicly made known to us, wherein we are first desired to consider the
lawfulness of our marching into Scotland; We blessed God we did that before we
came here, and are abundantly satisfied, that we are brought hither by the
Lord; Nay many of us lying under temptations of flesh and blood, and going
about to frame excuses to take us from this march, found that to have stayed
behind had been to have deprived our selves of much sweet communion with God,
that now through his goodness we do enjoy.

We have also considered the arguments by which you go about to weaken the
grounds of the Parliaments, and our superior Officers leading us into
Scotland, and must needs give you this return, that we are st^ll abundantly
established in this belief, that what the Parliament of England has done in
sending us into Scotland, has been of absolute necessity to preserve
themselves from being destroyed in their Religion and Liberties, which they
have been at so much cost both of blood and treasure to purchase and preserve.
And therefore by the way must needs tell you that we can not endure to hear
them called a p^etended Parliament, wh ch we desire you to take notice of, that
if you write to us again you would speak more reverently of the authority of
our Nation, or else we shall easily think you will upon every occasion be r ady
to i^vade England, that you may set up an authority which you may call lawful.

And let us as in the presence of the Lord, further assure you that we have
already examined our own consciences as before the Lord, and have a clear
assurance in our hearts that he will countenance us in this action, and that we
do not break any Covenant which we have sworn before God, Angels, and men, but
could be cont^nted (should we not thereby Idolize the Covenant) to march to any
Engagement with you, if call d thereunto by the Lord, with the Covenant on the
tops of our Pikes, and let the Lord judge who has observed the ends of the
Covenant best, you or we, we do acknowledge we have not been the exact
performers, yet not the wilful breakers thereof: Our consciences also bear us
record, we do above any thing in the world desire the Union of the two Nations,
and it is our prayer daily that those that fear the Lord in England and
Scotland, may become one in the hand of the Lord, and join together in the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and throwing down and tramp^i^g
upon the seat of the Beast, why should not Scotland as well as England rejoice
to see the horns of the Beast cut off, that we may join together to hate the
whore, and to burn her fl sh with fire

The Lord is our witness (whom we fear) we come not to oppress you, or shed
your blood, we have cried to the Lord again and again to prevent it, we have
sent our Declarations of love to the people of God in Scotland, wh ch some
amongst you, though they pretend to answer, do most i^juriously and
unchristianly keep from their sight, nay most falsely misreprese^ting us as a
people comewith intentions to destroy the poor Inhabitants, and that we are
l^ft of our God to be destroyed, but we have made our prayer to the Lord, and
made known before him their sayings, who have told the people of Scotland, that
God has forsaken us, and therefore bid them persecute and take us; saying now
the Sectari s days are come, etc. But the Lord is still with us, he is our
refuge and pr^sent help in trouble ready to be found; we do believe the cry of
the oppressed in Scotland will be heard; and woe be to those that are the cause
thereof. Our quarrel is still against Malignants, the Root whereof is now,
through the evil policy of some Statesmen, become the head of Scotland. We do
not quarrel^ with those whose hearts are upright with Jesus Christ, and
faithf^ll and loving to England, but with those who are most treacherous and
f^lse to both: And therefore we dare not any of us (though tempted thereto by
your Papers) be so carnally wise, as to desert the cause and work of Jesus
Christ, in which we have h^therto bin so long and so miraculously carried on;
do you think, we a e men so weakly principled as to be persuaded without the
least st^ength of Arguments to desert the interest of our own Nation, and
expose thousands of the precious Saints of Jesus Christ to be trampled upon as
the dirt of the ^r^ets, when the Lord is about to put on their beautiful
garments, and to ma^e them a praise in the earth? ^r can we (the ke you) betray
our superior officers in whom we see so much of the sweet spirit (...) mouths
are ope^^^ w^^e (...) for such a thing: ^he lord (...) upon him we shall with
(...). Which we humbly (...) of any more blood, (...) and comfortable to you
(...) with ioy^^^ ^^^land, and ^eave Scotland (...) English Army ha^^ (...)
amongst them. Which (...) might be ^ooner effected, were you ^^^ve suffered to
confer and (...) hearts one to an other: we do believe much of the bit^^^
(...) would be allayed in our brethren of Scotland, did (...) ^^ceedingly we
are slandered by the pens and tongues (...) ^en concerning our Religion and
faith toward God (...) we may not vainly boast of, (...) according to the
(...), we are ready to give an answer to the mea^est (...) Scotland, that shall
ask a reason of the faith and (...) with meekness and fear, and indeed we
account our best way of contending with (...) is to pray the Lord to (...)
sound in his (...). That so we (...) the lord (...) ^^^science, they that ^^eak
evil of u^ (...) of evil doers (...) ash^med, whilst they ^a^^y accuse our
good conversation in Chr^^^.

And thus we have in the naked plainness of our sou^s opened our hearts unto
you our dear brethren that fear the Lord in Scotland, where ever you be (...)
^ighest Councels, or the poorest cottages (...) Lord will in his due time (...)
^^^ells, and make you one with those that fear the Lord amongst us; which the
God of and Father of (...) Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our ^^d and our Father
^^so bring (...) in his due time, and in the m^an time make both (...) and
(...) ^^derstand the things that concern the exalt^^^ (...), that in all our
undertakings we may be subservi^^^ (...) the affairs (...) Jesus Christ* And
above all things take heed ho^^ (...) stir up any of the powers or strength
of this world (...) ^ne an other. The grace of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ the Prince
(...) ^e with you. Amen.

From the Be^g^^r at Musel^^^^gh, August, 1. 1650.
The ^^ply of the General Asse^^^^ o^ the Kirk of Scotland to the Declaration
of the Army to which the foregoing Vindication refers. As also the Paper of the
people of Scotland, to the Underofficers and Soldiers of the English (...)
^ad been ^er^to annexed, but that we understand they were both Prin^^^ (...) in
this City before our entrance thereinto.

FINIS.

