A LETTER FROM A Protestant of integrity, TO A Principal Peer of the Realm now
sitting in Parliament. BY Way of Animadversion on a Letter from a Person of
Quality to the same Peer of the Realm. Occasioned by the present debate upon
the Penal Laws.

London, Printed for the Author.

A LETTER, From a Protestant of Integrity, unto a Principal Peer of the Realm,
etc.
My Lord,
I Purposed not by my lines to intterrupt your pursuit of the important affairs
in which you are engaged; had not the unexpected boldness of a well-wisher to
the Roman Religion occasioned these.

Your constancy in, and zeal for the true Religion, (received and professed in
these Nations) will be your Lordships honor, no less then your care and
compassion to consciences pretendedly tender, not only differing in
circumstances (which love to truth may indulge) but dissenting and
diametrically opposite unto the substantials thereof, such as are the Roman
Catholics, for whom a pretended Person of quallity, has presumed to become an
advocate, beyond what your Lordships Disposition, his Majesty's Reputation, or
our Kingdoms present complexion (in which the restoring Prelacy is suspected,
and by some openly averred, to tend to a return to Popery) could dictate to men
of any competent prudence.

My Lord, publicly to observe the Parliaments debates concerning the Penal
Laws, is no piece of Policy; but this Gentleman's improvement thereof, seems
to be little short of folly; suggesting a propensity to alter our established
Religion, and that the (now falling) Presbyter has been and yet is the Papists
only opponent and obstruction, in which that party will not a little glory, as
conceiving some thing of truth in their observation that our Litturgy and
Prelacy, is very consistent with the Mass and Papacy.

This Advocate represents his Popish party, by epithites, which cannot but
move pity, and in an estate which directs duty for their releif and
restoration if what he suggesteth be found a verity.

He calls them a poor distressed and deplorable party; Page 1.
and my Lord, such indeed they do seem to be; but wise men are not without
fear, that on liberty to uncase they will appear more considerable, as those
who under all our late differing forms, have driven on the Catholics design,
De propaganda fide, fomenting our late tumults and commotions, Latet anguis in
herbis, their beginning to hiss unto the defaming of our eminent Martyrs,
derision of our Religion, and demand of the liberty of their own driving on (in
the late pamphlets boldly pressing into the World) displeasure against, and
depression of the Presbyterians (who have much more pleadable in their behalf
to propose them acceptable, then the present heat of our Revolutions will
permit them to produce, or the Peers and restored Prelates of our Realm to
ponder) are in my opinion no mean evidences thereof, for it is well known
affected poverty, and voluntary affliction is not the least part of this
peoples piety and devotion.

As to their Estate he tells us (my Lord) this last hundred years, they have
lain under a more bloody and inhumane persecution, then any before was hea^d of
among Christians. I must confess present evil seems unparralelled; and passion
is a multiplying glass; but Sir, will not any ordinary observer see this
advocate does highly hyperbolize and in a sullen fret like a subtle ^apist,
labor to delude by lies?

My Lord, admitting (what principles of Justice cannot admit) that their legal
prosecution, were persecution unjust, is it not monstrous to cry out, it is
bloody and inhumane, whilst by known and standing Laws declaring guilt and
punishment; and that making many gradations and slows process to the capital
crime or shedding of their blood; but the superlative words must appear
superlatively false; viz. That they have lain under the most bloody and
inhumane persecutions, that ever before was heard of among Christians, for (my
Lord) who that ever knew or heard of, the Heathen rage against Christians,
Arrians against the Orthodox, can give credit to this clamorous calumny; yea
who ever heard of the Popish persecution of Protestants, the Waldenses and
Albingenses, the devastation of Merundal and Cabriers; The fiery persecution in
the days of Queen Mary, the barbarous Rebellion in Ireland, with many the like
doleful Tragedies, acted by the Papists themselves, on no other cause but
matter of opinion, and Religion, which they called Heresy, and will not see
for number and quality of patients, nature and variety, cruelty and severity of
torments, slightness of cause and universality of Execution without Law or
regard of age, sex, dignity degree, (cutting down the tree, with the fruit
thereof falling in the very act of execution) a persecution much more bloody
and inhumane, then what this person of quality complains of; who may be
boldly challenged to make good his comparison by making his parallel for numbers
of sufferers, bloody inhumane sufferings; to square only with the three Marian
fiery years, and can choose, but conclude our Advocate judged by the age of his
patients, not the kinds or degrees of their sufferings; and sure (my Lord) this
Gentleman was wholly a stranger to the clemency of King James, and King Charles
the first, Witnessed by the easy compositions of Recusants, and ordinary
repreive and release of Priests and Jesuits; and I am sure their reign will
strike far into his hundred years complained of; However (my Lord) an Hyperbole
may be indulged in an advovate, when it is so notorious as in this case, it
cannot but return to the damage of the Client.

My Lord, I cannot but wonder, whilst toleration of Popery is the thing
pretended, that so great a liberty and on such a ground, should be required,
and that as a duty, not courtesy, viz. That his Majesty like another Cyrus,
may be pleased to procure, that Israel may return and build up their T^mple,
and that because the building is perpetual where God lays the foundation,
which whole request is (my Lord) grounded on a bold petitio principii for they
call themselves Israel, who on good ground have been accounted Sodom and
Egypt, they challenge the privilege of Syon, who are obnoxious to the doom of
Babylon; and as such, must expect Cyrus his opposition; For the Kings of the
earth must hate the Whore. They pretend to be founded by God who make petrum
petram, beyond the tenure of the the Gospel, Commission or scope of the Lords
intention; when those things are cleared, which they (but all others deny) take
for granted; there will be a ground to pray not only a liberty to use their
Synagogile, but (as they Phrase it) to build their Temple, and restore their
Mass, and (what is doubtless further in their intention) ruin all that dissent
from them; for (my Lord) it is a Scripture Maxim and an Ecclesiastical axiom,
Sions rise is Babylons ruin.

What is urged by way of Swada to this desired liberty in the next Paragraph,
signifies very little, until Roman Catholics, are rendered tolerable, by an
Abjuration of intolerable principles and practices we shall easily assent to
this Advocates Politiques, in point of Treason, Page 2.
and do believe, the Capital crime and punishment in the common Weal, as the
chief censure in the Church fall into contempt when made common, by being
affixed to every light transgression, and trivial defect; nor will I trouble
your Lordship with tracing, or a tedious animadversion of his historical
observation of the clemency of Germanius indulgency of Aurelius, or connivance
of Theodocius and Gratianus, admitting them as true, his work is to make
Papists square with primitive Christians, and maintain his inference, which he
is well aware will be found a plain Non sequitur on his premises, it is this a
minori ad majus, how much more reasonable will it appear to tolerate our
brethren of the Roman Religion, who are undeniably filii Christi, sons of
Christ by the mother Church, which we in England use to call the surer side,
etc.

My Lord, whatsoever the premises will allow, I must be bold to say, the
inferences is stuffed with fancies, which cannot be admitted, in all the
particulars of it; it proceeds with a plain petitio principii, under
controversy, yea, cleared in the negative.

This Advocate (my Lord) challenges the freedom of the House, under a filial
relation as brethren: He therefore affirms with confidence, The Roman
Catholics are undeniably Filii Christi: But he deals wisely in cleaving to
the Bastard pleas, on the Mothers side, lest the very boldness of the claim
should provoke the family to whip them out of doors. Yet (my Lord) as
undeniable as this Filial relation appears to him, it would be considered,
whether their Mother has not played the Harlot, and so they may be found
children of Adultery, although living in Wedlock, by our Law (not admitting the
child to be rightly fathered) covers her sin, and their shame.

Again, it would be considered, whether the Lord Jesus Christ has not given
the Church of Rome a bill of divorce, and branded her as the Mother of
Whoredoms, spiritual Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon; from whom all chaste Christians
are charged to Separate with detestation, lest they be defiled with her
uncleanness: It is more then probable, that on a serious scrutiny, this
Advocates impudent claim of the Papists sonship to Christ, may be silenced
with, Hosea 2.1,2.3.
Plead with your mother, plead with her, she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband, etc. I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children
of Whoredoms; for their mother has played the Harlot, she that conceived them
^th done shamefully.

Again, how came the maternity of the Christian Church to be confined to any
place, or peculiar people? Is not the wall of partition between Nations pulled
down, and quite removed? When was Rome thus espoused to Christ, that all filii
Christi must be Roman Catholics, at least, on the mothers, the surer side? As
if none could be members of his Church, without being Provinces to the Roman
Empire, and Proselytes to their superstition. Why may not Alexandria, Antioch,
Galatia, claim this Prerogative, as well as Rome? We may find Rome conform to
Babylon, and called by that name, as her Successor; but that she succeeded to
Jerusalem, is a blind bottomless suppo^ition: Yet we grant, the casting out of
the Jews, was the bringing in of the Gentiles; let this Contract, necessitating
such as heretofore were to Jewdaize, now to Romanize, or to renounce their
relation to Jesus Christ, be cleared. This is (my Lord) a most Popish brag,
without any bottom, though this Advocate has the confidence to tell your
Lordship, That it is a verity undoubtable (so far as I could find) that that
Church was formerly the reverend Mother of Christianism, and the most ancient
Lawmakers and Judge heretofore of all Religion.

You may (my Lord) see what is the toleration desired for Roman Catholics, how
high they would build the Popes Temple, if Cyrus will give them liberty. Rome
cannot be, if she may not be the Queen and Mistress of the World, to whom all
must bow, as bound to her for their very being. But (my Lord) this Advocate
seems better read in Roman Legends, then Scripture, or Church Records;
otherwise he would have found, Isa. 2.3.
the Law should, and did go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. And (my Lord) from this seed do spring the sons of Christ; in this
place the Lord himself preached, hither were the Apostles confined, from hence
they dispersed themselves through the world, hitherto the Christians appealed
as to the Lawmakers and Judge of Religion. Jerusalem is (my Lord) called and
known to be the Mother of us all. If our sonship to Christ be cognoscible and
determinable by our relation to any special place, as the Mother of
Christianism, we are bound (by natural affection) to go on Pilgrimage, and
undertake the Holy War, for the Holy Land; or at least, must have recourse to
Antioch, where Believers were first called Christians.

My Lord, I will stand by the Historical demonstration thereof, that
Superstition was made the sum of Christianism, and an universal Papacy
affected, before Romes Catholic Motherhood became a mask of sonship unto
Christ, and Christianism was found in our Island, before Austin, Romes proud,
bloody, and superstitious Apostle came to plant.

Lastly, my Lord, admit we Romes Motherhood; must degenerated children or
branches be tolerated? shall not scoffing Ishmael be cast out, and profane
Esau lose his birthright, though the one be undeniably the son of Abraham, and
the other of Isaac? Is it not our Saviors rule, Every branch that bears not
fruit, must be cut off? much more, that which bears wild fruit: Simple
symbolical relation to Christ, will not avail to entrance into heaven, nor
entertainment in the Church.

My Lord, these premises being groundless, the inference is easily evaded; and
admitting the Christians liberty by the Heathen, Orthodox under the Arrians,
Jews among the Venetians, and Moors among the Spaniards; yet it will not follow
with any Emphasis, that we should much more tolerate our (degenerate, spurious)
brethren of the Roman Religion; and the rather, because their principles, and
experienced practices, render them more unsociable then the very worst of
these, even destructive to Humane Society.

This exception (my Lord) is so legible, that it stared this Advocate in the
face in the very penning of this Apology: He seems to obviate and answer it
in his next Paragraph, in which his furious, freting terms do bespeak him
thereby pinched to the quick: he therefore stateth it in these angry
expressions, It is a most false Proposition, and proceeded doubtless from gall
and spleen, that Roman Catholics are altogether consociable, or that they
cannot live with us, or any sort of Protestants in one Kingdom and
Commonwealth, without jars and tumults: And so in the height of rage he lets
fly at the Presbyterians, and says, This is blown from their mad, turbulent
and presumptuous pulpits, whom he pursues with many invectives, throughout his
whole book, as if they only were his Antagonists.

My Lord, I am not Advocate for the Presbyterians (the chief unhappy declining
party among us) yet I cannot (in retired and serious thoughts) but wish the
present violence and contempt poured on them, may be found to redound to the
honor and good of our King and Kingdom: Whatsoever transcendent power over
Kings and States, some ambitious men (clothed with that appellation) might
pursue; we cannot deny the generality of that party to have done His Majesty
most eminent service, and were they as conformable in their Ecclesiastics, as
they are sound in their Politics, they would be ranked among the best, most
learned, and seriously pious of His Majesty's Subjects: To give them their due
(which we say must not be denied to the Devil) I find Crofton himself (who is
deemed the most violent of them) in the very book for which he now suffers, so
fully and plainly to assert his Majesty's Supremacy, Immunity from all humane
condition (as to His Subjects allegiance) and co-action; and so fully square in
all his Politics, that I cannot but question the prudence (not to say the
justice) of his so long and severe durance. But (my Lord) let these men be what
they will, I am sure the Presbyterians lose not, nor does our Church gain by
these and the like raging reproaches, representing them the only Protestants,
as if our Prelatical Clergy were (as they are suspected to be) the fast friends
to Papacy, and Roman Catholics.

Sure (my Lord) this person of quality never heard of Cranmer, Bancrofts, Hall,
Moreton, Usher, Davenant, Downam, and many other Prelates, who were
anti-Presbyters, and yet by pen and pulpit pressed, No peace with Rome: It is,
Sir, the strength of schism, to suggest and give men cause to suppose, our
suppression thereof, is the striking hands with superstition.

My Lord, when Presbyters are out of play, I hope the Papists shall find the
Protestants spirit abide on the Prelates and Clergy of the Church of England,
who will not cease from their pulpits and presses to declare, That Papists or
Roman Catholics qua tales believing and affirming no faith is to be kept with
Heretics (as they account all Protestants:) That the Pope is in all things to
be obeyed, as a power absolute and infallible: That the Pope may and can
dispense with, and absolve all oaths, civil or religious obligations (the very
sinews of humane society:) That he is Christ's Vicar, and as such, has the
universal power of the Kingdoms of the earth, and may give them to whom he
will: That the Popes Excommunication discharges all natural and civil
relation, and the duties thereof; absolveth the subjects from allegiance to
their lawful and natural Prince; warranteth the subjects rebellion, or
neighbors invasion and usurpation: That the Pope may pard^n an impiety pl^ed,
before it be perpetrated; as he did to the Monk which poisoned King John, and
the Conspirators in the Gunpowder Treason against King James (all which must be
most seriously abjured, without a Popish mental reservation, before this
Advocates security, That the Pope himself shall never be able to withdraw his
clients from their allegiance to His sacred Majesty, can he taken, or of
force) are altogether insociable, and cannot live with us, or any Protestants,
with the safety of humane society, which is more then jars and tumults.

And if, my Lord, Roman Catholics be found to be brats of Babylon, and
children of Antichrist, believing and practicing damnable Doctrines, and
deceiving, unto the destruction of such as drink their poisons; from whom the
Elect of God (having their names written in the Book of Life) are required to
depart. They will not fear to affirm, that to give them the least connivance,
is no less then damnable (for our Church knows no venial sin) and yet acquit
themselves from the charge of gall, spleen, madness, turbulency, extravagant
heat, indiscreet and hair-brained zeal, and the like epithetes framed out by
this Supplicant; whose wisdom it had been by softer words, and stronger reasons
to convince men's judgments, and persuade the indulgence of his party, in whose
behalf he passes from his passion, to offer something to salve the insolvible
objection against their defired liberty.

His first answer is, my Lord, according to the subtilty of the Man of sin,
urged with a double Sophism, referring us for the demonstration of the Papists
sociabilty, unto the times and places where and when Popery was predominate;
and bauking their barbarous cruelty, witnessed by the bloody and inhumane
persecution of those few Martyrs those dark times afforded, he has the
confidence to tell your Lordship, That from the Saxons, to King Edward the
sixth, to be a Roman Catholic, was never a bar to loyalty, obedience to civil
Government; nor can any deny, but that France, Spain, Italy, the Empire, and
Poland, have ever accounted, and do still him, as the best subject, and least
dangerous to the civil state, who is best affected to that Religion.

My Lord, this Advocate deals wisely to appeal to those times and places in
which the ignorant devotion to S. Peter's Keys, or awful dread of S. Paul's
sword, made Prince, themselves most slavish Vassals to the Papacy, to take
their Crowns at the Popes courtesy, and let his holiness kick them off at his
will, to dance attendance at the gates of Canusium, or suffer themselves to be
whipped at Canterbury, or his Holiness to tread on their Royal necks, and give
their Crowns to whom he pleases; in which case they durst not but deem the
peoples affection to that power (to which themselves swore allegiance) to be
the best mark of loyalty; the very thoughts to the contrary being an herefie
worthy the Popes curse, and loss of their Crown: But my Lord, one instance of a
Prince fully freed from this Tyrannical yoke, would be much more convincing.

But (my Lord) this Suppliant is sure a stranger to the base and barbarous
usage of the Emperors Henrious the fourth and fifth, Fredericus Barbarossa,
and Fredericus secundus, Childericus King of France, our own William Rufus,
King John, King Henry the second, and others, with the commotions,
perturbations, invasions, usurpations and rebellions against them, and many
other Princes, made by and upon a blind obedience of the Roman Catholics, at
the command of their holy Father the Pope; or thinks he, the sound here of
never reached to England, or would he have Pipinus, Rodulphus, Anselm, Thomas
Becket, and the Clergy under Henry the eighth, accounted most sociable men, and
loyal subjects, that he can with this confidence affirm, That from the Saxons
times, unto King Edward the fixth, to be a Roman Catholic, was the best mark
of loyalty: without doubt he hoped, that on the repeal of the Pepal Laws
against the Papists, the Statute of the submission of the Clergy will meet with
cui index expurgatorius, and that monument of Roman Catholic disloyalty be
quite obliterated.

My Lord, I wonder not so much to observe this person of quality to be mistaken
in the state and demeanors of his Roman Catholics in time long past, and
foreign Countries, as that he should aver, That they have not at any time
since been discovered, detected and charged with any imperfection, noxious to
the civol State and Government of England; page ^.
or that they did knit themselves on any account of disturbance here.

Sure (my Lord) this Suppliant supposes the Yorkshire, Oxfordshire, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cornwall, and Devonshire rebellions against King Edward the sixth; the
insurrections, rebellions, commotions, plots and conspiracies against Q.
Elizabeth; the conspiracy and combination in the Gunpowder plot against King
James, the late horrid Irish rebellion against King Charles the first, to have
been mere fictions, and false vanities, or not to have been tranfacted by Roman
Catholics, or to have been without disturbance to the Nations, in true
allegiance to the King. But (my Lord) so zealous in his Clients cause is this
Advocate, that he with confidence proceeds to avouch it, To the eternal glory
of that truly noble and honorable party, that not one Roman Catholic of
consideration, was in Arms against His Majesty or His Father. Of whom those
Armies were constituted, I know not, nor is it a season now to enquire: but
this I know, there were many (who were no fools) that have observed (on grounds
that I cannot avoid) that the Papists did designedly, as well as eventually
appear against, in appearing for his late Majesty, pursuing the plot managed
by Cardinal Barbarino and Curenus; and this I am sure of, that they reap little
honor by this bravado, who contradicts himself, avouching here, not one in
Arms against the King; and yet in his postscript he tells your Lordship, Sir
Arthur Ashton had a commission from the Rebels party; as (contrary to His
Majesty's gracious Act of Oblivion) does denominate them: he will do well to
wind off, by telling your Lordship Sir Arthur was a man of no consideration,
otherwise he will appear a right imp of Antichrist, working, by lies: One he
tells so loudly in his postscript, that all that ever knew the temper of what
he calls that Presbyterian Parliament, must conclude it improbable, yea
impossible, that after their discriminating Protestation, they should extremely
court the Papists to side with them, with a promise or proffer of the perfect
Abolition of the Penal Laws: but wise men silence all debates about the unhappy
war. This Advocate feeling his reason fail, forces it up with rage at the
Consistorian party, as if Cathedral men were clearly Romes children: of that I
have said enough verbum sat sapienti. That we have had changes in Religion
since Henry the eighth his time, is not denied, though blessed be God it has
been generally thought with some violent interruption (by superstition and
schism, two extremes of an happy, hopeful Reformation) for the better. As to
his Memento, we shall not deny it, because we desire it, viz. That they that
are now in gloria Patri, may be hereafter sicut erat in principio: for if Rome
will reurn to its primitive constitution, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline;
as Peter and Paul, left her, I dare undertake she will renounce her Catholic
maternity; and the very contemned Consistorians, will embrace her as a Sister,
for that Superiority and superstition which now swells her, were not (it is
known) at the beginning.

His caution we accept as good, and do desire to continue and live so with all
men in Christian charity, and amity, as to forget that the bonds of religious
unity, are set to be strengthened as that the bonds of humane society be not
dissolved; in pursuit whereof the duty of separation from the man of sin, and
mother of abomination (from which Rome and her Papacy are not acquitted) and
the insociable principles and practices, openly expressed and sadly experienced
in these Kingdoms, does stand against his desired liberty, and render
ineffectual all the instances of Pharisees and Saduces in Jerusalem, or
Zwinglians in Switzerland, or Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany, and the like
(whose necessity or policy prompting the same we will not dispute until he has
cleared the parallel, as well on the part of the indulged, as indulgents; and
yet England will not degenerate from its ancient glory and virtue, whilst
policy (the only plea he makes for their Spanish inquisition cruelty) does
(as himself confesses) teach more to keep fast and firm to one Religion, and
keep out deversities of Religion, and (my Lord let me humbly add) Page 7.
of readmitting that which has been exiled, and Exploded and returns with
principles in consistent to the common security of humane society; My Lord not
only nature but also Scripture does dictate a jus talionis, to Babylon, and
direct us to reward her, as she has rewarded us.

This Advocate having baracado'd the sociability of his Roman Chatholiques;
proceeds to obviate one objection more; which he apprehends, and by his own
fancy forces to look big upon him: against which he fights with the hight of
fury, not only against a Consistorian faction, but also the very constitution
of the Nation: The objection he thus states, It is not for their Religion, that
Priests and their entertainers suffer but plain matter of Treason; unto this in
heat of passion he Queries, how it comes to pass, that it should be treason to
be a Priest? or Capital for a Gentleman to entertain him? and so raging at
renowned Queen Elizabeth, and against the Laws of our Nation, he tells your
Lordship that this is not malum in se but quia prohibitum; but no way denies
or avoideth the objection, but spends this whole paragraph in fretting against
the Law, and Lawmakers: in which I desire your Lordship will please to note.

The arrogance of this Advocate, whose angry words do bespeak him and his party
prompt to blows; (if the time would permit it) he pretends to beg for
liberty, and yet presumes to arraign the very Law (desired to be repealed) at
the bar of his own private fancy; and charge the Law, and Lawmakers, with
irrationallity and injustice, or at least strange severities; and that because
this treason becomes such quia prohibitum; and if legislation did not possess a
power, to make a Capital crime of that Act which is not malum in se: was it my
Lord malum in se, to pray (in sense of Queen Mary's cruel and persecuting
disposition) that the Lord would turn her heart, or take her out of this World,
and yet may I not ask this Advocate how it became Treason so to pray; was it
not quia prohibitum, my Lord, these Roman Catholics, who without Law or
reason can make truth bonum in se, Heresy to be punished with fire, quia est
contra, catholicam (viz) Romanam, though not barred by any law cannot brook a
Treason quia prohibitum; how many of our Laws will be levelled, and laid aside,
if this man's exception may be admitted, and how must legislators give an
account of the nature of every act which occasioneth them to give it that name
of Treason, yet if this advocate had pleased to consider the Law he might have
seen a proditorious appeal, and subjection to, and advancement of a foreign
power and potentate, over and opposite to the Sovereign Majesty of this
Kingdom in every Roman Popish Priest; and there is the Rati^ formalis of the
Treason, and makes it such quia malum in se, as well as quia prohibitum. But
(my Lord) that which sticks in the stomach of these Romen Catholics is, the
power of which their Priests are deprived. He tells your Lordship, The Priests
were wont here in England to sit in the chair of Government, and by their
Oracles and Decrees, the people of this Land were only wont to he directed
both in Chancery, Rolls, and Ecclesiastical Courts. You may see my Lord, to
what pitch the Roman Catholics would screw their desired liberty, that the to
esse of our Laws may depend on their Priests Anathema; the places of trust and
honor be by them possessed, judgment be by them dispensed, and all civil
Offices be at their command, to commend their sociability, by executing the
writ de Hereticus comburendis, on the bare say of a Priest, that this man is an
Heretic. My Lord, all Lawyers that lay away this liberty, are strange and
irrational, and desired to be repealed.

2. My Lord, the little reason of this Corrector of the reason of our Law, is
worth observation: In his blind passion, he supposes and suggesteth it to be
made treason to be a Priest, and manageth all his invectives against the Law,
as if it were against the name Priest; which in its general nature, and vulgar
acceptance denotes, cui administrator of holy things between God and his
people: And so we know Moses consecrated a Priest. Christ was and is a Priest;
our Church call Ministers Priests, and every true Saint is a Priest; and the
Law must needs seem unreasonable, that shall make it Treason for a man to be a
Priest, in so large a sense as he by an ignoratio Elenchi renders it; but could
his heat have admitted him to have cast an eye on the Statute, he would have
found the Traitors to have been Jesuits, Seminary Priests, or other Priests,
made or ordained out of the Realm, or in the Realm, by any power, authority, or
jurisdiction, derived, challenged or pretended from the sea of Rome; And so the
Treason to consist not in their being simple Priests, but in their being Roman
Priests, subjected to, and advancing a Foreign Power and Authority above their
natural Prince: He may, my Lord, on enquiry, find Priests, yea Popish Priests,
when converted from the Papacy, have enjoyed the liberty of Subjects, and not
been judged Traitors, though he profoundly fancieth the Treason to be in the
general appellation; and as such, scolds at the Law as unreasonable, and so
runs into the third misdemeanor to be observed; (viz.)

3. His in^olency, in presuming to reproach the renowned Queen Elizabeth, as
illegitimate, and an usurper of the Crown: and so charging these Laws to have
been the products of her fears and jealousies against Mary Queen of Scots, whom
he determined to have been the just heir of the Crown: all which with a right
Roman Catholic spirit, he bottometh on the Popes declaring her illegitimate:
it is indeed true, he does mention our own Acts of Parliaments, which did
declare her such; but, my Lord, his foundation is the Popes Sentence and
Censure; otherwise his argument were the same against Queen Mary, as against
Queen Elizabeth, who also was declared illegitimate; and he would have seen
Acts of Parliament appropriating the Crown to her, as well as they had sometime
taken it from her. My Lord, come not the the Roman Catholics with a very
submissive spirit to supplicate their liberty, thus to reproach our Princes and
Laws, and so demanding the repeal of Penal Laws against themselves, as a matter
due and just: But if, my Lord, tha jealousies of Queen Elizabeth as an Usurper,
were the only reason and cause of those Statutes, how was it that these laws
did not cease with their cause, after King James (right heir according to this
Advocates account) come to the Crown? These laws were not only continued, but
renewed and rendered more severe, as the Catholic insociability (manifested by
their bloody and barbarous conspiracies against him, whom their Pope could not
declare illegitimate) had constrained.

My Lord, I have made bold to confider the Argumentation of this Advocate, for
the toleration of Roman Catholics: The remaining part of his Book is but a
Rhetorical swada, in which there are many words and sentences obnoxious to
exception: but knowing that your Lordship is more judicious then to be courted
by words without weight, I will not trouble your Lordship with any observation
of them; but humbly commit the cause to your grand and pious consideration, not
doubting but your zeal to the Protestant Religion, the interest of our Nation,
honor of our King, and glory of our Church (almost ruined by Scismaticks, on a
suspicion that it would strike hands with Roman Catholics) will prove more
fervent, then to be extinguished or abated by the water of these false
suggestions, furious expostulations, or fair spoken persuasions; and that your
Lordship will never engage your self, to indulge an interest directly contrary
to our Laws, Church, Religion, and Scripture duty: In which confidence I
commend your Lordship unto the Grace that is able, and will establish you to
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and rest,

My Lord, Your Lordsships most devoted humble Servant, C. D.
July 8. 1661.
FINIS.

