THE Declaration and Manifesto OF THE PROTESTANTS OF THE VALLEYS of PIEDMONT,
CALLED THE VAUDOIS, TO ALL Christian PRINCES and STATES, OF THE REASONS of
their taking up ARMS just now against the Duke of SAVOY.

And why they have put themselves under the Protection of WILLIAM, King of
Great Britain, and of the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland.

Done out of High Dutch.

Licensed February the 8th. 1689/90.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleet Street, 1690.

TO ALL Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States, THE Remonstrance and
Declarations OF US The Native and Ancient Inhabitants of the Valleys of
Lucerne, Pierouse, and St. Martin, commonly called the Valleys of Piedmont,
Greeting.
IT is not unknown to all Europe, That of Time out of Mind, we and our
Ancestors have been in the uninterrupted Possession of the aforesaid Valleys,
and of the same Religion which we profess at this very day, without any
considerable Alteration either in Doctrine or Discipline: And that under the
Successive Reigns of the Princes of Piedmont and Pignerol: And that at length
about Four Hundred Years ago, upon the failing of the Princes of that Family,
we put our selves under the Dominion of the House of Savoy, upon certain
Conditions and Articles then agreed on for Security of our Religion and
Liberties.

Under which Family of Savoy our Ancestors lived in the greatest Peace and Ease
for two Ages and more, till by the unhappy Counsels of some about our Princes,
we were put to great Severities in the last Age, on the Account of Religion;
notwithstanding whereof, Their Royal Highnesses were pleased at several times,
and upon several occasions, to Ratify our Rights and Privileges, and to grant
us full and free Liberty in the Exercise of our Religion; and particularly in
the Years 1561, 1602, 1603, and in the Year 1620. All which were Formally and
Solemnly Ratified and Enrolled in the Chamber of Turin, and declared to be
Irrevocable, Inviolable, and Perpetual Laws: And the Execution thereof was
Ordained by several Decrees of the said Chamber, and by the Senate of Turin, in
the years 1638, 1649, 1654, and 1655.

In which year 1655, the Council de Propaganda fide, settled at Turin some years
before, taking the Occasion of the Minority of Charles Emanuel, then Duke of
Savoy, caused to be Published an Edict, Ordering all the Inhabitants of the
Valleys to quit them within three days, and to retire to the Mountains, under
the pain of Death, in case they did not Renounce and Abjure their Religion they
had been Educated in. And albeit the said Inhabitants did really Obey this
Unjust Order, as much as the shortness of time granted them would allow, by
making ready to Remove, yet upon it fell out that Horrid and Execrable
Massacre, whereof all Europe has to this day an Abhorrence. But at length, by
the Intercession of several Christian Princes and States with the then Duke of
Savoy, and the Duchess, then Regent, the said Cruel Edict of putting us all to
the edge of the Sword, was recalled, and a new Confirmation given Us as to Our
whole Liberties, and the free Exercise of our Religion, upon the 9th of August
1655. which was thereafter enrolled in the Senate and Chamber of Turin.

Notwithstanding this Confirmation of our Privileges, several bad Ministers
did in many particulars infringe it by Oppressions and designed stretches of
Law; and at last, in the Year 1663, they re-acted the same Tragedies upon Us,
as they had done in the Year 1655. At which time, at the intercession of the
same Christian Princes, we obtained another Solemn, Irrevocable, and Perpetual
Patent in the Month of February 1664, likewise Ratified in the Senate and
Chamber of Turin.

Since which time, We, the Inhabitants of the Valleys, lived in great Peace,
and did many Remarkable and Important Services to the late Duke of Savoy,
Father to his present Royal Highness, and to his Royal Highness himself, both
in the War against the State and Republic of Genoa in the Year 1672. and
against the Banditti in Mondovi in the Year 1681, and 1684. As was acknowledged
by his Royal Highness in his Letters written to Us on that Occasion, which was
also Enrolled in the Chamber of Accounts of Turin.

Thus We rested secure of our own Innocence, and of the many reiterated
Assurances of his Royal Highnesses Favor to and Protection of Us, till the
31st. day of January 1685. At which time, without any imaginable Provocation on
our part, there was published in the Valleys an Edict of his Royal Highness the
Duke of Savoy, Prohibiting the Exercise of our Religion upon pain of Death, and
Confiscation of Movables, ordering all our Churches to be immediately
Demolished, all our Ministers to be Banished, all our Children to be Educated
and Baptized in the Roman Catholic Religion.

This Dreadful Edict was received among Us with the greatest Astonishment, and
in a moment seemed to disanimate Us altogether.

But at length we so far recovered our selves from our Consternation, as to
fall upon the ordinary means we had many times tried before; And considering
that it was more the effect of bad Counsel, than from the Natural Inclinations
of his Royal Highness himself, of whose good Intentions toward Us we had so
many Proofs: We had Recourse to Supplications, and presented his Royal Highness
four several Petitions for recalling this Bloody Order; and at the same time
made our Address to the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland, to Intercede with
his Royal Highness on our behalf.

Whereupon in an Assembly of the said Cantons, held at Baden in the Month of
February 1686. they dispatched Ambassadors to his Royal Highness at Turin, to
solicit the Revocation of that Edict against Us; And all the Answer they could
obtain, was, That It was not in his power to recall the Edict, because his
Royal Highness had past his Word to the Most Christian King already to the
contrary. Whereupon the Ambassadors of the Evangelick Cantons, seeing no other
way at present to save Us, proposed to the Court of Turin, That We, the
Inhabitants of the Valleys, might have leave betwixt that and a fixed time, to
depart to any other Country, with our Families and Goods, under the Duke of
Savoy's Safe Conduct. And to this end, the said Ambassadors procured leave from
his Royal Highness to allow certain Deputies of Ours to come to Turin, in order
to concert and agree on the Articles.

But in the mean time that we were meeting in an Assembly at Angr^gne about
this Affair, came out a Second Order from his Royal Highness, unknown to the
said Ambassadors, bearing Date Ninth of April 1686, for an Amnesty to the
Inhabitants of the Valleys, upon Condition they immediately remove out of his
Royal Highnesses Countries, with their Families and Goods, But the Order so
clogged and full of Limitations and Restrictions, that it was palpable to every
body, that it was nothing but a Snare to entrap Us, and to delude the
Solicitations of the Ambassadors of the Evangelick Cantons: For according to
the Terms of this Order, We were to Remove in so few days, to leave such and
such things behind us; we were to be separated in small Troops, so many miles
from one another, That we expected to be just so treated as in the Massacre in
the Year 1655. Upon which sad Juncture, we resolved to stand to our own
Innocent and Lawful Defense, till we might appease by Foreign Intercessions the
Wrath of the Duke of Savoy, and obtain for our selves a lasting Peace.

In perseverance of this Resolution, It Is known sufficiently to all the World,
what dreadful Afflictions, Murders, Rapes, Tortures, and all manner of
Barbarities we suffered by an Army of Savoy on the one hand, and of France on
the other, till we were reduced to a poor handful of starved and infirm
Creatures, whereof the most of them perished in the Mountains for Hunger. And
at last, the miserable remainder; after our Enemies had sufficiently glutted
their Rage with the Blood of our Brethren, were sent away to Geneva and
Switzerland in the most deplorable Condition that ever was seen in the World:
Many of Us dying in the Road through Cold and Sickness. Since which time we
have been forced to wander in strange Countries, where we have been against our
wills burthensom to the Inhabitants, who have showed Us a Christian Sympathy
and Compassion.

We, the Inhabitants of the foresaid Valleys, Considering that by no Laws of
God, or just Constitutions of Men, we can be justly thrown out of our Native
Country, and debarred from the Exercise of our Ancient Religion, which both the
one and the other, we and our Fathers have enjoyed and possessed through a
great many Ages. And Considering that his Royal Highness and his Predecessors
have at several times Ratified to Us and our Ancestors, the Liberties of our
Country, the Property of our Goods, and the free Exercise of our Religion: And
that the said Ratifications were declared to be Irrevocable and Perpetual Laws.
And likewise Considering, That We, the said Inhabitants of the said Valleys,
are persuaded in our Consciences, That it is our Duty to Vindicate and Assert
our Religion and Properties with our Sword, they having been granted to Us upon
just grounds and motives by our Princes. We therefore, trusting in the
Protection, Help, and Assistance of the Almighty God, the Lord of Hosts, do
Declare and make known to all Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Free
States, That we resolve to stand by, Vindicate, and Maintain our Lives,
Religion, Liberties, and Properties with open Force, and in a Defensive way;
and not to lay down our Arms, till we have procured to our selves the free and
peaceable Possession of our Country, Goods, Lives, Religion, and Liberties, in
the same manner as we enjoyed them before the Year 1684; and as is contained in
all the Ratifications granted to Us and our Ancestors abovementioned.
Declaring, That We by this our most warrantable and just Defense intend not to
diminish, detract from, or lay aside any of the just and lawful Prerogatives,
Preheminencies, Customs, Jurisdictions, or Royalties due to His Royal Highness
and his Successors, from Us and our Successors; But that we are willing, and
shall ever pay his said Royal Highness and his Successors all due Allegiance
and Homage, which can consist with the free Liberty of our Religion; and with
the peaceable Enjoyment of our Goods, Liberties, and Properties.

And We, the said Inhabitants of the said Valleys, do hereby in the Bowels of
Jesus Christ our common Savior, Obtest, Require, and Beg all Christian
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Free-States, that they would Compassionate our
Condition, and Intercede with His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, for the
Restoring to Us the Rights, Properties, and Liberties that have been so cruelly
and unjustly ravished from Us; and that they would procure to Us a firm and
lasting Peace, that we may no more be exposed to such horrid Barbarities and
Distresses for the Religion we derive from our Fathers, through the Succession
of a great many past Ages.

And We, the said Inhabitants of the said Valleys, do hereby Declare, That We,
in execution of this so just a Resolution of Vindicating our Religion and
Liberties by Arms, have at this time entered into the said Valley of St. Martin,
to take Possession thereof as a part of our Native Country, out of which we
were unjustly driven; and are resolved, through the Blessing and Favor of
Almighty God, to keep it, and to take Possession, as soon as is possible, of
the remanent Valleys and Territories, which justly belong to Us by an
immemorial Right; Resolving to keep the same without Prejudice to the just
Prerogatives, Preheminencies, Customs, Jurisdictions, or Royalties, in or
concerning the said Valleys, due to His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, and
his Successors, as Prince of Piedmont, when ever a firm and lasting Peace shall
be granted to Us.

And lastly, We, the said Inhabitants of the said Valleys of Piedmont, do
Declare to all Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States, That we have,
and do hereby put our selves under the Protection and Patronage of the most
Serene Prince William, King of Great Britain, and of the Illustrious and Noble
the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland; hoping and trusting in their Assistance
and good Offices, as also in the Assistance and good Offices of all other
Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Free States, until there be a firm and
lasting Peace obtained for Us from his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, or his
Successors, and Ratified in the Senate and Chamber of Accounts of Turin.

All which things abovementioned, We hereby make known to all Christian
Princes and People, by this our Solemn Declaration, given at our Camp at
Villesech^, in the Valley of St. Martin, this Sixth day of December, 1689.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE History of the Late Revolution in England, with the Causes and Means by
which it was Accomplished. Together with the Settlement thereof under Their
Most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in this present Parliament.

Of the French Monarchy, and Absolute Power. And also a Treatise of the Three
States, and their Power. Deduced from the most Authentic Histories, for above
1200 Years. Both Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near
Temple Bar in Fleet Street, 1689.


