A Present Remedy FOR THE POOR: OR, The most probable Means to provide well for
the Poor of the Nation; to free us in time from paying the Poors Rates; and
deliver us now from the public Nuisance of Beggars.

Humbly submitted to the Wisdom of the next Sessions of Parliament.

LONDON; Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M.DCC. Price 3 d.

A Present REMEDY FOR THE POOR.
HIS Majesty's Wisdom, Care, and Goodness in recommending this public
Grievance to the Sages of our Nation in the last Sessions of Parliament,
deserves the universal Acknowledgment and Thanks of the whole Kingdom. No
sooner was his Mind at liberty from the perplexing Thoughts and heavy Burden of
a tedious War, but he applied it to the study of promoting the Peace of his
People, by advising the redress of a known Evil, in these words: I think it
would be happy if some effectual Expedient could be found for employing the
Poor, which might tend to the great Increase of our Manufactures, as well as
remove a heavy Burden from the People. By this and many other Instances we may
clearly see our Happiness in the enjoyment of so excellent, valiant, wise, and
publick-spirited a Prince, under whose Government and Conduct we may promise to
our selves a lasting Quiet at home, and a flourishing Trade abroad: We may
promise to our selves all the Blessings of a happy People, if we could be as
unanimous and diligent in observing our Duties and Obligations, as he is
vigilant and careful in minding us, and performing all that is required from
him in that high Station of Honor and Trust, where a divine and savourable
Providence to us, our Religion and Nation, has placed him. But I intend not
here to enlarge upon the deserved Praises of our King, whom Europe and the
whole World admires for his extraordinary Abilities both in Peace and War; and
who with much more Reason and Justice might claim the glorious Surname of
GREAT, for having saved three Kingdoms from utter Ruin, than the Vanity of
others has assumed it, for having destroyed multitudes of Mankind. My business
in these Lines is, to lay open to the wise Governors of our Nation this great
Grievance of the Poor, which his Majesty recommended to the Consideration of
the last Parliament, and which hitherto continues without Redress. A growing
Grievance that is as disgraceful to our wise and reformed Nation, as it is
troublesome to us all, tho we our selves are exempted from the smart of
Poverty. I shall also venture to offer, with all submission to the Wisdom of
the Government, the most probable, or perhaps the only means likely to succeed
to remedy this public Nuisance, and what Advantages we may in time procure to
our selves and Nation by taking the Method I propose.

I need not tell you that Nature, as well as Christianity, calls upon us to
commiserate the Wants and Sufferings of our own kind; and we are taught by the
Birds of the Air, to supply out of our Abundance the Necessities of our own
Species. That Bird is most remarkable, mentioned by the Royal Prophet, Psalm.
104.17. and named by him Chasidah, the merciful Bird, because it is an
excellent Example among natural Beings, to recommend Charity and Liberality:
For as it is reported, the young will not only fetch Food for the old, but bear
them upon their Wings, when helpless. And of the Eagle it is said, That it is
so noble, as to call the rest of the Birds round about to partake of that
Plenty that Providence vouchsafes it. However, Reason can tell us that our wise
Benefactor having created the World, and the Blessings of it, for the general
use of Mankind; If his Providence appears partial in the distribution of its
Gifts, it is not with a design that we should ingross them to our selves, but
learn to imitate our good God, by imparting them to others, who are in want.
Stewards therefore we are, and not Proprietors of our Enjoyments; and the
intent of our liberal Maker is, that we should convey what we have received
from his bountiful Hand, to such Objects of Charity as we meet with in our
mortal Race; and the more liberal our God is to us, the more free we ought to
be to them. But the whole Body of our Religion, as it is the Product of pure
Grace, and a divine Charity, calls upon us, and injoyns us with many Promises
to encourage our Liberalities to the Poor and Needy, and frequently to extend
our Charity answerable to the heavenly Bounty. Nay, all our expectations of
Forgiveness of Sins, of the Mercies of our Redeemer, and of the future Rewards,
depend in some measure upon our Favor and Bounty to the poor Members of
Christ's mystical Body, whose Indigency a wise Providence lays daily before our
eyes, that we may by their Assistance and Relief lay up for our selves a good
foundation for a future State, and make our selves Friends, that is, oblige God
their Redeemer, and the holy Angels their Guardian-Spirits, to lend us also in
requital their assisting hand in times of want and danger. But I hope I need
not enlarge upon this Exhortation to Charity. Our Nation has always been noted
for Liberality to Foreigners in distress, and it is not probable it will be less
bountiful to its own Natives. How many excellent Laws have been made for that
purpose, for the continual Relief of the Indigent in every Precinct. I may say
that the Charity of the Nation has proceed in these latter days to an excess;
insomuch that many Poor trusting to it, wholly neglect the other means
appointed and required by God and Reason to recruit their Wants. It belongs
therefore to Wisdom, and our Christian Prudence, to direct, as well as to
encourage our Charity to the Poor, and pitch upon a right Method to relieve
their Necessities; such a Method as may be agreeable with the state and
condition of the Nation, and may encourage Trade, the chief Source of Plenty.

Poverty is a universal Cry and Complaint both in City and Country. Diverse
Families have bin brought into distress by the Evils and Mischiefs of the
Times, the Casualties of War, and several other human Accidents. And like the
miserable Cripple of the Pool of Bethesda, Poverty is of it self helpless, not
able to move without the assistance of others. And tho it sharpens Industry to
contrive new Inventions, it is in such Cases as when it is not altogether
despirited by the want of all Necessaries, but has a convenient supply of
means and life to stir and act. Herein Charity is the more obliged to discover
it self, because it is to help such as are both willing, and strive to help
themselves out of the Calamity; and in this case all its Proceedings and
Liberalities are crowned and rewarded with success, and a double Blessing.

Indeed Poverty in it self is an Evil of that magnitude, that we need no
artificial Glass to increase and enlarge it to our Eye. It is attended by so
many bad Circumstances, that may easily move our Compassion, and oblige
rational Beings to endeavor to remove it both from the public Society, as
well as from our selves. Were there nothing else but the Clamors and mournful
Outcries of the Poor that daily fill our Ears, and the sense of their urging
Necessities, and of their Families; were there nothing but their Nakedness and
Misery, this would be sufficient to render the public Poverty grievous to us
as well as to them. But it is a grand and chief Cause of many other Mischiefs
among us.

First, it is the Cause of many Robberies, House-breakings, Murders, and other
Villainies, to which Poverty prompts Persons who are in want, and by that means
renders our living and dealings in City and Country the more unsafe. And I am
persuaded that a great many who are executed every Sessions and Assizes, would
never have committed such Wickedness, if Poverty had not driven them to such
abominable Actions.

It is the Cause of Irreligion, and Ignorance of our Duty; for such as are
desperately poor, seldom or never mind instruction, nor the study of Religion:
they are brought up as Heathens, and the want of Necessaries takes up all their
thoughts how to provide Bread; so that they have no time to think upon God or
Eternity, nor the way that leads thither. It drives many to the necessity of
begging. It incourages Idleness, and makes several whose strength and abilities
might render them useful Members of the Society, to be not only useless, but
pernicious and mischievous. I need not reckon the other many Evils that Poverty
and Begging brings upon us. The number of Beggars increases daily, our Streets
swarm with this kind of People, and their boldness and impudence is such, that
they often beat at our Doors, stop Persons in the ways, and are ready to load
us with Curses and Imprecations, if their Desires be not speedily answered.
Besides, it is reported of the common Beggars, that they have their Meetings
and Rendevouz, where what they have got by their lazy Trade, they can spend
freely in Debauchery, Drunkenness, and other Sins. By this means the Charity of
good People is strangely misapplied, to the dishonor of God, and the disgrace
of Religion among us; and these ordinary Beggars hinder us from regulating and
disposing of our Charity upon the right Objects.

For the remedying of this Evil and its woeful Consequences, it is needful to
employ our Poor according to the ancient and known Laws of the Government, and
not only to put in execution the old, but to make such new as may stop the
increase of this begging Trade. It is needful that our wise Governors would
consider how to dispose of these poor People, and confine them to Workhouses,
where they may be furnished with necessary Tools, and obliged to get their
living in a lawful way. But the great difficulty is how to proceed in the
disposing of such vast numbers of both Sexes and of all Ages, and how to raise
a Fund to supply the wants of so many thousands.

I answer, That there is every year a million of Money collected in this Kingdom
from all Parishes for the relief of their Poor; and if this were rightly
applied to the employing, instead of buying them present Necessaries, it would
be sufficient not only to provide them Tools and other things needful to keep
them at work, but that, together with the Product and Advantage of their Work,
would answer all their Necessities, and supply all their Wants. But the
Difficulty is, how and in what manner to proceed. I am not ignorant, but know
perfectly well what Methods are observed in Holland and France; where it is of
late days that Beggars, unless they belong to Religious Houses, are not
suffered; and all Persons never so mean are provided for, without the gathering
of such vast Rates as among us. If in laying down the best means, as I
conceive, to provide for our English Poor, I vary from foreign Methods in some
things, it is because our Constitution and Government differs much from theirs,
and the Evil is greater among us than it was among them, and therefore requires
a Remedy answerable.

First, as it is needful to employ our Poor, and to set them to work, there is
a necessity that they should be confined to a certain House where they may have
all Conveniences for Life and Imploiment. The Workhouses that are already
built, are not so convenient as may be contrived for such a vast number of Poor
as are among us. I offer therefore to give the Model of such a House as shall
not be for State, nor to show the Grandeur of our Nation, but shall be for Use,
and capacious enough to contain and employ two thousand Persons in daily Labor.
Let such a House be erected near the City of London, as a Model for all the
rest; I suppose that three such Houses will be sufficient to contain all the
Poor of this great City and Westminster. And in imitation of the Metropolis,
let all other Cities erect for themselves such convenient Workhouses for all
sorts of Trades, and to employ and improve the Growth of the Country: for
without such a Confinement, lazy People, used to begging, will not take any
pains.

This House must be under the Command of a Governor, Deputy Governor, and
other inferior Officers, chosen in time from the poor People, who are to be
kept in hopes of rising to Honor and Authority in the House, by their
Industry, Diligence, and other good Behavior.

The Governor and Deputy Governor are to be chosen first by the Justices, and
Magistrates of every County; and the other inferior Officers by the Governor
and Consent of the House.

Let the Parishes give in the number of the Poor who have constant relief, when
the Houses are built. Let them send them that are chargeable, with their whole
Families to such Houses, being directed by the Justices, or Persons appointed
by Authority, what Parishes are to agree to put their Poor together; the
numbers of such Poor to be in every House, upwards of a thousand, and not
exceeding two thousand or thereabouts.

The Governor's Office shall be to buy Necessaries, to provide Wool, Flax, and
other Commodities; to take charge of the People; to see that every one labors;
to receive and take an account of their Work when done; to pay them their
Wages; to be answerable for all things; to have Authority in his House as a
Justice of Peace, and to punish with the consent of other Officers all
Misdemeanors, not injuring neither Life nor Limb.

Let there be in every such Workhouse a Chaplain, a Reader who is to be a
Schoolmaster, a Physician who is to be a Doctor, Apothecary and Surgeon, a
Butcher to buy and provide Food, a Brewer, Baker, and Cooks convenient: Some of
which may be taken out of the poor People.

The House is to be built in such a manner upon waste Ground, or Common, or
other convenient place, with necessary Gardens belonging to it, where all
Trades are to be distinct, with the Spinning-rooms, Infirmary for Maimed and
Cripples, for Old and unable to work, and a Nursery for Bastards and Orphans;
with a Chapel of an oval Figure, with Galleries, round Theatrewise; the Pulpit
and Desk near the middle: the Model I offer to give, able to contain greater
numbers than any of our Churches in a lesser Compass: The Ministers and School
masters Lodgings at one end, the Apothecaries at the other. By this means care
will be taken both of their Souls and Bodies.

All the Poor to be lodged at the discretion of the Governor, to be provided
at the public Charge, with Clothes all of one color in every House; Linen,
Tools, Beds and Beddings, with other Conveniences. And they are to fetch from
the Governor or his Deputy, Wool, Flax, Hemp, Iron, Leather, etc. and when
returned, to be allowed as other Masters give, or rather more. So that unless
such as are able to work employ themselves, they are not to eat.

Laws are to be prescribed to every House, which they must religiously observe;
such Laws as are agreeable with our holy Religion, the Laws of the Land, and
the good and peace of such Societies. And such as are not able to work, to be
provided for; but what every one can do, he is to be directed by the
Governors, and furnished with Materials accordingly; for the Governor is to
have an oversight over all the Offices of his House, to advise, direct,
encourage every one to do his Duty.

And for the better managing of a Trade, it is convenient, that four or more
Merchants in London should associat to furnish and take off such Commodities
and Manufactures as are there made, and in the Custody of the Governors in
their several Warehouses in the said Great House; and that these Merchants
should have their Correspondents in several Parts of England to buy off such
Manufactures made, some for ready Money, some upon trust, as they can agree, and
vent the same abroad, and have Returns.

The Governors are to keep an account of all such Moneys received and paid, and
to whom; what Benefit is made of the Work, and to be answerable to the Justices
at their Sessions.

The Governors shall receive from each Parish, weekly or monthly, what each
Parish was wont to pay to their several Poor for some years, until a stock of
Money can be raised; and to prevent Frauds, severe Penalties must be imposed
upon Offenders, and an account must be published and printed yearly, that the
Nation may see that there is no cozenage.

Let every Governor employ some in making of Sails, Ropes, Nets, and other
things for Shipping and Fishing; and when they have Youths able and willing for
the Seas, let them out of the public Stock buy one or more Boats, or
convenient Busses or Vessels at Sea, to belong to every House; and that all the
Fish taken shall be brought thither, if not too far from the Seas, and disposed
of at the Governor's Discretion, allowing a Subsistence and Salary to their
Agents. By this means the Shipping and Fishing Trade will be encouraged.

And if at any time poor Families have no Work, who belong not to these Houses,
there they shall be furnished with Wool, Hemp, etc. and other Materials for
them and their Families. So that these Houses may employ many more than are
shut within the Walls.

If any are sturdy, unruly, or refuse to work, or run away, a course may be
taken to remedy that and other accidents. A severe Law must be made to punish
Officers of Parishes that neglect to carry them back, and others that offer to
give them any relief; and such Penalties and Fines are to be returned and paid
in to the Governors of such Houses, together with the Persons of such Runaways.
No maintenance is to be allowed them, but within the House, and that
proportioned to their deservings. If they run away again, let them be whipped
publicly, and be carried back as often as they shall thus escape.

Now if any poor Families be not able to subsist by reason of Children, and
their Parents cannot well be spared from the Neighborhood, because of their
handy work, let the eldest of their Children be sent to these Houses; first
taught to read, write, and cipher, and to be put to such Trades and Masters in
these Houses as may teach them their Craft and Skill. So that the Officers of
every Parish shall not need to give any weekly allowance to such poor Parents;
and in a little time, when a considerable Fund may be raised by such Trade and
Working, no Poors-Rates will be any more gathered in the Nation.

If any sturdy Beggars be incorrigible, let the Governors, with the consent of
the Justices at the public Sessions, have Power to transport such unruly
Persons beyond Sea, if they be young and fit for Traveling to our Western
Plantations, or to send them to severer Houses to a straiter Confinement, there
to be dealt with according to Law, till they shall resolve to amend.

Let every such House have convenient Privileges granted to it to encourage the
Poor to be industrious. Let their inferior Officers be all annually chosen by
themselves, with the assistance of the Governor and his Deputy, who alone must
be appointed by the Government.

Let the Commodities and Manufactures made in such Houses be freed from
Customs, or pay not so much as others when exported out of the Land, for a
limited time.

Let it be in the Power of the Governors of such Houses near Seaport-Towns, and
other places, with the consent of such Persons of their Societies, as will of
their own accord, to plant in the West- Indies and such Plantations, to belong
to the Governors and their Houses, and to the Parties so sent, as they shall
agree. By which means they may vent a great many of their Manufactures made in
their Workhouses, and have Returns in Sugars, Tobacco, etc.

Let there be a Prebendary or two belong to each House, or a Benefice or
spiritual Living adjoining, for the encouragement of the Minister and
Schoolmaster, and let that be to them instead of a Salary to maintain them.
Let some other public Encouragement or Income be appointed for the Physician
to encourage him also.

Let every Child within the House be first taught to read, write cipher, and
other necessary Learning, with the Principles of true Religion, by the Minister
and his Reader, or Schoolmaster: and let constant Catechizing, and expounding
upon the Catechism in a familiar way, be practiced every holy day and Sunday in
the afternoon; and Prayers twice a week on the working days, or oftener if it be
convenient. And let all within the House come or be brought to the Divine
Service, at least every Sabbath Day, if Sickness hinders not.

Let all within the House live in a loving and courteous manner, abstaining
from Swearing, Cursing Scolding, or opprobrious Language, according to the Laws
there to be observed. And let them buy their Necessaries of one another, that
their Money may there circulate within themselves, and encourage their Industry
and Labor.

And for a greater encouragement to such charitable Houses, let the Governor of
his Deputy, and other Officers, with the Approbation of the Justices of the
County, have Power to buy Lands, Tenements, and other Rents, which may belong
to such Houses for ever, and to receive the benefit of any Gifts or Legacies,
etc. which religious Persons shall bestow upon them for the Repair of their
Houses, and the greater encouragement of the Poor.

Now for the maintenance of such Governors and Deputy-Governors, without taking
any thing from the public Moneys, I offer to lay down an easy and practicable
Method, which I doubt not but will be approved of. And besides, when the Trade
shall grow considerable in these Houses, let them have but the ordinary Fees of
Factors and Agents beyond Sea, or at home, that will greatly increase their
first Incomes, and cause them to live with Splendour and Plenty, without
diminishing any thing from the Poors Money, or the Public Stock.

And for the entire Suppression of the begging Trade, let it be lawful for all
poor Prisoners, who have nothing to subsist upon but Charity, to turn
themselves over to these Workhouses to get their living; and what they can
spare out of their Work, let it be employed to pay their Creditors, as the
Wisdom of the Nation shall think fit.

But how shall such Houses be erected, and who shall pay for the same?

I answer, Several easy and practicable Means may be proposed, for the raising
sufficient Sums of Money for the speedy building of Houses.

First let a Collection be made by way of a Brief in every County for the
benefit of that County; and the Moneys so collected be returned into the hands
of the Sheriff, or his Deputy, to pay off the Workmen and buy Materials.

Let all Commutations for Whoredom and Bastardy, be likewise converted to this
public Use, and the Money to remain in the hands of the Chancellor or Official
for this purpose, to be commanded from thence by the order of the Government.
And let a strict Inquiry be made, and all Persons guilty be obliged either to
fine or do penance. Truly this Money can never be better employed; for I have
seen in the dispensing Deeds of the Ecclesiastical Courts, that it is to be
employed, Ad usum Pauperum, and alios pios usus: To the use of the Poor, and
other religious Uses.

Let all Prebendaries and Dignities of the Church, which shall be hereafter
bestowed, pay a year or two years Rent, or a certain Proportion, to be charged
at the Discretion of our Parliament, and let this continue until such time as
these Houses so erected be paid for. And let all Benefices above 100 l. per
annum pay the Overplus into the Bishops hands, or his Receiver, for two years
after Induction. And let the Clerk oblige himself by Bond, or be forced by Law
to pay the same, and let him be instituted and inducted upon that condition.

Let all such as now enjoy great Benefices, multiplicity of Prebendaries and
other Pluralities, be charged to this pious Work as the Wisdom of our
Parliament shall think fit. But all Deans, Canons, Prebendaries, and Sine
Cures, ought in reason to contribute: For these Estates were first granted by
the religious Donors, ad perpetuam Eleemosynam; not only for the encouragement
of Learning, for the maintenance of the Service of God, for a more splendid
Government of the Church, but for the Benefit and Comfort of the Poor in every
County, where they had no Laws then to gather Taxes for their relief.

Let also some certain Fines to be imposed by the Government, at the Assizes
and Sessions, and in Courts of Judicature, upon Offenders, be appropriated to
the Building of these convenient Houses in the several Counties where the
Offenses were committed.

And for a more effectual carrying on of this good Work, let four or more
Persons be appointed as public Commissioners, to push it on and bring it to
perfection. Let them divide the Nation between them, and visit every County,
and there advise with the Justices for convenient places to erect such
Workhouse for the Poor. Let them be authorized by the Government to take waste
Ground, to agree with the Proprietors and Workmen, and to appoint, with the
consent of the Justices, Governors and Deputy-Governors, to oversee the
Workmen, and hasten the Building, according to the first Pattern to be erected
near the City of London. And let them make such Regulations as shall be
convenient. And let them order a stock of Hemp, and other Commodities and
Moneys to be delivered and paid to the Governors of the Poor out of the Moneys
collected in each County. And for their encouragement, let such Persons have
some public Office of Profit or Advantage bestowed upon them to encourage
them, and defray their Charges, that what they do may be gratis in relation to
the Poor, or their Stock, and nothing may be diminished out of it, but wholly
spent for the relief and employment of such poor Persons whose whole Families,
may be admitted, and all put to work according to their several Abilities and
Ages.

Some other easy Methods may be contrived to raise Money for the building of
these Houses, which may not in any wise burden the Commonalty of the Nation;
For instance, let all great Offices in Law, and other profitable imploys in
Church and State, be charged with the payment of some Proportion of such large
Revenues for this public Good. I doubt not but those worthy Gentlemen whom God
has blessed with plentiful Estates either in Church, Law, or Government, will
not grudg to allow something out of their abundance to this pious Work, for the
easement of their Neighbors and themselves.

If these Proposals may be accepted, and the Methods here laid down be found
agreeing with the Wisdom of our Governors, as it is both rational, just, and
feasible; I doubt not but to show another Expedient for the raising of a
considerable Sum of Money, with the general Applause of the whole Nation, if any
of these former Methods displease the Humor or Stinginess of such as are
desired to contribute; or if the Fund so raised be not sufficient to complete
this great Work; that is, to erect the Workhouses, and buy in to them a
sufficient Stock of the Growth of the Country, as may employ all the idle and
lazy Poor of the Nation. Let there be an inquiry made into two or three grand
Abuses in the Nation, and such as are found guilty, be deprived of their unjust
gain* that is, what they for some years have usurped and enjoyed contrary to
the known Laws of the Land, and be obliged to quit and to refund for two or
three years back what they have thus taken: I dare be bold to promise a
considerable Sum either into the King's Exchequer, or for the carrying on this
Work.

And for the City of London, for which I have always had a particular
Affection, having received there my first Education; as the Poor in the
adjacent parts thereabouts are more numerous than in any other part, and the
number of Beggars, and the Evil greater, so larger Sums of Money are required
for the erecting these necessary Workhouses. I suppose no less than three may
be required in and about this large City, for the containing of all the poor
Families. One in the City and Liberties, another about Spittle-fields, or
toward Wapping, and another for Westminster and that part. I offer to the
worthy and honorable Governors of this noble City, if they shall please to
listen to my Proposals, to show them an easy Method to raise Money for the time
to come, without burdening their Neighbors, sufficient for the building and
preparing all these Workhouses, and to give my pains freely in the management
and carrying on of this Work, without expectation of any other Reward but the
Honor and great satisfaction of seeing it brought to perfection.

I understand that the religious Governors of this City, empowered by Law, have
taken Methods already to employ their Poor, have raised Money, hired large
Houses in Bishopsgate-street, and are preparing them for their Reception, and
have brought this Business to a tolerable perfection, within their
Jurisdiction. Let them in prosccution of their judicious Endeavors, appoint
Officers to such a number as they can well manage. Let a Care be taken of
Religion among the Poor, that we may expect a greater Blessing upon the public
Proceedings; and let an Act of Parliament be desired, to confirm and grant such
things as shall be thought necessary for the carrying on of this pious Work.
And let there be a Stock of all Commodities growing in our Country be provided,
to employ such Poor as are within and without the House. I doubt not but to see
this business completed to the Satisfaction of all the Inhabitants whoin a
short time will rejoice to see their Money so well employed.

I entreat them therefore to consider, and seriously to weigh what I have here
offered, how reasonable it is that it is necessary that the lazy Poor should be
confined and obliged to work either for want of Food, or by some other
Restraint and Compulsion. That such Houses being built and regulated in this
manner, under a Governor and his Deputy, are the most convenient for this
purpose. That this Method tends to the Glory of God, the Instruction as well as
Employment and Maintenance of the Poor, to the freeing of the Nation from all
lazy and idle Beggars, to the increase of Trade, to the augmenting in time of
his Majesty's Revenues, to remove out of our sight a great Eyesore and
Grievance. It tends to ease us from the great burden of those Rates that we pay
to the Poor, more to encourage their laziness, than to relieve their wants. It
tends to the Glory and great Advantage of our Trading Nation, and to the Honor
of our Reformation. And this business may be so carried on, that no Person
shall find himself either burdened or aggrieved. And if any Objection, which I
cannot at present foresee, shall be made against this Expedient to provide for
our Poor, I offer to answer it, and to prove that it tends wholly to the
public Good more than to any private Interest. Neither can there be any
imbezling or diverting of the public Moneys from the appointed Uses, because
such as shall be entrusted, may be narrowly looked after; and no longer are they
to receive the same, than they free every Parish from their present Burden of
the Poor. And I judge it more reasonable for us to trust such judicious
Governors with a prudent management of the Poors Money for their good, than to
put it into the hands of such idle and lazy Prodigals (as we now do) who trust
wholly upon the Sweat and Labors, and to the forced Charity and Benevolence of
their poor Neighbors, and lavish it often at a strange rate. And these Houses,
the fuller they are, and the more hands to work, the richer they and their
Governors will grow: So that in a few years they will take away all our Poor
without contribution, who will be able to subsist plentifully and better within
these Houses than ordinary People without, and free us in time from the payment
of all Poors Rates.

I pray God direct our wise Governors in this and all their other
Consultations, for his Glory, his Majesty's Honor, tho Nations Credit, the
Increase of true Religion, and the public Good. Amen.

M. D.

FINIS.

