A DECLARATION MADE AT BODMIN IN THE COUNTY OF CORNWALL The 21. of November,
1643.

BY THE HIGH-SHERIFFE JUSTICES OF THE PEACE, His Majesty's Commissioners,
Gentlemen, and the Grand-Iury, Constables, and Freeholders of the said COUNTY,

With their general and unanimous Consents, and so entered in the Sessions
Rolls, to be kept in Record for the satisfaction of all men, concerning the
Legality of their proceedings in the present Wars, in the raising Men, Money,
Arms, and Ammunition for the defense of Our Religion, Laws and Liberty of the
Subject, and to suppress all Rebels, and specially, now these of the Town of
Plymouth, to reduce them to Loyal obedience.

OXFORD, February 3.

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

A DECLARATION MADE AT BODMIN IN THE County of CORNWALL the 21. of November,
etc.
WHereas by the Statute made in the 7th year of Edw. the first, it is Declared;
That to the King it belongs, and his part it is, to defend all Force against
his Peace at all times when need shall be, and thereto all his Subjects are
bound to aid him at all seasons. And whereas by other Statutes, made in the 11.
year of Henry the 7. the first, and the 19. of the same King, the first, it is
declared, That all Subjects are by their Allegiance bound to aid His Majesty
against every Rebellion Power and Might reared against him. And likewise by
another Statute made in the 18. year of Richard the 2. the 5. It appears,
That all the Subjects of this Realm do thereby bind themselves to stand with
our Lord the King in all cases that shall be attempted against Him, His Crown
and regality in all points, and therein to live and dye, as by relation to the
said Statutes it does, and will more punctually appear. We therefore having
taken notice of the said Laws, and the obligation wherewith We and all other
His Majesty's Subjects are bound by them, with the usefulness of the said
Laws, and the present urgent necessities that lie upon us, and the whole
Realm, intending to stand fast to the observation of our Laws, and the
laudable Usages and Customs of this Kingdom, in performance of our duties in
that behalf, have thought it convenient to Declare; That upon these Reasons,
according to our Allegiance, and by virtue of His Majesty's Commissions and
gracious directions, granted and signified unto us, of His good pleasure
therein, We have done Our best endeavors for the preservation of Our Religion,
His Majesty's Peace, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberties of the
Subject, for suppressing the hideous and unparalleld Rebellions that have been
moved in these Western parts of the Kingdom; wherein, with God's blessing, We
have so far prevailed, that the Peace of our Country has been hitherto so
preserved and kept, that We have enjoyed the benefit of our Laws of the
Kingdom within the said County, and these Armies which have been issued hence
to those good ends, with the assistance of such others His Majesty's faithful
Subjects that have joined with them, have obtained Victories over the Rebels,
and have quieted the Rebellion in diverse of the Western shires of this Realm,
and specially in the Neighboring County of Devon (excepting only the Town of
Plymouth, who continue obstinately in their Rebellion.) for these great
blessings We ascribe as is due, all honor and praise to Almighty God, and We
hereby make known to all men our purposes, to proceed, and go on according to
the Laws, and our duties and Allegiance in the same course we have done, by
the continuance of supplies of Men, Money, and Arms, with our best abilities,
for the subduing that Rebellious Town of Plymouth to their obedience, and for
enforcing them to restore His Majesty's Fort and Island (traitorously taken and
detained from His Majesty with Force, by these Rebels) unto His quiet
possession again. And We have now made this our Declaration for the
satisfaction of all His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, of the legality of our
Adions, and the clearness of our intentions in the course We have taken, and
which we are resolved upon to continue, to be only that which We are in duty
bound to do, and to which every good Subject ought to be obedient; wherein if
any of this County be hereafter refractory or negligent, they are to expect
punishment for the same in a legal way, according to the quality of their
offenses. And further, in regard some ill disposed seditious persons, under
fair shows of Religion, and teaching liberty, only to seduce and deceive the
people of this County and others to their own ruin, alleging, that by some
other Statutes now in force, the Subjects of this Kingdom, are not bound, nor
cannot be drawn or enforced, to go out of their Counties where they dwell, or
to arm themselves to that purpose against their wills, by this means
endeavoring to move the people to faction and discontent, and with all the
power that in them lies, to Foster and continue the Rebellion in the Town of
Plymouth and elsewhere, though to the disturbance of the Peace of this County,
and the whole Realm. And in regard it may be some men that have no evil
purposes are deceived in their judgments, that have not fully considered the
words and intentions of the said Statutes, which were made only to declare,
that the Subjects should not be so drawn out of their Counties at His Majesty's
pleasure or to any foreign War; but there is nothing contained in any of the
said Statutes, against or contrary to the aforeme^tioned Statutes, whereby
every Subject is bound to be ayding to His Majesty for the preservation of His
Peace; And in the Statute made the first of Ed. the 3. the 5. which We have
taken notice of, and does contain in substance all that is of any effect in any
other Statutes, which concern that liberty of the not compelling the Subjects
to be, by force, against their wills, drawn out of the Counties where they
dwell; in the body of that Statute these words are expressed, But where
necessity requires and sudden coming of strange Enemies into the Realm;
Whereby it evide^tly appears, on such occasions they are obliged by their
Allegiance, and may lawfully be compelled to serve out of the Counties; And we
wish all men to consider that both these things mentioned in that Statute, are
most manifest in the case of the Rebellion of Plymouth, where they have now
(yet under pretense of Religion) and have still had strangers of Foreign
Nations entertained by them, and the Rebellion it self, in themselves is most
notorious by the traitorous taking of the Kings own Fort, and Island by force
from Him, and so keeping it; their unlawful making Fortifications, in and
about their Town, their violently taking their Neighbors prisoners at their
wills, and barbarous usage of them, and transporting them by Sea, their illegal
exactions of Money, Thefts, Robberies, and Murders of His Majesty's Subjects,
committed and continued by them, their several bloody Invasions into this
County of Cornwall, their violent and inhumane assaulting Mount-Edgecombe
House, their next Neighbor in the same County, with other horrid Actions of
theirs, tedious to relate, hardly to be exampled in their impieties in any
story. We therefore herein clearly declare our opinions, that it is not the
meaning of any of the said Statutes, or of any other Law or Statute to free the
Subjects from going out of their County in any case of this nature; when
necessity requires, to preserve the Peace of the Realm against Rebels, and
Traitors of this Kingdom, or against any strangers that come into this Kingdom
to invade the Land, which if they were so to be construed would be most
pernicious to the Subjects themselves, and for those reasons We believe there
was ever care had by the Kings of this Realm, and the wisdom of our Ancestors,
to have no such thing enacted by them, that any County should be thereby
restrained not to be able to aid their Neighbor Counties, and the whole Realm,
and Subjects thereof, from being able to aid His Majesty for the preservation
of His Peace, His Royal Person, and the supportation of His Regality, Crown
and dignity, and just Prerogative Royal, and their own Liberties in all they
are interessed; And We are assured the subjects of this, and all other
Countries of this Kingdom, are by their Allegiance bound to support and uphold
the same. And We do hereby Declare our wills and intentions are, to prosecute
the same in all that we are able, and therein as we are confident all the good
subjects of this County, do and will most cordially condescend and agree with
us, so we desire and hope all others His Majesty's good subjects will
contribute their best ayds and assistance in the lame, against this Intestine
wicked Rebellion of Plymouth, and against all other Rebels and Traitors which
are in the Kingdom risen up against the Kings Majesty, and against all other
Powers or Might, that is, or shall be raised against His Majesty, for the
preservation of the Peace, His Royal Person, the supportation of His Crown and
Dignity, and for preservation of the Religion here established in this Kingdom,
and the known Laws and Liberties of the same, according to our, and their
Duties and Allegiance.

FINIS.

