New-England's Faction Discovered; OR, A Brief and True Account of their
Persecution of the Church of England; the Beginning and Progress of the War
with the Indians; and other Late Proceedings there, in a Letter from a
Gentleman of that Country, to a Person of Quality.
Being, an Answer to a most false and scandalous Pamphlet lately Published;
Entitled, News from New England, etc.
Honorable Sir,
THO I have but very lately advised you of my Arrival, and given you some short
and general Account of the State and Circumstance of Affairs in New England, at
the time I left the place; which I thought might have been sufficient, until I
should have the Honor to wait on you personally; but having had the view of a
certain Pamphlet lately Published and Entitled News from New England, etc.
pretending to give an Account of the Present State of that Country, and finding
the same so very fictitious, false and scandalous, published out of a most
wicked design to vilify and traduce some Worthy Gentlemen, who have been
better Friends to our Country, than ever the obscure Author thereof was, or
knows how to be, and to amuse and perplex others: I could not forbear out of my
Zeal for truth, and the love and value I have for the Peace and Welfare of my
Country, to give you the trouble of this Letter, to discover the falseness of
the pretended News, and the baseness and ignorance of the Author; who without
great difficulty may easily be guessed at, and known by his fruits.

And therefore it may not be amiss to acquaint you, that about two years since,
one Mr. J. M. pretended Teacher of the Gospel in Boston, privately left that
place and came for London, where of his own authority, he set up to be an Agent
for the Country, and used all the art and subtilty he could, during the Reign
of King James, to indear the same into the affection of F. Peter's, Mr. Brent,
and Nevil Pain, undertaking as well for himself as us to subscribe to the
taking off the Penal Laws and Tests, to support the Dispensing Power, and to
satisfy his own malice and prejudice (without any ground or reason) conceived
against the then Government of New England.

This Man, as it was the Opinion of most sober and considerate Men when I left
New England, so I may very justly term the Author and Promoter of all our
miseries, founded upon apparent and wittingly devised Lies and Calumnies,
carried on under pretense of Zeal and Piety, insinuated into, and imposed upon
many of the common People, hurrying them into mischiefs and inconveniences now
sufficiently seen, felt, and repented of; Him therefore, I will conclude the
Author of the beforementioned Pamphlet* the falsities whereof I shall now
plainly and briefly detect, to prevent your self and others being imposed upon
by him, as many of my Countrymen and others have too lately been.

And in the first place I cannot omit to take notice of his positive confidence
to charge a Commission granted in due Form under the Great Seal of England, for
the Government of one of Their Majesty's Plantations, Illegal and Arbitrary;
and that Government a Tyranny, which was by virtue thereof exercised with a
thousand times more justice and lenity, than when under the pretended Charter,
Administration, or Commonwealth Discipline, without any Authority for the same
whatsoever, if the Author had been but as well acquainted with the Law, as he
was with the Declaration he refers to, (and no doubt was the first contriver
of) he would have been of another judgment, or at least have concealed it until
the Opinion of his Superiors had been given therein.

2. That the War with the Indians was begun, as the Author there relates, or
that it was ever affirmed by the Indians, that they were encouraged thereto by
Sir E. A. is wholly false; for in the Summer 1688, when Sir E. A. went to
receive and settle the Province of New York* then annexed under his Government,
it so happened, that a Party of about Nine French Indians fell upon an Indian
Plantation at a place called Spectaclepond, near Springfield, on Connecticott
River, and killed and carried away about Nine Indians, and after coming to a
small Village on that River called Northfield, they killed six Christians, and
being pursued, fled; the noise of these Murders soon spread throughout the
Country, and notice was given thereof to all the Frontier or Out-parts,
advising them to be vigilant and careful to prevent Surprise by any strange or
suspected Indians, and soon after this News came to Saco, (a Town and River in
the Province of Maine above three hundred Miles distant from the places
beforenamed called by that name,) Five Indian Men, and Sixteen Women and
Children, who had always lived and planted on that River, were seized on, and
sent by Water to Boston, some of whom were so old and feeble, that they were
forced to be carried when ashore) on others backs. On their arrival at Boston,
the Lieutenant Governor and those of the Council there, examined into the cause
of seizing those Indians, and sending them thither; but finding that no Cause
was sent with them, nor any ground or reason to hold them in Custody, they
returned them to the place from whence they came, to be set at liberty; but
before they arrived there, the English near those parts were got to their Arms
and Garrisons: Other Indians of Ambroscoggen and Kenebeque River, hearing that
those of Saco were seized and sent away; forthwith surprised as many of the
English in Cascobay and Kenebeque River, saying, they intended no harm, but
would keep them till the Indians were returned: Upon the Arrival of the
returned Indians, they were sent unto, and a day and place agreed upon when
both the English and Indians were to be set at liberty, and all to be composed;
but the Indians not coming at the time appointed, the English waited not for
them, but were not long gone ere they came, and by an English Man and two
Indians, sent a Letter to the next Garrison, importing their readiness to
deliver up the English, and to make satisfaction for any hurt or spoil done by
them; who from that Garrison were Fired upon and ill treated, and not seeing how
what they expected could be answered, some of them discovered other English Men
on a Neck of Land, near the place appointed to meet at, and endeavoring to
seize some of them, were engaged into a Skirmish, where five of the English
were killed and several of the Indians wounded, who presently after in rage
killed two of the English Captives. In this manner, and no other was the War
begun; whereupon two Troops of Soldiers were raised, and sent to the assistance
of those parts against the Indians, with Provision and Ammunition necessary by
those of the Council at Boston, and the Indians first mentioned to be taken,
were again sent back and Imprisoned, and all in the absence of Sir E. A. Upon
his arrival at Boston, and being informed of the above, and that such Indians
were in Prison, a Committee of the Council was appointed to examine, and see
what Grounds or Cause there was for their Commitment or Detainer; and the
Committee reporting they could find none, those Indians were by order of
Council set at liberty, to be sent to the place from whence they were brought
if they desired it: As for the mischief said to be sustained by the Inhabitants
there, it cannot be imputed to those Indians, for it was either done while they
were in custody, or since the Rebellion and Subversion of the Government, from
whence begins the date of our Miseries; and I have just reason to believe, the
Author was too far concerned therein, as is evident by his directing of his
Letters to Simon Broadstreet Esquire Governor of the Massathusets, etc. before it
was possible for him to know that he was so, or could have any ground to
believe he would be, unless he had contrived or directed it.

3. There was no endeavors used to keep the People ignorant of Affairs in
England, nor were any Imprisoned for dispersing the Prince's Declaration; which
was never publicly seen or known to be in New England, till some time after
the Insurrection: Tho I have heard, that one Winslow arriving at Boston from
Nevis, about the beginning of April 1688. and pretending to show to several
Persons a Written Copy of the said Declaration, was sent for before a Justice,
and being examined about the said Writing, denied he had any such thing; and
behaving himself contemptuously, he was committed to Prison; and the next
Morning producing the same Paper to the Justice, he was discharged without any
further trouble or proceeding; and this was all that was acted in New England,
relating to the Prince of Orange's Declaration; so that there was no grounds or
reasons to stir up the People to Sedition, but only the ambitious desires and
wicked inclinations of their former Popular Magistrates and Members, to set up
their old Arbitrary Commonwealth Government, that freeing themselves from the
Authority of England, they might without fear of punishment, break all the Laws
made for the encouragement and increase of the Navigation of England, and
regulating and securing the Plantation Trade, as is sufficiently evident by the
several Vessels since arrived from Holland, Scotland, Newfoundland, and other
places prohibited by the Acts of Trade and Navigation.

And that such was their design, to rend themselves from the Crown of England,
will appear by the free and open confession of some well knowing in that
Conspiracy; who have since declared (before Witnesses of undeniable truth now
here in England) that the design of seizing upon Sir E. A. and subverting
Kingly Government in New England had been long contrived and resolved on, and
was to have been done the beginning of January 1688. and that those concerned
in the late Revolution were then to have acted the like parts, at which time
was no account of the Prince of Orange's intention of coming into England known
in that Land.

4. It cannot be said, that ever any unlawful Levies of Money were made upon
the Subject under the Government of Sir E. A. for all that was raised in his
time, was by virtue of a Law made and practiced for about Fifty Years before,
which was continued and confirmed by express command, under the Great Seal of
England, for support of the Government, and was but a Rate of one Penny in the
Pound, to be annually collected by Warrant from the Treasurer, which those who
lately assumed the Government, tho without any Lawful Power or Authority, have
so far exceeded, that for about Six Months management, they have caused seven
Rates and an half to be levied; and I have since advice that they have ordered
Ten Rates more to be exacted.

5. By the Actings and Proceedings of these New England Reformers, it is easily
to be seen, what regard they had to Religion, Liberty and Property; having now
had the opportunity to make themselves Persecutors of the Church o^ England, as
they had before been of all others that did not comply with their Independency*
whom they punished with Fines, Imprisonment* Stripes, Banishment, and Death,
and all (...) matters of mere Conscience and Religion only: The Church of
England, although commande^ to be particularly countenanced and encouraged, was
wholly destitute of a place to perform Divine Service in, until Sir E. A. by
advice of the Council, borrowed the new Meeting house in Boston for them, at
such times when others made no use of it, and afterward prom^ted and
encouraged the building of a Ne^ Church for that Congregation, to avoid (...)
manner of Offense to their dissenting Neig^bors, which was soon completed and
finish^^ at the particular charge of those of the Chur^^ of England; whose
number daily increasin^* they became the envy as well as hatred of th^^
Adversaries, who by all ways and means po^^^ble, as well in their Pulpits as
private (...) endeavored to asperse, calumniate, and (...) fame them, and so
far did their malice and bigotry prevail, that some of them openly and
publicly hindered and obstructed the Minister in the performance of the
funeral Rites, to such as had lived and dyed in the Communion of the Church of
England: And a most scandalous Pamphlet was soon after Printed and Published by
Cotton Mather, Son of the beforementioned, J. M. entitled the unlawfulness of
the Common Prayer Worship, wherein he affirms, and labors to prove the same to
be both Popery and Idolatry, and several scandalous Libels both against the
Church and Government, were spread and scattered up and down the Country,
insinuating into the Common People, that the Governor and all of the Church of
England were Papists and Idolaters, and to stir them up to Faction and
Rebellion, for which the said Cotton Mather, and others, were bound over to
answer according to Law; but was superseded by their Insurrection. And the
Justices having issued their Warrant for the observation of the 30 th of
January pursuant to the Statute, the same was called in and suppressed, by
Captain Wait Winthorp one of the Council, who in the Commotion, appeared the
chief Man and Head of the Faction against the Government, which he twice swore
to maintain and support, and tho at the time of the Revolution, most of the
Principal Officers in the Government were of the Independent and Presbyterian
Party, yet their malice and fury was not shown to any of them, but only used
and ex^rcised against those of the Church of England, whom (as well the
Governor as other Officers ^f the Government, and principal Members of that
Church) they seized and most barbarously ^mprisoned. The Church it self had
great dif^^culty to withstand their fury, receiving the ^^arks of their
indignation and scorn, by hav^^g the Windows broke to pieces, and the Doors and
Walls daubed and defiled with dung, and ^^her filth, in the rudest and basest
manner ima^^nable, and the Minister for his safety, was ^^rced to leave the
Country and his Congrega^^on, and go for England, the Persons Impri^^ned were
kept and detained, without any ^arrant, Mittimus or cause shown, and several of
them had their Offices and Houses broke open, their Goods and Estates taken
away, spoiled, and embezelled: And when application was made to the new assumed
Authority, for the benefit of the Habeas Corpus Act, and other Laws made for
the Liberty of the Subject, and security of their Property; the same was denied
with this reason given amongst others afterward there published in Print; that
till the unhappy time of Sir Edmund's Government, the Laws of England were
never used, nor any Habeas Corpus granted in New England, and therefore not to
be expected then; and about Ten Weeks after their Confinement, several of the
Chief Officers were by the House of Representatives voted not bailable, for no
other cause or pretended Crimes than for being employed by the Crown, having
therein so faithfully and truly behaved themselves, that none could justly lay
any Crime to their Charge. By this means many suffered Ten Months Imprisonment,
and others less, being turned in and out of Goal, as the Arbitrary pleasure of
their New Rulers should be verbally known: In their new Erected Courts, they
have publicly declared, they have nothing to do with the Laws of England, and
several of Their Majesty's Subjects, have been not only Fined and Imprisoned,
by the Arbitrary Will of the Magistrates, without any lawful Trial by a Jury of
their Peers, as the Laws of the Land direct; but for pretended Crimes sentenced
to Death, without any lawful Authority or Legal Form of proceedings, and some
of them Executed.

6. It is very true, that since the Imprisonment of the Governor, and
alteration of the Government in New England, the whole County of Cornwall,
great part of the Province of Maine, and part of the Province of New Hampshire,
are overrun and destroyed by the Indians; but the occasion thereof has been by
that Insurrection, and the withdrawing of the Forces left in those Parts by Sir
E. A. and deserting the Garrisons there, which was also the loss of the Fort at
Pemaquid, and above three Hundred of His Majesty's Subjects, and
notwithstanding the Malice of the Author cannot be the least imputation on Sir
E. A. who during the time of his Government, kept the whole Dominion from
injury, save what was done at first by surprizal, as by every honest Man will
be confessed, for what was done in releasing the Indians before mentioned, was
not an Act of Favor but Justice, nor done by him alone, but with advice of the
Council, and I can see no reason, why either the Indians or English should be
Imprisoned, or Restrained of their Liberty without sufficient cause, or why if
one Indian commits an Offense, all must be blamed or punished for it, tho they
are things too often used and practiced by our old Charters in New England.

Neither were the numbers or quality of those Indians capable of doing such
mischiefs, tho the follies and madness of the People since their Revolution,
have encouraged and provoked many to be their Enemies, and increased their
numbers, and no doubt given the French fair advantages to come into their
assistance.

The Fort of Pemaquid was burnt by the Indians, and the Guns sometime after
fetched from thence, by some of the Forces sent from Boston, and brought
thither by them, so that what is mentioned about the Dutch Privateer is wholly
false.

7. As to the pretended bloody Fight, said to be between the English and
Indians, it was only after this manner: A Party of about three hundred English
and Friend Indians, under the command of Captain Benjamin Church, being
overnight landed at a Town called Falmouth in Cascobay, in the Province of
Maine, the next Morning early, a Party of Indians of about two hundred came to
attack that place, who meeting with one Anthony Brackett, and his two Sons
going to his Farm, a little distant from the Town; they Fired and Killed them,
and by that alarmed the place; and thereupon a Party was sent to discover, who
advised what they were, and that they were very near the Town; the whole number
of Men being all called together had Ammunition delivered them, but by reason
of the unsizableness of their Guns and Shot, they were forced to beat their
Bullets into Slugs, which made it late before they could March to the Enemy,
who in the mean time had the opportunity to post themselves advantageously
behind Fences, Hedges, Old Trees, etc. and in that manner they engaged; and
after about two hours dispute the Indians retreated into a small swamp, and our
Forces left them with the loss of Eleven Men, and Seven wounded, of which Five
after dyed; but it was not known that one Indian was killed: And this is all we
can brag of in that Service, which was only fortunate, in that the Forces were
there, when the Indians came to attack the Place, which else probably they
would have carried, tho it is believed, had our Forces been ready early to have
attacked and pursued the Enemy, some greater advantage might have been gained,
but by late advice I am informed that Place is also deserted.

There is little dependence on those we call our Friend Indians, for they are
as great Strangers in the Eastern Country as the English, and will not travel
or venture farther than they, tho, being used to the Woods, may be quicker
sighted to discover the Enemy. You may perceive the fiery Zeal of the Author
and his Correspondent, who will not admit of a charitable Expression or
Character of his suffering Neighbors, but after they have been the cause of
all their Miseries and Ruin, must expect no other comfort from them than to be
accounted and termed Heathenish English Plantations; for which I cannot
conceive any reason, unless that many in those Parts have been differently
educated from those of Boston, and are of the Church of England, whose
Forefathers, for that very cause only, were forced to remove so far to escape
the lash of their Persecutors in the Massathusets Colony.

8. We have no reason to brag of our Armies Pursuit after the Enemy, for it was
never known that any Party last Summer went twenty Miles from our Settlements
(or Place where they had done us mischief) after them, neither, according to
the methods taken, would it avail if they had; for tho they knew the Indians
are in Arms, and taking all the Opportunities to attack and destroy them, yet
no suitable Provision was made in our out-Towns and Frontiers for their
Security and Defense; but after Advice given to Boston of a Town or Settlement
being burned and destroyed, in about a Fortnights time an Army or Party of
about two or three hundred Men would be sent to the Place to see if it were
true or not, and whether the Indians did not stay for their coming; which Army
of ours, usually abide thereabouts till they have eaten and consumed what stock
of Cattle or Sheep the Indians had left, and then return home again.

That any Captives escaped from the Indians, affirm, that the Indians say, they
are encouraged by some Gentlemen in Boston vigorously to prosecute the War, is
mere Invention, and a most false and groundless Imputation, unless by such
Gentlemen in Boston are meant Foster and Waterhouse, two of their own Party,
who being of the Conspiracy to subvert the Government, sometime in March, about
a Month before the same was put in Execution, loaded a Brigantine with
Provision and Ammunition at Boston, and entered her for Bermudoes, but sent her
to the Eastward amongst the French and Indians, then in actual War with us, and
furnished and supplied them therewith, when the Governor and the Forces were
out against them and had reduced them to the greatest want and necessity both
for Provision and Ammunition; and soon after the Revolution, that Vessel
returned from those Parts with her Loading of Bever and Peltry, which was
publicly known and talked, but no notice taken thereof, the grievous effects
of which, the Country well knows, and are since very sensible thereof.

The two Captives that last escaped and came to Boston, related, that by the
Service done by Sir E. A. the last Winter was Twelve-months, against the
Indians, they were reduced to that necessity both for want of Ammunition and
Provision, that in the Spring following they resolved to come in and surrender
themselves at Mercy, which they no doubt had done accordingly, if the
Revolution at Boston had not happened, the Forces being drawn off from the
Eastern Parts, Garrisons deserted, and they supplied with Ammunition and
Provision from Boston, which was the only encouragement they had to renew and
continue the War upon us, and has much increased the Numbers of our Enemies.

It Is true, the Mohawks (tho a small) are a warlike Nation, and have been long
Enemies to the French in Canada, and now in War with them; but that no ways
affects us in New England any otherwise than as it is some Diversion to the
French; for those Indians that war against us are in a direct opposite part of
the Country, remote from them, and can be supplied from Canada, Port Royal, and
Nova Scotia, although those Mohawks endeavor to obstruct it; and I could never
hear any Offer made by them to that purpose, or that they would engage against
our Enemies, for we never had any Acquaintance or Correspondency with them, to
influence them to our Assistance, they being very remote from Boston, and
always under the Government of New York: but I have been informed by Letters
from Persons of good credit at Albany, that when the Agents sent from Boston to
treat with the Mohawks, and renew their Peace and Friendship with them, and
desire their Assistance, proposed the same, the Mohawks replied, That it was
unnecessary for them to come so far to renew their Peace, since to the Indians
Knowledge, there had been no War between them, and that they had not only by
Words, but by Action, manifested their good Heart to the English, particularly
to New England, since they had by means of the Government of New York engaged
themselves in the last Indian War, for their Interest, against the Indians
their Enemies, by which means much Christian Blood was saved, although but little
notice of their Service has been taken by those who had the benefit thereof;
that they were then in War against the French, and would not increase the
number of their Enemies, until they certainly knew that those Eastern Indians
assisted the French against them. This is the sum and truth of that
Negotiation, which cost us above four hundred Pounds Expense; and what
Advantage or Credit we are like to get thereby, all Men may judg^.

We of New England (I find) are too apt to boast of what we neither understand
n^r have any assurance of, and build too much on mistaken Notions and false
Grounds, as in this Case of the Indians.

9. The Story about the Mohawks, Jesuits, and Eclipse of the Sun, has not been
heard of or acted in any part of New England, but, as I am informed, is an old
Story taken out of some History of the Spanish Indies, and only inserted by the
Author to enlarge his strange News, and fill up his Paper.

But it must be admitted, that with those Mohawks and other Indians several
French Priests and Jesuits have dwelt and inhabited, and endeavored to
propagate their Religion amongst them, which is more than any of our English
Priests or Teachers have done; for although by the Piety of our Forefathers,
considerable Sums of Money have been given, and a Corporation erected for the
Evangelizing of the Indians in New England, a very small progress has been
hitherto made therein; and now scarce any Endeavors or proper Means used at
all for their Conversion, tho large Sums of Money are annually sent over and
disposed of amongst the Brotherhood, on that pretense, which the Government, or
those chiefly concerned therein, would do well to enquire after, now there are
so many of that Country here capable to give an Account thereof, that so good
and pious an Undertaking may be neither neglected nor perverted.

10. It is too true, that great Devastations have been made in New England by
the Indians since the Revolution there, which those that subverted their
Majesty's Government have been and are the sole occasion of; and that the Fort
of Pemaquid, a considerable Frontier next the French, has been taken, the
whole County of Cornwall, greatest part of the Province of Maine, and part of
the Province of Hampshire, are destroyed and deserted, besides other Mischiefs
in the Massathusets Colony within thirty Miles of Boston; the loss and damage
of all which, when I left New England, was not computed at less than one
hundred thousand Pounds, besides the loss of above three hundred of their
Majesty's Subjects, and the whole Fish, Mast, and Lumber Trade, and all
Out-parts forced to Garrisons.

But that so considerable a Force (as is pretended) was sent out against the
said Indians, is a Misinformation; for there was not one Man sent from
Connecticott last Summer, nor had they resolved to be concerned in the War, tho
much persuaded thereto by those of the Massathusets: and when I left those
Parts, and for some Months before, there was not a Soldier out; and they have
reason enough to apprehend an Attack from the French as well as Indians, in the
Spring, so soon as the Rivers are open, and the Snow off the Ground; which (by
their present ill Management of Affairs, want of Authority, and the many
Divisions amongst them) they will not be in a posture to resist, nor to defend
and secure themselves and Country.

11. I did hear before I left New England, that about sixty Men were ordered to
march for Albany from the several Towns on Connecticott River; but whether they
were to assist those of Albany against the French, or to reduce them under the
Subjection of that Rebel Leslier, (who by the evil Instigation of those of
Boston and Connecticott had usurped the Government of New York, which those of
Albany always refused to submit to, but continued as they were,) was a great
Question, and can only be known by their Fruits and Service.

The base imputation, which the unworthy Author of that scurrilous Paper would
cast on Sir E. A. and other Persons concerned in Their Majesty's Government, I
think are not worth my taking any particular notice of, since both his, and
their Actions do plainly show them of whom he so speaks to be Faithful and
Loyal Subjects: And from the whole scope of proceedings in New England; it is
most plain that the late Subverters of the Government had no manner of regard
to Their Majesty's Interest or Service, but when they had as far as possible
ruined and destroyed the same, thought themselves obliged to endeavor their
own Security and Preservation, which if His Majesty does not speedily help by
settling of the Government, and giving them further assistance from hence, they
are not in a condition to maintain, but will endanger the loss of the whole
Country; As is evident by the farther late advice we have of the French and
Indians Incursions upon those parts, the loss of Schenectade a considerable
frontier Town near Albany, and of several settlements on Piscataqua River, with
about two hundred more of Their Majesty's Subjects killed and carried away
Captives, and the several other Parties of French and Indians, we hear are out,
designed to fall on other parts of that Country, and feared on Albany it self.

This Sir, is the true, tho miserable State and Condition of that Country, as
can be particularly made appear whenever it shall be inquired into, and must
pray your Assistance to endeavor a Redress of its present inconveniences, and
that we may obtain Their Majesty's favor for a happy settlement, that so
considerable a Dominion, on the prosperity of which, depends the Welfare of
Their Majesty's other West India Plantations, may not be ruined and destroyed
for want of Their Gracious Protection. Begging your Pardon for this tedious
discourse, I presume to subscribe my self,

Honored Sir, Your Most Humble Servant, C. D.

LONDON, Printed for J. Hindmarsh, at the Sing of the Golden Ball, over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1690.


