Two LETTERS to Dr. Benjamin Calamy, ONE IN English, the other in Latin, By
Thomas De Laune, upon his Imprisonment in Newgate, for the Answer given at the
said Dr. Calamy's Call, to his Sermon entitled, A Discourse about a Scrupulous
Conscience, in a late Piece called, A Plea for the Non-conformists, etc.
SIR;
IN your printed Sermon, Entitled, Scrapulous Conscience, you know you gave a
fair Invitation to such as differ from you, to examine what each Party (viz.
Conformists and Non-conformists) say for themselves, with respect to the Rites
and Ceremonies which the Guides of the Church impose on their Members, and by
penal Laws upon their Protestant fellow Subjects, the Non-conformists. --
Without doubt, your Call to such, pre-supposed a Reply, by which you expected
that there may be either an Opportunity given to you and your Brethren, to
rectify what scrupulous Consciences mis-understand, or that there may be some
Relaxation procured, of the severity they undergo, if their dissent appears to
be warranted by that only Rule of Faith, which Dr. Stillingfleet, and other
Eminent Conformists, call ^he Bible.

If you did not expect an Answer, or thought that none for fear of the Act of
Uniformity, etc. would make any Return to your Call, what can a man of Reason
judge, but that it was a florid Declamation, or a triumphant Harangue, a mere
Mockery and ensnaring of poor scrupulous Consciences, when they must be so
muzled, that they must not exhibit the Causes of their Doubts. Sir, you know
that it is unequal to gag the Respondent, when the Opponent's Mouth is at
liberty, or to manacle the Assaulted, when the Challenger flourishes a menacing
Sword.

Upon that public Call of yours, I adventured to examine (with the most
diligent search I could make) what each of the said Parties say for themselves;
and this not out of any Litigious Principle (that pruritus disputandi) now too
fatally grown Epidemical, but to give such as are concerned, occasion to
investigate these disputed matters to the very Foundation, to the clearing up
of Truth in a Juncture when it can never be more seasonable. What was digested,
was intended to be sent you in a Manuscript, with some modest Inferences and
Inquiries; but upon Re-collection I judged it would more answer your end, viz.
public Information, to have such Arguments as are producible by the
Dissenters, as public as the Invitation you gave them from Pulpit and Press,
it being equal that the Answer should be as spreading as the Objection.

I am far from the vanity of pretending to be your Competitor in the Faculties
of the Schools; I cannot judge of them any otherwise than as unserviceable to
Christian Religion, unless tinctured with that Grace, derivative only from the
Sanctifier of all Gifts, which I hope you partake of.

I am one of the meanest of the Flock, yet not below the Regards of the
Shepherd of Souls, who is no Respecter of Persons, and whose Example such as
call themselves his Ambassadors, ought to follow. And therefore though some,
who pin their Faith upon Canonical Sleeves, may censure me, for opposing (or,
if I may use a Military Metaphor, taking up the Gantlet against) a man of your
Figure; yet I can take up my satisfaction in this, that it was not Pride, nor a
Popular Itch, much less the love of a Prison, influenced me to become an
Answerer of your scrupulous Conscience.

I could heartily wish (as a mercy to these Nations) that all Religious
Differences were composed by Evangelical Rules; and and that all who own the
Name of Christ would serve him with one Heart, and with one Soul, and not tear
each other to pieces, which by consequence must expose them as a Prey to such
as gape for their Destruction.

If the Sanctions of Christ in the Old and New Testament ought to regulate the
Modes of his Worship, and that we are under an indispensible Obligation to obey
that Magna Charta of Heaven, then let us either quit the Name of Christians, or
act according to the supreme Law-giver's, unrepealable Statutes, quite
exploding what is undeniably borrowed from the Pompilian or Pontifical Canons.

Some Sheets have been printed off of what I intended to present to you, but
the Messenger of the Press interrupted the procedure, and got me committed to
Newgate, where I am now confined. There is nothing done, nor was intended to be
done, but a fair Examination of those things your Sermon invited to, which I
had thought (if esteemed Criminal) should fall rather within the cognizance of
Divines, than the men of Law; for me thinks the Pandects should not be the
Oracles of Religion, and that Temporal Statutes should be so civil as to give
precedence to the sacred Records.

It Is possible that Inquirers into Religion will look upon it as a preposterous
proceeding, and disagreeable to the Nature of the Christian Faith to force
doubting Persons by Penalties to embrace it; for that can never make them good
Converts, but Hypocrites. May they not say that it is a horrid Disparagement to
the Self-evidencing Light of the Gospel, if it cannot stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers, any other way than by the rigid Execution of Acts of State? I
cannot find that Christ or his Disciples ever Church-cursed or Newgated
scrupulous Consciences to Conformity.

My Confinement is for accepting your Invitation to hear both sides; and I
appeal to you, whether it be candid to punish me for obeying a Guide of the
Church? I look upon you (in honor) obliged to procure my Sheets (yet
unfinished) a public Passport, and to me my Liberty, else I must conclude it
unfair, and that if the irresistible Logic of Goals grows Al-a-mode, it will
make the Reformation, some pretend to, suspected to be very little meritorious
of that Name.

Religion is a sacred thing, and has been most horribly abused by such as have
super added their own Inventions, or those Traditional Fopperies received from
our deceived and superstitious Ancestors. I am satisfied you, as well as Dr.
Stillingfleet, will own (or there is no debating with you) that the Scripture is
our Only Rule of Faith; if so, pray let your scrupulous Consciences be won to
Conformity by that. All men are not of equal capacity, to apprehend things
doubtful; for if they had been so, there had been no necessity of Preachers:
and the methods of Convincing men is as plainly laid down in the Bible, as any
thing there, viz. by plain demonstrative Arguments, meek and winning
Persuasions, not the syllogisms of Prisons, Pillories, etc.

I beseech you in the fear of God, and as you will answer it to our great Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, That without respect to any other end than the good of
Souls (as the Profession you take obliges you to) that you would treat
scrupulous Consciences, as you would be dealt withal your self. If they have no
Reason for their Dissent, and will without ground suffer Imprisonments with all
the ruinous Concomitants of so dismal a Circumstance, it is certain that Bedlam
is more fit for them, than such places of Confinement, as are appointed for men
in their Wits; and by consequence it is pity to be so severe with such
Simpletons. But if you will allow them any Modicum of Reason, than I appeal to
all the Guides of the Church, whether it be not more consonant to the Precepts
of our sovereign Legislator, to confute them by his Rules, rather than by such
coercive Methods, which his Majesty judged ineffectual in his Declaration of
Indulgence, March 1672.

As Truth seeks no Corners nor Suborners, and as real Beauty will not be
beholden to the artificial Dawbings of a Pencil, so the Christian Religion
(where professed in its naked simplicity) needs no other Allurement to beget
Proselites than its own lovely and illustrious Features, altogether plain,
honest, and every way amiable, void of all Meretricious Gawdery, or that
Majestical Pomp which pleases only the external Sense.

I have no Malignity against any Person whatsoever, much less against your
Church, or any of its Members, all I desire is, that Scrupulous Consciences,
who trouble not the Peace of the Nation, should be dealt withal (at least) as
weak Brethren, according to Romans 14.1. and not ruined by Penalties for not
swallowing what is imposed under the Notion of Decency and Order, tho Eccentrick
to the Scheme we have of it in our only Rule of Faith. Sir, I entreat you to
excuse this Trouble from a Stranger, who would fain be convinced by something
more like Divinity then Newgate, where any Message from you shall be welcome to

Your Humble Servant, Thomas De Laune.
From the Press-Yard, Newgate, the 8th of December, 1683.
January Die Nono, 1683. Reverende Vir;
QVod semel atque iterum Concionatus eras, Typisque mandaver as de Dubitanti
Conscientia, quotquot Diversae sint sententiae circa quosdam Ritus ac
Ceremonias, ad utriusque partis Rations Examinandas, satis public vocitaverat.

Tacentibus alijs, in illa re, tibi parebam; non litigandi Causa (impar enim
est Congressus inter te, tantum virum and me tantillum) sed uthujus modi Litem
adim endi, sicuti praeceperas, adhibeatur occasio.

Si propter tale (duntaxat) obsequium, me paenas daturum, nescio quot quibusve
modis, decretum fuerit; Nunquid novae vincendi ratio, sacris paginis inaudita,
apud quosdam Antesignanos exoritur?

Quid de his rebus sentiendum esse videatur, ex sacro Codice ac probati.
Scriptoribus disquirere proposui, (te Cunctos vacillantes tam acriter
invitante) ex illo Lumine semitarum, ex illa Lucerna (Psalm. 119.105) Rations
aliquot hauseram adversus varios ac Multiplices Errores, qui in Ecclesiam
Irrepserunt.

Ea sola de causa usque ad Carcerem, ubi nihil amabile est, adactus sum. Vtrum
Istiusmodi Argumenta valuerint ad vestrae Concicnis ptheseis, probandas sub
Judice Supremo lis sit. Anve tali modo ullus ex dubitantibus in spirituale Cogi
potuerit, Ovile, Judex esto.

Nihil adversus Regiam Majestatem, nihil de Regimine Civili, nihil contra
Monarchiae pacem asseritur. De Rituum ac Ceremoniarum origin, deque rebus quae
specie veritatis, Etiamsi parum recte, in dubitantes Objiciuntur, sola
dissertatio est.

Quid de me Curia decreverit nescio. Fiat summi Patris Voluntas, Vniversis qui
salutis humanae largitorem secundum verbum ejus Colunt Pacem internam ac
externam in hoc, aeternamque in futuro seculo Precatur

Thomas De Laune.
Vt Responsum aliquod, quod Theologum decet per dilecttissimam meam Conjugem,
uti promisisti remittas, obsecro.



These two Letters were delivered to the Dr. and the Answer I received to the
first, was in effect, That if I had been imprisoned upon the account of
answering his Book, he would do me any Kindness that became him: To the second
he said (which hearing no effect of the former I sent him) That he looked upon
himself unconcerned, or to that purpose, as not being mentioned in the Sheets
he saw with the Recorder. To satisfy which Doubt, I sent a printed Sheet, the
very first of it, that makes it undisputable, viz. that what I am charged with
is an Answer to his Call. This is published (not out of any disrespect to that
Gentleman, but) to invite him to give a fair Hearing to my Plea, and so to
remove those Obstacles that lie in the way of scrupulous Consciences, in order
to a happy Union. I wish from my Heart that the Controversy might conclude in
that blessed effect.

The following Letter I sent to the Recorder, Sir Thomas Jenner, which I
publish for no other end, than that it may be a means to stir up the Minds of
some judicious Guides of the Church of England, to urge mild Arguments to
doubting Persons; for as I am not, nor never was; nor intended to be concerned
in any Action to the Disturbance of the public Peace, so I have been, and ever
shall be, in my mean Station, a hearty Well-wisher to the Prosperity of these
Nations under His Majesty's Government.

To Sir Thomas Jenner, Knight, Recorder of London.
SIR;
YOu know I was committed Prisoner first to the Compter at Woodstreet, then to
Newgate by your Warrant. In my Mittimus its said, That I refused to give Bail,
which is a Mistake; for being asked by you, Whether I would give Bail then? I
said, I could not, it being so late at night, when I had no opportunity to send
to such as would bail me. And being ask't, Whether I would give Bail the next
Morning? I said, I knew not whether I could or not, because I was not certain
whether such to whom I might have made Application would do it, or not. This
was no Sullenness nor Obstinacy in me, but what my real Apprehensions then
were. Some Friends of mine (freemen of this City) went afterward to be my
Bail, but they were told, you were not at home. They made thereupon an
Application to Sir William Turner, who referred them to you.

It is said in the Warrant, That I confessed I was the Author of a Libel,
entitled, A Plea for the Non-conformists, wherein are contained things
dangerous to the Government, which thus much, and no further is true: I
confessed before you, that I delivered a Manuscript of my own writing to one
John H^^, with that Title, in order to be printed, and that if the Print agreed
with the Manuscript, I would own it -- otherwise I could not, because the
mis-placing of a Stop, the mis-printing of a Letter or Syllable, or some other
Errata's of the Press, would alter the Sense, even to Contradiction of what was
intended to be discussed; which was not as my Indictment words it (in a form of
aggravating Terms) but in order to a plain disquisition of such things as Dr.
Calamy from Pulpit and Press, invited Dissenters to inquire into, as you may
see in his Book, called, A Discourse of a scrupulous Conscience. There is
nothing of matters relating to the civil State in what I am charged with; for I
am not concerned with that: But if the Guides of the Church (as Dr. Calamy
calls the beneficed men of the Church of England) will make public Challenges,
they should receive Objections, without punishing the Objectors, whose
(supposed) Crime is only for obeying them; and that, you know, Sir, is
disagreeable to Justice.

If any thing I have done falls within the Lash of English Laws, fiat Justitia.
But I am satisfied I have done nothing in this point unbecoming an honest
Subject, a Scholar, a Gentleman, and which is worth all, a Christian. I commit
the whole matter, with respect to this Dispute, to that supreme Legislator, who
is without exception just, and who will judge all that are subordinate to him.
Which is all from,

Sir, Your Servant, Thomas De Lau^^

FINIS.

