portrait of Mehmet IV Aetatis Suae 41

MAHOMET the Fourth, the present and Thirteenth EMPEROR of the TURKS 1683



Historical and Political OBSERVATIONS Upon the Present State of TURKEY,
DESCRIBING The Policy, Religion, Manners, and Military Discipline of the TURKS.
With an Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable Transactions
and Revolutions, which have happened from the beginning of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE,
to this present GRAND SEIGNOR.

TO WHICH IS ADDED HIS LIFE: Containing all the Material Occurrences that have
happened during his Reign. Together with the Present State of HUNGARY: AND
History of the WARS there to this Day.

By.R.D.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by J. Smith, Book Binder at the White Swan
in Water-Lane, in Blackfriars. 1683.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the PRESENT STATE OF TURKEY.
THe whole Power of the Ottoman Empire, menacing a considerable part of Europe
at this time, with a most dismal Desolation, ^he Maps of those Countries being
most in ^ogue, and questions Concerning the Policy, Religions, and Manners of
the Turks having ^ow the greatest share in all Discourses and Conversations; I
thought a Compendium of ^^e present State would not be unseasonable, ^r
unwelcom to the World, but would ^^ntribute both to others and my own
En^^^tainment.

Though this undertaking does seem to be of a greater extent, and to require a
larger Bulk, than these sheets will admit off; yet I question not, to give a
full and satisfactory account of the Policy of the Turks, and therein of the
fundamental Maxims of their Government: Of the strength and numbers of their
Militia, of the Civil Offices and their Revenues, with a Relation of the
Seraglio, and all thereunto belonging, adding the Model and Constitution of
their Religion, with the Articles of their Faith, and the Memoires and History
of the present Grand Seigniors Life unto this day. if I perform this so well,
as to content the Curiosity and Speculation of the Age upon those points, I
shall have sufficiently flattered my Ambition in having been able to furnish
any thing toward the public satisfaction.

So agreeable a Scene as the pourtraict of Turkey does afford, cannot be too
often represented; that variety of Customs, which how Barbarous soever our
Optics may represent to us, being no less pretending to Civility than our own,
though in an other Garb. And indeed it has seldom been known that where the
People and the Government have been rich, Arts, and Civility have been long
wanting and absent, the one attending generall^ upon the other. Wherefore if
this Land-ship of the State of Turkey be but considered with unprejudiced Eyes,
it will undoubtedly appear in other Colors than we commonly bestow upon that
Nation.

CHAP. II. The fundamental Maxims of the Turkish Policy.
THe first Grand Maxim of the Turkish Policy, is an entire and absolute
Submission and Obedience of the Subjects to the Will of their Prince, this
absolute resignation to the Pleasure and Command of their Sovereign is
instilled into the Turks, indeed rather as a Principle of Religion, than a mere
Politic Maxim; such Care being taken in the Education both of the Youth of
the Seraglio who stand fair and are the Nursery for the Principal Offices of
the Empire and of all the other Subjects of the Grand Seigniors Dominions, as
to infuse into them this O^inion, that it is highly Meritorious and a ^ind of
holy Martyrdom to dye by either the ^and or Command of their Prince; insomuch
that it would be no wonder amongst ^em to see whole Armies at his least beck
plunge themselves into Abysses, make Bridgges with Piles of their Bodies for
him to pass over Rivers, and only for his Diversion kill and butcher one
another. This subjection the Turkish Machiavels look upon to have been a main
Engine to the Increase and Enlargement of their Dominions, and fancy the
slackning this Discipline, and the Cabals in the Ministry under some of the
late Emperors, has been the occasion of those Revolts and Disorders which have
happened in that State.

The next is, the Princes preferring such Persons to the principal Charges of
the Court and Empire, as he can advance without Envy, and destroy without
Peril: And indeed nothing could be more for the interest of a Prince than the
conduct of the Ottoman Court in this point; for none are admitted into the
Grand Seigniors Service, but such as have had their Breeding and Education from
him, and by that means have imbibed such Principles from their Infancy as tend
wholly to the real Thankfulness for the Bread and Nourishment they have
received, and a kind of Religious Awe and Veneration to his Person. Besides, as
these Persons are constantly such as are taken in War or by Pyracy from
Christian Parents they remain without those usual support which the common
Interest of a Family and Alliances does afford. Moreover, the Sentiments they
inspire into those Persons are such as nourish and foment a detestation and
abhorrence of their Parents Opinions, and spurr them on to the venturing their
lives, their All to reduce them to the same Belief.

The Parity of Persons which is observed throughout All the Turkish Dominions,
is also without question one of the main securities of the Turkish sway, for
all are here equal and nothing but merit does advance People to the Ministry
and places of State. Thus all Offices being in the immediate disposal of the
Emperor, and not to be obtained by the Factions of Grandees, who might divert
the Peoples Eyes from off the Court, and by degrees tempt and delude themselves
into Rebellion, they make their addresses directly to the Grand Seignior, as to
the true source of their Promotions and Fortunes. And as this Parity makes all
the People court only their Princes favor, so it prevents any thoughts of an
Insurrection, or off casting of that Yoke of Tyranny, scorning basely to follow
and promote the Interest of those who are but their Equals. Thus the Subjects
in Turkey have nothing Hereditary, all their Honors and Places determining with
their lives, none receiving any Glory from Illustriousness of extraction, but
only from the Princes Favor and Bounty, which is in no wise claimed or
lessened by greatness of Birth, which here rather creates jealousy and danger,
than favor and advantage: By these means People are Studious to qualify
themselves for Offices, which Personal Merits render them Candidates for; and
as the Grand Seignior is here the Administratour to all dead Men's Estates,
Parents have not their thoughts so intent of heaping up Riches for an
Inheritance to their Children, as they are to Capacitate them for their Princes
Service. And this Destruction of all Nobility, cutting off all succession to
Riches, Offices and the Government, but in the direct Ottomen line, does
certainly preserve the Body of the Empire free from Faction and Rebellion.
Whereas the Rich and powerful Governments of many Provinces which lie far
remote from the Seat of the Empire, might tempt their Governors to a
Rebellion, had they the assistance and support which an ancient and an
Illustrious Extraction does afford. But as their Bashaws come of unknown
Parents, are continued but for a short time in those foreign Governments, are
Strangers in the Countries they sway, have no ancient Blood and Estates to
entitle them Heirs to the Succession, no Relations, Kindred or Alliances to
second, prosecute or revenge their Quarrels, or to create Kindness or
Compassion in the People to concern themselves in their behalf; so are these
Ministers deprived of all means, opportunities or possibility, of promoting any
Interest of their own above that of their Sovereigns: this it is has rendered
all Emotions that have been, and sometimes will be in all Empires of such short
continuance as Turkey; this it is that suffers the greatest Subjects in those
Dominions to be cut off according to the Princes Caprice, without raising the
least Murmurs amongst the People, who gaze upon such Spectacles without
concern, or if they Create any Motions in them they are only such as afford
pleasure, which they receive in seeing such Examples of Fortunes Unconstancy in
the World. But this severity in the Turkish Policy does not only extend to the
Bashaws and great Men, but to the very Ottoman Family it self, who are
suppressed with greater strictness than all others, and are debarred all Wealth
and Offices. Thus by the fundamental Laws of the Empire, the Children of a
Grand Seigniors Daughter married to a Bashaw, are not capable of any Office in
the State, but if by favor this is at any time dispensed with, they can never
attain to any higher Preferment than that of a Capugibashee, which is one of
the Porters of the Grand Seigniors Gate. Nay, it is so great a Crime to be
allied to the Royal Family, that it is almost Treason in those of this Race to
name it, nor is there in Turkey but one Branch of this Line of any account or
esteem, and that is the Offspring of Sultan Ibrahim, who was a Son of the Grand
Seigniors Sister, and married to a Sultana (and are said to be of the Race of
the Tartars) thus coming only by the Woman's side the less notice is taken of
their Blood. Nor had this Family subsisted to this day, had it not been for
this extraordinary Prudence and Discretion of its conduct in all the
Revolutions of the Turkish Government, never aspiring to Offices, nor meddling
with affairs of State, but living contentedly and with out Ostentation upon a
small yearly revenue of about 70000 Dollars.

The Turks do look upon as one Cause of the Conservation of their Dominions,
their laying wast and desolating their own Provinces that lie the farthest
remote from the Seat of their Empire, and by this means they think to enervate
and dispirit the People, and bring them more within the reach and compass of
Authority. And indeed it is seldom known that any Rebellions do arise under the
Turkish sway, though in the remotest parts of Asia; and these few that have been
seen, have with case been calmed and suppressed for the Malcontents and
restless Spirits find no shelter in those Parts, being stripped of their
Fortifications and Retreats in the Woods and Forests, and the Rebels thereby
exposed to the pursuits of an irritated Prince. And this it is that constrains
the great men of that Empire to deliver themselves up without more ado to
undergo Punishment and Death at the Will of their Sovereign, seeing they have
no means of flight, nor no place of refuge lest in Countries, that are laid
wholly wast and afford no sustenance or support. Besides this dispeopling,
dismantling, and thus desolating the Country, is attended with this other
advantage, that no Foreign Enemy can with a Land Army make any Invasion into
it with advantage, for the desolation of it renders it incapable of furnishing
any Provisions, and that there it is easily destroyed by the Grand Seigniors
own Subjects, and for an Army to bring Ammunition, and Provision along with it
sufficient for such an Expedition, is a thing almost impossible. Nevertheless
the immediate Frontier Places of their new Conquests the Turks take always Care
to fortify, and to garnish and strengthen with Colonies of their own People.

Now as the Turkish Expeditions are like a Torrent, which bears all down before
them so it is a point of their Policy when they have made a Conquest of any
considerable Country to strike up a Peace immediately, that so they may have
time to settle and confirm themselves in their new Acquisitions, well knowing,
that what they have so hastily overrun, is again to be as easily recovered, and
that the stream of such inundations is as rapid in the Ebb as in the Flux.

The frequent Change of Officers, the degrading of some and exalting of others,
is thought to tend very much to the welfare of the Ottoman Empire, for hereby
those Sparks are deprived of the means of rivetting themselves in the Peoples
Affections, or of fomenting any mutiny or alteration in the State: Besides as
all Offices are here purchased at very dear Rates, every Bashaw of Grand Caire
or of Babylon paying three or four hundred thousand Dollars for their
Commission; others two, others one hundred thousand, according as their places
are more or less considerable, and this Money they are constrained to take up
at interest paying forty or fifty per cent. annually and oftentimes more, so
that they are forced to squeeze and fleece the People for the reimbursing
themselves again, clear their engagements, and bribe and purchase the Favor
and Protection of the Minions of the Court. Nevertheless this stands them in
little stead, for when they have pretty well glutted themselves with their
Exorbitant Exactions, and that the People begin to bawle out loud against the
Tyranny and Oppression of those Ministers, they are presently offered up a
Sacrifice to their Furies, and those vast Estates and Mass of Treasure which
they had so unjustly heaped, confiscated to the Grand Seigniors use, who only
bestows on their Posterity what he in his Bounty thinks fitting. Nor are these
Harpies of Ministers the only Persons liable to the severity of the Turkish
Government, those who are the Favorites of the People being no less exposed to
the keenness of the Ottoman sway, which looks upon Popularity as an
unpardonable Crime. But then these Darling Officers are not dispatched into the
other World after the same manner as those public Pests, who are executed in
Triumph, but the others are cajoled with all manner of fair treatment, the
Grand Seigniors Umbrage is dissembled and they perhaps presented with a Horse,
a Sword, a Sable Vest, or a Commission for some more honorable and
advantageous Government, until they have got them into such places, that the
Executioner doing his orders by slipping the Bow-string about their Necks,
cannot create any combustion nor hazard the public Peace. Thus does Turkey
afford the fruitful Landscape of the unconstancy and mutability of Humane
Grandeur that ever any other Country did, one moment seeing one of these
Meteors shining in all the splendor, pomp, luster and magnificence imaginable,
and the next fall unpittied, barbarously put to death, his body thrown into the
Dirt of a foreign and unknown Country, without any solemnity of Funeral or
Monument, but no sooner in the Grave than his memory is forgotten.

But now I think 'twould not be all together improper to set down some of those
Religious Arts and Maxims whereby the Turkish Faith has and is propogated,
especially since their Law has that influence upon Affairs of State, and so
contrived for the honor and profit of the Sovereign; but for that purpose I
shall not need to look back so far as to give an account of its first taking
root or establishment, nor that Mahomets Law was an hodge-podg of Judaisme,
Chrystianity, and Paganism, nor of his nicking for lucky a juncture, as when
the greatest Politicians of the Age were employed in framing a Model of an
Ecclesiastical Monarchy, they and the Divines busied in healing the Wounds,
which the Heresies of Arius and Nestorius had made in the Church, nor shall I
speak of the stupidity and blockishness of the Age and Country he first set up
in, and so the more easy to be imposed upon by his false and pretended
Miracles, giving out he was sent by God to give a new Law to Mankind, and that
he was to reduce the World by force of Arms to his Obedience; that as Christ
was greater than Moses, so was he greater than Christ and the last of the
Prophets; that he had Communication with the Angel Gabriel for two years
together that he lived in a Cave, who delivered to him and helped him to
compile the Alchoran, though it was done by the help of Sergius the Monk; keeping
a Pidgeon which he had taught to feed out of his Ear, he pretended it was the
Holy Ghost, whom he conversed with and who instructed him in the Divine
Precepts. Whenever he was in fits of the Falling Sickness, to which he was
extremely subject, he gave out that they were holy and prophetical Trances,
with many other such like fopperies, and mad-visionary tales, too tedious here
to relate. Wherefore we will only take a short view of the practices now in use
with them for the insinuating and promoting the Rites, Doctrines and Laws of
the Turkish Religion.

The first was a Toleration of other Religions, especially cajoling the
Christians and their Te^ents, owning Christ to be a Prophet, and a greater too
than Moses; that Mary conceived by the smell of a Rose; that the blessed Virgin
was free from Original sin, and the Temptations of the Devil; that Christ was
the Word of God and is so styled in the Alchoran, and cured Diseases, raised
the dead, and workt many miracles, and that his Disciples did the like by his
power, hardly any of them ever speaking of our Savior but with Veneration and
Reverence, but will warmly deny his Passion, saying it were an Impiety to
believe that God who loved and had conferred so much Power, and so many Graces
on Christ, should so far dishonor him, as to deliver him into the Hands of the
Jews, who were the worst and most scorned of Men, or to the Death of the Cross
which was the most vile and infamous of all punishments; for being, as they
say, led toward the place of Execution, God not permitting so base a People to
put to Death so holy a Prophet (for they confess that he never sinned) did
assume him into Heaven: when mist and sought by the Soldiers in the throng,
they laid hold of one of the Judges that had condemned him, who resembled him
much in favor and proportion, telling him that he should not escape from them
again; and so not believing whatsoever he said, executed him in his Room. By
such like Baits and Artifices as these, and punishing severely all those who
Blaspheme the name of Christ, they think to decoy and invite over to their
belief the unwary Christians.

Toleration, as I said, being one of the first Traps that was laid for the
Professors of others Creeds, they have improved it to this, among the other
advantages of seducing and perverting the People that dwell among them, that as
they allow of Churches and Houses of Devotion in places where they have been
anciently founded, but admit not of holy buildings on new Foundations; they may
repair the old coverings and roofs, but cannot lay a stone in a new Place
consecrated to Divine Service, nor if fire or any accident destroy the
superstructure can it be re-edifyed, or any new strength added to the
Foundation, wherewith to underprop for an other building. Thus in time all the
Churches in the Ottoman Empire must of necessity fall to utter ruin, as many
have already done, so that seeing the Turkish Laws do not permit Christian
Churches to be restored, Christianity in time will be abolished in those
Dominions, unless it be the good Will of Heaven otherwise to ordain it.

Neither are their Laws concerning Christian Children less conducing to the
propagating Christianity, for if a man turn Turk, his Children under the age of
fourteen years, though educated with other Principles, must be forced to the same
Persuasion, Men that speak against the Mohammedan Law, that have rashly promised
at a time of Distraction or Drunkenness to become Turks, orhave had a carnal
knowledge of a Turkish Woman, must either become Martyrs or Apostates; besides
many other subtleties they have to entrap the Souls of Christians with the
niceties and entanglements of their Law.

Another point of the Mohammedan Policy is for the promoting of their Sect, not
to deliver up any City Town or Fortress where Mosques or other Religious Houses
of their persuasion have been once built, and where Mahometanism has been
professed; thus the Turk has no sooner set footing in a Town, but that he falls
immediately to erecting of Mosques and Temples, and thereby lays an obligation
upon the consciences of the Garrison to make the most obstinate and vigorous
Defense, and this being a Principle of their Religion never to yield upon a
voluntary surrender, it has often been so prevalent, and spirited the
Defendants to that Degree, that all the terrors and miseries of Famine, Sword,
and other Calamities have not been capable to constrain them to lay down their
Arms and capitulate a delivery.

Besides these Artifices the Mahametan Doctrine it self had such Baits and
Decoys, as were sure to catch and trepan all Carnal and Voluptuous Men, Mahomet
promising to the Possessours of the World, magnificent Palaces spread all over
with silk Carpets, flowery Fields and Christalline Rivers; Trees of Gold still
flourishing; pleasing the Eye with their goodly Forms, and the Taste with their
Fruits, under whose fragrant shades they shall spend the course of their happy
time with Amorous Virgins, who shall alone regard their particular lovers: Not
such as have lived in this World, but created on purpose: with great black
Eyes, beautiful as a Hyacinth, and the duration of one act of Carnal Copulation
should be for the space of sixty years; that their Women shall have daily their
lost Virginities restored, ever young (continuing there as here at fifteen, and
the Man as at thirty) and ever free from natural Portions; Boys of Divine
feature shall minister unto them, and set before them all variety of delicate
Viands. And a thousand other things sensual and ridiculous to wise and thinking
Men, yet capable of drawing in a senceless though sensual Multitude as the
Oriental Nations are above all others.

But when all these tricks fail them, they have an other way to propagate their
Religion much more prevalent than any yet mentioned, and indeed is what first
introduced it, established it, and has since main^^^^ (...) the World, and that
is by the ^wo^d (...) it is one of the Principal Articles of their Creed that
the Souls of those who dye in the Wars against the Christians, without the help
of any previous Acts of performance of their Law, or other Works, are
immediately transported to Paradise, which must necessarily make keen the
Swords and animate the Courage of the Soldiers: and besides this Resolution in
War, they infuse into them an invincible patience in bearing all terrestrial
wants by which they are kept tite against Sedition and apt to retain all things
necessary to compliance in Government. And by such like Insinuations is these,
do they whet such Multitudes of their Soldiers to rush blindly on to their ^wn
Ruin and Slaughter valuing their Lives and Bodies at no higher rate than the
price ^f Stones and Rubbish to stuff up Brooks and Ditches, that they may but
erect a Bridge or ^assage for their Fellows to assault their E^emies.

The success of the Ottoman Arms has con^rmed their opinion of their Faith, and
they ^ave made it a Principle, that whosoever pro^ers, has God for the Author,
and by how ^uch more successful have been their Wars, by (...) much the more
has God been an owner of their ^ause and Religion.

Nor is their constancy to, and their strict observation of their Primitive
institutes, small preservative against Divisions and editions both in Church
and State.

The Institution, Power and Office of the ^ufti is also a most Political
Contrivance, ^r though his decisions be looked upon as sa^ed and infallible, yet
is he constantly a ^eature of the Grand Seigniors, and that all ^wer both
Ecclesiastical and Civil be radical^^ in the Sultan, yet he is only a mere
Wea^^er-cock of State, pointing as the Court ^rects; the Grand Seignior always
chooses ^r this Office some person most Famous for ^s learning in the Laws, and
eminent for his Virtues and strict conduct of Life. Thi^ Ministers Office is so
great among the Turk^ that the Grand Seignior will in no wise contradict or
oppose his Determination in an^ case whatever.

This Minister is made use of as a Skrec^ by the Court, whether in cases of
condemning any great and Popular Man to Death or making War or Peace or other
important affairs of the Empire; and this is either to appear the more just and
Religious, or t^ incline the People more willingly to Obed^dience. Now though the
Grand Seignior be the Fountain and Oracle of justice, though he b^ above the Law,
yet when he has resolve upon the Fall and Destruction of any great and Popular
Man, the Mufti's Sentence giv^ a gloss and innocent varnish to his Action of
Justice.

But in case the Mufti be at any time foun^ refractory, and cannot or will not
resol^ the cases that are offered to his solution, b^ is fairly dismissed from
his infallible Office and an other set up in his stead who is mo^pliant and
flexible, and a fitter Oracle for the present juncture. And if any Hesitat^ on
be met with in the second, he is also d^charged, and so on with others until
the have met with one whose Prophesies jun^ more with the interest of the
Prince, y^ ^et things go as they will, the Musti's Life is ^ree from the Sword,
and his Fortunes sel^om subject to the Subversion. In short, he ^s the supreme
Judge and rectifier of all Actions, as well civil as ecclesiastical, and an
approver of the Justice of the Military. He seldom goes abroad, nor does he
admit of impertinent Conversation, he carries gravity with him in his looks, as
well as in his behavior. When any come to him for Judgment, they deliver him
in Writing the State of the Question, and he in Writing briefly returns his
Oraculous answer, ^he commonly wears a Vest of Green, and the greatest
turbant in the Empire, and though we should say as large as a Bushel we should
not be much out of compass. His Seraglio is neither large nor beautiful. In it
he keeps a Seminary of Boys, who are instructed in the Mysteries of their
Laws; he is not restrained, nor restrains himself from the Penalty of Women
his Incomes are great, his expenses small, and therefore his Wealth infinite.
Thus having briefly touched upon the Maxims of the Turkish Policy and some of
the Articles of their Creed. I shall now proceed, to give an, account of their
Persons, Garb, Dispositions, Manners and Fashions.

CHAP. III. Of the Persons, Garb, Dispositions, Manners and Fashions of the
Turks.
THe Turks are generally well complexioned, of goodly Statures, full Bodies,
and sutably proportioned; they suffer no hair about them, but a lock on their
Crown, and what grows on their Faces; for their Beards they wear at full
length, as a mark of gravity and of freedom, the Slaves in the Levant being
shaved, and the Christians ridiculed who so un-man themselves by taking off
their Beards. It is a badge of their Religion to wear white Shashes and
Turbants on their Heads, and they distinguish their Vocations and Quality by
their foldings and their size. Next to their Skin they wear a Calico Smock,
with large Sleeves longer than their Arms; under this a pair of Calico Drawers,
reaching to their Anckles, with Yellow or Red slip-Shoes, picked at the Toe,
and plated on the Soal: Over all they wear a half sleeved Coat girt unto them
with a Shash or Towel: their Neck all bare; and this is their Summer Garb
within Doors. But when they go abroad they wear over all Gowns, some with wide
half Sleeves, others with long hanging Sleeves buttoned before, and by the
meaner People another Fashion, reaching but a little below the Knee, with
hanging-Sleeves not much longer than the Arm, and open before, but all of them
ungathered in the Shoulders. In the Winter they wear a kind of Breeches or
Drawers of Cloth which about the small of their Leg are sowed to short smooth
Buskins of Leather without Soals, fit for the Foot, as the Glove for the Hand;
lining their Gowns with Fur, as they do their Coats; having then the Sleeves
(or quilted Wastecotes under them) reaching close to their Wrists. They wear no
Gloves, they wear long Handkerchiefs at their Girdles, some of great Value, and
admirable well wrought, the Modes never change in Turkey, no more than they do
in Spain, nor is there any great difference in the make of the Clothes of mean
People and those of Quality, only that they wear Cloth of Tissue, of Gold and
Silver, Velvet, Scarlet, Satin, Damask, Camlets, lined with Sables and other
costly Furs, and with Martins, Squirrils, Foxes, and Coney-skins according to
their several Qualities. But the common wear is Violet Cloth, they retain still
the Ancient custom of presenting Change of Raiment. The Clergy go much in
Green, it being Mahomets Color, and those of his Posterity and Kindred wear
Green shashes, and are called Emers, which is Lord, the Women in like manner
wearing also something of Green upon their Heads to be known. A Christian is
not allowed to wear Green, if he does out of ignorance, he shall be soundly
beaten, and his Clothes torn off his Back. In the City they have no Arms, only
tuck under their Girdle a crooked Knife of the bigness of a Dagger, in sheaths
of Metal, all beset with Gemms and precious Stones to a considerable value.
They are upright in their Gate, lofty in their Demeanor with an elated
Countenance. The greatest sign of Love and Honor is among them to take a
Person by the Hand, and lay it to ones Forehead; they lay their Hands on their
Bosoms in their familiar Salutations, bending their Bodies a little; but in
their respects to Persons of Illustrious Quality, they bow to the very Ground,
and kiss the Hem of his Garment. The Ornaments of their Head, they never put
off upon any occasion, they are Devout observers of cleanliness and neatness,
not only washing all parts of their Bodies upon every slight, occasion, but
going into their Bannio's (which are the most stately of their Public
Buildings) once or twice a Week, but perfuming their Beards and the inside of
their Turbants with Amber, they are so superstitious in their washings, that
they fancy the least Excrement upon their Garments is a Polution. They seldom
travel single, but expecting till a greater number be bound for the same place,
go and lodge together; These are called Caravans, and are security from Thieves
unless they come in Troops, and then the Governors sends against them, they
have not many Occupations and Exercises, being generally extreme slothful,
their Minds being in no wise inclined to Arts, nor have they any Inclination
for the Sciences, so that it is no wonder if a Man can only be provided in their
Country with what is absolutely necessary for Life, indispensably useful to
Commerce, and very meanly proper for the Recreation of the Mind and Body, and
for the passing ones time pleasantly and with de^ight, which ever proves
tedious to such dull, heavy and unthinking People as are he Mahometans. Thus
almost their only Exercise is shooting, wherein too they take so little pains,
that they sit all the while ^n Carpets in the shade, and make their slaves
fetch their Arrows, their Bows are made of the Horns of Buffiloes, intermixed
with Sinews, rarely wrought and many of them exquisitely gilded, and are for
form and length not unlike the Lath of a large Cross-Bow: They are indeed
excellent at Rope-dancing, and some of them are Wrestlers. But only such as
make it their Profession, and gain thereby their livelihood. Cards and Dice
they do not understand, but will play at chess all the day long, an amuzement
suting well enough with their sedentary Humor. Those of the better rank
delight much in Horses, which are both beautiful and well managed, but cannot
undergo hard riding; their Saddles, though not large be hard and deep, plated
behind and before, and some of them with Silver, as are their Massy Stirrups,
and the Reins of their Bridles suited unto their other costly Caparisons. When
they stand in the Stable, they feed them for the most part, if not altogether
with Barley; being here of small Value, and only serving for that purpose; they
litter them in their own Dung, first dried in the Sun, and pulverated, which
keeps their Skins clean, smooth and shining.

In Turkey they shut Cats and Dogs out of Doors every Night, and this is made a
piece of their Religion, and a cleanly one: the Dogs go most together making a
hideous noise and are dangerous by Night to Thieves and Drunkards; others
seldom walk among them after it is dark.

The thing, wherein Necessity has constrained the Turks to busy themselves,
are, Agriculture, Baking, dressing Victuals, and Architecture, and of late the
Christians have Care to cultivate the Lands in the Ottoman Empire. The Turks
seldom put Hand to Plow, but when they are pinched by necessity, for if there
be any Greeks or Armenians in (...) Village, they leave all to them and never
^rouble themselves with sowing or reaping. They have a great number of Bakers
in all the great Cities, those Bakers having for the most ^art Mills in their
own Houses, and keeping ^ertain Animals for the turning their Mills. The Turks
Kitchins are none of the most La^ish and Delicious, a Man needing to be sharp
^t to be much pleased with their Cookery, their Pillaw is the Principal Dish,
and is ^ice in Grain, dressed very small in Meat ^^oth, or else with Water and
Butter. And ^^is is the most excellent of all their Dishes, without which the
greatest Feast in the ^orld would not be of any esteem, some^^mes they put into
turned Milk which they ^^l Joyhourt, Saffron to make it Yellow, ^^ney or
Pekmess, which is Wine boiled (...) make it sweet, and a thousand other
Ingredients to satisfy the whimsicalness of so depraved a Taste as theirs. They
often have Roast-meat which they call Kiabab, which they neither lard nor bast,
unless it be with the fatt of Caramanian Mutton, the Tails of which Sheep are
as broad as the Brims of a Hat and proportionably thick. They are but a short
while at Table, and have sooner dined then we can eat a Dish of Broth. As soon
as Dinners over they wrap up their Sofra or Leather Carpet, their Table being a
round Board, standing on a Foot not past a Foot high, and brim'd like a
Charger; the Dishes have Feet like standing Bowls, and are so set one upon an
other, that you may eat of each without removing of any, though commonly they
have neither Tables nor Stools in their Houses but sit crossed legged on the
Floor at their Victuals, all in a ring. Their Houses are generally made of
Brick baked in the Sun, ar^ low and mean, which is to be ascribed to the
Peoples having no properties of their own, and therefore Care not to spend
either their Treasure or their time in building what they cannot transmit to
their Posterity nay which they themselves may be outed (...) the very next
Moment. Now though the Mahometans have some Rules of Architectur^ for the above
mentioned reason they never practice them for their own use. None but Public
Buildings as are the Temples, Baths, Hospitals, Coravanserats, Basarts and
Besestins, that have any thing in any wise passable well contrived.
Nevertheless the roofs of many of their Private Houses are curiously fieled
with inlaid Wood adorned with Gold and Azure to an excessive costliness, the
upper end of the Room being a little raised, is covered with Turkey Carpets,
whereon when they tread they put off their Slip-shoes. In the heat of the day
they sit on great out-Windows which many of them have made for that purpose.
But as for Hangings or the like to their Rooms they have none, all their
Furniture on the Inside being only bare White Walls, unless some peculiar Room
in the Houses of those of the Highest Quality.

Their Public Buildings are vast, and stately afar off being wonderfully
beautifyed by the abundance of Trees planted among the Houses, so as each City
seems rather a Wood than a City; which, beside the pleasant Aspect, shelters
against the Summer Sun and Winters Wind; the Streets are not broad, but paved
with a high foot-Causay on each side, in the middle a passage for Carts and
Horses; from the Caves on both sides is made a Boarded Arch not very close, yet
much defensive against Sun and Rain. Turkey is furnished with magnificent
Bridges, as Hanes, Mesketoes, Highways and other public Structures; and by
this means, when any Provincial Governor is both for Riches and Rapin
notorious, he is sure ere long to be circumvented, or else laid open to the
Accuser for confiscation, he to prevent this has no fairer way, than for the
public good to make some work of eminent magnificence; wherein lie the two
safe points of Reputation, in being held pious and exhaust, the one stops the
Accuser, the other the Exchequer.

But as I have spoke something of their Diet and their Habitations, it will not
be impertinent to enlarge a little farther upon their House-keepings and
Habitations; the Turks find the advantage of their sparing humor both in War
and at home, the greatest Provisions that are carried into their Camp being
only of Rice, potted Butter, and some dry or poudred Meats, they do not busy a
vast number of Men to search after and procure a hundred sorts of different
Meats, nor oblige their Soldiers to wander from their main Body to fetch away
to the peril of their lives wherewith to satisfy their Intemperance. And as for
their House keeping a Barrel of Rice a year, with some Pots of Butter, and
dried Fruits, make the greatest Provisions of a very numerous Family. For my
part I can refer to no other Cause than this the sobriety the strength and
plumpness of all the Eastern-People: And if they were allowed to have great
Estates in Property for the receiving of Annual Rents, this Retrenchment and
Moderation they have so long made in their Diet, would have settled more Rich
Families in Constantinople, than Feasting and Luxury have ruined in all his
Majesty's three Kingdoms. For a Kitchen in a House is like the Spleen in the
Body, the more it Augments, the more the other Faculties diminish. Nevertheless
their Pillaw, Doulma, Boureck, Chorbes and other Dainties would be pleasing
enough to some of our nicest Palats in Europe, and whereon a Man might make
both a substantial and a delicious meal.

Their Attendants at the Table are Slaves, such as have been bestowed upon them
by way of Present, or which they have obtained in War or by their Money; and
the greater number a Man has, the richer he is accounted: They make three Meals
a day. But at a Feast they besiege the Table all the day long, unless they rise
to ease Nature and forthwith return. They abominate Hogs-Flesh, Blood, and
whatever has dyed of it self, unless in extreme necessity. As Wine is
prohibited them by their Alcoran, (wherein nevertheless they will debauch to a
high Degree in private) their usual Drink is pure Water and sundry sorts of
Sherbets, some made of Sugar and Lemmons, some of Violets, Peaches, Apricocks,
or other Flowers, Fruits or Plumbs, as is the product of each Province; these
are dried together into a consistence reasonable hard, and portable for their
use in War, or elsewhere, mingling about a spoonful with a Quart of Water. But
one of their most common Drinks, now in great request with us, is their Coffee,
and Coffee-Houses abound in Turkey more than Taverns nay Inns or Alehouses in
England. In their Coffee-Houses upon Scaffolds half a yard High, which they
call Sofats, covered with Mats, they sit cross-leg'd after the Turkish manner,
commonly two or three hundred together chatting, often having some sorry
Music, thrumming up and down the Room all the while. They are incredible
takers of Opium, which abounds in some of their Provinces, this they say
expels all fear and renders them Courageous, but rather wild-headed, and
occasioning turbulent Dreams. The Turks are excessive in their jealousy,
surpassing therein all other Nations which is to be ascribed to Polygamy, which
renders the Husband unfit for sufficient correspondence, and suspicious the
Women will seek for due Benevolence elsewhere. Now they are generally exhorted
to Matrimony for the propagating of their Law, and the Man loses his Reputation
who deferreth marrying till the Age of five and twenty. Every Man is allowed
four Wives, who must all pin their Faith upon Mahomets Sleeves, and as many
Concubines as he can keep, and that two of any Religion soever. Yet this set
number of their Wives is no point of their Religion, but a restriction
introduced upon some Politic Consideration, as too great a Burden and
debilitation to men's Estates and Bodies. A Man being bound to make each Wife a
Cabin or Dowry, and each by the Law is allowed to claim her share in the
conjugal allowance, at least one night in the Week; for if any of them has
been neglected for a whole Week before, she may challenge Thursday night as her
due, and the Law has provided her Remedy in that case against her Husband: But
if her modesty will not allow her to sue for one Weeks Default, she has
nevertheless the Ingenuity to contrive a supply of her wants. Now as the Women
in Turkey are kept in the highest restraint imaginable, not being allowed to
stir abroad but muffled all but the Eyes, nor suffered to go to Church, or look
out of the Windows of their own Houses, nay not to converse with their own Sons
after such an Age; so none in the World can match them in their Ingenious
contrivances for the satisfying their lascivious Desires, which are nourisht
and fomented to that Degree by the strictness of their Guardians, that the
Turkish Women are accounted the most immodest Women in the World. Nevertheless,
a Wives incontinency does not here redound to the Disgrace and Scandal of a
Husband, the Brow- Antlets being placed to the account of the Father, Brother
or kindred of the Woman: Her Blood and Family being thereby tainted and
dishonored, and he by a Divorce both rids himself of his Wife, and purges
himself of the disgrace. But before we speak of the formalities of a Divorce,
it will not be impertinent to s^t down those of a Wedding. Now having bought
their Wife of her Parents, and recorded the contract before the Cadi they
solemnize their marriage in this manner. Many Women are invited by the Mother
of the Bride to accompany her the night before the Marriage day, whereof they
spend a great part in feasting; then lead they her into a Bath, where they
anoint and bath her. So breaking company, they depart unto their several Rests,
and in the morning return unto her Chamber; where they deck her in her richest
Ornaments, tying on her Silcken Buskins with Knots not easily unknit. The
Bridegroom having feasted a number in like manner, in the morning they also
repair to his House in their best Trappings, and nobly mounted, from whence
they set forward two and two in a Rank, to fetch home the Bride, accompanied
with Music, and conducted by the Sagdich, who is the nearest of his Kindred.
To the Sagdich the Bride is delivered with her Face close covered, and then she
is set astride on Horseback, with a Canopy carried over her in such manner, as
no part of her is to be discerned. Thus does this Troup return in the same
order that it came, having their Presents and Apparel carried after them in
Serbets or a kind of Baskets, and then follows the Bride her self, and last of
all her Slaves if any have been given her. The Bridegroom stands at his Door
to receive her, and has all respects paid him by his Guests: who nevertheless
go not in, and is regated by them with several Presents before their departure.
If she be of Quality, she is led to the Bride Chamber by an Eunuch, where Women
stand prepared to undress her. But the Bridegroom himself must untie her
Buskins, to which he is fain to apply his Teeth. Now he must entertain his
Wifes with equal respect, giving them the same Diet, the same Apparel, and the
same Benevolence, being expressly ordained in the precepts of their Doctors,
and all this must be exactly observed unless they are willing, and consent to
change Turns, and upon Default they may procure a Divorce upon complaint to the
Cadi: Now they have three Degrees of Divorce, every one of which is made,
before the Cadi, and by him both extracted and Registered; the first separates
the Man and Wife only from the same House and Bed, the Wife being still allowed
her Maintenance; the second divides them not only in that manner, but the
Husband is compelled to make good her Kabin, or Dowry promised at her Marriage,
so as to have no Interest either in him or his Estate, and to be at perfect
Freedom to Marry another, the third sort of Divorce is called ( Ouch Talac)
and is made in a Solemn and more Serious manner, with more rigorous terms of
separation, and in this case the Husband repenting of his Divorce, and desirous
to take his Wife again, cannot be admitted to her by the Law, without
consenting and contenting himself to see an other Man enjoy her before his
Face, an injunction ordained by the Law for a punishment of the Husbands levity
and inconstancy. And how severe a Condition soever this may seem, there be some
Turks who are content to accept of them again upon those Articles, and make
choice of some handsome Youth for the entering their Wifes Bed. In some cases a
Woman with many of her Friends goes before a Cadi, where weeping and taking off
her Shoe, she holds the Soal upwards but says nothing, and this ceremony is
used when a married Woman complains that her Husband would abuse her against
Nature. And no delivery can be so clean and neat as this by way of Emblem, such
Facts being too unclean for Language; there are some other points pleadable in
Law for Divorce in behalf of the Woman, as impotency or frigidity in the
Husband, and the like; as also if he maintain her not with Bread, Butter, Rice,
and Flax to Spin for her clothing, the Law supposing her so good a Huswife as
to supply her self with her own Labor; they have also a sort of half Marriage
among them which is called Kabin, when a man takes a Wife for a Month, or for a
certain limited time, and an agreement is made for the price before the Cadee
or Judge: and this is chiefly used by Strangers. Moreover there is still an
other sort of Marriages practiced in Turkey, which is the Conjunction of an
Eunuch with a Woman; such as are wholly deprived and disarmed of all parts of
Manhood, and yet do notwithstanding take many Wives, and exercise Lusts of an
unknown and prodigious Nature.

One Privilege the Grand Seigniors Subjects, have more then their Sovereign,
that they can marry whom they please, whereas he can marry none at all, under
which restriction those Princes have lain ever since the misfortune of Bajazet,
who being a Prisoner to Tamerlane had his dearly beloved Wife Despina violated
before his very Eyes; Insomuch that the Sultans to prevent such like
Misfortunes and Dishonours for the future, take no Female companion of their
Empire, in whom they can interess themselves farther than as Slaves, or for the
loss of Goods, Riches or Estates. Besides this Policy has a larger extent, for
it puts off all those vast Dowries, which otherwise should be made answerable
to a Sultana's Condition, so that by this means a great part of the Revenues of
the Empire would be diverted from the true Channel of its Interest and
Conservation, and lavisht upon uses rather tending to its Undermining and
Debilitation, than to the settling and augmenting its Grandeur.

The Children the Turks have by their Slaves, are equally esteemed by them with
those they have by their Wives, bating this difference in esteem of the Law,
that unless the Father manumisses them by his Testament, and conferrs a
livelihood upon them by Legacy, they remain to the Charity of the Elder
Brother that is born from the Wife, and are his Slaves, and he their Lord and
Master, so that from the Loins of the same Father may proceed Children of a
servile and ignominious Condition. The Women respect their Hu^band as a Master;
receive chastizement from him, which they interpret as a mark of his Affection,
they eat apart, unless particularly called by the Husband, and do not concern
themselves with Domestic Affairs, the Principal of their business being to
study all the ways possible to please their Husband, Nurse their own Children,
and cultivate their Charms. And indeed they are generally well featured, clear,
smooth, and ruddy complexioned, with large black Eyes, which they consider as a
Beauty, and is to be one of the greatest Charms of Mahomets Paradise, and those
who have not naturally black Eyes, have the Art to make them seem so, and also
dye their Eye Lashes and Eye brows, as they also do the hair of their Head
which they wear sometimes dishevelled. Their Nails they paint with a Yellowish
Red. On the top of their Heads they wear a Cap not unlike the top of a
Sugar Loaf, yet a little flat of Paste-Board, and covered with Cloth of Silver
or Tissue.

Women of the better Rank wear about the upper parts of their Arms, and smalls
of their Legs, Bracelets, and are elsewhere adorned with Jewels. When they go
abroad they wear over all long Gowns of Violet or Scarlet Cloth, tied close
before, the large Sleeves hanging over their Hands, having Buskins on their
Legs, and their Heads and Faces so mufled in fine Linen that no more is to be
seen of them than their Eyes, nor that of some, who look as through a Bevour,
being forbidden by their Alchoran to disclose their Beautyes unto any save
their Fathers and their Husbands.

The next that fall in our way to speak of after their Wives, be their Slaves,
who are Christians taken in War or purchased with their Money. Of those there
are weekly Markets in each City, where they are to be sold as Horses in Fairs,
the Men being prized according to their faculties or Personal abilities, and
the Women for their Youths and Beauties, being decked with all the Ornaments
that can inspire Love and Affection, and allure and invite Chapmen. And as
Jockyes view and examine every Part and Limb before they strike up a Bargain,
so are they so scrutinous as to search even her very Mouth. Their Masters may
lie with them, chastise them, exchange and sell them at their Pleasure: If any
Slave become a Mohammedan, he is discharged his Bondage. The old and the most
deformed are put to the most Drudgery, the Men-Slaves may compel their Masters
before the Cady, to limit the time of their Bondage, or set a price of their
Redemption, or else to sell them unto an other; but whether of the two, they
lightly refer unto the Slaves Election. If they be only fit for Labor, they
will accept of the Time, but if skillful in any craft, of the Price, which
expired or paid, they may return unto their Countries. But Gally-Slaves are
seldom released, in regard of their small number, and much employment which
they have for them: Nor those that are Slaves unto great ones, to whom the
Cady's Authority extends not.

Many of the Children that the Turks do buy, they castrate, making all smooth
as the back of the Hand, whereof diverse do dye in cutting, who supply the uses
of Nature with a Silver Quill, which they wear in their Turbants. In times
past, they only did but geld them; but being admitted to the free Converse of
their Women, it was observed by some that they more than ordinarily delighted
in their Societies. But others, that one of the Sultans seeing a Gelding cover
a Mare, brought in among them that Inhumane Custom. Eunuchs are in great
repute with their Masters in Turkey, being entrusted with the whole management
of their Estates, the Government of their Women and Houses in their absence,
and have shown themselves so Trusty, Loyal, Prudent and Courageous, that they
have often been called to the Helm, and had the whole conduct of the State
committed to their Care.

As for the Trade, and Sciences of the Turks, some of them have some small
Insight and Knowledge in Philosophy. Physic they have learnt rather from
necessity and experience than the Grounds of the Art. Astronomy is in great
vogue with them, and there be many pretenders to it, who sit frequently in the
Streets of the City to tell Fortunes, and are resorted to by such as are to go
a Journey or undertake any affair of Moment. They have a knack in Poetry,
wherein they chaunt their Amors in the Persian Tongue to vile Music, yet are
they forbidden so to do by their Law; Citterns, Harps, and Recorders being
their Principal Instruments. But their loud Instruments do rather terrify than
please, and charm the Ear. They neither study, nor are farther acquainted with
Rhetoric or Logic than what mere Nature does afford. Historians they have,
though their Writings read by none or few, as fancying none can give us the truth
of the time past, since none dare write the Truth of what is present. Nor
indeed is Printing tolerated in Turkey, for the Grand Seignior having observed
Learning and the Press to have been the chief fomenters of Divisions in
Christendom, has prohibited them his Dominions, and makes his Subjects
contented with such learning as proceeds from less erring Experience, which
they find adapt them sufficiently for all State-employments, and sooner
furnishes them with clearer reason, than those who run through a long course of
canting Terms, strange Languages and musty Arts, which the Custom of their
Universities does oblige their Students to. And indeed their Ministry has been
found so expert, so Prudent and so sagacious in all their Negociations and
Transactions, that they could never be overreached by the most learned and
most Politic Princes of Christendom. Thus all Sciences that have any affinity
to those we call liberal, are taught no where save in the Seraglio, as we shall
show more at large hereafter, where the Grand Seignior has power to increase
or diminish the number of their Professors according as it suits his
Occasions. By which conduct those many Schisms and Distractions which in the
State of most Christian Princes do frequently happen both in Church and State,
are foreclosed and prevented, and those many refined Mercurial Heads, which
with us for want of employment make it their Business to blow up the flames of
Sedition, are seta^nd bred to more gross Employments, and become more eager and
intent upon Profit and sensual Pleasures, than the vain and often desolating
Destructive Projects of our speculative Men. Writing they use, and that in the
Arabic Characters, but leave out the Vowels unless it be at the end of a word,
so that much is contained in a little Room; they curiously sleek their Paper
which is thick, much of it being Colored and dappelled like Chamblets, done by
a trick they have of dipping it in Water. Every one has some Trade or other,
not so much as the Grand Seignior excepted. Yet their Trades are such as serve
only their own Uses and Necessities, and not such as supply foreign Marts,
which they do not much frequent. And though the Turks be excessively avaricious,
yet they only work by starts, and more for their Amusement and Recreation then
for Profit. The Europeans have taught them to be subtle, nay treacherous in
their compacts and dealings, though indeed it must be owned, they have not yet
attained to the skill of their Masters. There is no People more covetous of
Salutation than the Turks, in meeting upon the Highway one with a stoop, and
his Hand upon his Breast, bids Salaum Aleek, the other with like abeysance,
replies Aleek Salaum: And when any one comes into Company, the rest salute him
with a Merrabbak Sultanum, ever sweetning their Conversation, with such accent
of Pronunciation, and so much respective gesture, as savours of a gentle
Genius, free from that rudeness whereof they are accused.

After their departure this Life, the Men by the Men, and the Women by the
Women are laid out in the middle of the Room. Whereupon diverse of their
Priests do assemble about the Body, and having performed certain vain
Ceremonies, as in wrapping their Beads about it, and in the often turning it,
invoking God to have mercy on the departed, they wash it, shave it, and shroud
it in Linen, which they leave untyed both at hands and Feet. Then lay the
Coarse on a Beer, placing a Turbant at the upper end, and carry it to the
Grave, with the Head forward: some of the Dervises going before with Tapers,
the Priest singing after, and lastly his Friends and Acquaintance. But Persons
of Principal Quality have their Horses led before them, with ensigns trailed
on the Earth, and other Rites of that Nature, diverse of the Lanters going
before, naming of God, and shaking of their Heads, and whirling about until
they fall down giddy, the sides and bottomes of the Grave are Boarded. For they
are of opinion that two terrible Angels called Mongi^ and Gudequir, do
presently repair unto the Grave, and put the Soul again into the Body, as if
(says the Alcoran) a Man should put on his Shirt and raising him on his Knees,
with his Head uncovered, (the winding Sheet being left unknit for that purpose)
demand of him in particular how he has behaved himself in this Life. Which if
not well, the one strikes him on the Head with a Hammer nine fathom into the
Earth, the other tearing him with an Iron Hook; and so continue to torment
until the day of Judgment. A Purgatory so feared, that in their prayers they
Petition God to deliver them from the Examinations of the Black Angels, the
tortures of the Grave and their evil Journey. But if he have satisfied them in
this reply, they vanish away, and two white Angels come in their Places, the
one laying his Arm under his Head, the other sitting at his Feet, and so
Protect him until Dooms day. Their Sepultures are notable; those of Princes or
great Men, are covered over with Silk, or Cloth of Gold, with a Turbant at the
Head, land set under a vaulted Arch supported by four Marble Pillars; some with
a little Cock of Fountain Water, and Lamps continually burning; they are made
near the Mosquees, especially if they built one, but never with in them; the
more ordinary are buried in some pleasant Place without the City, with a high
Stone standing at the Head, and another at the Feet; that at the Head, has
sometimes an Epitaph, and if it be a Man of Quality, is made at top in form of
a Turbant; those who bestow a Marble Stone over them, have it in the middle cut
through about a yard long, and a Foot broad; therein they Plant such a kind of
Plants, or Flowers as endure Green all the Year long; which seem to grow out of
the dead Body, thinking thereby to reduce it again into Play, though not in the
Scene of sensible Creatures, yet of those vegitable, which is the next degree,
and perhaps a preferment beyond the Dust. The Women flock every Thursday in
Multitudes to the Graves, weeping over their Children, Husbands, Kinsfolks and
dead Progenitors, often kissing the Stones, and praying for their delivery from
the aforesaid Black tortures; many times leaving Bread and Meat on the Graves
for Dogs and Birds to devour, as well as to relieve the Poor, being held an
available Alms for the deceased. The better sort do mourn in white, and but for
a little season. And the Women are not to marry by their Law, until four Months
and ten days after their Husbands death.

CHAP. III. Of the Mohammedan Religion, Sects and Priesthood.
THough several Articles before treated of, might well enough fall under the
General Head of Religion, nay though the whole Law of Mahomet it self was wholly
^ramed for the promoting of Temporal In^erests, yet it having for the Sins of
Mankind obtained so far, and made such Progress in the World, as to establish
its abominable superstitions in the best and grea^est part thereof, It will
well enough merit (...) distinct Chapter to show by what means ^t imposed, and
continues its Tyranny upon the Minds of its followers, into how many and what
Sects it is divided, and ^y what Methods governed and Officia^ed.

Few are Ignorant that the Law of the Mussulmans was compiled by Mahomet with
^^e help of a Monk called Sergius, and this ^e called the Alcoran; to which
some Do^^ours that succeeded, added the consent and testimony of wise Men,
called the Asso^^ah, or the Traditions of the Prophets, and a third Book,
containing Inferences or Deductions from one thing unto an other. Those
Doctors were Ebubecher, Osmar, Osman and Haly; the Califfs of Babylon and of
Egypt, were other Doctors and Expositours of their Law, whose Sentences and
Positions were of Divine Authority among them; but their esteem of being
Oraculous, failing with their temporal Power, that Dignity and Authority of
Infallible Determinations, was by the Force of the Sword given to the Turkish
Mufti. But though their Doctors do differ very much in the Explication of the
Law, yet a Man shall be accounted a Mussulman or true Believer, it he observe
these five Articles or Fundamentals of the Law, to which every Turk is bound.

The first, is Cleanness in the outward parts of their Body and Garments.

The second, to make Prayers five times a day.

The third, to observe the Ramazan or monthly Fast.

The fourth, to perform faithfully the Zehat, or giving of Alms according to
the Proportion prescribed in a certain Book, wrote by the four Doctors of
theirs, called Asar, Embela, etc.

The fifth, to make their Pilgrimage to Mecca, if they have means and
possibility to ^erform it.

But the Article of Faith required to be ^elieved is but one, namely, that
there is ^ut one God and Mahomet his Profit.

Other Rites as Circumcission, Observa^ion of Friday for a day of Devotion,
Absti^ence from Swines Flesh, and from Blood, ^all under the five Principal
points, because they are enjoined as proofs and Try^ls of Man's Obedience to the
more necessa^y Law.

Now for the more easy obtruding this ^ew Contrivance upon the World, Mahomet
decked it with such Ornaments of ^he Jewish and Christian Religion, as he
fancyed would most take the Eye and ^rocure him Votaries out of the Pale of
their Churches, yet leaving out such solemni^ies, as he judged to be too
effeminate, as ^^ne Pictures, Music in Churches, strange Vestures and
Processions, and those that were too chargeable, as the stately Sacrifices and
other solemnities of the Heathens, which had already been raised to that
^eight, that he could never expect to match much less to surpass. Miracles he
did not much rely on, well knowing that frequent ^mpostors had rendered them
suspected to the World; but made the Sword the Foundation of his Religion,
being mind full that it with more assurance Command Mankind, and therefore when
in his fir^^ beginning he was asked what Miracles h^ had to approve his
Doctrine, he drawing forth his Scimitar, told, that God having had his Miracles
so long slighted by the in credulity of Men, would now Plant hi^ Laws with a
strong Hand, and no more leave them to the Discretion of Ignoran^ and vain Men;
and that he had therefore sent him in the Power of the Sword, rather then of
Miracles: from hence it is that their Boys now ride to Circumcision bearing an
Iron Club in their Hands: Nevertheless, he failed not to frame his Sect so as
might take Humane Nature; not the intellectual part; for all superstition
Subsists on weak Hypotheses, whose plausible reasons may for a while prevail
in the World, by possessing some shallow, rash peremptory Brains but cannot
hold ou^ long, unless it have better Root than tha^ of Argument; he therefore
made it comply with the main Parts of our Nature, Hope and fear, thereby filing
the Mind with good Courage, which was much to his Military purpose: for he
finding the Sword to be the Foundation of Empires, and that to manage the
Sword, the rude and sensual ^^e more vigorous, then Wits softened in a ^^ild
rational way of Civility, did at first ^ame his Institutions to a rude Insolent
sen^uality; after which Education, he fitted ^is future Pretenses just unto
such Capaci^^ves: Wherefore seeing that Men's Opini^ns are in a great part
complexional and ^abitual, it is no wonder to see them taken with Promises,
which to us seem Beastly and ridiculous; they as much contemn ^urs; and in a
more natural way every thing (...) received, not at the rate of its own worth,
but as it agrees with the Receivers ^umour; whereby their Hopes and fears,
though false, prevail as strongly as if true, and serve the State as
effectually, because Opinion which moves all our Actions, is ^overned by the
appearance of things, not ^y their reality. Now to the intent that ^he most
notable fancies of Men might be ^ntertained, there are four several Orders
(...) their Religion, all very malicious against ^he Christians; not seeming
otherwise Vici^us, except their professed sodomy, which ^ho' severely punished by
their Laws, is ne^ertheless not reputed by them a Vice: ^^ch order upholds its
Reputation up, on ^ome one peculiar Virtue, which alone it ^rofesses, not
pretending to any other: the Calenderim upon Chastity, wearing an Iro^ Ring
through the Skin of his Yard, in some it is capable of being taken off, with
some difficulty; the Hagiemlar or Music or Love songs: the Torbacchi on
Revelations an^ Enthusiasmes, to foretell, and divert Divine Wrath: the most
rigid Spirits are the Dervislar, like Baals Priests launching them selves with
Knives: these Dervislars have assassinated many Bashawes, and also attempted
some of the Emperors in the mid^ of their Armies; so dangerous are violen^
Spirits when seconded by Religion, which being the only pretense in its way,
glorifie^ to Umpire Sovereign Authority, is to b^ kept within its due Limits,
least instead (...) cooperating with the State, it grow abuse^ beyond that use.
But indeed through the Prudent conduct of the Ottoman Helm, these excesses have
not been very frequent, the Government choosing into and so regulating the
Clergy, as that they make it their buisiness more to Trumpet up and dow^ such
Notions as tend more to the Conservation and Interest of the State, than t^
scatter and infuse their Enthusiastic fancye and self conceited and self
concerned Tenet^ The Turkish Government is sensible of wha^ vast concernment
is a Grave and Pruden^ Clergy to well being, though of late much slighted among
some sort of Christians, not so wise as to observe that the Eye for the most
part is caught before the Heart; and that Austerity and Reverence in external
Worship (if divested of all advantages else) cannot be denied to have a huge
Operation upon Obedience to the Civil Magistrate. It being unlikely that such
as take decency in Divine Worship for Idolatry, should not soon be worn out of
Reverence to their Governors, since the most destructive Parity begins always
in the Church.

Though we have treated before of the Power and Office of the Mufti's, and of
their Government in Religious matters, when we considered him as a Minister and
Implement of State, yet we will add what remains more to be said in this place,
and will begin with the Title which the Grand Seignior gives unto the Mufti
when he writes to him, which is.

To the Esad,
Who art the wisest of the Wise, instructed in all knowledge, the most excellent
of the excellent* abstaining from things unlawful, the Spring of Virtue and
true science, heir of the Prophetic and Apostolical Doctrines, resolves of the
Problems of Faith, revealer of the Orthodox Articles, Key of the Treasures of
Truth, the light to doubtful Allegoryes strengthened with the Grace of the
supreme assistor, and Legislator of Mankind, may the most high God perpetuate
thy Virtues.


This Mufti created as is before said by the Emperor, to whom he is held ever
subordinate; which makes the Turkish Theology excellently to correspond with
the State, as depending thereon: and seems of reason more Politic, then if
this Head Ecclesiastic were of another Country, or otherwise independent upon
the Prince, whereby having separate Interests, he might often make God Almighty
seem to decree more conform thereto, than either to the occasions of the Prince
or common Wealth; for all the Heathenish Gods, are used like Puppets, they seem
to speak, yet it is not they, but the Man who in a concealed manner, speaks
through them what he pleases. For though the supreme Head of judicature is the
Mufti's, there being no appeal beyond him in the greatest case soever, nor the
Emperor himself questioning his Decrees, and the reason is because they are
secretly guided by his assent and the Grand Viziors. Thus the Mufti is an
Instrument made use of to Spirit the Soldiers by coloring of public
Projects, and resolves by Divine Authority, and also to deside contraversies,
when they are too unruly, for any arbitrament not held Divine. Nevertheless, as
I said, underhand he consults the Grand Viziers, who lets him know the Grand
Seigniors Mind, and being thus inspired with that Soul, full of that God, he
utters his Orracles; which pass for the Word of God, as considering them
grounded upon the Alcoran.

This course has been strictly observed by the Ottoman Policy, well knowing
that the Keys of the Church can hang no where so quietly as at the Princes
Girdle, and considering that by this means the Court provided it self with a
favorable Empire, and who seemed of a more sanctified and indifferent allay,
than a secular Minister, and both by receiving from, and adding a greater
luster to the Beams of Religion, would be the more acceptable arbitrator for
the composing any discontents, that might be fomented between the civil Power
and the Subject, either through others Ambition or their own Oppression, not
unlikely to result from so absolute a Jurisdiction. The Mufti seldom appears
in Public, so that the People have him in that Veneration, as if they
considered something about him more then Humane. He is clothed in Green, which
kind none but the Kindred of Mahomet are suffered to wear. N^^ Malefactor is
suffered to dye, who hat^ the Fortune to see or be seen by him as h^ passes.
But notwithstanding the Princ^ Places him upon all weighty Occasions nex^ to
the Throne, and bestows and suffer^ him to receive all the other Honors in
^^ginable, yet if he is in the least found inclinable to run-counter to the
Will and designs of the Court, he is straity removed It having been a Maxim
long observed i^ this Empire, that neither Friends, Money Sanctity, Love of
People, former deserts or any present need of the Persons accurate Parts,
should in any wise bias the practiced Method of this Government, o^ removing
upon the least umbrage and jealousy soever given to the Grand Seignior, by any
Minister or other Person, the Prince esteeming no number of Lives, though never
so Innocent, equivalent with his safety, and the Nations. But though this Holy
Man comes to an unnatural Death. the Honor of his Place is so far from
receiving any Blemish by it, that his Body goes to the Grave without any
Aspersion, and his Successor Mounts his Chair without any prejudice, far from
being blasted with those errors that have been fastened upon Popes and
Patriarchs by their Predecessors ill ^onduct. For here the Mufti howsoever ^^l
he had deserved of Church or State is ^egistred amongst their Saints. And
herein ^ppears a main point of the Turkish Policy, ^or by these means they
prevent the truth of his Judgment being brought into Que^tion while he is in
being, which no Man will do of a Person whose Actions he dares not arraign
after he is Dead.

But we have considered this Divine Man sufficiently, it is now fit that we
look a while into the Alcoran, which Book the Turks never touch with unwashed
Hands; and a Capital Crime it is in the reading thereof to mistake a Letter, or
displace the accent, they kiss it, embrace it, and swear by it: calling it the
Book of Glory and directour unto Paradise. It teaches that God is only to be
worshipped, only one and the Creator of all Righteous, pitiful: In Wisdom and
power Incomprehensible. How God made Man of all sorts and Colors of Earth; and
being formed for thousands of Years laid him a Baking in the Sun, until he was
pleased to breath Life into him. Then commanded he all his Angels, to reverence
him: which the Devil at that time, an Angel of Light, refused to do,
expostulating why he should so honor that Creature whom he knew would becom^
so polluted with all manner of Vices, tha^ God therefore condemned the Devil to
Hell who ever since has continued an Enem^ to Man. Idolatry they hold to be
the mos^ accursed of Crimes, and therefore they interdict all Images and
Counterfeits soever reputing the Christians Idolaters for that they have them
in their Churches and Houses. But there was also a Politic motive of this
Prohibition of Maohmets, who considered that it was impossible if a Nation once
attains an Universal Prudence, but that the deceitful knack of such a Carnal
Adoration must needs grow loathsome, or lie obvious to their reproof, that
shall make it their full employment to find faults; and after an opportunity is
easily gained, to foment a Change, by discovering to the People absurdities in
their Worship; which is better prevented, in one directed as his is, to the
only Invisible and Omnipotent Creator, whose Nature and Power is so far remote
from the weak apprehensions of Men, as the sharpest Reason is not able to
batter a Faith solely built upon it. They are commanded seven times a day to
resort unto Public Prayers: the first assembling is called Singilnamas, which
is two Hours before day; the second Sabahnamas, at day break; the third
Vyle-namas at noon; the fourth Kyndinameus at three of the Clock: the fifth
Akshamnamas after Sun set: the sixth Chogicnamas, two Hours within night: and
the seventh Giuma-namas at ten of the Clock in the Night: the two last also on
Fridayes observed by all, on the other days but by the more Religious:
congregated they are by the chanting of Priests from the tops of Steeples; at
which times lightly though they be in the Fields; they will spread the upper
Garments on the Earth, and fall to their Devotions. Friday is their Sabbath,
yet they spend but a part thereof in Devotion, the rest in Recreations; but for
that time they observe it so rigorously that all Persons are exemplarily
punished that transgress the orders of it. Before they pray they wash all the
Organs of their senses; their Legs to their Knees, and their Arms to their
Elbows: their Privities after their purging of Nature; and sometimes all over
from top to toe: for which there are Houses of Office with Conduits belonging
to every Principal Mosque. Where Water is wanting they do it with Dust. At the
Door of the Mosque, they put of their Shoes, and entering sit cross legged upon
rows of Mats one behind another, the Poor and the Rich promiscuously, the
Priest in a Pulpit before them, not otherwise distinguished in Habit, but by
the folding of their Turbant. When they pray they turn their Faces toward
Mecca: first standing upright; without any Motions of their Bodies, holding the
Palms of their Hands upward; sometimes they stop their Eyes and Ears, and often
pull their Heir on the sides of their Faces; then thrice they Bow, as in their
Salutations; and as often prosterating themselves on the Earth. Doing this
sundry times they will look back upon no Occasion, until they come unto the
Salutation of Mahomet: at which time they reverse their Faces, first over the
Right Shoulder, and then over the left, believing that his coming will be
behind them, when they are at their Devotion, the Priest does sometimes read
unto them some part of the Alcoran. This Book is written in Arabic Verse, in
form of a Dialogue, between the Angel Gabriel and their Prophet, it is
prohibited to be translated, which both preserves the Arabic Tongue, and
conceals Religion. All set Texts are obnoxious to several Expositions, thence
grows Distractions so has this Bread four different Sects of Mahometans, each
interpreting it according to the Genius of its Nation, the Tartars simply, the
Moors and Arabs supestitiously; the Persian Ingeniously, the Turks with most
liberty, each nation scorns to yield to other in opinion, for honor sake,
especially the Turk and Persian, who nowrishing Designs of Conquest of each
other, do after the Old Custom of Princes, disaffect their People in Religion
toward the Enemy that they may be more fierce and obstinate against him.

A great means as I have already said, of Mohometismes making that Progress in
the World, is its pleasing Doctrine, suited to the depraved Inclinations of
Mankind, it being said in the Alcoran that when their Prophet asked the Angel
concerning Venery and some other delicacyes of life, he told him; that God did
not give Man such Appetites, to have them frustrate but enjoyed, as made for
the Gust of Man, not his torment, wherein his Creator delights not, upon this
it is, and for the drawing in Luxurious Complexions, which perhaps are the
greatest part of Mankind, that the Alcoran permits Poligamy to make a numerous
People, which is the Foundation of all great Empires; and prohibits Wine,
pretending a Devil in every Grape; thereby hardening the Soldier, preventing
disorder, and facillitating public Provision. The first being grateful to
Nature is generally received but the other is overpowred by Appetite, so that
many more Drink than abstain from Wine. Two other Principal points I shall
touch upon in the Mohammedan Religion. One is Predestination, the other
Purgatory: the first not meant in matter of Salvation, but of Fortune, and
success in this Life, they peremptoryly permit to Destiny fixed, and not
avoydable by any Act of ours. And yet this opinion of fate which usually takes
Men off from all Industrious Care of their own safety, does not sl^cker their
Diligence in dangers at Sea, and other cases. They admit no Hell for any but
those who believe not Mahomet; their own they afright with a Purgatory, which
holds but tell Doomes day; it is acted in the Grave, the pain is inflicted by a
bad Angel, whose force is lessoned by a good one, according as the parties Life
was led. To strengthen this good Angel, they do many Works of Charity, erecting
Hanes, Hospitals and Mesketoes, making Bridges and High ways, and storing them
with Fountains and other Conveniencyes for the relief of Travelers.

Having spoke so much of the Religion it self, it is now convenient to say
something of the manner of its Exercise, which is this in short; every Mosque
has a high slender Spyre Steeple adjoining: on the outside whereof and high, is
made abound or Tower with a Door opening South-East or East, as the Country
lies toward Meccha; here the Priest or Muazzin entering, with his Hands bowed
over his Ears walking round, turning on the Right Hand, in a loud voice tells
the People, many times over that there is but one God, which having performed,
all those that are piously given, throng to the Mosque, and say their Prayers,
continually repeating Allah heeber, as also the profession of their Faith, and
then they say Ahia Elfela, Ahia Elfela, which signifies come away to prayers, I
give you fair notice. Their gestures are first sitting cross legged, wafting of
the Body, then prostrate twice on their Face, they kiss the Earth; afterward
they rise, and stand with their Hand bowed over their Ears, but never do they
kneel or uncover their Head, accounting those postures unseeming. Having
already mentioned how often this service is performed, It is fitting that I
insert, that they believe that the Jews and Christians not having obeyed the
Command they had received from God, of praying to him often, he ordered Mahomet
to prescribe to the Mussulmans that they should address to him fifty times a
day their Vows and Prayers, but he foreseeing that his followers could not well
acquit themselves of this Commandment, he prevailed so far with God that he
contented himself with the tenth part of the Homages, that he meant to have had
paid him, and that this great number of fifty prayers a day, was reduced to
five, now the last and first Service which is at day break and an Hour after
Sunset makes a fine Show, all the Mosques being hung full of burning Lamps; but
none are bound to this frequency of prayer, but such Persons as have leisure,
others making the Highway or their Houses serve the turn, and this was devised
to keep Religion from falling into the danger of oblivion, which is in no wise
better maintained than by being often called to mind. Their Sabbath is kept on
the Friday, though not observed with all the strictness that Sundays are or ought
to be amongst us. Moreover they have two solemn times: Bairam and Ramazan, they
are both Lents, the first lasts three days, the other a month: their Fast is
according to the Jewish manner, not in quantity or quality of Meats, but in
time; for all the day long, they may neither eat, drink, nor use any sort of
venery; but at the appearance of the first Star, they make reprizals, gorging
themselves in all manner of Gluttony and Lust. Besides the Turks have one piece
of Divinity peculiar to themselves, which is a Custom of their Priests to sell
their merit; some more, some less, according to the Sanctimony of the Seller.
But before I close up this Article of Religion, I will set down what things a
Turk is bound to do before prayers, which may be reduced to five. The first, is
to believe the Articles of the Mohammedan Faith. The second, to be Circumcized.
The third, to pardon ones Enemies. The fourth, is to call out at the Turret of
the Church Steeples, or to go to the Mosque when one is called thither. And the
fifth, is to wash ones self, which is the immediate Preparation to prayer. Now
all the Articles of the Mohammedan Faith may be reduced to two, namely that
there is one God, and that Mahomet is his Prophet or messenger, and that that
only God is the Creator of Heaven and of Earth, and absolute Master of all
things. For which reason they do not suffer in their Mosques any Image
representing any living thing, either in relief or mere painting. The second
Article of the Mohammedan Faith comprehends an abridgment of all the mad fancyes
and extravagancyes of the Alcoran and of all its Commentatours, believing that
Mahomet is the Messenger of God, and that there cannot be a more certain truth,
than all that this Impostour has left them either in Writing or Tradition. This
Article being the Fountain of all the rest, it is not necessary that I hear
insert all their silly fancies of the Creation of the World, of its
Preservation, and of the course God takes to sanctify and save it; nor shall I
speak of all their whimsycal Opinions and so little conformable to right reason
with which they fill their Minds and stuff their Books. Enough already has been
said of their Paradise which they make all Spiritual by the beatifick Vision of
God, and all brutal by a glut of all sensual pleasures, and their affording
Room there to several Brute Animals. Nor shall I so much as touch upon the
Persons whom they admit into the List of their Prophets, the number being too
great, and who may all be reduced to these three, Moses, Jesus Christ. Whose
Divine Filiation and Death upon the Cross they deny, and Mahomet, whom they
believe to be the greatest of all. But will fall to give some account of their
Circumcision, and their manner of performing it. Being often hindered by a
Phimosis from satisfying his Brutalities, had his fore skin cut, and ordered
that all his followers should cause themselves to be circumcised, that so the
Bodies of his Mussulmans might again be known that were killed in the Battles,
they should fight for the establishment of his Law, that so they might be
interred and Honored as Martyrs, whether it was for the more drawing in the
Jews to follow his errors by the resemblance of that Ceremony, which only
differs from theirs in that having cut the fore skin, they do not tear like
them, with the Nail a little of the Flesh, which is above what the Anotamists
call the Curb, whether in short, that this impure Legis lator affecting an
exterior neatness, for the better hiding from the People the filth of his
Mind, he commanded those who had already embraced his errors, to have their
foreskin cut, because that it might otherwise detain some ordures, by which
means a Mohammedan presenting himself to prayer, without being entirely
purifyed, would not be heard of God. Who would consider him as a Mordar, that
is to say, unbelieving impure and Gullyed.

This Circumsicion which the Turks call Shounet, is only a mark of their
Obedience to the vocal Words of Mahomet, who has not written it in his Alcoran;
but ordered it only afterward, seeing he had many followers to distinguish
them from the Christians who have the foreskin; and from the Jews who have it
otherwise cut then they, though that their Circumcision be received among the
Mahometans.

Those whom they Circumcise must have attained to the Age of seven or eight
years, never younger, but often much older. The day being appointed for the
Ceremony, a Feast is prepared at the House of the Person to be circumcised. Who
is dressed as fine as Hands can make him, and having set him upon a Horse or
Camel, they carry him all about the Town if it is small, or only in his own
Prince or Parish if it be great. His Scool-Fellows and Friends follow him all
on Foot huzzaing and shouting the praises of their Friend, who is going to be
listed, in the number of the Mussulmans or true Believers. The Cavalcade being
ended, and the People returned home. The Imam of the Mosque of the Place, makes
a short Exhortation upon the Operation that is going to be made, then a
Surgeon having placed the Young Man upon the Sofa or State, two Servants
hold a Toilet strerched out before him, and the Surgeon having drawn out the
Foreskin ^s far as he can, he seizes it with a small ^air of Pincers at the
end of the Balances, ^hen with his Razour cuts it neatly, and ^howes it round
his Finger, which he lifts up crying several times, Alla Hecberia, alla, ^lla.
He then dresses the circumcised Person, who gives sufficiently to understand by
his Groans, how much pain a Wound puts him to, made in so ticling a part, and
the bystanders continuing their acclamations ^ongratulate the circumcised upon
his being entered into the number of the Faithful, and then fit round about the
Sofra or Tur^ish Table, where they are entertained according to the manner of
the circumcised's Parents.

The liberalities which Rich Persons bestow at the Circumcision of their
Children do often mount to very great sums; for besides the Presents which they
give to (...) number of Poor little Boys, who are ^lso then circumcised then at
their Costs ^s well as their own, and the entertainments they give almost to
all those who come thither, they likewise distribute great Alms to the poor of
their Neighborhood, that they may obtain from God blessings for the new
circumcised, and for all his Family.

The Ceremony that is preformed at the Circumcision of Renegadoes, is almost
the same except that being commonly miserable Wretches and the scum of the
World, two great Basins are carried after them, for the gathering the Alms,
which most of the Spectatours do not refuse them. They also carry as well as
the rest an Arrow in the Right Hand, holding the point or Iron downwards for to
make the People believe that they will rather suffer themselves to be pierced
with a thousand Darts, than renounce the Mohammedan Faith; but nevertheless many
Turks of sense do entertain upon this ^point many distrusts touching the
sincerity of the Faith of these new Mussulmans.

There are three sorts of Renegadoes, the first are those whom fate engages
amongst the Tribute Children, whom the Grand Seignior leavyes throughout all
his Empire; the second, those who out of a determined will change Religion, in
hopes perhaps of bettering their Fortune thereby; and the last, who only become
so out of fear of punishments, which perhaps they have merited for some fault,
or by their ill usage of him whom they have had the misforune to have met with
for their Patron. The number of these last is the least. Slaves in ^urky are
not so ill treated as People do ^magin, nay they are happy if they happen ^^to
some great City where they have a ^ood Aga and some peculiar Talent, then ^hey
are cherished by their Master, who ^oes not hinder them from going to Church
and performing their Devotions there when ^^ey please, and often also meet with
much ^ood will from their Mistresses, who out of ^^e Compassion common to their
Sex do ve^^ much alleviate the rigours of their Capti^ity, making them from
time to time some resents and Gratifications.

As for the place of this Bloody Ceremo^y of their Circumcision, it is
indeterminate, (...) well as the time and the choice of the ^inister. They do
not wait until this Ce^^mony to give names to their Children; and though they
have a Godfather, it is not ^r the first naming of them, that is done (...) the
House as soon as they are born, when ^eir Father out of a laudable Custom takes
^^m in his Arms, lifts them up toward ^eaven to offer them to God, and then
^^ts some Corns of Salt into their Mouths, ^^d names them saying, may it please
God (...)) that his holy Name may be always (...) savoury to thee, as this Salt
which I put to thy Mouth, and that he hinder thee ^^m relishing the things of
the Earth. As for those who dye under age before this Circumcision, they are
accounted to be saved by that of their Parents. Their little Finger is only
broken before they be buried, for a mark of their uncircumcision.

Having mentioned that the pardoning (...) ones Enemies is the third Duty
before Prayer, I must add that as the pardoning (...) ones Enemies has reguard
as well to the public tranquillity, as it is expressly commanded by the sacred
Orders of our Savior; it is no wonder if the Tukish, which are only a corrupted
heap of what is good Indifferent, or ill amongst the Christian Jews and
Idolaters, have ordained all the Mussulmans to pardon their particular En^myes;
for they are obliged to entertain contrary sentiments in regard of the Enemy^^
of their Religion and State. Thus there hardly any hatred amongst the Turks,
an^ when they have occasion to be angry, the are bound not to suffer Friday,
which their Sunday to pass, without being reconciled with their Enemy, or at
least if the cannot do it, they ought to begin the prayer, to which they are
obliged that day, (...) a Protestation they make to God to pardon their
Enemies, otherwise they fancy the should not be heard.

Upon this Foundation all the Mahometans are strictly forbidden through all
Turkey, to do any one's Neighbor an injury, whether by Tongue in giving
opprobrious Language, or with the Hands by striking him, or taking away his
Goods, or finally by his solicitations, exciting any other to do him a
mischief; on the contrary Punishments are inflicted upon those who are caught
in any of those faults. The Cudgel (which they fancy to have descended from
Heaven) because it imprints more respect among them, and contains them better
in their Duty than the most holy can do in our Countries, is the only P^^^w
wherewith they write and put in Execution the Sentences which they pass against
the Culpable. It is sufficient that the Subbacha does sometimes walk about the
Streets to put all the Inhabitants of a Town in Mind, that the least Storm that
shall be heard to grumble among them, is sufficient to bring down upon the
Heads not only of the Authors, but idle spectatours too, a Shour of Bastonades,
not withstanding all the reittreated cries they might make of Toba-Sultanum,
which those who are beaten make use of to ask pardon for their faults.

This fear makes every one upon his Guard. Those who have an Itch (...) with
one another, dare not vent their spleen for fear of being constrained to empty
their Purse of some thousands of Aspers, if they should come to be accused or
the Devan; and much less of enterchanging blows, for fear they be repaid with
others more sensible; and those who perceive them begin to quarrel, being
obliged under the same Penalties to part them with the soonest, do not leave
them until they have made them let go their hold. Besides it commonly happens
that they oblige them to embrace at the very Instant after their Quarrels, and
to renew a Friendship which would have been broken to all Eternity, if the
blind passion of two hot spurrs had been s^ffered to take its course without
daring to say any thing to them, as happens but two often in many parts of
Christendom.

When those who quarrel or f^ight, will not leave off, let what remonstrances
soever be made to them, or any passage of the Alcoran told them, which does not
often happen, they are seized on by force, bawling to them Charceulla, which is
as much as to say by the Law of God, they are led to Justice before the Cadi or
some other Judge, who condemns them to undergo the Punishments due to their
obstinacy. They lay the Criminal upon his Back, and giving him upon the Soul of
his Feet at least two or three hundred blows with a Stick, they also make him
pay two or three thousand Aspers for his penalty whom his passion had engaged.

The rigor of these Laws does not only bridle by force the Turks, who would
injure others, or do them any wrong, it has also insensibly accustomed them not
to swear nor profane the Holy name of God by their Blasphemies, as so many
others who have much more Holy Laws than they do with impunity. For this
reason it is that the greatest Oath they have in their Mouths is when they
would confirm any thing, is Vallahebilla, by the God I adore, and very often
all the Turks who live far distant from Constantinople, and who have by
consequence more Communication with Chri^tians, make use of the Oaths of the
Greeks and others, having none of their own in their Tongue, and they use them
rather by way of flattery and carress then invect^ve. Nevertheless they do not
always keep this Moderation, especially the Mobile or common People, and that
they treat with Persons of a different Religion from theirs; for instead of the
soft Words of Janum, ^kigusum, Cardache, which fignify my Heart, my two Eyes,
my Brother, and others which they commonly use, they than use the outraging
Terms, of Giaour, Kapee dinsis, Infidel Dog, without Faith, and other such like
execrations, which commonly come only out of Mean People's Mouths. Persons on
the contrary who are raised something above what is common, as Merchants, and
People of the Law, are for the most part very affable and humane, and if they
take but the least liking to a Stranger, they make him as many caresses and
obliging receptions as if he was of their Country or of their Religion, and
especially if he can discourse with them in the Turkish Tongue.

I have already sufficiently treated of their fourth Duty before Prayer, that
is concerning their being called out from the Turret of the Church, wherefore I
shall proceed to the last Preparation which the Turks make for that holly
Office, which they name Purification, and distinguish these Oblations by five
different names; and though they be not bound to do them all five before they go
to prayers, it will not however be unreasonable that I set them down in this
place. The first of all, and which is the most general, since the Christians
make use of it as well as the Turks, is the ordinary Bath, which they call
Amam; the second is for the corporal necessity, and they call it Taharat, which
^^gnifyes cleanness. The third is to purify themselves of the impurityes they
may have ^ontracted in them by night or day, they ^ive it the name of Gously,
that is to say ^urification. The fourth, is to wash themselves from all the
other Ordures, which ^hey have contracted during the day by the Organs of the
five natural Senses. They ^^ake use of a Persian term to name it, that (...)
the abdest, which signifyes Water for the ^and or Ablution. And the last is the
wa^^ing the Corpse of the Dead, which they all Euluriak makh, or Mortuary
Sotion. Now of all the Nations in the World, there (...) none which affects
neatness so much as ^oes the Mohammedan, as well amongst the Ot^mans as amongst
the Persians. All these people have made it a fundamental Princi^le, or rather,
all the essence of their Reli^ion, which only consists in outward Ceremonies.
This it is that renders them obli^ed to build a number of Places appointed or
Baths, wherein they may wash the Bo^y entirely. There is a great number of them
in all the Principal Cities of Turkey, ^ay and many of them are not much
inferi^ur to the ancient Banio's of the Roman ^mperours. There needs no more
than to ^ee those of the City of Bursa, which are of a Water naturally hot,
received into great Marble Cisterns; they are surrounded wit^ seats of the same
matter, are covered wit^ two very fine Domos, which form under them two great
Rooms where the Air an^ Water are of different heats, as well as i^ all the
others. And before People ente^ therein, they undress in another great Roo^^
more cool; so as all these structures have of necessity at least three great
Rooms: the first a man enters in is of a very temperat^ Air, and yet hotter
than that of the Street and then they strip themselves of their Clothes. The
second is of a stronger heat and the third is so hot that one cannot remain
therein without sweating.

All sorts of Persons are admitted to these Baths, the Christians and the Jews
as wel^ as the Turks, because they are built for the public use, and for the
neatness and Health of all People. I believe that these Baths d^ prevent all
the Eastern People from being s^ subject to Distempers as we are, nay an^ that
they would have still fewer Diseases if they went into their Bannians less
often It is with these Remedies as with Wine Tobacco, Medicines and all other
Medicaments, which people ought to take only for necessity, otherwise this
becomes more injurious to the Health than profittable. So i^ is with the
Bannians in all the Levant, there would be nothing better in the World if they
went into them at most but once a month, but because the Turks take them almost
every day. This moistens so much their Brain, that most of them are afflicted
with a continual Opthalmy which incommodes them extremely. Neverthelese,
because the Mahometans are very exact in observing the ridiculous orders of a
Religion so ill founded as is theirs, they love rather, let a man say what he
will to them, venture their Health by the frequent use of Bathing, than not
satisfy as much as is profitable for them, what the Law does command them. Thus
they all go too often to the Bannio that their ordinary revenue would not
suffice that expense, if they paid after the rate we do here in England, and
would have reason to complain of the excessive Charges to which their Obedience
to their Law does oblige them. But as there is no set price for this purpose,
and as every one gives what he thinks fitting as People do to Barbers, it costs
them no more than three or four Aspers, or each man his two pence. The Frans or
Europians give much more. All the World pays both Masters, Mistresses and their
Slaves, none but little Children tell five or six years end are exempted from
paying, nay often their Mothers give some Aspers for them when they carry them
thither; but when this happens it is not in the Company of their Father, since
that the Women are never in the Bannio at the same time with the Man; the time
is limited for each, the men go in from Break of Day till noon, till after
which time the Women never come, whether that the Men are of the Ancients
Opinion, that it is not over Healthful for Men to wash in the same place, and
at the same time that the Woman Bath, or that decency not allowing it, the are
forbidden expressly under grievious Punishments not so much as to come thither.
It being only allowed that Young Boys of seven or eight years old at most to
enter the Bannio's with their Mother, or their other Relations who carry them
thither, fearing nothing from so tender an Age. Nevertheless this does not
hinder, but that there are some so Ingenious as to take notice of all the sorts
of Divertisements which they take therein seeing the Women go as much to the
Bannio for pleasure as for necessity. they do no^ wait as the formerly did
amongst the Romans, for the wringing of a Bell before they go to the Bannnio's;
which are opened a four a Clock in the Morning, and are no^ shut until about
eight in the Evening: Bu^ during all that time never any noise or quar^els are
heard in the Bannio, nor that any ones Clothes are Purse or stolen.

The Mahometans do affect neatness of the Body to that Degree, that fearing to
be sul^yed by the vent of any of its Excrements, ^hey do not content themselves
with washing ^n the Public Bath all their Skin which is ^he universal
Emunctory, they are moreover obliged to clean all the passages, whereby Nature
discharges its necessities, and that as often as they have had need to
discharge themselves of the remains of the last Coction of nourishment: thus
they have almost ever the Embrick or the Ewer in their Hands for the cleaning
all the parts of the Body, through which any Excrement has been vented, and
nothing is more pleasant than to see a Turk who has any Diarrhea or looseness,
or any involuntary miction. He needs then no other business for the
sufficiently employing his time and exercing his Hands; they know not the use
of a Sponge as to that point, and it would be an unpardonable Crime amongst
them to make use of Paper, which being filled with Writing, might, have amongst
the Characters the Letters which form the name of God, which their ignorance
cannot perhaps discover therein, or else might be capable of receiving them
therein, having not been mad^ use of. For this reason it is that Paper i^ in
such great Veneration amongst the Mahometans. they do not employ it in any vil^
uses, and cannot endure it should be tro^ upon. When that they find any scrap
of i^ in the Streets, they snatch it up, kiss it and put it very devoutly into
some whole of (...) Wall. This great respect for Paper, they do certainly
derive from that they have for the Alcoran, which they never hold lower then
their middle, when they carry it, (...) keep it in their Houses, or else from
tha^ which they have all so for learned Persons, who are with them in great
esteem.

It is not sufficient that the Mahometans wash their whole Body in the ordinary
Bath they are moreover bound, (after having performed the Abdest whereof I will
presently give some account) to rinse it as I may say in a private Bath, when
it happens that they have had any extraordinary Evacuation in the night time,
or that they have slept alone or in company. This Purifica^ion is performed in
a great Tub or Cistern of a four sqare Figure, which is filled with Water every
Morning and not emptyed until Evening. This Tub the Turks call Aou^ Gousli. As
they do not make use of this Purifications until they well washed themselves
in the Bannio and performed the Abdest, they are not long adoing it; they do
nothing more then plunge themselves three times into the Water, than they go
out and make Room for an other, who does the same and accordingly gives place
to the next, and so one after another until all the Turks whom the foregoing
Night had obliged to this ceremony have purified themselves after this manner.

Though the number of those who plunge themselves into the purifying Cistern, be
considerably great, because that married Persons, to whom Marriage allows many
things forbidden to others, are thereto obliged as well as those who are not.
Nevertheless they do not change the Water until It has served them all, and
that they have said, plunging themselves in itt, he usual prayer of good
Mussulmans, which is la illa illa la Allam dulilla, Alla heeber, or other such
like.

Now the fourth and last Preparation for Prayer by the Turks, is the Abdest;
they may do every where, nay and with herbs by Stones or Earth, when they are
in any place, where there is no Water: they have got a fancy that God (who
demends more the inside than the outside of Men) if they had not first of all
satisfied, at least as much as they can that Ablution; nay, and that being made
in that impure State, they would be rather capable of drawing down the Anger of
God upon them, than obtain his Blessings, which they believe their Abdest does
procure them. For this reason it is they never build Moschs without adorning
them with some Fountains; and when the Place is not convenient for that
purpose. They hire a Man to keep Water in some Reservatories, from which each
Person draws by the means of some Cocks as much Water as is necessary for the
satisfying this Ablution.

It is to no purpose to say here after what manner the Turks perform this
Abdest, I believe that there be few People but know that the Turks wash almost
all their Head and Neck, the Arms to the Elbow, the Feet and extremity of the
Channel through which the Urine runs and the Port by which a grosser Excrement
is vented: But perhaps the Reader will not be sorry to learn that the strict
Obligation they have of washing themselves so often, is extremely painful and
troublesome for those who are in the Countries and far from Water, or who dwell
in cold or more Northern Climates, nay, and that it is the Cause that several
of those Turks could wish they were allowed to change their Religion, and
embrace an other, that does bind them to so many troublesome washings.

The fifth of the Turkish washings is that which is called Eulu-iorkmaghi or
mortuary cleansing, which is washing the dead Coarse, but as I think we have
been padling long enough, I shall Pass on to give an account of the Turkish
Justice. And indeed nothing can be more proper than to place here the Tribunal,
next after the Religion and Church, their Judges being ever Ecclesiastical
Persons; whereby both orders joined give orders to one another, and not only
Reputation but maintenance; for these places of Judicature are the only
preferment of the Priesthood; wherewith the Priest and Judge being maintained
in the same Person, two Gaps are stopped with one Bush without causing any part
of the Land to lie dead in the hands of the Clergy, or otherwise impoverishing
the People with Tithes. And this that Divine Legis-lator, Moses seems to have
foreseen, and therefore made him unite the sacred Rites, and Civil Sanctions
into one Body, making the Law of the Land a piece of Gods Law, and the justice
of the Magistrate Religion; which stamps no less Authority upon the Law, than
it procures Reverence to the Judges and promises to the Government, where it
is entertained, length of days and safety on the one Hand, with Riches and
Honor on the other. Which course affords also such Expedition as gives one
side at least, cause to applaud Justice. Whereas here the bettered Party is
left so little to Boast of, that he returns home as ill satisfied, as he who
had Sentence pronounced against him.

There are Diverse orders of Judges; especially two; the Cadi, and over him the
Moulacadi like a Lord Chief Justice; though as I have already said the supreme
Head of Judicature is the Mufti: These Judges are all excepting the Mufti
limited to set Precincts, and when convicted of Corruption they are made horrid
Examples; the main points wherein Turkish Justice differs from that of other
Nations are three; it is more severe, speedy, and arbitraty; they hold the
Foundation of all Empire to consist in exact Obedience, and that in exemplary
severity; which is undeniable in all the World, but more notable in their
State, made up of several People different in Blood, seat and Interest one from
another, nor linct in affection, or any common engagement toward the Public
good, other than what mere terror puts upon them. A soft Hand were unaffectual
upon such a Subject, and would soon find it self slighted, therefore the
Turkish Justice Curbs and Executes without either remorse or respect; which
succeeds better than ever did the Romans, with all their milder Arts of
Civility; compare their Conquests with those made by the Turk; you shall find
his to continue quieta nd firm, theirs not secure for many Ages. Witness first
Italy, than Greece and France, always full of Rebellions, Conspiracies and new
Troubles, which were caused by their Lenity, that did not humble the subdued as
low as Prudence did require; And the Sultan has a great Iron Club set up in
most Places of Turkey, especially Bosnia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Thrace and
Macedonia, to intimate what they are to trust to; nor does he so much rely upon
the Peoples Affection, which would tie him to respect full and less absolute
Domination, and then also be in their Power to alter, as upon that strength
which is in his own Hand makes him more himself, and binds with the tie of
fear, whereto Humane Nature is ever enthralled. The second point wherein their
Justice excells is quick dispatch; if the buisness be present matter of Fact,
then upon the least complaint the parties and Testimonies are taken, and
suddenly brought before the Judge, by certain Janizaryes; and the cause is
ever less than in two Hours dispatched, Execution instantly performed, unless
it appears a cause of such moment as does allow of an appeal to the Moulacady,
where also it is as speedily decided: If the matter be of Title or Right, the
Parties Name, the witnesses, who shall forthwith be constrained to come in. For
they have no old Deeds, nor other reckonings beyond the memory of Man: In such
cases Possession and Modern Right carries it, without that odious course of
looking too far backward into the times past: this Expedition avoids confusion
and clears the Court; whereby it so becomes sufficient for many Causes, and for
a great People. Now as for the particular Person, tho he sometimes seems
dissadvantaged by the have, which may make judgment rash, yet that have not
being passionate, it happens not often; nor then likely, is his damage therein
worse, than with us, where after the suspense, delay and Charge of suit, the
oversight of a Lawyer, may with error of pleading Cast a good Cause; so that
after a Man has been miserably detained to such disadvantages as his other
affairs, as he had better have lost his Suit at first; then does it finally not
so much on its own bare Right, ^s upon the Advocate sufficiency. The last
notable point of their Judicature is, they have little fixed Law, and therewith
flouri^hing make good that the most Laws are in ^he worst States. Yet they
pretend to judge by the Alcoran; whereby the Opinion of Divine Authority does
Countenance these Arbitrary Deqvisions, which without some Authentive Law to
justify them would hard^y be endured. But as it is manifest that the Alcoran is
no Book of particular Law Cases, they pretend its Study does not inform the
Judge lititerally, but by way of illuminetion, which not being given to secular
Persons, does neatly put losers off from referring themselves to the Text: The
Justice being Arbitrary, makes it their Opinion the more to the purpose of the
Public. For the Judges knowing themselves, but Instruments of State, and that
in its favor is their Establishment, they will ever judge by the Interest
thereof, if not out of Honesty, yet for their own Advancement.

CHAP. V. Of the Principal Offices and Dignities of the Ottoman Empire.
NOw having said thus much of the Turkish Justice, we will hasten into an
account of the Offices, Dignities, and several Governments in the Ottoman
Empire, and will for that purpose begin with the Prime Visior called in Turkish
Visior Azem, which is as much as chief Counselor; sometimes he has the Title
of the Grand Seigniors D^puty or Representative, being immediately entrusted
with all the Power of the Sultan, and indeed he is the Lieut^nant General of
the Empire and of the Armies, head of the Council, and disposes absolutely
under the orders of the Grand Seignior of all the Aff^ires of State and of War,
having in his keeping the Seal of the Empire. He has for Assesstors in the
Divan or Court where Causes are tried, six other Viz^ors who are called Viziors
of the Bench, and who are properly Councillors of State, but who have no
Deliberative Voice, but are only admitted into the Divan for the being
consulted upon some point of the Law, wherein they are learned without meddling
with the Government of State or any affair, at least unless their advice be
asked. There be fiver B^gler^egs to whom the Grand Seignior gives the Quality
of Vizier, and who posses the greatest and Richest Governments of the Empire,
namely the Bashawes of Babylon of C^yro, of Buda, of Natolea, and of Rom^nia:
The three first, who are the ^hree P^^ncipal, had formerly the Privilege wi^h
Exe^usion, to all the other Ba^hawes, to cause as well the Grand Vizier's three
Horse tales to be carried before them. But mentioning these Ho^s^-tales, it
will not perhaps, be ungtareful to give the Reader an Account of the Origin of
that Custom, which the Bashaw's, who have the Quality ^f Viziers, have of
carrying three Standards or Ban^ers, to each of which is fastened a Horse-tale,
died that color they please, except Green, though ^hey be allowed to dye the
Wood Green, to which ^he Standard is fastened: Which was a follows. ^he Turks
having one day delivered Battle to the ^hri^tians, their Standard was taken in
the Hurry, and the Tu^kish General seeing that the loss of the ^tandard made
his Men loose Courage, who began ^o run away; he cut off a Horses tale with his
Sa^^te, and fastened it to the end of a Half-Pike, which (...) lifted up;
Crying, Here Is the Great Standard, who ^^^es me, let him follow m^. At the very
instant, the ^^rks took Heart again, and being rallyed, return^d to the Charge
again, and won the Battle. The ^fficers under the Ba^hawe have their Standards
too, ^ut are not allowed to add to them one of those ^ales, and it is to be
observed, that the Bashawes, ^ho are not Viziers, can only carry two as the
Beyes, ^ho are below the Bashawes; and the Governors of ^e lesser Province,
carry but one. When the ^rand S^ignior goes into the Campaign, they carry ^ven,
because that according to the Turks; that ^e World is divided into seven parts
or seven ^^limates, whereof the Grand Seignior is Master, ta^^ng them in
Breadth, and for that reason it is, they ^^ve him in their T^ngue the Tittle of
Master of all ^ings. This is sounded upon Mahomet's saying, that (...) who
after his Death should be Master of the ^^nds cou^aining his Sepulcher, should
take the Ti^^ of Master or Head of all the Kings of the Earth. ^^ey add that
there be but three Empires, which ^e those of Constantinople, of Babylon, and
of ^rebi^^d; and for that reason it is that the Grand ^^ignior wears three
Tufts of black ^eron Fea^hers ^his Turbant. Now none but the H^rons of Candy
^^ve this Aigrette perfectly black, the Herons of all other Countries have it
either white or mingled and as there goes a great Quantity to the making o^ a
Tuft, this raises its price to a high Degree, which perhaps has made the use of
'em to be lost in ou^ Europe. As for all the Princes of Asia, they have always
the Aigrette very much In Esteem, but it must not have the least imperfection;
and in case it be the least broken at the point, they make no accoun^ of it,
and it loses all its value. By these three Aigrettes of the Grand Seigniors
Turbant, People know that the Grand Vizior is in the Army, because that then he
wears but two of them, and the thing is worthy of being remarked. When the
Troop^ are to March, the Grand Seignior draws up into Battalia, those which are
at Constantinople, and in the Neighborhood, and having the Great Vizio^ by
his side, he presents him to them for their General. The Soldiers then say not
a word, and d^ not make the usual Salute, until that the Grand Seignior has
caused one of the Agrettes to be taken out of his Turbant, to be put upon that
of the Grand Vizior: Then all the Army Salute him, and own him for their
General, and receive pay from him at the same time.

But to return, the Privilege of Horse-tales extends at present to the
Bashawes of Natolia and R^mania, and they are all five equal in that point* But
as for the Grand Vizior, who has a Magnificen^ Court, answerable to the
Grandeur of the Maste^ he serves, and his Family is composed of above two
thousand Domestics. Though he be subject as we^^ as the other Bashaws, to
undergo the Anger of hi^ Prince, and constrained to give him his Head, wh^^ he
demands it; nevertheless the Grand Seignior i^ important affairs and which
demand it, does yiel^ much to the Sentiments of the Grand Vizior an^ his
Propositions in the Council are, as man Se^tences. This it is renders his Power
so absolute, that in all the Empires and Kingdoms in the World, there is not
any Chief Minister whose authority can match that of the Grand Vizior. Whosever
comes to Visit him, he does not rise either (...) receive him, or conduct him,
unless it be the Mufti who is Head of the Law, for whom the Grand Seignior
himself rises also. But tins principally is worthy of being observed, that as
it only appertains to the Grand Vizior to propose all Affairs of Importance, he
must he careful not to start any thing ungrateful to the Grand Seignior: For at
the same time without making him any answer, he would be strangled; upon this
Maxim of the Ottoman Court, that nothing ought to be proposed to the Prince,
which he can be displeased at.

But before I proceed on the other Ministers, I will say something of the
Origin of the Grandees of the Port. Those who possess Places of trust, whether
in the Serraglio, or in the Empire (unless it be Eunuchs, of whom more
hereafter) come all generally from Children taken in War, or sent by way of
Present from the Bashawes; and Tribute Children, that are taken at the Age of
Nine or Ten years out of the Arms of their Mothers in all the Provinces,
subdued by the Ottoman Prince, they ought all to be of Christian Parents; and
without reckoning the Slaves taken from the Enemy, one may see by the Registers
alone of the Demesne of Constantinople, that of both Sexes above twenty
thousand are brought thither every year. The lesser Tartars who make continual
Incursions into all the Territories that are Enemies of the Empire send 'em in
Great Numbers; and the Grand Seignior having the Choice of all these young
Children, the handsomest and the most promising are distributed into diverse
Serraglio's, to be instructed there in the Law of Mahomet, and in all sorts of
Exercises, that of Constantinople is filled with the flower of these last, and
they are to be distinguished into two Orders. The first and most honorable is
that of the Ichoglans, destined for the great Charges of the Empire; the second
Azamoglans, employed in Offices which only requite strength of Body. The
Ichoglans, are those in whom, besides the Perfections of Body, their Governors
have discovered a fine Genius, proper for a fine Education, and for the
rendering them capable one day to serve their Prince. They are instructed with
great Care and a very severe Discipline, they pass through four Chambers called
Oda, which are as four Classes, wherein they learn by order all that is
suitable to Young Men, who are continually to attend upon a great Prince, and
who are as his Pages and his Gentlemen. If they commit the least fault they are
rigorously punished, and a Man had need to be endued with great Patience to
attain to the fourth Oda, where they begin to breath. But the hopes of coming
to the greatest Honors and most Eminent Offices, makes them suffer the
barbarous Treatment of the Eunuchs, who are appointed for their Masters, and
who are not sparing to them of their Cudgels. Though it be an Ordinance of the
Empire that all these Children be of Christian Parents, of the most Noble and
the Handsomest that can be found, the Capi-Aga, or great Master of the
Serraglio, the first of the White Eunuchs, who Commands in Chief the Ich^glans,
does nevertheless suffer some natural Turks to be introduced into their number,
recommendable by their good Qualities: But this is rarely done, and that with a
particular permission of the Prince, who loves much rather that these Children
be all Renegado Christians. This is the true O^igine of the Grandees of the
Port; they are all Slaves, having no knowledge of their Paren^s they apply
wholly their Affections to the Service of the Prince, who has raised them to a
high Fortune.

The Bashaws are thus taken out of the Order of the Ichoglans, and the Name of
Bashaw is only a Title of Honor and Dignity, common to all the Grandees of the
Port, who distinguish themselves by the difference of their Places. The four
Principal are the Vizier Asem, or Grand Vizier, the Chaimacan, the Bashaw of
the Sea, and the Aga of the Janizar^es. The Authority of these four Bashaws is
so great, that they sometimes deprive their Sovereign of his Crown, to give it
to whom they please; as has hap^ed in our Age to two Emperors together,
Mustapha and Osman the last of whom died in Prison by the infamous ^and of an
Executioner. But if these Bashaws do not understand aright how ^o take their
measures, they lose their Heads for the least fault, the Grand Seig^ior seizing
on all their Estate upon their ^eath, and taking their Children into ^e
Seraglio; very far from succeeding unto the Riches and Offices of their Fa^ers,
tho it should be the Son of a Grand ^izier, nay, or of the Emperor's Sister;
^ey can mount no higher than the ^ace of a Captain of a Gally; the Poli^ of the
Turks not suffering that a Family should render it self Powerful from Father to
Son, to deprive it of the means of ever being able to disturb the State. One
may hereby see, that the Fortune of the Bashaws, which is glittering for a
time, is a wavering Fortune; on which neither Son nor Father, be he in what
Credit he will, can make any foundation.

Having already spoken of the Vizier* I shall now proceed to the Chaimacan, who
is the Captain and Governor of the City of Constantinople, Lieutenant of the
Grand Vizier, but has no Authority bu^ in his absence; then he performs all the
Functions of that important Office, Commands absolutely, and gives Audience t^
Ambassadors. He is not subject as other Bashaws, to the harsh necessity of
givin^ his Head; because that if he does an^thing that is displeasing to the
Gran^ Seignior, he rejects the fault of it upon the Grand Vizier, from whom he
receiv^ his Orders.

The Bashaw of the Sea is the Admin and Captain General of the Naval A^mies;
the Beyes Governors of the M^ritime Provinces, and who are oblig^ to maintain
(...) Galleys of the Gra^ Seignior, depend on his Orders, and must put to Sea
upon the first Command he gives them.

The Janizary Aga, whom the Turks call Yongeri Agasi, is the Colonel General
of the Janissaries. This Office is very considerable, because that the Turk^sh
Infantry passes at present, for the greatest part, under the name of
Janissaries, tho the true Janissaries, who draw their Institution from Ottoman
the First, and their great Privileges from Ottoman the Third, make at present
but one Body of five and twenty thousand men. They have fine Regulations among
them, and are divided into several Chambers in great Houses they possess,
whether in Constantinople or other Places. The Order they keep there is so fine
and exact in every thing, and so strictly observed, that they live less like
Soldiers than Religious and Monasticks; and tho they be not forbidden
Matrimony, yet very seldom do they marry. The great Privileges which they
enjoy throughout all the Empire, where they are very much respected, makes many
People to exempt themselves from paving Taxes, and to discharge themselves from
some Public Duties, to gain by money of the Officers, who protect them, and
make them pass for Janissaries: but they do not receive any Pay from the Prince;
all their Advantages are limited to those Privileges, which are sufficiently
great. Thus by mingling the true Janissaries with the false, their Number does
now amount to above a hundred thousand; and to reckon only those who are
effectually Janissaries, their Body has rendered it self so formidable, that they
have unthroned Ottoman Monarchs, and made the face of the Empire change in a
moment. The Power of their Aga is very great, and no Body can approach the
Prince after the manner he is allowed to do; for, he can come into the Presence
of the Grand Seignior with his Arms free, and after a bold Gate and manner,
whereas that all the Grandees of the Port without Exception, even the Grand
Vizer, dare not appear there but with Arms across, and their Hands upon one
another on their Breast, for a sign of a profound Submission.

The Beglerbeyes follow in Dignity the four principal Bashaws, and are as so
many Sovereigns in the general Governments of the Empire, whereof the Grand
Seignior gives them the Command. These Grand Bashaws have under them
Sangiacbeys, who are Governors of Sangiacs or particular Provinces, as the
Sangiacbey of Salonica or of Morea.

Thus having mentioned these Principal Officers, and the Janissaries, I will
proceed to give an account of the Spahees, Zaims, and Ghaoax's.

The Spahees, who make a Body of about fifteen thousand men, are a sort of
Cavaliers, who would pass for the Nobility of the Country, and boast very much
of their Bravery: they live upon certain Timarrits or Fewds given them by the
Grand Seignior for term of life, as a Reward for Services, but with an
Obligation to serve on Horseback well appointed, wheresoever they shall be
summoned. These Timarres cannot be taken from them unless they are wanting in
their Duty, which is to be at the Army when the Grand Vizier goes thither in
Person. They live the most happy of all the Ottoman Empire, and like petty
Sovereigns in the Places where they command.

The Zaims differ little from the Spahees, and enjoy, as well as they, the
Command and Revenue of certain Fiefs given them by the Grand Seignior. There is
a great number of them throughout all the Empire, and they esteem themselves as
Lords and Barons of the Country. The Zaims and the Spahis are they who compose
the Cavalry of the Turks, and they know how many Horses they are to furnish
according to the Revenue of their Timars.

The Chaoux, or Chiaous Bashaw, is the Head of all the Chaoux of the Empire,
who carry the Commands of the Prince within and without the State, and are sent
upon Embassies, tho in the bottom they are only mere Messengers. Prisoners of
Quality are commonly committed to their Keeping, and they never suffer them out
of sight.

These are the principal Offices and Dignities of the Empire, all possessed by
People who are taken out of the Order of the Ichoglans. I now come to the
Officers of the Serraglio, where the Eunuchs are possessed of the principal
Places of Trust.

There be two Orders of the Eunuchs; there are those who are white, who are
merely cut, and there are those who are black, who are shaved even with the
Belly. Both are severe, fantastical, and jealous, and use all those cruelly who
are under their Charge. There is a prodigious number of them both in
Constantinople and all the Empire, and generally through all the East, where
there is no private Person, in case he has but any Estate, but keeps an Eunuch
or two as a Guard to his Wives. This it is that makes the great Trade of
Eunuchs in several Parts of Asa and Africa; and only in the Kingdom of
Goleonda, a small Territory in the East Indies, there has been known to be made
in one Year two and twenty thousand. In those Parts most Fathers and Mothers
who are poor, and have no kindness for their Children, whom they fear they
shall not be able to provide Sustenance for, if the least scarcity of Victuals
should happen, fell them to Merchants, who afterward cause them to be cut, and
sometimes shaved sheer off. Some of those who have nothing left, when they are
to make Water, are constrained to make use of a Quill or Tap* and to carry it
at the bottom of the Belly. As few recover from so dangerous an Operation, it
renders them much dearer than the others, and they are sold in Persia and
Turkey at the rare of six hundred Crowns a Man; a hundred, or a hundred and
fifty, is the price of common Eunuchs. Now for the furnishing all Turkey, all
Persia, all the Indies, and all the Provinces of Africa, it is easy to judge
that they must needs come by thousands from diverse Places. The Kingdom of
Golconda in the Peninsula, on this side the Ganges, and those of Assan, Boutan,
Arachan, and Pegu beyond it, furnish a prodigious number of them. All these
Eunuchs are white and tawny. The black Eunuchs, who come from Africa in a far
lesser number, are, as I have said, much dearer. The most deformed are those
which cost the most, their extreme Ugliness being a Beauty to them in their
kind. A flat Nose, a dismal Look, a great Mouth, thick Lips, black Teeth and at
a distance from one another, for commonly the Moors have fine Teeth, are
Advantages for the Merchants who sell them. The Serraglio of Constaminople is
filled with these two sorts of Eunuchs. The black are appointed as a Guard to
the Apartment of Women, and sent to the Court by the Bashaws of Grand Cairo.
The white something less savage, and who have been brought up with some Care,
are for the Quarter of the Grand Seignior.

The four principal Eunuchs, who approach the Person of the Prince, are the
Hazodabachaio, the Chasnardeerbashaw, the Kilargibashaw, and the Sarai Agasi,
who have over them the Capi-Aga, who is the Intendant of all the Chambers in
chief of the Ichoglans: they commonly succeed one another; that is to say, the
Sarai-Agasi to the Kilargibashaw, he to Chasnadarbashaw, this last to
Hazodabachi, and finally, the Hazodabachi to the Capi-Aga, who is ever the
oldest in Service of the white Eunuchs.

The Capi-Aga or Capon Agasi, is as the Lord High Steward of the Serraglio, is
the first in Dignity and in Credit of all the white Eunuchs, and is ever near
the Person of the Grand Seignior be he where he will. He it is who introduces
Ambassadors to the Audience; and all the great Affairs passing through his
Hands to come to those of the Prince, his Office renders him necessary to all
the others, and acquires him rich Presents. All those who make any to the Grand
Seignior ought to address themselves also to the Capi-Aga for the presenting
them to his Highness, from whence accrue to him very great Advantages. No Body
can enter into the Apartment of the Emperor nor go out from thence without his
Order: and when the Grand Vizier has a Mind to speak to him, he must be
introduced by the Capi-Aga. Whether by Day or Night if any hasty Business does
happen whereof the Vizier would give Notice to the Grand Seignior by Writing,
the Capi Aga must receive it and return the Answer. He wears a Turbant in the
Serraglio, and goes every whereon Horseback by a Privilege particularly
annexed to his Office. He accompanies the Grand Seignior, but stays at the
Door, having no more Command in that Place. When he goes out of the Serraglio
to quit his Office, which happens very seldom, he cannot be a Bashaw. As
concerning his Table, it is furnished at the Prince's Charge, and he has above
ten Sultanins a Day, which is above five Pounds of our Money. Capigi Aga's have
been known to have died two Millions rich, which returns into the Grand
Seigniors Coffers. This chief of the white Eunuchs is followed with four
others, who after him have the principal Places in the Grand Seignior's
Apartment.

The Hazoda Bashaw is as the Lord High Chamberlain, who has under his Charge
the forty Pages of the Chamber, who commonly attend the Grand Seignior's Person.

The Serai-Agasi has the Superintendence General of all the Chambers of the
Grand Seignior's Quarter, in what regards the Neatness, and the necessary
Reparations. He has an eye particularly upon the Seferli-Odasi, which is the
Chamber of the Pages, who take care of the Grand Seignior's Linen, and who
accompany him in his Voyages. He it is who appoints their Clothes, and all
things they have occasion for; and his Office is also much the same as in
England the Constable of Windsor, since it is for him generally to provide all
that contributes to the neatness and good order of that great Palace. His
Lieutenant is Seraihet-Odasi, who is also an Eunuch, whose Office is to have
the Tapistries changed every six Months, which are spread upon the floor in the
Rooms and Chambers of the Seraglio.

The Haznadar, or Chaznadar-bashaw, is the Head and Intendant of the Treasury,
and has the Conduct of the Pages of that Chamber. It is not to be understood of
the Treasury to be appointed to the necessities of State, and to the ordinary
Pay of the Soldiers, whereof the Grand Seignior and the three Tef^erdars, or
Treasurers General, have the Keys and Intendency: the Treasury I now mean, is
the Place where the Jewels of the Crown are kept, and all the other Riches
heaped up from Father unto Son by the Ottoman Princes, But it is to be
observed, that the Chaznadar-bushaw has now but the Name of the President of
the Treasury, nay, and that he has place therein, since that under the Reign of
Sultan Amurat, the Pages having made their Complaints to the Grand Seignior of
the ill Conduct of that Eunuch; upon their Request he granted that the
Chaznadar Bashaw should have no more command therein, and that the
Charnaketodosi should thence forward exercise his Charge, without depriving him
of the Title.

The Kilargibachi is the Head of the Pages of the Kilar, which is the place
where all the exquisite Drinks are kept for the Mouth of the Grand Seignior. He
is moreover the Chief of all the Akegis, who are the Cooks and Comfit-makers,
no Body being allowed to enter into those Offices but by his Order; and he has
under his Charge all the Plate which is for the Service of the Grand Seignior.
This Officer's Substitute is the Kilarketodasi, upon quitting of his Charge. he
is made a Bashaw. And here I must note, that those who go out of the Seraglio
to be Bashaws, must have been of the forty Pages of the Chamber, and have
passed through one of these six Charges, of the Chaznaketodasi, and of
Kilarketoda^i, whereof I have spoken, of Dogangibas^i, of ^hokadar, of the
Seligdar, and of the Rikabdar, whereof I shall quickly speak. Unless in such
cases, they can only be Beyes, or Zaims, or Spahies, or at most, Capigi
Bashies, by a singular Favor of the Grand Seignior. It is the very same thing
with the Gugombachi, who is the second Person of the Treasury, and with the
Anakdar-Agasi, who is the third. If those Persons leave the Seraglio, before
they are admitted into the Number of the forty Pages of the Chamber, they have
but one Pay, whereas the highest mounts but to two hundred Aspers.

The Dogangibashi is the great Faulconer, and his Place affords him much
attendance upon his Prince.

The Chokadar is He who carrys the Royal Robe called Ciamberluc, which we call
in England the Port-mantell.

The Rikabder is he who holds the Stir^up when the Grand Seignior mounts on
Horse back.

The Seligdar is the first of the Pages of the Chamber; he carries the Sword of
the Grand Seignior on days of Ceremony; and one of the handsomest Pages is
commonly chosen for that Office.

The Hammangibashi is the Head and Intendant of the Baths. When he goes out of
the Serraglio, as well as the Kamachirbachi, who is the first of the Pages of
the Seferli, their Pay is a hundred Aspers a day; and if they are in favor it
may mount to a hundred and fifty. It is in general to be noted, that when there
is a remove of any one of the forty Pages of the Chamber, to fill their Places
they take others out either of the Treasury, or the Kilar, or the Seferli,
which is done in turns: they always take out the most ancient, and those that
are next succeeding in their Place.

The Chimacibachi is the great Blancher, or the Head of those who whiten the
Grand Seignior's Linen.

The Giritbey is the Head of those who exercise themselves in shooting with the
Bow and lancing Darts; wherein a great Exercise is performed every Friday in a
Place of the Serraglio appointed for that Divertisement. These being the
Charges of the Serraglio, possessed by those who have passed the Chambers of
the Ichoglans, I shall proceed to speak of the Black Eunuchs, to whom are
committed the keeping of the Women's Apartment; and they choose for that Office
the ugliest and most deformed that can be found. they have all cut sheer off
since the time of Soliman the Second, who one day seeing a Gelding leap a Mare,
judged from thence, that the Eunuchs who kept his Women might also amuse their
Passions; which he prevented immediately by cutting off all they had; which
Rule his Successors have ever since observed. They are many in number, and have
amongst them their Chambers and their Regulations as well as the white Eunuchs.

The Keilar Agasi, or as others call him, Kutzlir Agasi, that is in English,
the Keeper of the Virgins, is the Head of all the Black Eunuchs, and is equal
in Authority and Credit with the Capi Aga, who is the Head of the white
Eunuchs. He is the Superintendent of the Women's Apartment, keeps the Keys of
the Door, and speaks when he pleases with the Emperor. The Office he possesses
procures him Presents from all sides; and none are made to the Sultana's by the
Bashaws and other Persons who stand in need of their Favor with the Sultan,
but that he also receives a share, which renders him one of the richest and
most considerable Officers of the Port.

Now I shall proceed to say something more of the Azamoglans, who make the
second Order of the Youth in the Serraglio, and out of whose Number the meaner
Officers are taken, a List of whom I am going to set down.

The Azamoglans as well as the Ichoglans, are, as I have said, Tribute-Children
that are levied upon the Christians, or taken in War by Land or by Sea. They
choose the handsomest and most robust for the Grand Serraglio; and they have
neither Pay nor Profits, unless they are advanced to some petty Offices, which
they cannot attain to until after several Years of Service, and then their
Wages is but seven Aspers and a half a day. As concerning mere Azamoglans that
are brought up in other places and are not admitted into the Serraglio of
Constantinople, the highest Pitch of their Fortune is to become Janissaries.

When that at the Arrival of these Youths at Constantinople the first
Distribution is made into the Serraglio's or Royal Palaces of the Grand
Seignior; some are also left in the City to learn Trades, and others are sent
to Sea to serve for Seamen, and render themselves expert in Navigation; by
which means they attain to some Places. But the Azamoglans of the Grand
Serraglio are employed in diverse Offices, and are made Bostangis, Capigis,
Atagis, Halvagis, and Baltagis.

The Bostangis are those who are employed in the Gardens of the Grand Seignior,
from out amongst whom those are taken who are to row in the Grand Seig^nor's
Brigantines, when he has a Mind to divert himself in fishing, or in taking the
Air upon the Canal: those who are taken unto the Brigantines, and row on the
right, may attain to the Charge of Bostangi Bashi, which is one of the most
considerable of ^he Serraglio: but those who row on the ^eft can only be
admitted into the petty Employments, which are bestowed in the Gardens. If it
chances that any one of them happens to break his Oar in the Grand Seignior's
Presence, his Highness ^auses immediately fifty Crowns to be gi^en him, and
causes also Money to be di^ributed to the others every time he goes ^board his
Brigantine. Their greatest ^ay, after having served some Years, is seven Aspers
and a half a day, besides Food and Clothing, which they are all equally
provided with.

The Bostangi-Bashi has the Superintendance general of all the Grand Seignior's
Gardens, as well of those of Constantinople as of the Neighborhood, and
commands above ten thousand Bostangis, whose Business is to look after them.
Tho he be taken out of the low form of the Azamoglans, his Power is
neverthele^^ very great, and his Office one of the finest and most considerable
of the Court: it admits him to the Prince's Person, to whom he may speak
familiarly when he carries him by Sea, being seated at the Helm of the
Brigantine, wherein the Grand Seignior is on Board, who very often makes use of
him to carry his Orders to some Bashaw whose Head he thinks fitting to take
off. All the Grandees of the Port stand in awe of him, and endeavor to gain
his Affection by their Presents, because he can do them good or ill Offices
with the Prince, whom he governs in his Walks. When he is at his Elbowes, with
the Rudder of the Brigantine in his Hand, he has the Privilege of sitting down
in his Presence, and may then discourse him upon the Affairs (...) State and
the Conduct of the Bashaws, ^^d according to his Passion or his Inte^^t, tell
roundly how things go, or turn ^^em after what manner he thinks con^^nient. In
short, if he is much in favor, (...) may have one of the great Govern^ents,
and become Bashaw of Buda, of ^^bylon, or of Cairo, nay and Grand Vi^^r, which
is the principal Office in the ^^pire.

The Capigis are the Porters or the ^eepers of the Doors of the Serraglio, ^^at
is to say, of the first and second ^^ourt; for that of the third which gives
^^trance to the inward Serraglio, is kept (...) Eunuchs. The chief of the
Capigis (...) called Capigibashi, who has under him ^^ther Officers, who have
the same name, ^^d of whom the Grand Seignior makes ^lso use to carry his
Orders. The Capi^^ga is over all.

The Atagis are the Cooks of the Ser^aglio, over whom, as well as over the
^alvargis, the Kilargibashi has full power: ^ach Kitchen has its Atigachi, that
is to ^^y, it is Master, whom we call Steward; and the Mouatbakemin is the
Intendant who furnishes the Kitchins with all that is ^ecessary for them,
taking care also of ^he Table of Ambassadors, according as he is directed by
the Grand Seigni^^

The Halvagis are the Comfitmakers (...)

The Baltagis are strong Fellows, e^^ ployed to carry Burdens, like our Po^ters
and Carmen; Baltagi signifying pr^perly a laboring Man.

The Emirahourbashi is the Master (...) the Horse, who marches before t^^ Grand
Seignior when he shows himself (...) Public, and in all Ceremonies.

The Ekmeggobashi is the chief of t^^ Pantry, and has the Superintendence (...)
all the Bread that is eaten in the Serr^glio. These two Offices are not given
(...) any of those who remain within the Se^raglio, but to persons who reside
without and have the freedom of going in a^^ out at all Hours.

The Caragi-Bachi is the Head of tho^^ who raise the Tributes; and both he an^
the Gemmeroubuchi or Principal Commissioner of the Revenues, and the
B^zarcunbachi or chief of the Merchants, a^^ bound to make Advances to the
Gran^ Seignior when he stands in need of M^ney, and that there is none in the
Pu^lick Treasury, not being willing the ^^cret Treasury should be meddled wit^*
They must procure it, and it is no diff^cult matter for them to do, because
(...) (...) the Tributes, Demesns, and other ^^posts that are paying to the
Grand ^^gnior; nothing of them is paid un^^ the end of the Year, and those
Offi^^s make themselves be paid in the be^^ning.

All sorts of People, of what Religion ^^ver they be, except the Mohammedan,
(...) bound to pay the Tribute without ^^y Exception, after they have settled
^^emselves in the Empire, and have at^^ned to the Age of sixteen Years: and ^^s
Tribute is five hundred and fifty (...) Aspers a Head, which neither rise ^^r
fall, remaining always upon the ^^me foot of eighty to a Plaster, which ^^mes
to about five Crowns of our Mo^^y. All the other Christians, who come ^^o the
Empire to trade, or for Business, ^^ough it should be only for a day, they
(...) made to pay the very first Town they ^^me to. Greeks who are Foreigners,
as ^^m Muscovy and other places, pay three ^^ndred and fifty Aspers; the
Armenians ^^o come from Persia, Georgia, Mingre^^, and other Countries, are
only taxed ^^ee hundred. As for the Christians who (...) called Franks, they
pay nothing; ^^d this has given a great deal of trou^^ to the Ambassadors of
Europe. As the Turks make their Year but of twe^^ Moons, and ours being near
twelve (...) a half, they are only paid for twe^^^ Moons; but in revenge and
to lose (...) thing, from thirty three to thirty th^^ Years they make the
double be paye^^ that thirty third Year, and are gr^^^ Husbands of their
Masters Revenues.

There be but two Princes in (...) World who have the Name of Ch^^ the Emperor
of great Tartary, and King of the lesser Tartars, who is a V^sal of the Ottoman
Monarchs. It is (...) the present Condition of this last I int^^ now to inform
the Reader.

When the Cham of lesser Tartary ^^ters upon the Government, he comes (...)
take an Oath of Fidelity to the Gr^^ Seignior, and the Turks hold him o^^ as a
Governor of a Province, or at (...) for a Vassal Prince. But those of (...)
Country, the Muscovites, Polanders, G^^gians, Mingrelians, and other People
(...) the Neighborhood, treat him as a K^^^ when they write to him The Gr^^^
Seignior uses a great deal of Policy in^^ Demeanor toward the Cham for (...)
he should revolt, and render him (...) more powerful than he is by making
^^liances with neighboring Princes; fo^^ is to be observed, that the lesser
Tartary, whereof the City of Caffa near the Cimmerian Straight is the Capital,
is not a Country conquered by the Arms of the Ottomans. It Is ancient Kings put
themselves only under the Protection of the Grand Seignior, who granted them it
upon Condition, that when the Father died, his Son or his nearest Relation his
Successor, could not enter upon the Government unless he came to take the
Investiture at the Port, and make Oath of Fidelity to the Grand Seignior,
obliging himself to come to him upon his first Orders. The Grand Seignior
promised in Return, that he will never establish any other than of his Race to
command in lesser Tartary; and as there be two Branches of that Family, he
keeps allways one in Exile in the Isle of Rhodes, while that the other governs.
But if after fifteen or twenty Years there be any Suspicion that this
entertains any Designs of rendering himself absolute, he sends for the Cham, and
his Children when he has any, and sending them to Rhodes, takes out from thence
he who was in Exile, and sends him to reign in his turn for some Years.
Besides, if the Ottoman Race chance to fail, the Cham is to succeed to the
whole Empire.

But now as for the Grand Seignior's Exchequer. All the Gold and Silver that
comes into it arises from the Revenues of the Empire, and from the sale of the
Goods which the Bashaws leave after Death. As concerning the Empire which
extends so far into the three Parts of our great Continent, and which embraces
so many Kingdoms, it is casie to judge that it furnishes immense Sums to the
Treasury; but it is not so easy to limit them. His Revenues consist
principally in the leavy of Tributes and in the Demesns. The three Tefterdars
or Treasurers-General giving an Account to the Grand Vizier of the Receipts of
the Provinces.

All the Receipts are for the most part in Silver in Specie; and as for the
Gold it arises from four Species, whereof there be two foreign, and two of the
Country. The one of the two first is the Commerce of the English, French,
Hollanders, Ita^^^ns, Muscovites, and Polanders, who ^^ing Duccates from those
Provinces. The other is the annual Tribute which the Cham of leser Tartary, the
Prince, of ^^^^^yloania, of Moldavia, and Walachia, the Republic of Bagusa,
and a part of Mi^grella, and Russia, are to pay to the Grand Seignior in pieces
of Gold, which mounts to very considerable Sums. The one of the two Sources of
the Country comes from the Spoil of the Bashaws, whereof coined Gold makes the
better part; the other from the Revenue of Egypt, where every year a certain
number of Sequins are coined, according to the Quantity of Gold which comes
thither from Ethiopia; and all those Sequins are brought into the Treasury.

The Revenue of Egypt does commonly amount every Year to twelve Millions of
Livers, which are to be divided into three parts; five Millions enter into the
Treasury of the Grand Seignior, four is employed in maintaining the Soldiers
and Officers of the Kingdom; and the three others are appointed for the rich
Present which his Highness sends every Year to Meccha, for the Charges which
regard the Religious Worship, and to fill the Cisterns of Arabia, whither Water
must be carried for several Days Journey.

Of the five Millions which enter into the Serraglio, the greatest part is
Sequins according to the quantity of Gold which the Abyssins have brought, and
the rest in the Lion or Hollands Rix Dollers.

But here perhaps it will not be unseasonable to speak of the Present which the
Grand Seignior sends every Year to Meccha, especially having said that the
third part of the Revenue of Egypt was particularly appointed for that purpose.

Three Millions of Livres of the twelve of annual Revenues which, the Kingdom
of Egypt affords the Grand Seignior, are employed in part in the rich Carpet
and stately Tent he sends to the Cheq every Year for the honoring the Tomb of
Mahomet. Another part goes to the Payment of those who serve in the Mosques; as
Imans, who are their Priests; Cheucks, who are their Preachers; Muczims, who go
cry about the Turrets of the Mosques to call the People to Prayers, and Kacim^
of Mecca and Medina, who keep and clean the Mosques and light the Lamps Out of
these three Millions must the nourishment be taken of all the Pilgrims, the
Grand Seignior sending a sufficient Sum for that purpose to the Cheq. This Che^
who is as the High Priest of the Law, an^ the Sovereign Pontif of all the
Mahohometans, of what Country or Sect soever, makes those poor People believe,
that there is every year seventy thousand Pilgrims, Men and Women, at Meccha;
and if the Number was not complete, ^he Angels would come in the form of Men to
make it up.

This Prince, for Whom all the Mahometans have a great Veneration, is very ^ich
and very potent, which is easy to judge by the Presents He receives from ^he
Grand Seignior and other Mohammedan Princes. These Presents belong to him ^ll in
Property at the end of the Year, when new ones come. He also profits by all
those of the Pilgrims, and Sums of Money which those Princes send him, ^or to
be disposed of in Alms according ^o his Will; and all these Presents together
raise him a Revenue that is not to ^e imagined. For Mahometism extends ^ery far
in Europe, in Asia, and Africa, and much farther than People common^y do
believe.

Caravans come to Mecca from several ^arts of the World; and the day being ^ome
that the Devotion is to begin, the High Priest, assisted with all the People ^f
the Law, makes Day and Night the ^ecessary Prayers and Ceremonies. On the
seventeenth Day all the Pilgrims assemble before the Cheq's Tent, who appears
at the Entrance, and standing upon a Piedestal to be seen by the farthest off,
says his Prayer, and gives his Benediction to all the People, ending with these
Words, God grant they may return in Peace as they came. From this moment every
one must live at his own cost, the Cheq gives nothing more, and then his Gains
begin to be very great; for al^ that is sold for the maintenance of the
Pilgrims, belongs to him, and besides he partakes with the Masters of the
Caravans, of whom the Pilgrims are boun^ to buy their Carriage at three times
more than it is worth, when that which they had brought with them from their own
Country had failed them in the way.

The Caravan of Cairo is the most numerous and most considerable of all the
Caravans which go to Mecca. The Caravan Bashi, who is Captain thereof, ha^
sometimes two hundred thousand Crown^ profit at his Return; and there is great
caballing for his place, which is at the Bashaws Disposal, and is seldom give^
but to him that bids most. The Captai^ of this Caravan is also Master of the
Waters that are brought into the Cisterns, it is by his Order that they are
distributed; and as this Distribution is equal for the Poor and for the Rich;
and if this last will have beyond what he is ordered, he must pay for it
dearly, and the Captain who taxes it at what rate he pleases raises a
considerable profit.

But let us return to the Grand Seignior's Present. The Tent and Carpet which
he sends are two pieces equally precious, both for the Beauty of the Stuff and
the Riches that are added to it. The Tapistry is to cover the Tomb of Mahomet,
and the Tent which is set up against the Mosch is for the Cheq, who stirs not
from thence during the seventeen days Devotion. That High Priest of the Law of
Mahomet has found the secret to raise immense Sums by this Tapistry and Tent;
every Year, and when the new Present ^s arrived from the Grand Seignior, he
^ends as a singular Favor pieces of the Courtin of the old Tent to several
Mohammedan Princes, from whom, in return, ^e receives magnificent Presents. This
Courtin which reaches all about the ^ut side of the Tent, to hinder those from
being seen that are within, is composed several pieces, six foot high, and of a
great length; and the Cheq gives those Princes to understand, that by fastening
one of those Pieces to their Tents when they go to War against thos^ whom they
consider as Infidels, they will be attended with all the happy Succes^
imaginable, and will not be long before they gain the Victory. It must be some
great Monarch, as the Great Kam o^ Tartary, or the Great Mogol, to whom he
sends either the whole Courtin^ Tent, or Tapistry, which he does onc^ in ten or
twelve Years, sometimes t^ the one, sometimes to the other. Arte^ that
Aurengezebe, King of the Indies (...) and whom otherwise we call the Great
Mogol, was settled upon the Throne, the Cheq sent him the whole Courtain o^ the
Tent; and great Joy was there a^ that Court that the King had receive^ from so
Holy a Place, as they call it so magnificent a Present. The Cheq presently
after tasted of the Royal Liberality of that great Monarch, one of the richest
and most potent of the Universe And at this rate it is that the chief of the
Religion of Mahomet, who has a kin^ of Dominion over all the Members knows how
to render them useful, and found the means of enriching himself at the Costs of
all the Mohammedan Princes and People.

I do not doubt but that those who have written of the Mohammedan Religion, have
made mention of the Pilgrimage of Mecca, which is one of its essential Parts,
wherefore I shall not enlarge farther upon that matter. I will only make three
Remarks, taken out of an Original of one of the most Learned in the Rubricks of
the Law of Mahomet. The first is, that by an ancient Tradition the Turks
believe that Mecca is the Place where God commanded Abraham to build him an
House; that while he was there all Nations came to visit him in Crowds; and
that it is also the same Place where Mahomet received the Alcoran from Heaven.
The second regards the Commands made to all the Mahometans, to go once in their
Life time a Pilgrimage to Mecca; for it is to be observed, that this Obligation
does not extend to the poor People, who have nothing whereon absolutely to
live, and who would make their Family suffer by their absence, having nothing
to leave them for their Maintenance. The third Remark is, touching the
preference of the two Cities of Mecca and Medina. The first is the Place of
Mahomet's Birth, which he had a design to have honored and celebrated by this
famous Pilgrimage, to which he obliges all those of his Law The second is the
Place of the Sepulture of which they tell many Fables. Mahomet in his Alcoran
only Orders the going to Mecca, where there are no other Relics of this false
Prophet than one of hi^ Slippers: and the Doctors of the Law do also grant,
that there is no Obligation to go to Medina, and that without seeing that City,
the Command of Mahomet is fulfilled.

CHAP. VI. Of the Original, and History of the Turks.
THO the Turks have acquired so vast an Empire, yet their Original is so
obscure, that what we know of it is rather Conjecture than any certain Account.
However, this is allowed of by all hands, that they were a People of Scythia,
who, either compelled by Famine, or the Sword of their Neighbors, to abandon
their own Country, passed through the Streights of the Caspian Mountains, and
subdued and settled themselves in Armenia the Greater; thereupon called
Turcomania, as it is at this day. Thus continued they to acquire Reputation,
and multiply their Accessions, professing Pagainism, and living in wandering
Troops, after the manner of the Scythian Nomades. The Saracen Empire being upon
its declension, nay, brought almost to the last Gasp, by the Division of its
own Princes; Mahomet, the Sultan of Persia being overpower^d by the Caliph of
Babylon, demanded Succors of the Turks, from whom receiving three thousand
Soldiers, under the Conduct of Tangrolipix, the Chief of the Seleuccian
Family, he overthrew the Caliph by his means. Nevertheless, he would have
constrained the Turk to have continued in his Service, which occasioned so
great a Breach, as that it came unto a Battle. Tangrolipix had the Victory, was
by both Armies elected Sultan, conquered the Caliph of Babylon, which he added
to his Dominions of Persia. About this time did the Turk embrace the Mohammedan
Religion, being two hundred and fourteen years after their Sally out of
Scithia. Tangrolipix was succeeded by his Son Axan, who consented that Cutlu
Muses, and his Kinsman, both of his Blood, should enjoy in absolute Sovereignty
what they should conquer from the Grecian Emperor: and they receiving Aid
accordingly from him for that purpose, subdued Media, much of Armenia,
Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithinia, and the greater part of the lesser Asia. This
Sultan moreover bestowed the Cities of Damascus and Aleppo, with their
Territories, upon two other of his Kinsmen, Duccot and Melich, upon condition
of paying him Homage, and also promising them all they could gain from the
Saracens, and allowing them Forces accordingly, they rendered themselves Masters
of the greater Part of Syria; but in a short while after, were expelled thence,
as also out of the most part of Asia the lesser, by Godfrey of Bullen, and by
him and his Christians driven to the more Easterly Parts of their Dominions.
After the Death of Cutlu Muses, his Son Solomon made a vigorous opposition
against the Western Christians; after his Death, his Son Mahomet had a War, and
then a Peace with Masut Sultan of Iconium. This Masut having gotten possession
of the whole Turkish Kingdom in that part of Asia, at his Death divided it
amongst his three Sons. To Galizasthan he gave the Regal City of Iconium, with
the under Provinces; to Jagupasan, A nasta and Anevra, with part of Cappadocia
and the Territories adjacent: but to Daduns he gave the ample Cities of
Caesaria and Sebastia, and all the large Neighboring Territories, being before
part of the Greek, Empire. But these Brethren fell at odds with one another,
and the eldest dispossessed Dadune of his Patrimony, and did the like with
Jacupasan. After which he invaded the adjoining Parts of the Greek Empire, and
in a Battle overthrew Emmanuel Comnenus, a valiant, but unfortunate Emperor;
who being dead, he conquered Phrygia, with diverse Frontier Cities and Castles.
Sultan dying in a very old Age, left behind him four Sons, Masut, Coppatine,
Reucratine, and Chaichosroes. To Masut he bequeathed Amasa, Ancyra, Dorileum,
with several Cities more of Pontus; to Coppatine, Melitene, Cesaria, Taxaria;
to Reucratine, Aminsum, Docea, with the Sea-bordring Cities; but to
Chaicosroes, (besides the Regal Seat of Iconium) Lycaonia, Pamphilia, and the
bordering Countries as far as Cotyanium, with the Title of Sultan. But these
falling likewise into Dissension among themselves, upon Reucratine and Masut's
contending in Arms for Coppatine's Possessions, who dyed not long after his
Father. But Fortune favoring Reucratine, he invaded the Sultan, took from him
Iconium, drove him out of his Dominions, and became sole Sovereign. This Branch
was not alone successful; for, the Race of Ducat and Melech recovered all Syria
under the Conduct of the renowned Saladine, and joined Egypt to his Empire,
leaving nine Sons behind, all murdered, but one, by Saphradine their Uncle,
that one escaping by the means of his Fathers Favorites, and was also called
Saphradine and Sultan of Aleppo. From that treacherous Saphradine descended
Meleden, Sultan of Egypt, and Coradin, Sultan of Damascus and Jerusalem. Tho
the vast Dominions of Saladin were thus again rent in pieces, yet still were
they possessed by Branches of the Selzuccian Family, until that the Mamulucks
stripped them of Egypt, and the Tartars drove them out of Syria; and the Turkish
Empire which Tangralipix established in Persia and those Eastern Countries, was
utterly subverted by the Tartars after it had continued a hundred and seventy
Years. These Tartars were a cruel barbarous People, dwelling on the North of
the Mountain Caucasus, who compelled by Famine upon the Instances of one Zingis
a Prophet of theirs, and who was dignified with the Title of Great Cham, like a
violent Deluge broke over the Bounds of those Mountains wherein they had for
many Ages been confined, and over run all the Eastern Parts of Asia as far as
the great Ocean. Heccata his Son, built Quinsay in China, and Cambala in
Cathaia, which last he made the Seat of his Empire. By his numerous Armies he
subdued the Aracosians, Margians, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Assyrians,
Mesopotamians, Armenians, Colchians, and Iberians, compelling the Turks to
abandon those Countries. But these last under Aladine one of the Selzuccian
Family, joining with the People of lesser Asia, took Cilicia from the Greeks
with the Places bordering; first settling the Seat of their new Kingdom in
Sebastia, and afterward at Iconium. Aladine left behind him two Sons, Azadine
and Jathatine; but they falling at Discord, the elder constrained the younger
into Banishment. But Jathatine returned after Azadine's Death, and was owned
for Sultan; but shortly after slain in single Combat by Theodorus Lascaes the
Greek Emperor. Another of the same Name was his Successor, but defeated by the
victorious Tartars, and forced out of Iconium: the Turks were finally compelled
to pay them Tribute, and become their Subjects. Jathatine being dead in Exile,
the great Cham divided his Kingdom between Masut and Cei-Cubades, who were both
descended of the Selzuccian Family, reserving a Tribute from them to himself.
Thus was this great and mighty Empire extinguished in Egypt by the Mammalucks,
and in both great and lesser Asia by the Tartars. But falling into Divisions,
every one got a share, and turned the Monarchy of their new Masters into an
Anarchy. The baser sort having got Possession of the Streights of the
Mountains, did prove troublesome Neighbors to the Christians by their frequent
Incursions; and having given a total Defeat to the Emperor's Lieutenant in
Paphlagonia, they overran all the Country unto the River Sangarius, subduing
Pontus and Galatia; and extending their Conquests Southward unto the Lycian and
Carian Seas, and to the River Eurimedon, which they divided into several
Toparchyes. Of the two forenamed Princes, Masut died without Issue, but
Ceicubades was succeeded by his Son Aladin, titular Lord of the Whole, though a
Tributary to the Tartar, and the last of the Selzuccian Family. Upon his Death
the Sovereignty was usurped, but not long possessed, by Sahib the head Vizier;
the Grandees sharing among them the Remainder of that dismembered Kingdom as
they had done the rest.

Ottoman, among these, possessed Siguta, a small Seigniory in Bithynia,
bestowed by Aladm the first upon his Father Ertogriel, the Son of Solomon, one
of the Oguzian Family, and once Sultan of Machan. Whom, fear of the Traitors
making him abandon his Kingdom, He for a long while led a wandering life, with
uncertain Fortunes. But Ertogriel coming into the lesser Asia, desired Aladine
to bestow upon him some corner of so vast a Kingdom for him and his Families
Habitation. Aladin remembering his own Sufferings, and the Assistance he had
received from Ertogriel in a certain Encounter, assigned him some few Lands,
and a Command upon the Frontier; where he lived long in great tranquillity, and
much beloved both by the Turks and Christians, who were his Neighbors. Dying
in the Year 1289, he left three Sons, Jundas, Saragatin, and this Ottoman, who
was elected by the Oguzians for their Governor. His People having suffered
some outrages from the Christians, he thereupon surprised several of their
Castles, defeated the Greeks in sundry Rencounters, took from them the City of
Nice, and upon the Death of Aladin, took upon him the Title of Sultan, making
Neapolis the Seat of his Kingdom, in the year 1300, where is to be placed the
first Date of the Ottoman Government. During his Reign of seven and twenty
years, he annexed Bithynia, Cappadocia, and most of the Fortresses that confine
upon the Euxine Sea, unto his Crown. His Successor was his Son Orchanes, who
took the great City of Pruse, and made it his Residence. Having made vast
Additions to his Dominions, he departed this Life, in the two and thirtieth
Year of his Reign, leaving his Scepter to Amurath his Son. He perceiving the
Greeks to be at Discord among themselves, first passed over the Streights into
Europe, took Abydosf and Callippolis, with the whole Chersonesus; and pushing
on his Conquests into Thracia, he took Philippolis and Adrianople; and still
continuing his victorious Career, subdued Servia and Bulgaria, passed into the
upper Mysia, was at length stabbed by a Common-Souldier, in the one and
thirtieth Year of his Reign, and leaving his vast Dominions and Acqusitions to
Bajazet his Son. This Bajazet subdued Phocis with the largest part of Greece,
and twice besieged Constautinople, though in vain. Being at length taken by
Tamerlane, and carried about in an iron Cage. He beat out his own Brains in the
Year 1399, being succeeded by his Son Callepine, to whom some attribute six
Years of Government, which others will not allow, but give the Succession to
his youngest Son Mahomet; the Reason of this Diversity proceeding from the
Suppression of the Turk^st Kingdom by the Tartars. Bajazet having many Sons,
they and other Mahemetans dismembered again this vast Empire, and possessed
themselves of several Provinces, but were all at length obtained and reunited
again by Mahomet, who added to them by Conquest, Dacia, Walachia, the greatest
part of Sclavonia, Macedonia, as far as unto the Ionian Sea. He removed the
Seat of his Empire from Prusa unto Adrianople, where he departed this Life,
after he had reigned seventeen Years, reckoning from the Death of his Father.
He was succeeded by his Son Amarath the Second: this Prince conquered Epyrus,
Oetolia, Attica, Baeotia, Achaia, and Thessalonica. After he had ruled seven
and twenty Years his Son Mahomet the Second ruled in his stead, and by his
brave Performances acquired the Name of Great, utterly subverting the Greek
Empire, taking Constantinople the Imperial City, the Emperor Constantine being
trod to Death by the Crowd of People in Adrianople Gate; and thus gained he the
Title of Emperor. He also conquered the Empire of Trabezond which Alexius
Comnenus had erected there, at such time as the Greeks did lose their European
Empire to the Latins. He also subdued Athens, Corinth, all Peloponnesus, Bosna,
Lemnos, Euloera, Mitylen, etc. and died in the one and thirtieth year of his
Reign, it being much suspected he was poisoned. Bajazet the Second, his Son,
having put a Period to his Wars with his Brother, subdued all Cilicia, part of
Armenia, with the rest of Cappadocia, which before appertained to the Carmanian
Kingdom. But his Invasion of Syria was not attended with that Success. After
which, he bent his Forces against the Venetians, took from them Naupactus,
Methona, Dyrrachium, and almost desolated Dalmatia. But Selym, his Son and
Successor, at length procured a Jew to poison him in the six and thirtieth year
of his Reign. This Selym subdued all Syria, Egypt, and Arabia; and after he had
reigned eight years, died of a most loathsome Disease, just as he was
entertaining Designs of invading the Christians. His Son Solomon reigned in his
stead, and took Rhodes, overrun Hungary several times, took Buda, Strigonium,
Alba Regalis, drove the Persians out of Tauris, annexed Babylon with the
Provinces of Media, Mesopotamia, and Assyria, to his Empire, extended his
Conquests into Arabia, and brought the Portugals in the Indies within the
Reach, of his Ambition. He died in the six and fortieth Year of his Reign,
leaving his Scepter to Selym the Second, the only Son he had then left
unmurthered. This Selym won Cyprus from the Venetians by his Lieutenants,
enlarged his Bounds with Walachia, Moldavia, and the Kingdom of Tunis, reigned
eight years, and was succeeded by Amurath the Third, who during his Reign of
nineteen Years, performed nothing of any great Consideration. Neither was
Mahomet the Third, his Son, a Soldier; his Reign of eight years being
inglorious, and chiefly spent in suppressing domestic Broils and intestine
Rebellions. Upon Mahomet the Third's Death his Son Achmet, then but fifteen
years old, was saluted Emperor. This Princes Reign was as unsuccessful as that
of his immediate Predecessor, the Persian King in the Beginning of it
recovering almost all from him that the Turks had taken from his Ancestors: for
the Sophi, in Conjunction with Caracan the Head of a Rebellion then in Turkey,
defeated Cicala Bassa in a set Battle, with the loss of almost all his Turks,
taking the Bashaw's Son Prisoner, and inviting, by secret Messengers, the
bordering Nations to revolt from the Turkish subjection, and again defeated the
same Bassa, who returned with a vast Army into those Parts, in two set Battles,
wherein seventy thousand Turks were slain. These Successes of the Persians
created a mighty terror over all Turkey, even in Constantinople it self, it
being bruited, that he was marching apace in the Head of an hundred thousand
men, and that Bagagi, a male-contented Bassa, was joined with him; Hereupon
Cicala Bashaw was again dispatched with Forces against the Sophi and the Asian
Rebels, but was again defeated by the Persian Monarch, and the City of Babylon,
now called Bagdat taken. Nor the less successful were the Ottoman Troops in
Hungary, the Imperialists routing them in several Occasions, which, with the
several Defeats the Rebel Hungarians received in diverse Occasions, brought the
Turks to more humble thoughts, and made way for a Peace between the two Empires.

Some time after, a Peace was also concluded by the Grand Seignior, with the
Persian Ambassador, then resident at the Port, but the Sophi thinking it to be
upon dishonorable terms, was so far from ratifying it, that he caused his
Minister's Head to be cut off, at his first setting foot in Persia.

In the mean while, the Turkish Navigation was extremely annoyed by Christian
Corsairs, who took their Ships, plundered their Islands, and Sea Coasts, and
carried many of the Grand Seignior's Subjects away captive.

In this Sultan's time was a great Plague at Constantinople, destroying many
thousands, of People every day, and almost desolating the whole City. And thus
after an uneasy and unsuccessful Reign, Ackmet died, having lived thirteen
years, and swayed the Scepter fifteen, and was succeeded by his Brother
Mustapha, by reason of Osman, his Son's Minority. But this Mustapha proving
cruel, not only to his own Subjects, but to Foreigners; imprisoning, upon some
slight pretexts, the French Ambassador, and torturing his Servants; clapping
also young Osman, the right Heir, and his Brethren into Chains; which gave such
Provocation, that the Grand Vizier at his return from the War of Persia, freed
Osman out of Prison, and put Mustapha in his place; where we will let him
remain until we have set down some Occurrences of the Reign of Osman, who was
not full thirteen years of Age when he was advanced to the Throne.

The first thing he did was to promise redress for the Affront that the French
Crown had received in the Person of it is Ambassador. His Reign was also
ushered in by a great Victory he gained by one of the Bashaws over the
Persians, which was occasioned by an Invasion o^ Persia it self, by which means
several of its Provinces were desolated by Fire and Sword, which forced the
Sophi to a dishonorable and disadvantageous Peace; the Persians sending two
hundred Camels laden with silk as a Tribute to the Grand Seignir for many years
after.

Osman abetted and promised assistance to Bethlem Gabor, Prince of
Transylvania, in be Designs he entertained against the Em^erour; and also with
a great Fleet of Gal^ies infested the Coast of Sicily, Landed in the Kingdom of
Naples, carrying 1500 Christians away into Captivity. And picking a Quarrel
with, the King of Poland, ^marched in the head of 300000 men, and ^herewith
enclosed the Polish Camp, wherein were 50000 brave resolute Fighting men, whom
not being able to draw out of their Tranches, insomuch that the Turks having
lost many of their men, what in the frequent Skirmishes, Diseased or Drowned in
the Torrents of Rain which fall in the coming on of the Winter-season, a Peace
was at length concluded by the Mediation of the Prince of Walachia; after which
he began to think of executing the Design which the Insolence of the Janissaries
had put into his head, which was to remove ^he Seat of his Empire either to
Grand Cairo or Babylon, though under the Mask of going a Pilgrimage to Meca;
Transporting for that purpose all his Carriages over into Asia, with all his
Treasure, not sparing the Plate and Ornament of his Pa^ace, but the Emperor
being betrayed by one of his Considents who had acquainted them with his
intentions, they mutinied and ran in a Seditious manner to the Palace*
demanding the Heads of the Chief Ministers, which the Grand Seignior declining,
unless by a Legal way, they violently laid hands upon them, barbarously
assassinating them in his Presence, and proceeded to call for Mustapha his
Uncle, Proclaiming him their Prince and Emperor; and notwithstanding all the
Condescension, nay Submission made them by Osman, they dethroned him, and
advanced Mustapha it his stead; who caused his Nephew to b^ Strangled after he
had reigned three year and some days, and lived sixteen.

The first thing Mustapha would have done afrer his readvancement, was to have
cut off Osman's Brethren, had he not bee^ hindered from so doing by the
Janissaries who caused the Counselors of such Wicked Designs to be Executed and
removed from their Places, as was accordingly performed. In the mean while this
Mustaph^ being little better than an Idiot, and leaving the whole management of
his affairs t^ others, the Soldiers lived at Discretion, n^ body daring to
oppose their outrages and exorbitancies: These Disorders occasioned three
Rebellions, one at Babylon, another at Arzirum upon the borders of Persia. and
a third in Mesopotamia, which menaced no less than the absolute downfall of the
Ottoman Empire: And indeed the Bashaw of Arzirum marched with an Army of One
Hundred Thousand Horse and Foot, demanding Justice of the Murderers of Sultan
Osman, and though some efforts were used to oppose his Progress; yet the People
being discontented with the present Government; so that they, the Soldiery and
Ministers, concurred as it were in an universal consent to Depose him a second
time, and exalt Sultan Morat, Osman's Brother into his place: Whereupon having
put Mustapha again into Prison, they haled Amurath out of his Confinement,
carried him to the Divan, clothed him in White, and so installed him Emperor
with all the usual Solemnities; After which this new Prince performed his
Corban or Sacrifice of Mutton to the Poor, and thus entered upon the Government
in the most dangerous of all junctures; the insolence of the Janissaries being
at the highest Pitch; the Troubles in Asia at that height as threatened the loss
of those Deminions, and no less wavering were the African Provinces. Besides
the Tartars grew refractory refusing him for their King whom the Grand Seignior
had appointed; insomuch that the Turk was forced to comply with the Juncture,
and allow of and confirm their own Choice. Moreover the Cossacks infested
extremely the Turkish Coasts and Navigation, entering the Bosphorus with a
Hundred and Fifty Sail of Saicks, and Landing, Plundered and Burnt several
Villages and Houses of Pleasure; after which, braving Constantinople it self,
they raised such a Consternation in the People, as is hard to be imagined could
be brought about by so inconsiderable a Foe in the Capital Seat of the Ottoman
Monarchy, and the most Formidable City of the Universe.

In the mean while Bethlem Gabor having obtained assistance from the Port
against the German Emperor, he made such Progresses in lower Austria, routing
the Imperial Forces in several Encounters, and taking in several Towns, that
the Emperor thought it time to begin to listen to Propositions of Peace; which
accordingly was concluded by the Mediation of the Palatine of Hungary; and
indeed the Turks were willing enough to listen to an accommodation, that they
might the better attend their affairs in Asia; where the Rebellion of Abassa
Bashaw of Erzerum growing daily more and more considerable; for being joined
with Bechir, Bashaw of Babylon, He was in a posture to Cope with the Grand
Seigniors Forces, and his Troops increased to that degree, that he adventured
to Quarter within five days Journey of Constantinople; and at the same time
Tidings coming that the King of Persia was entered into the Turkish Dominions
with a powerful Army; all these things concurring together, put the Ottoman
Court into a general Consternation; all the Troops which the Grand Seignior
sent against them, being still routed and defeated: The Grand Vizier being
hereupon dispatched with numerous Forces, to the Town of Babylon, in hopes that
the Mutinies of the Garrison would afford him an easy Conquest over that place;
but found such Opposition, That he was forced to raise the Siege with great
dishonor.

There having been again too, some breach between the Emperor, the Grand
Seignior, and Bethlem Gabor; all Parties being desirous to come to an
accommodation, it was accordingly struck up; this induced the Persian to make
offers of a Peace, with a reserve nevertheless, of the Town and Province of
Babylon; but these Conditions would in no wife be accepted by the Port, from
whence another Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men was dispeeded, which
entered Persia, took Tauris, viewed Bagdat, but finding it well provided and
defended with a numerous Garrison, they thought not fit to begin a Siege; but
having their Army again reinforced, they took some inconsiderable Towns, and
destroyed some Troops of those who were the Sophies Allies. These Successes of
the Turks being so little answerable to the Charges of the Expedition* being
likewise forced to raise the Siege of Erzerum; new Troubles arising in Tartary,
with a Mutiny of the Janissaries; the Turkish Councils began to be inclinable to
an accommodation with Abassa; whereupon a Treaty was set on foot, and a
Reconciliation made upon these Conditions* That Abassa should still continue
Bassa of Erzerum, his Son, Bashaw of Besra; his Kakya, or Lieutenant Bashaw of
Marasck with a general Act of Pardon or Indemnity to be given to Abassa and his
whole Army.

During these Occurrences, the Tartar^ having made an Invasion into Poland,
under^ their new King; and being met by the Polanders and Cossacks, a Battle
was fought wherein the Tartars were wholly routed* Thirty Thousand of them
being slain upon the place. About this time Bethlem Gabor, Prince of
Transylvania being dead, Ragotski was Chosen Prince in his stead after some
Opposition; This George Ragotski was a person rich in Money, and of great
Interest by reason of the Jurisdictions and Castles which he possessed in
Hungary, belonging to his Patrimony; and being conducted with great
acclamation, and a general concourse of People to Alba Juha, he there took the
usual Oath with much Solemnity and Magnificence.

During these Occurrences, various were the Successes of the Turks and
Persians, sometimes the one having the advantage, sometimes the other; now was
Bagdat Besieged by the Grand Seignior, and shortly after raised again; some
bickerings too there were between the Turks and Tartars, but presently healed
up for a time; as also between the Turks and Poles, which ended in
accommodations suitable to the exigency of the Juncture. Moreover, the Cabals
at the Ottoman Court, occasioned no small destraction in their Councils; the
four principal. Viziers being Brothers in Law, and having Married the Grand
Seignior's Sisters, they monopolized the whole Ministry to themselves; though
at length falling into some variance and misunderstanding it proved very
detrimenta^ to the Turkey affairs. Moreover, at the same time the Spahees and
Janissaries joined in a Mutiny, which proceeded to that height, as to commit the
greatest of Out rages in the very presence of the Gran^ Seignior, inhumanely
Murdering severa^ of his Favorites. But the Grand Seignio^ considering the
emergency of his affairs was constrained to dissemble this affront to Majesty,
until he had an occasion Clandestinely to take off the heads of the principal
Mutineers: These Turbulent humour^ in the Capital City, fomented the like i^
other parts of the Empire; so that ther^ broke out a Rebellion in Anatolia,
aros^ Troubles in Moldavia, and Mutinies at Bu^da. About this time the French
Ambassadors Interpreter, declaring too plainly the Sentiments of his Master to
the Grand Seignior, this last caused him to be empaled.

Now was a Peace suddenly struck up between the Grand Seignior and the Sophi^
but it only looked like those, who having ru^ themselves out of Breath, stand
still a while, That they may pursue their Chac^ with the more vigor; for the
same year i^ was again broken, and the War prosecuted with more eagerness than
before: The Truce between the Emperor and the Grand Seignior was continued for
a longer time; notwithstanding that the Progresses of Gustavus Adolphus at that
time in Germany, did invite the Turks to a Rupture. Warlike preparations were
then made against Emir Facardin, a Prince inhabiting a large part of Arabia;
and the like designed against ^he Crown of Poland: But passing over all ^hese,
I will proceed to give a Relation of (...) Fight of two English Ships, called
the Hector, and William and Ralph against the whole Turkish Fleet; these two
English Ships being Lading of Corn in the Gulf of Mola, were met with by the
Captain Bashaw, in his passage with the whole Turkish Fleet toward Cairo and
those Ports; now Corn being a Prohibited Commodity, and ^ot to be Transported,
under penalty of forfeiting Ships, Goods, and liberty of the ^en; the Bashaw
was invited at che pro^pect of such a Booty, to Command his ^allies to seize
the Vessels, which as they were but two, it was not questioned but that they
would yield and surrender upon ^^e first summons; but these true English ^ou
rages not being used to yield themselves ^p so tamely, were resolved the Turks
should pay as dear as they could make ^^em for the loss of their Liberty, Lives
and Goods; wherefore having by cutting their Cables, put themselves under Sai^
and got into the main Sea; they fought with the whole Fleet above three hours,
being sometimes Boarded by one Galley, some times by two at once; yet as they
plie^ their Quarter Deck Guns with small-sho^ and made a gallant Defense with
the^ Half Pikes, they often cleared their Deck^ and put off the Enemy with
great slaugh^ter; the Captain Bashaw being ashame^ that his whole Fleet should
meet with su^^ Opposition from such Vessels, resolved t^ enter his men at the
Gun-room Port of on^ of the Ships; and running the Prow of the Galley into the
Stern Port, the valiant Cre^^ of the Gun-Room, clapped an Iron Spike in to the
Trunch-hole of the Prow, whereb^ the Galley being wedged fast to the Timber of
the Ships, they brought their Stern-sh^ laden with Cross-Barrs, pieces of Iron,
and Partridg-shot to bear upon them, which r^king them fore and aft, killed the
Capta^ Bashaw himself, with near three hundre^ out of the Admiral Galley: At
length having spent all their Shot, they Charged the^ Guns with Pieces of
Eight, and being ove^ powered by numbers of their Enemies, an^ not able farther
to resist, they set Fire (...) their Ships, which blowing up, destroy two or
three of the Galleys which lay (...) their sides, together with those men which
were then Fighting aboard at hand-blows on the Deck with the Defendants; so
that none of the English were taken, unless three or four that were Fished out
of the Water; and thus was an end put to the Fight, the Turks gaining the
Victory with the loss of Twelve Hundred Slaves Killed or Wounded, besides
Turks, and were forced into Port, where they remained a full Month to repair
their Galleys, this Fight affected all the Turks with amazement, at the Bravery
or Obstinacy as they call it of the English; and is a matter remembered and
talked of to this day, especially by the Son of the Captain Bashaw who was
slain, called Omem, Bashaw of Ogli, being Bashaw at Rhodes at present, and
Commands three or four Galleys; for which reason he is so inveterate an Enemy
to the English, that to satisfy his Revenge, he buys what English Slaves he
can get into his Galleys, and sells none out under a double price or ransom.

In the mean while the Son of Facardin being overthrown, taken and strangled,
the Father himself was at length forced to surrender upon Condition, and became
for a while the Grand Seigniors Favorite; but this creating him a great deal
of En^y at Court, by the suggestion of his Enemies, (...) had at length a
formal Sentence of Death passed upon him by the Grand Seignior him self, and
was accordingly strangled by tw^ Mutes.

As Morat grew up in years, so he began to take upon himself the Government
though he exercised several Acts of Tyranny at the same time; and declared he
expected a blind Obedience from all his Subjects whatsoever: And as he was
strangely addicted to Wine, and often smarted under the effect of his Excesses
therein, he Prohibited the use of it under the severest penalty to all his
Subjects, After which, Declaring War against Poland, he bent his Arms that way,
though without Success, several ill Accidents happening both by Land and Water
in his Empire; many of his Ships being Cast away, with several of the chief of
his Officers; Fires being very frequent, especially a Terrible one happening at
Constantinople, which burnt down above 20000 Houses, 200 Mosques, and the
Library of the Mufti, which for the number of the Persian and Arabic Books,
was curious, and of high esteem; as also the Abbeys or habitation of the
Janissaries, containing 300 Chambers, each Chamber being capable to receive 400
men. In the mean while the Ottoman Forces being insuccessful in their
Expeditions against Poland; the Port was constrained again to implore a Peace
of that Crown; and to obtain it, to give up the chief Advisers of the War a
Sacrifice to its Resentment. New Troubles now happening in Transilvanania, the
Turk sent thither an Army, which was beaten, and the Turk compelled to a Peace.

Now does Morat resolve to go in Person against the Persians, and accordingly
marched for that purpose in the head of an Army of 300000 men; and coming
before Revan, had by the Treachery of the Persian Governor, who was ever after
his principal Favorite, that Town surrendered to him, and pursuing his
Successes, he entered farther into Persia, destroyed Tauris, and having
desolated and laid all waste wherever he came; he returned in great Triumph
to Constantinople, where he committed unheard of Acts of Cruelty in any other
Tyrant soever, the most Arbitrary and Vicious sort of life that ever Prince
did. During his absence from: the Army, the Persians regained Tauris, cut ^f
15000 Turks in an Ambush; the Ottopan Troops mutinied and assassinated their
^rincipal Officers. Now though the Grand seignior indulged his extravagant
humor ^th all sorts of Cruelties, yet this bad news from Persia hasted his
Preparations for those Wars, to which he was resolved to return in person, in
his way having subdued some Rebels, he passed the River Euphrates; and the
Persian Army not being able to make head against such formidable Forces, he
laid Siege to Bagdat; and being habited like a Common Soldier, he protested he
would never change his Clothes in any place but within the Walls of Bagdat; and
after the loss of vast numbers of men on both sides, he took that place, and
returned to Constantinople; where an Ambassador arriving shortly after from the
Sophi, a Peace was concluded between the two Empires. After which, pursuing his
Pleasures, especially Drinking with the former excesses, they at length kindled
in him a violent Fever, whereof he Died on Feb. 8. 1640. in the 17 year of his
Reign, and the 31 of his Age; This Prince was of a most Cruel and Implacable
Disposition, having amongst his other Acts of Tyranny, imbrued his hands in the
Blood of his two Brothers, Orchan and Bajazet, as also strangled his Uncle
Mustapha^ whose innocent weakness had been sufficien^ to secure himself against
the most horri^ Monster of humane Tyranny; he lest n^^ Son, for though he had
diverse, they died in the Infancy, notwithstanding which, his Kindre^ were so
detested by him, that he grudged the descent of Monarchy on his Brother
Ibrahim, who was preserved by a strange Providence from his Fury; often saying,
That he wished he might be the last of the Ottoman line, that the Empire of
that Family might end with him, and devolve unto the Tartar. He was
unquestionably the most absolute Prince that ever swayed the Ottoman Scepter;
but Religion he had none, seldom fasting in the Month of Ramazan, despising and
ridiculing all the Religious Orders of the Ottomans; never was the Soldiery
brought under that Subjection, as during the latter part of his Reign; he pryed
into all the Occurrences of Constantinople, keeping spies for that purpose, and
often concerted his affairs from the Discourses he himself had had in disguise
with people concerning his Government: He was a great Dissembler, Ready, Active
and Revengeful, excessively Avaricious, leaving 15 Millions of Gold in his
Treasury, which was empty when he took upon himself the Government. In short,
how bold a word soever, he was the most Tyrannical Prince that ever sat at the
Turkish Helm.

Sultan Amurath, or Morat being thus Dead, he was succeeded by Sultan Ibrahim
his Brother, who was the Sole Surviver, and undoubted Heir of the Ottoman
Family; But this poor Prince having been confined in a dark Room, where he had
received neither Light nor Air, but what a little Window afforded, which
sometimes in favor was opened to him from above; and what was worse, the
continual expectations and fear of Death, without Friends, Conversation or
House, rendering that confinement worse than the Grave it self; his daily Scene
and Entertainment being such as might terrify a mind more firm and constant
than his; so soon as he heard the acclamations and Huzza's of a multitude near
his Door, he forthwith fancied that his last hour was now come, and thereupon
Barring the Door, refused to give entrance; and though the Viziers Proclaimed
him Emperor; yet suspecting it might be some Artifice of his Brothers to see
with what satisfaction he would entertain the Tidings, he told them that he had
not the least Thoughts of the Empire, nor did he desire it; but prayed for the
long Life of Sultan Morat, whose Slave he pretended to be rather than his
Brother; but perceiving they endeavored to force open the Door, yet with
tokens of respect, he opposed, as much as in him ^^y their ^ss^rts, and kept it
as fast as possible he could; be remaining thus obstinate not to open, and they
out of Veneration to his Person, forbearing any ruder violence; Ibrahim could
in no wise be prevailed with to come out to a Throne, until all this bustle
coming to the ears of the Queen Mother, she came her self in person, and caused
the dead Body of Sultan Morat to be said before Sultan Ibrahims Door; which
besides her winning Expressions, and firm assurances of Amuraths Death, his
fears began to be dissipated; and suffering them to open the Door, he received
the Congratulations of the Ministers and Soldiers; after which having performed
all the Ceremonies of his Coronation, instead of attending business, he gave
himself entirely up to Luxury and Venereal Pleasures, committing the whole
management of affairs to his Mother.

The first thing of note undertaken in this Sultan's Reign, was the War against
the Cossack's, and that was done by laying Siege to a Town of theirs called
Asac, which after they had forced the Turks to retreat from, they themselves
abandoned; about which time was the young Prince, Sultan Mahomet Born that now
Reigns: After his Birth had been Solemnized with all sorts of Expressions of
Universal Joy and Satisfaction, came Complaints from the Emperor, of the
Treachery of the Turks, in endeavoring to surprise Raab, a strong Town in
Hungary, with 4000 men, yet without redress. In 1643 the Grand Seignior had two
other Sons Born; and indeed he seemed to make Procreation the whole business of
his Life, being always in Company of his Women, never stirring out of his
Seraglio; suffering the Ministers to dispose of all as they thought fit.

His Fleet indeed he sent to Sea, but without any other performances, than the
taking off a Bashaw's head; the Turkish attempts in all parts savouring of the
pusilanimity of him at the Helm.

At Alexandria 6000 Slaves took the Opportunity to make their escape, through
the little care that was then taken of them, by reason of the great Plague
which then raged in that Town; and carrying several Vessels with them that rode
at Anchor in the Road, they got first to Candia and Malta, and so into their
respective Countries: And upon the Grand Seignior's meeting with a denial of
returning them at his re-demanding them from the Seigniory of Venice, they at
the Port first mediated the War against that Republic, which afterward
occasioned the loss of Candia,

During these Occurrences, the Tartars making an Invasion into Poland, were
rencountred by a Parry of that Country, who killed 10000 of them upon the
place, forced many from Captivity, recovered a great Booty; and sent the rest
Naked into their own Country.

Ragotski, Prince of Transylvania, and the Turks fomenting a Rebellion in
Austria and Hungary, had 6000 of their men cut off by the Imperialists; which
forced the Turks to come to a Peace.

In the mean while all imaginable Preparations were making for a War, at the
Port; the Design as they gave out, being only upon Malta; but indeed the whole
Storm was to fall upon Candia, and other the Dominions of the Seigniory of
Venice: For, notwithstanding all the specious pretenses of the Ottomans to lull
asleep the fears of the Venetians, and damp their Preparations; a Turkish Fleet
of 100 Galleys, and 50 great Ships, with 300 Saicks, having on board an Army
which consisted of 7000 Janissaries, 14000 Spahees, 50000 Timariots, 3000
Pioneers, which they landed in Candia; and now the mask being off, a War was
Proclaimed at the same time at Constantinople; now before the Venetians could
bring such Troops into the Field, as might be capable to make head against so
Formidable a Power, the Turks had spoiled a great part of the Island; taken
Canea the second City of importance, as also Retimo; nevertheless the Venetians
were not idle; their Fleet ha^ the advantage over the Turks in severa^
Rencounters, lying before the Dardanells and braving all the Ottoman Naval
Forces though some time after several of their men of War were Shipwrackt, and
the damag^ sustained by that Storm was very great However the Venetian Forces
in Dalmatia under General Foscolo were very successful he Defeating the Ottoman
Troops, though very numerous, re-taking the Towns they had surprised, and utterly
driving them out o^ the Country.

During these Transactions, Ibrahim pursued his Pleasures with as much
eagerness as ever, being wholly guided by a Bawd o^ Wench, who in the nature of
a Bawd or Procurer, went from Bath to Bath to take a view of the Ladies; and
enquiring out the Dwellings of the most Charming, she recommended them to her
Sovereign, who was forthwith enamoured upon her praising their Beauty; and had
them immediately conveyed to his Bed, either by fair means, or by force; he
would also have ravished a Sultaness, Widow to his Brother Morat Deceased; but
she defended her self by a Dagger, and found the means to avoid his pursuits
for the future; Then his ^rocurer casting an eye upon the Daughter ^^f the
Mufti, a young person infinitely ^eautiful; she represented her so Charm^^g to
the Amorous Ibrahim, that he re^^lved to possess her, let what would come ^^t,
but thought it Prudence at first, consi^ring the Mufti's Power, to try if fair
^eans could prevail with him to deliver (...) up his Daughter; cajoling him
with ^^esents and Caresses; but that not succeed^^g, he treated him with Scorn
and Neglect, ^^ishing him the Court, and caused the ^and Vizier to seize on her
by force, and ^^ng her to his Bed; and after some days ^oyment, her continual
Tears, Sullenness (...) Reluctance much abating the pleasure expected, he sent
her home again to her ^^her; this workt the Mufti's anger to (...) highest
pitch of resentment, resolving ^n Revenge; and to that purpose Con^ing with
Mahomet Bashaw, a principal ^^^ber of the Divan, and the Aga of the ^^^izaries,
both Enemies to the Grand Vi^^^^; they concluded first on this Principal
^isters Destruction; whom accordingly Mutiny of the Janissaries, they caused ^^e
Strangled; and having also drawn in Queen Mother into the Conspiracy, in ^s the
whole management of Affairs would devolve upon her, she consented t^ her Sons
Deposition; whereupon they caused the Janissaries to mutiny again; wh^ demanded
of the Mufti, Whether according to their Law, Ibrahim as a Fool, Tyran and one
unfit to sway the Ottoman Scepte^ ought not to be Deposed? which being r^solved
in the Affirmative, the Grand Sci^nior was summoned to appear before t^^ Divan;
which Summons was seconded (...) a Festa; which is a point of Law resolv^^ by
the Mufti, That the Grand Seignior c^^led to account, is obliged to appear
before the Justice; but though he disdained (...) Festa, threatened the Mufti's
Head; (...) Tumults increased to such a degree, T^^ Ibrahim lost all Courage,
and fled to (...) Mother for Protection; but the Soldi^ took him and committed
him Prisone^^ the very same hole from whence he was vanced to the Empire: After
which t^ took his eldest Son Mahomet, and pla^^ him upon the Throne,
Proclaiming him ^^perour with great acclamations, which ming to Ibrahim's Ears,
he grew impact and with sad Lamentations beat his (...) against the Wall, till
at length, to put a to his Fury, four Mutes were sent to stra^^^ him, which on
the 17 of August 1^^^ they accordingly performed.

Sultan Ibrahim being thus taken off in 1648. in the 8 year of his Reign, and
the 39 of his Age, the Government was committed into the hands of the Grand
Vizier and the Queen Mother, called by the Turks Kiosim, and of twelve Bashaws,
who were to have the whole management of affairs, during Sultan Mabomet's
minority.

CHAP. VII. The Reign of Sultan Mehmet, or Mahomet the Fourth, Thirteenth
Emperor of the Turks.
SVltan Ibrahim perishing in this manner by the Cabals of the Mufti, and the
mutinous violence of the Soldiery; his Son Mehmet or Mahomet being a Child of
seven years of Age, succeeded in the Throne; during whose minority, (which was
to continue for the space of two years longer,) his Mother who was the first
Sultana assisted with the Council of Twelve Bashaws, took upon her self the
Regency; and their first Resolution was, That the War against the Venetians
should be continued, though Ibrahim a little before his Deposition, was far
advanced in a Treaty of Peace with that State. Now the Spahees not having the
usual Presents bestowed amongst them as was Customary at the Coronation of an
Emperor, fell into Mutinies and Disputes with the Janissaries; insomuch that
they had frequent Disputes and Rencounters in the Streets of Constantinople,
wherein many were slain (...) but the Spahees came ever so much by the ^^^st,
that they were compelled to aband^^ that Town.

In the mean, while the Venetians had the Opportunity by the means of these
Animosities, to provide for a War which they saw was inevitable, from th^^
Imprisonment, nay, and worse usage o^ their Ambassador; and the Strangling o^
his Interpreter; which Barbarity is commonly committed by the Turks upon suc^
persons, that others being thus Terrified may not dare to tell them their own;
s^ that they often mince, or wholly alte^ the sense or meaning of their Masters
o^ those occasions, when words are spoken by them, ungrateful to the Turks.

The Breach thus growing daily greater between the Turks and the Venetians, the
warlike Preparations on both sides were hastened with all possible Diligence;
several Rencounters the two Nations had, as well at Land as Sea: but tho the
Venetians blocked up the Dardanells, yet the Turks conveyed great Succors to
their Forces in Candia, where their Affairs standing in good terms, they
adventured to besiege the City of Candia, and battering it with many Pieces of
Ordinance, they at length took a small Fort that flanked it, and put the City
in great danger; when there arrived six Galleys of Malta with 600 Volunteers,
and 60 Knights of the Order, who beat out the Turks with great slaughter; and
after obstinate Disputes on both sides, th^^ Turks were constrained shamefully
to (...) the Siege.

During these Transactions, the Divisions amongst the Soldiery growing
greater, insomuch that the Governor to appease them was forced to sacrifice
the Grand Vizier to them, whom they executed, yet the Disorders were grown to
that height in Asia, that this was not prevalent enough to make them lay down
their Arms, but on the contrary, the Bassa was denied to pay in the Tribute of
their Provinces, alleging they would reserve it until the Grand Seignior was
of Age, and then be accountable to him both for Principal and Interests.

No less troublesome were the Cossacks too to the Port, committing Outrages
upon the Grand Seignior's Subjects in the very sight of Constantinople. But
after they had raised a general Consternation in that great Town, and made the
Inhabitants afraid it would become a Scene of Plunder and Slaughter, they
returned to their old homes, and so freed the Metropolis of the Empire from
these Apprehensions.

Notwithstanding all these Domestic Broils and Alarums, the Turks seemed
resolutely bent upon the War in Candia; for the carrying on of which, they
again fitted out a Fleet of a thousand Ships, Galleys, Galliasses, Saiques,
Brigantines, and lesser Vessels, provided with Bombes, Mortarpieces, and Fire
Works producing strange effects: and having strict Orders to fight the Venetian
Fleet, they engaged and fought with great Obstinacy and Resolution; but the
Venetians being the better Seamen, broke and disordered their Luge Armado, took
and sunk several Galleys, and put the rest to Flight, the Bashaw of Anatolia
being slain in one of them, who was sent to succeed Chusadin, Bashaw General of
the Forces in Candia, who had been made Vizier. Nevertheless, this great Fleet
of Turks overpowering to such degree as to numbers, that of the Venetians they
rendezvouzed again out of the several Ports they had sheltered themselves, with
a resolution to recover the honor they had so shamefully lost in the last
Engagement: Thus being met out of their several Harbors, they ranged their
Fleet in the Form of a Crescent, and the signal for the Battle being given with
much greater fury and obstinacy than the former: But notwithstanding that the
Turks fought with as great Bravery as possible, yet the Venetians plied them so
with thundering shot and Fireworks, that they were put to the worst, and the
Venetians pursuing their advantage they took 39 Galleys, 23 Ships, three
Galliasses, and three thousand Soldiers, forty Galleys, Ships, and other
Vessels, were burnt and sunk, and in them, by the great and small shot, 900.
Turks perished in both Engagements, the rest, with much ado, escaping to Naxos.

This discouraged extremely the Turks, and created some confusion in their
Councils, and what added to the troubles, were the News which came that the
People of Grand Cairo and Damascus had taken the opportunity of the Civil and
Domestic Broils, to throw off the Ottoman yoke, and assembling to forty
thousand, had possessed themselves of several Fortresses and strong Places, the
Turkish Governors conniving at these Proceedings, as looking upon the Empire
on the point to fall to pieces, which they thought to take advantage of and
shift every one for himself. Thus the Turkish Councils were wholly taken up in
contriving of means to put a stop to these Combustions, giving in the mean
while the Candiotts time to fortify their City after such a manner as that it
afterward became the Wonder of the World. This the Turks were sensible of, and
therefore by fine Words would fain have cajoled the Venetians out of Candy: but
they-understood the Posture of their own and their Enemies Affairs too well to
comply with the Turks Conditions: wherefore they commanded their Admiral to
block up the Dardanells, which he accordingly did; so that the Ottoman Fleet
under their Captain Bashaw durst not venture through; for which he being
displaced and strangled, the Bashaw of Buda was constituted Captain General in
his stead: and having rigged out a new Navy, this Admiral desirous to perform
some Exploit that might render him worthy of his place, took his Advantage,
broke through the Venetian Fleet, but therein sustained such damage that he had
little cause to boast, for the Venetians pursued him to the very Harbors
mouth, plied him so with thundering Shot, that seventeen of his Galleys were
sunk and taken, and four thousand of his Men killed; yet he put twelve thousand
Men on shore, and what Provision he could spare, receiving Order to return when
he had repaired his Damages, tho at the hazard of a Battle. But the Venetians
having notice of his Intentions, stood continually on their Guard; nevertheless
he made a shift to represent his own Exploits in such colors, that he caused
the General of the Forces in Candia's Head to be taken off that he might have
his Place, which he accordingly obtained, as also that of the Grand Vizier, but
soon after was forced to resign this latter to the Bashaw of Aleppo, a stirring
and active Man; who, after he had made such a Remove of the Officers at Court
as he thought convenient, sent to all the Maritime Ports to fit out, with all
Expedition, such Ships and Galleys as were fit for Service, determining to set
forth a Fleet greater than what had for many years before been seen in the
Levant; which was accordingly performed, but with the same Success with those
which had been formerly fitted out: for, most of the principal Galleys and Men
of War of the Ottoman Fleet were so rent by the Canon of the Venetians, chat
for the future they were rendered unserviceable, many falling into the hands of
the Venetians, the Turks abandoning their Ships, and flying to the Shore, no
longer daring to make head against them.

These ill Tidings first raised a general Consternation, and then such a
horrible storm of Mutiny and Sedition at Constantinople, as constrained the
Grandees of the Council to quit, for the present, all Thoughts of providing for
War against the Enemy, that they might defend and sure themselves from the fury
of their own People; for the Spahees and Janissaries joining together, pretended
to reform the Abuses of the State: to perform which, in a furious Tumult,
putting themselves in Arms, they ran to the Divan, where they deposed the Grand
Vizier, and discharged diverse other Officers of their Employment, the Mufti was
constrained to fly to Jerusalem; and the Queen Mother scarce remained secure in
her own Seraglio; and to so great a height their Rebellion proceeded, that they
purposed even to dethrone the Grand Seignior himself. And having thus cast off
all Respect; they entered the Imperial Palace, and forcing the Guards, broke up
the Treasury, and carried two Millions from thence. Nor did the Merchants Shops
and Warehouses escape plundering in this general Disorder.

In the mean while the Seditionaries having raised a base Fellow to the Grand
Viziership, as soon as this Storm was a little over, he was handsomely laid
aside, and one Kuperlee, a man of great Experience and Understanding, placed in
his stead.

But notwithstanding these Domestic troubles, the Turks were so absolutely
bent upon having Candia, that they continued to make all the Preparations
imaginable for the vigorous prosecution of that War, and for that purpose
equipped another Fleet to Sea in the Year 1646, consisting of 60 light Galleys,
28 Ships, and 9 Galleasses; and tho the Venetians lay at the mouth of the
Dardanelli with no more than 29 Galleys with some Boats and Brigantines, and
that the Turks had fortified themselves with Batteries on the shore, yet coming
to an Engagement, the Venetians had so absolute a Victory, that excepting
fourteen Galleys which escaped with the Captain Bashaw, and 4 Galleys of the
Beyes, all the whole Pleet was either taken, sunk, or burnt. The Venetians
nothing able to man all the Vessels they had taken, set many of them on fire in
the night, excepting only twelve Galleys, four Ships, and two Galeassies, which
they reserved for a demonstration of their Victory. With this glorious Success
5000 poor Christians obtained their freedom, tho in all this Action the
Venetians had but 300 men in all killed and wounded. The Venetians in
prosecution of this Victory, attached the Island of Tenedos, and became Masters
of it in the space of two days; as also in a short while after, of Salimene
anciently called Lemnos, which shameful losses irritated the mind of the Grand
Seignior to that degree, that he resolved the next Summer in Person to carry
the War into Dalmatia; tho this Resolution was afterward changed, by reason of
the Discontents at home, and the Fears of an Invasion from the Persian and
Muscovits abroad.

1657 was only remarkable for the recovery of Tenedos and Lemnos by the Turks.

1658 for the Rebellion of the Bashaw of Aleppo, who with an Army of forty
thousand Men, declared he would revenge the Death of his Brother, who had been
put to Death by order of the Port. This Bashaw grew at length so formidable by
his Defeating the Grand Visiers Numerous Army, and his joining with other
Rebels, that he gave Umbrage to the City of Constantinople it self, and in all
probability would have ruined the Ottoman Empire, had he not under pretense of
a Treaty of a Peace, been separated from his Army, and so strangled by a
Minister of the Port, 1659.

1660 was wholly spent in making preparations for War, without much Action, but
the Year following the Vizier marched in the Head of a hundred thousand Men
into Transylvania where the restless Humor and Ambition of Ragit^^skie had
created some Troubles, a^^reescore (...) having displaced the old, established
a new Prince, and taken in some Towns, finding himself so ill as in no
likelihood to recover, he prevailed with the Grand Seignior that his Son should
succeed him in the Grand Visiership, who followed his Fathers steps in
endeavoring to subdue the Soldiery, and extinguish all Arrogance and Faction
in the Empire.

Some time before the Grand Visiers Death, so terrible a Plague raged at
Constantinople that it swept away vast Numbers of People, almost desolated that
Town, and constrained the Grand Seignior to betake him self to Adrianople.

But the Pestilence seizing at length the Grand Seignior, in 1662 returned
again to Constantinople, spending the greatest part of his time in Hunting,
which he followed to that excess as proved troublesome and Expensive to his
People, for that all the Inhabitants wear summoned whithersoever he came,
insomuch that sometimes twenty or thirty thousand Men were appointed to beat
the Woods for three or four days, carrying before them the Compass of a whole
days Journey, about, enclosing all the tame and wild Beasts, within that
Circuit, which on the ^^v of the Scent, the Grand Seignior kills or destroys
with Dogs, Guns, or any other way with abundance of noise and Confusion.

But while the Grand Seignior is diverting himself with such sort of Pastimes,
the Grand Vizier endeavors to establish himself by removing his Enemies, which
he found no easy matter, having great Antagonists, as the Queen Mother, some
of the principal Bashaws, and several of the Grand Seigniors chiefest
Favorites; nevertheless his Conduct was attended with such Prudence and
Vigor, that he weathered all their Machinations, and maintained himself in his
Port.

In the mean time the Troubles continuing in Trainsylvania, great Preparations
were making at the Ottoman Court for the carrying on a War in Hungary, and that
Province. But while the Turks thoughts were busied in making Provisions for
that purpose, came tidings to Constantinople that the Turkish Fleet, consisting
of seventeen Ships, and thirty-seven Saiques bound for Alexandria in Egypt, and
convoyed by his Gallyes, which met them at Siro, very rich with Money, were
incountred near Rhodes with the Venetian Armates, and such ruin and prize made
of them, that of threescore Sail, twenty eight Saiques and four* Ships were
sunk and taken.

Tho this Rencounter created deep Resentments in the Grand Seigniors mind, yet
it did not direct the Ottoman Designs against Hungary, where the Grand Vizier
being arrived with a vast Army, sat down before New-husel, which after a close
Siege of 43 days and the Loss of 15000 Turks, was delivered up to him upon
Capitulation; after which he took Lewents and Novigrade, but assaulting Schinta
was beaten off and forced to a Retreat.

But the Year 1664, was more propitious to the Christians, Count Serini, for
the Emperor, besieging and recovering several Places, and routing the Turks in
diverse Rencounters. But at length jealousy arising between the Commanders, the
Turks took the advantage of it, raised the Siege of Canisia, which the
Christians had begirt, took Serins, within view of the Emperors Army. But on
the other side the Christians took Nitra, defeated a Body of four. thousand
Turks and Tartars, recovered Sewa, and tho the Pope in so critical a Juncture
recalled the Forces which he had sent to the Emperors Assistance, which might
have proved very injurous to the Affairs of Christendom, yet the Turks having
again besieged Sawa^ with a vast Army, the Imperialists* fought them, defeated
them absolutely, burnt Burcum, and falling upon the Turks near the River of Rab,
they made such Slaughter of them, that on the Turks side were slain that Day
Ishmael the late Bashaw of Buda, and Chimacham of Constantinople, by a Shot
from the Enemy* passing the Water; the Spalsula Agase, General of the Spahies;
the Janizary Aga, the younger Son of the Tartar Itan, and several other
Bashaws; Al^begh General of Borna, thirty* Capugi Bashaws, five and thirty
Pages or the Visiers, three hundred of his Guard, five thousand Janissaries,
three thousand Spahies, fifteen hundred Bosnacks, eight hundred Albarians, six
hundred Croats and Hungarians of the Turks Subjects, two hundred and fifty
Wallachians and Moldavians, six hundred Tartars, of Aratibia fifteen hundred,
and about four thousand other Asiaticks, from the farthest parts of the Turks
Dominions Eastward; so that in all seventeen thousand were slain on the Turks
side; besides which were taken sixteen pieces of Canon, a hundred and twenty
six Colors, with the Standard of the Vizier's Guard, five thousand Cymetars,
most of which-were embossed with silver and some beset with Jewels, with many
Horses, of which six were sent as a Present to the Vizier. Of the Christians
were slain about three thousand Men.

These Losses raised Discontents and Seditions amongst the Turkish Soldiery,
and both concurred to persuade the Vizier to make some Overtures of Peace; and
evidencing the reality of his Intentions by his Presents of a Vest of Sable,
and a Horse rickly furnished, with which he flattered and caressed the German
Resident, the Articles were accepted and embraced at Vienna with much
Greediness, and the Peace almost concluded and clapped up in a moment to the
astonishment of the whole World.

And now the Turks began to think again of prosecuting the War in Candia, of
the total Subjection whereof the Vizier being extremely ambitious, he made all
possible Preparations and Provisions for the carrying it on. Hereupon was an
Engagement near Canca, with the loss of many men on both sides. But while the
Grand Vizier was making ready to come in Person to Candia with a numerous Army,
the Jews were grown mad all over Turkey with the belief that their Messiah was
now come, an Impostor called Sabbatai giving himself out to be him; insomuch,
that they flocked together with so great a Concourse, as that it was thought
fitting to take the Ringleaders into Custody, and put them to Death. But the
pretended Messiah, Sabatai Nevi, turned Mohammedan to escape Punishment.

Now, in the Year 1667, does the Grand Vizier pass over in Person into Candia,
and having taken a view and surveyed all sides of the City, he laid a formal
and close Siege to it. Now were Mines daily fired on both sides, and Sallies as
frequently made, to the great Slaughter of Men and the Destruction of their
Works; and notwithstanding that Winter came on, yet the Turks having gained
Ground, continued the Siege tho the Extremity of the Season put some Cessation
to Action.

The Year 1668 was ushered in by a Fight at Sea, both to the Honor and
Advantage of the Venetians. In the mean while the Marquess de Villa, Governor
of Candia, being recalled by his Sovereign the Duke of Savoy, he was succeeded,
in that Command, by the Marquess de St. Andrew Montbrun, who wanted nothing of
the Vigilance and Circumspection of his Predecessor, passing whole months
without uncloathing himself; and as his Nights were without Sleep, so he
consumed the Nights without Repose, applying himself personally to Places where
was the most Danger. The Turks now approaching and pressing the Town daily more
and more closely, so were the Skirmishes and Sallies more frequent and bloody:
the Venetians by a Mine overthrew a Battery of the Turks: the French in a Sally
slew vast numbers of the Infidels, but lost themselves a hundred and twenty
Gentlemen in that Action. The Lunenburghers too made several successful Sallies
under Count Walde^k, who, exposing himself to all Dangers, received the Wounds
whereof he died. The Turks on the other side stormed three Bastions at once,
but were valiantly repressed by the Christians, and with great Slaughter.

In the mean while the Succors sent by his most Christian Majesty arrived in
Candy; whereupon, a general Sally was made, and the Christians carried all
before them, until that a Magizine of Powder, by chance taking Fire, it put
them into Confusion; insomuch they were forced to retreat into the Town with
great loss; and some Sallies more being made by the French with the like
Slaughter of their own Men. And now seeing that the Place was hardly any longer
tenable, they resolved to return into France, notwithstanding the earnest
Entreaties of the Venetians to the contrary: Who being discouraged by their
departure, and the Turks animated, they began to think of Capitulating with the
Vizier: A Treaty was accordingly concluded, and the place delivered up on the
27th of Sept. 1669. and this after it had maintained the War from the year 1645.

In the year 1670. Count Serini, Prince of Croatia, the Marquis Frangipani, and
Count Nadasti, joining with other Nobles of Hungary, sent Messengers to the
Grand Vizier at Candia, offering themselves Subjects and Tributaries to the
Turks, desiring his Protection of their Religion and Liberties.

In the mean while the Grand Seignior spent his time wholly in Hunting, and in
the Company of the Sultana, of whom having had a Son, he was so enamoured, that
he could not be absent from her in the least, no more than she from him.

During these transactions, and after, loss of Candia, and the Grand Vizier's
return to Adrianople, the common place of residence of the Grand Seignior; who
has ever had an aversion for Constantinople; Commissioners were appointed, and
met upon the Frontiers, for the treating of a Peace between the Port and the
Republic of Venice. The Hungarian Malcontents having sent Depuputies to the
Grand Seignior, to implore his Protection, which by reason of the desperateness
of their affairs, was at that time refused them. Many wondered that the House of
Serini, that had afforded such Valiant Champions for Christianity, should
Apostatize, and submit themselves to the Infidels. But the Neglects and
Affronts undeservedly cast on Nicholas Serini, during the late War, by the
Miniof the Imperial Court, and the Contempt and Scorn put on the Groatian and
Hungarian Nobility, was supposed to have fired the hot and ambitious Spirits of
those persons, who could more easily endure the slavery of the Turkish yoke,
than condescend to the Government and Prevalency of a contrary party. Hence was
the source of the present War in Hungary, which we will leave for a while, to
speak of that which the Turks did meditate against Poland in 1672. it being
requisite for the Intestine Tranquillity of the Ottoman Empire, that they have
always their forces employed in a foreign War, and the Turks upon the more
inclinable to one with Poland, both in regard of the ancient and inveterate
Hatred they have conceived against that Kingdom, through the valiant opposition
and successful repulses it always made against the various attempts or the
Turks, and the haughty Conduct of the Polish Ambassador, then Resident at the
Port, between whose Ministers and that Person was a great misunderstanding.
Hereupon followed an Invasion of Poland, in the year 1672, by the Grand
Seignior, with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, and beginning his
Enterprise with an Attach upon Caminieck, he had it, after eleven days,
surrendered to him, notwithstanding that it had formerly been looked upon as an
impregnable Fortress. After which, the Turks extended their Conquests as far as
they pleased, meeting with no opposition; the Poles being at Dissension among
themselves, finding there was no resiststing this Torrent, concluded a Peace
with the Ottomans upon these terms;

That the King of Poland should quit all claim to Vkrain, Podolia, and Rusland.

That for Leopolis, and the Country thereabouts, should be paid a Tribute of
seventy thousand Dollars a year; all other Capitulations formerly made were to
stand in force and virtue.

But the Year following the Poles refused to pay their promised Tribute;
declaring, that if they were pressed farther for it, they should be forced to
take up Arms in defense of their Honors, Safety, and Privilege of their
Dominions. This enraged the Turks to that degree, that Orders were immediately
issued out, that all those who eat the Grand Seignior's Bread, should, without
farther delay, prepare themselves for the War against Poland. Whereupon the
Forces marched on both sides; but notwithstanding the Grand Seignior's Menaces,
the Poles under their General Sobieski, now King of Poland, fell upon the
Turkish Camp, under the Command of Chusalin, and other Bashaws, killed to about
twenty five thousand of their men, with most of their Principal* Officers. The
Booty too was very considerable; for besides the ordinary Baggage, they took
two thousand Purses of Money, then newly brought for the payment of the
Soldiery, and twenty five thousand Wagons of Provisions and Ammunition.
Shortly after which, the King of Poland dying, General Sobieski was elected in
his stead, and now reigns:

During these Occurrences, the Maltese and Signiorese Corsairs meeting with the
Alexandria Fleet, they attacked them, and took four Gallions and two Saicks,
being a Prize of inestimable value.

About the same time the Malcontents in Hungary renewed their Petitions to the
Turks for their assistance.

As for Action, there was little passed, the Grand Seignior dedicating the Year
1675 wholly to Mirth and Jollitry upon the account of the Circumcision of his
Son. In 1676 the Grand Vizier Achmet died, in the forty seventh Year of his
Age, and fifteenth Year and eighth Day of his Government, after he had upon
every Expedition, enlarged the Bounds of he Empire, overcome New-hasel or
Oywar, and annexed to it a considerable part of Hungary, concluded the War with
Venice after twenty seven years Continuance, by an entire and total Subjection
of the Island of Candia, won Kamenite the Key of Poland, and laid the Vkrain to
the Empire.

In the mean while the Bashaw of Grand Cairo having laid too heavy Taxes upon
the People, they broke out into a Rebellion, assaulted the Bashaw, and
committed him to Prison; but means were quickly found by the Ottoman Court to
appease the People, which was chiefly brough^ about by removing the Bashaw to
the Government of Candia.

The Grand Vizier being dead, the Sea was given to Kara Mustapha, Bashaw who
for many Years had exercised the Office of Chimacam, or Deputy to the Great
Vizier, being a Man of courteous Behavior, wise and affable, not given to
Avarice, nor of a cruel Disposition* but immediately after his Promotion he
sent to the deceased Visier's Servants to condole the Death of their Master,
with Assurances* he would take them into hi^ Care and Protection; and
accordingly advanced them to great Promotions. He ushered in his Government by
Actions o^ Justice upon several Transgressors, cutting off the Pay-master's
Head for bringing false Money into the Exchequer, and displacing and deposing
such Ministers a^ he had found corrupted or remiss in their Duty. But his
carriage toward Foreign Ministers was arrogant and intolerable, refusing the
French Ambassador to have his Stool upon the Sofra at Audience, which
occasioned great. Dispute, and hindered Sir John Finch, his Majesty's
Ambassador, then at the Port, from going to Audience, which was offered, though
his declining of it was only under pretense of some Indisposition.

During these Transactions there being no prospect of an Accommodation with
Poland, great Preparations were made for the carrying on the War. The Tartar
Han, by Order from the Port took the Field; but after he had committed many
Outrages his Army was routed by a Body of sixteen thousand Turks and Tartars,
and he obliged to repass the Neister. The King of Poland too, in another
Rencounter, charged (...) Body of the Turks, killing seven thousand of them
upon the Spot. After which falling into Podolia, then ^n Possession of the
Ottomans, whom meeting with, he fought, and slew five thousand of them at that
Bout; but hearing that the Turks and Tartars, with a ^umerous Army, had invaded
the very Heart of Po^and, he bent his Forces that way, which though not
^xceeding six thousand Men, he fought that Army, ^aving first proclaimed the
Name of Jesus thrice, in ^he Head of his Troops; and in this Battle ninety
^housand Tartars, Turks, Moldavians, and Walachians, ^ere slain, seven hundred
taken Prisoner, a great ^ooty recovered; seven hundred being only slain of ^e
Poles side.

These reiterated Losses and the desire the Grand ^eignior had to possess
himself of the rest of Hungary, whose Divisions gave him a prospect of reducing
(...) to his Obedience, made way for a Peace; which was accordingly concluded.

In the mean while, the misunderstanding between the Grand Vizier and the
French Ambassador augmenting daily more and more about the Sofra, he was
treated by those Infidels in such manner as in n^^ wise suited with his
Character, and the Breach became the greater by the Enterprise of Monsieur d^
Quesne, the French Admiral, at Chio, in the Yea^ 1680; for the most Christian
King being then a^ Wars with the Tripolins, seven of those Corsairs had taken
refuge in the Port of Chio, an Island belonging to the Grand Seignior, Monsieur
de Quesne resolutely entered the Port with his Galleys, and after having
battered down a great part of the Castle, and demolished many magnificent
Fabrics, he sunk tw^ of the Ships, took one, and fired the rest, losing i^
this action but thirty of his men, tho of the Turk^ above eight hundred were
slain and drowned. Upon the arrival of this News at Constantinople, the Frenc^
Ambassador was confined, and many of his Servant imprisoned, nor could he
obtain his release men^ with less than three hundred purses of Money, eac^
purse being accounted five hundred Dollars.

Now tho the Grand Seignior had threatened the Czar of Muscovy with a War, yet
his Designs upon Hungary made him think of an accommodation, an^ accordingly in
May 1681, a Truce was conclude^ for the space of twenty years. Thus were the
Turk^ at full liberty to attend their Affairs in Hungary whereof we will give
an Account in the followin^ present State of that Country.

The Present State of Hungary.
THe Kingdom of Hungary did anciently contain, besides the Country properly so
called, the large Provinces of Dalmatia, Croatia, Schlavonia, Bosnia, Servia,
Bulgaria, Halibia, Lodomeria and Cumania, besides Transylvania, and others;
thus extending from the Euxine Sea as far as Austria, and from the Adriatic as
far as the Coasts of Poland: But is now confined within much narrower limits,
being bounded on the South with the River Seevus, and the Dukedomes of Servia
and Croatia; on the East with Transylvania; on the North with the Carpathian
Mountains, which sepa^ate it from Poland and Moravia; and on ^he West with the
Arch-Dukedom of Austria and the Dukedom of Styria. So that its greatest length
from the head of ^ibiscus, or the Teisse, to the mouth of ^he Mun, will amount
to about sixty ^erman miles, and its breadth to near as ^uch.

The air of Hungary agrees well enough with the constitution of the Natives,
though unwholesome, and hardly tolerable to strangers: In the middle of the day
in Summer being excessive hot and soultry, and at midnight as insufferably cold
and piercing. The frequency of Springs and Rivers which refresh and water every
part of the Kingdom, render the soil as fertile as any part of the Universe. By
these means are fed those vast numbers of Cattle, which are thence driven to
Vienna, Italy, and other neigh^ bouring Countries, there having been known in
one year alone that forty thousand yoke of Oxen, ready for the slaughter, have
passed the Roads between Vienna and Hungary. Another argument of its fertility
may be draw from its maintaining, as it has done, for so long those numerous
Armies of the Rebels, Turks and Imperialists. The F^^ rests and Woods breed
such plenty (...) all sorts of Venison, that a hundred an^ twenty Hearts have
been known to have been killed at one hunting; and the abundance makes them
never troub^^ themselves to preserve the Game b^^ Parks and Enclosures. And
such plen^ have they of Pheasants, Patridges, Woo^ cocks, and other sorts of
the most delicious fowl, that they are the ordinary food of a Peasants Table in
this Country; and at Buda at one Market Day have been sold eight thousand and
six hundred Turtles: And besides those which are destroyed in the Kingdom it
self, there are some hundreds of Cartloads of wild fowl exported yearly out of
Hungary into Austria, and other foreign Countries. The Wines of Hungary are
accounted as excellent as of any part soever, and as much valued at Vienna as
the strongest Spanish and Malaga; and particularly the Sirmian and Tokaiah,
which are reckoned the richest of the Kingdom. The most noted Mountain in the
Realm of Hungary is Carpathus, under which General name are commonly
comprehended all the Surmatian Hills, which separate this Kingdom from Russia,
Poland, Moravia, Silesia, and some part of Austria. Out of these and their
other Hills the Hungarians dig Gold, Silver, and other Metals. Besides, this
Country has several Fountains and Wells of strange and wonderful qualities:
Near the Town of Schm lnitz springs a noted Vitriol Water, which in a short
time turns great Plates of Iron into fine Copper, which is thence transported
into most parts of Europe. There are several Waters in the Country of Zip,
whereof if either Beast or Bird happen to taste, they dye immediately; and not
far from Rauschenbach, there is a fountain, which k^lls both the Cattle, and
the Birds that come within the reach of its streams. Hungary has on the West
two great and famous Lakes, the one called Balaton, and is thirteen Gernian
Miles in length, and the other Fewrtew. The most considerable Rivers of this
Country, is first the Danube; second the Teise, or Tabiscus, which receives
several others into it; third the Dravus, or Draab; fourth the Savus, or Sau:
And these four Rivers quarter the Arms of Hungary, the ancient Kings
considering them as the principal glory of their Dominions; and fifth Jaurinam,
called by the Germans, Raab, and by Foreigners Areto and Narato; and these four
last all fall into the Danube, which after it has run a course of sixteen
hundred English miles, empties it self into the Pontus Euximus.

These Rivers afford abundance o^ Fish, especially the Teisse, insomuch tha^ it
is a common saying, That divide the Teisse into three parts, and one of them
will be Fish. A thousand Carps have been known to have been sold near the Banks
of this River for less than an English Crown.

Hungary affords many Antiquities, and it is no hard matter to meet which
ancient Coins in that Country, that give the true Pourtraictures of
Lysimachus, Alexander the Great, Philip of Macedonia, Darius, Pergamus,
Hercules, Milo, and other Ancient Heroes. Near the Town of Jeva the Peasants
found a mighty Treasure of these Medals in Gold; which were discovered by a
sudden rushing torrent, the effect of a great shower. Each of these, to the
number of many thousands, weighed two or three Crowns; having on one side the
image of Lysimachus, and on the Reverse Victoria. With the Medals was found a
Golden Serpent: It being a custom amongst the Ancients to bury a Serpent with
their hid Treasure, in token of a faithful keeper.

The Huns, before the Introduction of Christianity, were a strange barbarous
and perverse sort of people. It was their custom to flash the Cheeks of their
young Infants, for the rendering their countenances the more terrible, so that
when they came to age they resembled^ more the Antique Statues, and rude
draughts of Faces carved on the sides of Bridges, and other public Fabrics,
than Men. Their Education too was so hardy as not to stand in need of fire,
either to warm themselves or cook their meat; for all their meat was eaten
either wholly raw, or otherwise slightly stewed betwixt the Riders Buttocks,
and his Horses Back. Houses they never inhabited, nor so much as a slender
Cottage or Hut of Wood or Rushes; but were from their Cradles brought up in the
Forests and Mountains. Their apparel was usually the skins of Wild Beasts,
which they never put off until they sell away in rags. They never dwelt in any
one certain place, nor troubled themselves to till or improve the land. They
had no sense of Morality, no observers of their Leagues and Promises with other
Nations, exercised no Religious Act, making their Swords, and other Warlike
Engines, their only Divinities. But the Huns at this day are much different in
manners from their Barbarous Ancestors. They have shown themselves in their age
a Warlike and Politic people, and zealous assertors of the Religion they
profess; they are generally lazy, but that may be attributed to the fertility
of the Country. They are Gluttons, but the Gentry are commonly persons of
great Humanity, Gravity, and Parts; but are nevertheless Ambitious and Popular,
and cannot well brook a Monarchical Sway. Their habits in Winter are
close-bodied Coats, with a loose Cloak, buttoned or clapped over their left
shoulder, and under their right pap, so as that they have their right hand at
liberty. They wear generally a girdle of what color they please, folded about
their middle. The Gentry affect most a Red Colored Silk or Velvet; the
Citizens Red or Blue Cloth; and the Peasants are commonly clad in a course
Cloth, either of a Green, or one of the forementioned Colors. The young men
fancy the feathers of an Eagle, Hawk, Kite or any other Bird of prey, a mighty
ornament in their Bonnets. The Hungarian Women do now something imitate the
Germans, and other Europeans in their apparel, only they wear a short Cloak or
Mantle thrown over their shouldes, which they still retain, how often soever
they change the mode of their other apparel: They generally wear a Veil over
the Mouth and Nose. The Hungarians shave their Heads, but wear their Beards to
a great length; and this they do, thinking perhaps thereby to render themselves
the more terrible to their Enemies. The Hungarians tell of one of their
Countrymen, who had a Beard of that prodigious length (in the Wars against the
Turks) that it served him for a Girdle by day, and at night instead of a
Coverlid for his whole Body. And in the time of his service, the whole Regiment
being commanded to be shaved, he was exempted, proffering to lay down his life
rather than part with this venerable ornament. Batchelours shave their Chins,
but wear Mustachoes on their upper lips.

The Hungarian Tongue is peculiar to the Natives of this Kingdom, having no
Affinity with any other spoken in the Neighboring Provinces. There is such a
resemblance in the Pr^^nunciation of this with the Hebrew Language, that should
the Hungarians make use of the Jewish Characters, all the several points and
accents which are used in the Hebrew, might be found very useful in writing the
Hungarian. Nevertheless, the Hungarians are so generally brought up to express
themselves in the Latin Tongue, that every Peasant is capable of giving an
intelligible answer in Latin, which is of more use to a Traveller in Hungary
and Transylvania, than in any other Country of the World. A man may travel
from Hamburg to the Borders of Tartary, and to Constantinople, without making
use of any other language than the High Dutch and Sclavonian; which latter
enters about Belgrade, and is spoken in Servia, Bulgaria, Romania, and a great
part of Macedonia. The Europeans generally begin their lines from the left, and
write toward the right hand; the Asians contrariwise from right to left: only
the Hungarian^ and Transylvanians draw their lines from the top of the Page to
the bottom. At present the whole Nation make use of the Latin Alphabet,
borrowing only from the Greeks (as the English do k and y.) Many men of
Learning cannot be expected in such a Martial Country, though it produced S.
Hierom and S. Martin, but they had their Education out of the Kingdom, as have
most persons of Quality at this day. But had these People had the leisure or
disposition to apply themselves to learning, they might had great advantages of
improvement from the Noble Library erected at Buda, by their King Mathius
Corvinus, about two hundred years ago. But these after the Surprising of that
Town, by Solomon the Magnificent, were dispersed into the Turkish Dominions and
other Parts, and what remained destroyed by the Fire that happened there in
1669.

Before that Christianity was planted in Hungary, these people, as most other
Barbarous Nations, owned no subjection to any certain Prince; but only by an
unanimous consent, subjected themselves to the Government of a Ruler or
Captain, who was to direct and command the rest, in the time of War or in other
cases extraordinary. Nay, and even after the Introduction of Christianity,
Hungary was no Kingdom, nor Governed by any self kind of Laws, before the
twelfth Century; though some affirm, that during the time of Paganism, the Land
was swayed by fourteen Dukes successively with Monarchical Jurisdiction. But to
come to this time; though the Kingdom of Hungary is pretended to be Elective,
yet still a Title to the Crown was pretended by all its Possessors, how faintly
soever made out. Nor will they, the Hungarians, allow but that their Crown is
independent, notwithstanding the homages that have been done by their Princes
to the German Emperors, and the Tributes they have paid the Turks, which they
call Pensions.

The Ceremonies anciently observed of the King of Hungary, was the Assembling
of the Bishops and Nobles, the Deputies, of the several Counties, Cities, etc.
in a certain Place near Paest, where after the Palatine had presented the
Prince to the People, and three times obtained their Assent, he put a Naked
Sword into the King's hand; who was to shake it East, West, North, and South.
These and other usual Rites being performed, that are observed at the
Coronation of a Christian King, he was re-conducted in great Pomp to his
Palace: The Crown of Hungary is had in great Veneration with that People; they
believing that the Fate of their Kingdom depends upon the Careful Preservation
of it; and in the severest Streights and Calamities that can befall them, they
are sure to take Care for its Security in the first place.

The Chief Revenues of the Crown arise from the Berg-T^wns, and the Mines of
Silver, and other Metals, whence the King is said Yearly to have One Hundred
and Sixty Thousand Rix-Dollars. The other great Branch of his Revenue springs
from the Impost upon Cattle, and is reckoned at Thirty Thousand Ducats. These
and other less considerable Advantages afford his Imperial Majesty, as King of
Hungary; Two Hundred, Twenty and Four Thousand Ducats, Yearly, which amount to
One Hundred and Twelve Thousand Pound Sterling, English Money.

Next in Dignity to the King is the Palatine, and is Promoted to that High
Station, by a Free Election of all the States: He gives the First Voice at the
Election of a King, is Guardian of the Young Princes of the Blood, calls
Assemblys of the States in Case of an Inter-Regnum; hears all Complaints
brought to the King, gives Audience to Ambassadors, and Reports their Business
to his Majesty: and Finally, in Time of a Vacancy, takes upon him the supreme
Administration of Justice, and Acts as Viceroy.

The Hungarian Nobility are Zealous Assertors of their Libertys, and the
viledges that have been Anciently Granted by their Monarchs. They think it is
below the Grandeur of a Nobleman to Live in a City or great Town; which they
say, were never designed for any but Merchants and Mechanics.

The Hungarian Cavalry is much better than their Infantty; which is chiefly to
be ascribed to the strain of quick and nimble Horses, which are bred in this
Country. They call their Horsemen Hussars, who Ride Armed Cap a pee, with an
Helmit, Coat of Mail, and Buskins of some Wild Beast's Skin; they carry a short
Spear in their Right Hand, and on their Left hangs a Cimeter, at their Back an
Harquebuss or Carbine. The Foot, which they term Heydukes, Carry a short Gun,
little longer than a Horseman's Carbine; on their Left Side hangs a Cimeter,
and under their Arm a Battle-Ax. Anciently there was no other appearance of
Devotion in these parts than this, they stick a Naked Sword in the Ground, and
Pay that Worship to it, which they think is due to this Great Preserver of
their Land, and Terror of their Enemies: but were first Converted to
Christianity in the Time of the Emperor Otho the First. They are at this day
much divided in their Opinions, there being Roman Catholics, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Arrians, Trinitarians, and other Sectaries, and Heretics. The
Roman Catholics have two Archbishops, and Twelve Bishops, who have Revenues
capaple of maintaining so much Grandeur as they Live in, being Esteemed Princes
of the Kingdom, and never Eat any Victuals without the previous Ceremony of a
Taster. Though the Calvinists are the more numerous of the Reformed Part, yet the
Lutheran have the Government in their hands, in those Cities and Great Towns
that have thrown off the Papal Yoke.

But having set down these Generals of this Country, we will now come to the
particular Description of the Kingdom of Hungary, which is usually divided into
the Upper and Lower Hungary; the former whereof reaches along the North-East
Banks of the Danube, up to the Borders of Poland, and the Lower along the
South-West.

The Towns and Cities of Note, which the Imperialists possess in Upper Hungary,
are First, Presburgh, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, since the Loss of Buda to
the Turks: it is pleasantly situated on the North-s de of the Danube; the Town
is not very strong, but guarded by a Castle with Four Towers, in the strongest
whereof is kept the Crown of Hungary. It has a Lutheran Church, and since the
taking of Gran by the Turks, is the Seat of that Archbishop.

II. Caschaw, is a Free Regal Town, immediately subject to the Emperor, and is
seated on the Banks of the River Hiwath, and drives a great Commerce with the
Polander.

III. Seuteh, another Regal City, and the Capital of the County of Zips, it is
seated on the Top of an Hill, its Inhabitants being generally Lutherans.

IV. Burtfield, another Regal Town, seated on a Mountain, in a Fertile and an
agreeable Country.

V. Epires, the Fourth Regal Town, on the Banks of the River Tarocza; much
famed for its great Traffic, especially in Sulf.

VI. Czeben, a Regal Town but of little Note, the Country round about
affording great store of Saffron, with plenty of Plums, and other Stone-Fruit.

VII. Trenchin, a fair City on the River Waag, with a Castle almost
impregnable, and is especial Noted for its Springs and Mineral Waters.

VIII. Filleck, a Notable Strong Fort, about Five German Miles from Caschaw.

IX. Tockay, another famous Fort on the Banks of the Te^sse; at the mouth of
the River Tockay, and whence its name.

X. Tyrna, a small Town about six German miles from Presbourg; the place where
the Chapter of the Archiepiscopal See of Gran is now held.

The Berg or Mine Towns in Upper Hungary still in possession of the Emperor,
are

1. Chremnist, whose Gold Mine has been wrought in above nine hundred and fifty
years.

2. Schemnitz, the fairest of all the Berg-Towns, being seated on a Rocky Hill,
Adorned by Three fair Churches, and Defended by as many strong Castles; and is
particularly Remarkable for its several Mines, especially those two which they
call the Trinity, and Winds^huht.

3. Newsoll, a handsome Town, and at, and near which are the greatest
Copper-Mines in Hungary.

4. Pugganiz, formerly a Fair Town, but now almost laid Wast, and Desolated, by
the frequent Incursions of the Turks, so that the Miners now have wholly
abandoned their Works there.

5. Koningsberb, now only Famous for a Fountain of Sower Mineral Water, which
has wrought some Notable Cures

6. Tillen, is an Ancient Berg-Town, but the Veins of Metal failing, is of
late wholly decayed and forsaken.

7. Sibeton, is the least of the Seven, and was formerly much more in Repute
than now.

There are several other Towns Considerable in those Parts for their Mines,
though they have not the Privileges of the Berg-Towns: As,

1. Virn-Grundt has a Mine rich in Copper, and several sorts of Vitriol, with
two Springs of Vitriolate Water, that turns Iron into Copper, and converts the
worst and most useless old Iron into the purest Copper.

2. Glashilton, famous formerly for a rich Gold Mine, which has since been
lost, and is now much resorted to for the sake of five natural hot Baths; the
Springs whereof are very clear, the sediment Red and Green, and the Wooden
Seats under Water are inarustated with a stony substance.

III. Zisenbach, also famous for hot Baths, there are many other small
Berg-Towns, in the County of Zips, as Wagendrusul, Schwedler, Goldnitz,
Smolnitz, Metzenscuffen, Stos, and Einsedel, where great store of Iron is got,
and wrought up in the Forges. Topschini, and Czetneki, noted for abundance of
Iron; and Rornau for Iron and Copper, and where sometimes is met with good
quantities of Gold and Silver Oar.

The Turkish Towns of note in Upper Hungary, are 1. Agria, or Eger, not far
from the Banks of the River Weisse, and was taken by Mahomet the Third, in the
year 1578. 2. Tomeswar, a strong Fort upon the River Temes, taken by the
Ottomans, after a brave Defense, in 1552. and has since that time been the
usual Residence of a Turkish Bassa. 3. Zolnock, an almost impregnable Fortress
on the Mouth of the River Zaggura, though shamefully abandoned by the
Imperialists, in 1552. and ever since possessed by the Turks. 4. Pest, on the
Fastern Bank of the Danube, over against Buda, taken by the Ottomans in 1602.
5. Cilozza, an ancient Town, and formerly an Archbishops See, but now overrun
with Mahometanism, 3. Newheusel, taken by the Turks in 1663. after they had
lost some principal Officers, and above three thousand common Soldiers in the
Siege.

The most considerable of the Aust^ian Cities in the Lower Hungary, are 1.
Comorra, a strong Fort in a corner of the Island Schutz, almost environed with
the Danube, Waag, and a deep Lake toward the West: This Town was once besieged
by the Turks, but after a great slaughter of their men, they were forced to a
shameful Retreat. 2. Altenbourg, being almost impregnable, and has often
repulsed the Ottoman forces. 3. Raab being once besieged by the Turks, they
lost twelve thousand men in one Attack; nevertheless it was at last delivered
up to them by the treachery of the Governor; but recovered again by Count
Swartzenbourg, in a notable surprise. Doctis, Poppe, with some other Forts, are
in the Emperors hands, and are Garrisoned, but not otherwise remarkable.

The Turkish Towns in Lower Hungary, are 1. Buda, the Capital of the Kingdom,
the ancient Residence of the Hungarian Kings, as now of the Grand Seignior's
Vizier, or Lieutenant of this Kingdom; it was taken by Solomon, Emperor of the
Turks; and its Baths are esteemed the noblest in Europe. 2. Stulhlwissenburg,
taken by the Turks 1543. recovered 1601. and re-taken by them again the year
after. It was anciently famous for the usual Coronation and Interment of i the
'Kings of Hungary. Epran, a very strong place on the South side of the Danube;
in the year 1595. this place was recued out of the hands of the Turks, in which
Siege Sir Thomas Arundel of Warder Castle in Wiltshire, behaved himself with so
much Gallantry, that he forced the Water Tower, and took from thence the
Turkish Banner: For which brave piece of service, the Emperor Rudolphus
created him a Count of the Empire; and King James made him not long after Lord
Arundel of Warder. Since that time the fortune of this Town has been various;
and 'twas finally recovered by the Turks in the year 1605. 4. Esseek, on the
Dravus, noted for a Bridge five English miles in length, and so broad that four
Wagons may pass over it in a Breast. 5. Frenfkirchen, had its name from five
fair Christian Churches, now converted into Turkish Mosques. 6. Sigett, a
strong Town situated in a Marish Ground, on the North side of the Dravus; in
the year 1560. it was taken by Solomon the Magnificent, who here ended his
days. 7. Sermium, now only remarkable for a polafable Wine, peculiar to this
part of the Country. 8. Canisha, a Fortress of great strength near the Borders
of Styria; in vain besieged by the Imperialists for a whole month together, in
the year 1664. 9. Peterwarren, a Fort on the Southern Banks of the Danube, in
the Country of Old Sirmium, or Sirmish. 10. Vesprin, beleaguered by a Turkish
Army, and after the loss of 500 men, shamefully abandoned.

Having thus described the Country it self, we will proceed to set down those
various Scenes of Action it has lately afforded. The Hungarians, as is
beforesaid, pretending an Infringement of their Privileges, and their
Discontents being fermented by some Ambitious Spirits, who hoped to promote
their own Interests by any Revolution in that Kingdom, they had by their
submission and prevailing Rhetoric of Presents to the Ministers of the Port,
obtained hopes that the Grand Seigni^r would take them into his Protection, and
assist them with forces for the driving the Emperor out of Hungary; and though
the Emperors Minister at the Port represented how prejudicial this would be to
the Treaties of Peace between the two Empires, yet he only obtained fair words
of a redress, for a breach was still fomented under hand. And though the
Emperor Leopold, in the year 1608. called a Diet at Edenburg for the
accommodating matters, yet the Malcontents were so perverse, that the Assembly
broke up, without coming to any conclusion. Hereupon Count Teckeley seized upon
several Fortresses on the Drove, and sent to the Bashaw of Buda, to advance
with his forces, refusing to have Peace with the Emperor, unless his own
Proposals was granted. Upon this, seventeen thousand Turks passed the Danube,
and made great spoil, burning and desolating all the Villages for the space of
fourteen miles, and were hardly restrained by the Bassa himself from laying
waste the Country. This growing thus worse and worse, the Emperor to
reconcile matters, did by his Declaration promise all convenient liberty for
the exercise of his Religion, with a Palatine, a Native of Hungary, with a
general Pardon for what had passed. But Count Teckeley and other Malcontents,
having other prospects, all these reasonable concessions were rejected.
Hereupon the Emperor caused a Detachment of seven thousand Horse and Foot to
be made out of his Army then encamped on the Rhine, to observe the motions of
the French, and sent them to join with Count Caprara, his Lieutenant General in
Hungary: This Force constrained the Rebels to abandon several places they were
possessed of. Nevertheless in the beginning of the year 1682. the Emperor
dispatched a Minister to Count Teckeley, to treat of an accommodation upon his
own terms; but the assurances he had received from the Port, of the Grand
Seignior's Protection, made him declare, That he had no power to treat of
himself, but must be forced to Act in concert with the Bassa of Offen, and move
according to the directions he should receive from the Ottoman Port.

Thus the season for Action coming, the Emperor sent some Forces more for the
better enabling Count Caprara to make head against the Enemy, which
nevertheless were not considerable enough to oppose the numerous Troops of the
Turks, Count Teckeley, and Abafti, Prince of Transylvania. Neither were the
Imperialists strength sufficient to hinder them from acting separately, or to
prevent Count Teck ley the besieging and taking of Chascaw, a strong City near
the Hewath; and Esperies within two days after. The Bassa of Waradin also
besieged Zathmar, which after several attacks, he carried by storm. Hereupon
Count Teckeley summoned the Hungarian Nobility to appear in Arms, though with
small resort; forced the Imperialists to abandon their Camp at Athol; which was
followed with the surrender to him of Lewentz. Villecke being besieged by the
Turks, was after several assaults delivered into their hands on the 17th of
September: After which it was demolished to avoid contests between the
Confederates. The Campaign being now over, a Truce was concluded for two months
between the Imperialists and Count Teckeley, and the several parties retired
into their Winter Quarters.

In the year 1683. the Imperialists and the Turks began the Campaign with
several skirmishes, and with various success. Count Wallastein, the Emperors
Ambassador at the Court of Poland, struck up a League Offensive and Defensive
with that King, whereby he is bound to take the Field with between thirty and
forty thousand Horse and Foot, to act Offensively against the Turks, and
Defensively against all other Enemies to the German Empire; in consideration of
which, the Emperor binds himself to have an Army of sixty thousand men in
readiness upon all occasions; immediately to pay twelve hundred thousand
Florins, and that himself, and the Queen Dowager of Poland disclaim all
pretensions to the Crown of Poland, and that neither Potentate enter into a
Treaty of Peace with the Turks but with joint approbation. And that both Armies
act separate, unless Cracow or Vienna be besieged, and then with united forces
to fall upon the Enemy; and that the Czar of Muscovy be invited into this
alliance. Whereupon in a General Council of War held on the eighth of April at
Vienna, it was concluded, That the Duke of Lorrain should be Generalissimo of
all the forces on that side. Whereupon after the Rendezvouze at Presbourg, he
marched at the head of forty thousand men; General Schutz with 7000 joined 6000
Polish Horse, under the command of Prince Lubomirski* A Body of 25000
Hungarians were to act in Vpp^r Hungary, 6000 were posted near Leopolstadt,
upon the Waag, and 10 o^ 12000 upon the Confines of Moravia and Silesia.
Already the King of Poland had already cut off a party, that had made an
Incursion into his Territories. He admonished Teckeley also to accommodate
matters with his Imperial Majesty, but without effect; though the Emperor had
proclaimed an Amnesty to all the Hungarians, in case of an entire submission.
During this a Croatian found the means to set a Magazine of the Turk on fire,
sufficiently stored with Provisions and Ammunition for 30000 men, for the space
of two years; and about that time General Schutz defeated a party of Turks of
the Garrison of Newheusel, killed 7000, and took 200 Prisoners. The Polish
Troops, on the Banks of the Danube, meeting with 5000 Tartars, the forerunners
of the Army, routed them, killed 1000; after which they fell in with a Turkish
Convoy of six hundred Mules, going to Belgrade, which they took, and converted
to their own use. But while the Imperial Troops were observing the motions of
the Turks, encamped near Newheusel, Count Teckeley beleaguered and took the
strong Castle of Denowitz. But care was not only taken to prevent his further
Progresses, but Zathmar was regained, and Count Zerini, since found to be a
Traitor, made Governor thereof. On the 24th of May the Duke of Lorrain broke
up with his Army, and marched toward Gran, with intention to fight the Tu ks
there, but finding them too strongly entrenched, he marched on, invested
Newheus l, battering and storming it with all the fury imaginable. And indeed
he attacked the place so vigorously, that if could not be expected it should
have held out many days, having already possessed himself of some of their
Works; but receiving order from the Emperor to raise die Siege: He accordingly
did so, but in his Retreat from thence, Captain Krause, and most of his men,
with the Counts of Taxis and Kanzianer, whom the Duke had commanded to encamp
near the Bridge of Newheusel, were in a sally of 300 Janissaries slain, and
their Heads placed upon Poles on the Bulwarks toward the Army. On the 12th of
May the Grand Seignior arrived at Greiks-Weissenberg, and their Army on the
17th; and having reposed there for a week, continued their march further. And
now the Ottoman Army coming on like an Inundation, burning and desolating all
wherever they came. The Imperial Troops removed from the Neighborhood of
Raab, the Cavalry encamping under the fortifications of Altenburg, and the
Infantry in the Isle of Schutz.

On the 7th of July, first Count Stirum, and then Count Caprara came Post to
Vienna, to give the Emperor an account, That the whole Ottoman Power had
engaged the German Cavalry, within four miles of that Town, had attacked and
taken their Baggage, and put the Troops to flight that were appointed to guard
it; that the Princes of Arsch^t and Savoy had been killed in the action, and
the Duke of Lorrain was engaged amidst the Enemies. Whereupon his Imperial
Majesty was advised to depart that very evening for Clooster Newbourg, and so
from thence to Lintz.

In the mean while the Turks made two Attacks upon Raab, in which they lost
5000 men. About this time a Relation of the Cham of Tartary was taken Prisoner
by the Germans, with another Tartar of eminent quality. After the Emperors
arrival at Pussaw, he received tidings, That the Grand Vizier had besieged
Vienna, and that Count de Zerini having Traitorously revolted from his Imperial
Majesty and joined himself with a Body of 8000 Tartars, was attacked by General
Dunwaldt, in the Woods near Vienna, defeated, and himself taken Prisoner,
besides a great number of Tarturs slain upon the place. Before the Grand Vizier
set down before Vienna, the Duke of Lorrain had made a shift to put into it
12000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1500 Dragoons. In the mean while the Besieged
making a Sally, kill 8000 Turks. In the latter end of July the Duke of Lorrain
having notice of a Convoy that was coming to the Turkish Camp near Vienna, sent
but a strong Party, who meeting with the said Convoy, defeated the Turks,
killing 600 of them upon the place, and took 1000 Wagons, laden with
Ammunition and Provision. The Turks having raised now three Batteries against
Vienna, they made three Attacks near the Sentenburg Gate and the Red Tower, but
were as often repulsed with the loss of about 8000 men: The Grand Vizier
thereupon demanded a Ceslation, to bury his dead: But Count Starenburg,
Governor of the place, made answer, That he had no need of a Truce, his
Garrison being all very well. These, and other losses of the Turks, the
Besieged having gained the Suburb called Leopolstadt, and ruined with their
Cannon most of the Turks Batteries, and particularly that which they had raised
before the Scotch Gate, and encouraged and animated by the Moneys and Wine
which the Governor gave them out of the Relgious Houses, they made so brave a
Defense, that the Grand Vizier thought fit to retreat to a little distance from
the Town, his Troops being annoyed by the stink of Bodies that had dyed some
years ago of the Plague, insomuch that many Distempers raging in the Camp, he
thought fit to refresh a while. During these transactions, the Duke of Lorrain
having advice, That Count Teckeley marched with an Army of 25000 men, as well
Turks as Hungarians, toward Presbourg, to possess himself of that place, by
means of the Intelligence he had there: His Highness immediately decamped from
Krembs, and arrived on the 30th of July, near Presbourg, and the next day
advanced toward the Enemy to give them Battle; but they not having the Courage
to hazard it, presently turned their backs, and retreated in the best order
they could: The Imperialists fell upon their Rear, and cut off between 6 and
7000 men, took six hundred Prisoners, amongst whom are reckoned 60 Hungarian
Gentlemen, took the Cannon, Baggage, and about 8 or 900 Wagons, laden with
Provision and Ammunition from the Turks Army: The Enemy being retired, the Duke
of Lorrain reinforced the Garrison in Presbourg, and caused all the Boats which
Count Teckeley had assembled for the making a Bridge over the Danube to be
burnt. In the (...) while the Garrison in Vienna continues to make a brave
Defense, being full of Courage, and in no want. On the other side the Turks
begin to have scarcity of Provisions, and were much weakened, before they
received a reinforcement of 60000 men. The whole Army of the Christian
Confederates, when joined, which is expected before this time, will amount to
vast numbers; the King of Poland marching in the head of 35000 men, the Elector
of Bavaria will 11000 effective, the Elector of Sa^^^ny with 10000, the Elector
of Brandenburg also furnishes 13000 upon certain conditions, the Circle of
Franconia and its Allies 8000, Bohemia and Lower Austria 6000, and the Lower
Saxony 6000: All these Troops joined to the 18000 men, Horse and Foot,
commanded two Leagues from Vienna, by the Duke of Lorrain, make up an* Army of
one hundred and nine thousand Combatants.

In the mean while the Rebels having made an Invasion into Moravia, the Duke of
Lorrain detached 800 Poles, who having joined a Party that was already abroad,
under the Command of the Prince of Lichtensteyne, they fell upon the
Hungarians, though very much inferior to them in number, defeating three
thousand of them, killing 600 upon the place, taking a great many, and
redeeming above a thousand Prisoners The King of Poland is advancing with all
possible expedition, his Army marching in three Bodies, and different ways, for
their greater convenience, and will be very near Vienna on the 20th or 21st of
this Month. The Prince of Waldeck is also joined the Imperial Army with 13000
or 14000 men of the Bishops of Wirtzbourg and Bamberg, and the Circle of
Franconia; the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony are also marched in Person in the
head of their Troops, and have it is expected, joined the Imperial Camp at
Enzedorf, not far from Vienna, by this time. In the mean while the Turks have
sprung two Mines before Vienna, but the first being countermined, they lost a
great many men; but the second had better success, and by its means they lodged
themselves in the Ditch, but were beaten out of it again. The Want of Forage
has reduced the Turkish Cavalry into a very ill condition, and there is such
great want of Provisions in the Turkish Camp, that they are reduced to feed
upon Horseflesh, and that an Ammunition Bread is sold for five Dollars. Besides
the Imperialists having passed the Danube, and fallen upon the Turks, had
lodged themselves in a small Island near the Camp, and had taken and brought
away 200 Camels, and other considerable Booty. Nevertheless the Ottomans do
push on the Siege of Vienna with all the vigor they are able, firing upon the
Town, incessantly from seven Batteries, and have made several Assaults upon the
Counterscarp, but have been repulsed with great loss. The Emperor was hastening
to meet the King of Poland, and was to be in person by the 23d or 24th of this
month in the Head of the Imperial Army, whereupon undoubtedly a General Battle
will follow, unless prevented by some Propositions brought by Count Caprara and
a Turkish Chaos lately arrived from the Grand Seignor, at his Imperial
Majesty's Court.

FINIS.

