DELIGHTFUL and INGENIOUS NOVELLS: Being Choice and Excellent STORIES of
AMORS, Tragical and Comical.

Lately Related by the most Refined Wits. Under Borrowed Names.

With INTERLUDES between each Novel.

VIZ. I. The Lucky Throw, Or, A Wife by Chance II. The Frustrated Intentions.
Or L^^ Martyrdom. III. The distressed Traveller. Or, Fortu^e at last. IV. The
Generous Gallant, Or, The Intrigues of Love. V. The Unhappy Counterfeit. Or,
Fortunate Gipsy. VI. The Champion of Honor. Or, Virtue Preserved.


Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Crayle at the Lamb in Fleetstreet, next
White-Friers Gate. 1685.

The BOOKSELLER to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with a Novell Banquet, which in the pleasantness and
Variety of the Subject, and the several Comical and surprising Circumstances, I
am confident will be no less Grateful to Thee than I intend it. I must confess,
the Critical Palats of the Age have been too much Nauseated with lean and
Jejune Discourses of this Nature, especially when the Regalio has been prepared
by unskilful Hands; But this being both the Business and Diversion of a Person
eminent at Court for Wit and Parts; I dare Promise Thee that Polynant Relish,
which will not Cloy but satisfy the most Curious or the severest Judge. These
ensuing Histories were writ by a Worthy and Learned Pen, at the Request of some
Gentlemen and Ladies, and now Published from his own Manuscript, that the more
Ingenious Part of the World may share in that Recreation, which was at first
designed for the private Entertainment of some Persons of Honor. The Stories
are here told under feigned Names, that we might preserve that Respect and
Reverence due to their Title and Grandeur.

But I shall no farther inhance thy Expectation of the following Treatise; An
Invitation is Civil and Modish, and so far I only offer it, though I do not
Question but every Guest will meet with a Dish will give him some obliging
Gusto.

B. C.

THE INTRODUCTION
THe Noble Melintus, whose Arms abroad had been no less Successful than his
Amors at Court, the one Rendering his Name equally terrible to his Foes, as the
other did his Person, Lovely to those Beauteous Ladies his Generous Addresses
had Acquainted him with; On a sudden forsook the Court, and Sighed away his
bitter Hours in a Solitary Retirement. When the News was Spread, the Noble
Melintus was withdrawn, it Raised a Wonder in all; His own Merits having Gained
him more then Ordinary favor from his Prince, and his Courtly presence, and
Obliging Mean, Won a respect from all that knew him. The Count his Uncle more
particularly Enquired the Reason of his present discontent, from whom at length
with much difficulty, he Forced a discovery. I must, my Lord, (says Melintus)
Bless that Happy Minute when first I saw the Matchless Corinna, and Curse the
Severity of my Stars whose kinder Inf^^ence ought to have given Her more
constancy, or me less concern, for that Loss, I now but in vain Lament, She Is
gone! My Lord, She Is lost to Me for ever! My hated Rival now Surfeits with
delights in those Curling Arms I once thought mine; Every kiss he takes is a
Blessing stolen from Me, nor has He Honor enough to pity, but Scorns, laughs at
my Miseries, and with the Memory of my sufferings, where his Cloyd Appetite to
fresh Enjoyments, Melintus would have proceeded, but the Count having now the
true Cause of his Melancholy, chose rather to divert his Passion then Encourage
it by a further discourse upon the same Unhappy Subject; And like a subtle
Rhetoritian with undiscerned Charms, led his heedless Auditor wide from his
present Theme of Sorrow, to a more Soft and Comical Entertainment: And when he
took leave promised to send Geronto, his old witty Companion, and some others
of his Friends, both Gentlemen and Ladies, the next Afternoon to Visit him;
Whose facetious Humors, and pleasant Conversation would divert his Melanchely,
and prove the most powerful Cordial to recover a dispairing Lover. Accordingly
the next day, Geronto, Lysander, Florimel and Aurelia, went over to Barn-Elms,
where Melintus had for some days past Concealed himself, that he might more
luxuriously Indulge his discontented thoughts free from the Trouble of
Ceremonious Visitants. No sooner had they saluted Melintus, whose Cloudy
Forehead spoke the present Anguish of his Soul; But in came Parmenio and
Philotas, each leading his Mistress, the fair Evadne and Beautiful Theodosia.
Melintus was not a little Surpised to see his Friends Crowd in so fast upon
him, when Geronto (their Mutual Civilities being past) began to Rally Melintus
with such sharp Excursions as his great Wit had always priviledg'd him to at
Court, and his Intimate acquaintance might now more freely Challenge from his
Friend, the little bickerings with Repartees being over, in which the Ladies,
especially Florimel, lost no advantage, they fell upon more Composd Discourses,
and as nothing could be more agreeable to the Company, nor any Subject more
proper then that of Love, Geronto whose Talent was great that way, first broke
the Ice, and began with this Harangue,

NOVEL the First.
By GERONTO.
A Gentleman, younger Brother of a very good Family in the West of England,
having had the advantage of a Liberal Education at the University of Cambridge,
left those happy Walls, esteeming that sort of Collegiate Imprisonment too
narrow for his more aspiring and ambitious Thoughts, which now began to feel
the heats of Love, and Warmer desires of attaining that pitch of Honor and
Reputation his Ancestors had Arrived to. Having thus taken leave of his
Studies, he returned into the Country to receive the plentiful provision his
Father had by Will assgned him, which amounted to 4000 li. on which foundation
(though Inconsiderable to what his elder Brother enjoyed) he doubted not to raise
as Substantial a fortune by his Industrious Improvement as his Birthright had
denied him: With this Intention, knowing the Barren Soil of a Country Life,
was not so fit to accomplish his designs as the more fruitful emploiments that
attended a Court and City, he repaired to London: But bringing with him a
Temper too Generous to Flatter, and too Gentile to Cozen, he quickly found
without the first he must expect no preferment at Court, and wanting the Second
it was Impossible to advantage himself am^dst a Crowd, whose only patrimony was
their craft. In the midst of these Thoughts he had often resolved to return to
the more innocent diversions of the Country; But finding himself entangled in
his Affairs, and engaged in the acquaintance of the Town Gallants, who at first
had insensibly wrought him into their Society, by those N^ts and Subtletys they
Spread to catch the heedless and Unwary; And being softened by the charms and
allurements of the fairer Sex, to whose Visits he was every day enticed, he
found it impossible to discharge himself of these Inconveniences, though he had
before his Eyes the most dismal prospect of misery, and inevitable Ruin of his
Fortunes which now began to consume apace, and in three years time the whole
Treasure was quite Exhausted. His Companion, who had so often been relieved by
his Generous kindness were so far from pitying or Assisting him in these
distresses, that like the Summer Birds, they left his Wintered Quarters to seek
a Spring in some warmer Climate, without the least Gratitude or kind
remembrance of those Lavish kindnesses with which they had been so often
refreshed? In this Condition, Repentance, the usual Comerade of distress,
presented her wrinkled Face to the poor undone Youth, and brought into his
Thoughts his former miscarriges, but with all lest him destitut of any obliging
Clue to Extricate himself from the Labyrinth his follies and Misfortunes had
Ensnared him in. How ready he then was to curse the Influence of those Stars
that frowned at his Birth, and Raised in his own Breast an Enemy against
himself; To blame his past Improvidence, and all the Obliquityes of his former
Conduct; They can best Judge who have seen and known how few Friends adversity
affords, and how the pleasures of former prosperity are the bitterest
Ingredients of present Calamity.

In this deplorable Estate after that by renewed solicitations he had wearied
all his Friends, Poverty began to grow Shameful, his wonted Embroider yes were
now worn into Rags, the Treats and Regalios' with which he had tired out the
day, and Stole from the Hours of Rest to Solace himself with, now Tantaliz'd
his present Hunger; His Beds of Down and softer Companions of Nightly Amors,
were now no more, a Numerous concourse of Dunns with their Loud Alarms broke
his Rest, and like Hornets with their Stinging Demands, perpetually tormented
him, and he who but a little before was the Court and admiration of every
Flattering Sycophant, is now their Scorn and Laughter. Instead of his Livery'd
Attendants, the Staff Officers watch his Steps, and nothing but the infamy of a
Prison and the Gripes of penury, are the thoughts with which he Entertains
himself; So that being forced to the utmost Extremity, he resolved rather with
the Prodigal, to return to his Fathers House, than feed upon Husks amongst the
London Swine; To which End, having Raised as much Money as the remains of his
Movables would pledge for, he began his Journey for the West, hoping his
Friends would Commiserate his indigent Condition, however one Blessing he was
sure of, to be out of the Noise and Clamor of his Ravenous Creditours. His
Money being short he was forced to Travel on Foot, nor had he hopes it could
carry him to his Journey End, but resolving to trust his better fortune he set
for ward; And having Traveled three days saw the last penny disposed of. The
Evening now drew on apace, and he found himself Extremely wearied, no prospect
of a Town to lodge at, or Money to pay for it, or other necessaries he had
occasion for, going heavily on under so great a load of trouble and discontent,
and pondering with himself, if it was altogether impossible for the wit of Man
to find out a Remedy for these present Evils, lifting up his eyes, at a
distance espied a Country Village half a Mile before him, which as soon as he
had overtaken, he sat down under a Hedge which belonged to a Neighboring
House, to consider what course to take to relieve his present want: Upon this
Hedge there were several pieces of Linen hung out to dry, and though it was now
late in the Evening, yet such was their Security and so great the Honesty of
those Country Hobs, that they feared no filching hand to Thieve them away; the
full Moon which with her Silver Beams supplied the Brightness of the Golden
day, discovered the Temptation to him, nor could he observe any Person near to
Guard the Hedge: But being never used to Steal, he was very loath to begin now,
nor was he less Averse to Beg; But urged by his extremities he was about to
bear away some of the Linen, when putting his Hand into his Pocket he found a
pair of Dice; Are you here still? Said he, here still? To tormen, but not
assist Me! Oh base and bewitching Tools, the Wisemans scorn Charms to the fool,
and Panders to the Knave! here still; To refresh my Memory how you Ruined and
deceived Me! I have heard amongst your friends you have been Styled, the
substance of hope, the miserable Man's last relief, and is it possible to find
one fitter to receive your favors then my self; Assist me then, and Umpire
between my necessity and Honesty, whilst I pursue my Intentions to play fairly
with this Hedge for the Linen it is Clothed with, and less needs then my
distressed Shoulders, which want a Covering. Yet am I resolved, if you cross my
hopes, I will yet be Just to my Losses and pay what you decree against me, and
if you strip me I shall then forswear your Assistance for the Future, and trust
my self Naked to the Charity of well disposed Christians, from whom I will hope
for that good fortune and Reasonable relief which you deny me.

Come then and lets try the Chances; Here Mr. Hedge, my Hat against that shirt:
7 is the Main, have at it; 12, Pox ont', out at the first Throw! There't goes
again, my Coat against those two Handkerchiefs and four Aprons, 6 is the Main,
now 12 good Dice, or I Am undone, ha! 5 to 6, I Have the worst on it, b^t away, now
Cater Ace, Tra Du^e, what are you? Cater Duce, the Devils in the Dice, then I
must strip. Curse on ill Luck! But never be faint hearted; come, nay Breeches
you must go to, 9 is the main, have at it: what now, Duce Ace? The Devil take
all ill Luck, well, here is stockings and Shoes yet, what is there 8? Now good
sweet Honey. Dice be kind, Pox on it, (4) to 8, its two to one against me humph!
Sice Duce, Iv'e lost it, there is no hopes, Ruin is my portion, well I have
nothing left now but my Shirt, and so farewell ail; Here the Dice began to
Repent, and the Spark won back his Clothes, and as much Linen from the Hedge
as was necessary to supply his present Occasions, nor was he covetous of more,
which he Packed up into a Bundle and Trudged forward, thanking his Stars for
his good Success. But not many paces was he gone before he was pursued by the
Owner, (who standing undiscovered behind a Tree was an Eye witness of this
strange Adventure,) and easily overtaken, by whom being questioned about the
Linen, he no ways Endeavored to Conceal but Justified himself in the Fact,
telling him he came honestly, by them, and would keep them, and make good his
Title before any Magistrate in England. Enraged with this Answer, the
Countryman with Loud Out cries rai^'d the Neighborhood, who passed their
Censure, and with words and blows both threatened and punished him: In so much
that he was forced to desire a ^ruce and entreat a hearing, but had he spoke
loud as the North wind the Women would have Silenced him; O Rogue, says One,
I Am glad we have found you, now I know how my Poultrey went, which I charged on
the more innocent Fox, it is you Sirrah had them, and you shall pay for them.
Well said, Neighbor, says another, let us make an example of him, this is the
Rascal, I believe, came a begging the other day, and whilst I was gathering
sticks Stole the Beef out of my Pot, and had like to have Ravished my Daughter.
Hang him: Hang him, Thief: Scolds the Chorus. He endeavored to lay this Storm
by mild excuses, telling them he was a Gentleman and ought to Answer what he
had done before a Magistrate, all which did but the more incense the Rabble,
who had certainly torn him in pieces, had not a Farmers Daughter, taken with
his Shape and port, persuaded her Sweetheart Richard to use his Oratory for
the Gentleman's safety, which he not at all Curious in, did it to this effect.

Fie, Neighbors, I think the Devil's in you, will not you hear a man speak, let Me
tell you, it does not become us to be Executioners to a Thief, that is the
Hangmans Work. If he has been a Rogue let the Jailer have him, and the Rope
Throttle him, but why should our Hands save them a labor, our Landlord's a
Wise Man and a Justice, let us carry him thither, and I warrant you Mr. George
his Clerk will quickly take Care to send him where he best deserves.

Away with him, Away with him replied the rest, which was no Unwelcome News to
Honoriu^, (for so let us henceforth call the Unfortunate Youth) hoping he
should find a Gentleman of those Generous Sentiments, who upon the Relation of
all Circumstances would Commis^rate his Condition and assist his necessities,
they carried him to the House of a very Worthy Gentleman, to whom they
represented the Crime with all the complaints and aggravations their Country
Rhetorique could advance, entreating his Worship to make a public example of
so Notorious an Offender. To which Accufation, the Justice demanded of Honorins
what he had to say for himself; Who Replied,

I shall not Worthy Sir, go about to deny or Evade what I am Charged with, as
to the taking away the Goods my Accusers Claim, but as a Stranger and a
Gentleman (however I appear under this disguise of habit) I humbly Entreat your
Favor to hear me a few words in private, and I do not doubt but your Worship
will then think me not so hainously Guilty as my Accusers would persuade you
to.

The Port and demeanor of Honorius, to gether with the gracefulness of his
Elocution, so far wrought upon the Justice as to disn^iss the Crowd, Restoring
to the party his Goods, and giving them his promises that he would take care of
the Criminal.

No sooner were they departed, but Honoriu^ proceeded to acquaint the Justice
with his condition in every point, and how, urged to what he did by the force
of irresistible Necessity, which he hoped his goodness and Charity would rather
pity, then punish with the Severity of Law. The Justice extremely taken with
the pleasantness of the Relation, told Honorius he was fallen into such Hands as
would not Injure him, rather Contribute to his Relief: But fince, pursues he,
you are Charged with a Crime of this Nature, think not but I will Inflict a
punishment o^ you, and as your Crime is Venial, your punishshall not exceed it.

All that I require of you is that you lie in my House this Night, and take
that Accommodations the same can afford you, as to my Table and Cellar, or what
else you please to Command; Yet your Lodging must be in a Chamber which has
been haunted for these three years past with the Apparition of a Ghost, and so
frighted those who have seen it, that no Person yet was ever so hardy to speak
to it. If on these Conditions you like to be my Guest, you shall find a hearty
Welcome and a supply to carry you to the place you determine. Honorius with a
grateful acknowledgement received the offer, and humbly thanked the Gentleman
for his great favor to him, Telling him he was now doubly Obliged to his
Misfortunes, as well that he had the Honor of knowing so Worthy a Person, as
by this Adventure he might possibly make an Improvement in the Experimental
part of Spectresm, which in his younger years he had only Read at the
Univerfity; ^hese and other Complyments much pleased the Justice, who led him
into the Parlour, where wa his Wife and Daughter, a Person of Incomparable
Beauty and richly Furnished with all the Ornaments of Body and Mind, to whom
after he had recounted how the Gentleman, had promised him to ^ye in the
Haunted Room, and speak to the Ghost if it did appear; He ordered his Servants
to prepare Supper, and in the Interim called for Wine to entertain the stranger
who thought himself extremely happy; The time passed a way in a very agreeable
Conversation, and the Justice was not a little pleased with the Modest
behavior of Honerius, nor did the young Lady his Daughter less admire his
person, the vivacity of his Wit and the quaintness of his discourse, which though
she endeavored to hide, plainly appeared in her kind and Obliging Glances,
which Honorius soon perceived, and had taken further Encouragement had not the
meaness of his present appearance dampt his aspiring Thoughts. But to shorten
the Relation, Supper was ended, and the Ladies withdrew to their Chambers, at
such time as the old Gentleman conducted Honorius to an excellent Room well
Furnished with all things convenient and Ornamental, telling him Jocosely. That
must be his Prison for this Night, and as many more as he Thought fi^. And
wishing him good Night, Withdrew. The Complyment was returned by Honorius who
was well provided with Fire and Candle, and Bottles of Wine, that the Devil
might have the less power over him. Being now alone he had leisure to confider
his present Circumstances, when reflecting on the Beauty of the young Lady, and
the kind looks she bestowed on him, he began to hope they might be the presages
of his better fortune, which now seemed once again to Smile upon him. With
these Thoughts he went to Bed not much Concerned with the apprehensions of what
had been told him, yet not altogether slighting the danger he might be in, kept
his Candle burning; and being ready to take the Sweets of Rest the Clock struck
one, at which time the whole House was very quiet, and not the least Noise to
disturb him.

Musing with himself about his present fortune, he thought h^ heard something
Trip along the Gallery before his Chamber, whilst more regardfully attending he
saw his Chamber door open, and in a Night dress he perceived a Person as he
thought enter and take two or three Rounds about the Room, and at length open a
Closet door. This Apparition though it seemed not so dismally frightful, yet
struck him with a present horror, which whilst he was more seriously
considering, came out of the Closet and took a Second walk in the Chamber, and
by degrees came nearer and nearer to his Bed side, which he diligently
observing, his apprehensions of the danger grew stronger upon him, but taking
courage was resolved to speak to it. With this intent looking sted fastly upon
it, he thought he beheld the same face of the Young Lady he had seen but some
few hours before, this abated his fears and Encouraged his Resolution. Rising
out of his Bed he approached it, which seemed nothing Shy of his advance, and
drawing nearer took it by the hand, which he found ^oft and warm, and as true
Flesh and Blood as his own, and more curionsly viewing the Face saw it to be
the real Person of the Young Lady, whose Body wak't whilst all her Senses were
fast locked up in the profoundest Sleep. His thoughts were now again at the same
puzzle between his own desires and the Ladies Honor, as before they had been
between his necessity and Honesty, but the Temptation proved too strong for the
tender Virtue of Vigorous Youth to withstand. Leading her to his Bedside he
Softly laid her down and placed himself by her. But here should I recount the
bold Trespass of his Hands, which found nothing of a Ghost about her, or the
more daring attempts of his succeeding pleasures, my own Cheeks would blush at
the Confidence of my Tongue; Nor is it possible to speak the Transports
Honorius felt, I hope your kinder Imagination will supply the defects of my
Expression. It is enough, that whilst Honorius was Revelling in the midst of
that Garden of pleasure and stealing the forbidden fruit, the Lady Awaked. She
had now been sensible of those delights from the obliging Embraces of her New
Bedfellow, and those kind Caresses her waking fancy had presented her with,
which she had never found from the Cold Arms of her confident Sylvia; Whilst
she lay thus considering what this strange Dream should be, or if a truth, what
it meant; Her Senses being now more perfectly her own, she discovered her self
in another Bed, when hearing her Lovers excuses and the many pardons he begged,
She was ready to Swoon away at so strange a Surprizal, Oh Heavens! Says She,
what have thou done? Oh Ravisher base and Unworthy Guest; Are these thy
acknowledgements of my Fathers kindness: With Charms and Philtres to bewitch my
Innocence, had thou no more regard to myspotless honor then thus betray me
to perpetual Shame and Ignominy^; Dearest Madam, replied Honorius, if the
Arraigned have leave to offer ought to arrest their Sentence, by the powers of
Love, by all that is Sacred to you, Fly not from me before you hear my Defense.
Think not, sweet Lady, that to Satisfy the rage of my burning lust, or to
Grasp such infinite happiness I would use ^^wor thy means; It Was fortune gave
you to my Arms, and as well might the Sun diselose his Summer Beams, and the
Earth refuse his Bounty, as I Shut my eyes against those glorious Beautyes,
whose Charms fired my heart, and ravished all my Senses, I saw you, Madam,
walking in your Sleep, I saw your Naked Beautyes, whose powers even Age it self
though proud of its boasted abstinence could not resist, and may not youth be
pardoned? If not, Let loose your anger, wrinkle your brow into a Frown, and
assure your self it shall be as mortal as the most venomed or pointed weapon
death it self makes use of to destroy the guilty; or if this punishment be too
flow for your fleet Rev^nge, plung^ a Dagger in my Breast, which I had
ratherfeel then once hear the dismal found of that single word, Farewell; Yours
Madam, let me Live for ever, or fall this minute a wolcome Sacrifice to your
unjur'd Fame, it is I, Madam, I confess it, that Violated your unspotted
Innocence, pure as the Mountains Snow, and Chaste as the Winters Ice, whom if
your Mercy cannot pardon, let your Severest Justice Carve a Satisfaction from
this offending Breast. With these and many other the like expressions did the
Amorous Youth sooth the disconsolate Lady, till at last, overcome with his
Importunities, with Tears of Joy She embraced the gladded Lover, and consented
he Should live: Live then, says She, and let the same bright witnesser, of
your Trespass and my dishonor; hear our Marriage Vows, and see this Sacred Tie
by which I am ever yours. -- Honorius his best Expressions were now too poor to
speak the Raptures of his Soul, nor certainly was ever Bridal Night passed over
with greater pleasure and delight then this between the two Enamorists, in so
much that the Shrill Messenger of the Morn had given Notice of its approach
e're their thoughts strayed from their Enjoyments: But being apprehensive of a
discovery, which was not yet ripe for the Fathers Ear with aparting kiss they
took leave of each other, she Engaging Honorius to make some excuse to prolong
his stay, promised to return the next night to his Bed; which he received with
all the Gratitude he could express for so great a favor. The Lady was now gone
to her own Chamber, and Honorius was at leisure to consider the present state
of his affairs, how his Shattered fortunes were now repaired, by an
Extraordinary providence, beyond all hope or Expectation. This Lady was the
only Child of her Parents, and Heiress to a very considerable Estate, and as
Valuable for her Virtue, Beauty and all other accomplishments that might
Complete the Happiness of a Lover, as any of her Sex. Whilst his thoughts were
employed in these ravishing Contem plations, his Senses began to t^re, and he
fell afleep at the same time when the Justice and his Lady came into his
Chamber, to Enquire how he had passed the Night, hearing the door open he
Awakened, and after he had feigned himself discomposed, he a^quainted them it
was a real truth the Room was haunted, and that he had seen a Spirit, but he
supposed^^^e same so far from Evil, that if ever Angels left their Heavenly
abodes to come upon Earth such was this and no worse; for though he had seen and
Conversed with it, yet was he not in the least affrighted, nor did its
discourse import any thing of harm to himself or the family, but what it had
said he had been by Sacred Vow obliged not to discover, till such time as he
had seen it again, for the too early Cock had Summoned it back to its unknown
Mansions e're it had finished the Secret it came to discover. The gladded
Justice embraced his Welcome Guest, and with the kindest words he could expres^
himself, entreated his stay the following Night and that he wou^d make him
happy in his far the Acquaintance; Less powerful Oratory would have persuaded
Honorius to accept of that h^^ so much coveted; however thankfully return n^^
the Justices Complements he soon after Ros^ and Spent the day in the
Conversation of h^^ New Friends. Nor was the Lad yever from his thoughts, or
her blushes from her Cheeks, whenever she Surpised his Strolling Eyes,
catching Glances from hers at a distance. In short, the Second Night came, and
the long expected hour of Meeting brought ou^ Lovers to each others Arms; the
Happy Minutes fled fast in their Mutual Embraces, whilst the Lazy Intervalls
were Spent in contrivance how theyshould Gain her Parents consent to finish
their Vowed Espousals. This the Lady undertook: It was now day break when
Aemilia retired to Her Chamber, and taking a convenient opportunity that
Morning in private, discovered to her Mother the whole Intrigue of her
fortunes, and told her, it being usual with Her to repair to that Chamber in
the day time to dress her self, and having often Spent her Hours in Reading in
the Closet, being more particularly delighted with the prospect, she believed
it had been Customary with Her for several years to walk this there in her
Sleep, though it was never known till this Lucky Stranger had made the discovery.
Nor did she Conceal the Important truth with all the Naked Circumstances, then
praising the Generou; Education and Endearing Carriage of Honorius begged her
Mother with all the Pathetical Expressions of Love and tenderness, to intercede
with her Father on his behalf; which she at last promised. The old Gentleman
was much Surpised at the Relation and severely blamed her unlawful Loves, but
at the same time considering the Violence of his Daughters affection, and the
Honor of his Family; consented to Her Wishes, and went with them to Honorius
his Chamber, whom he Saluted his Son in Law, and soon after Ordered the
Consummation of their Nuptials, which were Celebrated with all Imaginable Joy
and Splendor. About a Month after, Honorius and his Lady in a Coach and six
Horses went down to Visit his Relations, who all Congratulated his Happy
fortunes, which were soon after increased to a very great Estate by the
unexpected Death of h^s Elder Brother.

Geronto having thus Finished his Relation the whole Company, especially
Florimel, seemed extremely pleased with it; For indeed it was hardly possible
for him to speak to any Subject, though never so mean and Trivial, but what his
great Wit would always Beautify with those Charming Graces which won the
constant Applause of his Auditors, an Excellence peculiar to himself in which
few could ever Tollerably Imitate him.

Melintus Thanked him for his pleasant Fancy as be called it, and told him a
discourse of so much Mirth and Humor might have been better bestowed for his
part, Melanchely had of late so prevailed upon him that all Comedy was as Harsh
to his Ears, as the Clicking of a Death Watch to a Hoording Miser.

But Madam says he to Aurelia, if you please to Circulate the discourse as of
Right it belongs to you, I remember a Story I have formerly had the Honor to
hear you tell, which if I mistake not was Tragically Unhappy, but as it then
pleased with the Sadness of it, I am sure it would much more now, since my
Vitiated Palate Relishes nething but what is Compounded of the bitterest
Ingredients.

Sir says Aurelia, I presume you meant the Story of Amasius and Ortelia, but I
am afraid I shall unpardonably Transgress the Commands of my Lord your Uncle,
and the passion of the Relation will affect you too ^e^rly; Though who knows but
Melancholy, which is only a more Natural poison, may be easiest Expelled by an
Application of its own Temperament, however, Sir, your Commands will Apologize
for me, which I thus Obey.

NOVEL the Second.
By AURELIA.
A Young Gentleman whose Name was Amasius, the only Son of an Opulent and well
known Merchant of the City of London, after he had been furnished with a
Competent Shart of Learning, to Qualify him for the study of the Law, was
placed at the Inns of Court, where the Advantages of his Fortunes and his own
Modest behavior gave him a Welcome reception amongst all his fellow Students.
However after he had Spent two years there, his mind inclined to Travel, and
Communicating his design to his Father, easily obtained his consent. After he
had seen Fraence and Italy he came to Brussels, and Spent about four Months in
Flanders, and then removed to Amsterdam, where Lived a Gentleman who was his
Fathers correspondent, and an Eminent Merchant, at whose House he was invited
to Lodge during his Refidence there. This Gentleman who was of considerable
Estate and quality, had great Refort of Company to his House, with whom Amasius
soon acquainted himself, his Generous conversation and affable Temper rendered
him Courted and beloved by all: He was likewise the Happy Father of three
Daughters of so Incomparable Beauty that the whole Country could not produce
their equals, nor were they less praised for a prudent Conduct, and Virtuous
Education. With the youngest of these called Ortelia, it was the fortune of
Amasius to fall in Love, and as if the same Loadstone had Attracted both their
Hearts, the same passionate desires, warmed Ortelia's Breast, and tho both of
them were Shy of discovering their affections to one another, yet no
opportunity was missed in which by all the little Arts of Obligation and
kindness they strove to advance themselves in each others favor, his Courtship
was most particularly to her, and her regards and Eye always upon him. If
Amasius happened to sigh, Ortelia would turn her Face to hide her reply in the
same Note; In this Condition for some Months did they live, wh^lst by degrees
all the diversions of the Country, the Visits of Friends, Balls and
Entertainments grew Nauseous to the Lover, and a settled Melancholy seized his
Spirits. This was Observed by all his Acquaintance, but particularly by the
compassionate Eyes of tender Ortelia, who seemed very much concerned ^east the
same (probably) might be for some more Happy Mistress he had left in England.
Under this anxiety and disquietude she had suffered some Weeks, which perhaps
had wrought more effectual to her disadvantage, had not Amasius one day took an
opportunity when she was alone in her Chamber, employed upon a piece of curious
Needlework, wherein she had drawn the little God smiling at a disconsolate Lady
whose Heart he had, newly struck with one of his Feathered Weapon^, prostrate
at his Feet, as if she seemed by her tears and piteous looks to beg his Mercy.
Taking notice of the fancy.

Is it possible my dearest Ortelia, says he, you should be such an Artist in
your Draughts of this God of Love, and never feel a Dart from his quiver? How
know you Sir, replied the Fair One, but what you have seen may have a nearer
Relation to Me then you are pleased to Imagine, and that this wounded Lady may
be a proper device to represent my Unfortunate self; That Madam is Impossible
(pursues Amasius) for then should I view you in another posture, I should see
you Seated on a Throne with Growns and Scepters at your Feet, an Imperial
Canopy above your Head, supported by admiring Angels, disposing of bleeding
hearts and my own amongst the Fatal Number. Oh Fylreply'd she, you Complement
me Amasius, as if I were that Object of your happiest desires the Seas now part
you from, and I cannot but believe at the same time you address your
Commendations to Ortelia, you intend them to one more Lovely in your Esteem. I
did not think Madam, replies Amasius, you was so much a Siranger to your own
perfections, to believe these Eyes could be so much deceived, as to place my
respects on any other Object; Oh no, assure your self that if Amasius must not
be admitted to admire his Ortelia to steal a kiss and Imprint his Lips on those
fair Hands, to Languish at your Feet, and beg your Compassion, the grave shall
have my Couriship, and for ever will I bid Adieu to all the empty pleasures on
this side the Dust.

With these and such like Courtly Expressions as opportunity would give leave,
did our Enamored Pair pass away the Hours, and give each other the assurance of
as strong and lasting an Affection as Love it self could implant in the minds
of the most passionate; Nor was the same so secretly cautioned, but that the
Parents of Ortelia took Notice of its Growth, which as they saw no reason to
discourage, so neither would they give License to the continuance of it, till
such time as Amasius his Father was acquainted with it, and they had obtained
his consent. To which purpose the Dutch Merchant discoursed Amasius, telling
him, that he was on his part ready to give Ortelia a proportionable fortune to
what his Father should settle on him, and was no ways averse to his Marriage
with his Daughter. Amasius with tears of Joy returned his acknowledgements, and
Entreated him by all the Endearments Imaginable, by the next Packet to
acquaint his Father with it, and beg his leave that it might be forthwith
Consummated, this he promifed, and accordingly did; This Letter Amasius,
Seconded with one of his own, wherein he described the Virtues and agreeable
sweetness of Ortelia's temper, begging pardon that without his leave his
thoughts had been fixed upon her, which he believed were directed by the Hand of
providence, and designed by Heaven for the Establishment of his future
happiness. The Father was well pleased with the proposals made by his
Correspondent, and in a short time after returned his consent. This was
certainly welcomed with no inconsiderable Joy by the Lovers, who had Spent the
last month in fear that some cross accident might Obviate their expectations,
or at least procrastinate their Nuptials, which they so earnestly wished for,
But having now the Consent of their Parents Concurrent with their own desires,
the day of Marriage was agreed upon to be within a fortnight, and all necessary
preparations taken care of, to render it as Splendid as public. The pulses of
our Lovers be at nothing but desire, and the Minutes seemed to Travel on
Crutches and the Hours with a snails pace followed after. Ten days were now
past and the Eleventh had showed his Face, when early in the Morning a Letter
came by a particular Hand to Amasius from his Father, the Contents were in
these words.

My Dear Amasius,
If ever thon intendest to see thy Living Father, and as thou tenderest my
Blessing upon Sig^t of this, without any delay make all possible have to

Thy Loving and Dying Father. R. A.


Never did the young Swain with greater Horror see the Enlightened Sky Dart out
a growing Thunder bolt amidst his harmless flock, then did Amasius receive this
killing Message which struck his Enlivened Joy into Mortal apprehensions. A
Command so peremptory admited no excuse nor can I relate with how great a
discontent, he was forced to obey the Mandate, or in the least proportion
express the sad Farewell, he was constrained to take of his weeping Ortelia.
The tears they Shed or the Sighs that broke prison from their Breasts, were as
innumerable as the tears of Autumn, or the drop^ that fill the Oecan, yet
obedience was indisputable, and his dolatory and unwilling departure Criminal;
in short, he Sighed and vowed Eternal Love, promised his return, and almost
dying on her Lips in his last salute, took leave and repaired to his Ship which
waited for him. The willing winds wafted him unwillingly from the Joy of his
Soul, and in a few Hours he lost fight of shore, where he had continually fixed
his Eyes, and lest his dearest treasure; In every blast he thought he heard
Ortelias lamentation, and grew angry with the Churlish winds that they would
not do him the same kind Office and return his Sighs to Her. His Voyage was but
too prosperous in Conveying him thence, though in some measure he was pleased
therewith in that it gave him hopes he should be the less while from the
Mistress of his affections, with whom he had left his heart the pledge of his
resolved return. In a few days he arrived at London where he found his Father
upon recovery from a dangerous sickness in which his Physicians had dispaired
of his Life. The old Gentleman welcomed his beloved Amasius with the hearty
affections of an Indulgent Father, whilst he Congratulated his escape from the
Grave with all the Transports of a dutiful Son; After a little time he
recovered a good state of health, and received the Visits of his Friends and
Neighbors. The General Accomplishments of Amasius his affable discourse and
Courteous behavior were observed by all, who Commended him for the most
complete Gentleman they had ever seen, amongst others an Ancient Gentleman,
Master of a great Estate and Father of our only Daughter to inherit it;
proposed her to Amasius his Father as a convenient Match for his Son, at such
time as he had procured his leave to depart and Consummate his Bliss with the
Beauteous Ortelia. This old Fox knowing that her fortune would treble what was
offered with Orealia, greedily devoured the bait, and Commanded Amasius to
forget his first, and apply his Addresses to this Second Mystress, which though
he refused with all the prayers and Gentle Arguments Love could Muster on his
behalf, by the recital of those many and Sacred Vows he had passed, and the
miseryes he must certainly meet in the Violation of that Troth which Heaven it
self had been witness to, yet the passionate Father, wholly devoted to his
Interest, would by no means be prevailed upon, but enjoined him by his Paternal
Authority and as he hoped to Heyr his Favor and fortunes, to obey his Command
wretchedly miserable was the Condition of Amasius, but complaints were in Vain,
the old Men were agreed and he must submit or incurr his Fathers utmost
displeasure. However not all their Art or Industry could ever alienate his
thoughts from his dear Ortelia. She was constantly in his Eye and the Subject
of every Melancholy Soliloquy that he rep^ated to the careless winds and
unanswering, Groves, where he Sighed away his tedious Hours. In Memory of her
the tender Trees were wounded to Carve her Name, and every kind Turf that used
to be his Couch was Nourished by the dew that fell from his Eyes; The Birds for
got their Notes, and learned to Sympathize with him, and Echo it self repeated
nothing but Ortelia's Name. Every one Compassionated the unhappy Youth; but the
Cruel Father, who seeing all things in the Mirror of his own Sordid Interest
forced Amastus to Visit his designed Wise; but how Cold and unlike a Lover his
Addresses were, the young Lady quickly took Notice of, and acquainted her
Parents with it, which was not long before it came to his Fathers ears, who the
more he found him Averse to his Humor, the more did he press the same, and
charged him as undutifull and Rebellious to his Commands, which by all that was
Sacred he Vowed he should perform. To this end he forthwith with enjoined a
Second Visit which disconsolate Am^sius obeyed and having the opportunity of
private discourse with the young ^ady, who was a Person of equal discretion and
Beauty, he resolved to deal generously with her, and lay his present Condition
naked before her. To this end after some short discourse leading to his
purpose, he told her he was infinitely troubled that he had not a heart that he
could entirely devote to her Service, but that the same was possessed by
another whose Charms not long before had made an absolute Conquest over him,
and to whom by all the Vows and promises that Lovers make, he was in the
strictest sort obliged; So that should he go about to deceive her by
Counterfeiting a passion that could never be real, he should play the Traitor
with a Lady, who had for her Virtues and Incomparable desert so much of his
esteem, that he could never pardon himself so great a crime. The young Lady was
extremely pleased with his Ingenious Confession, and promised she would on her
part never go about to make him guilty of the breath of those Vow^, she looked
upon above all others, to have some thing more awful and Religious in them and
exacted the most sincere observance: But on the contrary she would endeavor
what lay in her power to divert her Father from his design. Ah Madam! replied
the gladded An asius, and can you be so kind, so forgetful of my faults, and
give me your pardon, then may I hope once more to be happy.

You have it Sir, says the Lady, and an Esteem with it Suitable to your
Merits, for surely there is none who knows your Circumstances but must Commend
you, and to Evince to the World, I am one of that Number, the blame shall be
mine; and if you please, in Obedience to your Fathers Commands, to pursue your
Courtship, the Breach shall appear on my part.

Its Heaven! Heaven Madam! Replied the overjoyed Am^sius, that must repay this
favor, which all my Stock of Gratitude is too poor to Answer in the least
degree. These and such like discourses were the Entertainment of the Second
Meeting wherein it was resolved Amasius should carry on his seeming Addresses,
and the refusal to be on the Ladies side, this he so lively personated, that in
the eye of the World, he was looked upon as absolutely Enamored of her
excelleneyes as if the same had been real, upon which his Father received him
with a double return of his respect and kindness to him. The old Gentleman
having settled the whole affair between themselves, agreed the time and place to
finish the Espousals, under which apprehension, let us change the Scene to
Holland, where during the time of Amasius absence, the disconsolate Ortelia
like the Mourning Turtle on her Melancholy perch, Sighed out her Sorrows in the
longing expectation of her Dean Amasius his return, but having by the
miscarriage of his Letter for two Months heard nothing from him, began to think
him unkind and forgetful of his Vows; when it happened an English Gentleman
Traveling into those parts, and invited to her Fathers House with other
Friends one day to Dinner, amongst the variety of their discourse of England,
and of their severa^ acquaintance there, it was asked if he kne^ Amasius his
Father, how he did, and if perfectly recovered from his late Sickness, which he
told them he was, and that his Son, the young Gentleman, was to be suddenly
Married with a Lady to whom he had been some time Engaged. This unexpected News
Surpised the whole Family, but especially Ortelia, who trembled and changed
Color at it; the question was renew'^ by Ortelias Father, Sir, says he, I have
some knowledge of the young Gentleman, and should be very glad to hear of his
prosperity, and entreat you, Sir, if you can to tell me more pa^ticularly the
Person to whom, and the Grounds of your assurance that he is so soon to Change
his Condition. In answer to which, the Gentleman told him her Name, described
her Person and fortune, and withal gave her a very advantageous Character, as
to her Virtues, her Beauty and excellent Temper, adding that before he left
England the day had been appointed; which ^he supposed would happen two days
following, that he was with Amasius, and his Father when the Wedding Clothes
were bought, and other provisions made for the Solemnity. And is, pursues one
of Ortelias Sisters, Amasius as accomplished a Lover as he seems a Gentleman;
Doubtless Madam, says the stranger, he wants nothing to Commend him to the
World in all respects, and I have observed, (for I live near him) his Visits to
be very assiduous, his mean and address Vigorous and Courtly; The day I came
for Holland he waited upon her in a New Chariot Richly guilt, in which they
both went to a play together. Persidious Wretch! says Ortelia to her self, am
I so soon forgotten! -- Oh Amasias! and blushed and could scarce re^rain her
Eyes from expressing the Violence of ^er passion, which her Friends taking
Notice of, ^iverted the discourse and Dinner being ended; ^he slipped from the
Company to her Chamber, where after she had given her passion its full rage
against the false Amasius, she flung he^ self down upon the Bed, where she lay
till he^ Sisters came up to comfort her. But alas! to^ late, for the Torrent of
her Griefs had already put a f^tal period to her life, and her Soul wa^ fled to
those Mansions of Bliss which she missed of here, so strange were their
Surprise at so sudden a Difaster, that they could scarce beleiv^ their eyes,
their loud shrieks and cries called u^ the House, and so excessive was the
general La^ mentation that it is beyond the power of m^ expression to describe
it. I will now leave thi^ House of Mourning and return to Amasi^s, who^ all
this time had lived upon the Rack, and wa^ against his will obliged to Act a
part so direct^^ contrary to his Inclinations and the ingenuity o^ his Temper;
But this being at the L^dies request and known to her, it did the less concern
him: On the other Hand the young Lady ha^^ used all her endeavors with her
Father to pu^ off the Match, alleging in her self a present in disposition of
health, and unwillingness so hastily to change her Condition, nor could she
d^^cover, (whatever the world might see,) tho^ Graces in Amasius his Person, or
that agree ab^ humor in his conservation, that should t^m^ her to Marry him,
and Hazard her future (...) piness in the Choice of a Husband she could never
entirely Love. But all her arguments were in Vain, her perverse Father would
permit no disputes, but sharply reproved her, Saying, not her Eyes should be
the guide of her Choice, that should depend on his pleasure, that he was very
well satisfied in Amasius, and did expect nothing from her but a due Compliance
to his Will. In this state their affairs stood till the very Night was come
which preceeded the Morning of their Nuptials, on which as they were
discoursing together, Amaesi^s on his knees begged her pardon that he must
unwillingly take some other course to avoid that, which to any other man in the
World would be the greatest Blessing his Soul could wish to enjoy on this side
Heaven; But what the same should be he was not yet determined, but impossible
it was, that he could be ever forced to betray his vows to Ortclia. The good
Lady pityed his Condition, and begged him by no desperate Act to urge his Fate,
telling him she would be ready to share his misfortunes, and equally suffer
with him. The Evening grew on a pace and Amasius with a Thousand thanks to the
Generous Lady took leave, no ways resolved what to do, his wandering thoughts
fell upon several Stratagems to defer the Wedding, but none of them pleased
him, the Obstinacy of his Father was not to be removed by all his prayers and
Entreaties. At last he resigned himself to his Pillow, and recommended the
success of this great affair to the care and Conduct of his better Genius;
however this point he fixed, that rather then break his Vows he would Venture
the displeasure of his Father, and if no Mediation would reconcile him, he
resolved for Holland to l^ve and dye with his Dear Ortilia. Often did he
endeavor to Compose himself to rest, but the Troubles of his mind kept his
Eyes open, nor had he slept a wink when the clock struck two, the Moon shone
full upon the Window and his Melancholy fancy was shaping the several Shadows
into various representations and figures, when he thought he heard his door
open, and turning his Eye he saw the Appearance of a Woman with a Mournful and
pale look, enter his Chambers, startled at the Phantasm as he at first supposed
it to be, after a little time he recovered himself and observing the figure
more nearly, he thought he beheld the very Person of Ortelia, Clad all in white
with her Hair disshrevell'd, and at the End of every Lock a drop of Blood,
which hung round her Shoulders like a Chain of Rubyes; On her head she seemed
to have a Crown of Gold set round with diamonds, Emeralds Saphires, and other
precious Stones of different Colors whose Dazzling rays his weaker eyes could
no more behold then the Sun in his Meridian Glory, this surprising Vision
struck a sacred horror through every part, though the strangeness of the
Apparition did not so much assright as the Majestic Port and radiant Graces
pleased his admiring fancy: It moved in a gentle pace toward, the Bed, and
drawing the Curtains in a pleasing but hollow voice, spoke to him.

Fear not, Amasius, for I am now too late satisfied of thy Fidelity to the
Mistaken Ortelia, nor do I come from the Shades of Death, to reproach thy
unconstant Love, it has been the Misfortune of my Credulity, not thy
Disloyalty, too late I knew it, to Remedy the dissolution I suffered; but the
powers amongst whom I am, have since revealed the truth and though I can never be
thine.

Not mine, replied the trembling Amasius, not mine, Ortelia? Think not those
Shades shall ever hide thee, no Ortelia; if really thou art my Ortelia, surely
thou could not think so hardly of me, but even amidst those dark Shadess
below Amasius would seek thee out; and since our Destinyes have forbid us to
abide on Earth, is there no Seciety beneath it? thither I will follow thee, and
Trace every step of thine till I have wearied thy Fleeting Manes and forced
thee to repose, where I will rest in thy ^osom and enjoy the happiness of being
ever with thee,

Alas Amasius! Replied the Mournful Shade, little art thou learnt in what we
know, nor dare I tell thee what we are Subject to, who Travel in that great
Abyss. Live therefore, Amasius, it is Heaven enjoins it, Heaven (to which in a
short time my andring spirit must take its everlasting flight) bids thee not
shake the Sands of life which in a short time will of themselves run out, much
less break the precious Crystal that contains them; long it will not he e're
we shall meet again and be for ever joined by Ties more Sacred then Flesh and
Blood can admit of here. Oh Amasius, we shall be infinitely happy, but we must
wait the leisure of Heaven to make us so.

May that time quickly come, cries the passionate Amasius, move faster, O ye
Sluggish Hours and huddle into days, ye days into years to accomplish that
Happy period.

'Twill not be long first, said Ortelia, but in the mean time observe my
Request, and do no Violence to your self, nor ever consent to Marry the Person
designed nor any other, and if you can possibly prevent it, never reveal one
Syllable of this discourse, nor let the World know I have now appeared to you,
for if you do, my restless Ghost will ever haunt you.

I dare promise any thing thy Blessed Shade desires me, Replied Amasius, but to
live is a punishment too intolerable for frail Mortality to bear, I Will cast off
my hated Life with all the Gild^d vanities that attend it, to be Blessed amongst
the Number of the dead, with the Sight of my Ortelia

We must not, said She, Carve out our own desires, if we should, our unskilful
Hand would often mistake the Poison for the Antidote, but as thou Tenderest the
Prayers and Entreatyes of dead Ortelia, patiently attend thy Fate.

At which word the Shrill Harbinger of the Morn gave Notice of the approach of
day, and Summoned all wandering Ghosts to their dark abode; when Ortelia
contracting her scattered Rays into one Glorious Beam of Light, cried
Farewell! Farewell! My Dear Amasius, and vanished in a Minute. Amasius, seeing
that Ortelia was now gone beyond recall, fell into these passionate Complaints,
Oh kind Death, if ever thou had pity for the Miserable suffer thy self this
once to be entreated, discharge me from this Clog of earth which still sinks my
aspiring Soul; See here a Resistless breast which begs but one single Shaft,
and have thou none at leisure? Insulting Tyrant to keep the wretched in Chains,
and like the Conquered B^jazet make me the Gazing Stock of Fools, whilst I am
imprisoned in this Cage of Flesh, but Oh! that like him, I could dash out life,
against those Bars that hold me! Oh sad parting, Oh Dear Ortelia! and art thou
gone so soon from me, who perhaps may never see thee more? Come death and ease
me, Oh cruel fate obey! No! no! I am condemned to Linger out a miserable life
in pains, more Exquisite then the sharpest Martyrdoms, but thou dear Soul have
told me it shall not be long. Oh remember but thy last promise, and I will ask
no more to complete me happy; with these and other dolorous Expressions did the
Unhappy Amasius Vent his sorrows, whilst excess of passion had thrown him into
a Violent Fever. In the Morning early, his Friends came Crowding to his
Chamber to bid good Morrow to the Bridegroom, and finding him in Bed yet, one
of them began to Rally his Sluggishness, who on a Wedding day when all the
preparations for the Nuptials waited for him, and his Friends were Met to
welcome the Happy Hour, was the greatest Loyterer himself: To whom Amasius only
answered with a deep Sigh, which wa^ followed by Showers of Tears, the most
pathetick Oratory of a troubled Mind: what weeping, Amasius? says another, sye
for shame, let the old and impotent who have worn out Youth, and are now cursed
with the miseries of Age bewail the loss of those pleasures they once did Revel
in; but thou art now in full possession of those riper Joys, and thy happier
fortune speaks nothing but Mirth and Jollity. Pray forbear Sir, your unwelcom
Jests and spare your Railery, at this time said Amasius, the Grave must be my
Marriage Bed, and Oh that I were now to dress my self, and be there undrest at
Night, with what cheerfulness should you then fee me consummate those wished
for Espousals. But Gentlemen, as you are my Friends let me beg of you to give
me no farther disturbance, my thoughts are o^herways disposed of then you
imagine, and the greatest kindness you can do me is to leave me to my own
M^ditations. In so disconsolate at one did Amasius deliver himself, that he
strangely Surpised the hearers with pity for his Condition, the reason of
which they could not possibly imagine. His Father was immediately acquainted
with it, who coming to his Bed side found him extremely ill, and fitter for the
Advice of the Physicians then the Entertainment of his Friends, or the intended
Solemnity. The Doctors were sent for to consult of his present Distemper, who
all agreed he was in a High Fever, but that the cause thereof was not
External, but from some extraordinary grief which oppressed his Spirits, and was
not to be removed by all their Learned prescriptions, nor could they advise a
more proper Cure then what they endeavored to prevent his Death. For some
weeks in this miserable Condition, did he linger out the tedious Hours, to the
great trouble and discomfort of his Relations, who daily Visited him, and as
often pressed to know the cause of his present affliction, which he the more
carefully strove to hide, nor could they Guess at any probable cause, but as
they observed his deep Sighs, and then of a sudden his passionate and abrupt
expressions of O dear Ortelia, happy Ortilia, but soft, but gone for ever O
miserable wretch, miserable Amusius, I come, I come, my Joy, my Dear Saint, I
com, from whence they all concluded nothing but the Hand of Heaven could work a
Cure on his Distempered mind, whilst his Body only S^mpathiz'd with the anguish
of his Soul; in the mean time, his Father heard from his Dutch correspondent,
how fatal his unkindness had been to his Family, who now began to fee his own
Error, and blame himself as the only cause of those Misfortunes in which they
had both so great a Share; and that by crossing the Established Loves of
Amasius and Ortelia (which received their Life and vigor from his
encouragement) he had occasioned the death of Beautiful Ortelia, and reduced
his Son into those miseries and discontents from which he had but small hopes
to recover him. However after six weeks Languishing under his illness, he began
to grow into a better State of health, but his Melancholy increased upon him;
Though his Father endeavored by all imagineable diversions to drive it from
his wounded mind, and supposing he yet knew nothing of Ortelia's Death,
resolved to Conceal it from him, till he had in some measure Estranged his
Affections from her, which he hoped in time to Effect* But after two Months
were passed, and Amasius was rather worse then better, he began to think that
if his Son, knew of Ortelia's death and the impossibility of ever enjoying her,
it might by degrees quiet his troubled mind, and put him upon some thoughts of
perfecting the Match he had designed him with much advantage. Accordingly one
Evening he took an opportunity to disclose Ortelia's Death to him omiting those
Circumstances that more particularly concerned her love to him, which would
rather aggravate then allay his passion.

Alas Sir! said Amasius, I have long since known more of that affair then you
are pleased to Communicate to me now; I know that Ortelia is dead, and that
Amasius can never be happy till he is so too; But for this I must blame the
weakness of my Love, that what a Woman could do for me, I cannot for her, nor
dare not, Since I am forbid all violent Remedies, which adds to my affliction,
and prevents that Cure, which otherwise I would soon accomplish.

His Father was strangely Surpised to see himself prevented in his discovery,
and commanded Amasius to tell him how he came by his Intelligence, supposing
that contrary to his order some of his Friends had acquainted him with it.

Amasius humbly begged his Pardon, and assured him, it was not from his
Relations or any Person else he had Entrusted with the Secret, that he came by
the knowledge of it, and earnestly prayed him not to press that question any
farther, which if in Obedience to his Commands he should be obliged to Answer,
would yet add more to that weight of sorrow he so miserably labored under.

This made the old Gentleman his Father the more Inquisi^ive, who conjured him
by that respect and duty he owed him as his Father, to give him a plain and
Satisfactory account, which without any excuse he immediately expected from him.

Well Sir, said Amasius, since you will extort a Secret from me, which of all
things can only make me more Unhappy, take it, and Judge if my Duty to you is
not above all regard to my self -- Here Amasius acquainted his Father how he
had s^en Ortelia, and the discourse he had with her, the Night before his
intended Nuptials, Adding withal, that in declaring what he had forced him to,
he should be the most miserable of Men, as the Sequel of his Unhappy Life
approved him to be.

Some time after his Father by the Advice of his Friends, removed Amasius into
the Country, and having several Relations and acquaintance near York, that
place was fixed upon, hoping that Change of Air and variety of Company might be
of advantage to his Health, and a diversion to his Melancholy. But Alas! He
never Enjoyed a Minute free from the thoughts of his fair deceased Ortelia, the
only Intervals of pleasure he had, were when the kind Ghost of Ortetelia came
to visit him, which she was often wont to do, or at least his deluded Fancy
Imagined so, from that time (when by the Severity of his Father he was forced
to discover that he had both seen and discoursed with her the Night before the
intended Marriage.) At several times would he start upon a sudden from his
Company, saying, do you not hear Ortelia's voice? I come, I come, my Dear, Ah
there she is, pray do but observe how kindly the poor Ortelia looks on her
Amasius, see how Melancholy and pale she is, how beautifully sorrowful she
Glances at me, Oh my Dear I come, but when shall I come, never to part from
thee more? Oh that this was that blessed Hour that would make me for ever happy
with thee! And then retireing into the next Room, would talk with the same
passionate Expressions of Love and tenderness to her, as if he did really
Conversc with her in the visible form of Flesh and Blood. Thus did he pass away
about half a year, when one Night after he had been walking and discoursing
with her for at least two Hour, (though at all these several times she was never
seen by any Person but himself, fometimes indeed they could distinguish two
several Voices) when returning to his Friends more pleasant and Merry then ever
he had been before, I thank Heaven, says he, my sorrows have now found a
period; I have but sew nights more to repose on Earth, and then shall I live
with my Ortelia, and enjoy Eternal Rest of Body and Tranquillity of mind. That
Night he Slept heartily and next Morning arose early in a most Serene and
Composed Temper, at which his Friends were extremely pleased, and though they
were much Surpised at the discourse of his approaching Death, yet seeing him
continue so well for three days, they began to forget their fears, and please
themselves with the vain hopes of his perfect recovery. The next day being
Thursday, and Bowling-day, it was agreed they should take their Horses and Ride
to the Green, and there Dine with other Gentlemen who usually Met there once a
Week: Amasius cheerfully consented to it, which was the more taken Notice of,
it being the first time they could ever prevail with him to go into a public
Company, or divert himself with any Sociable Recreation. After Dinner they
Bowl'd again, when a dispute arising about a Cast, Amasius took his friends
part, at which his Adversary was so Incensed (being a Choleric Person) that he
struck him with his fist, but the Gentlemen who were present interposeing they
prevented any farther Mischief. Amasius, who disdained to receive so public an
Injury with the patience of a coward, withdrew into the Garden, and privately
sent a note to the Gentleman to let him know, he there expected with his Sword
in his Hand Satifaction for the Affront he had put upon him. His adversary
came, and after some few passes ran Amasius through the heart, of which he
immediately dyed, and went with Joy to meet his Dear Ortelia in the Shades
below, to the great Grief of his Father and all his friends who had known his
Virtuous and Honorable Accomplishments.

Aurelia having thus Finished her Tragical Relation, Melintus paid her his
more particular acknowledgements, nor did the Rest of the Company forget their
Respects, though all thought it an unreasonable Entertainment for a Gentleman,
whose present Distemper had too much affinity to Honorius his Melancholy
passion, and were not a little apprehensive of the ill Effects it might
produce. However to prevent his being too serious and considerate upon it,
Lysander, who was next in the Rota, took his turn and thus addressed to the
Company.

NOVEL the Third.
By LYSANDER.
IT was the unhappiness of Cratander, whose Generosity very often out-stript
his prudence, and his Natural Bounty the Narrow Confines of his Estate, to be
at last reduced to great necessity, his Friends Commiserating his Condition
advised how they might best assist his present distress and prevent his own and
the dishonor of his family. They resolved at last upon a friendly Contribution
to raise some Moneys, and present him with a good Gelding, and proposed to him
the going up to London, where he might put himself into some employ and
particularly that of the Kings Guards, which would afford him a Gentile and
competent Support. Cratander was easily persuaded to embrace the Council of his
friends, and not long after left the North his Native Country, and took his
Journey to London. After he had spent some Months there in vain, either through
his own ill Conduct, the Modesty of his Temper which could not Sue for favors
with that Confidence which others succeed by, or that his Stars had designed
him for some greater end, having almost Spent the little Stock he had, he saw
he should be soon forced to Sell his Horse to buy Hay, and to Live longer there
at so great Expense, would most certainly involve him in Debt and Misery. In
the midst of these distracted thoughts he resolved to quit the Town, and make a
Visit to an old Acquaintance who was Master of a plentiful Estate, and lived
in the West of England, and accordingly did so. The next Morning he set out
early, and Traveled almost fifty Miles, when Night coming upon him hastily he
lost his way upon a great Common, and not knowing the Coast of the Country
wandered up and down, till at last he spied a Candle at a Shepherds Cott about
half a Mile, distance, which he steered up to. Hallowing to know who lived
there, the Shepherd came out, of whom he Enquired the way to the Town he
intended to Lodge at that Night, the Shepherd told him he was five Miles off,
and the way difficult to find, if he was a stranger in the Country, Cratander
told him he was, and had already lost his way and tired his Horse, and If he
would be so kind to give him Accommodation for that night, he would gratify
him to his Content.

The Shepherd told him his was a House but of one Room, though plentifully
Furnished with Inhabitants, that besides his Wife and himself he had Six
Children, and but one Bed, and a Matress, and not so much as a Hovell to put
his Horse in.

Cratander then enquired if there was no neighboring Village could give him a
Reception for one night, the Shepherd told him a mile off there was one, and if
he pleased he would be his Guide, which Cratander accepted of when they were
Arrived at it, they found but one Alehouse in the Town, and that afforded no
better Accommodation then the Shepherds Hutt; Cratander in this distress, asked
if there was no Gentleman or Farmer in the Town would be so kind to Entertain
him for a Night, the Shepherd told him it was a very poor Village, but there
was a Manor House in it, at which a Gentlewoman now lived who was Daughter to
the Lord of the Manor, who died six Months ago, that she probably might be so
kind to him as a stranger, when others for the same reason would distrust and
refuse him so Charitable a favor. Cratander, with the directions of the
Shepherd, went up to the Hall, the Shepherd knocked at the gate, and told the
servant a Gentleman defir'd to speak with her Mistress, who immediately sent to
Invite him in, Cratander excused himself, that it would be too great a boldness
in him who was a stranger to the Lady, but he would wait as a beggar at her
Gate to entreat a Boon from her Hands. The Maid carried back this answer, which
surpised the Young Lady, especially when her Servant told her he was a
Gentleman on Horseback well acco^tred, and Robin who was her Shepherd was with
him, the Lady came presently to the Gate to whom Cratander with all Modesty and
respect addressed himself.

I am, Madam, though a Stranger to you, forced to presume upon your Favor, that
you will please to give leave to a Traveller who has lost his way to beg a
Lodging for himself and Horse, the same Stable shall Entertain us both, nor
should any thing but downright necessity oblige me to this Confident Petition.

The Lady who was of a most affable and sweet Temper told him readily he was
most heartily Welcome, and she only wished her present Hospitality could answer
the Merits of her Guest; upon this invitation Cratander alighted, whom the Lady
Conducted into the House and ordered his Horse to the Stable. He was
Entertained in the principal Room with a plentiful Supper, which being ended,
Cratander in the most Obliging Expressions paid his thanks to the Generous
Lady, and taking up his Sword and Pistols which lay upon the Table, now Madam
if you please, I will walk into the Stable and repose my felf by my Horse, for
this days Journey has made me both weary and Sleepy; The Lady at these words
seemed extremely Surpised, and with a graceful sharpness told him, She was
very sorry that the Cordial Welcome She better designed him, then was able to
express upon so sudden an Occasion should be so far mistaken; That she hoped
her House, how meanly soever Furnished, might afford him a better Lodging then
her Stable, which she desired he would believe by accepting of it. Cratander
was much out of Countenance at this reprimand, but recovering himself, Modestly
replied, Dear Madam, you have already so infinitely obliged me that I had not
Confidence enough to Trespass farther upon so Generous a Temper, especially
when at the same time I consider my self an absolute stranger to you, which
perhaps may create some fears and Jealousyes in your Family, though your Noble
Breast which knows no Guilt in it self, can Harbor no suspicion of others. The
Lady Blushed and told him, She saw too much Honor in his Person and demean to
Judge so unworthily of him, and desired he would please to take his Chair and
pass away half an Hour, till his Chamber was prepared for him. Cratander had
observed that both before and at Supper the Maid that waited had her eye
constantly fixed upon him, and with a look that spoke Horror and Consternation,
as if she suspected him for a Person who had some Villainous design brooding in
his heart, which his being so well Armed gave occasion for, Nor was he mistaken
for she had several times pressed her Mistress that the stranger might lie in the
Stable with his Horse as he himself requested, That it happened out very odly
that this stranger should come this very Night upon those pretentions when no
such accident ever was before, a Night when all the Menservants, had leave to
be abroad at a Country Wake and none but Women and a poor Boy who belonged to
the Stables left at home, her Mistress heard her reasons and inclined to her
Opinion, but considering what a reflection it would be upon her, if this
stranger was really that worthy Gentleman he appeared to be, she resolved to
run all risques rather then be guilty of so base and degenerous an Action. The
Gentleman and Lady had passed away the time in variety of discourse, by which
she was now fixed in a good Opinion of him, and had fully banished those fears
and apprehensions her Maid had whispered in her Ear, when the Servant came down
and told her the Chamber was ready, if the Gentleman pleased to go to Bed, upon
which her Mistress ordered her to take the Candle and wait upon him to his
Lodging. The Lady attended him to his Chamber, and smilingly told him, Sir,
pray Command whatever you want, and my house afford^, I wish you good Rest and
hope your Lodging will be as pleasant here as in the Stable -- Cratander would
have replied, but the Lady was gone, The Maid having left the Gentleman to his
rest, went to her Mistresses Chamber, where she began a fresh to discourse her
form^r Suspicions, but the Lady with a frown bid her be Silent and make have to
Bed; those Jealousyes were idle fancies only, and should never discompose her
rest whatever should be the issue of them. The Maid went to her Chamber, put
out the Candle and laid herself upon the Bed, wishing for the Morning, which
would dispell those Melancholy thoughts that now oppressed her mind. Her present
fears banished all Sleep from her Eyes, and the Clock had now struck One, when
she heard a Noise in the Courtyard, starting up she ran to the window, where
she saw four Men at the door, who first Tried the Latch to see if it was open,
and finding it fast Bolted and Locked, they endeavored by main strength to
force their Entrance, the Maid frighted out of her wits, ran to her Mistress,
Chamber, where with her passionate Out cries, She awakened her, and told her,

There were four Robbers in the yard breaking into the House, who would
certainly Murder them all, and the Person She had Entertained was no doubt of
their Gang?

The Lady Alarmed at this unexpected News, half distracted flew to Cratanders
Chamber; who was fast asleep and loudly Snoreing, but she soon awakened him
with her loud complaints, and upon her Knees with all the passion, and moving
Rhetoric her fears could inspire her with.

Begged her Life and Honor of him, and the preservation of her Family, and She
would immediately deliver him all her Money, Plate, Jewels, or whatever else he
thought worth his acceptance; And in the same Breath repeated, but pray Sir
Spare my Life, Spare my Honor, and I shall think my self indebted to you for
whatever I part with besides.

Cratander, whose thoughts at the lowest Ebb of fortune could never Entertain a
base design, was no lefs Surpised then the Lady, and told her.

Madam, I understand not your meaning, but if you please to be plain in your
Expressions, I will defend both your Life and Honor with the utmost hazard of
my own. Oh Sir, says the Lady, there are Theives breaking into my House, and
pardon me if I mistake you for one of their Confederates. Il's convince you
presently, replied Cratander, and leaping out of Bed Slipped on his Clothes, and
with his Sword and Pistols, by the Maids direction, made to that part of the
House they first attempted, Cratander had the fortune to have just got to the
door, when they forced it open, and discharging one of his Pistols amongst
them, he saw a Person drop, upon which they gave back; but he with his Sword in
Hand, advanced two or three Steps, and by the opposition he met with, from one
of them received a Slight Wound upon his Breast, which he revenged by another
upon his Adversaries right Arm, which so disabled him that he gave back, and
Cratander retreated to the door for fear their odds might oppress him, whose
safety depended only on his single Courage. The Thieves seemed to go off, and
lest one of their Companions bleeding upon the Ground, which Cratander by the
Groans supposed to be dying, but not knowing what reserve of strength they
might have, he made fast the door and went up to his Chamber, where he had left
the Lady half dead with fear.

Madam, says he, was it not for what your Ladyship has suffered in the affright
I am heartily glad of this opportunity, which has I hope in some measure made
me Serviceable to your Ladyship, and given a Testimony of that Honor and
Justice which before as a stranger might be questioned in me. The Lady with
tears in her Eyes, which stood ready to sally out either with Joy or sorrow,
returned her thanks in the most grateful Sense her words could express, called
him the Preserver of her Life, Honor and Fortune, who certainly was s^nt from
Heaven, like a Guardian Angel, to defend her from the rapine and Violence of
Theives and Murderers. After some care taken of his wound, which was not deep,
they resolved not to go to Bed for fear of a Second A^taque; but in Cratanders
Chamber spent the remainder of the Night, wishing for the Morning light, that
they might safely discover the Person who was left behind dead upon the Spot;
As Soon as the day appeared, Cratander, the Lady, and the rest of the Family
opened the door, and in the yard found a great quantity of blood spilt upon the
Ground, but the Body was conveyed away, which they could trace no farther then
the out-ward Gate, which was left open, and the lock broke off; Cratander
stayed two days till his wound was Closed, and the Lady recovered from that
Consternation she was under, when ready on the third day to take his leave
against all those arguments of kindness and respect the Lady could press upon
him, a Servant came over to invite her to the Funeral of her Uncle a Gentleman
of Competent Estate who lived ten miles off. The Lady was very much Surpised
to hear of her Uncles so sudden death, whom she had not known to be ill, and
particularly inquired the cause, to whom the Servant could give no other
Answer, but that going to Bed something indisposed, he was found dead in the
Morning, the Lady was now Furnished with fresh occasion of Grief, which she
made use of as a powerful reason to persuade Cratander to stay one day longer,
and particularly desired him to bear her Company to that mournful Solemnity.
Cratander told her he was extremely sorry for her loss of so near a Relation --
Alas Sir, says she, it is not that alone, I have a second loss in a good
Friend, to whose Care and Advice my dying Father recommended me and I have been
sufficiently sensible of his kindness in the management of those worldly
affairs Women are generally born strangers to. The next day being that of his
Funeral, Cratander promised to wait upon her, and in the Interim endeavored to
cheer up her drooping Spirits with a Suitable Conversation to her Solemn grief.
Being arrived at the House the Lady was earnest to know what sudden Distemper
was the cause of her Uncles death, her Aunt told her she supposed an Apoplexy,
but desiring to see the Corpse, she answered that being a Corpulent Fat Man the
Coffin was nailed up early in the Morning for fear the Body, which began
already to Corrupt, should be offensive to the Company. The Lady was very well
Satisfied with the answer, and led by Cratander, attended the Corpse to the
Grave. At their return home discoursing of the Funeral, Cratander asked who
that Gentleman was in the Brown Periwig that assisted at the Interment, The
Lady told him, he was a Gentleman of intimate acquaintance with her Uncle, who
had formerly a fair Estate, but his too lavish Hand had now forced him to
receive his Support from the kindness of his more familiar and Charitable
Friends. Madam, says Cratander, did you not observe a black Ribbon tied about
the wrist of his Right Hand; yes Sir, says she, I did so, he is a Gentleman
who drinks high and is often in Broyls, I wish Madam, says Crata^^er, he was
guilty of no other fault, though I cannot commend a quarrelsom Temper in my best
Friends; but proceeds he, would you please to Seal my pardon beforehand, I
would make one step farther, which I shall do with all respect to the Memory or
reputation of any Gentleman alive or dead. Sir, says she, I am altogether in
the dark, and cannot Guess at your meaning, but assure your self it is not in
your power to disoblige me: Madam says Craetand^r, when 'twas my good fortune
the other Night to engage the Thieves who had broke into your House, after the
fall of one of them, I pressed fo^ward with my Sword and received the hurt upon
my Breast from another, which by that glimmering light of the Moon we then had,
bore the perfect Shape and lsikeness of this Gentleman, who at the same time
received a hurt on his right Hand, which this Person seems to have; Sir, what
says the Lady, a little warmly, pray do you infer, Madam, says he, I do
suspect this Gentleman to have been in the Company, and I should be very glad
to be satisfied in it Sir, says she you seem to hint something more then I am
willing to believe you do. Madam, replied Cratander, I shall make no reserves
in your Ladyships Company, but I heartily wish this Hand did not Contribute
more to your Uncles death then I ever designed it should.

Sir, says she, it is impossible I dare acquit you, and do at this Minute, and
pray let us discourse no farther on so unpleasant a Subject.

Madam, says he, I will Trespass but in one word more, my Suspicion commenced
when I first saw that Gentleman at the House, before I ever knew he had any
hurt on his Hand, for I observed I could never fix my Eye upon him but either
through shame or Guilt he avoided the Test of my looks, and either changed
Countenance, or Showed some inward emotion of Spirit, which they who are better
Read in the lines of Nature, and more Critically observe her Rules, would
Construe in the same Sense that I do.

Sir, says the Lady, I am no ways averse to your Satisfaction in that point,
but I would at the same time have a due regard to my Name and Family.

Madam, replied Cratander, I will proceed by such wary Methods as you your self
shall approve of, I will go to some Surgeon thereabouts, and complain the
wound I received on my Breast Festers within, and advise with him for the Cure,
and so from one to another; and if this Gentleman's wound appears to be so, and
no strain, in all probability he applied himself to some Neighboring
Surgeon, and by him may receive some leading Circumstances to confirm or
abate my Suspicion.

Sir, says the Lady, upon the Terms I before mentioned, you may use your
pleasure. Cratander accordingly the next day took his Horse, and at a public
Inn near the Town where the Uncle lived, desired to know if there was ever a
Surgeon in that part of the Country, whom he might safely entrust. The
Landlord directed him to one at the next Town, to whom Cratander Showed his
wound, which was not perfectly Cured, and in discourse, was asking if he had
much practice in the Country for green Wounds, the Surgeon told him every
tittle, and that by accident the other day, a Gentleman who had been engaged in
a quarrel, received a Cut on his Right Hand, whom he now had under Cure, which
had it not slanted a little had certainly Cut all his Muscles in two and for
ever disabled him. The Person and Circumstance of time he more particularly
urged, but at that distance, as if rather for discourse sake then Enquiry, and
found them all Correspond with his first Suspicion. At Night he acquainted the
Lady with the particulars, and prevailed with her, that he might get a Justice
of Peaces Warrant to apprehend him, and oblige him upon his Examination to give
a Satisfactory account where and when he received that wound. This was done and
the Gentleman taken into Custody, who giving only Evasive Answers, was told if
he would not be more positive and direct, they should be forced to charge him
more Criminally, which an ingenious Confession might prevent or in some measure
atone. The Gentleman was in great confusion what to say, but at last fully
Confessed the whole matter, that he with two more whom he Named, were won by the
Uncle upon the promise of a Considerable reward to assist him in this
Enterprise, that they pitched upon that Night rather then any other, because
the Menservants would be abroad, and the House defenseless, that they had
resolved to Murder the Young Lady and all the Family, for fear they should
hereafter tell any Tales, that the Uncle was Shot at the door where he received
his hurt by Cratander, and afterward they came back and brought of his Body
for fear of a discovery. Upon this the Gentleman was committed to Winchester
Gaol, the other Two having some Notice of it fled. The Body of the Uncle was
taken up, and found to be Shot into the Heart with a Pistol Bullet which was
there found, the Motive to so bloody and barbarous a design, (besides the
instigation of the Devil and his own Covetousness) was generally supposed to be
the Estate of the Young Lady which descended to him, who was her Fathers
Younger Brother, and she the only Child he left behind. The Young Lady
considering how miraculously she had been preserved, and that next to Heaven
she owed her Life to the Courage and Gallantry of Cratander, Franckly told him.

Sir, I never yet Enquired whether you was Married or no, nor was it a question
ever in my Thoughts before, if you are not and will accept of my Person with
the Fortune that attends it, I hope to be Happy in your Embraces.

Cratande^, who little Expected that Fortune who had been always a niggard to
him, should now pour down her Blessings with so Lavish a Hand, in a Rapture of
Bliss, cried out, O happy Cratander, for ever happy. Dear Madam I am yours for
ever, and let the declining Sun tell the other part of the Globe how happy his
Fellow Traveller is made to day; which she readily consented to, and they were
immediately Married, within a Month after the Aunt dyed for grief, and that
Estate fell to Cratander in Right of his wife who was next Heyr at Law; Thus
Lives he Master of a fair Estate which his courage and generosity most worthily
deserves.

Lysander ended his Story with the applause of the whole Company, and Melintus
himself Smiled at the Close, and said the Lady could do no less then Crown her
Champion with the full Enjoyment of her Estate and Person.

Florimel whose turn it was to lead, desired to be Excus^d, that she had never
a Story fit for such sober Company, but Melintus told her he would admit no
Excuse, She was not so Airy, but She had some more serious Intervals, and he
hoped this was one of them. Well Sir says Florimel, I Will take my Course and you
must take your Chance.

NOVEL the Fourth,
By FLORIMEL.
CHarilus, (for under that Title I intend to disguise his proper English Name,
out of respect to his Person and quality) was the Eldest Son of a Worthy
Gentleman in Oxfordshire, and Heir to a fair Estate. His Father took particular
care in his Education, to furnish him with all the Accomplishments Suitable to
his parts and Character, for Nature had been prodigal to him in all the gifts
of mind, which she inchas'd in a Body of Elegant Composure and perfect
Symmetry. After he was arrived to more Natural years, his Father brought him up
to London, and entered him into the Society of Grayes-Inn, where he not so much
designed him for a profound Lawyer, as to be Capable to serve his Country in
that Station and Quality he was born in. For the first two years he was
observed by all, for a Sedulous Student, and knew no other pleasures or
diversions of the Town, then those of the Playhouse or Dancing-School, both
which he rarely frequented, and then rather out of Complaisance to his Friends
then Inclination in himself. It fortuned one day he was Invited abroad by some
of his acquaintance to an Entertainment of the Spring-Gardens, where they were
Engaged to Meet some Ladies, to whom the last Night they had lost a Collation
at a Game at C^rds. Charilus who knew nothing of the design, was very ready to
accept the Treat, and promised his Company, The Gentlemen and Ladies met
accordingly, the Entertainment was Noble and Costly, the Gentlemen Generous and
Frank, and the Ladies fair and Obliging. Charilus whose heart was yet a
stranger to Love, began of a sudden to feel its warmer powers, and himself
discomposed that he resolved all happiness into that of Love, and Condemned the
ignorance of his past Life, who had only Studied Men and Books to know the
worst half of Mankind, and neglected the fairer Sex, the Beauty and Glory of
the whole Creation. Having thus but dipped his Foot in the water he found it so
refreshing he resolved to wade farther and plunge himself into that Abyss of
pleasures his Thirsty Soul so eagerly Coveted. These Ladies brought him into
the Acquaintance of others, which they enlarged to their own Friends, till in a
short time the day was not long enough for him to pay his Visits (which he
punctually observed) to each expecting Mistress. About this time his Father
dyed and left him a plentiful Estate with a considerable Sum of ready Money,
which he improved to the better Conduct and more easy Management of his Amorous
Intrigues, Numerous were the Female Clients of this young Lawyer, and the
rather because he gave, but received no Fees, except those in Tail, besides the
great advantage he had of other Gentlemen in his comely personage and courteous
behavior, that he wounded more hearts in a week then he could Cure in a Month
with his best performances. It Chanced one Evening being at a Rall in
Leicester-Feilds he saw the Beauteous Bellinda, whose powerful Charms would
have Conquered a more stubborn heart then Charilus wore, which by its frequent
wounds was now grown soft and tender, and easily received the lightest
Impression. Bellinda was now the only game Charilus purfu'd, which he did so
Vigorously, that he lost no opportunity he could improve, to render himself
respected by her; He danced with her, and afterward obtained the favor to
wait upon her home in his own Coach, which he looked upon as a promising
earnest of a more ample reward in future. But after several Visits made with
all passion and diligence as the Devil would have it, Bellinda proved of a
different mould from other Ladies of her Sex, and Virtue had been Regent at her
Nativity, above Beauty or pleasure. Charilus who had never met a repulse like
this in the whole Career of his hot desires; Entreated, Treated, presented,
which the Lady still accepted upon honorable terms. When h^ found these Baits
would not take, he offered Marriage as the last and most prevailing ^^^ument.

Bell^nda told him, She was under no Vow to a single Lise, but could dispose of
her Person and Fortune as best pleased her self.

Charilus told her that was the only happiness he aimed at, and would complete
immediately, but that he was under a Sacred Obligation not to Marry for some
time which was now Expired to Six Months, that he did believe a contract in the
Eye of Heaven, was as Obliging as the public Solemnization of the Wedding,
which was only required by Law for the more known and certain descent of
Estates, that if she pleased to consent to a Contract now he would most
assuredly Consummate the Marriage Six Months after.

With these and other arguments and the most Solemn protestations his quick
Invention, could Furnish his Expressions with, he won the credulous Bellinda,
who without any tedious or formal Ceremony of contract, took his word Charilus
immediately ordered private Lodgings for himself and Bellinda, where they lived
with the highest content and Satisfaction, the six Months being expired,
Bellinda remembered him of his promise; which he excused at that time, as a
thing that might be done any day, for that he was engaged in some Affairs of
great Importance. Thus from time to time he had always some Studied Answer to
divert the discourse, which at last she found had no place in his intentions,
and pressed no farther. However no Persons lived more amicably and Friendly
together, that I much question (were there not other more Substantial reasons
to be given) whether an indissolveable Tie of two Persons, does not render
their Converse more uneasy, and their whole Lives more querulous, then if it
was only a Knot which each Person. might unloose at pleasure. Charilas who was
always of a Generous and Noble Temper (nor was Bellinda parcemonious) having
one day an Occasion for two hundred pounds, began to consider his present
Circumstances and inspect his accounts for the last seven years, when first his
Acquaintance commenced with Bellinda; He found his Estate much impaired by the
negligence of Tenants, his Rents fallen one third, and the Body of the Estate
sunk under a weighty Mortgage, which still preyed upon the Vitals, besides
several Debts abroad, which would grow Clamorous and disreputable to him, and
fifteen Hundred pounds, which he had received as Bellinda's Portion, was
sometime since spent and forgotten, the Unwelcome prospect he now had of his
Shattered Fortunes, raised different passions in his Laboring Breast, which
after he had singly examined, he found himself only to blame, who either by his
own Inadvertency or too much Confidence in others, had suffered his Estate to
steal from him, without that prudent observance which might only preserve it.
At last he resolved to disintangle himself from the trouble of Lands and
Mortgages and part with all for a valuable consideration in Money over which he
would keep a strick Eye, This he resolved and in part performed. He sold the
whole Estate paid all his Debts, preserved his Reputation with the world, and
had two Thousand pounds Overplus, to lay the foundation of a New fortune, which
he promil'd himself might be easily done. But being naturally averse to
business, and unwilling to descend below his former Grandeur, he so long
deferred it, that there was not Room left for that consideration, and Calling
Bellinda one Morning into his Closet he showed her a draught of his present
Misfortunes and withal told her there was but Three hundred left of the last
two Thousand pounds, that though he never was Ceremoniously Married to her, yet
he looked upon himself as obliged to provide for her; and not for that respect
only, but as he ever had a most Sincere Love for her and that whatever
distress; should befall him, her Share should be the least in them. She began
to Lament her great Unhappiness, who must shortly be Exposed to the Injuryes of
the World, and theinclemency of Friends, when Charilus prayed her patience to
hear him a few words.

My Dear Bellinda, says Charilus, that my Affections have been hearty and
unfeigned you your self shall Judge, and think not that those vigorous Flames,
which were first inkindled between us, shall ever know decay or Period.
Distress if rightly used, is but a poignant Sauce to whet our Cloyed Appetites;
Loves fire may be as intense in the heat, 'tho the Flames are not so active,
but affliction Rowzes up the Sleeping Embers and seems to give New Life and
heat. But this I only speak as Consolatory, now to the point I intend; There is
but one way to retrieve our drooping fortunes, and that with you approbation, I
am resolved to prosecute, which is this, I have an Aequaintance in the City, a
Person of Eminent Reputation, and my particular Friend, whose Assistance I am
affur'd of in this affair; You shall take two hundred and fifty pounds of this
Money, a Footman and Two Maids to wait upon you, and assume a Name both
honorable and well known in the West of England, and pass for a Gentle woman
of the same Name, of a very considerable Fortune and at her own disposal. My
Friend I spoke of, shall take you fair Lodgings in a Merchants House, give you
the Character I mentioned, and assist you in the whole Conduct of this design.
Very well, says Bellinda, now you have reduced me to nothing, you intend to
set me up for a Fortune, like a Gilt of the Town -- Soft! says Charilus, you
are too quick upon Me and overshoot the mark, this being done I Will go down into
the Country, and reconcile my self to my Uncle, (who has a fair Estate, which I
am next Heyr at Law to, if he don't Cut of the Entail) and make use of my
Courtship to you, and the hopes I have of your Favor to Cement the difference
between us, and Engage his Interest for the obtaining your Love, of which I
know how to make good Advantage.

Well then, and what must be the Issue of this? Why nothing Child but an
Established Felicity to us both in Matrimony, and the Secureing my Uncles
Estate, when ever Heaven shall call him into a better World.

I know not how (says Bellinda) to trust any affair where there is Matrimony
in it, it is a word so abus^d upon all Occasions, and I my self have had some
litttle Experirience of it -- but I forbear, that is a tender part. But do what
you please you shall always find me of the same obsequious humor.

Charilus having fixed this point, and seen Bellinda placed at a Merchants
House, (where she had the Reputation of a Fortune of Eight Thousand pounds, and
five Hundred li. per An.) and made some Vifits to her, he went down into the
Country where his Uncle received him as a Gentleman and a stranger, of whom he
had not heard a word this seven years, but as Common fame reported him to his
disadvantage. After he had Spent two days there, his Unclecame to a more easy
familiarity, and inquired of his affairs blameing his Imprudent management of
his Estate and Riotous Expenses, which Charilus in part Confessed, and laid his
finger where he thought his Uncles Eye had not yet discovered the blemish. This
he thought a proper Season to discourse him, of his Courtship to Bellinda
(whose Name we will preserve though her Character's altered) he assured him of
her fortune and his Interest with her, and that if he would please to afford
him, the least Umbrage of his favor he did not question Success, and that he
should be not only able to repair the Breaches in his Estate, but considerably
advance it by this plentiful Addition. His Uncle told him he had in so high a
Measure forfeited his Esteem with him, that he might reasonably imagine he
suffered as much in the Opinion of others; That this would be a work of great
difficulty, and beside fortunes now a days were grown so common and Cunning,
that very often the most Judicious Eye, could not distinguish the real from the
Counterfeit. After other reasonings on both sides the Uncle seemed to be
satisfied with Charilus his discourse of the fortune, and told him that if he
would stay with him till Term which was not long, he would consider farther of
it, and then he had buisness at London. During his stay in the Country, he
wrote two Letters to Bellinda, which he Showed his Uncle and the Answers he
received, by which he abated the difficulty of the Courtship so that now the
great Quaere was the certainty of the Estate and Money. At the beginning of
Easter Term they both came up to London, and Charilus would have made a Visit
the next Afternoon to his Mistress, but his Uncle told him the Tailor had been
with him in the Morning, and promised him to bring his Clothes by twelve the
next day, and that he had a mind to go along with him, if he would defer it to
the next Afeternoon, which Charilus consented to, and they accordingly went
together. At the door he met with one of Bellinda's Maids, and asked if her
L^dy was within, who Answered, yes, pray Sweet heart, says he

Present my very humble Service to her, and let her Ladyship know my Name is
Charisus, who beg the Honor to kiss her Hand.

The Maid went up with the Message, and presently down came her Woman with this
Answer.

Sir, my Lady presents her Service to you, She Is something indisposed at this
time and begs your pardon.

Upon which Charilus and his Uncle returned to their Lodging. Where the Uncle
Umph'd, and Umph'd! And told Charilus, this was a Sort of a cold indifferent
Complement, which he excused, that Ladies of that quality and fortune did often
put on State to give a greater value and Esteem to their Character. However the
Uncle was much disatisfied to see his Nephew thus Slighted and urged, that they
should make a Second Visit by Nine next Morning, which he Excused as not the
Mode of the Town to Visit Ladies, but in the Afternoon. Next day he was
Impatient till the Clock had struck Three, that he might have a Sight of this
Lady, after three they made a Second attempt to a Visit, and sent up the same
Message as before, but the Uncle for fear of some excuse pulled Charilus by the
Sleeve and followed the Servant up stairs, where they met her returning to
Invite them up. At their entrance into the Dining Room, they saw the Lady at
the Table talking with a Gentleman, and a great heap of writings and parchments
before them, upon which Charilu stepped b^ck, but the Lady very familiarly called
him in, and desired his Friend would please to walk in too, which Invitation
the Uncle had already prevented out of his great Curiosity to see the Lady;
Charilus saluted her with all imaginable respect and asked pardon for
interrupting of her in the midst of Bui^ness. S^e answered, it was no great
Buisness, this Gentleman was her Lawyer, and they had been looking over some
loose papers, at which she turned the Carpet gently over them, and told the
Gentleman if he pleased to come at Ten in the Morning they would Inspect the
rest, upon which he took his Ieave. Then she particularly apologiz'd for
yesterdays rudeness as she pleased to call it, that indeed she had been busy
all day wi^h her Lawyer, was undrest, and understanding there was a stranger
with you Sir, to Charilus, I was forced to use the frequent excuse of our Sex,
which I beg this Gentleman's pardon for -- to the Uncle. which Complement after
he had taken care to Answer -- She invited them to sit down, and put on a most
facetious and obliging Countenance. Amongst other discourse Charilus asked if
the Painter had finished her Ladyships Picture yet, yes Sir, says she, it
hangs in the withdrawing Room -- and rising up, pray Sir, says she, give me
your Opinion, whether it is like or No, with that Charilus waited upon her into
the Room, and the Uncle (thinking it but common manners to let the Lovers be
private at their first Enterview after so long a Vacation) stayed ^ehind;
Charilus gently putting the door too, which the Uncle observing b^gan to peep
under the Carpet, wh^re he saw several Bonds, Letters, and one Mortgage for
four Thousand pounds. After half an Hours stay the Lovers returned, and the
Lady afresh excused the incivility of her absence, to a Gentleman of his
quality, whom she now understood to be a near Relation to this Worthy Gentleman
her Friend; Mutual Complements having passed between the Uncle and Lady they
sat down, and fell upon other discourses. After half an Hours flay longer
Charilus and his Uncle took leave of the Lady, and in the next street parted;
his Uncle telling him he would make a particular Enquiry for his own
Satisfaction, and within two days he would resolve him what he would do. Two
days after he came early into his Chamber with a Letter in his Hand and told
him he had weighed all Circumstances of Truth and improbability, had made a
most particular Scrutiny into the Ladies fortune, her Relations, and whatever
was to be considered upon that point, and did agree with him, that she was a
most Beautiful Virtuous Lady and Mistress of the same Estate in Money and Land
(if not more) as he first reported to him. That he was withal very sensible
that she had more than ordinary Respect for him by those familiar kindnesses
she Expressed, that delay was the greatest Enemy he could have in this affair,
and whatever was resolved must be with Expedition. I do withal think it
proper, says he, you should make her some Handsome present as either a Locket
of Diamonds, a fair Necklace of Pearl, or what you think is most Modish and
acceptable, Sir, says Charilus, I humbly thank you, you certainly advise the
best Method that can be; yes, says the Uncle, interrupting of him, and you
ought likewise to appear in a fine Gilt Chariot drawn by two Flander's, these
are very taking with Young Ladies, they were so in my time, yes Sir, says
Charilus, but my present Stock of Money will not reach so far, and I am
unwilling to run in debt to Tradesmen it may prove a disadvantage to me, if
known, you are in the right says his Uncle, and I did fear as much, and for
that reason I have here writ a Letter to Badley my Steward, to furnish you with
Eight Hundred, or a Thousand pounds, which you would rather have, and do you
take it, and go down into the Country with all speed, if he has not so much in
his Hands let him raise it of the Tenants, but I expect, Nephew, you shall
return it to me Six Months after Marriage: which Charitus submissively promised
to do, and to take Post immediately into the Country. Charilus overjoyed at
this great Blessing of fortune beyond his utmost Expectation, Stole a Visit
first to Bellinda, and told her all his Uncle had said, showed the Letter, and
after they had Congratulated each other in this happy Success, took leave for
the Country promising all speed in his return. In the Afternoon the Uncle made
a Visit to the Lady, and talking Jo^osely of Marriage, made his address to her,
and told her, if she could comply with a little disproportion of Age, no Person
had more Vigorous Flames, or a more passionate affection to her Service then
himself, that as for his Nephew, to whom he believed she had some respect, he
was a wild Extravagant Young Man, that he who had already ruined his own
fortnne, would be unsafely trusted with another, and an Empire in the Cup of a
Voluptuary would be as soon quaft of, as that Narrow Spot left by paternal care,
which his Riotous humor had already Spent, and yet not quenched his Thirst.
The Lady was very much Surpised at his discourse, and told him she rather
expected he would have been an Advocate in his Nephews behalf, then have
Furnished her with such powerful Arguments of disesteem. The Uncle made his
Attaqus so close and quick, that she began seriously to consider of her own
Circumstances, and at last told him, it was a matter of so great Moment he
could not reasonably expect a present Answer. After some other discourses to
the same purpose the Uncle took his leave, prom. sing to wait upon her the next
day. Upon the Second visit he presented her with a Necklace of Pearl, and a
Gold Watch studded with diamonds, which he begged of her to accept, and in the
close of all told her he had a clear Estate of a Thousand pounds per Aunum
besides Money abroad, that he would settle Six Hundred pounds a year in
Jointure, and what more she pleased of her own fortune. The Lady thanked him
for his great Respects to her, and those Generous offers he was pleased to
make, that was she determined, as she was yet no ways inclined to Marry; She
should Entertain as worthy and deserving thoughts of himself as of any other
Gentleman in England. The Esquire, for to that Title his Character is now grown
up, looking upon this last Answer to be as absolute a Surrender as would
Consist with her Modesty, told her that from the first Minute he had the
happiness to see her, he was struck with Love and admiration, that he
designedly sent his Nephew into the Country upon an April Errand, that he might
have the freer access to her Person, and then earnestly pressed the Wedding might
be over before his return.

At last She told him, within two days He should have the Result of her more
serious Consideration.

Bellinda was now more posed then ever which way to Steer, the Uncles great
kindness to Charilus was but Counterfeit, but to her real, that it was much
better to save one, then that they both should perish, nay, this might preserve
both for upon this Marriage she hoped to be in a Condition to serve him; Nor
was she so much too blame who had been ruined by ^ne Branch of the Family, if
she prudently Endeavored her safety by another, and the Un^le repair those
Breaches the Nephew had made, Thus she pondered ^he Morning before ^he expected
his return, and at last resolved to Marry him, but first secure the Jointure.
In the Afternoon came the Esquire, and after a Cun^ing Harangue of reason all
in his own Com^endation why she should Marry him, she decla^ed her consent,
That as to matter of Jointure, ^he was well satisfied with the six Hundred
^ounds a year at present, and what part of her ^wn fortune he would put into
her Hands, should be as he pleased at his own time. Thus ^he Bargain was made,
and her Lawyer who was repar'd before Hand, sent for and ordered to ^ake the
Jointure upon such particulars and (...) be ready upon Thursday Morning by
Eight, when the Jointure was Sealed and the Espousals Consummated. Charilus
came late to Town the same Night to his Uncles Lodgings, with a return of Eight
Hundred pounds, and waiting his coming in till it grew late, went to Bed, in
the Morn^ng early he asked what time his Uncle came in, and if he was yet
stirring. The Servant told him he did not come in all Night, nor had he seen or
heard from him since he last went out the Morning before. Charilus was very
much troubled at this, fearing some Misfortune had befallen him (which was true
enough, though not in his Sense) but not knowing where readily to find him, he
went first to give Bellinda a Visit, and acquaint her with the Joyful News of
the Eight Hundred pounds, when offering to go into the Bedchamber her Maid
would have stopped him, which be took little Notice of, but pressed in, and saw
some Body in Bed with the Lady, Upon which in the greatest rage and fury he
drew his Sword, and Swore he would be the death of that Villain who had thus
abused him. The Uncle crept under the sheet for fear expecting the Sword either
in his heart or Guts at each Oath he Swore, Bellinda was strangely Surpised,
and Shrieked out for help, whilst Charilus discharged whole Valleys of Oaths
and Curses on those two miserable Wretches, and violently pulling down the
Clothes, discovered his own Dear Uncle in Bed with his Mistress. Charilus at
this was no less astonished, then they affrighted, when Bellinda interposed,
and defired his patience but for two words; Sir, says she, I beseech you
Compose your self, and be not angry with this Gentleman or my self, for we are
Man and Wife. This was so amazing a Story he did not know what to answer to it,
but after a little pause, considering it as a truth, there might be a good
improvement made of it, he fell into a violent passion with his Uncle, called
him all the infamous Names he could invent, and with the point of his Sword
threatened immediate Vengeance upon that false Heart, which had so basely and
Treacherously supplanted him; After his passion was grown more cool, the Uncle
offered terms of reconciliation, and acknowledged the hainousness of his crime
in betraying that trust he had reposed in him and Robbing him of a Mistress of
so considerable a Fortune, for all which he was ready to make present
Satisfaction. The terms agreed upon were these, that Charilus should have the
Eight Hundred pounds now in his Hands, and his Uncle make over to him four
Hundred pounds a year out of his Estate, and put him into immediate possession
of it, ^n consideration of the Injury he had done him in the loss of his
Mistress, all which the Uncle performed that day according to the Tenor of the
Articles. Within a Month after he discovered some part of his own Error, as to
the mistake of the Fortune, but nothing farther, however they went down into
Oxfordshire together, where in less then a Twelvemonth he dyed, and Bellinda's
Jointure being an Entailed Estate came into Charilus his Hands, who in Memory
of former kindnesses was highly Generous and Noble to her.

Here Sir, says Florimel, should I conclude with my Story, but that I have
something to say by way of Consolation to you Melintus, and therefore beg leave
to carry on Bellinda's Character one step farther.

This Lady Sir, after the death of her Husband came up to London, and 'tho she
had for some years of her acquaintance with Charilus resided here, yet was she
seldo^ abroad, and not at all known to the Gallant of the Town, so that upon
her return she passed for a New Face, and was general^ thought to be a Maid.

Amongst other Sparks who made sear^ up and down for fresh Beauties, the
Matchless piece of Chivalry, Sir -- was one, you all know, who was the Person
that first discovered that Notable way of affronting Ladies of Quality by
breaking their Windows with Crown pieces; It was his fortune to Meet with this
Lady and after some necessary Treats to introduce a more familiar acquaintance,
he fell Smart upon her, but all in vain, her Honor was Lodged in an
impregnable Fortress; when that would not do, he betook himself to his last
Remedy, Marriage; Offered a fair Jointure and whatever else should be thought
convenient, this at last was approved of, but the Knight was mistaken in his
Measures she would yield up no part of the premises till the Jointure was
Sealed, and the Marriage completed; which, rather then lose his longing he
consented to. A short time after the Wedding, he asked her what reason she
imagined more particularly Influenced him to Love her, when she could not
Guess, he told her, it was for her strict Virtue and Chastity, for he had made
a Resolution never to Marry any whom he could prevail upon without it, and that
is the reason that though I have Courted Hundreds I was never Married till now;
Why look you Sir says she, I had that Trick put upon me once too, but I was
resolved I would never be Caught Twice with the same Bait.

Now Sir, as to the application, why should you be in the Dumps and Melancholy;
hide your self from your Friends, and call those Stars, you ought to Bless by
all the Naughty Names you can think of, when who knows but that beloved she
might have proved another Bellinda, and take her at the best -- but with your
permission I have done Sir.

The Company all Laughed heartily, and Melintus could not forbear a public
Smile, I knew says he, we should have one Roguish Story or another, I expected
it Florimel, but above all commend me to your close, where you come off with a
Relish indeed -- Parmenio, says Melintus, I think it now falls into your
division, pray will you oblige us with a Story that may Temper the heat and
passion of Florimels, and Compose us to our wonted Gravity.

NOVEL the Fifth,
By PARMENIO.
A Gentleman who had been formerly a Merchant in the City of London, and
acquired a considerable Estate, withdrew into the Country, having Spent his
younger years in the Noise and hurry of Business, resolved now to enjoy the
fruits of his Labors in quiet, and Gratify himself with Solitude and
Retirement; having a fair House in Hartfords^ire, he inclined to fix there,
where he was eminently hospitable to the Gentry, and Charitable to the poor.
But that he might not be out of all concern of business in the world like an
idle person, he still kept some Ventures a broad, which he called the poors
Stock, in which and all other his endeavors, providence blessed his Industry
with that constant fuccess, that he used familiarly to say he grew Rich in
spite of his Teeth, for if he shut Money out at the door, it would come in at
the Window. This Gentleman at his death left only one Child a Daughter called
Joanna, to whom he gave a very great Fortune, and committed the care of her
Person and management of her Estate to two Gentlemen her Guardians. She was now
about Eight years old when she desired she might (as she usually did once a
year) go see her Uncle, a Gentleman of fair Reputation and good Estate in
Essex, which they granted, and sent her over attended with two Servants. After
she had been there a Month, her Uncle who was a passionate Man, catching her in
some fault threatened to whip her; She farther provoking him with some Scurvy
reply, he did so, at which time as she cried out, was heard to say by some of
the Neighbors, O pray Uncle don't kill Me, which neither he or any of the
Family took much Notice of at that time. The next Morning early she stole out
of the House, and after she had wandered some Hours not knowing whether to go,
met with a Company of Gypsies who took her up, made much of her, changing her
Cloths and staining her Complexion, brought her with them in few days to
London, and from thence went their Rounds into Hampshire, Wiltshire, and about
the Country. The Uncle missing his Niece next day, made all possible Enquiry
after her, sent to all the Neighboring Viliages, searched all the public
Roads, but could not receive any account of her. He next sent into
Hartfordshire to her Guardians to know if she was returned home, but meeting
with no satisfaction, concluded that some young Gentleman who knew she would be
a great fortune had Stole her, and carried her far away to some distant County
where she lay concealed. This the Guardians believed too, till some of the
Neighbors at their Gossipping, were prattling what they heard others say, and
began to wish seriously that it was not too true, especially when they
considered that if the Child dye^ in her Minority, the whole Estate would
descend to the Uncle. This was buzzed about till at last it reached the
Guardians Ears, who making more particular enquiry into the truth of it, were
informed by some of the Neighbors that the Night before the Child was missing,
they heard her cry out most lamentably, pray Uncle don't kill Me, this they
considered as an odd Circumstance to happen just the Night before, and asked
the Persons who thus informed, if they could safely take their Oaths of it, and
would do so before a Magistrate, who said, yes, it was all true and nothing but
the truth. After some deliberation they acquainted the Uncle what the
Neighbors said, and how nearly it did touch his Reputation now, and might his
Life hereafter, if his Niece was not found. He told them he was altogether
innocent of any Injury done to her, nor did he remember that ever she said so,
though he owned he whipped her severely, which was for telling a notorious Lie, and
using some other indecent expressions, which he thought she deserved to be
Corrected for. Upon this all the ponds and Rivers were searched, and a
considerable reward promised to any Person, who could give an account of her
alive or dead. No News being heard of her, the Neighbors began to Grumble and
said, that the Guardians and Uncle had Complotted to Murder the Child and Share
her Estate: This being now grown a public discourse in the Country to the
great disadvantage of their Reputation, who before were Esteemed as Gentlemen
of Honor and integrity; They resolved to probe the bottom of this cause, and
prosecute the Uncle as far as the Law directed them. Accordingly they went over
into Essex, and sent for him to a Gentleman's House who was his Neighbor, and a
Justice of the peace. Being altogether, the Guardians complained to the Justice
of this report, and desired him that he would take Cognizance of it as far as
the Law required, that i^possible their Reputations, and the Gentleman's might
be preserved free from such an undeserved calumny. The Justice sent for the
witnesses, who Swore positively that on such a Night, which was the immediate
Night before she was missing, they heard her cry out with a lamentable voice,
pray Uncle don't kill Me. Upon which the Justice bound the Uncle in a
Recognizance of two Thousand pounds to appear at the next Assize, and the
Guardians in a bond of five Hundred to prosecute the Uncle. In this Interval
the Uncle having used all the probable means for a discovery that humane Wit
could imagine, but not being able to make any, began to think what was to be
done, the time of the Assize drew on, and then he should certainly be Indicted
for the Murder of Joanna, nor had he any way to clear his Innocence against
such Circumstantial Evidence, but by a downright Negation, which though some
of his Friends might Credit, would yet take no place in a Court of Judicature.
Having thus confidered the difficulty of his Case, he at last resolved thus. In
his search after Joanna, he had found a poor Man's Daughter in another County,
who both in Age, Features, and Complexion, so much resembled her that a^ first
sight he thought she had been the real same, now says he to himself, if I can
get this Girl of her Parents, and dress her up in the same habit, Joanna wore,
the very Guardians shall not distinguish her from their own Pupil, she will
appear so like the very same, nor have I any other course but this to preferve
my self, he accordingly did so, and for a Sum of Money bought the Girl of her
poor Relations, diligently instructed her in the part she was to act, who being
of a ripe Wit and very apprehensive had her Lesson to a hair. A day or two
before the Assize, he gave out he had by great fortune found his Niece, brings
her home to his House with her real Father and Mother, who gave a Satisfactory
account to all persons how accidently they found her in a wood almost Starved,
and She not remembering from whence She had wandered they Entertained her amongst
their own Children. The Girl owned how she Stole away for fear her Uncle should
whip her again as he threatened, all which Romance hung so well together, that
the Guardians believed her the same, and no body questioned the truth. At the
Assize he was called to appear which accordingly he did, the Judge asked him for
his Niece (...) if she was found yet, Yes, my Lord, says the Gentleman, she is
in Court, Very well, say ^s my Lord, produce her, and bid the Guar^ians appear,
accordingly they did, and the Counterfeit Joanna, Are you satisfied, to the
Guardians says the Judge, that this is your Pupil, the Daughter of Mr. -- with
whom you were left in trust? Yes, my Lord, said the Guardians, After a farther
account how she was found the Judge ordered their Recognizance should be
withdrawn, and the Uncle discharged. It happened that an old Woman who was in
Court about other business, hearing what a Bustle had been made about her young
Mistress, and that she was found again, as they came out of Court crowded to
see her, and looking full upon her, believed it to be the same, but the Girl
not taking Notice of her, She cried out, O Mistress you don't know Me, upon
which She answered presently, no, what says she don't you know old Nurse? I am
sure you are not the same then, upon this the Girl was startled, the Guardians
made a stop and asked her how she came to forget Nurse so soon, she not giveing
a present answer, they began to suspect something and brought her again into
Court and Nurse with her.

The old Woman said, She did believe it had been the same at first, but upon
review she much questioned it, that she her self had Nursed her till she was
almost four years old, and if it was her Mistress she had a Scar upon her left
Arm above the Elbow.

The Judge ordered they should look upon her Arm, which they did, and reported
there was no Scar above but one below the Elbow, upon this it was generally
believed she was the same, and all things set right again. However the Judge
seemed more disatisfied then before, ordered the Uncle to withdraw, and
examined the Girl, Afterward the Man apart, who said he had found her in a
Wood, and then the woman, and here he found they all disagreed in one point or
other, at length by crossing the account of the Man and Wife, and then
considering that both the Guardians and Nurse agreed the true Joanna, must
needs have remembered her Nurse, since it was not a Twelvemonth ago since she
saw and particularly knew her, they agreed it was yet a Cheat, which the Woman
for fear of punishment, first Confessed, and then her husband owned it, and
lastly the Girl; They proved the Receipt of so much Money at such a time, proved
by several neighbors, who had known this Girl for five or six years together,
that she always was looked upon and reputed as their own Child and always
lived with them. Upon this discovery an Indictment was preferred against the
Uncle, for the Murder of his Niece Joanna, but he having no proof to clear
himself by, and this appearing with so foul a Face against him, he was
Condemned to be hanged, and was within a Week after Executed. It fortuned about
nine years after at the Summer Assize at Nottingham, two young Gentlemen who
were lately called to the Bar, whereof the Judges Son was one, walking out
early one Morning in the fields they saw a whole Covie of Gypsies under a
Hedge, when they came near, two of them stepped out, and in their Cant told them
a great deal of good fortune by looking into their Hands, and viewing the lines
of the Face as they pretend, upon which one Gentleman threw them a Shilling,
the other called them idle Whores, and said they deserved to be whipped for
public Cheats, upon which one of them a tall black Girl told him, he ought not
to despise a Gypsy for he should Marry one before he was Three Months older,
at this the Gentlemen fell a laughing and entertained them with other like
discourse; when they came home one of them mist his gold Watch, and another had
lost all his Money. They began to grow angry to be thus Cheated, and getting a
Constable very luckily, met with these two going off another way; They charged
them with the Watch and Money, which they as peremptorily denied, upon which
the Constable brought them along into open Court which was then sitting, upon
Examination they denied the Fact, nor could they upon search find either about
them. However, the Judge ordered them to be soundly lashed for Vagrants, and
sent out of Town, as the Constable was taking them away, the Gentleman who was
the Judges Son, called out Jocosely to the Constable, pray favor the
black-woman, for she tells me, I shall Marry a Gypsy within these three
Months; which his Father overhearing called them back again, and asked them

How long they had pretended to telling of Fortunes, I had thought, says the
Judge, all your Trade had been Picking of Pockets; No, and please you my Lord
says the black-Woman, my profession is only telling of Fortunes, I never
understood nor practiced such unlawful Arts, at which the Court laughed -- My
Lord then asked (seeing her a good favored young Woman, and so quick in her
Answers) what Country Woman she was, to which she said, she thought
Hartfordshire. Then he asked, if she was born a Gipsy; She said No, but She was
as good, for She had been Nine years Apprentice to a Gipsy. At which he asked
her, if she had e're a Christian Name, yes, my Lord, says she, I think so, for
my Name is Joanna, the Judge hearing the Name Joanna recollected himself, and
remembered the Story of the Essex Gentleman, who was by him Condemned for
Murdering his Niece of that Name. He then asked her, if she had ever been in
Essex, or had any Relations there; She said, not since she was very Young,
which was at the time she met with the Gipsys first, and then She had an Uncle
there, who used her very hardly, and so she ran away from him, and was never
there since, nor never Enquired after him. Upon this he concluded her to be the
same Person, and called to the Constable and told him, he should not let them
be whipped, but carry them home to his own House and Entertain them there, till
the Court was up, and then he should receive farther Orders. The whole Court at
this began to Wonder, and believe one or both of them to be Gentlewomen of good
Families, nor did they spare telling the young Gentleman that for ought they
knew it might be his Fortune indeed to Marry a Gipsy, if this Young Woman
should prove to be a Person of Quality and Estate, which fell out even so, for
the Assizes being over, the Judge who had a Seat in Hartfordshire, and had
known her Father formerly, brought her up in his Coach, and presented her to
the Guardians who owned her to be the same Person, which the Nurse and all her
Surviving Relations Confirmed. At the same time his Lordship, who knew her to
be a very great Fortune, proposed a Match between his Son and her which she
Franckly consented to, and was presently after Solemnized.

Thus ended Parmenio when the whole Company Bowed their respects, and were all
extremely pleas^d with the fortune of the Gipsy, But Sir, says Melintus, I
could have wished you had carried a lighter Hand over the hard fate of the
Uncle, whom I pity with all my Heart. Sir, says Parmenio, I could have wished
it had not been true, but as it is so under unquestionable Evidence, I durst
not give my Hand the Liberty of one Sweetning Stroke.

Now, Madam, says Melintus to Evadne, we must beg the next favor from your
fair Hands, No Sir, said she, your power with me always Commands.

NOVEL the Sixth
By EVADNE.
^Rithia the Beauty of her Sex and Glory of her Age, was the Daughter of an
English Earl, of an Ancient Family, whose Noble Acts in Chivalry stands first
upon Record in our most early Histories, Her great Wit and Excellent Sweetness
of Temper obliged all who had the Honor of her Acquaintance, which every
Gentleman both Courted, and admired. And if amongst those Thousands who were
ready to Sacrifice their bleeding hearts to the fair Orithia, any was thought
to have a more particular interest in her Favor, it was the Lovely Philanthus,
who was only able to make a Reprisall of Hearts amongst the Ladies, for those
Orithia Captivated from the Men. Philanthus his Family was somewhat inferior,
but much more Opulent, he being the Eldest Branch of it, who for the great
Service of his Father, (who lost his Life in the Wars against the French) had
the Honor of Knighthood Conferred upon him, whilst yet a School boy, by his
Gracious Prince. The Assiduous Address of Philanthus, his kind Reception, and
more intimate familiarity obliged us all to believe he would be that happy
Conqueror, who should carry off this Noble prize from the Rest of the
despairing world. But amongst those Stars which influence the great affairs of
Love, some are kind and propitious, whilst others infect their good intents by
their poisonous Neighborhood, some such unhappy Conjunction there was which
suddenly blasted Philanthus his blooming hopes, robbed him of all his Glorious
Expectations and left him the Pity or the Scorn of his Rivals.

The Count de Montallo who was Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy, at the
English Court, being shortly to return, and having often admired the Beautiful
Orithia, as the most lovely Creature his Eyes yet beheld, made his private
Addresses to her, and without the knowledge or Consent of her Relations was
Married to her.

My Lord, her Father, and all her Friends were extremely concerned at it, there
not being any but who gave Philanthus the Encouragement to hope he should be
that happy Person, nor had he any reason to question Orithia's Favor, till the
Count made his applications, and then the Ambition of being so great a Countess
soon prevailed over the more easy powers of Love. Within four days after,
Orithia went along with the Count her Husband for Savoy, without seeing or
taking leave of any of he^ Friends or Relations. This sudden Marriage with the
Count had at first extremely incensed my Lord her Father, but considering she
had Honorably disposed her self, without the Charge of a weighty portion,
which his Circumstances could not so conveniently spare, he now called that
prudence and discretion, which before he thought a rash and inconsiderable
Action. After her Arrival at Savoy, for three years she lived as happy and as
great as heart could wish, the Count her Husband loved her above all the World,
and his Estate, which was very considerable, was absolutely at her Command. No
Empress, though she might have more large Dominions, was better beloved, or more
willingly obeyed then she was. It happened that the Duke of Savoy making Wars
upon some of the Neighboring Princes appointed the Count de Montallo General
of his Army, which was an Honor he could not refuse, though with some regret
he parted from the Arms of his beloved Orithia. That he might leave the affairs
of his Family under the better Government, he appointed three of his Friends as
Commissioners to take an account of his Rents, assist the Countess upon all
occasion with their Advice, and manage all his business to his greatest
advantage and reputation. To these he added one more, who was the honest
Sabrino as he used to call him, a Gentleman of some Relation to the Count, but
his intimate Friend and Confident. The Duke being now with his Army, and not
expected back till a peace was concluded, which was yet but uncertainly
discoursed; Sabrino, who had the largest Commission of any of the rest, and
much more respected, considered that this was the only opportunity his heart
could wish for, to complete those desires he had so long languished under.
Accordingly one day coming up to the Countess, as if upon some Urgent business,
he found her alone in her Closet, where without any regard to the Honor of the
Count, the Virtue of the Lady, which he had no reason to suspect, or to the
Modesty and good manners in himself, of which he ought to have had some share,
he discovered his unlawful passion, which she received with that abhorrence
and detestation that he was well assured he was now undone for ever if he did
not preserve himself by being the first Accuser, though he had nothing to Charge
the spotless Orithia with, but what was false as Hell or Devils could invent.
However envenomed malice will want neither Instruments or Methods to perfect
its Revenge; though what wrong had Sabrino received? He first gives the affront,
and then demands Satisfaction, and first Tempts the Lady with his lascivious
address, then calls himself injured, so great a Crime is it to be good and
Virtuous in the prospect of those who are wicked and debauched. Sabrino, that
he might lose no opportunity, sent presently to the three Commissioners to meet
him at his own Chamber, where he told them,

He had a secret of that importance to communicate to them and of that strange
Surprise, that he wanted words to express the present Horror of his thoughts;
I have for some time suspected, and I wish I could say I did yet but suspect,
Oh shall I speak it! The Fidelity and Chastity of the Countess -- upon which
one of them told him, Sir, I will as soon believe, the Glorious Cherubins may
be tainted in their pure Angelic Natures, as that any Temptation of dishonesty
has or ever shall assoil the Virtue of that immaculate Lady. Oh Sir, says
Sabrino, be not too forward I once thought so too, but I am afraid I shall be
able to convince you sooner then you or I could wish for. In the Interim pray
make your own Observations, and let this pass no farther.

Sabrino had a Nephew a proper young Gentleman, who had been Page to the Count
in England, and since his return, was preferred to be Gentleman Usher to the
Countess; This Gentleman he sent for privately to his Chamber, and told him he
understood what a particular kindness the Countess had for him, and that now
was the time for him to make his fortunes in the absence of his Lord The young
Gentleman told him, he did not understand his meaning, O Nephew said he, are
you so short sighted, why the Countess is in love with you above all the World,
and wants nothing but an opportunity, to complete yours and her own happiness
in Bed, which I have promised her this Night. Wherefore you must in the Evening
pretend to go Sick to Bed, and then undress to your Gown, and Steal into the
Countess's Chamber, and lie under the Bed, till she gives you Notice to come
forth, but be sure no Body sees you enter her Chamber, if they do, make some
excuse and go out again and so wait till you have an opportunity, pray Uncle,
says the young Gentleman, did the Countess her self bid you tell me thus? I,
I, She her self bid me, and said, that very suddenly she would make you
Gentleman of the Horse. The innocent Gentleman discovered not the Snares his
Uncle had laid for him but in the Evening accordingly did so, after Sabrino had
been at his Chamber and found him not there nor about the House, he concluded
he was then safely Lodged under the Bed, and a little before the Countess went
to her Chamber, sent for the Commissioners, and told them, he was informed that
the Countess's Gallant was to be with her that Night, but who he was that he
could not tell, Sabrino and the rest concluded to pretend some extraordinary
business, to be dispatched that Night and to desire to speak with her as soon
as her Women had left her, and then if there was any Gallant, they should
certainly discover him, if not give the Countess no reason to suspect their
design, Accordingly they did so, and coming softly up stairs knocked at her
Chamber door, an old Gentlewoman who had formerly been her Nurse, lay in the
Chamber with her, and was going into Bed, when she heard some Body knock at the
Chamber door, She asked who was there? And their business, to which one of them
answered, we are the Commissioners and want to speak one word with her Honor
upon Urgent business, which was forgot before, and must be dispatched this
Night. She acquainted the Countess with what they said, who ordered her to let
them in. As they were by her Bedside discoursing with her, Sabrino cries out,
I, here he is, here is the Rogue, and pulls his Nephew by the heels from under
the Bed, and calling him Rogue, Villain and Traitor to abuse se good a Lord,
struck him through the heart with his Sword, before he could speak one word to
Vindicate himself or his Ladies Honor. It was now in vain for the Countess to
Endeavor to purge her self from a Crime which appeared against her by so
Notorious an Evidence, though she did in the presence of several Worthy persons
take the Sacrament upon it, that as she never had been Guilty against her
Husbands Bed, so she knew nothing of that Persons being there; that it was all
the malicious Contrivance of Sabrino (whose unlawful desires she had refused
with Scorn and contempt) that had now plotted this Revenge to Rob her of her
life and Honor at the same time. This some believed, who thought the Countess
to be as incorrupt as Virtue it self. But others said here is plain
demonstration against her, and she who dares commit Adultery, will not stick to
a lie to defend her Guilt. The Commissioners writ a Letter to the Count to
acquaint him with this unhappy News, in which they gave a most particular
account, and in the Close highly Commended the Fidelity and Justice of Sabrino,
who seeing his Honor abused, would not spare his nearest Relation. The Count
was astonished at the News above any Misfortune that could have happened, and
notwithstanding this demonstration, as they called it in their Letter, he put a
greater Confidence in the Justice and integrity of the Countess, then in all
their Solemn protestations. And as he sent them word

He was extremely troubled for the Countess that she should lie under so heavy
an Aspersion, which if he did not believe the World would, and therefore with
prayers for her deliverance (if Innocent) did resign her up to the Law, so he
should have been much better Satisfied in the Guilt of his Wife, if Sabrino had
Spared his Kinsmans Life, in that Transport of rage in which he killed him.

Upon the Receipt of this Letter the Commissioners, (as the Custom is there)
disposed the Countess into a Nunnery, where She is to continue a year and a
day, and if in that time no Champion appears to justify her Innocence against
her Accuser, She is upon the last day brought into the List appointed for the
Combatants (if there be any) and there burnt at a Stake, which death she
Legally suffers if her Champion has the worst of it. The Countess was highly
sensible of this as the greatest affliction that ever befell her, yet her own
Innocence, and the Satisfaction that arose from thence made the distress much
more easy and supportable. The Count was still Engaged in the Wars, and the
Countess had now been three quarters of a year a Prisoner in the Nunnery, and
no Person appeared in her behalf to Vindicate her Honor and Virtue. She now
considered that the small remainder of her Life would soon be gone, and unless
some Centleman would Entertain such Honorable thoughts of her, as to believe
her Guiltless, and Engage his Life to preserve hers, she must certainly suffer,
and as no Person had yet offered himself, so was she altogether at a loss where
to find that Gallant Friend. At last amongst other English Gentlemen who had
been formerly her Friends and Acquaintance, She fixed upon Philanthus, but at
the same time Corrected her Error in thinking that he who believed himself the
most disobliged of all Mankind, should now hazard his Life to Vindicate her
Reputation, No, certainly he would be pleased to hear of her Miseries, and
rejoice to see her proud heart now humbled under the deepest afflictions, but
on the other Hand considering him as a Gentleman, a Person of unquestionable
Courage and Gallantry, and one whose former affections were most sincerely
devoted to her Service, he would rather Court such an opportunity to lay an
everlasting obligation on her which all her Treasury of thanks and Gratitude
should be too poor to recompense. And this took place in her resolution;
Accordingly She writ a Letter to Philanthus and sent it by a Gentleman who had
been formerly her Servant, with orders where to find or Enquire for him at
London, and to deliver him that Letter, receive his Answer and return with all
speed. Philanthus who had still the same respect and love for Orithia as would
consist with Honor, having read the Letter, was extremely troubled at it, but
at the same time being Ruined himself in his Fortunes, his mind sunk under the
load of miseries which oppressed him, writ back a most passionate Letter of
excuse, with which she was no less affected as well for his as her own sake.
Orithia Spent her short time (which now wanted but a week of the fatal day) in
recommending her Soul to Heaven, wholly despairing of any relief on Earth.
Philanthus having since seriously considered the present distress of the
Countess, and that she must for ever suffer in her Memory, which to all Noble
Spirits is Ten times worse then a Thousand deaths, and that though in his
excuse to her he had not put his own interest or business into the Scale to
balance against her Life and Honor; But that strange and unexpected disasters
had reduced him to that mean degree of want that he was not able to Equip
himself for the Service; Yet this from a Generous Spirit was mean and pitiful,
that however his Friends would not assist him here, he could want nothing there
of Horse or Arms a Cavalier could ask. After he had pondered a while on this
thought he went to a Gentleman of his intimate acquaintance, showed him the
Letter, and begged of him to furnish him with Moneys for that design which he
did, and Philan^hus a short time after went privately over to Savoy. Being
arrived at Turenne he Enquired at what Nunnery the Countess de Montallo was,
and what the general opinion were eoncerning her Guilt or Innocence;
Understanding the Nunnery was Thirty Miles from Turenne, and that all Persons
spoke well of her and did believe her falsely accused, he went directly thither
Being come within Four Miles of the Nunnery, by the side of a great Wood, he
spyed a Hermits Cell, at which alighting, he asked of the Holy Father, what the
discourse was about the Countess, he told him that in a fair Plain before the
Nunnery, She was to suffer to Morrow Morning before Eleven of the Clock, if
there was no Person found so hardy to fight her Accuser, nor did he yet hear of
any Champion who had appeared in her behalf. Upon which he told him, he had a
very great desire to see her before she suffered, but he supposed it would be
very difficult to obtain that Favor unless he had on a Religious habit, and if
he would do him that kindness to lend him his Weeds, he would walk over that
Afternoon and return in the Evening, and leave his Horse and Armor there till
he came back, the Hermit very readily agreed to it, then Philanthus who spoke
Italian well, put on his Weeds, and in all Respects appeared to be a grave
Religious Hermit, having a long Beard and all things answerable, He was now
Arrived at the Nunnery, and out of Respect to his habit (for Hermits are there
had in great Veneration) was immediately conducted into the Countesses Chamber,
where entering, those Nunns who were attending upon her withdrew, that she might
have the more freedom of discourse with this Religious Father. He stayed with
her three Hours, and was as well satisfied of her Innocence and Sabrino's
Roguery as his heart could wish. Asking her, if she had no hopes of any Friend
to appear in the Lists to Morrow on her behalf, She said, No, She never sent
but to One English Gentleman, and his Misfortunes happened at the same time to
be almost as great as her own. When he took his leave of the Countess, she
pulled off a Diamond Ring from her Finger, and told him, Holy Father, I am
obliged to you above what I am able to Express for your Prayers, and good
Advice, I have nothing of Worldly Goods-left Me to dispose of but this Ring,
which was given Me by my Brother in England, a little before I Married into
this Country, I pray accept it, and keep it for my sake. The Hermit received it
with all Thankfulness, and taking his leave, burst out into tears to see so
great a Beauty reduced to those thin meagre looks, and that Virtue of which she
had so large a portion should be Triumphed over by wickedness and Villainy. At
parting the Countess shook him by the Hand and cheerfully bid him not weep,
this was the last day she could be miserable. Philanthus returned to the Cell
where he again put on his own Habit, and told the Hermit what he thought of the
Innocence of the Countess. The next Morning at Nine of the Clock the Countess
all in white, was brought from the Nunnery into a fair adjacent plain, in the
middle of which was sixth a Stake, with a great deal of dried Wood and other
Combustible Matter. On a large Scaffold on one side was a Chair placed for the
Countess, and at the other end a Tribunal Erected for those who were appointed
to see the Execution performed, and if there should happen to be any
Combatants, to determine any matter of difference that should arise. The Judges
being Seated on the Tribunal and the Countess in the Chair, Proclamation was
made, that if any Person would Venture to Wage War in defense of the Countess
de Montallo's Innocence, Seignior Sabrino the Accuser was ready to Answer him
at single Combat. Before this Proclamation was made, all the Drums, Trumpets,
Clarions and Instruments of field Music first sounded, and then the principal
of the Judges gave order for the first Proclamation, and so for the Second,
when being ready to give the last Summons, at a distance appeared a Champion
who by the waving of his Sword, gave Notice what he intended, he was Mounted on
a Milk white Courser in black Mourning Armor, his Beaver fast locked down, his
Device, the Sun Shining gloriously from a Cloud upon distressed Innocence,
which was a Virgin habited all in white. As soon as this strange Champion was
Entered the Lists, a Herald demanded of him who he was that came thus Armed? he
told him, he came to loso his Life or Vindicate the Honor of the Countess of
Montallo, who was unjustly accused by a Rogue a Liar and a Vilain; and that he
would prove him to be. Upon this the Herald demanded of the Countess, if she
was willing to Venture her Life and Honor upon the Success of her Champion, to
which she answered, yes, I pray God prosper him. Immediately after upon the
Sound of the Trumpets, the two Warriors set Spurrs to their Horses, and in the
first Career, the Ladies Champion had the worst, and lost one of his Stirrups,
when recovering himself he redoubled that disadvantage upon his Enemy, having
broke their Spears they fell to their Swords, when Philanthus lent him such a
blow on the Helmet, that ohe half of it fell down upon his Shoulders upon which
followed whole streams of Blood; At this the whole Cirque which consisted of
Thousands of Spectators gave a loud Shout, Sabrino being Cut deep into the
Scull, and having lost a great quantity of Blood in the middle of the next
Course fell headlong from his Horse. Philanthus lept readily down and putting
the point of his Sword to his Throat, bid him ask his Life, it is to late, says
Sabrino, But I Will clear my Soul from all filthy Sin before I dye, Upon which a
Confesor was called, to whom he publicly Confessed his unjust Accusation of the
Countese, and the reason that put him upon such a Bloody Revenge, so long as he
had Breath he called often upon her to forgive him, which was not long, for his
Wound was past Cure, and in less then half an Hour he dyed. I shall forbe^r to
mention the loud shouts and accl^mations of the people, for the Countesses
deliverance, and that her Innocence was cleared in the Face of the whole World;
In the midst of all this Joy and Triumph, Philanthus stole privately away
without being known by any Person who he was, and came over to England, where
he never discovered the least Syllable of what he had done to any of her own
Relations.

The Countess was now led back in Triumph, and Complemented with the Visits of
all Persons of Quality, and Congratulations of all her Friends, when every one
Inquired of her, this Gentleman's Name and Country who was her Champion, She
told them, at the place of death she expected none, nor knew of any, that as he
came from Heaven for ought She knew he was returned thither again, for
notwithstanding the strictest Enquiry She could make, she heard no account of
him. A Courier was immediately dispatched with Letters to give the Count a
Relation of this great News, who was so extremely Transported with it, that
being but lately recocover'd from a dangerous Fever, it threw him into a
Relapse of which within few days he dyed. But before his death, in his Cooler
fits he ordered his Secretary to write a most kind and passionate Letter to the
Countess to rejoice with her for her Miraculous Preservation, which afterward
she received, he made his Will and left her all his whole Estate for Life,
besides Jewels Plate and Money to a very great Value. Soon after his death she
parted with all the Land to the next Heyr, for a Valuable consideration in
Money, and returned to England after She had been five years and three Months
absent. Philanthus went as other Gentlemen and Ladies did to give their Service
and Welcome to Orithia, and Fortuned to sind ber in the Dining Room all alone,
who received him with all Respects, but upon discourse of the Letters extremely
blamed his unkindness and degenerous Spirit, that could value any thing to the
World above the Honor and Life of a Lady for whom once he had some regard.
Philanthus endeavored to Excuse himself from the great necessity and distress
he was then under, that though when her Ladyship left England he was Master of a
fair Estate, yet since by some extraordinary Losses he had received, and
Charges in Lawsuits he was at this preseut reduced to Downright poverty and
want. She told him she was heartily sorry for it, but that Fate and Chance ran
through the whole World. Company coming in, Dinner was placed upon the Table,
and when it was almost over, Philanthus put on the Ring and presented his
Service to the Countess in a Glass of Wine, She presently saw the Ring and
changed Color, which was taken Notice of by my Lord her Brother and all the
Company, who asked if she was not well, at that she blushed again and said, yes
my Lord indifferent, however they perceived some sudden alteration which they
could not Guess the reason of. After Dinner was done she stepped to Philanthus,
and taking him on one side d^sir'd to know from whence he had that Ring. Madam,
says he I had it from a Lady for whose sake I will never part with it. Sir
said she, I presume I know it, yes Madam you do so and gave it to a Hermit on
the Evening before you was to suffer. I, Madam, was that Hermit and next day
your Champion. Upon which the Countess gave the whole Relation of it to the
Company, and promised Philanthus in Gratitude to him, she would make him Master
of her self and all her Fortune next Morning, which was accordingly done, and
the Marriage Celebrated with all pomp and Solemnity.

As Evadne had concluded her Story, in came Count Melintus his Uncle, and some
other Persons of Honor from Court to give him a Visit, upon which the Company
broke up; Melintus paying his more particular Thanks to Evadne for her most
pleasant and Divertive Story, which was Seconded by all the Gentlemen and
Ladies; And as they took leave, Melintus told Philots and Theodosia, they stood
in arrears which he did not question but they would discharge to the great
Satisfaction of the Company at their next Meeting.

FINIS.
ERRATA
In the Pre^ace to the Reader, Page 1 line 16^^ read poignant for polynant; in
the Book, p. 18^^ l. 12. r. walked for wak't, p. 37 l. ult. r. Gentlemen for
Gentlem in, p. 44 l, 13 r. wandering for a^dring p. 84 l. 3. Quare for Quate.

Advertisement of some Books lately Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Crayle, at
the Lamb in Fleet street next White Fryers-Gate.
THe Beauty of Holiness, written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, etc.
to which is added Holy Devotions upon several Occasions, fitted to the main
Uses of a Christian Life, The Fourth Impression in Octavo.

The Christians Companion, or a Guide to the Holy Scriptures. discovering the
hidden Treasures, contained in the New Testament, and Explaining the difficult
and Intricate Texts throughout every Chapter, together with Family-Devotions,
by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England, in Octavo

Quintus Valerius Maximus his Collections of the Memorable Acts and Sayings of
Orators, Philosophers, Statesmen, and other Illustrious Persons of the Ancient
Romans, and other Foreign Nations, upon Various Subjects, together with the
Life of that Famous Historian, Newly Translated into English, in Octavo.

The Queens Closet opened, comprehending several Hundreds of Experienced
Receipts, and Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Surgery, Preserving, Cookery,
etc. Which were presented to the Queen, by the most eminent Doctors in Physic,
Chyrurgions, Oculists, and diverse Persons of Honor, whose Names are fixed to
their several Receipts, The last Edition Corrected and Enlarged with many New
and late Additions 120.

5. Delightful and Ingenious Novels, being Choice and excellent Stories of
Amors, Tragical and Comical, lately Related, by the most Refined Wits, with
Interludes between each Novel, Price Bound 1 s.

Where is Likewise Sold

Dr. Barkers Famous Gout Plaster, which infallibly takes away the pain in
Twelve Hours time, with the Paroxysm of the Distemper, and in time may effect a
perfect Cure, Price each Roll, 5 s.


