Truth Defended: OR, A Triple Answer to the late Triumvirates Opposition in
their Three Pamphlets, VIZ. Mr. Baxter's Review, Mr. Wills his Censure, Mr.
Whiston's Postscript to his Essay, etc.


With Mr. Hutchinson's LETTER to Mr. Baxter a little before his Death.

And a POSTSCRIPT in Answer t^ Mr. William Walker's Modest Plea for Infants
Baptism.

By Tho. Delaune.

Jude 3. Earnestly contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Printed
for (...), and are to be sold by Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near
the Royal Exchange, 1677.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THou art here entertained once more with this Controversy; for though some
may think it more seasonable for persons in our Circumstances, to be silent at
this time of day, yet the restlessness of our Adversaries, makes it needful
for us to vindicate that great and necessary Truth of our Christian Baptism,
from the affronts put upon it, and its Professors, by men of a quarrelsome,
satirical, and invective spirit. There is an unseasonable (yea a sinful)
silence, by which Truth is betrayed and left unrescued as a prey to its
invaders: of which, having a clear call, and no other appearing, I am loath to
be found guilty, though conscious of my weakness.

I have compendiously handled what is voluminously managed by others, so to draw
the matter into the narrowest limits I could.

I find it to be a general Objection, That it is not likely, that our Way
should be true, because so many learned and pious men for so many ages, have
been of the contrary persuasion. In answer to which I humbly submit these brief
Considerations.

1. That the highest seize of Learning, do not privilege from Error: For
the way of arriving to Scripture-knowledge, is not through those gaudy portals
of Philosophy, and artificial ratiocinations, but by an earnest waiting, and
address to the Lord in Prayer and Scripture meditation; Solomon obtained wisdom
by asking it of God, not by ransacking the University, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. The
promise is to the petitioning, faithful Christian, Mat. 7.7. and 21.22. James
1.5, 6, 7, 17. 1 John 3.22. And common experience shows us, that a plain and
serious, though illiterate Christian, gets that view of Scripture and spiritual
things, which the most subtle and piercing eye of the graceless Schoolman
cannot reach. He is most like to come acquainted with Gods Counsel, that is most
intimate with him, in a most humble and holy retiredness and contemplation. It
was in his retiredment that Moses his face was so irradiated with glory, Deuteronomy.
34.29.35. whereas the most elevated (whether natural, or acquired)
accomplishments, (if ill employed, as a sharp Sword in a mad hand does greatest
mischief) do but render the possessors fitter Instruments to propagate error:
For Refined parts, and witty Reasonings, if unsanctified, do commonly persecute
Truth, and advance Falsehood, Philosoph^ Haeretic^rum patriarchae; it being in
their Judgments a depre^sion of their imaginary glory to acknowledge, that poor
Mechanics, or Laics (as they count them) should correct their Learned
extravagance, or be better proficients in the School of Christ then they;
though we have the very Word of Truth for it, 1 Cor. 1.26. Mat. 11.25. And very
suitably does Dr. Carlton Bishop of Chichester, in his Thankful Rememb. Edit.
1627. p. 289. express himself; A L^y-man that has the Spirit of God, is better
able to judge of the Church and its Members, then a man in Ecclesiastical
function that has not the Spirit of God. Inf^lix est sa^ientia, ^^trae verbum
Dei sapere, says Justin (...) And it has ever been found, that plain Divinity
^^sts a more radiant luster, then the obscure (...) of the Schools, though
spangled in their gaud^est attire. And Augustine himself says. Epist. ad
Or^sinm, that as the Sun is to be seen only by (...) own light; so the light of
the Gospel is visible only through the rays it communicates. Sicat S^^nt non
videt oculus nisi lumine Solis, sic ver^um (...) dominicum lumen non poterit
vid^ri n^si ^ps^us (...). But you will say, that many ^f our oppos^te, ^re (...).
as well as learned. Which I shall readily grant. And I am persuaded that some
of them a^ precious in the sight of the Lord, eminent for cr^^e and holiness;
yet that renders them not ^^fallible. The wisest on Earth, know but in part:
And it is a most certain rule, that as a Church must be proved by the Doctrine,
not the Doctrine by the Church; so men must be counted Orthodox by the
soundness of their Judgment; and not the foundness of their Judgment or opinion
necessarily concluded, because they (being such pious and learned men) held so.

2. This Argument (if of any weight) lies against the whole body of the
Reformation, as well as us: For can it be imagined, (says Cluniacensis in
behalf of the Romanists) that so many great Doctors and Fathers of the Church,
pious (in their way) and of stupendous learning, should err all this while?
etc. Contra Petro Bruisianos, p. 1124. Edit. 1614. Siccine caecatus est orbis
terrarum, tantaque hucusque caligine involutus, ut ad aperiendes oculos suos,
and ad tam diuturnam noctem illustrandam, post tot Patres, Martyrs,
Pontifices, and universarum Ecclesiarum principes, vos tandiu expectarit, and
ad corrigendum longum errorem suum, Petrum de Bruis, and Henricum ejus
asseclam, velut Apostolos novissimos elegerit? Itane usque ad novos saeculi
reparatores mundns periit? etc. So that when our dissenting Protestant Brethren
resolve these Interrogatories for themselves, they Answer this Objection also,
for us.

3. The Example of the holiest men, must not be our Rule of worship; for we can
have no possible assurance that what they hold is a Truth, (unless it be
revealed in the Scripture) since it is possible for the holiest man on Earth to
err, yea in this very thing; therefore the truth of an opinion must be made
out by Scripture demonstration, not by the multitude, quality, or holiness of
its favorites. We are not to follow a Paul, but as he follows Christ, 1 Cor.
11.1. We are not to follow a multitude any more in error, then evil, Deuteronomy.
23.2. We are not to believe an Angel from Heaven, any more then he agrees with
the Gospel already delivered to us, Gal. 1.8. much less are we to receive any
doctrine upon the credit of Man, who is a Creature far short of Angelical
spirituality. We conceive it our duty, with the noble Bereans, to search the
Scriptures, whether these things be so, Act. 17.11. Our Appeal must be to the
Law and to the testimony, Isa. 8.20. not to the number or piety of our party.

But says the Objector, It Is arrogance in you to think your selves wiser then
your Forefathers; and want of charity, if you say they erred either maliciously
or wilfully.

Answ. So might the Papists say to the Protestants, so might the Church of
England say to all other dissenters, as well as us. And what new discovery can
there be made, but must be obnoxious to this censure? We ascribe nothing to our
own wisdom; it is the beneplaeitum, or good pleasure of the Lord to reveal his
Truths to Babes, which are hid from the wise and prudent, Luke 10.21. for which
we must, as Christ did, express our thankfulness. And no man must presume to
call him to account for the exercise of his Sovereignty. We believe that a
great many hold Infant Baptism purely out of Conscience, because they think the
grounds urged for it from Scripture be valid; and that if they were satisfied,
as we are, of its unlawfulness, they would renounce the practice, as a great
many do, upon the accession of more light. (2) That vast multitudes hold it,
out of pure ignorance. (3) Some because it was the opinion of their Ancestors,
and is so generally owned. (4) Most from that wretched and mischievous conceit,
with which (except some few of the most refined Protestants) the world is
intoxicated, viz. that WITHOUT IT THEIR CHILDREN ARE DAMNED. (5) Many of the
great and learned ones hold it, because it is the Cornerstone of the
Ecclesiastical Fabric erected by the man of sin, against which they must not
declare, if they will be Ministers of that State. (6) Most are brought up in
that way, and never examine it, whether right or wrong. (7) Some that would
examine it, judge that so great a part of the world would not hold it, if it
were unlawful, and so are led by an implicit Faith. (8) Some that examine it
are biased by Interest, or Education, so that the clearest Argument, or
Reason, cannot remove them. (9) Some are indeed convinced by the force of
Truth, yet the love of the world, or some such sinister end, hinders their
owning so despised and uncountenanced a practice. And a great many (through
grace) are convinced, and wrought upon to own it, and be^r their testimony to
it; and certainly the testimony (though but) of a few, that are not blinded
with temporal ends, (and that cannot be charged upon us) but swim painfully
against the stream, is not to be slighted.

Obj. But you make an Idol of it, and censoriously condemn all that differ from
you.

Answ. This is an injurious charge; for we ascribe no more to it, then is
warranted in the Word of God. We look upon it as the initiating Ordinance into
a Gospel profession, Act. 2.41, 42. An Ordinance of Christ, of the some
duration with preaching, Mat. 28.19. A lively resemblance of the Death, Burial,
and Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. And we conceive it our duty to
be found in the practice and profession of it, though we undergo the censures
and affronts of the age we live in, thereby. We make no Idol of it, nor does
our Religion consist in it only; we desire to press after Holiness, and to
worship our God in Spirit and Truth, to walk blamelesly. Nor do we condemn
dissenters, but pray for them, that the Lord would give them more light. We
desire to love all men, as far as they appear to us to belong to Christ; and
would walk together in love, as f^r as we agree: But when they err from the
Rule, we dare go no further with them; -- Magis amica veritas, it being (as
Aristotle himself said, l. 1. c. 6 Ethicorum, (...)) a sacred thing to prefer
Truth before Friendship.

Daille tells us in his Right use of the Fathers, p 97. that Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, (I may add Origin) Cyprian,
Lactantius, Hillary, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, and Epiphanius, that is, the
most eminent, and most approved of the Fathers that ever were, have stumbled in
many places, and quite fallen away in others. Of which they themselves were so
sensible, that they gave us many cautions not to lean upon their Authority: Non
^ecipienda veterum Authoritas, Scripturae testimonio destituta, August. Ep. 19.
Ex omnibus Fatribus nemo est, quin suis scriptis aliquando faede erraverit and
hallucinatus est, Lubert. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 7. In libris Doctorum Ecclesiae
aliquondo errores, aliquando Haereses inveniuntur, non est tamen, ut
condemnemus vel librum, vtl Authorem, Deus enim hoc permittit, ut nos veritatem
ex ipsis scripturis indagemus, Anselm. Comment. in 2 Cor. Therefore it is the
less to be wondered, that such as suck their unexamin'd Religion from their
mouths, go astray with them. Nor can we be censured of arrogance, if, upon the
trial of their documents, we hold fast only that which is good. The sober
Author of the Naked Truth tells us, p. 42. That in matters of Faith, there were
some errors very Primitive, and at the time of the Evangelical Reformation by
Luther, Melancthon, Calvin he can show some errors generally received in most,
if not all, the Churches of Christendom, but neither approved nor known by the
Primitive Church. Now, this being so, let the sober judge what little reason or
safety we have, to be led by any man's ipse dixit.

I would not be understood in any thing I say about this matter, to cry down
humane learning as a thing of no use: For I confess it to be of excellent
benefit in its place, if rightly employed; and that the knowledge of the
Original Languages in which the Scriptures are penned, is of very great
necessity, that we might converse with that blessed Book in its own emphatical
and Native Idiom, and that we might not be imposed upon by wrong Translations.
Yet we are to consider the bounds of Philosophy and humane literature, viz. it
is to be exercised in the things that may be known by the light of Natural
Reason; but when it travels beyond that road, and must needs be defining things
beyond its sphere, it becomes extravagant and saucy. Accinge te ad
Philosophiam, sed hac lege, ut memineris nullam esse Philosophiam quae a
mysteriorum veritate nos abdueat: Philosophia veritatem quaerit, Theologia
invenit, Religio possidet, says Picus Mirandula ad Ald. Man. Fire is good in
the Chimney, but mischievous in the Housetop. Learning is good as an handmaid,
Hagar-like, but if it must needs be Mistress, and usurp Authority in the
Family; if like scoffing Ishmael, Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.30. it will mock at the
Spirit, and the simplicity of the Gospel, let it be cast out. As Reason is
above Sense, so Faith is above Reason. It Is the work of Faith, by the aid of
Divine Revelation to be employed in the mysteries of Religion: Therefore our
Philosophers when they attempt that undertaking by the dim guidance of Natures
light, are guilty of as great an absurdity, as if the eye should encroach upon
the ear, and would pretend to distinguish the various gradations of Musical
Notes, or the Quavers of a pleasant Instrument; which it cannot so much
perform, as the dullest brute can imitate the warblings of the Nightingale.
Christ made choice of the despised and unlearned, that his grace might be the
more magnified, and that it might be seen, that he is able to qualify a
Fisherman, Tentmaker, or any other Tradesman, to be the Messenger of the
Everlasting Gospel, and Ambassador Extraordinary, as it were, of Heaven,
without being beholden to Aristotle, Cicero, or Aquinas. He could by his
Almighty power, have converted the great Athenian Academicks, as well as
command a fish to bring him the tribute money, Mat. 17.27. but his pleasure was
to pitch upon a few poor people. And shall we despise his grace when appearing
in ^uch now? God forbid.

We are opposed by men of different persuasions, Prelatical, Presbyterian,
Independent, etc. all agreeing in the practice of Paedobaptism, though from
very different grounds. And I must confess that I find the greatest Ingenuity
in Mr. Walker, who very honestly holds Infant Baptism upon the same ground the
Antiquity he alleges did, viz. the conceit of its necessity, though perhaps
not in so very gross a degree as some of them: And insists most upon the old
Mediums, to the shame of those that look upon themselves more Refined, who
twist themselves into so many new forms, before they will part with it. So that
he may be allowed many hundred years, whereas the others can claim no Antiquity
for their faederal Right above the 16th. Century. So that if things be weighed
in the balance of an unprejudiced mind, Mr. Walker's undertaking, may be
likely (though not so Intended by him) to convince people, that since the
grounds their adored Antiquity has laid for this practice, and he has so fully
produced, be so weak and unscriptural, they ought not to venture their Faith in
so leakie a bottom, but to reform, and reduce it to its Primitive purity: It
being an undoubted maxim, that (in Controversies especially) Omne certius
eligibilius est incerto; and Omne quod est propinquam vero, est magis
eligendum; -- Whatsoever is most certain, and bordering upon Truth, is to be
chosen, before that which is doubtful and disputable. And whether our way, or
theirs, he most agreeable to the Word of Truth, and the practice of the
Primitive Saints, is submitted upon a fair trial, to the decision of the
judicious and unbyassed Reader.

I have with as much brevity as I could, given a short Answer to each of our
Adversaries who have lately appeared against us, (unreply'd to:) There remains
something to be said to one Mr. William Allen, (an Apostate Baptist) for some
late Arguments for Infants Baptism; which I should have done also, but that it
is performed by an able hand, and designed speedily for the public.

Most of these Papers were ready for the Press many months since; but we find
it a difficult thing to pass it; wanting the privilege of an Imprimatur. My
great distance permitted me not to see the sheets, in which are some errors
injurious to the sense, some of which upon a cursory reading I gathered, the
rest are left to thine Ingenuity to correct or pardon.

T. D.

PREFACE.
IT would appear to me somewhat strange, had I not seen a late example in the
forwardest Champions of Paedo-baptism (even Mr. Baxter and Mr. Wills) that a
man of so exuberant an invention as Mr. Whiston, and so copious in venting his
Notions, should yet shift off his Antagonist with so disingenious and
unscholar-like a Return, as he gives Mr. Hutchinson in his Postscript. Whether
he be such an admirer of his own clocution, that studying to display his
faculty, he has neither leisure nor Candor to give his adversary any other
answer, then Contempt, or Naked Gainsaying? Or whether the evidence of truth
has not so substantially silenced him, that (yet loath to seem so) be is forced
to betake himself to such Evasive Subterfuges, I will not determine. But I have
just cause to think the later; for can any man imagine that one of his
Forwardness, Acquisition and Leisure, (being as he says, Postscript, p. 250.
Free from all Family entanglements, etc.) had he any thing to the purpose to
offer, would fail to publish it so seasonably in vindication of the cause he
manages. How unconvincing such a method of disputation as he takes, is, he
cannot be ignorant of, and such as will be imposed upon thereby, may quietly
enjoy that liberty for me. And I would have Mr. Whiston know, that the notice
that I take of his Books, is not because I think he has done more then others
of his persuasion, nor that I apprehend any stronger authority in his ipse
d^^ir, then in the Dictates of his Predecessors: But because he seems (as he
tells us in the Preface to his Essay) to tread a new Path, and proceed in
another Strain, then either the Prenitive Fathers, or the Mayor (...) ^ound
out: For of the first he tells in the Language of an Oracle; That wherein they
dissent from him, they themselves dis^^nted from the Truth: And of the later,
That their mistakes need Rectisying.

But to prevent the ill influence this his new started Argumentation may have
upon the well meaning and enquiring Christian Mr. Hutchinson endeavored in
some late Animadversions upon Mr. Whistons answer to Mr. Danvers, to make him
sensible how unrighteous and liable to exception his said undertaking was. And
therein did not proceed upon bare Dictates, but plain and solid Demonstration
from Scripture-evidence.

And though the singleness Mr. Whiston appears in, be a just motive to us to
slight his new stamped Divinity, especially since it consists of little more
then mere Affirmations; yet he was opposed with such strength of Demonstration,
that I see he is loath to encounter it, but in that New way of Postscripting
Mr. Baxter taught him, viz. To Answer Books by general Negations. Therefore I
see no Reason but it may be taken for granted, that he is drawn to the Lees of
his Ratiocination.

And whereas he complains of Mr. Hutchinsons overlooking the first Treatise of
Infant Baptism, p. 251. Mr. Whiston may consider, it was Mr. Hutchinsons work
then to detect and refel his injurious Cavils against Mr. Danvers. And truly I
must inform him for my part, that it is a service of no grateful relish to me
to take in hand and peruse (...), so tedious and incoherent a Discourse, and
upon which with more truth and honesty, that Character he gives Mr. Danvers his
Treatise, may be retorted, viz. That it carry's sufficient Antidote against its
own embracements. -- But to prevent his glorying; I shall only take a Brief
Survey of that Piece, and leave a few Remark. upon it, with the Reader.

And as to his quar^lling with Mr. Hutchinson for taking no notice of his
Intimations given by (...) lishing some thing further, concerning this
Controversy: I cannot conceive how he can frame any just Charge thence against
Mr. Hutchinson, unless he fancied him to have Mr. Baxters faculty of
Prophesying, what his adversary is impre^nate^ with. But since no man besides
Mr. Baxter is master of such aforeknowledge, few besides Mr. Whiston would
blame an Antagonist for that neglect, viz. Of answering a man, before he hears
his Arguments. Or if Mr. Whiston would have no Answers made him, till he
publishes all he has to say -- It will be found an Imposition of two Majestical
an Aspect. And in my opinion, it had been more Consonant to the general
Reformation he bespeaks, (not only from us, but from those Paedobaptists, that
hold up that practice upon grounds different from his) to have published his
labors in an entire Tract, then thus by parcels. But since he is in the humor
of Writing, as we know not when it will be over, so he must give us leave,
(without staying for what is behind) to ataque his forces already mustered, and
encounter the rest (if worth any opposition) as they come on. Yet from me (who
am by the last Commands of Mr. Hutchinson, (now with the Lord) oblidged to give
Mr. Whiston this Return to his Postscript, which Mr. Hutchinson saw a little
before his Death) I think fit to let him know, that I have more value for my
time then hereafter to consume it upon the refutation of his Dictates, already
sufficiently defeated.

And though in Mr. Hutchinsons Animadversions, p. 54. he was earnestly called
upon, that if he thought himself concerned to appear further in this Contest,
he would lay down his Thesis distinctly, and set down his Arguments
Syllogistically, Yet how little notice he has taken thereof, and how like a
Dictator be appears in his Essay, is left to consideration.

And since he over passes the Arguments opposed against their practice,
insinuating as if Mr. Hutchinson had mistaken the right ground thereof, since
he does but and Dictates, to Dictates: And his Essay is but a (...) built upon
a foundation already overture (...): since be takes those 3 prepositions for
granted, p. 3. b^ by; and upon that suppesition feigns those high privileges
of the seed of Believers, those glo^^^^ benents and advantages which he tells
us p. 244. have been assigned to them, as in Covenant, and having the token
thereof (he means Baptism) applied to them; since (I say) these tedious
branches of his Dis^^^se sprang from an unsound Root, or mere figment, viz. A
supposing that the Covenant of Grace is made with Believers, and their natural
seed in their generations, and so have a right to Baptism: We might spare the
labor of confuting such fancyes afresh.

Therefore the method I shall use in this Return shall ^e. 1. To Refor the
Reader for an answer to the Argumentative part of Mr. Whistons Books to such
places, where they are soundly confuted already by the late Writers of our way.
2. I shall wholly wave his impertinent fictions in his Essay, concluding that
in the overthrow of those points he takes for granted, p. 3. Those glorious
privileges he dreams of will vanish into gilded Chyme^^'s, or the mere
apparitions of a beguiled (...). 3. With same Rest^^ions upon his Poliscript (a
Cant way of consuting Books, by the Argument used against Belamine) I shall
leave all at the Tribunal ^f the Reader.

A Brief Survey and Confutation of Mr. Whistons Books, etc.
I Shall begin with his large Preface of about 46 pages: Wherein he says page
7. That if he errs, it is cum ratione. To which I say, that error is too often
disguised under the plausible show and semblance of truth, and some man have
the art so to paint it. But instead of making it therefore reasonable, it is
rendered the more pernicions; in as much as it is so much the more likely to
ensnare and deceive; And Satan is never more capable to do mischief, then when
he is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore Mr. Whiston had need be
wary, lest what he goes about to establish, be found in the great day, to be no
part of the Doctrine once delivered to the Saints. For then an erravi cum
rations, will scarce be sufficient to answer that Question; Who has required
this at your hands?

Preface p. 14. Mr Whiston assigns 6 causes of our Rejecting Infant Baptism,
the substance of which are. 1. Want of tender affections toward Relations. 2.
Confounding either some supposed, or real irregularities in the administration,
with the practice. 3 Not considering the true Reason of primitive Christians
Baptism at Age. 4. Our comparing the little good, and small advantage accruing
to believers seed, with the variety of inconveniences, and ill consequences of
Paedo-baptist Doctrine. 5. Placing too much of our Religion in an external way
and mode. 6. By preposterous enquiries after the will of Christ, as not taking
our rise from the Covenant made with Abraham,

To the first, I say, that as Mr. Whiston only speaks his thoughts without
proof, so little more needs be said in disproof of it; save to tell him that it
is not so. We have as much natural love to our Children as any I presume that
oppose us: and we look upon that as no instance of affection to them, to cross
our Lords Institutions, (which should be more dear to us, then that Imaginary
fondness he talks of) in Communicating an Ordinance to them, that is not
appointed for them.

2. We have produced our Arguments (even such as we find unanswerable) against
the Pedo baptists mode of administration, and the subjects they apply Baptism
to, and therefore the 2 d particular is frivolous.

3. We make the New Testament Scripture our warrant in the practice of New
Testament Duties and Ordinances; and the primitive Christian's exact conformity
is the best explication and comment upon the precepts there; and ought to be
our pattern We find neither express nor Consequential warrant for Baptizing
Infants there. For,

A necessary consequence is that which proves the matter concluded certainly so
to be. Yea, certe ita esse, nec aliter se habere pass. There must be tam
necessarius nexus, and indissolubilis aependentia, such an infallible
dependence between the subject and predicate, that the conclusion must be
universally and perpetually true. And every necessary consequence demonstrates
a priori; For, Demonstratio est ex prioribus, notioribus, and causis. A
posteriori only the discovery of habits is made. Now we never yet could find a
Medium in Scripture that proves Infant Baptism (nor that they have any
qualification that Intitles them to it) by any consequence in the true,
logical, and direct notion of it. 1. No acts of faith, or repentance can be
seen in them. 2. Nor any discovery of gracious habits. 2. Nor yet can it be
demonstrated that they have in foro Ecclesiae, any interest in the Covenant of
Grace, till at years, and capable to profess and act faith. Though, for ought
we know, they may (in foro Dei) be invisible members of the mystical body of
Christ, and in a capacity of salvation, through the presentment of that
satisfaction made by Christ, the free gift coming upon all, Romans 5:18. Yet that
being uncertain of any Individual, can be no ground for Baptism. And how can we
without incurring a most dreadful breach of charity, exempt dying Infants from
the benefit of that grace, they having by no actual sins barred themselves from
its saving communications? And what Scripture can be produced that any one is
damned merely for the non-application of a Sacrament (provided it to be not
contemned) I can no where find. Ursinus tells us in his Catechism, that it is
not the want, but the contempt of the Sacraments damns, Privatio Sacramenti non
damnat, si non accedat contemptus, Christus non adimit sal^tem eis; quibus
adimitur Baptismus.

The Consequences produced for Infant Baptism, we find to be sophistical
wretched Non-sequitur's, and against the rules of that Logic, so celebrated by
the Authors that make them.

The Jewish High Priesthood, will prove a High Priesthood now, by as good
Consequence of the faederal right, then, proves a faederal right now. And the
Passover being to be taken and eaten, Exodus 12.4. according to the number of
jouls in the house, and by every one according to his eating (and therefore by
Children) will afford a consequence of Infants right to the Supper, as valid,
as that drawn from their Circumcision to their Baptism.

But that indeed there is no Birth-holiness now (that being a legal privilege
abolisht, and not comporting with the Gospel) is unanswerably evident by this
Argument.

If the legal commoness and uncleanness of some meats, Flesh, Birds, Beasts,
Persons and their natural seed above others be taken away; then the legal
holiness and cleanness of some meats, Flesh, Birds, Beasts, Persons and their
natural seed above others, is also taken away. But the Antecedent is true;
Ergo, so is the Consequent.

The major is undeniable from these received Maxims, Contrariorum eadem est
ratio: And Contrariorum uno sublato, tollitur alterum, viz. Of Contrary's take
away one, and the other cannot remain in its opposition to it any longer. The
minor is evident from Act. 10.11, to 28, Act. 11.2 to 9. Gal. 2.11. to 28. But
to the matter

We find the true reasons of the primitive Saints being Baptzed at age, to be,
because they durst not recede from the Rule. And that is our reason for
practicing as they did.

4. We know no advantage accruing to Infants from their Baptism, it makes them
in your own esteem nominal, not real Members of the visible Church. And the
name without the nature is worthless. And the absurdities and inconveniences
of that practice are obvious in our VVritings. The Gospel Church must consist
of living Stones, at least such as (to our cognizance) profess so to be, not
ignorant Babes untransformed out of their natural state.

5. That we place too much of our Religion in an external mode, is false
suggestion, not to be made out by Mr. Whistons Logic. We profess to worship
God in Spirit and Truth, (according to our measute, and by Divine assistance)
in an exact conformity to his Revealed Will.

6. Our enquiry's after the will of Christ, are from the Revelations of his
will in his word, and if that be termed prepostero^s, let our opposites find a
better foundation for their enquiry's, and it shall be considered. We think it
a fruitless, and ^indeed preposterous undertaking to seek for the Institution
of Baptism in Genesis 17.7. We have it nearer home in the New Testament, and that
we adhere to. No Arguments from the pretended Analogy to Circumcision are
deemed by us of any greater force, then those drawn from the Levitical
Priesthood and its Ceremonious appurtenances to vindicate the Papal, or
National Prelacy and its concomitant rites

In Mr. Whistons 1 Book he lays down his grand proposition p. 1. thus That it
is the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the Infant seed of one, or both
believing Parents should be baptized. To prove which p. 2. he lays down three
subordinate propositions, viz. That God in Genesis 17.7. Intended Abraham and his
natural seed. 2. That God settled the same promise upon, and confirmed it to
believing Gentiles. 3. That all under the promise ought to be Baptized.

Page 3. He distinguishes Abraham's seed into natural, and spiritual, or
Mystical. p. 4. He subdistinguishes the spiritual, or Mystical into visible and
Denominative 2. Invisible and Real, Romans 9.6. Tells us p. 5. That Baptism does
not properly incorporate into the body of Christ, as invisible, but as visible.
p. 7. Says the difference between both. Seeds is only Respective, because the
same persons in different respects may be both his Natural and Spiritual Seed.
Natural Seed, are such as descend immediately from Abraham's own Lovns, or 2. his
whole race and Posterity. p. 10 He says that under the term (Seed) both
Natural and Mystical are comprehended. p. 17. That under this Covenant both
Jews and Gentiles are comprehended. -- And that God had a peculiar regard to
the Natural Seed -- that Parents performing the Conditions of the Covenant,
convey to their Children the same Interests themselves had.

Cap. 1, p. 19. He labors to prove that all Abraham's immediate Natural seed --
were intended as the immediate subjects of his promise, ( Gen 17.7.) p. 36.
That the Covenant made with Abraham was a Covenant of Grace -- And the same for
substance that believers are now under. -- That it was conditional. p. 51. A
Covenant being a mutual compact. p. 52. That the Condition required of Abraham,
was also required of his Natural Seed. p. 54. Chap. 4. p. 64 The 2 d.
subordinate proposition is Prosecuted, into which service these Scriptures are
pressed, Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 13. Isa. 59.21. and 65.25. and 44.3, 4. Jer. 3.12.
Ezekiel. 37.21, 22. with Romans 11.26. That is the same Covenant Jews and Gentiles
are under, Jer. 31.31. with Heb. 8.8. Isa. 54.1. with Gal. 4.27. Hos. 1.11. and
2, 3. with Romans 9.25, 26. Amos 9.11. with Acts 15.20. so out of the New
Testament Gal. 3.13, 14.

Chap. 6. p 104. He proceeds to make our that the promise of Salvation
appertains to the houses of believing Parents, as such, without respect to the
personal faith of any in the said houses of such, besides there own; for which
he urges, Mar. 10.31. Luke 19.8, 9. Acts 2.38, 39. and 16.31. 1 Cor. 7.14. And
p. 106. says the promise, believers are under, is not absolute, but
Conditional; and so it must be understood of their houses -- which Condition he
expounds p. 108. viz. That the Master of the Family believing, his house shall
be saved upon Condition of his believing. He affirms ibid. that Children in an
especial manner are included and comprehended under the term (house.) p. 203.
That the Interest of any of Abraham's natural seed, arises from their Relation
to their immediate, Parents included in the phrase (their generations.) Affirms
p. 205. that the Infant seed of believing Gentiles are to be accounted of,
numbered amongst Abraham's Mystical seed.

Chap. 7. p. 213. The 3 d. subordinate proposition is prosecuted from Genesis
17.9. That as Circumcision of old, so Baptism is now the token of that
Covenant. And p. 222. That the will of God concerning Circumcision, shows us
what is his will concerning Baptism, as the one, so the other, should be
applied to the Infants of believing Parents -- Yet says he argues not from
Analogy, only takes Circumcision as a Comment upon the Command, Genesis 17.7. p.
226. He comes to show the agreement of ^apti^m to Circumcision, as being both
the solemn rite of admittance into the Church: 2 d. To seal and assure the
subjects of it their enjoyment of the good things, blessings and benefits
promised in the Covenant, as Remission of sins. 3 d. To oblidge the person
receiving it to keep exactly the Articles of this Covenant. Jer. 4.4. 4th. ^o
be a visible badge to distinguish the people of God from all other people.
Chap. 10. p. 249. He brings the several instances of several Households to
confirm his tenent. Act. 16.14, 15, 33. 1 Cor. 16.16. as Lydia p. 273. the
Tailor p. 27^. Stephanus p. 274.

Chap. 11. and the Chapters not mentioned, as 3, 7, 8. etc. He pretends to
answer Objections, amongst which he insists upon Mat. 28.19. with Mar. 16.15,
16. p. 288.

Answer, As to Mr. Whistons 1st. subordinate proposition before rejected; I
say. To insist at large in a fresh Confutation of the use Mr. Whistons makes of
this Scirpture, viz. Genesis 17.7. were but Actam agere: Therefore as I said, I
will refer him, and the Reader to such as have already proved this plea to be
vain. Mr. Tombs (a learned Writer now with the Lord) sufficiently clears it in
his Writings upon the subject, particularly in his 3d. Review, (a large Book
never yet answered) Printed 1657. Sect. 2. p. 5 and so on. Mr. Blackwoods Storm
of Antichrist, p. 31. 32. 33. 34. and onwards. Mr. Patient in his Book of
Baptism p. 72. and onwards. Mr. Lawrence p. 17^. and onwards. Mr. Danvers p
171. 2d. Edict. and onwards. Mr. Skynner in his Treat. of Baptism p. 8. and so
on. Mr. Hutchinson in his Treat. p. 12. and so on. Mr S^^d and Mr. Cheer, p. 8.
and so on.

2d. That no Covenant Interest intitles to Baptism without Repentance. See at
large evidenced by Mr. Tombs in the said 3d. Review, Sect. ^. p. 15, 23, 40,
etc. That no agreement between Circumcision and Baptism justifies Infant
Baptism, Sect. 11. Such Arguments as are drawn from the Covenant in savor of
this practice of Paedobaptism are largely confuted, Sect. 12, 13, 14. That the
Gospel Covenant is not exten^^d to believers Infants as such, Sect. 16. That
the (...) are not Seals of the Covenant of Grace. Sect. 31. That (...) is not
by Birth, nor the Church as (...) Corporations, Sect. 36. That the holiness, 1
Cor. 7.14. is Matrimontal, evinced at large Sect. 76.92, 93, 94, 95. The
succession of Baptism to Circumcision at large considered. Sect. 81. That the
enlargement of our privileges under Gospel administrations prove not Infant
Baptism, Sect. 84.

Now this proposition (which Mr. Whiston p. 62. calls the foundation to his
whole Superstructure) by the conferring of his assertions with the Books
quoted, will (I doubt) be found rotten, and consequently his whole
superstructure must needs fall. But in regard some of the Books mentioned are
scarce, being out of Press, I shall with what brevity I may abstract from them,
our understanding of the Covenant of Grace; which term is applied to signify.

1st. The Covenant of Grace in its own nature, singly or universally considered.

2ly. The manner of its administration, according to Divine Institution.

In the first signification, it signifies the great Mystery of the mercy of God
in Christ, wherein the Father has established Jesus Christ his Son, the head of
all things, and given him a blessed seed of the sons of men, to be by him, and
with him, Heirs of the glorious Inheritance of the Grace of God, and the
blessed Consequences thereof, against all possibility of miscarriage, according
to his eternal purpose. This Covenant was at first published Genesis 3.15. it is
spoken of Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9. Is. 42. and 49. This is the Everlasting Covenant,
still one and the same, immutable from Everlasting to Everlasting. This
Covenant was at sundry times, and after diverse manners, under diverse Signs,
Figures, Types, Promises, and Prophesies, renewed and ratified with the blessed
Patriarchs Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Sem, Melchisedeck, and with the Fathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; with Moses, and the Prophets, before the coming of
Christ; And brought to light, and revealed in all the Mysteries of it by John
the Baptist, Christ and his Apostles, which still continues, and shall
continue without Change, to the worlds end. This Covenant has one spiritual
Father, viz. Christ. Isa. 9.6. and one spiritual Seed, Psalm. 22.30.

2ly. The Covenant of Grace, as it signifies the manner of Administration, may
be thus described. It contains the whole, and every part of that Instituted
Worship, whereby God does ordinarily bring about the purposes of the
Everlasting Covenant, viz. To set Christ upon his Throne, and to gather him the
Seed given him by the Father, And the Covenant under this acceptance is not
one and the same always, but has passed under many great alterations and
changes. The Lord suiting his Ordinances and Appointments to the Persons,
Seasons, and Works he had to do. Therefore all its force and authority thus
confidered depends entirely upon the Law of its Institution, and is in force as
that Law directs, and not otherwise.

In this sense it is distinguished under, two known heads, respecting two
seasons; The first before, the second after the ascension of Christ.

Before Christ's coming it passed under the great alterations and Changes, for
the first 2000 years, from Adam to Abraham -- The Ordinances and form of
worship then in practice, and other occasional figures, representing the
mystery of the everlasting Covenant, and Chosen and Rejected Seeds therein
considered, was a Ministry dignified with as eminent and glorious Saints as any
the Book of God records. And though for the nature of it the same with the
Law of ^oses, proportioned to it, and after fell in with it; Ye^ in all that
long series of time, there was no distinguishing Ordinance Administered to
Infants of ^elievers, nor any unknown Doctrine to that purpose.

It Is true at Circumcision that began, which (viz. Circumcision) by the Law of
Moses was taken in with the preceding Institutions, and there received its full
Instalment, and became the Head Ordinance of the Levitical Ministry. This
Administration of the Covenant of Grace, is usually called the Old Covenant, or
the First Covenant, Heb 8.7, to 13. the Law, Romans ^.13, 14. Heb. 10.1. Gal.
4.21.

This Covenant while it stood, though Glorious; yet the Spirit of God never
exalted it above the degree of a Handmaid, appointed for the time being to
Minister to the Everlasting Covenant; And then to be utterly cast out of the
Church together with her Seed according to the flesh; whom the Apostlecalleth
Servants, and not Sons, Gal. 4.7. Prophetically instanced in Abraham's family
under the^ Type of the Gospel Church in the persons of Hagar and ^hmael, Genesis
21.10, 11, 12 unveiled at large, Gal. 4.22. to 31.

This old Administration is termed, A service unto the example and (...)
Heavenly things, Heb 8, 5. A figure for the time the present. Heb. ^.9. It
(...) perfect, Heb. 7.19. and 10.1. The Lord (...) it not as an hand writing
(...), and (...) it to be Cross, Col. 2.14. There ended (...) Covenant, there
expired the Law; the force and authority upon which that administration stood.
There was (...), to the flesh cast out, as Typified G^^. 21.10. And henceforth
the children of the promise are counted for the feed, Romans 9.8. Thus we find a
total abolition of the legal Covenant, with all its appurtenances, of which
Circumcision was a chief: And therefore the fleshly seed is excluded for ever
upon the exclusion of that Covenant, because it can claim a standing by no
other Right: But in what is said touching the abrogation of the legal Covenant;
I would not be understood to teach the Abrogation of any Moral Doctrine or
Precipt.

The last Administration of the Covenant of Grace, usually called the New
Covenant, is that which was established by Jesus Christ at his coming. This
Covenant ministered not to any Doctrine above or beyond it self. Heb. 10.1. but
was it self the Mystery of the Grace of God plainly administered, Col. 1.26.
Ephesians. 3.8, 9. It was under a veil, till Christ revealed it; And the whole scope
of Christ and his Apostles Doctrine, runs quite beyond the privilege of the
seed after the flesh, and is placed upon the seed after the spirit, as being
indeed the true seed, who were really stated by God in the privilege of the
everlasting Covenant, through their New Birth, and not otherwise, Mat. 3.8, 9.
and 16.18. The Gospel Church is built upon the foundation of actual faith in
Christ, and the Birth Privilege cannot be squared by that rule, to have place
in that building. Isa. 54.13. with John 6.44, 45. Luk 14.26. Gospel Privileges
are a part of Gospel Inheritance and follow Gospel Sonship -- If Sons, then
Heirs, Gal. 4.7, Romans 8.17. Gospel Sons are not born such, Jam. 1.18. And
therefore the visible profession hereof must be the common principle to
constitute visible Children of the Gospel Covenant, under the administration of
Jesus Christ, by whom Grace and Truth was administered, not Flesh and Figure.

(...) and (...) do not always note a Mutual Covenant and mutual performances,
as Genesis 9.9, 10. where a Covenant is made with Fowl, Cattle, Beasts, etc. There
is a single, as well as mutual Covenant. And if there must needs be a
Convertibility between those that Contract then there can be no Covenant with
Infants, because, they cannot Contract. And if their Parents Contact for them,
let them be also sealed for them.

That this may be further illustrated the learned Reader may note, that there
is an exact Conformity betwixt us ^in our sense and understanding of the
Covenant of Grace) and the most learned of the Orthodox Writers as Piscator in
Sext. Observe. in Heb 8 also upon Romans 9. Alsted praecogn. Theol. l. 2. c. 123.
Amesius in his Coronis to Remonstrants Art. 5. c. Wollebius in Compend. Theol.
l. 1. Can. and lib. 1: ca. 21. Twiss. Vind. Great. lib. 3. errat. 8. Sect. 5.
and lib. 1. p. 3. digress. 2. Scultetus in Sermon. in Isa. 41. Boltons
Instructions for Comfort. Afflict. Consciences, p. 272, 273. 2 Ed. Diodat. on
Rom 9.6. Norton. Resp. ad Appollon. cap. p. 30, 31. I forbear to transcribe the
several passages referred to, because I intend to confine my self to what
bravity I can, and being certain, if the learned Reader will have recourse to
the Originals quoted, he will find them in this case expressly and directly for
us, and against our Opposites.

Baptism a part of Gospel instituted Worship, and all the force and authority
it has upon the conscience in point of practice is to be derived from the
plain and express Law and word of God, by which it is made an Ordinance. God
keeps his Ordinances exactly to his own Methods and Manner, and man's nature is
very presumptuous to be interposing and meddling, so Heb. 8.5. Exodus 25.9 to
40. All Instituted worship must be conformed to the Heavenly pattern.

The Covenant thus stated, with the Scriptures enforcing it, duly weighed, (I
question not) would put an end to the Controversy about the Birth Privilege
upon which the Baptism of Infants is founded; and to balance what Mr. Whiston,
and those of his party offer, I submit what is here briefly offered, to the
serious scanning of the Indifferent and Unbyassed Reader.

As for those several texts urged by Mr. Whiston to confirm his second
subordinate Proposition, particularly mentioned, before, I cannot upon the most
exact examination I am capable to exercise, find that they make any thing for
him. And but that I question not, but any Reader that has the use of his
Reason, and any Compentency of understanding in the Covenant of Grace (or has
not a mind to be bolstered up in his conceit, and so is loath to be abused)
will so find it, I would by particular Demonstration evidence it. Therefore I
shall only earnestly recommend to the Christian Reader this Caution, that he
think not the bare naming of a text or texts enough to confirm an opinion, but
that he seriously note the Context, with the Scope and Drift of the Holy Ghost,
and the coherence of the sense alleged, with other Texts, before he be
inveigled to a closure with this, or that converted Tenent. And should I
deliver my Judgment, it must for all that come at last to this Decision:
Therefore I freely appeal to the serious Reader; and if he finds Mr. Whiston
has not Wrested those Texts from their direct and native scope and meaning, he
is at liberty to join with him. For my part I cannot but say, that as far as I
see, they make far more against, then for the Doctrine of the birth privilege
now in Controversy.

The most considerable New Testament Scriptures I find Mr. Whiston insist upon
for proof of Paedobaptism, are Mar. 10.10. Luke 19.9. Act. 2.38, 39. and 16.31.
1 Cor. 7.14. from which he draws a bold Conclusion; That the promise of
Salvation appertains to the houses of Believing Parents as such, without
respect to the personal says of any in their houses besides their own.

As to Mar. 10.10. there is nothing relating to the thing in Controversy -- The
Disciples propound a question about Divorcement; and what is that to the point
in hand?

2ly, Luke 19.9 Affords no color for such a conclusion: For Salvation may be
said to become to Zacheus his house. though none but himself be saved. He that
believes upon a Dictate, that a family may be saved by the Masters faith, will
believe any thing. Salvation is tendered to all, but it is applied only by
every ones faith in Jesus Christ. If it be not so, they are happy families
indeed that can obtain it at so easy a rate as their Masters faith! They may
lie in unbelief, that have a Zacheus to believe for them! Surely this is none
of Christ's Gospel, Rom: 1.17. and 3.28. Joh. 3.5. etc.

3ly. Act. 2.38, 39. Yields as little proof for this assertion as the other.
And he that can find this Consequence there, deserves to be styled Magnus
Apollo. The promise to the Children was not as they were the seed of Believers;
For their Parents were not then Believers, Nor to them, nor any other, but as
called, by the Lord, which calling made them Christ's, and capable of Baptism.
The whole (as the context shows) is an encouragement against despair by reason
of their Crucifying Christ, and wishing his blood upon them and their Children,
Mat. 27.25. For which very sin, the Apostle tells them they may have Remission,
Christ being raised for their Salvation, and their Childrens ( viz. their
posterity) and all God should call though a far off, if they did Repent and
were Baptized into the name of Christ

Of our mind herein is Dr. Hamond (a great pleader for Infant Baptism) who
says in his Resolutio^s concerning Infant Baptism. Sect. 81. If any have made
use of that unconcludent Argument (viz. Act 2 39.) I have nothing to say in
defense of them, the word [children] there, is really the posterity of the
Jews, not particularly their Infant Children. And Dr. Tailor lib. Proph p. 233.
Says that by Children is meant the posterity of the Jews -- adding -- that he,
that when ever the word (children) is used in Scripture, shall by Children
understand Infants, must needs believe that in all Israel there were no men,
but all Infants and if that had been true; it bad been the greater wonder that
they should overcome the Anakins, and beat the King of Moab, and March so far,
and discourse so well, for they were all called the Children of Israel

4ly. Act. 16.^1. proves not his Conclusion; for the Scripture Records that the
Jaylors family had the Word of the Lord spoke to them, as well as himself. ver.
32. Yea that they believed. ver. 34.

1 Cor. 7.14. Proves not the Salvation of a believers house; to assert it, is
to run into a desperate error, viz. That the unbelieving wife is saved by the
husbands faith, and e contra. Which I suppose no sober Protestant durst affirm*
And Mr. Whiston will do well to recall that expression p. 108. That the Master
of the family believing, his house shall be saved upon Condition of his
believing; it being so grossly contrary to the tenor of the Gospel. let him
peruse Romans 1.17. and 3.28 Heb. 11.6. Mar. 16.16. John 3.5. etc.

Mr. Whiston I observe all along his Book in defense of Infants Baptism --
borrows his most formidable Artillery from the Old Testament, Yet tells us be
argues not from Analogy with Circumcision. But if he can make me believe that,
he has a notable faculty of persuading. For alas! how does he invita minerva
squeeze Arguments from Genesis 17.7. to prove Infant Baptism. And I appeal to all
Readers, whether that place, and Circumcision be not the Alpha and Omega of his
proofs. What a tedious talk does he make to prove that there is an Idendity
betwixt the Old and New Covenant? how learnedly does he labor to prove that
the Covenant entered with Abraham respected his natural seed? Whereas if He
means the Covenant of Circumcision (as it is called Act. 7.8.) who denis it? But
if he means the Covenant in the first notion, laid down before, we absolutely
deny i^* and he can never prove it; the contrary is largely evinced. This
exploit fills up almost his whole Book, and what a considerable range of words
does he muster up to show the agreement betwixt Circumcision and Baptism p.
226. and so to p. 148? Does he not lay p. 222 That the will of God concerning
Circumcision, shows us what his will is concerning Baptism, and that as the
one, so the other should be applied to Infants? and what is this but Analogy?

His talk p. 240. etc That Baptism is the sign, or token of the Covenant vow,
is vain, and his Inference, that as Circumcision of old, so Baptism is now the
token of the Covenant, is groundless. But suppose that were granted (which yet
there is no ground for) his definition of a sign produced from Austi^, p. ^16
[viz. id quod se ipsum sensui and preter se aliquid animo repraesentat, or his
later Author, Signum est quod se ipsum sensibus, and id cujus signum est
intellectai aufert, or another Author I can help him to, viz. Scheibler.
Metaphys. lib. 1. cap, 26. Signum est quod potentiae cognoscenti aliquid
representat viz. That a sign or token is that which represents something signed
to the mind or understanding,] will do him more hurt then good; For Baptism
according to these definitions cannot be a sign or token of the Covenant of
Grace to any Infants; for it does not represent the Covenant either to their
sense or understanding.

Learned men divide signs into Natural, and Arbitrary: Natural, have a natural
connection with the thing signified, as Smoke to Fire. Arbitrary signs, signify
only by Ordination or Institution. Now Baptism is no natural sign to the
Covenant of Grace, nor do learned men so account it, And those that affirm it
to be an Instituted sign, would do well to produce the Institution if they know
where to find it in Scripture.

Further, Signs are divided into Rememorative, Demonstrative, and Prognostic;
The first shows what is past, as the Lords Supper shows Christ's Death. The
second something present. The third, something to come; as Physicians
Prognosticate the event of Diseases by the Symptoms. Now Baptism is in neither
of these acceptations, a sign to Infants; For it neither Remembers them of the
Covenant; nor Demonstrates it to them; nor Prognostcates that they shall ever
be in it. Therefore it is not a sign or token to Infants to the Covenant of
Grace, any way that I know of.

Mr. Whiston comes at length to improve the Instances of Baptized Households,
for his service; And insists much on Lydia's, p. 273. But that this will do him
no good, is apparent in my answer to Mr. Baxter.

His Criticism upon the phrase Act. 16.34. (...) rending it, he rejoiced with
all his house, he believing in God; is vain. For by this Interpretation, his
whole family was capable of rejoicing; Therefore no Infants there, they being
incapable of such impressions. The word was spoke to them all, and its evident
they all believed, the adverb [(...), with his whole family] in the propriety
of the phrase, having an immediate relation, and connection to (...), believing.
And therefore I fee no reason to reced from the vulgar translation, and lean
upon such an extorted Criticism, as contradicts the plain meaning and scope of
the text. He labors to fasten an absurd sense also upon that text Mat. 28.19.
viz. That the persons to be baptized are the Nations in gross. But I refer him
to what I have spoke to Mr. Baxter about this, and to Mr. Hutchinsons
Animadversions, p. 20.

In the course of his writings he frames sundry Objections, which in my
opinion, though not stated with such advantage as they might he, are enough to
confute his allegations. And some as being too strong for him, he avoids
giving* a d^rect answer to; for he fetches such circuits, and cunningly wastes
the time in circular preambles, till he thinks the Reader forgets the
Objection; and then stoutly sets upon another; yet when all is done, he either
very sorrily, or not at all answers it. Insomuch that as it happens his Book
carries a sufficient antidote against its own ill influence, to any persons
that have not a mind to be deceived.

There are several things more liable to exception in this Book; But I shall
spare him, having I hope sufficiently, (though briefly) razed his strongest
hold, with which the other petty Auxiliaries will stand or fall. And therefore
I have done with this first part.

His Essay is wholly applicatory; Therefore as I said, I pass it, and come to
his Postscript, where I shall have occasion to enlarge, (where it is meet) by
way of Vindication of Mr. H^t^hinsons Animadversions upon this second Book.

Mr. Whistons Postscript p 246. alleges, That they Baptige no Infants from the
ground of their Relation to Abraham as his seed -- But from the tenor of the
Covenant as made with Abraham's seed in their generations; and says, that
because Mr. Hutchinson proceeded to disprove that opinion which is none of his,
he is not concerned to answer him.

But I shall show the evasion to be frivolous; For whoever pleases to peruse
Mr. Whistons book, will find, that he makes this very ground he renounces the
main foundation of his pleading, as preface to the first Book. p. 3^, 33. he
calls it in express terms, the foundation to his whole structure -- so p. 62,
63. 107.114.117.126, 127.262. and almost all along raises his Arguments from
that Topic. Therefore does it not naturally follow, that when he is put to it,
he will quit his main Garrison, rather then stand to it? This is an Instance of
a weak Cause.

Abraham's seed are to be understood in a twofold sense. 1. Natural. 2.
Spiritual. And each of these again, is to be considered as his next and
immediate, or more remote seed. The Jews were his Natural seed, some next, some
remote. And such as were born of his body as Isaac, and such as believed as he
did were his spiritual seed too. Yea more distant generations bore that title,
as well as those that more immediately sprung from him* Hence the Jews stiffly
pleaded their privilege, Mat. 3.9. but were rejected, the dispensation that
gave it them being expired

No Gentile can lay claim to Abraham as their Father upon a natural account, he
standing in no such Relation to them. But he is a spiritual Father to them, if
they believe, and nor otherwise, Gal. 3.29. Nor can a believing Gentile convey
that title to his Children which he has not himself; The title of Natural
Sonship, to Abraham, no believing Gentile has; Therefore he cannot convey it to
his Posterity; For, nil dat quod in se non habet. A spiritual son of Abraham,
it is true, every believing Jew and Gentile is, but spiritual privileges (as
Gospel Sonship, etc.) are not hereditary. A believers Child can no more be
saved by his fathers faith, then an unbelievers child can be damned for his
fathers sin. And if the Fathers faith must serve the child's turn, there is all
the reason in the world, that the farhers Baptism, should also be Baptism
enough to the child Why the one should not be imputed as well as the other, is
a question worth Mr. Whiston's Resolution.

Now Mr Hutchinsons Arguments in his Treatise of Baptism were managed to make
out. That Infants can stand in no Relation to Abraham now, neither immediately,
or remotely considered; And consequently not to be baptized upon that account,
as p. 4 that Act. 2.38, 39 is no ground for Infant Baptism, p 7. That
Abrahae^^s own natural seed, are not his spiritual seed without personal faith,
p. 12. That there is no such thing as a Jewish Birth-priviledge in Gospel days
p. 14 That Abraham has two seeds, neither of which are Infants of believing
Gentiles, p. 20* That the Law of Institution, not the Covenant is to be the
ground of v^sible administrations in Gospel-dayes, p. 26. That it is a mercy,
not a misery to be broken off from the piviledges of Circumcision, p. 4^. That
Christians Children lose no privilege by being unbaptized, p. 48. That the
same Arguments urged to prove Childrens right to Baptism, will as well prove
their right to the Supper, and that in Infants there is the same thing wanting,
which qualisies for both, p. 55. That Infant Baptism is Will Worship, p. 60.
That Infants of believers have no more faith then unbeliever; Infants. -- And
Animadversions, p. 16 that Mat 28.19. is a full and plain Commission, to which
we must adhere, and tha^ Infants are not there included, p 19. That Infant
Church-menbership is repealed, p 22. That the promises to Believers houses are
not to be understood in Mr. Whistons sense, p. 22. That infants are are
incapable of the ends and uses of Baptism, p. 35. That the Jews came to John's
Baptism, Mat. 3.7. upon the same mistak^ of a federal right as the
Paed^baptists do now, and that their rejection is a notable Argument against
this practice. p 36* That Baptism succeeds not in the p^ace, roam, and use of
Circumcision, p. 45. That Circumcision was not administered to the adult as
^rlievers, p. 49. Nor to their seed as such. p. 50. -- All which points with
many other particulars directly tending ter refute the practice of Infant
Baptism, are in the said ^reatise fully and substantially made out: And if the
disproof of these Arguments* concerned not Mr. Whiston, as he (...) a promoter
of Paedobaptism. I know not what does. But since he waves the^^ so slightly, we
look upon them as substantial and unconfured.

And I appeal to any Judicious Reader, whether the Arguments that disprove
Infant Baptism, from that pretended title they are said to have to Abraham as
their common father, as believers Children; do not also disprove it
substantially when urged ^^om the like title derived from their immediate
Parents. It Is certain, that the title that is found rotten in the root, cannot
be found in the branches. And if Abraham's next and natural Children have no
title to Baptism upon that account, much less his more remote Children, and
least of all other believers Children, whose title is originally pretended from
him.

Mr. Whiston p. 247. Denies that the Covenant of Grace is made with the Ele^l,
as such?

Answ. Our sense of the Covenant of Grace, you have in the preceding pages. Let
Mr. Whiston show where any Covenant of Grace is made with Reprobates. It Is
true, such were under external administrations under the Law: For Ishmael and
others were Circumcised, that had no Interest in the Covenant of Grace. But
that, by any party from thence, the natural seed of believers, as such, should
be baptized, under the now-administration of the Covenant of Grace, is not
warranted in the Bible.

That the Covenant of Grace is made with the Elect in Christ is clear in the
Scriptures; take these Texts instead of many that may be produced, Jer. 31.31,
33. Heb. 8. and 10 Chapters. And our Learned Divines so understand it. See the
Assemblies Cathecism; Piscator is clear in it Obs. 8. in Hebr. Promittit (Deus)
in hoc saedere tria ex gratuito favore praestanda Electis, viz. Remissionem
peccatorum. gratuitam propter Christum illuminationem mentes ad cognoscendum
Deum, and renovationem voluntatis ad obdiendum legibus dei, quae tria in loco
Jeremiae satis clare ac distinct proponuntur.

So Wollteus Compend. Theol. lib. 1. Can. 2. Faedus gratiae and testamentum
(...) dispositio nominatur, quia hac Deus fili^s suis Caelestem haereditatem
destinat morte Jesu Christi silii s^i interveniente consequendam.

Piscator again on Romans 9.6, 7. Pactam autem dci tantummodo ad Isaacum, and
reliquos filios promissionis, id est, Electos per illam praefiguraturos, quod
Apostolus probat testimonio ipsius Dei, Genesis 21.12. And upon the 8 and 9 ver.
That the promise of Grace made to Abraham pertains properly to the Elect only,
whom the Apos^le calls the Children of the promise -- promissio gratiae
Abrahamo facta, ad solos electos, quos vocant filios promissionis pertinet.

Wollebius, is yet very express Compend. Theol. lib. 1. c. 21. Subjectum seu
objectum f^ederis oblati sunt omnes vocati, proprie tamen electi. To these may
be added the stream of Ancient and Modern Writers; which, in my opinion, will
Counter balance Mr. Whistons Denial.

That this Covenant of Grace belongs not to believers Infants as such, is
evident, because many such have not the grace of that Covenant desecribed Jer.
31.31. etc bestowed upon him; I^hmael, though a great Believers Son, is branded
for a Reprobate. And it belongs to many of the called posterity of unbelievers,
as common experience evi^ces.

The Conditional Covenant of Grace (if they will so call it) I can find it to
be no other then this -- Whosoever believes shall be saved -- and it is certain
this Covenant concerns not Infants, much less the I^^ants of Believers only.
The Covenant of Grace gives what it requires, and enables the Covenanters to
perform the Conditions required by receiving the Graces therein promised. And
it cannot be affirmed that it does so to Infants while such.

Mr. Whiston says that Baptism is not to be administered to adult or Infant,
upon the account of election* We grant it; and Mr Whiston by this Concession,
spoils the Argument drawn from Mar. 10.14. for Infant Baptism, for which I
believe his brethren will reckon with him. We baptize none because they are
elected, but because they profess Faith and Repentance

His Inference of the perpetuity of the Covenant as it respected Abraham's
Natural seed, from the term [Generations] is vain: For that term holds forth a
limited season, viz. During the legal Administration -- In which sense the term
[Generations] is frequently used as Levit. 3.17. and 6.18. and 23.41. etc. The
term as it respected Abraham's spiritual seed, comprehends both the legal and
Evangelical Dispensations; but what is that to Infants, who are in that sense
his seed?

In concurrence to what we say, that Learned man Mr. William Strong is very
pathetical in his Select Sermons Printed 1656. p. 333. on Gal. 4 21, 22, 23,
24. where he tells us.

1. That there are two Coverants, the 1. of Works, the 2. of Grace; typed by
Sarah and Hagar.

2. That there are two sorts of persons in the world, under these two
Covenants, the one born after the flesh, the other by promise: The one
unregenerate, the other Regenerate.

3. That the first sort are in a state of bondage, the other in a state of
freedom as the mothers were.

4. That no man can stand under both Covenants at the same time, no more then
he can be born of two Mothers.

5. That from the first Covenant, there must be a translation to the second,
and that supernatural.

This I briefly abstract, the Discourse at large is worth perusual, and gives a
fatal blow to Paedobaptism, though perhaps Mr. Strong (who was a Paedobaptist)
was not thereof aware.

Object. But you^^ say how are Infants saved then, if under a Covenant of Works.

I answer with Dr Tailor; That as we are sure God has not commanded Infants to
be baptized, so we are sure he will do them no Injustice, nor damn them for
what they cannot help therein.

2. Baptism translates not to a state of Grace, unless in Conjunction with
Faith -- Therefore baptized Infants are never the nearer Salvation merely for
their Baptism -- And the same way they are saved when baptized; the very same
way are the unbaptized Infants saved also; For the medium that proves the one,
proves the other also.

Two or three other passages Mr. Whiston produces as Reasons, why he reckons
Mr. Hutchinsons book useless as to the design carried on in it; But they are of
the same strain with this; and therefore need no other answer.

P, 248. He charges Mr. Hutchinson with some Contradictions and absurdities, as
his calling the Covenant of Grace and its administration two distinct
Covenants, and his saying that Circumcision is a Covenant of works, from which
(says Mr. Whiston) It will follow, that a Covenant of Works may be the
administration of the Covenant of Grace, which is incongruous. To which I Reply.

It is before demonstrated (I hope undenyably) that the Covenant of Grace is
immutable and everlasting -- That in respect of its various administrations
under Law and Gospel it is called two Covenants, New and Old -- That the
Covenant of Works (so called, under the Law administered to the Covenant of
Grace in Types and Figures, of which Circumcision, being the head Ordinance,
was Synechdocally called the Covenant, Genesis 17.10. And that the Covenant of of
Grace is now under the Evangelical Dispensation administered in that purity and
spirituality Typed out by the Law. Therefore what incongruity or absurdity is
to be hereon chargeable, is to me unknown*

He charges Mr. Hutchinson with another absurdity, for affirming Isaac to be
the subject of the pr^mise made to Abraham as taken both ways, viz. as it
resp^ct^d temporal and spiritual blessings. But if this be an absurdity (as I
am sure it is not) Dr. Owen and other Protestant Divines are guilty of it. See
Dr. Owens Exercit on the Heb. p. 56. 1 Tom.

Two instances more he produces, but the same, or like this, therefore I pass
them as frivolous.

What Mr. Whiston says further are but general evasions, in which I find
nothing worth a Reply. But p. 253. he tells Mr. Hutchinson, That he greatly
wrongs Dr Owen, insinuating that Mr. Danvers and he are unworthy men for
wresting Authors words at such a rate; -- adding that Dr. Owen su^poses Infants
visibly in the Covenant, as the seed of parents visibly so.

Reply, That Mr. Hutchinson truly and faithfully quoted the Doctors
Exer^itation word for word I can truly affirm; and he that will confer the
quotation with the Doctors Book will find it so. Therefore, how can he be said
to wrest the Doctors words? Mr. Wh^ston should recall that rash and
incon^iderate expression.

2. What the Do^or supposes to Infants being in the Covenant, in his Judgment
or practice concerns not the matter in hand. But I am certain he has not a word
of that nature in that Exercitation, nor in the whole Book that I can find. And
I am as certain, that the Doctors discourse of the Covenant, wholly excludes
them from any such title. And if Mr. Whiston can no better reconcile the
Doctors words to h^s Practice, he had better have held his peace.

Next he den^es that he ca^^s Mr. Danvers his Book all forg^ry, etc. By which I
see he needs a good memory* And I refer the Reader to Mr. Whistons second Book.
p. 56. where he says, that Mr. Danvers his Book will remain as a public
evidence of his forgeries, falsities, etc. So Pref. 1, 2. he calls it a mere
cheat, supported by fraud and guile, pref. p 4. false and disingenious, --
proceeding from immodesty to impudence. p 8. ^^rgeries designed to de^eive
unwary Readers -- p. 10. and p. 8. of the Book, he calls Mr. Danvers a knowing
falsifier; without the actual fear of God before his eyes. p. 55. A downright
falsifier p. 47. etc. Producing amaze of Nonsensical words, p. 69. one of the
most unworthy and disingenuous men that ever put Pen to paper, p. 136. and more
of this railing stuff. Which, whether it comports with Mr. Whistons profession,
or suits with Gal. 6.1. Ephesians. 4.31. Tit. 3.2. Exodus 23.1. let his second
thoughts inform him.

And how pitifully he has made these high and extravagant Charges appear, is
already very evident. And that Book he loads with these railing Epithites, will
stand upon Record as a substantial confutation of this Ridiculous practice Mr.
Whiston labors to support. And that Worthy person he traduces (in the esteem
of persons eminent for piety, quality, and parts,) deserves a quite contrary
Character, then those uncivil scandalous and ill-applyed reproachful terms Mr.
Whiston disgorges. Discovering nothing more, then that he railes upon and
reviles him, because he cannot answer him as his other Antagonists, Mr. Wills
and Mr. Baxter did before him, supplying the want of Reason with Rage and
Malice. Perhaps he will tell us, that he wrote all this in the spirit of
meekness. But for my part he will hardly persuade me to believe it; nor will it
gain credit with any sober person, unless he has that Grecian says spoken of
by Plautus in Asin. Let him therefore if it be his humor, please himself with
such language, and deny it when he has done. I have almost done with him.

His Epilogue is somewhat pleasant: He tells Mr. Hutchinson. That if he can
procure him a Certificate, that his Book deserves a more full consideration, he
shall be gratified. -- That Is a notable Confutatian indeed from a wordy Author
of Controvery! It Is discreetly done however, to slight the Book he cannot
answer. And I think he is like to have but little more provocation from us; for
he has already said too much to little purpose.

FINIS.
A JUST REPROOF TO THE Clamorous Cavils OF Mr. OBED WILLS, the Turbulent
Appealer.

Wherein the vanity of his Rash Censure of the BAPTISTS Answer (to that his
frivolous Appeal made to them against Mr. Danvers) is detected, and his unjust
Charge of Ignorance and Partiality is refelled.

By Thomas De-laune, one of his abused Judges.

Prove. 9.7, 8, 9. He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame; -- and
a blot; -- and hatred: Rebuke a wise man, and (...) ^ill love thee; -- and be
yet wiser. Printed, Anno Dom. 1676.

The Preface.
MR. Wills in the Prologue to his Appeal, (that the world may see he walks by
pattern) produces the Example of the Quakers Appeal to the Baptists against Mr.
Hicks as his Precedent. And I confess he has in some things exactly followed
his Copy: For as the Quakers with great Outcry and Conndence provoked the
Baptists to examine the Controversy then in hand, and to pass their Sentence;
so with like heat and vehemence Mr. Wills falls into the same strain of rash
and unrighteous accusation against Mr. Danvers. And as the Quakers (when a just
Sentence was past against them, evidencing their Clamours to be Calumnies, yet)
like obstinate, and incorrigible accusers, fall foul upon the persons they
themselves had before invested their Judges, and with great wrath and severity
arraign and condemn them, for speaking Truth: So Mr. Wills with Quaker-like
insolence, because the persons Appealed to, did not please his Spleen in
condemning Mr. Danvers, right or wrong; brands them with Ignorance and
Partiality in a Paper lately published, Entitled, Censura Censurae.

That the Baptists acted with Christian equity and fairness in their
Examination of the matter in Controversy, and with great care end pains
searched into the Authors quoted, I am as sure of, as I can be of any thing,
being an eyewitness to, and assistant in that work. And that their Answer to
Mr. Wills was so Modest, that it is beyond the exception of a sober man, the
thing it self impartially considered will evidence.

If it be enquired why the Subscribers of the Answer to Mr. Wills do not all
concern themselves in a Vindication? I answer. -- That they have already done
what is needful in giving their Judgment in the things they ought to take
cognizance of; And I know no Law, that oblidges them to the drudgery of
confuting the Cavills of such an inconsiderate decuser. They are persons
engaged in a greater and more necessary work, and to give themselves any
further interruption in such a contest, is thought to be a needless task, and
an intrenchment upon their more weighty Affairs. Having something else to do,
then to attend the drudgery of drawing the saw with such a lamentable trifler.

I am (I confess) the weakest of them, yet Providence has been pleased to cast
this task of their Vindication upon me. And Mr. Wills himself has given me a
particular challenge and provocation, in making some exceptions against me,
(distinct from the rest) which I am oblidged to say something to. And I hope,
if what I offer be demonstrative, the Reader will express so much equity as to
judge of the matter in dispute from the evidence and reason of it, and not from
the Authority or Number of the parties contending. To chose an opinion by
voices is not safe. Error, when it becomes the darling of a man of parts (and
such are frequently its Patrons) is set off with all the imbellishments, which
the Schoolmen and Sciences can furnish him with, which gaudy paint makes it
often cheat, (and pass for the truth with) vulgar eyes, who (gazing on its
superficial dress) seldom discern Counterfeit from Current. Hence it happens
that such become Heterodox; few receiving the naked and unadorned Truth when
rivaled with asplended and specious error. Sophistry is but perverted logic;
and that person that in his Disputations borrows his keenest weapons from it is
to be suspected as being scarce sound. I have often found the Advocates of a
bad cause (as Ribera expresses ^it -- Curam habent nitoris, cultusque verborum,
venustatis and numerositatis sententiarum) careful of their Cadencies, and the
Handsomness of their style; that what is wanting of Native Beauty, may be made
out with a supplement of Paint.

How far Mr. Wills has contracted the guilt of playing the Sophister, let his
discerning Readers determine: For my part I think his greatest Excellency lies
there, as far as appears to me in his published Treatises. And that he is a
mere Word-pecker, is very obvious: For if he finds one misplaced, misinserted,
or by chance misapplied (as often happens with the most accurate, through the
Transcriber or Printers fault) he gloryes and insults, as if he had gained an
Olympic prize: Though his own Writings are obnoxious to the same Correction,
as I could abundantly show if needful.

It is worth notice, that the main thing in Controversy (viz. the Antiquity of
Infant Baptism) is quite given up and forsaken by Mr. Wills, it being evident
by Mr. Danvers, etc. That for the first 300 years, The Baptism of grown persons
professing faith, was universally owned and practiced; and no Record of credit
that assures us, that Infant Baptism was at all owned as Christ's ordinance. The
most that can be said, is, that it was Creeping in, in the third Century, when
Tertullian opposed it, and got some small footing by degrees, from the opinion
of its necessity to salvation (and that from a fatal mistake of John 3.5.) And
in the year 416. received its instalment by humane Authority; being imposed by
a dreadful Anathema at the Milevitan Council. Certainly had it been the
practice of the universal Church, Tertullian (the ancientest Latin Father)
could not have opposed it, uncontradicted. And it is past doubt, that it was
dislik't and cried down by many, when that Council sat, else their Canon was
ridiculous and vain. The Eclcesiastical Empire was then upon its erection, and
Paedobaptism was thought a necessary pillar to support it therefore was the
opposite party from time to time crush't with these terrifying Canons and
Curses. Now Mr. Wills having lost his Garrison, with incorrigible obstinacy,
man's his Outworks, and Approaches, pouring out Contempt and Appeals, as if he
would carry all by noise; but how such a re-attack shall prevail, is easy to be
conjectured.

Had Mr. Wills accepted of Mr. Danvers's modest endeavors, to give him
satisfaction in a private way, with promised assurance, that he would publicly
recant any mistakes, which the closest scrutinie of indifferent persons,
mutually chosen could bring to light; it had been a strong argument that he had
sought to clear and defend Truth, not purchase Applause, etc. And had saved a
great deal of labor and trouble.

But in Print he must be; yet has not the ingenuity and common honesty to
retract, or repent for his own Noterious mistakes and falsehoods (so fully
detected and enumerated by Mr. Danvers in his Writings, particularly in his
Rejoynd. from p. 49. to 77. whilst he has the confidence (not to say impudence)
with so much severity, to take by the throat, and exact from him the utmost
mite, yea and that for mistakes of his own making too which he so unjustly
Fathers upon him.

Discovering hereby his folly and shamful partiality, that whilst as concerning
his own errors, he can overlook Beams, swallow Camels, and leap over Mountains,
He can with such an Eagle eye discover the Motes, strain at the Gnats, and
magnify the Male-hills of others.

The notority whereof you will find further Exemplified in the following pages
by

Tho. Delaune
April 20. 1676.
A just Reproof to Mr. Obed Will's, etc.
IN p. 14: of our Answer to Mr. Will's Appeal, after we had as mildly treated
him, and with as much impartiality as was possible; we made a motion to him,
that if he thought himself concerned to appear any further in the Controversy,
he would be persuaded that things may be transacted in an amicable and friendly
way, which we hoped may tend to our mutual satisfaction, in the clearing up of
truth, and to cherish that love, that all that fear the Lord should bear each
other, though differing in some things. Yet notwithstanding, he comes forth in
such a Contemptuous, Sarcastical, and Insulting spirit, as if that mode of
writing were the very Sinews of his undertaking, and of the essence of his
faculty. Which I shall mention only once for all, and betake my self more
immediately to the matter of his Censure, having neither leisure, nor will to
strive with him for mastery in such Rhetoric.

1st. He says p. 5. That we accuse him for what was never brought to our Bar.
But if he must needs call us forth, without any seeking of ours, and invest us
with a power to Judge his Appeal, he must give us leave also, (which is not
denied to any in that Capacity, as appealed unto) to hint unto him what
Circumstances we found, that made his grievance not so notirious as he
pretended, and the antecedent passages that argued him precipitant, and the
Defendent far from Contumacious.

2ly. He says we borrow our accusations from Mr. Danvers Preface. But suppose
we had, that is no excuse sufficient for him: For he should have disproved the
things if untrue. We noted them from our own knowledge of the truth of them,
and not merely because Mr. Danvers said so.

His talk that we gave Mr. Danvers's Judgment, not our own; and that the things
brought to our Bar, we carried back to his; is utterly untrue: For we consulted
with him no more then the nature of the matter before us required; Nor did we
hold any Intelligence with him, but what consisted with Justice and
Impartiality. We were obliged in equity to hear him, before we could proceed to
a determination: For Alteram andire partem, is allowed in every Law. And that
our answer was a capite ad Calcem of Mr. Danvers forming, as Mr. Will's has the
confidence to publish, p. 8 is a gross falsehood, and his Inference of our
Collusion, unrighteous; His very parallels confute him; We must needs have the
same matter, as far as we treat upon the same thing; yet our expressions are
not of Mr. Danvers's framing.

Whether Mr. Will's has done such great service, as he boasts of p. 6. in
detecting Mr. Danvers his mistakes, any further then what are acknowledged, is
left to understanding Readers to determine. What we found fault with, in Mr.
Will's his appeal, deserves a smarter reprehension then we gave him. Mr.
Danvers truly, and sufficiently demonstrates it; and Mr. Will's answers it not
but with an excuse of little weight. For if Mr. Danvers upon a private
intimation, had retracted publicly, what he misrepresented, why may it not be
as satisfactory, as if after this public, and clamerous way of detection? We
know no reason to the contrary; but that then perhaps Mr Wills might miss of
the glory of the Conquest he fancies he has obtained, and the opportunity of
making this Ostertation of his parts.

His own method he is left to follow^; But that method of an Appeal, that
accepts of no treatment with the person charged, and yet cries out for Justice,
is most irregular, if squared with the rule of God in cases of offense, Mat.
18.15, 16, 17. And if Mr. Will's find nor the Apellatees contumacie, to be a
necessary circumstance in the Lawyers Definition of an Appeal, yet he may find
it in Christ's directions in cases of Appeal, in the text cited; Yea so
necessary, that no appeal must be made, but upon the Criminals refusal to hear,
Mat. 18.16. etc. And surely that Pattern ought to challenge more of our
Conformity, then the Lawyers Maxims, which are not to teach us Divinity. Hence
we made a Difference of the binds of Appeals, which Mr. Will's might have
understood, if he had been candid, when we said An appeal in these cases, viz.
Religions Contests, which is not his Lawyers business to Define. Now whether
that Law above mentioned be not against the form of Mr. Will's his Appeal, is
left to his more serious consideration.

But he tells us p. 7. That if we had considered things as we ought, we might
have seen good caust for his way of procedure. And gives 4 Instances to prove
Mr. Danvers Contumacious; Three from the Magdeburgs, and a quotation from
Luther.

To which it is replied, that the three instances from the Magdeburgs afford no
Justification of Mr. Will's his procedure. For any judicious Reader will find
upon perusal of the 1st. of those places he cites, that Mr. Danvers is guilty
of no greater mistake, then not observing an exact variation of the character;
which Mr. Will's knows is too often the Printers fault, (and his own Books are
not free from it) For which Mr. Danvers makes amends enough, in owning
publicly the words to be his own.

2ly. As to that of adding the word [only] Mr. Danvers gives a very
satisfactory Return to it, in his Reply p. 32. (and Rejoyned p. 54, 55.) His
words being a necessary Consequence from the Magdeburgs speech, who expressly
say -- Baptizatos esse adultos exempla probant, and, de Infantibus baptizatis
exempla annotata non leguntur, which put together amounts to what he says,
viz. That the Magdeburghs find only examples for adult baptism viz. In the
Scripture instances they produce. Therefore it is strange that Mr. Will's
should insist with so much Obstinacy upon this particular.

3ly. As to the third, that Mr. Danvers quoted those pages 125, 126. as
relating to the superstitious rites, may (without any such impossibility as Mr.
Will's talks of) be understood by a mean Reader. And surely none but a man of
Cavil would insinuate it, as such a Justification, for so irregular, and
clamerous an Appeal as his is, if you read Mr. Danvers Treat. p. 101. Reply p.
36. and Rejoinder p. 71.

4ly. As to the Quotation from Luther, as we compared it with the plain and
well grounded Treatise Mr. Danvers mentions p. 40. Rejoynd. whence he took it,
and which we found to be word for word, as he expressed, and where it seems it
was misquoted, so, we are satisfied he is therein no forger. And though he
mentioned it not in his Reply, yet one mistake not owned, will scarce be enough
to vindicate Mr. Will's his procedure; (and his refusing the civil accommodation
tendered him) to rectify all mistakes as in his Preface to Rejoinder most amply
appears: And let it be considered that if one mistake, not owned by a
sufficient ground to render a person contumacious and stubborn, and will
justify an Appeal against him. Then what will those many do which Mr. Danvers
in his Rejoynd. p. 21. to 77. charges upon Mr. Will's? In that appeal to his
conscience for his Impenitency, for Backbiting, Scoffing, Railing salfe
Accusation Slandering, Prevarication, Forgery, Mistranslation, etc. As
demonstrated by diverse instances out of his Writings.

Yet let it withal be understood as to that one particular, had Mr. Will's had
but had so much patience to have heard Mr. Danvers Answer thereto, as is so
fully expressed in his Rejoinder before he had Appealed, he had doubtless saved
himself and others the trouble thereof.

So that upon a candid survey of these four passages, nothing can be found in
them to justify Mr. Wills his rash and inconsiderate procedure.

That we consulted with the party accused for a sentence (which he bids us deny
if we can, p. 10.) is not demonstrated by his Instances, compared with this
Reply. And is hereby denied, and hope a bare Negation will be deemed as valid,
as the unprov'd assertion of a man, that shows himself so frequently halting in
this kind, as (to an indifferent Reader) may easily appear.

He tells us p. 10. That there is much in our dealing with his Appeal that
looks like partiality, of which he pretends to give a fourfold Instance. In
remarking some things in his Appeal as false and Injurious, or unfit, and
passing by in silence some things in Mr. Danvers of the same or like nature.

Reply, If Mr. Wills had considered things with candor and sobriety, he might
have known, that it was our work to give Judgment only in matter of fact
disputed by them both, and such as were Mr. Wills his mistakes, and never owned
so, was our part to remark to him in order to his acknowledgment. Whereas
there was not the like reason to remark Mr. Danvers his mistakes, they being
already owned in Print. For which we made a sufficient Apology in our answer p.
13. No more being required from us, but to bring Mr. Danvers to such a public
acknowledgment. And Mr. Wills his bare saying, that Mr. Danvers his answers to
some of them, are not only weak, but untrue, is no proof, that they are so.

2ly. In giving our Judgments only upon part of his Appeal, and passing by
others, as the strange Doctrines he charges upon him, which Mr. VVill's says
we slightly answer.

Reply, For this also we give the Reason, p. 14. Because they were things
Controverted ( viz. betwixt us and Paedobaptists, who sometimes bestow that
Epithete upon some Doctrines which we own not to be so) And it were as proper
for Mr. Will's to put the Question, whether Infants Baptism be lawful to our
Decision as these things. And to put it out of doubt, Mr. Danvers his answer to
them is owned to be good and substantial Rejoinder, p. 49, 50, 51. And our
saying they were Collateral, is no untruth; the grand Question before us,
being, Whether Mr. Danvers was such a falsister as his accuser pretended; and
not whether Infant Baptism was lawful: For to put that Cuestion to us, would be
Ridioulous. And whether what we mention about the Milevitan Canon, be so
Collateral, as Mr. Will's pretends, shall be considered in its due place.

3ly. In taking Mr Danvers words for Answers to some of the particulars in his
Appeal, and for sufficient answers to the trivial and insignificant.

Reply, -- If Mr. Danvers his answers were full and proper, here lies no just
charge against us, nor any instance of partiality. And when Mr. Will's
demonstrates they were not so, it shall be considered.

4ly. As to what relates to my self, I refer you to my particular defense made
afterward by it self.

Next Mr. Will's, having, as he says (though untruly) manifested our
Partiality, comes to show that Mr. Danvers his acknowledgments are not so
ingenuous as we make them; And

1st. About the passage of Nazianzen Baptizandos peccata sua confiteri solitos,
which Mr. Danvers owns should be Translated, The Baptized were wont to confess
their sins. And what would Mr. Will's have more? Would he have Mr. Danvers say
he prevaricated, when his Conscience tells him no such matter? Or can Mr. Wih's
make out, that that sense Mr. Danvers deduced is not to be Consequently drawn
from that expression?

2ly. Mr. Danvers his acknowledging his error about Deus Dedit, prevented that
fear of Mr. Will's, that the Reader might conclude that gifts were given by the
Baptized to the Church, and his guessing happily thereby that none were
Baptized, but the adult. And is not that enough?

3ly. As to the quotation out of Walden about Wickliff, the thing charged upon
Mr. Danvers, was, That he made Walden say, that Wickliffs Doctrine was very
agreeable to the Doctrine of former Heretics, as Pelagius, etc. App. p. 173.
Which he owned to be his mistake. And what could we expect more from him? It
was not our business to lanch into the Controversy, whether Wickliff opposed
Infant Baptism etc. That must be sub judice. Though by the way, since Mr. Wills
acknowledges that Wickliff and the Albegois did deny that Infants were to be
Baptized with Water, as necessary to their Salvation; has himself confirmed the
truth of the thing, till he make appear that the Paedohaptists in those days
did upon any other ground Baptize their Infants. Which Mr. Timbes and Mr.
Danvers have so often called for. That of the Faederal right, which the
Protestant Paedobaptists have so boasted of, being but of yesterday; never
heard of as said, till Zwinglius time. And as to Mr. Will's his talk, that we
never examined the History of these things, it is untrue, and just of the
complexion of the rest.

4ly. That mistake about Zonaras, p. 41. is also owned; and if Mr. Will's in
his own conceit magnifies it as no such trifle; he must give us, and others,
the liberty of our thoughts

5ly. The mistake about Lanifrank, Mr. Danvers very honestly owned, and
intended to rectify it before Mr. Will's minded him of it; which is enough to
satisfy any man of common ingenuity. And those other untruths Mr. Will's found
complicated there (as he says) were acknowledged in the grand error that
produced them, and could no more injure any afterward, then branches can grow,
when the root is taken away.

6ly. The mistake of Sericius for Hi^omarus is also owned, which was to us
enough; though the following words of Mr. Danvers should be omitted.

Next Mr. Will's comes to show, That the particulars in his Appeal, which we
call trivial and insignificant, deserve not those epithetes: And that Mr.
Danvers his answers, which we make our own, are very insufficient to satifie an
Impartial Reader.

Reply, In regard Mr. Will's makes the greatest Flourish, and ^angling about
the particulars he brings under this head; I shall offer these few
considerations to all impartial men, in justification of our procedure herein.

1st That the thing charged upon Mr. Danvers was forgery and perverting of
Authors, which indeed is a great charge, and reflects much infamy upon the
Cause that must be beholden to such props for its support. -- And that Mr Wills
^n these particulars made that charge good, does not yet appear.

2ly: It is acknowledged Mr. Danvers was in some particulars mistaken, which we
found him very willing to own, as publicly as he had before delivered them;
and which, as far as he was convinced of, are acknowledged in his Rejoinder,
but how inconsiderable the Reader can best judge.

3ly. It must be declared (that as far as we are capable to judge, both from
the experience of his Integrity, Candor, and piety, as well as our tracing him
upon this occasion, in his quotations) we could not find any of his mistakes to
proceed from that principle Mr. Wills insinuates, Infant Bapt. p. 57. viz. That
he will not refuse the most sordid, and shameful ways to promote his cause; or
that he knowingly misrepresented any of his Authors. And we cannot but judge
Mr. Will's an egregious over-lasher, in that consident assertion, p. 34. of the
same book viz. That never any writer did more prevaricate, or show more
falsehood then he has done; and that he would certainly have forborne it, if he
had thought any man would have been at the trouble to examine and search,
whether he spoke truth or not. But,

4ly. Inasmuch as we found no such weight in the particulars under this head,
as Mr. Will's would suggest, to prove his charge of prevarication, but on the
contrary, an enumeration of Cavilling exceptions of no great affinity to the
general charge of Forgery, etc. And in our Judgments for the most part
sufficiently defended by Mr. Danvers, we thought no law, did oblidge us to
condemn him for a Forger, from such instances as carried no sufficient evidence
in them, that he was so. And therefore these particulars coming so far short,
of what Mr. Will's produced them for; what fitter Epithetes could we give them,
then that they were trivial and insignisicant, and merited not a second
Confutation?

But since Mr. Will's now falls upon us, the said particulars shall be
reviewed, and the naked sense given of them, and so discharge any further
transaction, in such contests, with so unreasonable an opposite. And if Mr.
Will's will have the last word, I think I shall not quarrel with him for it.

And as for his menace of an answer to Mr. Danvers Rejoinder, it is like his
way of dealing, and scarce to be reconciled to the Conclusion of his first
preface vind. Where he gives security for his future silence. But if the
Circumstances he supposes his Antagonist is under, may encourage Mr. Will's,
to revive his clamours, and perpetuate, the quarrel, we hope If his attempts be
worth opposition) truth shall not want an Advocate, that may disappoint this
i^vader of the Trophyes he promises himself in its spoil. But to the matter,

1st. Mr. Danvers having quoted a passage from Bellarmine, to show that
Apostolical tradition was esteemed the principal ground of Infant Baptism, (it
seems) omitted that saying -- deducitur evidenter ex Scripturis. And Dr. Fields
saying, (after such another expression) that the Scriptures deliver us the
ground of it Mr. Will's though he pleads for himself in the like case, Vind. p.
7. accuses him for it App. p. 162. To which it is said, that in all such cases,
to prevent Cavil and offense, it were better; if the entire sentence were
always expressed. But the Circumstances that made this appear to us, to have, no
great weight in it, were these, 1st. Mr. Danvers sets down Rep. p. 74. these
words of Bellarmine omitted before, of which we were bound to take notice,
being a Book precedent to Mr. Will's his appeal, and before any reproof for the
omission. as we can find.

2ly. It is evident the Jesuit urged Tradition for their practice of
Paedobaptism; And that phrase was but a faint Insinuation, that it may be
gathered from Scripture, viz. Joh. 3.5. and such mistaken places. And the
quotation was pertinently enough applied, if Mr. Will's his example were a
sufficient excuse for those that imitate him, in giving only what Authors say
to the matter in hand.

But in Mr. Danvers his Answer in his Rejoinder p 25. here are two new errors
charged 1. That he says he quoted Bellarmine under the head of Tradition. 2.
That he quotes the passages before omitted, under the head of Consequences p.
74. Reply.

1st. It Is true, the term [Tradition] is not mentioned in the Contents of that
Chapter, but there is that that is equivalent, viz. The Scriptures total silence
about Infant Baptism; with the necessity of Scripture warrant to Authorize
every Ordinance. For both which branches several Authors are produced; And
Bellarmine for the first, which he expressly owns, viz. That there is no express
Scripture for it, though he pretends it may be deduced from thence.

That Mr. Danvers quotes that passage Rep. p. 74. (as before) Mr. Will's owns,
being not able to contradict it. And though the Chapter or Section, has not the
term [consequence] mentioned, no more then the other [Tradition,] Yet the
Marginal note expresses it to be a Tradition (as they word it) gathered from
the Scriptures -- which is the same with them as Consequence. So that upon the
whole matter, it does nor appear how this charge can be advanced to any other
title then trivial and insignificant, nor can we expect that labor can turn to
any great account, that is spent in consulting such a mere Catching at words.

2ly. It Is true, we find not Dr. Field expressly quoted in that 74th. page; Yet
it is to be considered that it is plainly referred to. For Mr. Danvers drawing
a Parallel between the Popish and Protestant Paedobaptists, says thus p. 74.
Do the Papists affirm that notwithstanding it is a Tradition or custom of the
Church, yet that it is plainly enough gathered out of the Scriptures, viz. from
Circumcision; for which he quotes Bellarmine. And then adds -- so does Mr.
Will's for the Protestants say (who in p. 105, 106, 107, 108. Infant Baptism
gives their sentiments from Rivet, Calvin, Dr. Field, the later in this very
quotation word for word, all which Mr. Danvers sums up) that notwithstanding
there is neither precept nor practice expressly written in the Scripture, yet it
is gathered thence by consequence, as coming in the room of Circumcision; and
therefore that Infants have a right to Baptism, from the right that Infants had
to Circumcision Mr. Will's p. 105. Now Mr. Danvers referring to the place where
Mr. Will's quotes the Protestants, one of which was Dr. Field, referred
necessarily also to Dr. Field there, which the matter disputed, must needs lead
the enquiring Reader to; And though it were better in order to prevent the
Cavils of such as lie at Catch to be more express in references, yet we
conceive a Candid and Judicious Reader will have better thoughts of Mr. Danvers
in this particular, then what are suggested by an Antagonist, that so ground
lesly perserveres in his severe and unjust inculcations of unfaithfulness in
Mr. Danvers, and partiality in us; and that without stronger demonstration then
such frivolous Instances as this, and what are ejusdem farinae.

2ly. As to the passage of Dr. Owen, Mr. Danvers his answer is full and proper,
and satisfactory (doubtless) to any ingenious Reader, as appears in his
Reyonder p. 25, 26. It being indeed needless to add any more thereto.

3ly. Mr. Will's Appeals to the Reader p. 22, 23: Whether the passages about
Lydia, Beza and Ames App. p. 167. be so trivial and insignificant as we make
them. And which is also left to be determined at that Tribunal, whether they be
not indeed so? Or have evidenced enough in them, to prove Mr. Danvers a forger?

Next he Renews his Charge of Self-contradiction against Mr. Danvers, viz. That
if he made the ground of the Corinthians scruple 1 Cor. 7.4. To arise from the
instance of putting away strange Wives in Ezra and Nehemiah's time, it was a
plain contradiction to make the words [ else were, etc] an Argument ab absurdo,
because from those Instances they could conclude no otherwise, but that their
children were Bastards, and to be put away; And then desires such of us, as
know what an Argument abassurdo is, to exercise our reason about this matter,
and again affirm it no contradiction, if we can, and the Instance trivial and
insignificant.

Reply, What Mr. Will's calls a contradiction here, appears not so to be, but
the contrary. For the Jews being under a strict inhibition to marry with
strange wives, or mix with the Gentiles as appears Ezra. 10.2. etc. and Neh.
13.27. etc. Yet transgressed against the Lord in that particular, and began a
Reformation in Ezra's time. Which practice of old, questionless gave ground to
the Corinthians scruple, whether the believing husband or wife may cohabit with
the unbelieving Yokefellow. Which doubt the Apostle Resolves in the
affirmative; as if he had told them, it is true, you were strictly prohibited
under the law to cohabit with strange wives; but that was under a Dispensation,
which is now relaxt: And the end of such a prohibition [viz. to keep the people
of whom according to the flesh, the Messiah was to come, unmixt with the
Idolatrous Nations] is now come to pass, as so the cohabiting with a strange or
unbelieving Yokefellow, which was then a sin, is not so now; and the issue of
such a marriage, is not illigitimate now, as it was then; Therefore the
relation is mutually sanctified, else (that is, had not the Gospel dispensation
taken off the legal inhibition aforesaid, and the Relation were not so
sanctified your children were unclean, (that is, the issue of an unlawful bed;)
but now, [the Gospel dispensation allowing this Cohabitation] are they holy;
that is, not the product of an unlawful marriage, as in Ezra, and Nehemians
time, but legitimate. And therefore the Apostle uses an Argument ab absurdo
(which is drawn from the absurdity following the contrary practice) to persuade
them to dwell together, that so they might not fall into the absurdity, they
were by their separation thinking to avoid; the way to have an unhallowed
issue, being now contrary to what it was in Ezra's time, viz. theirs was so by
cohabiting, but ours by separation.

Therefore where to find any other contradiction here, then what is between the
two dispensations of Law and Gospel, we cannot yet discover. Was it
Contradiction in the Apostle to satisfy the seruple of his doubting
Gorinthians, and to show them, that the way they would take to escape an
absurdity, was to fall into it? Certainly this charge is easily avoided, and
the Contradiction found there, if any, degenerates from its definition given by
Aristotle l. 1. poster. c. 5. (...). So that I conclude there is no
inconvenience in affirming this instance to be still trivial and insignificant.

Mr. Will's his next instance of self contradiction is as p. 24. That Mr.
Danvers tells us [from Sabastin Franck] 2 Ed. p. 231. That about the year 610.
Childrens Baptism was held in many places of little esteem [by the learned
endeavors of Adrianus and others] And yet in his Reply p. 140. He tells us [
viz. from Austin] That Infants Baptism was universally received in the 7 Age
[in other parts of the VVorld] to beget them to regeneration [as imposed by the
Church of Rome --

But as to this Mr Will's would do well to consider that the contradiction
(if any) lies betwixt his two Authors Austin and Franck. And which kind of
scruings may be very unsafe, least absurdety be reflected upon the Scriptures
themselves; who tell us in one place, that the Disciples went out preaching
the word in every place Mar. 16.20. Act. 8.4. And yet again that the Ap. Paul
afterward preached in many places where the word had not been preached Romans
15.14.20. And that Infants Baptism it self, as Mr. Danvers observes may be of
little esteem in many places in England where so universally imposed and
received in every Parish: A sign how hard Mr. Will's was put to it when he
went so far, and yet could find no greater contradiction then this.

5ly. As for Innocents giving Divine honor to the Popedom, it is true, we
find not the Original words literally bear any such thing, though he joined
Peter with God himself in his invocation. And the veneration Papists give
Peter, as they fancy him to be their Proto-Pope induced Mr. Danvers to think
Innocent addressed his adoration to him as such, he not mentioning any other
Saint.

6ly. In the Quotation from Vossius App. p. 108. Mr. Will's is grossly out. Mr.
Danvers said 2 Ed. p: 118, 119. That Vossius informs us from good authority,
that from Austin to Bernards time, seven or eight hundred years the Custom was
to Baptize naked, both men, women, and children, with the reasons usually given
by the Ancients for the same, viz. That they might therein be as in the state
of Innocence, and as naked in their second as at their first Birth; and as they
expected to be in heaven, and therein no otherwise then Christ was upon the
Cross, which you may read at large in p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. quoting these
several authorities to justify it, Cyril, etc. (Mr. Danvers mentions all p.
119.

In our former examination of this Charge, finding Mr. Wills under a mistake,
we let it pass under that remark of trivial and insignificant, but since he is
not contented therewith, it shall now be demonstrated, that Mr. Will's his
accusation, was not only trivil, but a gross falsehood, and therefore he had
better have been satisfied, with our first Answer. For,

1st. In Mr. Will's his quotation of Mr. Danvers, he disingenuously conceals
the later part, which plainly evidences that Mr. Danvers gave only the sum of
what is largely insisted upon by Vossius in the said pages, and should
necessarily be inserted. But Mr. Will's savv, that that would spoil his
charge. And let any man of common reason judge, whether it be not an
unrighteous and unhandsome procedure in Mr. Wills, thus to frame a charge of
his own, and produce a large quotation from Vossins, insinuating that Mr.
Danvers had mistranslated it; whereas Mr. Danvers only takes a fevv words out
of that quotation, and the follovving pages comprehending the substan^e
thereof, which he faithfully gives.

2ly. As to the matter of fact in Controversy, viz. Whether the Ancients gave
those as the reasons, for Baptizing naked, vvhichr M. Danvers asserts, and Mr.
Wills denies, charging Mr. Danvers with ignorance and gross perversion, of that
quotation, is certainly Mr. Wills's gross perversion, if not ignorance; as
these instances clearly prove, and as clearly Justify Mr. Danvers.

Vossius in his ^hes. Theol. Edit Bellositi Dobunorum 1628. p. 350. etc. and in
the Ed. quoted by Mr. Danvers p. 32, 33. etc. Cites Cyril, Hierosol, Catech,
ystag. 11. Statim igitur ut ingressi estis vestem exvistis, quod quidem exuti
hominis antiqui cum operibus suis imago fuit. Atque ita exuti, eratis nudi,
imitantes and in hac eum, qui in cruce nudatis fuerat, Christum -- that is;
Therefore as soon as you were entered, you put off your Clothes, which was
indeed the signification of your putting off the Old man, with his works; which
being so put off, ye were naked, so imitating Christ, who was naked upon the
Cross. And a little further -- nudi fuistis in conspectu omnium, and non vos
pudebat, Revera in hoc enim protoplasti Adam ferebatis exemplum, quia nudus in
paradiso fuit, and tamen nullo afficiebatur pudore, that is, ye were naked in
the sight of all men, and were not ashamed, in which you did truly hold forth
the example of your first parent (or first formed) Adam, who was naked in
Paradise, and was not ashamed. So Amphilochius in the life of Bazil, vvriting
thus of him -- Petebat adeo aliquod suae fidei signum ostendi: surgensque cum
tremore, suis se vestibus spoliat, unaque cum vestibus, veterem exuit hominem
-- that is -- he besought of God that some sign of his faith may be shown, and
arising with fear, disrobes himself of his apparel, and with his Clothes, put
off the old man, Ergo (says Vossius) eo quod vestimenta exuebant, mystice
significabatur veterem, exui hominem -- that is -- therefore in as much as they
put off their Cleathes, the putting off the old man was mystically signified.
And to this purpose several other Fathers are Cited; concluding with a passage
from Bernards 46 Sermon de paupertate -- Ideo nudi nascimur in hoc saeculo,
nudi etiam accedimus ad Baptismum, ut nudi and sine impedimento perveniamus ad
Caelum -- that is -- Therefore we come naked into this world, and naked do we
approach Baptism, that naked and without any impediment we may come to heaven.

Now is it not evident that the Ancients baptized naked (as Mr. Danvers says)
to signify the state of innocence, and that they may be as naked in their
second, as at their first birth, etc. And if so, is not Mr. Wills his charge
false and injurious? and his Reflection upon us, (of partial and inconsiderate)
rash, and unrighteous? And if he has read Vossius, how can he clear himself
from ignorance or dishonesty, so to misrepresent him? or if he has not read
those pages, how unfit is he to control or correct those that have?

7ly. As to the Quotation about Arnobius, I cannot Judge Mr. Wills his quarrel
about it, to be any other then an instance of his unrighteous vociferation --
for Mr. Danvers rold him he mentioned that some only of those that follovved
where taken from the Magdeburgs, and if Arnobu^ be not there, how could he take
him thence, But under this head it may be necessary to prevent further Cavils
of this nature, to acquaint the Reader that Mr. Danvers sometimes, when he
takes some quotations from the Magdeburgs, adds also (as in this particular,
and that from Jerome. 2 Ed. p. 56. and that of Bazil p. 55. and some few others)
some quotations; from the original Authors themseives, not taken from the
Magdeburgs; and sometimes takes part of a quotation from the Magdeburghs, and
adds to it out of the Original, which indeed should be so mentioned, in
distinction from what he borrows from the Magdeburghs; though Ingenuous and
Candid Readers would have recourse to the Authors themselves whom he mentions,
in their examinations, before the publication of their Censures; yet it were
better to prevent those that are not Ingenuous from this ground of Cavil by
mentioning particularly what he took from the Magdeburgs and what from the
Originals.

8ly. As to what Mr. Wills complains about himself p. 27. of his Censure that
Mr. Danvers patcht up words at a 100 pages distant, to make him say that Infant
Baptism may be lawful because not forbidden in Scriptures. I say that I find
what Mr. Danvers quoted as Mr. Will's Speech, is truly recited, and Mr.
Danvers only gathers from Mr. Wills that he insinnates such a thing, and Mr.
Wills his words seem to lookas if he would have such an inference take place,
though in direct terms not so worded as Rep. p. 93. to which I refer, and to
Rejoynd. p. 43.

9ly. As to the phrase, is puerum sine baptismo mortuum resusitarit ex mortuis
and tandem baptizarit; It is granted the most genuine Interpretation is, that
he raised a child that dyed unbaptized from the dead and Baptized him. And Mr.
Danvers denis it not, only pleads for an equal liberty of offering the Reasons
that induced him to that translation, and remark which is but fair to allow him.

10ly. As to the Synod of Illerdon in Spain, we found by the restimony of two
able persons in the Dutch Tongue, that Mr. Danvers had it from that Dutch
Martyrology cited a sew lines below it. p. 114. And Mr. Danvers citing it from
thence acquits him from the Charge of forging or perverting it. And if they
that inserted it there misapply it, they ought to bear the blame.

11ly. Next Mr. Wills p. 30. repeats his charge of strdnge Doctrines, and
conceals Mr. Danvers his answers to them which is scarce honest dealing. But
the Reader is referred to Mr. Danvers his Rejoinder p. 49, 50, 51. For an
Answer to this Charge.

At length Mr. Wills p. 31. comes to vind cate the particular instances we
remark to him. And 1st. makes an Apology for leaving out part of Nazianzens
sentence; to which it was said that the reason of that remark was to make him
sensible, that he should not bear so severely upon Mr. Danvers for such
matters, as he himself was guilty of, as that particular was a proper instance
of; and that it is but equity in him to take the same plea he himself makes use
of. As for his calling Mr. Danvers his address to him about the passage in
Bazil (trepanning,) is doubtless an expression that argues Cholar and passion,
which commonly overmaster judgment and charity too. But how candid Mr. Danvers
was therein, let p. 74. of Rejoinder be considered.

2dly. Next he endeavors to excuse his stopping his translation out of Calvin,
which we mention to him p. 4. And says, He translated so much of it as might
satisfy any that bad the use of their reason, that Calvin owned it was no
where expressly mentioned (viz. Insant Baptism) therefore although, etc. Clearly
implied it.

Reply, ^st. If Calvin owned (as Mr. Wills is forced to confess) that there was
no express Scripture for the practice, what ground had he to accuse Mr. Danvers
for so representing hith?

2dly. An English Reader might be imposed upon, though having the use of his
reason, notwithstanding Mr. Wills his For although, etc. His talk that our
affection to our Champion would not suffer us to be so just a^ to blame Mr.
Danvors, is a sarcastick and groundless surmise. Mr. Danvers says that Calviz
confesses, no Infants were by the Apostles bands baptized; which is true, and
appears from the very Latin Quotation cited by Mr. Wills, p. 161, 162. Appeal
Therefore how could we blame Mr. Danvers for speaking truth?

3dly. As to his excuse about charging Mr. Danvers for adding to Jerome,
whereas the words (as we found) were Verbatim his; cannot be esteemed so
plausible as to acquit Mr. Wills, who should (before so rash an assertion, that
the words were not Jeromes) examine Jerome himself. Mr. Danvers says some, not
all that follows, are given by the Magdebargs. Though it is confessed, it were
better (as said before) if what he took from them, and what from the Originals
they refer to, were so specified.

4ly. Whether Mr. Wills his palliation of leaving out Estins Ann. Genesis 17.7 at
the end of the Quotation fathered upon Calvin, be sufficient to cover so
wilful an abuse, we leave the Judicious Reader to determine. And judge Mr.
Wills his senseless shifting it over, not worth while to detect.

5ly. As to the Quotation from Dr. Hammond, Mr. Wills was mistaken in affirming
so confidently that Mr. Danvers misquoted it; whereas he did not, as was
demonstrated Rejoynd. p. 31. with some concurrent passages, that evidenced Dr.
Hammond was of that mind sully (as of truth he ought.) And if Mr. Wills esteems
that first, a worse edition, we are not of his mind in that particular: For we
judge that passage as it is altered to contain an untruth, as may be easily
demonstrated; and the Drs. first to be sound and consonant to the most Orthodox
Writers, and to himself also in the same thing. It Is true some of us saw a late
Edition of the Drs. Annotations, wherein that passage was as Mr. Wills quoted:
but being Printed since the Drs. death, we knew not but it may be an alteration
of some others making, and so not to be regarded, having an undoubted Book
before us. Nor did we see that Review Mr. Wills speaks of. And so could not
tell where more properly to place the mistake then at Mr. Wills his door; who
should of right examine the first Edition too (and later Editions always put
in mind of a former) before he had so presumptuously exhibited an accusation;
and backed it, with so heedless and untrue a Remark as App. p 171.

6ly. Next Mr. Wills would clear himself for leaving out [pa^v^lis] in the
quotation from Walden. And if his excuses in relation to it be sufficient, let
the Reader acquit him. We think it needless to make his winding shifts to get
off any reply. He lays, if it be an error, it is venial, and not wilful. Be it
so, but to us it appeared suspiciously, that he should leave out that word, and
take the words going before, and coming after.

7ly. Our producing that Milevitan Canon from the Collectione Regia, was to
convince Mr. Wills and his Readers that Mr. Danvers forged it not. And indeed
all the error Mr. Danvers is guilty of, is, that he did not originally quote
the Regia Collectione where it is, for it, which he rectifies Rejonder p. 37.
But Mr. Wills says, we are mistaken when we affirm this to be an Anathema
against those that held children might be saved without Baptism; and to make
his assertion believed, mangles the Caron and perverts it grossly; disjoyning
words in a continued sentence most disingenuously to serve his turn. To
evidence which, we will here again recite the Canon, and translate it. 2. We
will show Mr. Wills his interpretation to be false, and not to be with any
show of sense Grammatically gathered from the words. The Canon is.

Item placuit, ut siquis dicit, ideo dixisse dominum; In domo Patris mei
mansiones multae sunt, ut intelligatur, quia in Regno Caelorum, erit aliquis
medius, aut ullus, alicubi locus, ubi beat vivant parvuli, qui sine baptismo
ex hac vita migrarunt sine quo in regno Caelorum quod est vita aeterna intrare
non possunt, Anathema sit, that is It also pleases us, that whosoever affirms,
that the Lord therefore said, In my Fathers house are many mansions, that it
may be understood, that in the Kingdom of Heaven there will be some middle or
any other place, where little ones may live blessedly, who departed this life
without Baptism; without which they cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is eternal life, let him be accursed.

Now is it not as clear as the day, that the persons against whom this
Anathema was made, held, that Children dying unbaptized were to be received
into the Kingdom of Heaven, grounding their upon conceit the text recited in
the Canon viz. In my Fathers house are many mansions -- Though they sancyed
that such Infants should enjoy some distinct place there from others. And if
the must have any place in the Kingdom of Heaven, then certainly they are saved
-- unless Mr. Wills can with some new Criticism distinguish Regnum Caelorum,
from Regnum Caelorum, the Kingdom of Heaven, from the Kingdom of Heaven.

But Mr. Wills says, Those persons Anathematized, held that Infants who dyed
without Baptism, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and recites that part
of the Canon to prove it -- qui sine baptismo ex hac vita migrarunt, in regne
caelerum quod est vita aeterna intrare non possunt.

Reply, But the quite contrary is true; and it is very strange that Mr. Wills
should so confidently betray either his ignorance or dishonesty, thus to
interpret the Canon, and impose his mistake with such a face upon his Reader:
For I appeal to any man that understands the Grammatical construction of a
Latin phrase, whether he does not grossly pervert it? And his beginning at qui
sine baptismo, etc. giving it as an entire sentence, is deceitfully done. For
these words have an immediate connection to the preceding words, and cannot
without a manifest intention of perverting them, be taken disjunctive from
them, not being divided by so much as a Comma: And they are indeed the sense
and opinion of the Anathema makers themselves, not of those they curse, who
(its apparent) held, That Infant may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven without
Baptism. And for that cause was this Anathema framed against them. And so we
dismiss this particular, referring the Keader to our Answer, p. 8, 9. and Mr.
Danvers his Rejoinder p. ^7. where it is sully spoken to. Where you have the
words of the Councels Letter to Innocent, and his decretal Letter to them
again, so expressly demonstrating the grounds of the Anathema to be, That some
did then assert that Children might be saved, or enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven without Baptism.

8ly. As to the passage about Bazil, I gave already a hint that this is one of
the quotations which Mr. Danvers should express as taken from its Original,
not from the Magdeburgs; and it is like that of Jerome before mentioned. Mr.
Danvers cites Bazil as saying, that Faith must needs precede and go before
Baptism. And we find the words as we cited them in our Answer, p. 11. viz. It
is necessary: first to believe, and after to be singed with Baptism. And
whether it be not the same thing, let the Reader judge, though not the same
syllables.

And thus (...) our Answer Reviewed to Mr. Wills his Appeal, having gone over
every particular in this unjust Gensure of his, (not mentioning that of the
Virgin Mary's being added to the form of Baptism, Mr. Wills owning it his
mistake to aver the contrary) and we hope have evidenced that his charge
against us of ignorance and partiality is unrighteous and groundless; and that
our Carriage toward him deserves not so uncivil a treatment as he gives us.
Therefore (as said before) there is no farther cause at present to trouble our
selves with him; being satisfied that we have given the sober and impartial no
cause to censure or blame us. And if Cavillers will set themselves to carp
(fince, as Mr. Baxter says, a man may find words at length for almost any
cause) we will give them their liberty of pursuing such unworthy undertakings,
which seldom meet with any better success, then the hiss of the Judicious, and
the just Indignation of all Readers, but such as have little of serious
employment for their time.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce Mr. Wills in his Censure upon the Baptists Answer to his Appeal, is
pleased to single me out from the rest that subscribed it; I hope it will be
allowed me to make also a particular defense to what he charges me with p^ 3.

He observes, as he tells us p. 10. That there is much in the Baptists dealing
with his Appeal that looks like partiality, and to make his insinuation
believed, gives 3 or a Instances, whereof the last is, Their taking in my self
to sit Judge with them upon his Appeal, though (he says) 1. A party in the
cause, and apparently biased. 2. Virulent in my Scoffs, And then 3. hints an
absurdity to me, from whence be inferrs, That I am unqualified for the
examination of Latin Authors; noting in his Margent that I undertook to
prophesy that after Mr. Baxter, Mr. Whiston, and himself none shall stand up in
the defense of Infant Baptism. And 4. He presumes I was the person pitched upon
to examine the particulars of his Appeal, and so by my ignorance brought them
to Justify Mr. Danvers his Addition to the Milevitan Canon by a passage found
in Pervetusto codue. This is what he says to me in particular. And to which I
Reply,

1. I can in sincerety say, that what I writ by way of encomium, as Mr. Wills
calls it, upon Mr. Danvers his Works, or against his Antagonists (both Mr.
Danvers and Mr. Wills being, when I writ that Epistle, equally Strangers to me)
was the result of that persuasion which the clear and substantial evidence of
truth begets in an impartial searcher. And I shall not be ashamed to own that
my judgment is still the same, for all the pains which Mr. Wills has taken,
which seems to me, to manifest him rather an impertinent captious wrangler, (
whose masterpiece is Sophism and Logomachy) then an Author of such Reason and
Sobriety, that all his Readers must be charmed into a subscription to his
ill-prov'd affirmations. And I am very certain, that men: as clear sighted as
himself, and at least, as well advantaged in Learning and Piety, are fully of
my opinion; that though Mr. Danvers (through the toil of so many quotations,
and being not Infallible) had mistook some inconsiderable things; yet the grand
matter in dispute is managed with such Scripturer evidence, and illustrated
with such humane concurrence, as is beyond the power of Mr. Wills his Negatives
to invalidate, at least with the sober and impartial.

2. It is to we an instance that this Advocate of Paedo-baptism manages a
languishing Cause, because be is driven to infist upon such a parcel of
exceptions, as truly and really deserve the Epithetes of trivial and
insignificant, and of so little moment to the point in hand, that had Mr.
Danvers wholly left them out, his Cause had been fortified well enough without
them; not only by the entire Book of God, but many of the most undoubted humane
Testimonies, not at all, or very faintly assaulted. Insomuch that Believers
Baptism has been evidently cleared to be the only Scripture Baptism, and so
practiced for the Primitive Centuries, and eminently witnessed unto, by some
People and Churches all along.

But I am biased, he says, because I express my contempt of him, etc. I must
confess that I have no such esteem of his works, as Mr. Baxter bespeaks for him
in his Epistle; nor do I look upon him to be so infallible as to greet him for
an Oracle; nor does his Paedo baptism appear to me to be so scriptural a
practice, and so ancient as he would make it. And I believe all the Baptists in
England are so far biased. And therefore his Appeal was but at best
ridiculous, if he insists upon that Objection, that none of them should be
admitted to examine his Appeal whose Judgments bespeaks them Parties. And he
might level that exception against any of them as well as against me, since
they are all parties so far as to disapprove Infant Baptism. and Which makes me
conceive that Mr. Wills promised himself, (since no Baptist must without
becoming obnoxious to this objection, pass a sentence upon his Appeal) that it
might pass without Answer But,

2. For any contempt or prejudice to his person, (which as I said I am a mere
stranger to) as far as I know my own heart, I can say, I have none, And though
I am fully satisfied his undertaking is very much against truth; yet have I as
far as I have been concerned, examined things, as to matter of fact (which only
come under our Cognizance as appealed unto) without any respect to person or
cause. And I know that the persons concerned in the examination besides my
self, have cted their parts with naked impurtiality and candor, and truly
stated things as they appeared unto them. And that they are not such Ignorant,
biased persons, as this man of modesty represents them, is already evident.

He says, I confine the Church of God within the narrow limits of my own party
-- which I affirm to be an untruth, and challenge him to make it good from any
word or writing of mine; the contrary is evident from the second line of the
verses he speaks of, where I mention them, as well as our selves, by that term
[Christi-colae] worshipers of Christ.

Mr. Wills says, I am virulent in my Scoffs. But he has taught me how to
esteem his Censure. (If I answer him according to his folly, Prove. 26.5.) will
justify me. And I profess, I have seldom seen a serious argument managed with
such Jocoseness and Captring Sarcisms as he does it. And to express a rebuke to
(...) without those terms that usually are bestowed upon such frothyness, I
need a new Dictionary. And till that be found out, I judge it scarce possible
to give him a faithful reprehension in any mode, but he will be ready to count
it virulence.

3. He says I am unqualified for the Examination of Latin Authors, as not
able to form Sustinco, and puts a Scoffing Remark in the margent, that I
undertook to prophecy that after Mr. Baxter, Mr. Whiston, and himself (three
matchless Heroes indeed!) none shall stand up in the defense of Infant Baptism.

Reply, What my Abilities are in that Language, it is not my humor to boast
of. But that I may satis facere Momo I will show Mr. Wills that my disability
in that tongue, is no consequence flowing from that absurdity he fancies. And
therefore I will take the liberty to inform him, that whatsoever fault it is,
it is the Printers, not mine, and he can avouch for me, that I found fault with
it my self, my original being -- nec unquam

Causa patrocinio substituenda novo est. for which substituenda, he printed
sustinuenda] but it was too late to be corrected when I saw it; that sheet
being last printed off, its errors could not be gathered amongst the errata
gathered else where before. And if I had seen it before it was wrought off the
Press, that mistake, and two others in p. 12. of the Epistle in the same sheet,
lines 10. and 29. viz. counted for routed, and defer for deter, had not past
uncorrected.

But that this very word printed for it (as it happens) yields Mr. Wills no
such instance of my ignorance, will be very evident to him that considers what
Epenthesis, Syncope, Anthiteses, etc. are. That the exastest Poets often cross
the known rules of quantity. Epenthesis a letter may be added to Sustinenda to
adapt it for a verse; and but one is added. Now if Mr. Wills knows these
things, is not be disingenuous in corping where he knows no error but the
vulgar rules Justify? If he knows them not, how can it be thought, that he
came honestly by the style of M. A.? Or that he is a person qualified to be
such a Corrector of Books as he proclaims himself? Besides be perverts my
meaning in that verse; for by patrocinio novo, I mean not Mr. Baxters, Whistons
and Wills's successors in the Controversy: But I meant, as may be easily
understood thus; that the cause, viz. of Paedobaptism, is not to be substituted
(or set up) instead of the true Baptism, by that new Patronage or Sanction, viz
Genesis 17.7. which I call new, because it was not made the maine prop of Infant
Baptism, till the other foundations it was built upon by the Popes grew crazy,
and the Reformers being ashamed of them, as being too rank, inverted this in
the 16th. Century; viz. a Covenant made Genesis 17.7. with ^elievers and their
Natural seed, which (they say) intitles to Baptism. And the participle
(substituenda) is not a prophetic, but an ennuciative term; An enunciation
being defined, Oration in qua aliquid de alio vere vel salso pronunciatur. So
that this Bagle-ey'd corrector of small, and sometimes no faults, is out in his
Logical, as well as his Grammatical faculty.

I have one thing more to reckon with him for, and that is, his presumption
that I was the person pitched upon to examine the particulars of his Appeal, who
by my ignorance brought them to justify Mr. Danvers his addition to the
Milevitan Canon, by the passage in Pervetusto Codice, insinuating as if none
but my self had examined it; which is implied in that expression of his -- that
he is sat^sfied some of them have learning enough to have discovered the
mistake, had they considered it themselves. But here also I must inform him
that his presumption is false, and no better then the petulant excursion of an
idle thought, that has no umbrage of truth to guide it. And to leave him no
cloak for that presumption, I do assure him, that those persons, whose learning
he acknowledges sufficient to discover the mistake, have as well as I,
individually examined every particular of his Appeal. And that they are not
under such a mistake, as to this of the Milevitan decree, is already apparent

Thus Reader you see this particular charge against me is no instance of the
Baptists partiality in their examination of Mr. Wills his Appeal. And to put
the matter beyond any surther exception, that Epistle of mine, which he Cavils
at, was but then in the Press, and was not seen by any of the Subscribers at
that time of our examining the Appeal, which is enough if no more had been said
to clear them from this frivolous insinuation.

The Reason why I am ^o large in my Return to so incon^iderable a charge as
this, is, because I observe Mr. Wills strikes at the cause he opposes through
my sides, and therefore I am the more concerned in my particular vindication.
For, 1. You see he insinuates (though nothing more false) That I was the only
person to whom the examination of his Appeal was committed. 2. When he has
possessed his Reader with that suggestion; he represents me as a very ignorant
unqualified person for such work; on purpose, that the Reader may conclude the
answer coming from such a person to be but sorry and ignorantly managed, and
that Mr. Wills is therefore apparently abused. But that artifice shall not
serve his turn; for as I said before, I declare that I was so far from being
the single Examiner, that I was no more then an assistant to those persons,
whose learned accomplishments, parts, and worth I readily own, far superior to
mine. And are possessors of a Reputation too well fortified for Mr. Wills his
art to Undermine. And who I question not will, as they see cause, vindicate
themselves, and their professions, from the Criminations of such an unrighteous
Accuser and Gainsayer.

The 5th. of the 3d. Month, 1676. Tho. Delaune.

FINIS.
Mr. Richard Baxter's REVIEW Of the State of Christians Infants, EXAMINED; And
his Grounds for the Baptism, of such found to be Insufficient, and groundless.

With a Postscript in Defense of Mr. Danvers his Third Reply; further
discovering Mr. Baxters Notorious Equivocations, in palliating his Slanderous
methods of Writing against his Opposers.

By Tho. Delaune.

(...). Athen. ex Passid. Quae in singulos essundos inspiciam obiter, and
verborum acrimoniam in os Autoris retorquebo. Pu^. 12. Diatrib. Printed, Anno
Dom. 1676.

Mr. Baxters Review of the state of Christians Infants Examined, etc.
THat Baptism as administered to Believers, is a Gospel Ordinance, no man I
presume (but such as reject all Ordinances) ever could deny, it having so
express a san^^ion in the word of God. And whether any but such ought to be
baptized, has been an ancient Controversy, and much agi^ated in this and the
neighboring Nations of late years: Insomuch that any inquirer into the state
thereof, may easily ^urnish himself with what is alleged on both hands;
therefore I see no necessity of Polemical A^^ditions

Among all the opposites of Antipaedobaptism in this Nation, no man (in my
opinion) has with more virulence be stirred himself then the (...) of this
Review. His Books of Baptism save me the labor of demonstrating it, And the
experience he has given the world, convinces me, that he is the person his own
Pen describes in the Preface to his More proofs viz. One that can find words at
length for almost any cause. And p. 45. of this Review, where he tells us; That
there are but few confess so clear that a man may not talk against as long as
his talking faculty holds out. And that Mr. Baxter has not yet lost this
faculty, this Review plentifully instances

At every turn he takes in the lists of dispute, he rails with plenty of
exclamation at such as divert him from doing greater service to the Church, and
extort such stri^^ from him -- which is an outery without Cause; for doubtless
he is never more in his Element, then when he is tossing the Ball of
Contention, and I think there is scarce any Sect that call themselves
Christians, but have been made the objects of his talking faculty, and have
selt the keeness of his Polemicks, and mostly without any challenge from them.
And what exploits he has done for the Church in his peaceable Intervals is
worth another Review.

It is known to such as converse with the Writings on the Subject of Baptism,
what Mr. Tombs, Mr. Danvers, Mr. Hutchinson, etc. on the one hand; and Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Wills, Mr. Whiston, etc. on the other have produced about that
point. For me to re-captiulate it, is needless. My present task is only to
consider briefly what weight there is in this Review. The occasion of which is
briefly thus. Mr Baxter having in some of his VVritings expressed a great deal of
wrath and contempt toward the Antipaedobaptists, and their practice of adult
baptizing: And loaded them with some standerous Charges, which when (to his
shame) detected; he yet persisted in a pertinacious defense, or rather
equivocation; endeavoring with all the artifice of his talking faculty to
disintangle himself, and further to bespatter and Reproach his Monitors. Which
kind of Carriage, as it bespeaks a desperate Disease, that will not be Cured
(as Dr. Pierce tells him) with soft usage; so it could not but justly provoke
the indignation of those, that were under the lash of his Calumny, to express
some Checks to him, to awaken his Repentance.

Amongst the rest, Mr Ed. Hutchinson sent him a private Letter, which Mr.
Baxter makes the occasion of his Review, and yet ingenuously conceals the
Letter, though he publishes an answer of about 46 pages to it. To supply which
defect, it shall be here incerted, It was Verbatim thus.

Sir, Though the fiery temper your reprovers commonly find you in, Mr.
Hutchinsons Letter to Mr. Baxter.
might discourage them from any further adress of that kind to you; yet
Christian Charity oblidges me, to represent unto you, some of those Gr^evances
you gave an Original to, and which are likely to survive you, unless you can be
persuaded to make the abused world some reparation. I can say (and I know that
it is the mind of many) that what of Christ, and his Gospel, is visible in you,
we highly prize and esteem; and your works, as far as they tend to advance true
Piety, we duly value: But you must give us leave to say also, that as in some
things, you have surpast a vulgar eminence, so the corruptions (always
concomitant to frail nature) have more notoriously raged in you, then most of
your size and denomination; and that which superadds no mean aggravation, is,
that you have had frequent admonitions, and reprehensions, but with a contrary
effect, then usually is seen in Saints: For instead of reforming and allaying
that unhappy spirit you were acted by, it has been but the more disturbed and
invenomed. And though in the intermissions of your passion, you drop many
wholesome truths, and aphorisms worth notice, (and which impeach their author
roundly at other times) yet some unlucky fit of rotten Dictating, or fiery
intemperat Disputation spoils all, and tend strongly to convince us that you
are then left to your self to rove in the wide wilderness of your own spacious
imaginations: And this is motive enough to us, to be cautious what we receive
from you, and examine whether it comes from the Lord, or instampt with your own
authority, and accordingly to receive or reject it.

Hence it is, that whereas the point of Infant Baptism (which you tell us has
its considerable difficulties) came under a fresh disquisition, several pious
and judicious persons hoped that a serious and full debate thereof, would fix
the minds of men, and establish that truth so long contraverted. But Mr. Wills
appearing in that insulting, rude and vainglorious manner, made wise men doubt
whether God had appointed him to be one of those Prophets, that should feed his
people with knowledge and understanding. But when he became your herald, loudly
proclaiming your approath to the lists after so tedious an interval, our hopes
were pregnant, since we could not but think, that the whole force of
Paedo-baptism was mustered up to encounter us, in your teeming self; and what a
combat must that be! But upon the appearance of that bulky piece of
Circumlocation, artifice and distinction, we found our expectation frustrated,
and that you had shamefutlly baffled your admirers, who may justly exclaim in
the language of the Prophet; Surely every man in his best estate is altogether
vanity -- And pray to be delivered from the Comination pronounced Jer. 17.5.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. Therefore Sir you must give us leave to tell you that (notwithstanding
that keeness so essential to your humor in treating your opposites) we find
little of argument in your attempt. And your More proofs instead of confuting
the allegations and sentiments of Mr. Danvers, has strongly contributed to
confirm and ratify them, and inclines not a few that were before wavering, to
close with that Scripture Baptism so evidently demonstrated from undeniable
arguments drawn from the Example and Commission of our great Lawgiver [ into
whose throne you tell us no man must step, pretending to mend his work.
Christian Dire. p. 683.] the practice of the primitive Churches, and the best,
and purest Antiquity. And since this effect of your Book was against your will,
the accident greatly adminishes the kindness. Therefore we hope, neither you,
nor any Judicious person (...) blame our perseverence, nor their choice, unless
you or some of your party, can produce some more nervous, and convincing
demonstrations (which we despair to hear of) then is hitherto exhibited in your
most eager disputations: I confess the truth is therefore thus much beholden to
you, that as Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt, so its made more
transparent by being confronted with Cavil and ter^iversation.

'Sir, As you are esteemed the Goliath of your party, so it was expected you
would produce those invincible argument; so often threatened, and whether it be
fair for you to put them off with proofless Dictates, loud outeries, and
frightful exclamations, with some new miuted distinctions is submitted to your
second thoughts But Sir you must not expect that men of Reason will any longer
swallow your ^^certain Dictates: They are Camels too gross for their throats.
And I must in^orm you, that not only your Not^rious aberrations from Scripture,
Reason, and the practice of antiquity, but also your frequent waverings and
unsteadiness, have mightily weakened your authority, and ^nc^ested your credit,
insomuch that we are necessitated to hearken to the Counsel of Solomon (a wiser
man then your self) meddle not with them that are given to Change. And if we
utterly reject that opinion you have so stiffly espoused, I dare say we are
Justified in your own Conscience, considering how lamely you have vindicated
your self in your Diminitive Rejoinder to Mr. Danvers's several notorious
charges against you, in plain matter of fact; and his just anatomizing of your
Changes, self Contradictions, and Repentances. Certainly had you not been
grossly and egregiously guilty (and beyond the slyness of your distinction to
wipe off) you would have published a Vindication to each particular, needing it
far more then your corrupt Aphorisms. And wise men judge, you had never in your
life more need of employing your fluid Invention, and never (before) sailing
faculty of gainsaying (if you can say any thing) then at this time. But your
pr^ting us off with a flam is the wonder of the Age, and will be so to the
next, if your numerous progeny of Books furvive so long, though others think it
an instance of no mean craft in you, to hold your peace; since you can say
nothing, but what (as the fluttering of an entangled bird entangles it more)
would more and more expose you. But Sir (in the judgment of the most solid) an
Ingenuous Recantation, would be more prudent and Christian like. But the
Providence is Doctrinal, and proves a seasonable check to men's sinful
admirations, if not adorations of humane wisdom. And how can your Proselytes
but blush at their former subscriptions to your Dictates? For are not your
unsteady and Proteus-like Revolutions, as another little Book of Ecclesiastes,
fully preaching forth the vanity and emptiness of all things below God, and the
folly of trusting in man, however celebrated and cried up. It being surely the
great design of God, which he is the more especially carrying on in this day,
to cause all our Goards to wither, under the shadow of which we have reposed
our selves, and to famish all the Gods of the earth that his People may keep
themselves from Idols.

Sir, I would earnestly recommend to your most serious and retired thoughts,
whether you (having set down such excellent rules for this Generation how to
manage Theological Wars, and to banish pride and wrath from all such
Encounters) should not also lead them by your Example, and practice in those
precepts you give them the speculation of? And whether on the Contrary you have
not come forth in that spirit you so pathetically declaim against p. 191. More
Proofs viz. with a militant disposition, animosity being your valor, and how
to make your adversary contemptible, or odious, being your work? and whether
you be not that man of Disputation, Controversy, and Strife your own p^n sets
off in your due Epithets? And truly Sir had not the same pen told us. That the
crying and bauling Children that will not let you rest, must bear the fruits of
your disquietment, p. 213, 215. ibid. we could easily gather what a wrathful
animosity and disturbance you were in, from that unfatherly corr^ction you give
them. For that overs^r^rtness and acrimony of your spirit, and the fury
wherewith you brandish the Rod, must needs be the result of some ill humor
unseasonably agitated. But Sir by that ^^ng a^quaintance you have with your
self, you cannot be excused, unless you know what are the vicissitudes of your
humor; and in what season your paroxism Returns. Therefore you did very
unluckily to take the Petulant Children under your Castigation, until the sit
were over, and your mind returned to a more calm and peaceable ten per, for
correction in anger is ever esteemed unreasonable.

Sir, I must friendly admonish you (and which is the complaint of a great many)
that you have encumbered us in a Controversy, wherein not a few would fain have
a satisf^ctory resolution, but left us in the Briars before we scarce
understand your meaning. Certainly you had better never begun, unless you had
come to some more commendable period. Or if you be indeed gravelled, why do you
not confess so much? You refer us to what you have writ already. Sir you cannot
expect that the abused world can take it kindly you put them upon such a task
as the Poets report of Sysiphus: No sooner at the end of your tedious
wranglings, but they must begin again. But that you may have no cause to
complain, we have compared (as you desure) your Pro's and Con's, and find you
shamefully guilty in many particulars in fa^^, which your More Reasons, (as you
^ew Christen it) cannot excuse you in, nor is the little Postscript (joined to
the 5 s. Book) a sufficient compurgator of; some of which I would here
particularize, but that I find them truly enumerated to you already with ample
and undeniable demonstration by Mr. Danvers; of which though you seem to take
so little notice, calling it a bundle of mistakes, sierceness, and confidence;
Yet others cannot choose but look upon your shifting it off so disdainfully, as
mere subterfuge and evasion. And how like a proficient in sophistry you have
acquitted your self of that shameless slander of naked dipping, and how
pitifully you would come off; with the unrighteousness of that New charge you
exhibit, of your Paper left with the Clerk at St. James's, being grossly
falsified (being the particulars you pick out of the bundle, and we by which
may justly measure the rest) are also by the same hand now, with all possible
perspicuity and demonstration evidenced in a 3 d. Reply. Therefore Sir, it
behooves you, (and you are hereby earnestly called to do it) to do your self,
and the abused truth, as well as your injured Neighbors so much justice, as to
repent for, and retract that slanderous calumny, and your seduction of so many
souls into the belief of it; as well as that heterodoxy your late writings
abound with. For alas! Sir what have you done (in your disquietment) more then
t^ become the Trumpet of your own frailty? What forgeries or prevarications
have you detected? Humane weakness, so much exemplified in your self, might be
plea enough for a few slight escapes of little remark to the Controversy, and
which Mr. Danvers owns. Certainly no man has less reason to magnify Mole-hills
then you.

And this Sir should be a motive to prevail with you to examine your heart,
whether you have not that pride there that will not let you s^oop? But (like
the stubborn twig) you will rather b^eak then bend Surely Sir it appears to me a
very preposterous (though very sly) expression, when you tell your faithful
Monitor, (who at your loud provocation, painfully delineated your shameful
tergiversations, and in a sober and Christian spirit recommended them to your
most serious Review) That you would not so much as describe or denominate Mr.
Danvers's Citations of Dr. Pierce, to prove your Popery, and Crimes, nor his
possages about the Wars, and about your Changes, Self-contradictions and
Repentances, lest you do that which savorech not of forgiveness. As if he had
so mightily wronged you by his faithful Reprehensions, when your own Pen can
tell us in Print, 1 Disp. Sacram. p. 487. That your pride needs sharper
reprehension, then friends have ever used about you, and therefore they are
better from any body, then nobody. And though some call your discretion into
question for so provoking Mr. Danvers to enlarge so demonstratively upon that
just Charge he exhibited against you in gross, yes I am very certain however he
deserves your thanks much more then your forgiveness. Besides Sir, if you thus
treat your admonishers, you are like to have but few, since it can searce
relish with any man that (when you have railed, reproacht, vilified and mocked
him, and had in return only a mild Christian reproof and admonition, backed with
fall demor-stration, yet) you must tell him, you forgive him the wrong you did
him, and the kindness he did you; Which whether it be not a Solaecism in
civility and Christianity, as well as sense, let even your most zealous
admirers judge.

And now Sir may not your unwary proselytes beg your pardon, that they have at
any time shadowed themselves under your wings, took your ipse dixit for
Scripture verities, and waited for your Oraculous pronuntiations? It being
feared that God is punishing their Confidence in you, as he did Isreal's wise
men of old, when the people trusted in them, Isa. 29.14 The wisdom of their
wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be bid.
And seeing you are so well acquainted with Repentances, it is just to admit of
their acknowledgment, especially if they be ready (as some are) to promise in
the words of Job, that Wherein they have done foolishly they will do so no
more. And though it be now a common question whether you will ever die a Martyr?
And most resolve it in the Negative (wondering that out of your Magazine of
distinctions, you cannot pick out some to shist off the present perset cution
so loudly recorded, or indempnifie those that suffer by proxy for you, when you
took your flight) Yet we have the charity to believe (if your friends be
faithful to reprehend, and you ready to receive it) a possibility of
establishing your wavering mind after all your transformations, and perhaps to
fix you on that unerring soundation of the Prephets and Apostles, from which
you have gone so much afiray, and that you may yet preach the truths you have
destroyed. And we are confirmed in our hope not only from the omnipotent power
of God, but also from the Connaturalness of Change to your disposition. Its
pity a man of your figure, one that God (like Saul) has made higher then
diverse of your Brethren, should be such a man of Contention, such an Unus
contra Populum in your generation. And so your pious labors in other things
(useful to the Church) be either burred in oblivion, or greatly slighted,
because of your dissonancy in some great points of faith; and heteredoxy to the
pure and incorrupt discipline of the primitive Churches. We have been informed
from your own pen, that the shadows of the Eternal evening are upon you, and
you have been some time waiting at the door of eternity. And it is a trembling
consideration to some that love you, that you should take your leave of us so
unreconciled to your self, as well as to the of truth of God, especially that
point of Scripture Baptism to which you have born so famous a testimony in some
of your writings, and so timerously asserting Infant Baptism in others,
assuring us it has such considerable difficulties, that it may justly make
wise and good men to doubt; and that you your self, though its most industrious
undertaker, tells us of your self, that you think you have proved it, but not
by evidence so clear as every good man can perceive More Proofs; p 219. But Sir
since you do but think so, and we think otherwise, viz. that you have not
proved it, why may not our think be as good as your think. Therefore we desire
you, (before you take your final leave) to suffer a word of Exhortation. And we
beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and as you will shortly answer at
the great and dreadful Tribunal, that amongst your other errata, you would
repent of that absurd and heretical position of a Baptismal Covenant of Grace
running in a fleshly line, by which you have not only deceived many thousand
souls, but so proselyted some Ministers, and furnished them with matter to
repair the breaches that have been made in Babylon to the great binderance of
that Reformation so solemnly endeavored and Covenanted for; and thereby make
your self the person you arraign viz. One that trains up militant heirs and
successors to propagate the Contention. (witness Mr. Parret your Index-maker;
who might from your works raise 1500 as well as 50. queries, that so the
multitude might secure him from Resolution; For I conceive he might fish doubts
enough out of your writings, which are known to be fruitful enough of Riddles
of that grain.) To conclude Sir, if this advice may be successful, it will be
an encouragement to us to follow you (while we live) with our prayers, that
(though some of your works may be burnt, yet) your soul may be saved in the day
of the Lord -- Which is the earnest desire of

Your Soul-Friend Edw. Hutchinson.


In Return to this comes the Review in hand. But the Lord was pleased to take
the worthy and pious Author of that Letter to himself before Mr. Baxters Review
came to his hand. Which Providence (with some concurring circumstances)
necessitates me to appear in his vindication.

That choice labourer in his Lords Vineyard was long (even at the time of
writing that letter) exercised under such a Distemper as certainly premonished
him of his approaching period. And therefore was glad if he could be
Instrumental in bringing Mr. Paxter to a Review of what he inconsiderately
published: Hoping that so he might be convinced that his corrupt writings stood
more in need of an humble and penitent Retraction, then so contumacious a plea,
as he now exhibits.

But its now too apparent, that no such Repentance is to be expected. But the
talking faculty must to work once more, and palliate with a fresh torrent of
words whatever extravagant fit his luxuriant pen ever fell into. If I should
pursue Mr. Baxter in all his turnings and windings to support his tottering
reputation, and insist upon every particular in his Review capable of
exception, my undertaking would swell into such a volume as I have neither
leisure nor mind to compile. Therefore his discourse being so loose and full of
incoherencies, I shall willingly leave his impertinent digressions, and address
my self to (...) upon such passages as are most likely to affiright the unwary
Reader from a closure with the truth we contend for.

He tells us p. 7. Review, That upon the deepest search he is able to make in
above 20 years consideration, he is satisfied we hainously wrong the mercy of
God, and the Church, and true Believers, and their seed, by denying them that
part in Gods Covenant and mercy, which he has proved to be stated on them in
Gods word -- That God never had Church Laws on earth, whether in Innocence or
since the fall, which extended not the privilege of a Covenant and
Church State to the Infants of the Church. And so he runs on telling us that
from Adams time till now Infants were Church Members, and that Christ so found
them, and so continued them.

Answ. By the Marshalling of his Comma's, and if all these particulars be
antecedents to the pronoun them, here lies a heavy Charge; for it seems (if he
be believed) that we deny the mercy of God, the Church, and true believers, and
their seed, a part in Gods Covenant and Mercy, which (Mr. B. says) he has
proved that God has stated on them in his word. But let him consider whether
the mercy of Gods having a part in the Covenant and Mercy of God, be not
nonsense, 2. He would do honestly to produce from any Anti-paedo-baptist,
where they ever denied the Church, and true believers, and their seed (if
believers) a part in Gods Covenant and Mercy. I am confident he cannot do it;
and therefore what shall we call this but (in his own Language, More Proofs, p.
236.) a bold-fac'd falsehood? 3. What he has proved essewhere, is sufficiently
disproved elsewhere also. 4 He would do well to produce those Church-Laws that
gave Infants the privilege of Church Membership in Innocence, or name any
Infant that was in the World then. He is a notable searcher into Antiquity
indeed, if he can bring to light such an Arcanum! Besides we could yet never
find in the word of God (I believe it will put Mr. Baxter to his Trumps to
produce any Scripture to evince) that any Infants were Church Members before
Circumcision, nor yet after it came to a period with the legal dispensation
that gave being to it. If he clearly proves this Dictate, we shall submit 5. We
believe that true Believers and their seed (if Believers) have a part in Gods
Covenant and Mercy, and to deny it them, were to impeach free grace. The thing
we deny, is, that Christ appointed the seed of Believers before Conversion to
the privilege of membership in his visible Church. And how we wrong them in
not forcing that upon them, which no Divine Law gives them Right unto, Mr.
Baxter has not convinced us.

He says be is not hardened enough to reject so plain a text as 1 Cor. 7.14. or
to own our interpretation of it.

Answ. That that text affords not the least color of proof for Paedo-baptism:
and that our sense of it is genuine and Orthodox, is at large evinced by Mr.
Tombs 3 Review p. 7.91, 93, 94, 95. Mr. Danvers Treat. p. 160. 2 Ed. Mr.
Lawrence Treat. of Baptism p. 260. Mr. Blackwo^ds Storm of Antichrist p. 43,
and several others, who have unanswerably vindicated this text from Mr. Baxters
unsound sense, as to the enquiring Reader by consulting the places referred to,
may clearly appear. And if Mr. ^axter rests in his satisfaction, and still will
pertinaciously desend his corrupt gloss, it is not in our power to unharden him,
we leave that to omnipotency.

The term (...) holyners, as Mr. Tombs notes, is only found among
Ecclesiastical writers; yet (...) signifies to preserve chastity, as St^phanus
observes out of Demosthenes (...) where a P^iest of B^^^hus speaks thus, (...),
that is, I am holy and pure from the company of man. And learned men tell us,
that (...), etc. Chaste, Chastity, to be Chaste, come from the root (...), holy.

Holiness was predicated under the Law of the temple and its Ute^sils, the City
Jerusasem (called (...), Math. 4.5. and 27.53.) of places, Math. 24.15. stand
(...), in the holy place, and diverse other things. And in this very text the
same holiness or sanctification which is predicated of the Children, is
predicated also of the unbelieving husband and wise: Children they are holy, so
of the unbelieving Yoke Fellow it is said, they are sanctified, that is in
English, they are holy, and the words in the Greek are the very same: The verb
(...), being the preter tense passive of the active (...), which comes from the
Root (...) holy. And therefore there is as much holiness from this text to be
ascribed to the unbelieving husband or wise, as to the Children. And why the
unbelieving husband or wise may not be therefore baptized and in Church too, as
well as their Infants, this holiness being pleaded by Mr. Baxter to be sederal,
(though it be as clear as the Sun that the persons Denominated holy were at
that very time privative unbelievers and so cannot be said to be soederally
holy or sanctyfied) is a question worth the Resolution of such an Oedipus as
himself. But in my opinion, he can never make any clean evasion from this
absurdity. And if he can satisfy his Conscience that this text is so plain to
prove the federal holiness of the Children of believers, it is to me an
Instance, that his Judgment is enslaved by a peremptory and tenacious will.
Now I apdeal to any considerate Reader whether there be any other holiness
meant in this text, but what may befall an unbeliever; for the unbelieving
yokesellow is sanctified with this holiness, though still unbelieving. And as
the word (...), signifying proles, soholes, issue, or offspring, extends it
self beyond Infants, to all Children, as Math. 15.16. Romans 8.16. Math. 11.19.
where the same word is used, so the word holy (as I said before) being the same
attributed to the Unbelieving husband or wife) is as applicable to a child of
years, and not believing, as to an Unbelieving bushand or wise. And of such a
holy child what great cause will there be to boast as a fit subject for
Baptism? And whether such a holiness be not so far from foederal, that it is
purely Matrimonial and Civil, and opposed to that Uncleanness contracted by
Cohabiting with strange wives prohibited under the Law, is submitted to the
determination of the Judicious. Besides I only add, that as the native scope
and tendency of the text evidences the Holiness there to be only civil and
Matrimonial, so we have some parallel places, as Mal. 2.15. 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5.
and Deuteronomy. 23.7. Mr. Baxter knows how (...) holy, is rendered, and holiness is
opposed to fornication, 1 Samuel 214, 5, 6.

Next Mr. Baxter tells us, that man must not teach God how to speak, but
carefully enquire, what he has spoken -- To which I willingly assent. And if
Mr. Baxter had been so securely modest and sober, as to content himself with
what was spoken to him by the Lord, and had not given his licentious
Imagination so unbounded a scope, as to pester the Nation with his confounding,
unscriptural legions of distinctions, and frivolous niceties with which his
Polemicks are so stufft, he had done more service, then the utmost exploits of
his talking faculty will ever amount to.

Another of his Arguments he moulds into a Quere, thus; Do you think that Paul
mentions that as agreat and comfortable privilege of believers which belongs
to Heathens equally with them?

Answ. Where Paul uses that phrase (viz a privilege of believers) upon this
account, or any words equipollent, I cannot find, Mr. Baxter quotes no
Scripture for it. But I humbly conceive the question needs a resolution from
himself; For the holiness in the text is indeed attributed to Heathens (for
such was the unbelieving yokefellow) as well as the children; and therefore
it is his part to make it out such a great and comfortable privilege as he
talks of. And the term Heathen is all one with Gentiles, contradistinct to
Jews, the word (...) signyfies both, Act. 4 25, 27.

Mr. Baxter goes on p. 9. and tells us, that being called to a Review, he
remembers our Savior himself was a Churchmember in his Infancy, even the head
(though he said in his Plain Scriptare p. 62. that it is disputable, whether
ever Christ was a Churchmember properly, or no) And if an Infant was capable
of being the head, King, Priest, and Prophet, relatively, though yet he had
never ruled, sacrificed, or taught, then there is nothing in the Infant age
which makes it incapable, of being members, subjects, and Disciples of Christ.

Answ. 1. This vain plea is already sufficiently answered by Mr. Tombs. And to
me what Mr. Baxter urges, seems to make more against, then for his Paedo
baptism -- For if Christ whose title to the headship of Churchmembers in his
Insancy was undoubted, was not for all that baptized till at age, to set a
pattern for us in our approaches to that Ordinance; then certainly it is an
audacious practice to baptize Infants, whose title to Churchmembership and
Discipleship is impossible to be made out with parallel clearness, and that
too, in expressed dissonancy to that great and most illustrious example of our
Christian Baptism.

2ly. To argue from Christ's headship, that Children should be baptized, is a
mere non-sequiter. Christ in his Infaney was head of the Church, but not in
acts exercito; so for ought we know Infants may be members of his Mystical
hody, yet are no actual Disciples, till they hear the Gospel, and profess the
faith. And invisible Membership, being uncertain to us, can be no ground for
Baptism. Besides, as Mr. Tombs says, by this Reasoning, an Infant in the womb
may be a visible member, because then Christ was head of the Church, and an old
man should not be a member, for Christ was not an old man. And I may add, that
Infants by this argument should be Prophets, Priests, and Kings, in their
Infancy, as well as Church Members, because Christ was so. But Mr. Baxter will
not be hasty to make this Conclusion.

Mr. Baxter queries, are not Infants members of other societies? families? the
Kings subjects? And why not Christ's, as well as the Kings?

Answ. So are Pagans Children, unbelievers Children, etc. members of Families,
Kingdoms, etc. therefore they also by this Medium should be Baptized.

2ly. There is a Characteristical mark that distinguishes the Church of Christ
from all other societies -- It must consist of visible Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33.
Act. 2.41.47. There must be a right dispensation of the word and Sacraments,
Act. 2.41. Math. 28.19. From every member of this society there is required a
profession of his faith, and a holy conversation, Act. 8.37. 1 Pet. 3 16, 17,
Romans 10.10. Math. 3.36. Act. 19.18. Now no Parity of Reason drawn from the
Constitutions or practice of other societies or corporations, is of any force
to obtrude any Law upon this society (so distinct from all others) It must be
governed by its own sanctions, which are no where to be had, but in the word of
G^d; From a close conformity to which, no parallels framed by our carnal
Reasoning, must sednce us.

In agreement to our definition of a visible Church Mr. B. thus exprefies him
self in his Book of Bpatism, p 87. A self society of persons separated from the
world, to God; or (...), called out of the world, etc. And Dr. Featly, p. 4. A
particular company of men professing the Christian says, known by two marks,
the sincere preaching of the word, and due administration of the Sacraments.
And how this Definition can agree to a society, of which the Major part are
ignorant Babes, let them judge.

Wollebius in his Compend. Theol. Edit. Cantabr. 1642. lib. 1. c. 25. p. 135.
defines a visible Church, Caetus hominum verbo and sacramentis ad gratiae
statum vocatorum, a company of men and women called by the word and sacraments
to a state of grace. This book is in great repute in the Univerfities, and
commonly first read by young students in Divinity; and if we adhere to this
definition, Infants are excluded, because they are not called by the word to a
state of grace; And though the term (Sacraments) be redundant in the
Definition, yet it is certain Wollebius held, that the bare application of the
Sacraments converts not to a state of grace, but in conjunction with the
effectual preaching of the word. And all Divines agree, that Ecclesia, a Church
(coming of a Greek verb, that signifies evocare, to call from.) is Caetus
hominum ex universo genere humano collectus seu evocatus per Evangelium, a
company of people gathered or called from the universal race of mankind by the
preaching of the Gospel. And the greek is derived of the hebrew (...) a
congregation. He says p. 11. he could theeasilier bear with our delay of
external Baptism, if we did not deny all Infants their part in the Covenant of
life.

Answ. That we deny all Infants their part in the Covenant of life is a false
suggestion; we charitably hope (and our hope is built upon the free grace of
God) that, though the Scriptures clearly reveal nothing of their salvation or
Damnation; forasmuch as none can be saved but by Christ, Act. 4.12. And that
all are guilty of sin. Romans 5.14. Infants by the presentment of the
satisfaction of Christ are saved, the free gift coming upon all, Romans 5.18.

Of this satisfaction there is a twofold application, 1. by Faith, in the
Adult. 2. without Faith, to dying Infants by virtue of the election and free
grace of God. Romans 11.7. and 5.18. And if we question how Infants dying after
Baptism are saved, we must have recourse to this way, it being owned by
Protestants, that Baptism does not conser grace, nor wash away Original sin:
And if we determine nothing positively in this matter, Mr. Baxter should not
find fault with us, he telling us in his Christian Directory, p 821. That
almost all Infants cases are to us obscure.

He says p. 12. That we lay such grounds as destroy and exclude them by a
sentence of damnation: because if we add them not to the Church, we exclude
them from salvation.

Answ. This language is spoke without book. We limit not salvation to the pale
of the Church, as this Dictator does. We have no rule to add any to our
Churches, but such whose professions give us ground to Judge that they belong
to the Lord, being Converted. We pass no such damnable sentence upon any that
are not joined to us; we hope the best; and our judgment, we pass (when called
to it) according to appearance; de non apparentibus and de non exiftentibus
tadem est ratio, Is the language of the Schools.

2ly. This is Mr. Baxters own harsh Divinity, to destroy and exclude Multitudes
of Infants by a sentence of Damnation, when he holds that the vast progeny of
such as are (in his conceit) unbelievers. have no right to the Baptismal
Covenant, and Church membership, and consequently (according to his Doctrine)
are not of Christ's Church or body, and therefore he is not their Savior Let
him tremble at this dreadful conceit

Hhis talk that they may visibly belong to the Kingdom of God or satan, is a
mere fancy. For Infants are neither in Gods nor the Devils visible Kingdom,
till they declare by their professions to whom they belong visibly. Every
Infant is in the invisible Kingdom of God or Satan, that is, elect or
reprobate; yet no child till he make profession does visibly belong to the one,
or to the other. We have no Warrant to take cognizance of them as in the one or
the other visibly, but as at years they visibly appear to cleave to either.
None are visibly Satan's subjects, but the Children of disobedience in whom he
works, Ephesians. 2.2. Such are not Infants visibly. And none are Christ's Diciples,
Subjects or Servants, but such as obey him, Romans 6.16. His Servants are ye to
whom ye obey, etc. 1 John 3.10. In this the Children of God are manifest, and
the Children of the Devil, whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God,
neither he that loves not his Brother.

But I ask Mr. Baxter in whose visible Kingdom are Believers Infants before
Baptism. If he say in the Devils; then he is guilty of the same execrable
Doctrine he charges upon us. If he say they are in Christ's visible Kingdom
before Baptism, viz. his visible Church, as Mr. Baxter himself calls it, Review
p. 12. Then how can they be said to be admitted by Baptism? Is it not nonsense
to say, it enters them into a state they were in before? To let one into a
Room, when he is already there, is impossble. Nor will the distinction of
complete and incomplete member serve Mr. Baxters men, or members in f^eri and
imperfectly, as he styles unbaptized Infants, Christian Directory p. 806. since
according to his own maxims, an incomplete member has only jus adrem, non in
re; ad Ecclesiam, non in Ecclesia. A title to, not a standing in the Church.

But if they be complete or perfect members after Baptism, why have they not
the supper and other Ordinances of the Church administered to them? If they be
still incomplete, as before Baptism; What benefit have they by Baptism, being
as lame Members after as before it.

Now as Mr. B. was told, he must hold two first entrances into the visible
Church, viz. Natural-birth and Baptism; of else he must hold that Baptism is
not the first entrance: Or else that Believers Infants are not entered; and if
not so not in the visible Church before Baptism. If he says the first, he,
contradicts all he says of entering the visible Church in his Plea against the
seekers, p. 343. If the second, He contradicts all he says of Baptism's being
the only entrance: If the third then of these two things he must necessarily
say one, viz, Either all the Infants of believers that die (before their
visible entrance into the visible Church by Baptism, are damned without hope --
(which he dares not aver if he be a Protestant) or else that they may be in a
state of Salvation and yet not be visible Members of the Church; let him avoid
this if he can. And does not this same Mr. Baxter tell us in his first Book of
Baptism p 72. That it is not the denial of Baptism directly, that leaves
Infants in the visible Kingdom of the Devil. And if he still holds this for a
truth, how can he honestly exclaim against us at this rate, as if our denial of
Baptism to them, had damned them all.

The text Act. 2.47. That God added to the Church such as should be saved, is
not (as he falsely imagines) to be understood of all or only such, but only such
men, and women (not such Infants) as should be saved.

The impartial consideration of this, makes his loud talk about our placing all
Infants Unbaptized in the Kingdom of the Devil, an empty jangle. And if Mr
Baxter thinks indeed that all unbaptized Infants are under that unmercyful and
too cruel Character; and that the mere act of external Baptism translates them
to the Kingdom of Christ, in holding the first he dreadfully preaches Millions
of poor harmless souls to Hell -- And in holding the second, he ascribes more
to Baptism, then ever God did ( viz. that it procures salvation, and differs in
nothing from the blasphemous feats ascribed by the Pope to his opus oparatum)
Mr. Baxter gives another argument why upon his Review he sees cause to plead a
fresh for his Infant Baptism, and that is the Baptizing of households.

Answ. This argument is over and over answered. And is it not strange that the
word (household) in those few places mentioned must include Infants, when
Baptism is spoken of: but when the passover is spoken of, then Infants are
excluded, because else we shall argue from thence to their eating the Supper,
as they from Circumcision to their Baptism? Do not these men force that
signification upon words that best serve their turn?

2ly. There is no probability that Lydia had a husband, or Children, or she may
be an ancient widow, and her children (if she had any) grown up. In Act.
16.40. we read, that those in her house were capable of consolation. 2. The
Jaylors family believed. Act. 16.34. (3.) The household of Stephanus addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15. (4.) Crispus believed
in God with all his house, -- Therefore there were no Infants, Act. 18.8. We
read of no more Baptized households in Scripture. Narcissus and Aristobulus
households are urged by some; but there is no mention of household in the Greek;
but it may be Friends or Kindred, Romans 16.10, 11. (...).

Reader, I should weary thee and my self, if I should run over the long-winded
Repetitions of Mr. Baxter in this Review. What I said already if well weighed,
Answers his tedious talk in the succeeding pages. And I think my time more
worth then to wast it in disproving naked dictates. What becomes of Heathens
dying Infants, is known only to God, and it is no better then sinful curiosity
to be wrangling, and too confidently obtruding our conceptions about such
unrevealed matters. It Is certainly the safest way to be sober, and advance no
further in such quests, then the Scripture guides. We have enough revealed to
employ our studies upon, and make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

To enervate our Plea for non-Baptising Infants, viz. the want of Scripture
president or grecept, he propound a question to us, thus. There is no
Scripture-president for Baptizing Kings (he might add Cobblers too) must none
therefore be Baptized?

Answ. This is a gravelling quere he thinks. But we find Scripture president
for Baptizing men and women. And in my Judgment Kings and Queens, and Cobblers
also, are men and women.

He says p. 17. The Scripture tells us not all that was done, but all that must
be done. We grant it -- And if the Scripture tells us all that must be done,
and we find not a syllable there of Infant Baptism; is it not very injurious to
blame us for renouncing such a practice as we find no warrant for? This very
man tells us, pl. Script. p. 301. That he finds it a hard Controversy to prove
Infant Baptism, it is so dark in the Scripture -- And More Proofs p. 219. That
it has considerable difficulties, and that his proofs are not so clear as
every good man can perceive -- And yet he has published a Book Entitled, plain
Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism -- strange considence, and Contradiction!

But now he produces (as he tells us,) a full command for Infant Baptism, Math.
28.19. because Nations must be Baptized.

Answ. What shall we say to men whose Judgments are fore stalled by a darling
error? I need not add much to disprove this, but referr the Reader to our Books
where this text is vindicated from Mr. Baxters senseless gloss. Nations are to
be discipled, and so Baptized, Certainly the Pronown [then] governed by the
participle [Baptizing] can possibly relate to no other Substantive, then the
Persons commanded before to be taught. For as Dr. Holmes truly tells us p. 7.
it is not the Nations in gross. For then, all must be Baptized, if the word
Nation universally taken does there denote the Subjects of Baptism. But it is
the Nations with restriction, that is, such as are discipled by teaching, and
no more, that are commanded to be baptized. And if this be not the sense, they
must baptize them in the lump, Heathens, Unbelievers, Professors Infants, and
all, and that whether they would be baptized or nor. Let Mr Baxter consider
what a full command he has met with for his practice.

Mr. Baxters further talk about Infants being Disciples, and his parity of
Reason from their being the Kings Subjects; Ergo, why not Christ's, I look upon
as frivolous. His frequent urgeing the parents Faith to be the ground of their
Baptism, and that the Parents will go for theirs in consenting, shall be
answered in the words of a learned Doctor.

If they have imputative faith, so let the Sacrament be too; that is, if they
have the Parents faith, or the Churches, then so let Baptism be imputed to them
by derivation from them, and as in their mothers womb, and while they hang on
their mother breasts, they live upon their mothers nourishments; so they may
upon the Baptism of their parents or their mother the Church; For since faith
is necessary to the susception of Baptism (and they themselves confess it by
striving to find out new kinds of Faith to daub the matter up) such as the
Faith, such must be the Sacrament; for there is no proportion between an actual
Sacrament, and an Imputative faith; this being an immediate and necessary order
to that. And whatsoever can be said to take of the necessity of actual faith,
all that and much more may be said to excuse from the actual susception of
Baptism, etc. And a little further he adds -- That if baptism be necessary to
the salvation of Infants (as the Fathers of old, and the Church of Rome and
England since) [yea and Mr. Baxter too] upon whom is the imposition laid? to
whom is the Command given? to the Parents, or the Children? Not to the Parents;
for then God has put the salvation of innocent babes into the power of others;
and Infants may be damned for their parents carelessness or malice. It follows
that it is not necessary at all to be done unto them, to whom it cannot be
prescribed as a Law, and in whose behalf it cannot be reasonably entrusted to
others, with the appendant necessity: And if it be not necessary, it is certain
it is not reasonable, and most certain it is no where in terms prescribed. And
therefore it is presumed that Baptism ought to be understood and administered
according as other precepts are, with reference to the capacity of the subject,
and the reasonableness of the thing.

And again -- If any man runs for succor to that exploded Cresphugeton, that
Infants have faith, or any other inspired habit of I know not what, and how; we
desire no more advantage in the world, then that they are constrained to
answer, without Revelation, against Reason, common sense, and all the
experience in the world. Haec ille.

Reader, I take Mr. Baxters Review hitherto to be showed vain, and his ground
for Paedo-baptism to be very weak and frivolous. He comes next p. 20 to add and
enlarge upon 4 particulars, and those subdivided into many others, which
comprehend the rest of the Review.

1. The benefits of Infant Baptism -- And I think most of the benefits he
enumerates he learnt of the Pope.

2. The evils that follow not baptizing them. These are mere whimsies of his
own making, not worth a serious Readers patience. I willingly pass them, there
is nothing argumentative in them, therefore no need of a Reply.

3. The sins we would draw men to by rejecting it -- And here he is very
fruitful, he finds them to be no less then 15. And all without Proof; therefore
I pass them with a naked Negation, which is ever as valid, as a naked assertion.

By way of digression, before he comes to the fourth particular, Mr. Baxter
quarrels with Mr. Hutchinson for desiring him to repent of his absurd position
of a Baptismal Covenant of grace running in a fleshly line, and seems to deny
that ever he used such a phrase, but if he remembers himself, he uses the words
[baptismal Covenant] frequently, as More Proofs, p. 198. 224. 238. even in this
Review p. 3. and 38. And several other places. And does he not call that
Covenant, a Covenant of grace through all his writings? If that be not his
meaning, why does he not tell us what other Covenant he means? And does he not
as confidently affirm, that that Baptismal Covenant of grace is conveyed to the
Children by their believing parents? And is not that a running in a fleshly
line, and in his conceit hereditary? if so, what reason has he to exclaim, as
if that were charged upon him, which he holds not? Does he not call our Dispute
against this conceit, a Hectoring men out of their Inheritances, Review p. 34?
which fully explains what Covenant he means: it seems he dares not own his
opinion, when stated in the proper terms, but would mince it into a more
disguised and specious Phrase, to impose with the more artifice upon his
credulous can (...) But let them take warning (if they be wise) not to take
such rotten precepts of men, for Gospel, though set off in plausible language
by such a man of tongue.

The rest of his talk better deserves those titles of supercilious, and
insulting, and Rhetorical invective canting, etc. which he bestows upon his
admonisher, then the Letter sent him.

4. At last he comes to the 4 particular, containing 13. other particulars,
which he says he might be seduced into, if he had owned Anabaptism. Answ. But
that (as Mr. Eyres said long ago) it is too well known that Mr. Baxters tongue
is no slander, I would particularly demonstrate, either those evils he
insinuates us to be guilty of, and led unto by our principle, are none of ours;
and that through grace we are kept from such opinions or practices; (as our
public Confessions and Conversations are ample testimonies of) and which none
but a man of Calumny would charge us with. But in the consciences of all sober
dissenters we question not but we shall be freed from an imputation uttered in
heat, and that looks with such an aspect as if mere malice had given it birth.

And as these particulars are the mere product of that peevishness and anger he
is commonly in, when he corrects these bauling and Crying Children, as he calls
us, More Proofs p. 2. 3. and so scarce worth our notice; so I observe he
blesses God for delivering him from some things, which yet he was foully guilty
of; as the 3. particular, viz. A proud overvaluing of his own opinion, etc. And
the 4. viz. having a hand in all the turnings and overturnings; settings up,
and pulling down; praying, and unpraying, owning and disowning; bloody days;
and thanksgiving for them, etc. And that in a more notorious degree then any of
the persons he accuses, as is already to his shame made out from his own pen.
So that I could retort these particulars almost generally upon him; for he
deserves much of that Character he vainly boasts he is free from, but such
applications we find by experience do him little good, and therefore at present
I spare him.

And whether he be not fallen point blank into his 9. particular, viz. That
when once prepossession, prejudice and Interest of Reputation had engaged him
in so bad a cause (as Infant Sprinkling) he studied all that he could rak^
together to maintain it, and to have stretched all his wits to have opposed all
that is brought against it, etc. let his Conscience determine.

I desire the Reader to note, that it any passages of his are past without
Animadversion, they are either such things as are largely confuted already, or
else apparently frivolous; and so not worth mine nor the Readers time.

A Postscript to Mr. Richard Baxter, showing the Vanity and Equivocation of his
Return to Mr. Danvers his Third Reply.
Sir,
THat worthy person at whose Invitation you say you published your Review being
now with the Lord; And your accosting Mr. Danvers so Cowardly (when, I verily
believe, you knew him to be under such Circumstances as necessarily obliged him
then to wave further contest with you) are two motives to qualify your wonder
at my appearing in both their vindications. And I assure you I know no cause of
repentance for the undertaking, unless my disability in defending them, renders
it not so completely done as their own (more able) pens might have done it.
Therefore Sir, notwithstanding the hazard I undergo of being branded with those
r^aiting Epithetes you dispense with great freedom amongst your Monitors, I
will make bold to tell you, that it were more safe for you to have returned a
private answer to that private Letter of Mr. Hutchinsons, and have performed
your promise of silence to Mr. Danvers, then in the first to expose your
ridiculous threadbare Plea to a new scanning, and in the Second to give a
notable Instance, that you are like that pompious Cardinal, that would not be a
slave to his word.

Your general exclamations against Mr. Danvers; your charging him with strange
heaps of untruths (without any Reply to his demonstrative and large defense,
and taking no notice of the gross falsehoods he proved you guilty of, and his
delineating you in your several true shapes and colors, that your disguise may
no longer delude us) will scarce pass for Oracles, with such as know that such
language is become a Second nature in you. Sir, I am satisfied these things are
evidenced to your just conviction, else you, being such a proficient in the
talking faculty, and one that can Hector it at such a rate in more minute and
unnecessary wranglings, would let us here on it on both ears. But since you are
silenced in such matters as evidence your tongue to be no slander, we need say
but little more.

Are not you the man who without the least reverence or regard to truth, had
the boldness to publish to the world, in your Key to Oath. p. 312, etc. That
Sir H. V. was a Papist, and a Jesuit, and had brought his wicked and corrupt
opinions from Italy, and how the Papists were strong in England under his ma^k;
And that he had his hand in chief in the Kings death. And that notwithstanding
your many Reproofs for those horrid and notorious Forgeries and slanders, and
the many calls given you to repentance, and satisfaction, for such impieties,
yet have not you hardened your self against all admonition therein to this day?
as though your tongue and pen was your own, to use how you pleased against any
man.

Are not you the man who accused that worthy and Learned Mr. Bagshaw of eighty
untruths in the compass of a few pages? when scarce one could be made appear
with any demonstration.

And if you suffer your milk to boil over at such a rate, and be so lavish
with a slanderous tongue and pen against others, have we not cause to conclude
your clamorous and railing out cries and invectives against Mr. D. to be of the
same stamp, especially since you please only to give us your own word for them.

Do not you tell us p. 47. That you had detected voluminous untruths in Mr. D's
former Book, and p. 49. That the very first Paragraph of the latter has more
then one or two lies in it. And yet neither show the insufficiency of his
defense to the former, nor give the least demonstration of the latter; and is
not this a very convincing way, and who but Mr. B. think you, appropriateth to
himself such mediums.

But lest you should be thought wholly silent as to particulars, you are
pleased to condescend to give us one particular instance wherein Mr. D. has not
answered your charge telling us p. 48. His accusation of the Novatians the
neither defends (that you see) nor confesses to be aslander, but silently
passes all the matter by. And is not this very strange that you should so
punctually call him to an account for this one, being in so great an Arreare
with him, there being so many Forgeries and falsehoods of far greater moment he
has laid at your Door, which you have neither confessed nor defended. But what
cause you had to fall upon him for this supposed omission let the Reader judge.

For Mr. D's having in his 2 Reply in answer to you defended [the Donatists,
some of his witnesses] against your cavils, whom he had in several particulars
made to appear to have been one in principal with the Novatians, as Treat. p.
223, etc. And 1. Reply p 1^6. Does in p. 49. 2. Reply, tells us in there Lords.
And that the Novatians were the same with the (...) ways doubt from the
Reasons, before expressed groan of which you refutes) and to which I shall add,
what (...) in Gabriel Prateolus de vit. sict. concerning the Novations p. 123.
viz. That they affirmed Infants did not stand in need^, Baptism; Infantes non
egere Baptismo.

And if this be neither to defend nor confess, but to pass over all the matter
in silence, will eas^ly be determined.

You come on afresh to excuse your slander of Naked dipping, About naked
dipping.
and tell us, that it was not the way of most of them when you wrote that Book;
And that you heard of none of those few that for any considerable time
continued it. Sir, this condems you notoriously, that notwithstanding you knew
it was not the way of most, you should yet charge it to be their ordinary
practice in indefinite and Universal terms; which no Reader could understand
otherwise, then that it was the general way of all Anabaptists, and the
ratify because you thereupon levey your Arguments against Anabaptisty it self
for the breach of the 6. and 7. Commandments charging Murder and Adubery upon
it; and I observe your craft in stuffing in the Quakers quaking, etc. as
parallel Cases, to make the Reader think the matter of equal probability. But
Sir, I am satisfied your conscience knows (and it is evident enough to others)
that you only delude the world by your similiturdes; there being not the least
color of proof, or shadow of evidence (nor scarce same which you call a liar)
to be produced that ever any such practice has been amongst us. The Quakers
having not only owned their quaking in Print, but thousands of eye witnesses in
readiness to attest the same (it denied by them;) whereas neither word nor
witness can be produced for Anabaptists naked dipping. And you are not
ignorant, that Samuel Fisher in that Book of his (recommended by you,) did upon
your first broaching of this slander (challenge all the world to bring fofth
any one faithful witness to confirm the same) if they could. Therefore for
shame go not about to palliate so wretched a misreport, and spend no more of
your learned nonsense to extricate your self. But rather honestly repent that
ever you broacht it.

You would now alter the state of the question p. 50 which it seems must be not
whether you reported such ^^thing? (that is too evident to be cluded) nor
whether it was true? (this too, to your shame, is made our to be your lie) But,
whether you did well, or ill to believe it. And you tell us you would
disbelieve it, but you cannot.

To the question as you now state it. I hope an answer from your own pen will
be satisfactory. It is in your Christian Directory p 156. Fame is too ordinary
a liar, and they shall be liars who will be its messengers, etc. And a little
further you thus express your self -- If you know (...) not to be true, or that
there be not sufficient evidence to prove it, you are guilty of lying and
slandering Interpretatively; though it should be true, because it might have
been a lie for ought you know; more of this Mr. Danvers quotes 2 Reply p. 118.
worth your notice, though you superciliously slight it. Pray consider another
Answer to your question Exodus 23 1.

You say you are not able to dis believe it -- What are you indeed hardened in
your unbelief? can neither Scripture, notorious evidence, nor your own pen
convince you, that you ought not only to dis believe, but also repent for false
report, which you have no other ground for but that fame which you call a liar?
If you be such conviction proof, your case is desperate.

But Sir, you pretended you had more then common fame for your report. Your
very words are p 131. plain Script. We dispute not against bare words, but
experiences and known practices; For their naked dipping is a known thing, and
the wickedness that has followed on some, and that some have dyed on it. And to
excuse this you tell us p. 53. Review That you never alleged your own
experience -- But Sir this will not excuse you from the sentence your own
tongue passes upon you, viz. That you are a lying Messenger of lying same, and
lying reporters. For you put the question Christ. Direct. p. 156. How know you
whether the thing reported is true? Is it only because a credible person spoke
it? But how did that person know it to be true? might not he take it upon trust
as well as you? and might he not think a person to be credible that is not? And
how commonly does faction, interest, passion, or credulity make the person
incredible in one thing, who is credible in another? etc. Can you avoid this
condemnation from your own mouth, having pronounced your self an interpretative
liar? if not, blushing more becomes you, then to wast more Ink in palliating so
pilpable a falsehood.

You say, you are past doubt that you have read of their Baptizing naked in
Foreign writers, p. 53. But what then? was not your calumny of English
Anabaptists? and must Foreign writers be believed by you (when yet you can
produce none) against known practice at home.? I am weary of further exposing
so temerarious an accuser.

But what need I say any more hereto, since Mr. D. has in so many particulars
(in his 3. Reply) so substantially detected your falacy and falsehood herein,
discovering that all your endeavors to extricate your self, has but involved
you into surther guilt.

Therefore Sir, suffer me in conjunction with your other Monitors, earnestly to
exhort you to Review and lay to heart this your slanderous way of writing, and
be prevailed with once in your life to retract some of your bad, and
particularly, amongst other of your calumnies, let not your slanderous Reviling
of the Vanists and Anabaptists be forgotten by you. And in the mean time, that
you will cease justifying or palliating such impieties which will do nothing but
inhance your reckoning in the day of Account.

You come next to avoid, About his Paper left with the Clerk.
as well as you can, the use made of the paper lest with the Clerk -- telling
us, the motive of it was your pity to two Parishes, containing a million of
souls (consider whether you are not out in your Arithmetic) of which not above
sixty thousand can bear in the Parish Churches, which induced you to be as
busy in propagating the Gospel near Whitehall, as the Jesuits (you say) to
their just praise are in America.

Whatever your motives were, God and your own heart knows. But in my opinion
you have fitted your self ad amussim with parallel preachers, your justly
praised Jesaites. For you have taken much pains to preach their Gospel, as
several learned pens have made out.

You tell us the substance of your declarations, viz. That you did not meet to
worship God with any other manner of worship, then what is according to the
Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, and though you did not read your
self, but another did^t, it was because you were not able; which if you were,
you would do it.

Answ. Mr. Danvers charges no more upon you, then what you confess here, viz.
Your profession of Conformity to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of
England.

2. You would evade this by telling us, that he that says the Lords Prayer,
does not use another manner of worship then the Church; but I appeal to your
conscience, whether by the words of your declaration you would not have the
Conforming party understand, that by your Reading you meant the
Common Prayer Book? if so, is it not wretched equivocation, and do you think
God will be served with such deluding reservations? And whether you did not pen
your declaration in such ambiguous and equivocal terms, as on the one hand to
blind the Conformists, and make them think you theirs; so on the other hand, to
excuse your self to the Non-consormists, by telling them, you meant the Reading
the Scriptures? and so cunningly play an Ambidexter in Divinity.

And so your reading some part of the Scriptures, it may be the Lords prayer,
ten Commandments, Epistle and Gospel for the day, etc. (as that once in
Buckinghamshire,) may serve to elude the Conformists, because read out of the
Common Prayer Book, but if taken notice on by a Nonconformist, then it was only
reading the Scripture, not Common Prayer. And for observing hereof, you so
violently fly in the face of Mr. D.

You tell us, you are not able to read your self. But what? why Reader, if thou
art a Conformist, he means Common prayer, but then he could hear it read well
enough. If thou art a Non conformist, he means the Scripture. But Sir, are you
not able to read the Scriptures? Can you have leisure and ability to write
voluminous Directories, Bodies of Divinity, Catholic Theologies, and no time
nor leisure to read the Scripture? It seems your Divinity is no Scripture
Divinity.

As for your talk of a considerable part of the writing being left out, I must
profess I cannot believe you, and my incredulity is grounded upon firmer
evidence, then your flander of naked dipping; if you desire to know it, it is
like you may. The matter of fact charged, your own pen acknowledges; which at
present is enough.

You say you are no greater adversary to the Liturgy then Mr. Hildersham,
Knowstubs, Ball, Bradshaw, Paget, and Mr. Gifford were.

Answ. What adversaries they were to is I have not leisure to examine. But I
know what adversary you have been to it I can to refresh your Memory tell you,
that.

In your Book dedicated to Rich. Cromwell Protector, Prief. p. 17. you said,
that most that are serious in practical Christianity, were against such formal
ways of worship -- And the spirit of profaneness complied with it, etc. -- p.
36. you said, English Episcopacy gratified the Devil and wicked men -- that the
rabble of ignorant persons, worldlings, Drankards, Haters of Godlyness, were
very Zealous for them, etc. p. 3^8. you called the Church of England, the sink
of all the other Church, in England. The Bishops Government, you called
Ceremonious impositions, Usa pation, and pretended Office, First disp. p. 457.

Have you not said in your Savoy Conference, of which you are said to be the
Penman (but certainly you were an approver, if not the (...) that t^^ ^e are no
Records of known credit for any (...) for the first 3^0 years. p. 11. And have
you not given 60 exceptions against it, of which some were, that it (...)
little from the Romish form^, p. ^. part 1. That it Unites only in a dead
Religion, p. 23. That a Coat may be made for the Moon, as well as a Liturgy
framed, suited sufficiently to the variety of places, times, subjects, etc. p
55?

And this is the friend ship you expressed to the Liturgy, and the Bishops when
you were in your highest elevation. But now you complement them by the titles
of the Right Reverend Fathers in God, etc. in the Account of the Savey
Conference.

As to Mr. D. leaving out any part of the Paper, was not your exception, but
for his grossly falsifying it, and which your own Book seller at first told me
was respecting the alteration of that clause, viz. I would accordingly read the
same, For I would accordingly read my self, and which Mr. D. rectified by a
copy affirmed to be from the Original in the Clerks hand, and with all the
little cause given you thereby for so severe a Remark; and doubtless had there
been any such gross falsisication, or any considerable clause left out, we
should have heard of it in words at length before this.

Sir, Your disease seems to me to be the more incurable, in that you have
turned scorner since your admonition, Mr. Danvers in his 2. Reply gave you a
very demonstrative one, and which I suppose you can find no equivocations to
shift off (which is wonderful) therefore you take no notice of it: But you say,
you will hear some Scriptures he sends you to. And you draw such
mock-consequences from them, as if they were not pertinent to your case. But if
you please, I Will give my self the trouble to draw consequences more pat from
them and leave you to apply them.

2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. Paul exhorts the Corinthians to approve themselves Ministers
of God, in much patience, afflictions, necessities, distresses etc. Ergo say
you, Did R. B. do ill to come out of the Goal, when he was put in? or not put
himself in again? p. 61. No Sir, that is not the right Ergo: but Ergo R B. did
ill to slink his neck out of the Collar, and inveigble a poor Country Minister
in to suffer for him in the common Goal ^ For I very well remember, that giving
that Country Minister, (that was clapped upt in your stead) avisit in the
Gate House; he slewed me a copy of the Warrant by virtue of which he was taken^
which was against Richard Pa^ter of the parish of St. Giles, but when they
sound you were withdrawn, they blotted out your name, and interlined your
Deputy-sufferers name just over it And if you have not reimburs'd his charges,
it is just you should.

2. The second text is Act. 20 1^, 1^, 13. Paul preached till break of day etc.
Ergo, say you, R B. should not preach in the Country; you deny the Consequence,
adding that perhaps Mr. Danvers meant (as it is like he did) Act. 21.13. Paul
was ready to be bound or die at Jerusalem -- Ergo say you, R. B. did sin in a
voiding it often before. etc. -- Whether this consequence be applicable to you I
shall not now dispute: but I may safely draw this consequence, Ergo R. B.
should not avoid preaching in the City to ensnare another, nor avoid being
bound to bind another.

3. The third is Matt. 10.38. He that takes rot his Cross and follows me, is
not worthy of me: Ergo, you say, R. B. must make his own Cross, or sins in
avoiding it; or must ^o into a prison to a void preaching -- But you miss the
right Ergo here too: For it should b^, Ergo R.B. should not make a Cross for
another, nor make another go to prison to hinder him from preaching. Your
phrase of pleasing his spleen in preserring a prison before a Pulpit, relishes
your Gall Mary have chosen a station in a prison, before such a Pulpit as you
tell us is near a kin to an Alehouse or Tavern, p. 113. Grotian Religion or
Augean stable, which none but such a Hercules as you, would undertake to
mundifie

4. The fourth is John 10.12.13. The hireling sees the Woolf coming, leaves
the sheep, etc. Here you make no Ergo's, but say you are no hireling. But Sir,
the Ergo that should follow this, should be; that if you have a Meeting house
built at the great expense of others, and undertake to preach in it: Ergo, you
should not upon the notice of danger, trepan another to undergo the
imprisonment due to you, and slily march off, under the pretense of Country air.

And for your saying, you are not so much as the Pastor of any Flock, It may
not be un-worthy the enquiry how you came to be absolved from your Pastoral
charge of your Flock at Kidderminster, once owned to be committed to you by
Christ, (viz. those in that Parish who gave an account of their faith and good
life to you, and thereupon admitted by you to the Lords Supper) and whether
that is a relation holding good only in fair weather, or to be played fast and
loose with at leisure.

5 The last is Matt 2^.2, 3, 4. They bind heavy burders grievious to be horn;
and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one
of their singers, etc. Ergo you say, R. B. should not preach in the parish
Churches; or should bind heavy burdens for himself -- No Sir, that Consequence
is not in the premises. But Ergo R. B should not when he builds a
Meeting Place, preach there only in calm weather, but rather their (when danger
comes) others should bare the burden of the affliction (viz imprisonment in the
Gate House) upon their -- shoulders, R. B. himself should put in his little
singer (of equal fortitude it seems with another shoulder) and move off the
burden himself. Or Ergo, if R. B. has no mind to be prisoner, he should not
subtly draw in others, that perhaps have no more stomach to the entertainment
there then himself.

Sir, you have long abused the world, too apt of it self to receive opinions
upon the bare (though mistaken) reputation, of such voluminous triflers as you.
And I am persuaded several of your proselites have sucked in your corrupt
Notions, (without any serious examination of your reasons) merely because you
said so. And therefore what Dr. Pierce, Dr. Tully, Mr. Crandon, Mr. Danvers,
Mr. Bagshaw, and several other learned men have writ to detect your
corruptions, is, in my judgment, very good service; that you may not under
your disguise of piety, learning, and purity, longer infect the Nation with
that dangerous leaven your books abound with. And if men will still, after such
fair warning, make you the Oracle of their Divinity, let them blame themselves
only if they find the effects of it malignant and perilous.

It Is like you can write another Book (at least a Postscript) if you be in the
humor, to consute all we say; and that you will call what I say to you,
Quaker-like oratory and obtestations, and that it is in hypocrisy (as you tell
Mr. Hutchinson, though you boldly assume a prerogative, that belongs not to
you, of judging the heart) and it is probable you will still outface Mr. Danvers
his large Demonstrations, with Postscripts containing general exclamations and
dictates, and belike you think your ipse dixit is of as uncontrolled authority
as that of Pythagoras -- But Sir, it is my present intention to give you leave
to talk, till you talk your self quiet: for there is no gaping against an Oven.

Yet I can (if you will but hear it) cure your pretended ignorance, why people
talk of your averseness to martyrdom. And it is not (as you would insinuate)
because we judge all persons graceless, that are not Martyred, (for so we judge
them not) nor that you may be capable enough of our good opinion though
unmartyred; nor do we mock at Paul for being let down by the wall in a Basket;
nor at our blessed Saviors withdrawing into Egypt, into the Wilderness, or
Galilee; which you would sain make examples in your case -- But Sir, it is
because you have given too large an experience, that you can conform to
whatever mode of worship is uppermost in the Nation, at least so far, as to
stave off suffering And that you are surnisht with words to such a degree, as
to outface all the world, that they must take you as their exampler in
Religion. That when formerly you said, the English Episcopacy was a government
that gratified the Devil, you upbraidingly told them, all blasphemers, and
baters of Godlyness, voted for them, Disp. pref. p. 17. And now on the other
hand, you can change your note, and tell such as conscientiously dissent from
that way you branded so dreadfully, that they are ignorant, peevish
Church-dividers, sectaries, and what not? And what security can you give, but
if Popery should come (as we hope it never shall) to have the upper hand, you
would cry up that too, and proclaim all dissenters from it, as deserving the
same Epithetes? Your prasing the Jesuits for their industry in converting the
Americans from their Heathen to a Romish Idolatry, Review. p. 55. That Popish
leaven wherewith you mix the most cardinal Protestant Doctrines; your bold
arguings against the Divine and self-evidencing light of the holy Scriptures,
etc. bespeak a latitude in you capable enough of such a transformation. And
though the examples you mention are a sufficient plea for avoiding a
persecution so Circumstanced as Christ's and Paul's were; yet where do you find,
that they procured others to supply their Rooms, viz. to suffer as proxies for
them? If you can produce that, you do something toward your vindication.

Tho. Delaunt

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
In Answer to Mr. Walker 's Modest Plea, etc.
MR. Walker's Modest Plea for Infant Baptism coming to hand, whilst those
Papers were delayed at the Press, I thought fit to say something to it; yet
shall observe my wonted brevity: and the rather because his Arguments (as he
says, p. 425.) are mostly those that were used by Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Hammond,
now fitted by him for vulgar capacity. As for Dr. Tailor, whether we respect
the Authority of the Person, or the strength of his Reasoning, let his Liberty
of Prophecy determine, whether he has not given Paedobaptism such a wound, as
neither he himself, nor any other of that persuasion, (no not Dr. Hammond
himself) were, or ever will be, able to cure. So that whatever he urged against
us afterward, (which was but very faint too) is upon record substantially
confuted by his own pen. As to Dr. Hammond's Arguments, they are largely and
learnedly refelled by Mr. Tombs, in the later Sections of the second and third
part of his Review, which Mr. Walker should have taken notice of; and to which
the enquiring Reader is now referred.

As to the style and manner of Mr. Walker's writing against us, I own it to be
indeed, for the most part, modest and sober, having not given himself the
libert^ of such an unsavory treatment, and unchristian Refl^^^^ons, as is
almost the common language of our other Antagonists; And (...) ground for his
so fairly treating us, in the beginning (...) Preface, [viz. as lying under the
strongest prejud^^^ (...) dissenters from the Church of England, because (...)
ingly fair pleas, from Scripture, and Ecclesiast (...) few of our fellow
dissenters can paralli^^ (...) more favor and kindness to be treat (...) ness
and clearness ought our (...) candid and ingenuou^ (...)

As to the matter of his Book, it is confessed, his labor in quoting so many
Greek and Latin Authorities, has not been small; (And Mr. Danvers before him
gave through every Century a collection of their real, as pretended
Authorities:) And I confess freely, that he has much more to pretend from
Antiquity, then those have who assert Infant Baptism from a faederal right, a
Medium not to be found among the Fathers, nor in the world (as I can find) till
about Zuinglius his time in the 16th. Century. For all the Fathers that held
the Baptism of Infants, for these last 1200 years it has been in the world,
have asserted it [and Vossius himself says, that it was the mind of the
Catholic Church, Magnus est (antiquitatis) consensus, quod -- Infantes per
baptismum vitae ac felicitatis aeternae participes fiant, p. 594.] from its
necessity to salvation. Which dismal opinion growing common, that none without
baptism could be saved, from John 3.5. mis-understood; and the Interest of
their Childrens salvation, having so near an influence and impression upon
them, caused them to admit a conclusion of so great moment and concernment,
upon very easy and infirm considerations. And hence came the pract^ce to give
them, as Baptism, so the Lords Supper, for 600 years together, from its
necessity also to salvation, as they inferred it (and indeed with as much
reason as the other) from John 6.53.

By way of premise, and to prevent Repetition, I shall consider how far the
practice of Antiquity (so much leaned upon by Mr. Walker and others) is
obliging to us, and of what weight their Testimonies ought to be, in deciding
this Controversy. And I shall lay this down for a principle, which no man I
presume will deny, -- That Proofs ought to be fetched from such things as are
confessed and acknowledged by our adversary whom we endeavor to convince,
otherwise we shall never be able to move him, or make him quit his former
opinion. And therefore no proof from the Fathers, to prove a matter of right,
is valid against us, because we own ^ot their Authority. To many indeed, that is
a great argu(...) baptizing of Infants, but to us (as I said) such (...) are so
far from being of the first magnitude, (...) collateral, being as often brought
for the (...) as truth.

(...) as a Rule, or Standard to try (...) certain and undoubted, and must
carry with it, a sufficient authority to satisfy the understanding, which
neither can, nor indeed ought to believe any thing in point of Religion, (as
the excellent Daille at large evinces) but what it knows to be certainly true.
It is certain that in the proof of an Hypothesis, to begin with the Fathers and
humane Authority, is to invert the natural order of things; we ought first to
have recourse to the Scriptures of truth, that we may be assured, that the
thing is, or ought to be, before we make enquiry whether it has been in the
respective ages believed or not. For to what purpose is it to find that the
Ancients believed it, unless we find withal in their writings, some reason of
this their belief? and what harm is it to us to be ignorant, whether Antiquity
believed it, or not, so long as we know that the thing is? Quod sacris
Scripturis traditum non est, non sine peccato inquiritur, sive periculo
ignoratur, says Bull^nger.

The greatest admirers of the Fathers confess, that though they err little in
matter of right, yet are often out, and have their failings in matter of fact,
because right is an universal thing, every way uniform, and all of one sort,
whereas matter of fact is a thing which is mixed, and as it were enchas'd with
diverse particular circumstances, which may easily escape the observation and
knowledge of (or at least be not so rightly understood by) the most clear and
piercing wits. Now the condition of the Churches belief in every particular
age, is matter of fall, and not right, and a point of History, not an Article
of Faith. He that will not examine the Reasons, as well as the Opinions of men,
(though of never so venerable names) may be soon led into a labyrinth of error.
How consonant to Reason is it, that we should allege, not the Names of Books,
but the Reasons, and take notice not of the quality of their Authors, but of
the solidity of their proofs, so to reduce the dispute from persons to things,
according to that memorable saying of Jerome, Ep. 15. Non juxta Pytagorae
Discipulos, praejudicata doctoris opinio, sed doctrinae ratio ponderanda est.

What is urged here is to reduce Controversies to be tried before the right
bar, viz. the Scriptures, since that alone is of so sacred and undoubted
authority as to oblige our belief, to whatever is found there; and against
which no objections lie, the Lord having by his gracious providence preserved
them in the Church from the injuries of time, ignorance, and fraud, from the
beginning hitherto. They have been kept with much greater care, then any other
Books, translated into all Languages, retained both by Orthodox and Heretics,
diligently observing each other, so that there could not possibly happen any
remarkable alteration in them, but that presently the whole world would have
exclaimed against it; whereas (as learned Daille truly says) much of the
writings that go under the names of the Fathers, are not truly sach, and that
the Heretics vented their conceits under those eminent names, to gain them
repute; And that their legitimate pieces are wonderfully corrupted and obscure,
(and such are not proper for the decision of Controversies) and encumbered with
Rhetorical flourishes, and Legical subtilties; and that they have erred in
diverse points of Religion, and contradicted one another in matters of great
importance. So that in this case we are to take the course that is observed in
all Sciences whatsoever; we are to prove the truth we propose by such maxims
as are acknowledged and allowed, making good that which is doubtful, by that
which is certain; and clearing that which is ob^^ure, by that which is evident.
The Word of God is our Common Book, let us search into it, for that upon which
we may ground our own belief, and by which we may overthrow error; -- Regula
est mensura sui and obliqui. The Scripture sufficiently delivers us the
positive truth, which is enough; for as whatsoever rightly follows thereupon,
is true: so whatsoever clasheth with, or contradicts the same, is false. No
Science gives us any certain account of Negative Propositions, for as much as
to go about to number them all, would be both an infinite, and also an
unprofitable, useless piece of work: Therefore such as go about to establish an
opinion, because not expressly forbidden in Scripture, (as Mr Walker seems to
do. p. 218. whose words are, Never stand hunting for a Scripture for it, so
long as there is no Scripture against it) do not consider that they undermine
the securest ground we stand upon, against the invaders of Religion: For by
that argument (as Dr Owen well says) ten thousand things may it made lawful,
there being no express Scripture sorbidding the upstart inventions, and
impostures of Seducers by name and circumstance. And what a crowd of such
corruptions have crept into the worship of God, under this pretext, in times of
Superstition, under the Antichristian servitude!

All the use we can make of Antiquity is, either in matter of fact, (viz.
whether such an opinion was in being in their time) or matter of right, (viz.
whether it ought to be so;) For this later, no sober person will take any of
the Ancients to be competent Judges, for that were to slight the Word of God,
and bestow the prerogative that belongs to it upon frail man, which the Fathers
themselves durst not usurp. Therefore it rests that we can make no further use
of them, then to witness matter of fact. And though we find them avouch a
matter of fact, yet that proves not that the thing is lawful. As for instance;
we find Cyprian, the earliest pretended Patron of Paedobaptism in the 3d.
Century, (if that Epistle to Fidus be a legitimate piece of his) make mention
of Infant Baptism; and if that proves the lawfulness of that practice, it will
also prove the lawfulness of Infants receiving the Lords Supper, because the
same Cyprian asserts it to be necessary for them in order to their Salvation,
lib. 3. test. ad Qui. c. 25. And Maldonate affirms, in Joan. 6. number. 116. that
this opinion of Augustine's and Innocent the first's prevailed in the Church
about 6^0 years; -- que (scil. sententia Augustini and Innocentii primi)
sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus
fuisse necessariam. Therefore that practice of Infant Commanion being as
gray headed as their Baptism, deserves equal veneration with it.

It appears by this, that it is worth enquiry upon what grounds those alleged
Patrons of Paedobaptism went, for if they have erred in the Reason of the
foundation, it will be easily believed they did also in the building.

Cyprian held Baptism simply necessary to salvation, lib. 3. Ep. 8. ad Fidum.
So Jerome contra Pelag. and Austin l. 1. de peccat mor. and remiss. Si ergo
(ait) ut tot, and tanta divina testimonia concinunt, nec salus, nec vita
aeterna, sine baptismo, and corpore and sanguine Domini cuiquam spectanda,
frustra sine his promittitur parvulis. That is, Therefore if so many, and so
considerable divine testimonies agree, that none must expect salvation, nor
life everlasting, without Baptism and the body and blood of the Lord, without
these it (salvation) is vainly promised to little ones. This was the Universal
ground and motive of the Fathers that assert Infant Baptism for many hundred
years. And as for their warrant, it is certain they built their practice upon
Tradition not written, being no more able then other men to find a word of
Instituio for it in Scripture, where it is not. It Is true, that word
(Tradition) is general, signifying all Doctrines written or unwritten, 2 Thessalonians.
2.15. But 'twas by the Fathers, as it is now, accommodated to signify a
Doctrine not written, yet supposed to be Apostolical, which, if allowed to
every pretender, would bring miserable confusion into Religion, and soon
metamorphose it into an adulterated Form of humane Invention, Mat. 15.9. and
10.16. Act. 5.19. Gal. 1.9.

Now all those Fathers that practiced Paedobaptism as an Apostolical practice
not written, as most have indeed done, that being their best plea, are justly
to be reputed ours, and of our side, for they judge it not from Scripture,
therefore fetch its rise from Tradition, which because it cannot bear the
weight of an Institution, the whole building is to fall; for by flying for
refuge to Tradition, they do with us affirm, that there is no better ground for
Infant Baptism then humane Tradition, which is indeed none at all. And thus all
the Testimony and Authority of these Fathers becomes ours. There has been (we
own) such a thing as the Traditions of Christ and the Apostles, which are of
the highest and greatest authority, but they were such things as afterward
were committed to writing by the Evangelists and Apostles; other Traditions we
avow none, but esteem them Apocryphal. So that it follows (as I said) that such
as avouch Infant Baptism from Tradition, acknowledge in so doing, that there is
no better authority for it, and so conclude with us that it has not the
Scripture for its foundation. And so those that give it to Infants as simply
necessary to Salvation, will be of no authority against us, nor of any credit
to their cause, because the building must be levelled according to the
foundation, and that being false, they are necessitated to the mistake of their
building. And if there were any force in these authorities for Infant Baptism,
why should it not regulate our practice in the other Sacrament, which was as
anciently given to Infants as the other, (and says Dr. Tailor p 231. they were
honest that understood the obligation to be parallel) and in some places to
this day, as Brerewood in his learned Enquiries affirms; viz. by the Jacobites,
Christians so called in great numbers in Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, Babylon,
Palestine, so by the Habassines inhabiting Ethiopia, and the Armenians, etc. so
that if Antiquity be our guide, it will lead us to administer the Supper as
well as Baptism to Infants, and if it fail in the one, it is to be suspected in
the other. I see not why the Supper should be a greater mystery then the other,
or the ceremony more significant, or that the Duty of examining should need
more of the use of Reason, then believing, repenting, and confessing our sins;
it is as natural and proper to Infancy to be nourished, as to be born, therefore
as capable of the ceremony of their nourishment, as of their birth, and so of
one as well as the other Sacrament.

I am the longer upon this point, because it will much shorten what follows,
and to show how unreasonable the immoderate veneration of Antiquity is, which
has well nigh undone the world, and justled the simple and primitive purity of
Religion almost out of doors; and to reduce men to the testimony of the Word of
God alone, in the decision of Controversies. The use we make of Antiquity is,
not from any force we apprehend in such Reasonings to establish the truth we
contend for; but barely by way of Illustration, and as an argumentum ad hominem
only, as the Apostle Paul cited the Cretan Poet Epimenides to Tit. 1.12. (...);
to prove what a censure their own Poets passed upon the Cretans: And to show
that our Adversaries have no such advantage over us in the matter of Antiquity,
as they vainly fancy; it being unanswerably made out by Mr. Danvers, Mr. Tombs,
and others, that the Antiquity of the three first Centuries, as well as the
Scripture text, is expressly for us. And of all Antiquity, we are most
especially to regard those first Centuries, it being the ordinary course of
things to contract corruptions more or less, according as they are more or less
removed from their first Institutions. And more then so, that the truth we own
has been eminently witnessed unto by some People and Churches all along, yea by
the very mouths of our adversaries; for whilst by Canons and Curses they labor
to establish Infant Baptism, to warrant which if they had conceived there were
any Scripture ground, that would be needless; for as Mr. Will well says, Inf.
Bapt. p 106. That which prevails by force of a greater, needs not be assisted
by a weaker Authority. Therefore they (having no Scripture to bottom it upon)
employed both their Authority and ablest Pens to persuade the world that it was
absolutely necessary, that so it might the easil^er be received. And thereby
they declare, that it was from time to time witnessed against, otherwise their
labor was idly spent, in making such a do to establish a practice that non
eopposed. So that as Mr. Danvers well notes, Rep. p. 70. these Canons being
made upon occasion of those that denied Infant Baptism, we have our witnesses
through all ages to testify that our practice is no novelty. And if
Tertullian's opposing Infant Baptism, be brought as an evidence that it was
then in the world, (as Mr. Walker says, p. 281.) then certainly we ought to
have the like freedom of concluding, that if those Councils produced against
us, bent their Authority to establish Infant Baptism, it is an evident proof
that it was opposed all along, and so had no quiet being in the world.

Certainly the testimonies of Strabo (who lived about 837 years ago) and Vives,
that no other but adult baptism was practiced of old, as cited by Vossius,
These. Theol p. 429. are not to be slighted, however Strabo, or the Scribe,
mistook the year of Augustine's age. And in the midst of Papal darkness, about
400 or 500 years ago we find Bernard complaining thus, of the Puritans (so
called) of his time; Irrident nos quod baptizamus Infantes, quod oramus pro
mortuis, quod Sanctorum sustragta postulamus, etc. They deride us because we
baptize Infants, and pray for the Dead, and desire the intercession of Saints.
Sermon. 66. in Cantic. And Vossius tells us; that Tertullian and Nazianzen were
of the judgment of Strabo, and would have Infant Baptism deferred, (nisi
pe^iculum (mort^s) urgeat,) and pray what should cause those great Doctors to
oppose the Baptism of such Infants as were likely to live, if the Universal
Church were of a contrary mind? Indeed Vossius says it was only their private
opinion, but that is more then he is able to demonstrate from any of their
Contemporaries; therefore his word for it, is but an ipse dixit, which must not
stand against his plain demonstration of the other.

Mr. Walker in his Preface reckons 19 particular Reasons why in ancient times
adult B. ptism, and 4 why Infant Baptism was deferred, therefore concludes that
because those Reasons are disterent from ours, our plea from Antiquity cannot
serve our Hypothesis

Answ. I might here with greater equity retort this consideration upon
Paedobaptism, as held by many Protestants, and say, that whereas we find the
Antiquity that held up that practice, did it from such rotten,
anti-evangelical, and exploded notions, (viz. the conceit of its absolute
necessity to salvation, etc.) as most of our Protestants durst not own, (though
I fear such writers as Mr. Walker border too near upon them) but do hold up the
practice from another pretense, viz. that imaginary Covenant they dream, to
have been made with believers and their carnal seed; therefore our present
Paedobaptists retaining only the practice, not the ground of Antiquity, cannot
without a manifest breach of modesty claim Antiquity for their Hypothesis, or
against ours. But,

2. We are not much concerned to (...) and time in disproof of this matter,
since every rational man will allow, that (though we should take all this for
granted, yet) the erroneous apprehensions of some persons, and their practices
consequent thereto, and that too no higher then the 4th. Century, is no
sufficient argument to prove that the generality of those primitive Christians,
that lived in the precedent Centuries, which we challenge to be for our
practice, delayed their own, or their Childrens Baptism, from those particulars
enumerated and no other; for all that delayed their own or Childrens Baptism,
upon the true and proper ground, viz. the want of Faith and Repentance, came
not justly under reproof; (and that I presume is the reason, why they have had
none) therefore there is a stronger probability that the writers of those
times, judged that ground of delay ( viz. if in a state of unbelief)
legitimate, and so had no occasion to mention it.

3. It Is no strange thing, even in our day, that persons out of such undue and
unwarrantable grounds as mentioned, delay their submission to the way and
Ordinances of Christ, and I am persuaded that a great many, that are thoroughly
enlightened, do yet at this time of light stifle Conscience, and for the Reasons
mentioned in Mr. Walker's 2, 3, 6, 14, and 19th. particulars, slight and
neglect the pure worship of God, and satisfy themselves in a posture of
worship quite foreign from what the Lord has prescribed. For where a mode of
Religion is established by a Law, and where profits, preferments, safety, etc.
are the baits of its professors, no wonder that men (carnally minded) follow
it, and neglect that Savior whose kingdom is not of this world. Do^s it
therefore follow by any rational way of deduction, that be cause a great many
do so, therefore none do the contrary that because many deferred their Baptism
for love of the world, therefore none deferred it because unqualified subjects,
viz. unbelievers? -- therefore how can this enumeration hurt us?

4 Besides, of Mr. Walker's witnesses Tertullian is the eldest, who lived in
the 3d Century; Nazianzen and Basil flourished in the 4th. and Chrysostom in
the 5th. Century. Of these Tertullian being the earliest, and therefore worth
more then all the rest, expressly oppos^s Infant Baptism from the same ground we
do; -- Let them come (says he) while they learn; -- let them be made Christians
(that is, baptized) when they can know Christ; -- veniant dum discunt; -- fiant
Christiani quum Christum nosse potuerint, Tert. de bapt. p. 264. So that this
witness is expressly for us, (though Mr. Walker was pleased to forget this
ground of delay (in the right latitude) in his large ind^ction, though from so
considerable a witness) the rest we regard not. We grant that in the following
Centuries, Infant Baptism as well as Infant Communion, and other corruptions,
gr^w to be more generally practiced, which about the ^d. Century were obscurely
creeping in, therefore the witnesses produced against us, of those times, if to
prove a matter of fact, viz. that Infant Baptism was then in the world, are
very needless, for we confess it; viz. first as being only practiced in peril
of death, to save their dying souls, as other sick and dying persons;
afterward upon all Infants, as enjoined by the Councils, to take away Original
sin, Regenerate and save them: If to prove de jure that it ought to be so, we
reject their authority, as unfit Judges to determine our Controversies, being
frail men, liable to error and corruption.

As to those 4 particulars concerning the delay of Infant B^ptism, for which he
says Nazianzen reproves the deferrers, if it were so, it does not hinder but
that there might be other Reasons for their delay; for Nazianzen himself was
against the Baptism of Infants till they could Answer for themselves, except in
case of urgent ^^vil of death, (...). Orat. ^0 p 658 the good man being
infected with that superstitious conceit, that Baptism was simply necessary to
salvation. So that this witness contributes nothing of disservice to our
Hypothesis, nor of advantage to our ^dversaries.

The Text whereon Mr. Walker grounds his discourse is Luke 18.16. Suffer little
children to come unto me, etc. from whence he infers, that little children are
to be suffered to come unto Christ, and ought not to be forbidden coming unto
him; which I confess is a sound conclusion. And be it noted by the way, that
Dr. Hammond says the Arguments from this Text are imperfect ways of probation,
sect. 23. of his Resol. to 6 Queries about Infant Bapt. whose word should do
much with Mr. Walker. He that would evince that this Text is a sufficient
foundation for the fabric of Paedobptism, should have proved, that there is no
other way of coming unto Christ but by Baptism; or that Christ, or his
Disciples, actually baptized these children; or that the blessing in the Text
is baptizing. It Is true, we have an ipse dixit from Mr. W. p. 19. that there
can be no other way of their coming to Christ, but by Baptism; but he cannot
blame us if we rely not upon his authority in so material a point.

Now if those things be not clearly demonstrated, no certain consequence will
flow from this Text, that Infants ought to be baptized; and if it will not
certainly follow, what rational man dares build his belief upon a foundation so
uncertain, and that in opposition both to that plain precept and example we
have for adult baptism. But this is so far from certainty, that there is not
the least show of probability that our Savior did (or intended to) baptize
them. That Christ has no other way to bring Infants to himself, but by
Baptism, is a speech too harsh, if not bordering upon blasphemy; therefore Mr.
Walker should recall what he says that is liable to such an Interpretation: for
if it were so, then doubtless our Savior would have ordered those children to
be baptized, for whose approach unto him he was pleased to express so much
willingness. So that as Dr. Tailor notes very pertinently, p. 230. Lib. Proph.
we may say, that from the action of Christ's blessing Infants, to infer that
they were baptized, proves nothing so much, as that there is a want of better
arguments; for the Conclusion would with more probability be derived thus:
Christ blessed children, and so dismissed them, but baptized them not;
therefore Infants are not to be baptized. That Christ did not baptize them, is
an argument sufficient, that he has other ways of bringing them to Heaven then
by Baptism. Many thousand ways there are by which God can bring any reasonable
soul to him, but nothing is more unreasonable, then because he has tied all
men of years and discretion to this way, therefore we of our own heads, shall
carry Infants to him that way without his direction: the conceit is poor and
low, and the action consequent to it, bold and venturous; let him do what he
pleases with Infants, we must not.

It Is a most rational conjecture, that if it had been the practice of that time
to baptize Infants, as well as the adult, and that they had (...) true,
lawful, and wonted subjects of Bapti^^, the (...) could not be so ignorant of,
and contra^^^^nry to the^r own known custom, as to forbid them, or (...) their
^^wardness, but would have rather encouraged (...). m. But this circumstance
discovers that Paeaobaptism was (...) none of the Disciples employment; the
ground of whose rebuke to those that brought the children (doubtless) was their
unwillingness to have Christ too much pressed, and so they reproved others when
they thronged so fast upon him, that they had no leisure so much as to eat
bread.

Besides, in the 15th. verse we have the end noted, for which these children
were brought to Christ, viz. that he would touch them, (and what doubtless) in
order to their cure from bodily infirmities, which are as incident to Infants
as Men; which is very probable, if you compare this passage as it is in Mat.
19.14. with the 2d. verse, where it is said, that he healed great multitudes.
And Luke says, that they brought little children also, which term [also] shows
that others were brought too, because they heard that virtue went out of him,
and that as many as touched him, were perfect^y made whole, Mat. 14.36.

If we pass by without any opposition what Mr. Walker says in the 1, 2, 3
Chapters, it cannot hurt the cause we maintain; for we are willing to bring our
children to Christ, as far as we are able, and he has prescribed; to resig^
them up to him, and dedicate them to his service, to pray for them, instruct
them in the Faith, and in a word to bring them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord; we cannot bring them unto Christ, who is now in Heaven, by way of
personal approach, (as the Infants in the Text were brought) therefore we know
no other way to bring them unto him, but by teaching them as soon as they are
able to learn, what it is to fear him, love him, believe in him, and obey his
Laws. So that we agree with Mr. Walker, that we ought not to forbid our
children to come unto Christ, but to contribute our endeavors to their early
conversion, they having, in common with the rest of mankind, gracious
Invitations to come to his Mercy seat, Mat. 11.28. Rev. 22.17. Isa. 55.1. etc.
But to prove that Christ appointed the manner of their coming to him to be by
Baptism, in any part of his word, (hic labor, hoc opus) is the (...) of this
dispute.

P. 13. Mr. Walker tells us, the phrase may be taken figuratively, so notes a
becoming or being made a Disciple unto Christ, Mat. 11.28, 29. This is granted,
but then the great doubt remains still, whether Infant Baptism singly
considered, (I mean without the qualifications requisite in the baptized, which
are Faith and Repentance, as the Church Catechism informs us) be of such
efficacy as to make one a Disciple? Mr. Walker p. 17. holds the affirmative,
his words are, Our children are made Disciples to Christ, by being baptized in
the name and with the baptism of Christ. And p. 19 where either of these is,
(viz. baptizing or teaching) there a person may become, or be made a Disciple,
though not so complete and perfect, as where there is both.

Answ. To affirm (as Mr. Walker does) that Baptism makes one a Disciple, is to
contradict all the experience in the world; For, if we respect the
signification of the word in its proper and genuine notion, (it being (...),
discipulus, of (...), disco, and that of the root (...) didicit) it signifies a
Scholar, or one that learns of another, which necessarily implys a just
ripeness and activity of Organs, inward and outward, which all Infants want;
therefore, what can they learn by Baptism, who want the exercises of
understanding, and in whom Reason is (as it were an embrio) not yet come to a
capacity of acting? And if we use the word according to the constant Scripture
acceptance of it, it is certain, that though discipling, and baptizing, go
together in the adult, the term is no where applied to Infants, but always to
such as learnt the Doctrine of Christ, who says, Mat. 11.29. (...), learn of
me, etc. And Luke 6.40. we have the term ((...)) which is a Relation, in the
same proposition with its correlate ((...), a Doctor, or Teacher.) And Reason
teaches us, that where there is Discipleship, there must of necessity be
Mastership or Doctorship, according to that Rule in Logic, Relata sunt simul
natura, (nempe quatenus relata) that is, Relations (as they are such) are
together in Nature; for though the Father be before the Child, yet he is not a
Father till he has a Child; nor can one be a Master, or Doctor, before he
teaches, nor a Scholar or Disciple, before he learns. So that Baptism having no
such efficacy in it self, nor any such virtue conferred upon it by any word of
God, as to make one a Scholar or Disciple of Christ by the bare action, we may
safely conclude that Disciples are made so by teaching, not by baptizing; which
is further evidenced from John 4.1: (...), etc Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples, etc. where note that it is not said, made or baptized, for then the
Greek should be, (...), but it is a Conjunction copulative, ((...)) denoting two
distinct actions, viz. discipling, and baptizing. And hence it will undeniably
follow, that it was the method of our Lord Jesus, to make Disciples first by
teaching, and then baptize them. And certainly there can be no error in
following so blessed a pattern.

And what warrant Mr. Walker has to wrest this word out of the signification
the Holy Ghost constantly puts upon it, to countenance such a Discipleship as
is no better then a mere conceit, (or ens rationis) is more then I can imagine.
These Scriptures John 6.45. 1 Cor. 4.6. Phil. 4.11. John 7.15. deserve
consideration. So that I cannot see any ground to conclude, that this Text is
such a clear Scripture ground for Infant Baptism, as Mr. Walker conceits it is
p. 23.

He says p. 24. That a Consequence from Scripture rightly made, is a ground
good enough to bear any weight that can be fairly laid upon it, and as valid to
all intents and purposes as if it were express Scripture it self, that being
eminently contained in the Scripture, whatever it be that may be fairly drawn
from it.

Answ. Here I shall take occasion to consider, how far it may be safe to build
upon Consequences in matters of Religion And first, it is most certain, that
the All-wise God (judging it meet to give us that great and gracious gift of
his Word, to be a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our path, Psalm.
119.105.) would not give us an imperfect or obscure Rule of Faith. The Lord is
so far from leaving us at a loss, that as, in other cases, when objects or
things to be believed are in their nature very spiritual and much remote from
external sense, and the common road or ordinary walks of the Reasons or
Understandings of men, (the eye of Faith being dim, wherewith they are to be
apprehended) he is graciously pleased to relieve the defect of that visive
faculty, in clothing those spiritual objects with as much external sensibility
as well may be, so accommodating and attempering the spirituality of them unto
this eye, that it is enabled to behold them more steadily; thus is the Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, our Union and Communion with him,
Sanctification and Forgiveness of sins, brought down in the Sacramental
Ordinances of the Gospel, and accommodated to us as near as their spiritual and
sublime natures would permit, by opportunity whereof Faith is much refreshed
and encouraged, to converse more frequently with them, and to meditate with
less distraction, and more composedness; as the Vail on Moses's face qualified
its dazzling brightness, and reduced the disproportion of the object to the
children of Isreal's weak senses, Deuteronomy. 34.33. Is it not therefore irrational to
imagine, that the Lord, who is so ready to accommodate his blessed Mysteries by
apt resemblances to our understandings, should yet deliver us his Divine
Oracles in such a Dialect, as is not to be understood without the subtilties of
Logic, and the Criticisms of the Schools? or that such things as are necessary
to be believed and practiced, are left to the Inferences and Consequential
deductions of men, which are as different, as passion, prejudice, opinion, or
Interest influences them? Certainly such an oversight is not to be chargable
upon the eternal wisdom of God, who has in a style full of gravity, simplicity
and plainness, without fraudulent ornaments, accommodated whatsoever is to be
believed or practiced to the understanding and capacities of men, and that in
express and intelligible terms, which is indeed the (...), or meet
accommodation of words into things. Non movent, non persuadent sacr^e literae
(says Picus Mirandula ad Hermol. Barbar.) sed cogunt, agitant, vim inferunt,
legis rudia verba, and agrestia, sed viva, sed animata, flammea, aculeata, ad
imum spiritum penetrantia. He that with a discursive understanding considers,
that the Scriptures in setting forth spiritual things abounds with Metaphors,
Parables, and Similitudes borrowed from Earthly things, and often calling them
by the very names that material or earthly things are called, cannot but arrive
at this conclusion, that it is rather to accommodate those spiritual matters to
our capacities and understandings, then to hide and obscure them from us; God
conveying the knowledge of heavenly things to us, by preaching them by their
respective parallels of earthly things; for as Burgersdicius well notes in his
Logic, l. 1. c. 24. Oration Metaphorica est perspicua sensibus, and ad animum
assectusque movendos aptissima; A Metaphorical speech is perspicuous to sense,
and to work upon the mind and affections most proper.

I shall readily own, (that the Lord having endued us with Reason, that being a
discursive faculty, which from apt and proper premises infers their natural
Consequences) we are not to flight that blessing, but to make use of it in its
proper place, viz. in Resolving principles by fit Mediums into their
Conclusions. But to be too busy in matters of Gods positive worship, (which is
as much out of the reach of our Reason to define, as it is beyond the power of
a blind man to judge of colors, that depending merely upon Gods Institution,
and for which we have his plain prescriptiors before us) and boldly obtruding
such Consequences in reference thereto, as our dim faculty of ratiocination
shall suggest, is to offer strange fire at his Altar, and show our selves
rather bold Interpreters, then obeyers of his Law. Ratio est potentia
Discursiva a principiis ad Conclusiones, sed non habet in se principia iliarum
rerum quae side apprehenduntur; impudenter itaque Conclusiones aedificat super
arenam opinionum suarum, cum sua principia quae sunt vera in ordint Naturae,
opponit principtis Theologicis, quae sunt long supra Naturam. God has layn
down the Rules of worship plainly and operly; And as Wollebius says, p. 7.
Comp. Theol. E^^i quibusdam locis obscurior sit, aliis tamen se explicat, and
primarios Religianis articulos perspicue tradit; Though in some places it may
be (seemingly) obscure, yet in other places it expounds it self, delivering the
prime Articles of Faith very evidently and clearly, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16. And August. de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 26. tells us, that one place
of Scripture must be expounded by another; locum unum sacrae Scripturae per
alium ejusdem Scripturae clariorem facere est optima interpretatio. So that if
the prime Articles of Faith, and practical Duties be evidently and
perspicuously laid down and delivered in the Scriptures, (as indeed they are)
what necessity is there to have recourse to such far fetched and extorted
consequences, as are usually calculated to countenance some beloved error, for
the sake of which, the Text is so tormented and rackt by the Critical Wits of
our age, that there is scarce any Sect but pretend patronage from it, though
the Conclusions they squeeze are no more to be found in the premises, (unless
by that wretched art of Sophistry) then a Dolphin in the Woods.

It is to be bewailed what conviction proof men are, even in so plain a case;
has not common (and woeful) experience taught us, that when such a liberty of
allowing Articles of Faith, and Opinions from pretended Consequences, was most
encouraged, that Religion was then most encumbered (yea stifled) with the
products of such wanton wits as played the Sophisters with Scripture, and
obtruded such Brats of their own begetting, as legitimate offsprings of the
Word, upon the too much abused and credulous Vulgar, to the misleading of their
Souls, and fostering, as well as propagating, Division and Confusion in the
Church? whereas of right, no products of an humane spirit, should be receivable
in Evangelical Religion. Therefore in my opinion it is the safest way to be
sober in a matter of such high concernment, and admit of no consequence in
point of faith or practice, that are obscure, doubtful, or uncertain, but only
such as are plain, and to be easily seen by any eye to be the natural and
undoubted result of the premises, and consonant to the general nature and
tenor of the Gospel. And Mr. Wills his demand, who shall be Judge to determine
which consequences are plain, and which not? is a captious question, propounded
only to make a noise; for the same interrogation lies against all consequences,
viz. who shall Judge, what consequences are rightly deduced, and what not?
which, (when he resolves it for himself) resolves the other also for us. It Is
certain, that every man's Reason and discretive Judgment, must in that case be
his Judge, no other being invested into that Supremacy. It Is true, that appears
plain to one; which appears not so to another, therefore we are to pray for a
discerning and clear understanding, Jam. 1.17. that we might be established in
Evangelical Truths, without being beholden to the niceties of the Schoolmen,
and their idle speculations.

I have insisted the longer upon this point, because we are generally charged
to deny all Consequences from Scripture, which is false; for we grant that
after the example of our Lord Jesus and his Apostle, Mat. 22.31, 32 Act. 13.33,
34. we may from plain and lawful premises, infer their necessary Conclusion.
The thing we deny is, that such Sophistical, pretended Consequences, (not at
all countenanced in Scripture Text) as our adversaries use in the management of
this Controversy of Infant Baptism against us, are of any validity or credit,
and should not therefore be used.

It may be well called the Naked Truth, that (a late excellent Pen has so
feelingly expressed) There is nothing has proved a greater plague to
Christianity, then School Divinity; where new questions, nice distinctions, and
rash conclusions, are tossed up and down like Tennis-balls, whence proceed
cruel bickerings and dangerous Heresies. The first Divinity School we read of,
was set up at Alexandria by Pantenus, whence sprung the Arrian Heresy, which
soon overran all Christendom. In the subtilty of those Schools Heresy grew
refined, and with their distinctions and evasions quite baffled the plain and
simple professors of the Gospel. There is no giving way to rational Deductions
and humane Argumentations, against Faith and Scripture. The Primitive Doctors
converted from Heathenism and well skilled in Philosophy, Antiquity, History,
and Logic or Sophistry, translated those Sciences (falsely so called) into
Christianity, to illustrate by their indiscreet zeal, and imbellish Christian
knowledge by Artificial forms and figures, but rather desaced it, Col. 2.8.
That the Greeks fond of niceties, transplanted their beloved Rhetorical flowers
into Christian Gardens, which proved indeed Weeds. Haec ille.

So that the conclusion I shall in this particular come to, is, That we are not
under the notion of Consequence to admit any thing in point of Religion, but
what is of such clear and undoubted Scripture demonstration, as might satisfy
the Conscience that it is the Will of God; And that we are to use all
endeavors to rescue Christianity from those encumbrances of humane inventions
and Traditions, which the wanton and licentious Schoolmen have mixed with it;
and so reduce it to its primitive purity and simplicity, by adhering close to
the Word of God, and rejecting all those corrupt glosses, that under the title
of explaining, render it indeed more obscure, unintelligible and confounding.

As to Mr. Walker's Arguments from the benefits of Infant Baptism, which he
says are an early Consecration -- being brought thereby into Covenant -- under
a Vow -- and others care -- united to Christ -- made thereby Children of God --
heirs of Heaven -- partakers of Grace -- consigned to a Resurrection -- are
saved by it -- freed from Original sin, etc. they are all, in the notion Mr.
Walker holds them, Popish, and exploded (for the most part) by our learned
Protestants, as vain and idle conceits. Insomuch that it is needless for me to
spend time in disproof of that which is so fully done already. For what
tendency has this kind of arguing, but to ascribe that virtue to the bare
application of an Ordinance, which the Lord never gave to it, and so set up an
Opus Operatum, which the Protestant Churches vehemently disclaim?

Dr. Owen in his Theologomena, lib. 6. c. 5. p. 477, etc. has excellently
refelled this position, viz. Regeneration by Baptism ex opere operato,
concluding with this verdict of it; Neque sane dogma perniciosius, aut quod
peccatorum animis praesentius venenum propinaret, facile excogitaret ipse
mendaciorum pater. -- That the very Father of lies could not easily invent a
more pernicious opinion, or which might instill a more deadly poison into the
hearts of sinners. And then very amply discovers, how all are born in sin,
being children of wrath by nature; and that Regeneration is effected by the
Spirit, through the Word in the hearts of believers according to the New
Covenant, and not by these Popish Inventions.

Of the same Judgment with Dr. Owen herein, were our first impugners of Popery
the Waldenses, in their Treatise of Antichrist, writ (as is said) by Peter
Bruys Anno 1120. P. Perin. l. 3. p. 267. So was the famous Wickliff, as Mr.
Danvers demonstrates at large, p. 121. etc. of 2 Reply. And Dr. Usher in his
State and succession of the Church, Dr. Tailor Lib. Proph. p. 242, 243, etc.
and in a word the whole stream of modern Doctors. Calvin's words are memorable
in inveighing against the mischiefs of this opinion, Instit. l. 4. c. 15. sect.
20. Quantum damni invexerit dogma illud male expositum, baptisma esse de
necessitate salutis, pauci animadvertunt. Ideoque minus sibi cavent, nam ubi
invaluit opinio, perditos esse omnes, quibus aqua cingi non contingit, nostra
conditio deterior est quam vtteru populi, quasi restrictior esset Dei gratia
quam sub lege, venisse enim Christus censebitur non ad implendas promissiones
sed abolendas, quando promissio quae tunc ante octavam diem, saluti conserendae
per se erat satis efficax, nunc absque signi adminiculo rata non esset. And
sect. 32. says, Non arceri a regno Coelorum Infantes quibus a praesenti vita
migrare contingit, antequam aqua mergi datum fuerit; atqui jam visum est fieri
non levem injuriam Dei faederi, nisi in eo acquiescimus, ac si per se infirmum
eset, quum ejus effectas neque a baptismo, neque ab ullis accessionibus
pendeot, etc. So Rogers in his Analysis of the 39 Articles, p 167, 168. tells
us in behalf of the Church of England, We condemn the Opinion of the Russe is,
that there is such a necessity of Baptism, that all that dye without it, are
damned. Reverend Mr. Perkins on Gal 2. Vol. 2. Edit. 1617. p. 191, etc. tells
us, That the outward washing does not make any man a member of Christ, -- that
Baptism is not of absolute necessity, -- that Adoption and Life, begin not in
Baptism, but before, -- that a Sacrament has not the grace of God tied to it,
or shut up in it, -- but is an Instrument to which grace is present in the
right use thereof; -- that this Doctrine ( viz. that a Sacrament confers grace
by the work done) is a fiction of the brain of man, 1 Pet. 3 21. -- that
Regeneration is a work of Creation, therefore it is of God immediately, and not
immediately from the Sacrament. And much more to this effect, but it is too
tedious to transcribe it, therefore I refer to the Book it self, which notably
confutes this conceit.

Yet to add ex abundanti, I shall cite one more as a witness against the
absolute necessity of Baptism; it is Mr. Wills, p. 150. Infant Bapt. who to
give him his due, speaks notably to it; If Baptism (says he) be of absolute
necessity to salvation, and that Regeneration is affixt to it, and none can be
saved without it, then it is in man's power to save and to destroy; If they will
baptize their children, they may save them; if they neglect it, damn them,
which is horrible absurdity to conceive. And in the next page makes out very
well, that Baptism is not at all concerned in John 13.5. but Regeneration; and
in so doing proves himself to be more Orthodox in that particular, then all his
Antiquity for Paedobaptism, who all of them expounded that Text of external
baptism, though very absurdly. But what need I particularize a few, when the
whole stream of the Reformed Writers exclaim with one consent against this
Doctrine, and bend much of their labors to refell it.

Mr. Walker indeed says, as p. 113. That it has not any Physical virtue in it
self, in the way of a Natural cause to effect Salvation: But the very Papists
say so much, for no man will be so ridiculous as to assert it a Natural cause
of salvation, and I am certain the Papists say no more, then Mr. Walker, when
he tells us, that Baptism saves Infants, as p. 108. That it must needs make our
Hell the more hot to find our unbaptized children there, p. 147. That the
baptized are rescued wholly, or in a great measure, from Original sin, p. 150.
No Baptism, then no Son of God, and then no Heir of his, p. 153. No Baptism, no
entrance even for Infants into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, ordinarily, etc.
p 154. None were saved without the Ark; so none, that we are sure of, are saved
without Baptism; -- What need Infants have of Salvation, the same they have of
Baptism for their Salvation, p. 156. calls an Unbaptized state a damnable
state, p. 142. with much more to that effect. And pray what is all this but an
Opus Operatum? or a tying the Grace of God to the Sacrament? I know not that
the Papists say any more then Mr. Walker, p. 113. viz. that it has a saving
efficacy for such end communicated by God to it, etc. but I would fain learn of
Mr. Walker, who made him acquainted with that part of Gods counsel; for I could
never yet find it in the Bible, that Baptism was dignified with so transcendent
an energy, as (in disjunction from Faith, and so it is in all Infants) to effect
Salvation.

It Is true, to a qualified subject, viz. a penitent Believer, the Lord has made
it an Instrument, through which he conveys the saving communications of his
Grace; and to such it is necessary (not absolute, but) necessitate praecepti,
because God commanded it. Yet the want of it, where it may not be had, damus
not; though the contempt of it, is a horrible affront to the Divine Majesty,
and consequently a dangerous sin. But it is not necessary, necessitate medii,
since salvation, which is the end, may be had without it; as in the ease of the
Thief upon the Cross, etc. But to Infants it is no way necessary; (1) it is not
so necessitate praecepti, because Christ no where commanded such to be
baptized; nor (2) necessitate medii, because Christ no where appointed it to be
the means of their salvation. We have several passages in Scripture, that give
us encouragement of the salvation of dying Infants, through the rich grace and
tender mercy of him, who is (we hope) their Redeemer as well as ours. But I
have in my Answer to Mr. Baxter, p. 16. touched upon this point.

Next Mr. Walker in 5 Chapters labors to show, that children are not incapable
of Baptism; but his Reasons are not convincing to me, nor do I believe they can
be so to any, that with an unprejudiced mind, reads our Books; wherein is amply
made out, that Infants are not capable subjects of Baptism, no more then of
other Church Ordinances, because they want Faith and Repentance, as the Church
Catechism informs us; and which the same Book tells us, is required of persons
to be baptized. Neither will the Sureties profession for the Child serve the
turn, for we find no such practice allowed of, or so much as mentioned in
Scripture. Neither by any Law of God or man, is such a dispensation granted,
that a substitution of another's Faith, should supply the desect of the person
to be baptized: Nor does the Child give them any Commission to believe for him,
nor can they perform, what they promise, which is no less then the performance
of the great and principal graces of the New Covenant, viz. Faith and
Repentance, which are the peculiar gifts of God. But I shall dismiss this
particular, referring Mr. Walker to Mr. Tombs his Just Reply, p. 105. Printed
1675. where by way of Animadversion on that part of the Common Prayer Book, he
confutes this practice unanswerably; And Mr. Danvers his Treat. p. 83, 84. and
218, 219, 220. where it is also refelled by substantial, and yet unanswered,
Reasons.

It is an inconsiderate expression of Mr. Walker to say, p. 203 That in this
argument of twist^d hairs (viz from the order of the words Mat. 28.19.) the
greatest strength of these Sampsons lies: For we do not infist upon the order
of the words only, but upon the order of the things also, as constantly
practiced. And I challenge any man to produce, that the order of the things
ever differed from the order of the words, or was by any Apostolical practice
inverted; or that any person was baptized by them that was not first taught. So
that having the order of words and things also for us, and that from a mouth
that never spoke an incongruous word, we conceive we deserve no blame in
adhering to so plain a rule.

But Mr. Walker says, the order of words is for them, because here is teaching
after baptizing; and Mar. 1.4, 5. John baptized and preached, and (...)
signisying, not teach, but to make another a Disciple; and so reads a
Grammatical Lecture, ending in this, that unless it be understood, make
disciples by baptizing them, and by teaching them, there is a Tautology in the
phrase, -- as Teach all Nations, etc. -- Teaching them, etc.

Answ. That Mr. Walker has made choice of a wrong Interpretation, yea such as
will be guilty of a signal absurdity, will be easily apparent. And 1. I confess
the verb (...), signifies discipulate, or ma^e disciples. And if the phrase be
admitted to bear that sense Mr. Walker would have, viz. to make Disciples by
baptizing and teaching, yet Infants will be excluded; because to the making of
Disciples these two actions are required, viz. baptizing and teaching; and
Infants are incapable of the later till they come to years, therefore cannot be
discipled. But, that (making Disciples) and (baptizing) are (as hinted already
above) two distinct actions, is clear in John 4.1. (...), etc. he makes and
baptizeth more disciples, etc. you see (...), by the conjunction copulative
[(...)] is set down as a distinct work from ((...)) therefore he did not make
them Disciples by Baptism, but by something acted toward them before. And if
this be not understood so, and that (...) and (...) are Synonima's, here will
be a manifest Tautology, for then the words will run, Jesus baptized, and
baptized more Disciples then John.

And I appeal to Mr. Walker's Conscience, whether what is expressed Mat. 28.19.
by the Participle (...), may not without any violation of the sense be read
imperatively by the Verb (...), thus, Disciple all Nations, and baptize them;
and if so, whether (...) and (...) would be terms equipollent, and so (by
consequence) Tantology, viz. go baptize all Nations, and baptize them, a
gemination elegant in the Hebrew, but supper^fluous in the Greek Tongu^? But to
clear our own Interpretation, as well as I demonstrate the absurdity of theirs,
it is necessary to know, that there is a general teaching to acquaint persons
with the Gospel, which who^ once they believe and are baptized, there is a
second teaching to bring them on toward perfection. You know what a short
Consession was required of the Eunuch, Act 8.37. If thou believe with all thy
heart (says Philip) thou may. The profession of which short Creed, qualified
him (being by that a Disciple fit) for Baptism. But was there no need (think
you) of any further teaching? Yes doubtless, he had need of Instruction in the
practical Duties of Christianity afterward. So that the words are thus easily
vindicated from Tautology, for they run Paraphrastically thus: As if Christ had
said, Go disciple the Nations, that is (as Mark 16.15. more plainly delivered)
preach the Gospel to every Creature, and baptize such as are so discipled by
your preaching, and when they are admitted into Church Communion, teach them to
observe all my Commands. See here (as plain, as if writ with the Sun beams)
that the first teaching is, what they should believe, and the next teaching is,
what they should do; Faith being necessary to admit them into the Church, and
a holy Conversation necessary to keep them there. And that this is the genuine
meaning and Interpretation, we need no other proof then the Apostles practice
pursuant to it, who preached first, then baptized, and then taught too. First
they gathered Churches by preaching and baptizing, and then preached to them so
gathered; the first preaching for Conversion, the other for Confirmation and
further Instruction; a teaching a priori in order to Discipleship and Baptism,
and a teaching a posteriori in order to Perfection. Baptism is to be by precept
immediately after the first, and the other by precept so immediately after
Baptism, which is walled in on both sides by teaching, that Infants are
universally excluded, till they be capable of being taught.

As for Mark 1.4. in the verse before preaching is before baptizing, -- The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord. -- And
it is absurd to imagine that a man can be baptized before he be preached unto;
for then he should be baptized, into he knows not what.

Mr. Walker's urging the Custom of the Catholic Church to baptize Infants, and
the Constitution of the Church of England in justification of that practice,
serves to little more purpose then to fill up his paper; for neither the one,
nor the other, will prove that it ought to be so; for the Universality of an
error renders it not authentic. Therefore though I could produce several
exceptions against Mr. Walker's claim to some of those Authorities he produces,
yet I shall only glance upon what he says about the 3 first Centuries. And
truly if we enquire into the quality of the Witnesses produced for these times,
it will be found that Paedobaptism leans upon a broken reed. For the earliest
they pretend to, is Justin Martyr's Responses, which is a spurious piece, as is
evidently and unanswerably made out by Mr. Danvers, Treat. p. 140. insomuch
that Mr. Walker in his postscript makes no defense to it, save to say, that it
is acknowledged a very ancient piece. But by his leave, it is not so ancient
neither, for it is certain it was forged after the 3d Century, (probably a very
considerable time) for mention is made Quest. 127. of the Manichees, who sprung
not up till about 130 years after Justine, who wrote his ^ Apolog. 150 years
after Christ, and so this Witness is cashiered. There are many Reasons to be
seen in Scultetus in Annal. Justin cap. 11. to detect this forgery; and the
learned Daille, V^ssius, Rivet, Perkins, etc. reject it; therefore no argument
from such a cheat is valid against us.

As for the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens Romanus, and Dionysius the Areop.
Eccles. Hierar. I wonder Mr. Walker would fill up so many pages from such a
Rhapsody of forgery, after all the unanswered arguments given against them by
Mr. Danvers, Treat. p. 140. 1 Rep p. 80, 81, etc. which were so much to Mr.
Wills's conviction, that he confesses them to be a cheating Tribe, p. 127. Inf.
Bapt. And they are not only disowned by us, but by learned Paedobaptists also,
as by Voffius These. Theol. p. 432. Edit. 1628. who though he took great pains
to prove the Antiquity of Paedobaptism, yet slights Justine's Responses, the
Eccl. Hier. and these Constitutions, as suppositious; -- Mitto (^os) ne^ ^rim
libri isti little sunt, quibus tribuuntur vulgo; -- I make no account of them,
(says he) for the Books commonly ascri^ed to them are none of theirs. So the
learned Daille, and many other Paedobaptists, whose testimonies are not to be
slighted, because against their own practice; for the witnesses of enemies are
ever most convictive.

The pretended testimonies of Irenaeus, Cyprian, and Ori^en, are largely
discovered to be invalid by Mr. Danvers, Treat. p. 134, to 150. Reply p. 84, to
97. and Rejoynd. p. 16. to 21. and by Mr. Tombs, 3 Review, sect. 89, 90, 91,
98, etc. so that it is indeed labor lost to add any thing thereto. Yet,

1. It Is a great doubt whether Irenaeus his speech (if it were his own) be at
all of Infant Baptism; the most that can be said is, that perhaps it was so;
and forte ita, solvitur per forte non. All that is produced from him is, that
Christ came to save (omnes qui per eum renascuntur, Infantes, Paeros, Juvenes,
Seniores) all that are born again through him, Infants, noys, Young men, Old
men; which proves not that Infant Baptism was at that time in the world: For
it is more probable that the right deduction from thence is, that in the opinion
of Irenaeus, Infants are capable of the New birth, or Salvation, as well as
elder persons. For to be born again, and to be baptized, are not terms
Synonimous, or Convertible; for many are regenerated and saved, that are not
baptized; and many baptized, that are not regenerated and saved Besides if this
passage mean Infants to be baptized by Christ, it contradicts John 4.2. where
it is said that Christ baptized not. See Mr. Tombs 3 Review p. 79. and Mr.
Danvers 1 Rep'y p 82.

It Is (certainly) ill done to take such a Gloss after that impudent Monk
Fevardontius, who as Rivet tells us, Crit. Secr. l. 2. c. 26. was a man of
villainous audacity, and of no Faith, who most filthily and with impious and
lying Annotations ^oexupted the ^arks of Irenaeus; hamo project and acae, and
nuliius fidei, soede in multis corrupit [opera Irenaei] and annotationibus
impius and mendacious conspureavit.

As for Tertullian, he is (as before) expressly for us, and V^lius, Daille, Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Wills, yea and Mr. Walker, confess so much Nor do those passages
Mr. Walker quotes, so much as mention I^sant Baptism as approving it, nor any
thing directly tending thereto; for then Tertullian should have contradicted
himself. Daille says in his Right use of the Fathers, l. 2. p. 72. that
Tertullian was so far from pressing men to baptize their children, while they
are young, that he allows, and indeed persuades the contrary, etc. and his
opinion herein, is not much disserent from that of the Anabaptists of our time.

If Cyprians Epistle be genuine and uncorrupted, (as is doubted too, his Works
falling into ill hands) it is rather a shame then a credit to Paedobaptism, to
infist upon such a ridiculous piece, that asserts Infants Baptism from such
corrupt grounds as are there insisted upon.

Vossius lays no stress upon the witness of Origin, because we have no original
of it. And it is unquestionable that what we find in him about Infant Baptism
to wash away Original sin, (quia essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati,
quae per aquam and spiritum ablui deberent) was foisted in; For Origin (as Dr.
Owen truly says) was a great Pelagian, which Sect, as is well known, denied
Original sin. Mr. D. Rep. p. 88. made this Objection, but Mr. W. gives no
answer to it, as I can find, nor indeed can he.

These are all the Antiquities pretended from the first 3^0 years. And let the
judicious and impartial Reader consider, whether that cause be not in a forlorn
and languishing case, that has no better, then such a rotten, basis to rest
upon.

What Mr. Walker urges from the lying Talmud, (as the learned Sir Norton
Knatchbull calls it in his Animadversions, p. 315) to evince that Baptism was
used by the Jews in the initiation of Proselytes, is of no force against us,
who receive not their Custom as Gospel, nor durst we practice Infant Rantism,
which is no Baptism, from Jewish principles, it having been never appointed by
Christ, or his Apostles, but corruptly arose with Infant Communion, from a
conceit of necessity, as is already evident.

Mr. Walker proceeds to argue, p. 292. that Infant Baptism is an Apostolical
practice, for which he urges the baptizing of households; but what I have said
to Mr. Whiston and Mr. Baxter about this, may also serve here. But I hope, if
that satisfies not, Dr. Hammonds opinion in the matter will be convincing, he
says, Resol. p 471. sect. 21. that to conclude Infants were baptized, because
households were so mentioned to be, is unconvincing, and without demonstration,
it being so uncertain, whether there was any Child in the samilies.

But 1 Cor. 7.14. is the great Topic he insists upon, viz. the unbelieving
husband is sanctified by (it should be to) the wife, etc. which he says should
be rendered ( has been sanctified, as Dr. Hammond formerly said) it being
(...); And that the sense of (has been sanctified) is, has been baptized, the
effect being put for the act, by a Metonymie.

Answ. I have already spoke to this Text in my Answer to Mr. Baxter, p. 12 to
which I shall add now, that Mr. Walker chooses a very absurd Interpretation; For
according to his talk the words of the Text will run thus, The unbelieving
husband has been baptized by the believing wise, and the unbelieving wise by
the husband, which is ridiculous; for if it should be true, then a prosess'd
unbeliever should be a fit subject of Baptism, and a woman a fit administrator;
[and the Papists are beholden to Mr. Walker, for helping them to a Scripture,
to warrant their practice of women's baptizing in case of necessity.] And then
what need the Apostles be sent to baptize, or the Ministers of the Church of
England, to Monopolize that practice now, when all the men and women in the
respective Nations, may baptize one another? This Interpretation deserves
indeed to be laughed at. Neither does Mr. Walker p. 299. avoid the danger of
the absurdity that follows it, by his shifts there. Besides he (being well
skilled in the use of Particles, having indeed excellently advanced that kind
of learning) knows that the particle ((...)) should be rendered (to) not (by) in
this place, unless he will make the Apostle say, that the says of the wife
sanctifies the unbelieving husband foederally, and is therefore capable of
baptism by his wises says, which is not to be affirmed; for the faith of the
one is not the (next and effectual) cause of the others Sa^ctification; for
this Sanctification is contingent, that is, it may, or it may not be, as verse
16. Thus its rendered Col. 1.23. -- preached (...), to every creature. Romans 1.24.
God gave them up (...), to uncleanness. 2 Cor. 8.1. the grace of God is
bestowed (or given) (...), (rendered in Latin in the dative, Ecclesiis) to the
Churches. 2 Pet. 1.5. add to your faith, etc. (...). Mat. 27.12. (...), to
him. Act. 7.44. tabernaculum testimonii suit patribus, (...); the particle
((...)) being in these places, and many others, rendered (to) not (by) Besides,
(...), and (...), holy, and unclean, are immediate opposites^ and therefore
according to Logic Rules, look in what sense the one is to be understood, in
the directly contrary to that sense, must the other opposite be understood.
Thus if the term (holy) signifies a Non-admittance to Church Ordinances, the
term (unclean) must signify an exclusion from such: -- but that is untrue; for
Infidels children upon their conversion, were admitted, and some children of
believers were excluded from Church-Ordinances, and Privileges, yea in the
state of Infancy, as the children got by strange wives in Ezra's time, Ezr.
10.3, 5, 44. were put away, as well as the mothers; So this holiness being
understood of legitimation, the uncleanness must necessarily be understood of
bastardy, as the issues of the strange bed were reputed of old. Which sense is
so apposite and proper, that no other can be reasonably ascribed to this Text;
and that a holy seed is legitimate, see Ezra 9.2.

The term ((...), unclean) is used for whoredom frequently in Scripture, as
Romans 1^ 24. and 6.19. Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5. Rev. 17.4. What Nazianzen's (...)
imports, is nothing to us, the expression is a mere Catechresis. And it is
certain the term is no where in Scripture used in such a sense, viz. he was
sanctified, for he was baptized; (...) is, usui sacro destinari, as Pasor
informs us, John 17.19. See 1 Timothy 4.5. Luke 11.2. Jud. 1. So that this Text
affords no color of proof, that Paedobaptism was an Apostolical practice.

In that old Translation of the Bible, (done by John Rogers the Martyr, as
says Holingshed in his Chron, p. 1168.) we find in the Notes upon 1 Cor. 7.14.
these words, viz. Not that children are clean and pure by nature, for that were
against the Apostle himself, who proves Romans 5. that all are under Original
sin, and naturally the children of wrath, as Ephesians. 2. But his meaning is, that
like as all things are clean to the clean, so that he may be conversant with
her, and not ^ssend in so doing; and that the children of them are not to be
reputed as unlawful and unclean.

His Dilemma p. 329. is nugatory, and will directly lie against themselves in
many points of Popery they reject. And his enumeration of things believed, yet
not expressly delivered in Scripture, is frivolous: for we deny not, but Infant
Baptism may be right, if proved by good consequence, (yet it is certain, that
the only Rule in Sacraments is the Institution, and practice) but we deny the
consequences produced for it, to be good. So that it is not consequences, but
pretended, absurd, and illogical consequences we deny, therefore his discourse
being be sides our practice, is insignificant. It Is a very bold, and dangerous
practice, to set up any Invention of our own in Religion, under pretense of its
being agreeable to Gods secret will, (as Mr. Walker talks) for who can tell
whether it be so, or no? Methinks Nadab and Abibu's tragical end Lev. 10.
should teach such, what they are to expect for presumptions of that kind.

The Argument p. 338. is a weak one and will prove the Doctrine of Purgatory,
and the Invocation of Saints, etc. to be no sin, as well as Insant Baptism. But
that it is a sin, because a transgression of a Law, may be thus demonstrated;
That which is done besides (and without any warrant from) the Doctrine and
practice of the Lawgiver, is a transgression of a Law: But Infant Baptism, is
such; therefore a transgression of a Law, and consequently a sin. The major is
apparent from that maxim received among Protestants, and by which they defend
themselves against Papists, viz. that in positive Worship whatsoever is not
commanded, is forbidden. The minor is proved at large in our Writings.

The rest of Mr. Walkers discourse, as where he affirms, that Infant Baptism
might be lawful, though there were neither command for it, nor example of it,
as p. 331. is not only against us, but against all the Reformers: for, if such
a Doctrine were believed, what a gap would it open for all Tradition-mongers,
to break in, and impose what they please upon us? that pretense being as
allowable in all other exploded points, as in this; therefore I believe all
that make the Scriptures the Standard to try Doctrines by, will be of our side
in this case, therefore at present I think it needless to say any thing more to
it.

What Mr. Walker say, in Reply to the Answer made to the Objection from no
express Command or Example in Scripture of women's receiving the Lords Supper,
is not satisfactory, nor does it prove that there is as good consequence for
Infant Baptism, as women's receiving the Supper; And he taking no notice of what
Mr. Danvers so fully writ about that matter, to Mr. Blinman, p. 177. 1 Reply,
it is enough to refer him thither; and to Mr. Tombs his Just Reply, p. 96. As
to his defense p. 409. of those spurious Books ascribed to Justine Martyr,
Dionysius the Areopagite, etc. mentioned before, being all that is produced for
that practice for the first 300 years, it is merely insignificant, he having
not answered what Mr. Danvers urged with undeniable demonstration to prove them
fabulous, as Treat. p. 98, etc. and 136, etc. So that what I said before, with
this Reference, is enough as to that particular. And therefore at present I
shall say no more but this, (with Mr. Tombs) That if any person be deceived by
those arguments urged for Infant Baptism, after so full a discovery of the
futility of them for these 30 or 40 years past, we may conclude, that they are
deceived, because they are willing to be deceived.

FINIS.

