AN ARGUMENT Showing, That a Standing Army, With Consent of PARLIAMENT, Is not
Inconsistent with a Free Government, etc.

2 Chronicles. 9. 25. And King Solomon had four thousand Stalls for Horses and
Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen; whom he bestowed in the Chariot-Cities,
and with the King at Jerusalem. LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock near
Stationers. School.

THE PREFACE.
THE Present Pen and Ink War raised against a Standing Army, has more ill
Consequences in it, than are at first Sight to be Discerned. The Pretense is
specious, and the cry of Liberty is very pleasing; but the Principle is
Mortally Contagious and Destructive of the Essential Safety of the Kingdom;
Liberty and Property, are the Glorious Attributes of the English Nation; and
the dearer they are to us, the less Danger we are in of Loosing them; but I
could never yet see it proved, that the danger of loosing them by a small Army
was such as we should expose our selves to all the World for it. Some People
talk so big of our own Strength, that they think England able to Defend it self
against all the World. I presume such talk without Book; I think the prudentest
Course is to prevent the Trial, and that is only to hold the Balance of Europe
as the King now does; and if there be a War to keep it abroad. How these
Gentlemen will do that with a Militia, I should be glad to see Proposed; it is
not the King of England alone, but the Sword of England in the Hand of the
King, that gives Laws of Peace and War now to Europe; And those who would thus
write the Sword out of his Hand in time of Peace, bid the fairest of any Men in
the World to renew the War.

The Arguments against an Army have been strongly urged; and the Authors with
an unusual Assurance, Boast already of their Conquest, though their Armor is not
yet put off. I think their Triumph goes before their Victory; and if Books and
Writing will not, God be thanked the Parliament will Confute them, by taking
care to maintain such Forces, and no more, as they think needful for our safety
abroad, without danger at home, and leaving it to time to make it appear, that
such an Army, with Consent of Parliament, is not inconsistent with a Free
Government, etc.

An ARGUMENT, showing, that a Standing Army, with Consent of Parliament, is not
Inconsistent with a Free Government, etc.
IN the Great Debates about a Standing Army; and in all the Arguments used on
one side and 'tother, in the Case it seems to me, that both Parties are Guilty
of running into the Extremes of the Controversy.

Some have taken up such terrible Notions of an Army, that take it how you
will, call it what you will; be it Raised, Paid or Commanded by whom you will,
and let the Circumstances be altered never so much, the Term is synonimous, an
Army is an Army; and if they don't Enslave us, the Thanks is not to our good
Conduct; for so many Soldiers, so many Masters: They may do it if they will;
and if they do not do it now, they may do it in another Reign, when a King
shall arise who knows not Joseph, and therefore the Risque is not to be run by
any means: From hence they draw the Consequence, That a Standing Army is
Inconsistent with a Free Government, etc. which is the Title to the Argument.

This we find backed by a Discourse of Militia's, and by a Second part of the
Argument, etc. and all these Three, which seem to me to be wrote be the same
Hand, agree in this Point in General* That the War being at an end, no Forces
at all are to be kept in Pay, no Men to be Maintained whose Profession is
bearing Arms, whose Commission is to Kill and Slay, as he has it in the Second
Part; but they must be Dismissed, as Men for whom there is no more Occasion
against an Enemy, and are dangerous to be kept up, least they find Occasion
against our selves.

The Advocates for the Necessity of a Standing Army, seem to make light of all
these Fears and Jealousies; and Plead the Circumstances of the Kingdom, with
Relation to our Leagues and Confederacys abroad, the Strength of our
Neighbors, a Pretender to the Crown in Being, the Uncertainties of Leagues,
and the like, as Arguments to prove an Army necessary. I must own these are no
Arguments any longer than those Circumstances continue, and therefore can
amount to no more than to argue the necessity of an Army for a time, which time
none of them has ventured to Assign, nor to say how, being once Established, we
shall be sure to be rid of them, in case a new King should succeed before the
time be expired, who may not value our Liberty at the rate his present Majesty
has done.

I desire calmly to consider both these Extremes, and if it be possible, to
find out the safe Medium which may please us all.

If there be any Person who has an ill Design in pushing thus against the
Soldery. I am not to expect, that less than a Disbanding the whole Army will
satisfy him; but such who have no other End than preserving our Liberties
entire, and leaving them so to Posterity, will be satisfied with what they know
is sufficient to that End; for he who is not content with what will fully
answer the End he proposes, has some other End than that which he proposes. I
make no Reflections upon any Party, but I propose to direct this Discourse to
the Honest well meaning English* Freeholder, who has a share in the Terra
firma, and therefore is concerned to preserve Freedom to the Inhabitant that
loves his Liberty better than his Life, and will not sell it for Money; and this
is the Man who has the most reason to fear a Standing Army, for he has
something to loose; as he is most concerned for the the Safety of a Ship, who
has a Cargo on her Botom.

This Man is the hardest to be made believe that he cannot be safe without an
Army, because he finds he is not easy with one. To this Man all the sad
Instances of the Slavery of Nations, by Standing Armies, stand as so many Buoys
to warn him of the Rocks which other Free Nations have split upon; and
therefore it is to this Man we are to speak.

And in order to state the Case right, we are to distinguish first between
England formerly, and England now; between a Standing Army able to enslave the
Nation, and a certain Body of Forces enough to make us safe.

England now is in sundry Circumstances, different from England formerly, with
respect to the Manner of Fighting, the Circumstances of our Neighbors, and of
our Selves; and there are some Reasons why a Militia are not, and perhaps I
might make it out cannot be made fit for the Uses of the present Wars. In the
Ancient Times of England's Power, we were for many years the Invaders of our
Neighbors, and quite out of fear of Invasions at home; but before we arrived
to that Magnitude in the World, it is to be observed we were hardly ever
invaded, but we were conquered, William the Conqueror was the last; and if the
Spaniard did not do the same, 'twas because God set the Elements in Battle
array against them, and they were prevented bringing over the Prince of Parma's
Army; which if they had done, 'twould have gone very hard with us; but we owe
it wholly to Providence.

I believe it may be said, that from that Time to this Day, the Kingdom has
never been without some Standing Troops of Soldiers entertained in pay, and
always either kept at Home or employed Abroad; and yet no evil Consequence
followed, nor do I meet with any Votes of the Parliament against them as
Grievances, or Motions made to Disband them, till the Days of King Charles the
First. Queen Elizabeth, though she had no Guard du Corpse, yet she had her Guards
du Terres. She had even to her last hour several Armies, I may call them, in
Pay among Foreign States and Princes, which upon any visible Occasion were
ready to be called Home. King James the First had the same in Holland, in the
Service of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and in the Unfortunate Service of
the King of Bohemia; and that Scotch Regiment, known by the name of Douglass's
Regiment, have been, (they say) a Regiment Two hundred and fifty Years. King
Charles the First had the same in the several Expeditions for the Relief of
Rochel, and that fatal Descent upon the Isle of The, and in his Expeditions
into Scotland; and they would do well to reconcile their Discourse to it self,
who say in one place, If King Charles had had Five thousand Men, the Nation had
never struct one stroke for their Liberties; and in another, That the
Parliament were like to have been petitioned out of doors by an Army a hundred
and fifty Miles off, tho there was a Scotch Army at the Heels of them: for to
me it appears that King Charles the First had an Army then, and would have kept
it, but that he had not the Purse to pay them, of which more may be said
hereafter.

But England now stands in another Posture, our Peace at Home seems secure, and
I believe it is so* but to maintain our Peace abroad, it is necessary to enter
into Leagues and Confederacies: Here is one Neighbor grown too great for all
the rest; as they are single States or Kingdoms, and therefore to mate him,
several must join for mutual Assistance, according to the Scotch Law of
Duelling, that if one cannot beat you ten shall. These Alliances are under
certain Stipulations and Agreements, with what Strength and in what Places, to
aid and assist one another; and to perform these Stipulations, something of
Force must be at hand if occasion require. That these Confederacies are of
absolute and indispensible necessity, to preserve the Peace of a weaker against
a stronger Prince, past Experience has taught us too plainly to need an
Argument.

There is another constant Maxim of the present State of the War; and that is,
carry the War into your Enemies Country, and always keep it out of your own.
This is an Article has been very much opposed it is true; and some, who knew no
better, would talk much of the fruitless Expense of a War abroad; as if it was
not worth while to defend your Confederates Country, to make it a Barrier to
your own. This is too weak an Argument also to need any trouble about; but this
again makes it absolutely necessary to have always some Troops ready to send to
the assistance of those Confederates if they are invaded. Thus at the Peace of
Nimeguen, six Regiments were left in Holland, to continue there in time of
Peace, to be ready in case of a Rupture. To say, that instead of this we will
raise them for their assistance when wanted, would be something, if this potent
Neighbor, were not the French King, whose Velocity of Motion the Dutch well
remember in 1672. But then, say they, we may send our Militia. First, The King
cannot command them to go; and Secondly, if he could, no body would accept them;
and if they would go, and would be accepted of, they would be good for nothing:
Is we have no Forces to assist a Confederate, who will value our Friendship, or
assist us if we wanted it? To say we are Self-dependent, and shall never need
the Assistance of our Neighbor, is to say what we are not sure of, and this is
certain it is as needful to maintain the Reputation of England in the Esteem of
our Neighbors, as it is to defend our Coasts in case of an Invasion; for keep
up the Reputation of our Power, and we shall never be Invaded.

If our Defense from Insurrections or Invasions, were the only necessary part
of a future War, I should be the readier to grant the Point, and to think our
Militia might be made useful; but our business is Principiis Obsta, to beat the
Enemy before he comes to our own door. Our Business in case of a Rupture, is to
aid our Confederate Princes, that they may be able to stand between us and
Danger: Our Business is to preserve Flanders, to Garrison the Frontier Towns,
and be in the Field in Conjunction with the Confederate Armies: This is the way
to prevent Invasions, and Descents: And when they can tell us that our Militia
is proper for this work, then we will say something to it.

I Will suppose for once what I hope may never fall out, That a Rupture of this
Peace should happen, and the French, according to Custom, break suddenly into
Flanders, and overrun it, and after that Holland, what Condition would such a
Neighborhood of such a Prince, reduce us to? If it be answered again, Soldiers
may be raised to assist them. I answer, as before, let those who say so, read
the History of the French King's Irruption into Holland in the year 1672. where
he conquered Sixty strong fortified Towns in six Weeks time: And tell me what
it will be to the purpose to raise Men, to fight an Enemy after the Conquest is
made?

'Twill not be amiss to observe here that the Reputation and Influence the
English Nation has had abroad among the Princes of Christendom, has been always
more or less according as the Power of the Prince, to aid and assist, or to
injure and offend, was Esteemed. Thus Queen Rlizabeth carried her Reputation
abroad by the Courage of her English Soldiers and Seamen; and on the contrary,
what a ridiculous Figure did King James, with his Beati Pacifici, make in all
the Courts of Christendom? How did the Spaniard and the Emperor banter and
buffoon him? How was his Ambassador ashamed to treat for him, while Count
Colocedo told Count Mansfield, That his New Master (meaning King James) knew
neither how to make Peace or War? King Charles the First fared much in the same
manner: And how was it altered in the Case of Oliver?

Though his Government did a Tyrant resemble,
He made England Great, and her Enemies tremble.
Dialogue of the Houses. And what is it places the present King at the Helm of
the Confederacies? Why do they commit* their Armies to his Charge, and appoint
the Congress of their Plenipotentiaries at his Court? Why do Distressed Princes
seek his Mediation, as the Dukes of Holstien, Savoy, and the like? Why did the
Emperor and the King of Spain leave the whole Management of the Peace to him?
It Is all the Reputation of his Conduct and the English Valor under him; and
it is absolutely necessary to support this Character which England now bears in
the World, for the great Advantages which may and will be made from it; and
this Character can never Live, nor these Allyances be supported with no Force
at Hand to perform the Conditions.

These are some Reasons why a Force is necessary, but the Question is, What
Force? For I Grant, it does not follow from hence, that a great Army must be
kept on Foot in time of Peace, as the Author of the Second Part of the Argument
says is pleaded for.

Since then no Army, and a great Army, are Extremes equally dangerous, the one
to our Liberty at Home, and the other to our Reputation Abroad, and the Safety
of our Confederates; it remains to Inquire what Medium is to be found out; or
in plain English, what Army may, with Safety to our Liberties, be Maintained in
England, or what Means may be found out to make such an Army serviceable for
the Defense of us and our Allies, and yet not dangerous to our Constitution.

That any Army at all can be Safe, the Argument denies, but that cannot be made
out; a Thousand Men is an Army as much as 100000; as the Spanish Armado is
called, An Armado, though they seldom fit out above Four Men of War; and on this
Account I must crave leave to say, I do Confute the Assertion in the Title of
the Argument, that a Standing Army is Inconsistent with a Free Government, and
I shall further do it by the Authority of Parliament.

In the Claim of Right, presented to the present King* and which he Swore to
observe, as the Pacta Conventa of the Kingdom, it is declared, in hac verba,
That the Raising or Keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be by Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

This plainly lays the whole stress of the thing, not against the thing it
self, A Standing Army, nor against the Season, in time of Peace, but against
the Circumstance, Consent of Parliament; and I think nothing is more Rational
than to Conclude from thence, that a Standing Army in time of Peace, with
Consent of Parliament, is not against Law, and I may go on, nor is not
Inconsistent with a Free Government, nor Destructive of the English Monarchy.

There are Two Distinctions necessary therefore in the present Debate, to bring
the Question to a narrow Compass.

First, I distinguish between a Great Army and a small Army. And

Secondly, I distinguish between an Army kept on Foot without Consent of
Parliament, and an Army with Consent of Parliament.

And whereas we are told, an Army of Soldiers is an Army of Masters, and the
Consent of Parliament don't alter it, but they may turn them out of doors who
Raised them, as they did the Long Parliament. The First distinction answers
that; for if a great Army may do it, a small Army cannot; and then the Second
Distinction regulates the First. For it cannot be supposed, but the Parliament
when they give that Consent which can only make an Army Lawful, will not
Consent to a larger Army then they can so Master, as that the Liberties or
People of England, shall never be in danger from them.

No Man will say this cannot be, because the Number may be supposed as small as
you please; but to avoid the Sophistry of an Argument, I Will suppose the very
Troops which we see the Parliament have not Voted to be Disbanded; that is,
those which were on Foot before the Year 1680. No Man will deny them to be a
Standing Army, and yet sure no Man will imagine any danger to our Liberties
from them.

We are asked, if you establish an Army, and a Revenue to pay them, How shall
we be sure they will not continue themselves? But will any Man ask that
Question of such an Army as this? Can Six Thousand Men tell the Nation they
will not Disband, but will continue themselves, and then Raise Money to do it? Can
they Exact it by Military Execution? If they can, our Militia must be very
despicable. The keeping such a Remnant of an Army does not hinder but the
Militia may be made as useful as you please; and the more useful you make it,
the less danger from this Army: And however it may have been the Business of
our Kings to make the Militia as useless as they could, the present King never
showed any Tokens of such a Design. Nor is it more than will be needful, for
6000 Men by themselves will not do, if the Invasion we speak of should ever be
attempted. What has been said of the Appearance of the People on the Purbeck
fancied Invasion, was very true; but I must say, had it been a true One of
Forty Thousand Regular Troops, all that Appearance could have done nothing, but
have drove the Country in order to starve them, and then have run away: I am
apt enough to grant what has been said of the Impracticableness of any Invasion
upon us, while we are Masters at Sea; but I am sure the Defense of England's
Peace, lies in making War in Flanders. Queen Elizabeth found it so, her way to
beat the Spaniards, was by helping the Dutch to do it. And she as much Defended
England in aiding Prince Maurice, to win the Great Battle of Newport, as she
did in Defeating their Invincible Armado. Oliver Cromwell took the same Course;
for he no sooner declared Wat against Spain, but he Embarked his Army for
Flanders: The late King Charles did the same against the French, when after the
Peace of Nimeguen, Six Regiments of English and Scots were always left in the
Service of the Dutch, and the present War is a further Testimony: For where has
it been Fought, not in England, God be thanked, but in Flanders? And what are
the Terms of the Peace, but more Frontier Towns in Flanders? And what is the
Great Barrier of this Peace, but Flanders; the Consequence of this may be
guessed by the Answer King William gave when Prince of Orange, in the late
Treaty of Nimeguen; when, to make the Terms the easier, 'twas offered, That a
Satisfaction should be made to him by the French, for his Lands in Luxemburgh;
to which the Prince replied. He would part with all his Lands in Luxemburgh to
get the Spaniards one good Frontier Town in Flanders. The reason is plain; for
every one of those Towns, though they were immediately the Spaniards, were really
Bulwarks to keep the French the further off from his own Country; and thus it
is now: And how our Militia can have any share in this part of the War, I
cannot imagine. It seems strange to me to reconcile the Arguments made use of
to magnify the Serviceableness of the Militia, and the Arguments to enforce
the Dread of a Standing Army; for they stand like two Batteries one against
another, where the Shot from one dismounts the Cannon of the other: If a small
Army may enslave us, our Militia are good for nothing; if good for nothing,
they cannot defend us, and then an Army is necessary: If they are good, and are
able to defend us, then a small Army can never hurt us, for what may defend us
Abroad, may defend us at Home; and I wonder this is not considered. And what is
plainer in the World than that the Parliament of England have all along agreed
to this Point. That a Standing Army in time of Peace, with Consent of
Parliament, is not against Law. The Establishment of the Forces in the time of
K. Charles II. was not as I remember ever objected against in Parliament, at
least we may say the Parliament permitted them if they did not establish them:
And the Present Parliament seems inclined to continue the Army on the same
foot, so far as may be supposed from their Vote to disband all the Forces
raised since 1680. To affirm then, That a Standing Army, (without any of the
former Distinctions) is Inconsistent, etc. is to argue against the General
Sense of the Nation, the Permission of the Parliament for 50 years past, and
the Present apparent Resolutions of the best Composed House that perhaps ever
entered within those Walls.

To this House the whole Nation has left the Case, to act as they see cause; to
them we have committed the Charge of our Liberties, nay the King himself has
only told them His Opinion, with the Reasons for it, without leading them at
all; and the Article of the Claim of Right is left in full force: For this
Consent of Parliament is now left the whole and sole Judge. Whether an Army or
no Army; and if it Votes an Army, it is left still the sole Judge of the
Quantity, how many, or how few.

Here it remains to enquire the direct Meaning of those words, Unless it be by
Consent of Parliament* and I humbly suppose they may, among other things,
include these Particulars.

1. That they be raised and continued not by a Tacit, but Explicit Consent of
Parliament; or, to speak directly, by an Act of Parliament. 2. That they be
continued no longer than such Explicit Consent shall limit and appoint.
If these two Heads are granted in the word Consent, I am bold to affirm* Such
an Army is not Inconsistent with a Free Government, etc.

I am as positively assured of the Safety of our Liberties under the Conduct of
King and Parliament, while they concur, as I am of the Salvation of Believers
by the Passion of our Savior; and I hardly think it is fit for a private Man to
impose his positive Rules on them for Method, any more than it is to limit the
Holy Spirit, whose free Agency is beyond his Power: For the King, Lords and
Commons, can never err while they agree; nor is an Army of 20 or 40000 Men
either a Scarcrow enough to enslave us, while under that Union.

If this be allowed, then the Question before us is, What may conduce to make
the Harmony between the King, Lords and Commons eteernal? And so the Debate
about an Army ceases.

But to leave that Question, since Frailty attends the best of Persons, and
Kings have their faux Pas, as well as other Men, we cannot expect the Harmony
to be immortal; and therefore to provide for the worst, our Parliaments have
made their own Consent the only Clause that can make an Army Legitimate: But to
say that an Army directly as an Army, without these Distinctions, is
destructive of the English Monarchy, and Inconsistent with a Free Government,
etc. is to say then that the Parliament can destroy the English Monarchy, and
can Establish that which is Inconsistent with a Free Government; which is
ridiculous. But then we are told, that the Power of the Sword was first placed
in the Lords er Barons, and how they served the King in his Wars with
themselves and their Vassals, and that the King had no Power to Invade the
Privileges of the Barons, having no other Forces than the Vassals of his own
Demeasnes to follow him: And this Form is applauded as an extraodinary
Constitution, because there is no other Limitation of a Monarchy of any
Signification than such as places the Sword in the hand of the Subject: And all
such Government where the Prince has the Power of the Sword, though the People
have the Power of the Purse, are no more Monarchies but Tyrannies: For not only
that Government is tyrannical which is tyrannically exercised, but all
Governments are tyrannical which have not in their Constitution sufficient
Security against the Arbitrary Power of their Prince; that is, which have not
the Power of the Sword to Employ against him if need be.

Thus we come to the Argument: Which is not how many Troops may by allowed, or
how long; but in short, No Mercenary-Troops at all can be maintained without
Destroying our Constitution, and Metamorphizing our Government into a Tyranny.

I admire how the Maintainer of this Basis came to omit giving us an Account of
another Part of History very needful to examine, in handing down the True
Notion of Government in this Nation, viz. of Parliaments. To supply which, and
to make way for what follows, I must take leave to tell the Reader, that about
the time, when this Service by Villenage and Vassalage began to be resented by
the People, and by Peace and Trade they grew rich, and the Power of the Barons
being too great, frequent Commotions, Civil Wars, and Battles, were the
Consequence, nay sometimes without concerning the King in the Quarrel: One
Nobleman would Invade another, in which the weakest suffered most, and the poor
Man's Blood was the Price of all; the People obtained Privileges of their own,
and obliged the King and the Barons to accept of an Equilibrium; this we call a
Parliament: And from this the Due Balance, we have so much heard of is
deduced. I need not lead my Reader to the Times and Circumstances of this, but
this Due Balance is the Foundation on which we now stand, and which the Author
of the Argument so highly applaudes as the best in the World; and I appeal to
all Men to judge if this Balance be not a much nobler Constitution in all its
Points, than the old Gothic Model of Government.

In that the Tyranny of the Barons was intolerable, the Misery and Slavery of
the Common People insupportable, their Blood and Labor was at the absolute
Will of the Lord, and often sacrifice to their private Quarrels: They were as
much at his beck as his Pack of Hounds were at the Sound of his Horn; whether
it was to march against a Foreign Enemy, or against their own Natural Prince*
So that this was but exchanging one Tyrant for Three hundred, for so many the
Barons of England were accounted at least. And this was the Effect of the
Security vested in the People, against the Arbitrary Power of the King; which
was to say the Barons took care to maintain their own Tyranny, and to prevent
the Kings Tyrahnizing over them.

But it is said, the Barons growing poor by the Luxury of the Times, and the
Common People growing rich, they exchanged their Vassalage for Leases, Rents,
Fines, and the like. They did so, and thereby became entitled to the Service
of themselves; and so overthrew the Settlement, and from hence came a House of
Commons: And I hope England has reason to value the Alteration. Let them that
think not reflect on the Freedoms the Commons enjoy in Poland, where the
Gothic Institution remains, and they will be satisfied.

In this Establishment of a Parliament, the Sword is indeed trusted in the
Hands of the King, and the Purse in the Hands of the People; the People cannot
make Peace or War without the King, no^ the King cannot raise or maintain an
Army without the People; and this is the True Balance.

But we are told, The Power of the Purse is not a sufficient Security without
the Power of the Sword: What! not against Ten thousand Men? To answer this,
it is necessary to examine how far the Power of the Sword is in the Hands of the
People already, and next whether the Matter of Fact be true.

I say the Sword is in part in the Hands of the People already, by the Militia,
who, as the Argument says are the People themselves. And how are they
Balanced? It Is true, they are Commissioned by the King, but they may refuse to
meet twice, till the first Pay is reimburst to the Country: And where shall
the King Raise it without a Parliament? that very Militia would prevent him. So
that our Law therein Authorizing the Militia to refuse the Command of the King,
tacitly puts the Sword into the Hands of the People.

I come now to Examine the Matter of Fact, That the Purse is not an Equivalent
to the Sword, which I deny to be true; and here 'twill be necessary to Examine*
How often our Kings of England have Raised Armies on their own Heads, but have
been forced to Disband them for want of Moneys, nay, have been forced to call a
Parliament to Raise Money to Disband them.

King Charles the First is an Instance of both these; for his First Army
against the Scots he was forced to Dismiss for want of Pay; and then was forced
to call a Parliament to Pay and Dismiss the Scots; and though he had an Army in
the Field at the Pacification, and a Church Army too, yet he durst not attempt
to Raise Money by them.

I am therefore to affirm, that the Power of the Purse is an Equivalent to the
Power of the Sword; and I believe I can make it appear, if I may be allowed to
instance in those numerous Armies which Gaspar Coligny, Admiral of France, and
Henry the Fourth King of Navar, and William the First P. of Orange brought of
Germany into France, and into the Low Countries, which all vanished, and could
attempt nothing for want of a Purse to maintain them: But to come nearer, what
made the Efforts of King Charles all Abortive, but Want of the Purse? Time was
he had the Sword in his Hand, when the Duke of Buckingham went on those
Fruitless Voyages to Rochell, and himself afterward to Scotland, he had Forces
on Foot, a great many more than Five Thousand, which the Argument mentions, but
he had not the Purse, at last he attempted to take it without a Parliament, and
that Ruined him. King Charles the Second found the Power of the Purse, so much
outballanced the Power of the Sword, that he sat still, and let the Parliament
Disband his Army for him, almost whether he would or no.

Besides the Power of the Purse in England, differs from what the same thing is
in other Countries, because it is so Sacred a thing, that no King ever touched
at it but he found his Ruin in it. Nay, it is so odious to the Nation, that
whoever attempts it, must at the same time be able to make an Entire Conquest
or nothing.

If then neither the Consent of Parliament, nor the smalness of an Army
proposed, nor the Power of the Sword in the Hands of the Milia, which are the
People themselves, nor the Power of the Purse, are not a sufficient Balance
against the Arbitrary Power of the King, what shall we say? Are Ten Thousand
Men in Arms, without Money, without Parliament Authority, hemmed in with the
whole Militia of England, and Damned by the Laws? Are they of such Force as to
break our Constitution? I cannot see any reason for such a Thought. The
Parliament of England is a Body of whom we may say, That no Weapon Formed
against them could ever Prosper; and they know their own Strength, and they
know what Force is needful, and what hurtful, and they will certainly maintain
the First and Disband the Last.

It may be said here, It Is not the fear of Ten Thousand Men, it is not the
matter of an Army, but it is not the Thing it self; grant a Revenue for Life,
and the next King will call it, My Revenue, and so grant an Army for this King,
and the next will say, Give Me my Army.

To which I Answer, That these things have been no oftener asked in Parliament
than denied; and we have so many Instances in our late Times of the Power of
the Purse, that it seems strange to me, that it should not be allowed to be a
sufficient Balance.

King Charles the Second, as I hinted before, was very loath to part with his
Army Raised in 1676. but he was forced to it for want of Money to pay them; he
durst not try whether when Money had Raised an Army, an Army could not Raise
Money. It Is true, his Revenues were large, but Frugality was not his Talent,
and that ruined the Design. King James the Second was a good Husband, and that
very Husbandry had almost Ruined the Nation; for his Revenues being well
managed, he maintained an Army out of it. For it is well known, the Parliament
never gave him a Penny toward it; but he never attempted to make his Army
Raise any Money; if he had; it is probable his Work had been sooner done than it
was.

But pray let us Examine abroad, if the Purse has not Governed all the Wars of
Europe. The Spaniards were once the most powerful People in Europe; their
Infantry were in the Days of the Prince of Parma, the most Invincible Troops in
the World. The Dutch, who were then his Subjects, and on whom he had Levied
immense Sums of Money, had the 10th Penny demanded of them, and the Demand
backed by a great Army of these very Spaniards, which, among many other Reasons
caused them to Revolt. The Duke D'Alva afterward attempted for his Master to
raise this Tax by his Army, by which he lost the whole Netherlands, who are now
the Richest People in the World; and the Spaniard is now become the meanest and
most despicable People in Europe, and that only because they are the Poorest.

The present War is another Instance, which having lasted Eight Years, is at
last brought to this Conclusion* That he who had the longest Sword has yielded
to them who had the longest Purse.

The late King Charles the First, is another most lively Instance of this
Matter, to what lamentable Shifts did he drive himself? and how many despicable
Steps did he take, rather than call a Parliament, which he hated to think of.
And yet, though he had an Army on Foot, he was forced to do it, or starve all his
Men; had it been to be done, he would have done it. It Is true, 'twas said the
Earl of Strofford proposed a Scheme, to bring over an Army out of Ireland, to
force England to his Terms; but the Experiment was thought too desperate to be
attempted, and the very Project Ruined the Projector; such an ill Fate attends
every Contrivance against the Parliament of England.

But I think I need go no further on that Head: The Power of Raising Money is
wholly in the Parliament, as a Balance to the Power of Raising Men, which is
in the King; and all the Reply I can meet with is, That this Balance signifies
nothing, for an Army can Raise Money, as well as Money Raise an Army; to which
I Answer, besides what has been said already; I do not think it practicable in
England: The greatest Armies, in the Hands of the greatest Tyrants we ever had
in England, never durst attempt it. We find several Kings in England have
attempted to Raise Money without a Parliament, and have tried all the means
they could to bring it to pass; and they need not go back to Richard the
Second, to Edward the Second, to Edward the Fourth, to Henry the Eighth, or to
Charles the First, to remind the Reader of what all Men who know any thing of
History are acquainted with: But not a King ever yet attempted to Raise Money,
by Military Execution, or Billetting Soldiers upon the Country. King James the
Second had the greatest Army and the best, as to Discipline, that any King ever
had; and his desperate Attempts on our Liberties showed his good Will, yet he
never came to that Point. I will not deny, but that our Kings have been willing to
have Armies at Hand, to back them in their Arbitrary Proceedings, and the
Subjects may have been awed by them from a more early Resentment; but I must
observe, that all the Invasion of our Rights, and all the Arbitrary Methods of
our Governors, has been under pretenses of Law. King Charles the First Levied
Ship Money as his due, and the Proclamations for that purpose cite the
pretended Law, that in Case of Danger from a Foreign Enemy, Ships should be
fitted out to Defend us, and all Men were bound to contribute to the Charge;
Coat and Conduct Money had the like Pretenses; Charters were subverted by Quo
Warrantoes, and Proceedings at Law; Patriots were Murdered under Formal
Prosecutions, and all was pretended to be done legally.

I know but one Instance in all our English Story, where the Souldery were
employed as Soldiers, in open Defyance of Law, to destroy the Peoples
Liberties by a Military Absolute Power, and that stands as an Everlasting Brand
of Infamy upon our Militia; and is an Instance to prove, beyond the Power of a
Reply, That even our Militia, under a bad Government, let them be our selves,
and the People, and all those fine things never so much are under ill Officers
and ill Management, as dangerous as any Souldery whatever, will be as Insolent,
and do the Drudgery of a Tyrant as effectually.

In the Year when Mr. Dubois and Mr. Papillon, a Member of the Present
Parliament, were chosen Sheriffs of London, and Sir John Moor, under pretense
of the Authority of the Chair, pretended to nominate one Sheriff himself, and
leave the City to choose but one, and confirm the Choice of the Mayor, the
Citizens struggled for their Right, and stood firm to their Choice, and several
Adjournments were made to bring over the Majority of the Livery, but in vain:
At length the Day came when the Sheriffs were to be sworn, and when the
Livery-men assembled at Guild Hall to swear their Sheriffs, they found the Hall
Garrisoned with a Company of Trained-Bands under Lieutenant Coll. Quiney, a
Citizen himself, and most of the Soldiers, Citizens and Inhabitants; and by
this Force the Ancient Liverymen were shut out, and several of them thrown
down, and insolently used, and the Sheriffs thrust away from the Hustings, and
who the Lord Mayor pleased was Sworn in an open Defiance of the Laws of the
Kingdom, and Privileges of the City. This was done by the Militia to their
Everlasting Glory, and I do not remember the like done by a Standing Army of
Mercenaries, in this Age at least. Nor is a Military Tyranny practicable in
England, if we consider the power the Laws have given to the Civil Magistrate,
unless you at the same time imagine that Army large enough to subdue the whole
English Nation at once, which if it can be effected by such an Army as the
Parliament now seem inclined to permit, we are in a very mean Condition.

I know it may be objected here, that the Forces which were on Foot before
1680. are not the Army in Debate, and that the Design of the Court was to have
a much greater Force.

I do not know that, but this I know, that those Forces were an Army, and the
Design of all these Oponents of an Army is in so many words, against any Army
at all, small as well as great; a Tenet absolutely destructive of the present
Interest of England, and of the Treaties and Alliances made by His Majesty with
the Princes and States of Europe, who depend so much on his Aid in Guard of the
present Peace.

The Power of making Peace or War is vested in the King: It Is part of his
Prerogative, but it is implicitly in the People, because their Negative as to
Payment, does really Influence all those Actions. Now If when the King makes
War, the Subject should refuse to assist him, the whole Nation would be ruined:
Suppose in the Leagues and Confederacies His Present Majesty is engaged in for
the Maintenance of the present Peace, all the Confederates are bound in case of
a Breach to assist one another with so many Men, say Ten thousand for the
English Quota, more or less, where shall they be found? Must they stay till
they are Raised? To what purpose would it be then for any Confederate to depend
upon England for Assistance?

It may be said indeed, if you are so engaged by Leagues or Treaties, you may
hire Foreign Troops to assist till you can raise them. This Answer leads to
several things which would take up too much room here.

Foreign Troops require Two things to procure them; Time to Negotiate for them,
which may not be to be spared, for they may be almost as soon raised; Time for
their March from Germany, for there are none nearer to be hired, and Money to
Hire them, which must be had by Parliament, or the King must have it ready: If
by Parliament, that is a longer way still; if without, that opens a worse Gate
to Slavery than the other: For if a King have Money, he can raise Men or hire Men
when he will; and you are in as much danger then, and more than you can be in
now from a Standing Army: So that since giving Money is the same thing as
giving Men, as it appeared in the late K. James's Reign, both must be
prevented, or both may be allowed.

But the Parliament we see needs no Instructions in this Matter, and therefore
are providing to reduce the Forces to the same Quota they were in before 1680.
by which means all the fear of Invading our Liberties will be at an end, the
Army being so very small that it is impossible, and yet the King will have
always a Force at hand to assist his Neighbors, or defend himself till more
can be Raised. The Forces before 1680. were an Army, and if they were an Army
by Consent of Parliament, they were a Legal Army; and if they were Legal, then
they were not inconsistent with a Free Government, etc. for nothing can be
Inconsistent with a Free Government, which is done according to the Laws of
that Government: And if a Standing Army has been in England Legally, then I
have proved, That a Standing Army is not Inconsistent with a Free Government,
etc.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Lately Published.
SOme Reflections on a Pamphlet lately Published, Entitled, An Argument
showing that a Standing Army is Inconsistent with a Free Government, and
absolutely Destructive to the Constitution of the English Monarchy. 2d. Edit.
Printed for, and Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1697.


