A DEFENSE OF Dr. Oliphant's SHORT DISCOVRSE Of the USEFULNESS of VOMITING in
FEVERS, In ANSWER to The Melius inquirendum, etc.

^n a LETTER to a Friend.

Maledicus a Malefico non distat, nisi occasion.

Quintil. EDINBURGH, ^rinted by J. W. for Thomas Carruthers, and sold at his
Shop in the Parliament ^^loss, Anno Dom. M.DC.XC.IX.

Sir,
YOur Surprise was but equal to my own, when you saw the Answer to Dr. O's
Discourse about Vomiting in ^evers; the passing over his Reasoning with seeming
Negligence, and the Wresting and Suppressing his Quotations, were but ^^ch
Replies as the Dr. expected, seeing ^here could be no other: But the
Represen^tion of the Matter of Fact is so grossly false, and does so consist
with my own Know^dge, that I thought my self, in Justice and ^riendship,
obliged to make you and the ^orld acquainted with it. And here I shall ^ot
insist on the Dr's own Assertion, which (...) you and me who know him, will go
fur^er than that of the Answerer. But a ^entleman of Undoubted Credit, who was
^y when the Dr. was first called, told me, that when he proposed Vomiting to
the Pa^ent, he so far disowned the getting of se^eral Vomits before, that he
told the Dr. he ^as sure it was the only thing would do him ^ood, and that he
was sorry he had not cal^ed him sooner. And for the Answerer's Ap^ealing to the
Apothecary's File, by which, ^e says, it is manifest he had been Vomited seeral
times, tho I had heard Mr Montelth, whom the Patient employed as such, openly
affirm the contrary, yet I could not imagine any Man would be so Barefaced,
without some Ground, so that to be fully satisfied, I went with the Dr. to the
Shop, and not only saw the Ordinary's Bills, but got a Copy of them written by
the Apothecary's own Servant, and Attested by him and his Master who was
present, to be the only had been ordered before the Dr. was called* They are as
follows.

July 12. R. Decoct. Com. pro Clyst. Lib. 1. In Colat. dissolv. Elect. lenit.
unc. 1. semis. Mel. Merc. unc. 1. Sal. Prunel. dr. 1. F. Clyster.

R. Amygd. d. exc. no. x. sem. 4. frig. maj. a dr. 1. pap. alb. dr. 11. cum s.
q. Aq. Font. F. Emulsio, ad lib. 1. In Colat. dissolv. sach. cand. Aq. Cinam.
a. unc. semis.

July 13. R. Decoct. amar. cum dupl. senna. unc. 4. in Colat. dissolv. sal.
absinth. dr. semis. F. potio. And each of these was once repeated.

And except the Answerer call Vomits an^ Emollient Clyster, an Emulsion and the
bitter Decoction with two Drachms of Senna, which is more proper for allaying
of Vomiting than provoking it, there was not so much as the Vestige of any
other.

The Dr. did not think these worth mentioning in the Account he gave, because
they were no way proportioned to the Greatness of the Disease, and what he had
mentioned were the Remedies mostly insisted upon, and he said very justly, a
Man might as reasonably expect to take a Fort with no better Artillery than
Pen-guns, as to think to make such Evacuations as were evidently necessary by
such Ineffectual Medicines. These Frightful Symptoms as want of Pulse, Spasms,
etc. which we are told in the Answer, fol^owed the taking the Vomit ordered by
the Dr, are as false as that the Answerer had given one himself. And the Dr.
was so far from being in any great Apprehension of Danger, that it was not his
own Motion to call any other Physician, it was done to comply with the Desire
of the Gentleman's own Lady, who had too near a Concern to be a proper Judge in
the Affair, and who, without any Wonder, might be allarum'd, when the Life of
so kind and deserving a Husband seemed any way in Danger; When that other
Physician and the Dr. came together, they found him in so Soft and Sound a
Sleep, that they stayed a considerable time, before they would disturb him, so
far was he from that low Pass the Answerer brings him to. And to vindicat what
these two Gentlemen thought proper to be done afterward, against any
Reflections made by the Answerer, I think it is at least sufficient to oppone
their joint Opinion against (...) single one. As for the Dr's leaving the
P^tient before he saw the Effect of the Vom it is of the same Piece with the
rest, sei^^ he was actually by him most part of all the Day. That this is the
true Matter of Fa^^ any Man who will give himself the Troub^^ to enquire may be
satisfied, either from t^^^ Apothecary, or the Gentleman himself, these who
were Assistants. But it is no wonder the Answerer had nothing but false
C^lumnies to stuff his Paper with, or you kno^ Stultorum Thesaurus Maledicentia.

Amongst the other Slanders he asperse the Dr. with, there can be none more
M^licious than that of calling him a Banterer Scripture, and saying it was a
Syrophenici^ Story; which you and my self, and other who ever discoursed him on
that head, kno^ to be so false, that we have all the Reason the World to think
the Dr. does more firml^ and upon more solid Grounds believe tho^ Sacred Truths
contained in Scripture th^^ any of his Accusers do: But it is easy to d^^cover
the base Motives of some People (...) dispersing such Calumnies not only of him
but of others who, I believe, are equally Innocent. But I shall wave all this,
and ma^^ have to the Answers given to the Dr's Re^sons and Authorities.

And First, He passes over the Dr's own ^easonings, by tellling he grants all;
and that the Dr. Discourses concerning Blood^ng before Evacuations; he says
concerns ^vacuations in general, and so leaves them ^s he found them. I have
nothing to reply ^o that, but refer you to them again; only (...) cannot
understand what he means by Eva^uations in general, seeing the Dr. is speak^ng
plainly of Evacuations in continued Fe^ers, when the Stomach and Primae viae
are ^vercharged with Choler and other Humors. I come next to the Authorities.

The Dr. had made an evident Consequence from two Aphorisms of Hippocrates,
which may be reduced to a plain Sylogism, ^hus, When Humors are to be
Evacuated, let ^^t be done the way that Nature affects most, ( i. e. ^f there
be an Inclination to Vomiting by Vomiting) but in very acute Diseases, let the
Humors be Evacuated that same day, if the Matter is turgid (which is any day so
long as the Matter is turgid.) Ergo. Now, To overturn this, the Answerer brings
another Apho^ism, which proves that Hippocrates was against Vomiting in Fevers,
which the Dr. ^ad obviated by acquainting us that Hippocrates knew no Effectual
Vomit could be safely given in any case. This is answered by calling it Stuff,
though it be the very same thing Fernel says. The Dr. had also taken notice,
that the Fevers in those Climat^ and Times were far from what we now have which
has made several of these Aphorism in acute Diseases, which either were not
understood, or not to be followed in Fevers which did not agree with these
Hippocrate^ had observed in any thing but the Name do so much harm in the Cure
of Fevers. cannot pass over what Dr. Tournefort says o^ this head in his
Learned Preface to the History of Plants about Paris. Deux ou trois lignes,
says he, mal expliquees d' Hippocrate out coute la vie a des millions de
persons Depuis le renouvellement des lettres les Medecins qui ont eu le plus
d'erudition and qui se son^ piquez de bien entendre la Doctrine de ce gran^
homme, se sout retranchez a ses maxims le^ moins assurees, and ont tout a fait
neglige la matiere medicinale don't il se servoit. Two or three Lines of
Hipprocrates ill Explained, have cost a Million of People their Lives. Since
the restoring of Letters, Physicians who have had the most Learning, and who
have valued themselves on the right Understanding, the Doctrine of that great
Man* have laid aside such of his Maxims as were the least certain, and have
quite neglected those Medicines he used, by reason as he adds afterward, they
were too violent.

Next, he comes to Celsus, and tells us that the Authority the Dr. brings from
him ^^s, concerning intermitting Fevers; to prove ^he contrary of which, I
shall only insert the Quotation again with the Answerer's Addition. Vomiting,
says Celsus, as in perfect Health it is often necessary for such as are
Cho^erick, so it is also in these Diseases which are ^ccasioned by Choler, what
the Answerer ^dds from the Author, is, Ergo omnibus qui ^nte febres horrore and
tremore vexatur. etc. ^ecessarius est, in English, therefore it is ne^essary to
all who are troubled with Chilness and shivering before Fevers, whereby it is
evident he is speaking of putrid continued Fevers, which do most commonly
Invade that way, and which by no means can be said of Agues which have that
trembling and Chilness through their whole Course. However, that you may not be
in a doubt about Celsus's Opinion, the Dr. quotes Cap. 7. lib. 3. De Cu^atione
febris ardentis, of the cure of a burn^ng Fever, where he orders positively
Vomiting in the height, and cautions it not to be done before the Fourth day,
si pituita, ^ayes he, in Stomacho coiit, inclinata jam ac^essione, vomere
cogendus est, and afterward, Cum vero in summo incremento morbus est, u^lique
non ante diem quartum, magna siti antecedente, frigida aqua copiose prestanda
est, u^bibat etiam ultra satietatem; and cum jam venture and precordia ultra
modum repleta, satisqu^ refrigerata sunt, vomere debet. Take notice here that
Celsus uses the word Accessio in a^ continued Fever, which solves the
Objection the Answerer has to Fernel's Authority. The Dr. had told in his
Discourse, that Celsus used such Vomits as the Answerer sets down, and gives
the Reasons of it, which (...) need not repeat.

What he objects against the Quotations of Fernel and Plater, I shall briefly
discuss. He says Fernel speaks in that first Citation the Dr. adduceth, only of
intermitting Fevers; on the contnaty he is treating of all these which are
attended with redundancy of Choler and other Humors, which all of 'em have
sensible remissions and Exacerbations, which is what he means by the
Accessiones, and such are almost all the Fevers we commonly have among us. He
has nothing to say to the other Quotation, but that Fernel speaks there only
of Purgatives, which the Dr. brought as an Argument a Majori; for he had told
before, That the Ancients used these, because they knew no effectual Vomits
which were safe, but used Purgatives, notwithstanding of the vast Commotion
they make in the whole Juices of the Body beyond Vomitive and Laxative
Medicines, such was the force of the Indication. That Plater used only these
Vomits, the Answer speaks of, is no wonder, seeing he knew no other; but to be
obstinatly addicted to such now after the discovery of the many Excellent and
safe Preparations of Antimony, is truly to be such a one as the Answerer
speaks of, whom Experience is never to make Wiser.

Etmuller by his own Confession approves of Antimonial Vomits in all Fevers,
and adheres to Sydenham. Now, to let you see it was not from him he had it, but
from his Master Johannes Nichael, whose Practice he strictly followed,
Preceptoris sui scripta (speaking of Etmuller) in adornanda praxi pro norma
fere atque Cynosura habuit, successu certe felicisimo, says the Prefacer to
Michael's Works. In which Cap. 3. De febribus Patridis in genere. He says,
Vomitoria optima sunt ex Antimonio: Nam Antimoniatis radicitus hoe febres
extingui Possunt, and quots Hartman, whose practice has been very much
esteemed, and who Cap. CCXXXV. speaking of two Preparations of Antimony,
whereof the one is for Vomiting, and the other for Purging, adds Utervis autem
pulvis, justa dosi exhibitus, medetur febribus tam intermittentibus quam
continuis.

Willis he ownes gave Vomits in Fever but not after the fourth Day, I know n^
what way he can prove this, seeing Willis far from saying any such thing. It Is
true, that Observation the Dr. mentions, the V^mit is given the fourth Day, but
that do not say, but he might have given it later the Indication had continued.
But here ta^^ notice, that the Answerer speaks not o^ Word of that Vomit Quoted
by the Dr, whi^^ Willis gives to a Slender Weakly Woman which is the precise
Quantity of Emeti^^ Wine the Dr. gave, because it was to ma^^ both Willis and
Sydenham guilty of giving Quadruple Dose. And here it is lucky for the Answerer
his Patients are not much acquainted with the Doses of Medicines, otherwi^^
they might easily understand what good the^ were to expect from one who is not
ashame^ to own that two Drachms of Emetick Wi^^ is a sufficient Dose for any
thing above fiv^ Years of Age. The Dr. indeed added to h^^ a very small
Quantity of a Gentle Purgativ^ by which he designed chiefly to make the
Operation of the Vomit both Easy and Saf^ and that this is not only his, but
the Practic^ of the best Physicians, he gives the Authority of Dr. Tournefort
in the forementione Preface, where speaking of what the Brea^ and Organs of
Respiration suffer in the tit Vomiting, goes on, C'est pour cela que les ^^s
habiles Medicines se sont avisez sagement ^mesler en plusieurs rencontres les
Emetiques ^ec les Purgatifs, pour eviter une party de vio^tes Secousses que
donnent les Emetiques, et pour terminer les matieres a sortir par les deux
^^uts. It is for that Reason, says he, that ^^e most Skilful Physicians, have
wisely jud^^d it convenient in many Cases, to mix ^^omitive and Purgative
Medicines together, ^^t so they might prevent a part of the vi^ent Concussions
which Vomits occasion, ^^d to make the Humors come forth as well ^^wnward as
upward.

The Authority of Sylvius is too particular be well Answered, therefore he
passes over, by telling that Sylvius speaks only Fevers in general. Whereas he
says patto the Matter in Hand, In Fevers, when ^^e Gall works up, and is too
plentiful, Vomi^^^g and Purging by Stool are chiefly conducible, ^^d afterward
positively prefers Antimonial ^^mits to all other.

I am now safely come to Dr. Sydenham, ^^d if he don't make the Charge good, I
shall content both the Dr. and I quite the Field. ^^e Answerer pretends, That
these conti^^ed Fevers Dr. Sydenham treats of, which ^^ged four Years together,
viz. 61.62.64. and were accompanied with an Inclination to Vomit, were
successfully Cure by Vomiting, but in the Fevers which fo^lowed in the 65, tho
attended with the sam^ Symptoms, that Vomits had the contrar^ Effect. Now to
confute this, I shall onl^ adduce Sydenham's own Words, whereby (...) shall
plainly appear, that what he had said (...) Vomiting in that Quotation, he
designed for a General Method in most of their Fevers which, as the Dr. had
taken notice of, were the same precisely we usually have amongst u^ That Fever
which broke out in the 65 an^ 66 the Answerer speaks of, was truly the Plague,
and is by Sydenham called Febr^^ Pestilentialis and Pestis, and was quite
different from these ordinary continued Fever he had observed before, and
because Vomiting had not the same Success in that, as i^ the preceding Fevers,
he concluded it to be of an extraordinary kind. I shall ad^ his own Words.
After he tells he ha^ given a Vomit to a Lady seized with one (...) these
Pestilential Fevers, he adds, Page n^ 95. Postero mane, cum aegram iterum
adirem ei alvum profluere intelligo, quae res, ab alquot annorum usu
insolentior visa, mihi non l^vem sollicitudinem injecit. Exinde autem Febre^
non vulgaris generis esse judicavi (quemadm^dum etiam eventus docuit)
Proindeque aliam a^ea, quae superius tradita est, quaeque constanti sucessus
serie hactenus a me usurpata fuisset, meden^^li rationem sibi vindicare. Next
Day, says he, when I Visited my Patient, I understood she ^^d a Looseness,
which, by the Experience of ^^eral Years, seemed somewhat Unusual, and ^^^de me
not a little Anxious. But from ^^t I concluded, it was not a Fever of an
^^dinary kind (which I was also taught by ^^e Event) And therefore, that it
required ^^other Method of Cure different from what have given before, and
which, by a con^ant Tract of Experience, I had found suc^^ssful. From which it
is plain to a Demon^^ation, That he had laid down that Method Vomiting, as a
General Rule in the Cure the most usual Fevers. And for his using ^^gatives
afterward, that he also did on ^he Account of a New Fever, he had never before
observed, as the Title of that Schedule ^hows, which he calls Schedula
Monitoria de Novae Febris Ingressu, and in the very beginning tells the
Occasion of his Writing that Schedule. Populare scilicet meos admonens, says
he, de subingressu Novae cujusdam Constitutionis, a qua pendet Febris Nova
Species a ^uper grassantibus multum abludens. It was to advertise his
Countrymen, of the coming ^n of a certain New Constitution, from which ^^d
depend a New Sort of Fever, very far ^ifferent from these which raged formerly.
And in Effect, that Fever was a Sort of Peripneumonia Notha, as is evident from
the Schedule.

But last of all, the Answerer enters into a Confederacy with his sworn
enemies, the Mathematics to defeat the Dr. and for that makes use of Dr. P's
Dissertation of the Cure of Fevers by evacuation, wherein tha^ Gentleman, after
comparing the Cutaneou^ Perspiration or sweating with the other Evacuations,
concludes, That if the Morbisick matter to be evacuated be actually mixed with
the Blood, and circulating in the Blood Vessels, it will be Ten times soone^
done by Sweating than Purging: Whereas Dr. O. is supposing a great deal of the
Fuel of the Fever stagnating in the Cavity o^ the Stomach and Intestines, and
of the Usefulness of Evacuating that timeously by Vomiting, which otherwise
would mix with the Blood, and put us to the necessity o^ Diaphoreticks to do
our best to save the Patient's life: But that Dissertation it seems h^
understands as well as the other of Dr. P^ Writings.

He Answers nothing to that Quotation the Dr. brings from Dr. Tournfort to
prov^ that the French Physicians had changed their old way of treating Fevers,
for that of g^ing Antimony, and other the most violen^ vacuating Medicines we
know. I shall only add, That to my certain Knowledge, it is so far the Practice
in England of their best Physicians, that they are not contented to give
Antimony Infusion, such as is the Emetick Wine, but give the Emetick Tartar,
which is Antimony in ^ubstance, and which operats a great deal more violently,
and that on any day of the Fever, if the Indication continues. And I have
frequently heard the Dr. tell, That when he was at Oxford, he knew some of the
most famous Physicians there give strong Vomits toward the very last period of
the Fever, to wit, when the Lethargick, and Comatous Symptoms were looked on as
the Immediate Forerunners of Death, and that sometimes with surprising Success.

I shall conclude with this, That I Am sorry the Dr. should have been so
unluckily engaged to enter the Lists with one wrho had nothing to oppone to his
plain Reasons, and irrefragable Authorities, but malicious Calumnies, and
Ungentlemanny Scolding, savouring altogether of the Lee of the People and mean
Education; which he thought as far beneath him to Answer, as to retort. I ^^m.

Sir, Yours, etc.


