THE Poor Man's PLEA To all the Proclamations, Declarations, Acts of
Parliament, etc. WHICH Have been, or shall be made, or published, for a
Reformation of Manners, and suppressing Immorality in the Nation.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCVIII.

THE PREFACE.
REformation of Manners is a Work so Honorable, and at This Time so absolutely
necessary, that, like the Reform of our Money, it can be no longer delayed.

The Ways by which the present Torrent of Vice has been let in upon the Nation,
and by which it maintains the Tyranny it has usurped on the Lives of the
Inhabitants, are too plain to be hid. The following Sheets aim at the Work, by
leading to the most direct means, Viz. Reformation by Example. Laws are, in
Terrorem Punishments, and Magistrates Compel and put a Force upon Men's Minds;
but Example is Persuasive and Gentle, and draws by a Secret, Invisible, and
almost Involuntary Power.

If there can be any Remedies proposed more proper to bring it to pass, they
that know them would do well to bring them forth. In the mean time the Author
thinks Conscience in the Minds of Men Impartially Consulted, will give a
Probatum to the following Proposal; and to that Judgment he refers all those
who Object against it.

D. F.

THE Poor Man's PLEA TO All the Proclamations, Declarations, Acts of
Parliament, etc. which have been, or shall be made, or published, for a
Reformation of Manners, and suppressing Immorality in the Nation.
IN searching for a proper Cure of an Epidemick Distemper, Physicians tell us
it is first necessary to know the Cause of that Distemper, from what Part of the
Body, and from what ill Habit it proceeds; and when the Cause is discovered, it
is to be removed, that the Effect may cease of it self; but if removing the
Cause will not work the Cure, then indeed they proceed to apply proper Remedies
to the Disease it self, and the particular part afflicted.

Immorality is without doubt the present reigning Distemper of the Nation: And
the King and Parliament, who are the proper Physicians, seem nobly inclined to
undertake the Cure. It Is a Great Work, well worthy their utmost Pains: The
Honor of it, were it once perfected, would add more Trophies to the Crown,
that all the Victories of this Bloody War, or the Glories of this Honorable
Peace.

But as a Person under the Violence of a Disease sends in vain for a Physician,
unless he resolves to make use of his Prescription; so in vain does the King
attempt to reform a Nation, unless they are willing to reform themselves, and
to submit to his Prescriptions.

Wickedness is an Ancient Inhabitant in this Country, and it is very hard to
give its Original.

But however difficult that may be, it is easy to look back to a Time when we
were not so generally infected with Vice as we are now; and 'twill seem
sufficient to enquire into the Causes of our present Defection.

The Protestant Religion seems to have an unquestioned Title to the first
introducing a strict Morality among us; and it is but just to give the Honor of
it where it is so eminently due. Reformation of Manners has something of a
Natural Consequence in it from Reformation in Religion: For since the
Principles of the Protestant Religion disown the Indulgencies of the Roman
Pontiff, by which a Thousand Sins are, as Venial Crimes, bought off, and the
Priest, to save God Almighty the trouble, can blot them out of the Account
before it comes to his hand; common Vices lost their Charter, and men could not
sin at so cheap a Rate as before. The Protestant Religion has in it self a
natural tendency to Virtue, as a standing Testimony of its own Divine Original,
and accordingly it has very much suppressed Vice and Immorality in all the
Countries where it has had a Footing: It has civilized Nations, and reformed
the very Tempers of its Professors: Christianity and Humanity has gone hand in
hand in the World; and there is so visible a difference between the other
Civilized Governments in the World, and those who now are under the Protestant
Powers, that it carries its Evidence in it self.

The Reformation, begun in England in the days of King Edward the sixth, and
afterward gloriously finished by Queen Elizabeth, brought the English Nation
to such a degree of Humanity, and Sobriety of Conversation, as we have reason
to doubt will hardly be seen again in our Age.

In King James the First's time, the Court affecting something more of
Gallantry and Gaiety, Luxury got footing; and Twenty Years Peace, together with
no extraordinary Examples from the Court, gave too great Encouragement to
Licentiousness.

If it got footing in King James the First's time, it took a deep Root in the
Reign of his Son; and the Liberty given the Soldiery in the Civil War,
dispersed all manner of Profaneness throughout the Kingdom. That Prince,
though very Pious in his own Person and Practice, had the Misfortune to be the
first King of England, and perhaps in the whole World, that ever established
Wickedness by a Law: By what unhappy Council, or secret ill Fate he was guided
to it, is hard to determine; but the Book of Sports, as it was called, that
Book to tolerate the Exercise of of all sorts of Pastimes on the Lord's Day,
tended more to the vitiating the Practice of this Kingdom, as to keeping that
Day, than all the Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, and Endeavors of future
Princes have done, or perhaps ever will do, to reform it.

And yet the People of England expressed a general sort of Aversion to that
Liberty; and some, as if glutted with too much Freedom, when the Reins of the
Law were taken off, refused that Practice they allowed themselves in before.

In the time of King Charles the Second, Lewdness and all manner of Debauchery
arrived at its Meridian: The Encouragement it had from the Practice and
Allowance of the Court, is an invincible Demonstration how far the Influence of
our Governors extends in the Practice of the People.

The present King and his late Queen, whose Glorious Memory will be dear to the
Nation as long as the World stands, have had all this wicked Knot to unravel.
This was the first thing the Queen set upon while the King was engaged in his
Wars abroad: She first gave all sorts of Vice a general Discouragement; and on
the contrary, raised the value of Virtue and Sobriety by her Royal Example. The
King having brought the War to a Glorious Conclusion, and settled an Honorable
Peace, in his very first Speech to his Parliament proclaims a New War against
Profaneness and Immorality, and goes on also to discourage the Practice of it
by the like Royal Example.

Thus the Work is begun nobly and regularly; and the Parliament, the General
Representative of the Nation, readily pursues it by enacting Laws to suppress
all manner of Profaneness, etc.

These are Great Things, and well improved, would give an undoubted Overthrow
to the Tyranny of Vice, and the Dominion Profaneness has usurped in the hearts
of men.

But we of the Plebeii find our selves justly aggrieved in all this Work of
Reformation; and the Partiality of this Reforming Rigor makes the real Work
impossible: Wherefore we find our selves forced to seek Redress of our
Grievances in the old honest way of Petitioning Heaven to relieve us: And in
the mean time, we solemnly Enter our Protestation against all the Vicious Part
of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation; as follows:

First, We Protest, That we do not find impartially enquiring into the matter,
and speaking of Moral Gooodness, that you are one jot better than we are, your
Dignities, Estates and Quality excepted. It Is true, we are all bad enough, and
we are willing in good Manners to agree, that we are as wicked as you; but we
cannot find on the exactest Scutiny, but that in the Commonwealth of Vice, the
Devil has taken care to level Poor and Rich into one Class, and is fairly going
on to make us all Graduates in the last degreee of Immorality.

Secondly, We do not find that all the Proclamations, Declarations, and Acts of
Parliament yet made, have any effective Power to punish you for your
Immoralities, as they do us. Now, while you make Laws to punish us, and let
your selves go free, though guilty of the same Vices and Immoralities, those
Laws are unjust and unequal in themselves.

It Is true, the Laws do not express a Liberty to you and Punishment to us; and
therefore the King and Parliament are free, as King and Parliament, from this
our Appeal; but the Gentry and Magistrates of the Kingdom, while they execute
those Laws upon us the poor Commons, and themselves practicing the same Crimes,
in defiance of the Laws both of God and Man, go unpunished; This is the
Grievance we protest against, as unjust and unequal.

Wherefore, till the Nobility, Gentry, Justices of the Peace, and Clergy, will
be pleased either to reform their own Manners, and suppress their own
Immoralities, or find out some Method and Power impartially to punish
themselves when guilty, we humbly crave leave to object against setting any
Poor Man in the Stocks, or sending them to the House of Correction for
Immoralities, as the most unequal and unjust way of proceeding in the World.

And now, Gentlemen,

That this Protestation may not seem a little too rude, and a Breach of good
Manners to our Superiors, we crave Leave to subjoin our humble Appeal to your
selves; and will for once, knowing you as English Gentlemen, to be Men of
Honor, make you Judges in your own case.

First, Gentlemen, We appeal to your selves, whether ever it be likely to
perfect the Reformation of Manners in this Kingdom, without you: Whether Laws
to punish us, without your Example also to influence us, will ever bring the
Work to pass.

The first Step from a loose vicious Practice in this Nation, was begun by King
Edward the Sixth, backed by a Reformed Clergy, and a Sober Nobility: Queen
Elizabeth carried it on. 'Twas the Kings and the Gentry which first again
degenerated from that strict Observation of Moral Virtues, and from thence
carried Vice on to that degree it now appears in. From the Court Vice took its
Progress into the Country; and in the Families of the Gentry and Nobility it
harbored, till it took heart under their Protection, and made a general Sally
into the Nation; and We the Poor Commons, who have been always easy to be
guided by the Example of our Landlords and Gentlemen, have really been
debauched into Vice by their Examples: And it must be the Example of you the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, that must put a Stop to the Flood of Vice
and Profaneness which is broken in upon the Country, or it will never be done.

Our Laws against all manner of Vicious Practices are already very severe: But
Laws are useless insignificant things, if the Executive Power which lies in the
Magistrate be not exerted. The Justices of the Peace have the Power to punish,
but if they do not put forth that Power, it is all one as if they had none at
all: Some have possibly exerted this Power; but wherever it has been so put
forth, it has fallen upon us the poor Commons: These are* all Cobweb Laws, in
which the small Flies are caught, and the great ones break through. My
Lord Mayor has whipped about the poor Beggars, and a few scandalous Whores have
been sent to the House of Correction; some Alehousekeepers and Vintners have
been Fined for drawing Drink on the Sabbath Day; but all this falls upon us of
the Mob, the poor Plebeii, as if all the Vice lay among us; for we do not find
the Rich Drunkard carried before my Lord Mayor, nor a Swearing Lewd Merchant
Fined, or Set in the Stocks. The man with a Gold Ring and Gay Cloths, may Swear
before the Justice, or at the Justice; may reel home through the open Streets,
and no man take any notice of it; but if a poor man get drunk, or swear an
Oath, he must to the Stocks without Remedy.

In the second place, We appeal to your selves, Whether Laws or Proclamations
are capable of having any Effect toward a Reformation of Manners, while the
very Benches of our Justices are infected with the scandalous Vices of Swearing
and Drunkenness; while our Justices themselves shall punish a man for
Drunkenness, with a God damn him, set him in the Stocks: And if Laws and
Proclamations are useless in the Case, then they are good for nothing, and had
as good be let alone as published.

It Is hard, Gentlemen, to be punished for a Crime, by a man as guilty as our
selves; and that the Figure a man makes in the World, must be the reason why he
shall or shall not be liable to a Law: This is really punishing men for being
poor, which is no Crime at all; as a Thief may be said to be hanged, not for
the Fact, but for being taken.

We further Appeal to your selves, Gentlemen, to inform us, whether there be
any particular reason why you should be allowed the full Career of your corrupt
Appetites, without the Restraint of Laws, while you your selves agree that such
Offenses shall be punished in us, and do really execute the Law upon the Poor
People, when brought before you for the same things.

Wherefore, That the Work of Reformation of Manners may go on, and be brought
to Perfection, to the Glory of God, and the great Honor of the King and
Parliament: That Debauchery and Profaneness, Drunkenness, Whoring, and all
sorts of Immoralities may be suppressed, we humbly propose the Method which may
effectually accomplish so great a Work.

(1.) That the Gentry and Clergy, who are the Leaders of us poor ignorant
people, and our Lights erected on high places to guide and govern us, would in
the first place put a voluntary force upon themselves, and effectually reform
their own Lives, their way of Conversing, and their common Behavior among
their Servants and Neighbors.

1. The Gentry. They are the Original of the Modes, and Customs, and Manners of
their Neighbors; and their Examples in the Countries especially are very
moving. There are three several Vices, which have the principal Management of
the greatest part of Mankind, viz. Drunkenness, Swearing, and Whoring; all of
them very ill becoming a Gentlemen, however Custom may have made them Modish:
Where none of these Three are in a House, there is certainly something of a
Plantation of God in the Family; for they are such Epidemick Distempers, that
hardly Human Nature is entirely free from them.

1. Drunkenness, that brutish Vice; a Sin so sordid, and so much a Force upon
Nature, that had God Almighty enjoined it a Duty, I believe many a man would
have ventured the loss of Heaven, rather than have performed it. The Pleasure
of it seems to be so secretly hid, that wild Heathen Nations know nothing of
the matter; it is only discovered by the wise people of these Northern
Countries, who are grown Proficients in Vice, Philosophers in Wickedness, who
can extract a Pleasure to themselves in losing their Understanding, and make
themselves sick at heart for their Diversion.

If the History of this well bred Vice was to be written, 'twould plainly
appear that it begun among the Gentry, and from them was handed down to the
poorer sort, who still love to be like their Betters. After the Restitution of
King Charles the Second, when drinking the King's Health became the distinction
between a Cavalier and a Roundhead, Drunkenness began its Reign, and it has
Reigned almost Forty Years: The Gentry caressed this Beastly Vice at such a
Rate, that no Companion, no Servant was thought proper, unless he could bear a
Quantity of Wine; And to this day it is added to the Character of a Man, as an
additional Title, when you would speak well of him, He is an honest drunken
Fellow; as if his Drunkenness was a Recommendation of his Honesty. From the
practice of this nasty Faculty, our Gentlemen have arrived to the teaching of
it; and that it might be effectually preservd to the next Age, have very early
instructed the Youth in it. Nay, so far has Custom prevailed, that the Top of a
Gentleman's Entertainment has been to make his Friend drunk; and the Friend is
so much reconciled to it, that he takes that for the effect of his Kindness,
which he ought as much to be affronted at, as if he had kicked him down Stairs:
Thus it is become a Science; and but that the Instruction proves so easy, and
the Youth too apt to learn, possibly we might have had a College erected for
it before now. The further perfection of this Vice among the Gentry, will
appear in two things; that it is become the Subject of their Glory, and the way
of expressing their Joy for any public Blessing. Jack, said a Gentleman of
very high Quality, when after the Debate in the House of Lords, King William
was voted into the vacant Throne; Jack, (says he) God damn ye Jack, go home to
your Lady, and tell her we have got a Protestant King and Queen; and go and
make a Bonfire as big as a House, and bid the Bntler make ye all drunk, ye Dog:
Here was Sacrificing to the Devil, for a Thanksgiving to God. Other Vices are
committed as Vices, and men act them in private, and are willing to hide them;
but Drunkenness they are so fond of, that they will glory in it, boast of it,
and endeavor to promote it as much as possible in others: It Is a Triumph to a
Champion of the Bottle, to repeat how many Quarts of Wine he has drank at a
sitting, and how he made such and such honest Fellows drunk. Men Lie and
Forswear, and hide it* and are ashamed of it, as indeed they have reason to do:
But Drunkenness and Whoring are Accomplishments People value themselves upon,
repeat them with pleasure, and affect a sort of Vanity in the History; are
content all the World should be Witnesses of their Intemperance, have made the
Crime a Badge of Honor to their Breeding* and introduce the practice as a
Fashion. And whoever gives himself the trouble to reflect on the Custom of our
Gentlemen in their Families, encouraging and promoting this Vice of Drunkenness
among the poor Commons, will not think it a Scandal upon the Gentry of England,
if we say, That the Mode of drinking, as it is now practiced, had its Original
from the Practice of the Country Gentlemen, and they again from the Court.

It may be objected, and God forbid it should not, That there are a great many
of our Nobility and Gentlemen, who are Men of Honor and Men of Morals; and
therefore this Charge is not universal. To which we answer, It Is universal for
all that, because those very Gentlemen, though they are negatively clear as to
the Commission of the Crimes we speak of, yet are positively guilty, in not
executing that Power the Law has put into their hands, with an Impartial Vigor.
For where was that Gentleman or Justice of the Peace ever yet found, who
executed the Terms of the Law upon a Drunken, Swearing, Lewd Gentleman, his
Neighbor, but the Quality of the Person has been a License to the open
Exercise of the worst Crimes; as if there were any Baronets, Knights, or
Squires in the next World; who because of those little step* Custom had raised
them on, higher than their Neighbors, should be exempted from the Divine
Judicature; or that as Captain Vrats said, who was Hanged for Murdering
Esquire ^hynn, God would show them some respect as they were Gentlemen.

If there were any reason why a Rich Man should be permitted in the public
Exercise of Open Immoralities, and not the Poor Man, something might be said:
But if there be any difference it lies the other way; for the Vices of a Poor
Man affect only himself; but the Rich Man's Wickedness affects all the
Neighborhood, gives offense to the Sober, encourages and hardens the Lewd, and
quite overthrows the weak Resolutions of such as are but indifferently fixed in
their Virtue and Morality. If my own Watch goes false, it deceives me and none
else; but if the Town Clock goes false, it deceives the whole Parish. The
Gentry are the Leaders of the Mob; if they are Lewd and Drunken, the others
strive to imitate them; if they Discourage Vice and Intemperance, the other
will not be so forward in it, nor so fond of it.

To think then to effect a Reformation by Punishing the Poor, while the Rich
seem to Enjoy a Charter for wickedness, is like taking away the Effect, that
the Cause may cease.

We find some People very fond of Monopolizing a Vice, they would have all of
it to themselves; they must, as my Lord Rochester said of himself, Sin like a
Lord; little sneaking Sins will not serve turn; but they must be Lewd at a rate
above the Common Size, to let the World see they are capable of it.

Our Laws seem to take no Cognizance of such, perhaps for the same reason that
Lycurgus made no Law against Parricide, because he would not have the Sin named
among his Citizens.

Now the Poor Man sees no such Dignity in Vice, as to study Degrees; we are
downright in Wickedness, as we are in our Dealings; if we are Drunk, it is plain
Drunkenness; Swearing, and Whoring, is all Blunderbus with us; we don't affect
such Niceties in our Conversation; and the Justices use us accordingly; nothing
but the Stocks, or the House of Correction is the Case, when we are brought
before them; but when our Masters the Gentlemen come to their Refined Practice,
and Sin by the Rules of Quality, we find nothing comes of it but false
Heraldry, the Vice is punished by the Vice, and the Punishment renews the Crime.

The Case in short is this; the Lewdness, Profaneness, and Immorality of the
Gentry, which is the main Cause of the General Debauchery of the Kingdom, is
not at all touched by our Laws, as they are now Executed; and while it remains
so, the Reformation of Manners can never be brought to pass, nor Profaneness
and Immorality Suppressed; and therefore the Punishing the Poor distinctly is a
Mock upon the good Designs of the King and Parliament; an Act of Injustice upon
them to punish them, and let others who are as guilty go free; and a sort of
Cruelty too, in taking the advantage of their Poverty to make them suffer,
because they want Estates to purchase their Exemption.

We have some weak Excuses for this Matter, which must be considered: As,

(1). The Justice of the Peace is a Passive Magistrate, till an information be
brought before him, and is not to take notice of any thing, but as it is laid
in Fact, and brought to an Affidavit. Now if an Affidavit be made before a
Justice, that such or such a man Swore, or was Drunk, he must, he cannot avoid
Fining him; the Law obliges him to it, let his Quality be what it will; so that
the Defect is not in the Law, not in the Justice, but in the want of
Information.

(2). The Name of an Evidence or Informer is so scandalous, that to attempt to
inform against a man for the most open Breach of the Laws of Morality, is
enough to denominate a man unfit for Society; a Rogue and an Informer are
Synonimous in the Vulgar Acceptance* so much is the real Detection of the
openest Crimes against God, and Civil Government, Discouraged and Avoided.

(3). The Impossibility of the Cure is such, and the Habit has so obtained upon
all Mankind, that it seems twisted with Human Nature, as an Appendix to Natural
Frailty, which it is impossible to separate from it*

For Answer;

1. *It Is true, the Justice of the Peace is in some respect a Passive
Magistrate, and does not act but by Information, but such Information would be
brought if it were encouraged; if Justices of the Peace did acquaint themselves
with their Neighborhood, they would soon hear of the Immoralities of the
Parish; and if they did impartially Execute the Law on such as offended,
without respect of Person, they would soon have an Account of the Persons and
Circumstances. Besides, it is not want of Information, but want of punishing
what they have information of* A Poor Man informs against a Great Man, the
Witness is discouraged, the man goes unpunished, and the Poor Man gets the
scandal of an Informer; and then it is but too often that our Justices are not
men of extraordinary Morals themselves; and who shall Inform a Justice of the
Peace that such a man Swore, when he may be heard to Swear himself as fast as
another? or who shall bring a man before a Justice for being Drunk, when the
Justice is so Drunk himself, he cannot order him to be set in the Stocks?

(2.) Besides, the Justice has a power to punish any Fact he himself sees
committed, and to enquire into any he hears of casually; and if he will stand
still and see those Acts of Immorality committed before his Face, who shall
bring a Poor Man before him to be punished? Thus I have heard a Thousand horrid
Oaths sworn on a Bowling Green, in the presence of a Justice of the Peace, and
he take no notice of it, and go home the next hour, and set a man in the Stocks
for being Drunk.

As to the Scandal of Informing, it is an Error in Custom, and a great Sin
against Justice; it is necessary indeed that all Judgment should be according to
Evidence, and to discourage Evidence, is to discourage Justice; but that a man
in Trial of the Morality of his Neighbor, should be ashamed to appear, must
have some particular Cause.

(1.) It proceeds from the Modishness of the Vice; it has so obtained upon men's
Practices, that to appear against what almost all men approve, seems malicious,
and has a certain prospect either of Revenge, or of a Mercenary Wretch, that
Informs merely to get a Reward. It Is true, if no Reward be placed upon an
Information, no man will take the trouble; and again, if too great a Reward,
Men of Honor shun the thing, because they scorn the Fee; and to Inform merely
for the Fee, has something of a Rascal in it too; and from these Reasons arises
the backwardness of the People.

The very same Rich men we speak of are the persons who discourage the
Discovery of Vice, by scandalizing the Informer; a man that is any thing of a
Gentleman scorns it, and the Poor still Mimick the Humor of the Rich, and hate
an Informer as they do the Devil. It Is strange the Gentlemen should be ashamed
to detect the Breach of those Laws, which they were not ashamed to make; but
the very Name of an Informer has gained so black an Idea in the minds of
People, because some who have made a Trade of Informing against People for
Religion, have misbehaved themselves, that truly 'twill be hard to bring any
man either of Credit or Quality to attempt it.

But the main thing which makes our Gentlemen backward in the prosecution of
Vice, is their practicing the same Crimes themselves, and they have so much
wicked Modesty and Generosity in them, being really no Enemies to the thing it
self, that they cannot with any sort of freedom punish in others, what they
practice themselves.

In the Times of Executing the Laws against Dissenters, we found a great many
Gentlemen very Vigorous in prosecuting their Neighbors; they did not stick to
appear in Person to disturb Meetings, and demolish the Meeting Houses, and
rather than fail, would be Informers themselves; the reason was because they
had also a dislike to the think; but we never found a Dissenting Gentleman, or
Justice of the Peace forward to do thus, because they approved of it. Now were
our Gentlemen and Magistrates real Enemies to the Immoralities of this Age, did
they really hate Drunkenness as a Vice, they would be forward and zealous to
root the practice of it out of the Neighborhood, they would not be backward or
ashamed to detect Vice, to disturb Drunken Assemblies, to disperse those
Plantations of Leachery, the Public Bawdy-Houses, which are almost as openly
allowed as the Burdelloes in Italy* They would be willing to have all sorts of
Vices Suppressed, and glory in putting their hands to the Work; they would not
be ashamed to appear in the detecting Debauchery, nor afraid to embroil
themselves with their Rich Neighbors. It Is Guilt of the same Fact which makes
Connivance, and till that Guilt be removed, the Gentlemen of England neither
will, not can indeed with any kind of Honor put their hands to the work of
Reforming it in their Neighbors.

But I think it is easy to make it appear that this difficulty of Informing may
be removed, and there need not be much occasion for that Scandalous Employment.

It Is in the power of the Gentry of England to Reform the whole Kingdom without
either Laws, Proclamations, or Informers; and without their Concurrence, all
the Laws, Proclamations, and Declarations in the World will have no Effect; the
Vigor of the Laws consists in their Executive Power; Ten thousand Acts of
Parliament signify no more than One single Proclamation, unless the Gentlemen,
in whose hands the Execution of those Laws is placed, take care to see them
duly made use of; and how can Laws be duly Executed, but by an Impartial
Distribution of equal Rewards and Punishments, without regard to the Quality
and Degree of the Persons? The Laws push on the Justices now, and they take
care to go no faster than they are driven; but would the Justices push on the
Laws, Vice would flee before them as Dust in the Wind, and Immoralities would
be soon Suppressed; but it can never be expected that the Magistrates should
push on the Laws to a free Suppression of Immoralities, till they Reform
themselves, and their Great Neighbors Reform themselves, that there may be
none to punish who are too big for the Magistrate to venture upon.

Would the Gentry of England decry the Modishness of Vice by their own
Practice; would they dash it out of Countenance by disowning it; that
Drunkeness and Oaths might once come into disesteem, and be out of Fashion, and
a man be valued the less for them; that he that will Swear, and be Drunk, shall
be counted a Rake, and not fit for a Gentleman's Company. This would do more to
Reforming the rest of Mankind, than all the Punishments the Law can inflict;
the Evil increased by Example, and must be suppressed the same way. If the
Gentry were thus Reformed, their Families would be so too: No Servant would be
Entertained, no Workman Employed, no Shopkeeper would be Traded with by a
Gentleman, but such as like themselves, were Sober and Honest; a Lewd, Vicious,
Drunken Footman must Reform or Starve, he would get no Service; a Servant once
turned away for his Intemperance, would be entertained by no body else; a
Swearing Debauched Labourer or Workman must Reform, or no body would Employ
him; the Drunken whoring Shopkeeper must grow Sober, or lose all his Customers
and be Undone. Interest and good Manners would Reform us of the poorer sort,
there would be no need of the Stocks or Houses of Correction; we should be
sober of course, because we should be all Beggars else; and he that loved his
Vice so dearly as to purchase it with the loss of his Trade or Employment,
would soon grow too poor for his Vice, and be forced to leave it by his own
Necessities; there would be no need of Informers, a Vicious Fellow would be
presently Notorious, he would be the Talk of the Town, every one would slight
and shun him for fear of being thought like him by being seen in his Company;
he would expose himself, and would be punished as unpitied as a Thief.

So that in short, the whole Weight of this Blessed Work of Reformation lies on
the shoulders of the Gentry; they are the Cause of our Defection, which being
taken away, the Effect would cease of course, Vice would grow Scandalous, and
all Mankind would be ashamed of it.

(2.) The Clergy also ought not to count themselves exempted in this matter,
whose Lives have been, and in some places still are so Vicious and so loose,
that it is well for England we are not subject to be much Priest-ridden.

It Is a strange thing how it should be otherwise than it is with us the poor
Commonalty, when the Gentry our Pattern, and the Clergy our Teachers, are as
Immoral as we. And then to consider the Coherence of the thing; the Parson
preaches a thundering Sermon against Drunkenness, and the Justice of Peace sets
my poor Neighbor in the Stocks, and I am like to be much the better for
either, when I know perhaps that this same Parson and this same Justice were
both Drunk together but the Night before.

It may be true, for ought we know, that a Wicked Parson may make a good
Sermon; and the Spanish Proverb, may be true of the Soul as well as the Body,
If the Cure be but wrought let the Devil be the Doctor; but this does not take
with the downright ignorant People in the Country; a poor Man gets Drunk in a
Country Ale house, Why, are you not ashamed to be such a Beast, says a good
honest Neighbor to him the next day? Ashamed, says the Fellow! Why should I be
ashamed? Why, there was Sir John -- and Sir Robert -- and the Parson, and they
were all as Drunk as I. And why a Beast, Pray? I heard Sir Robert -- say, That
He that Drinks least,
Drinks most like a Beast.


A Vicious Parson that preaches well, but lives ill, may be like an unskilful
Horseman, who opens a Gate on the wrong side, and lets other Folks through, but
shuts himself out. This may be possible, but it seems most reasonable to think
they are a means by that sort of living to hinder both themselves and others;
and would the Gentry and Clergy of England but look back a little on the Guilt
that really lies on them, as Gentlemen by whose Example so great a part of
Mankind has been led into, and encouraged in the Progress of Vice, they would
find Matter of very serious reflection.

This Article of the Clergy may seem to lie in the power of their Superiors to
rectify, and therefore may be something more feasible than the other; but the
Gentry who are Sui juris, can no way be reduced but by their own voluntary
practice. We are in England exceedingly governed by Modes and Customs. The
Gentry may effectually Suppress Vice, would they but put it out of Fashion; but
to Suppress it by Force seems impossible.

The Application of this rough Doctrine is in short both to the Gentry and
Clergy, Physicians Heal your selves; if you will leave off your Drunkenness and
Lewdness first, if we do not follow you, then set us in the Stocks, and send us
to the House of Correction, and punish us as you please; if you will leave off
Whoring first, then Brand us in the Foreheads, or Transport or Hang us for
Fornication or Adultery, and you are welcome; but to preach against Drunkenness
immediately after an Evening's Debauch; to Correct a poor Fellow for Swearing
with the very Vice in your Mouths; these are the unjustest ways in the World,
and have in themselves no manner of tendency toward the Reformation of
Manners, which is the true Design of the Law.

It Is acknowledge'd there are in England a great many Sober, Pious, Religious
Persons, both among the Gentry and Clergy, and it is hoped such cannot think
themselves Libelled or Injured in this Plea; if there were not, Laws would
never have been made against those Vices, for no men make Laws to punish
themselves; it is designed to reflect upon none but such as are Guilty, and on
them no farther than to put them in mind how much the Nation owes its present
Degeneracy to their folly, and how much it is in their power to Reform it again
by their Example; that the King may not publish Proclamations, nor the
Parliament make Laws to no purpose; but that we might live in England once more
like Christians, and like Gentlemen, to the Glory of God, and the Honor of the
present King and Parliament, who so publicly have attempted the great Work of
Reformation among us, though hitherto to so little purpose.

FINIS.

