A BRIEF REPLY TO THE HISTORY OF Standing Armies In ENGLAND. With some Account
of the Authors.

LONDON: Printed in the Year School.

THE PREFACE.
IN all Ages of the World, and under the Best of Governments, there were always
some Persons to be found, who either for Envy at the Prosperity of some;
Ambition, Popular Vanity, or Private Ends, took Occasion to appear as
Malcontents, and set themselves to Explose and Consure the Actions of Their
Governors: History is so full of Instances of this Nature, that 'twould be an
affront to the Gentlemen I am dealing with, to suppose them ignorant of 'em.

In Our Age, where Nicknames are so much in fashion, we have called them
Murmurers, Grumbletonians and the like, of whom one of our Poets has said not
improperly.

And should King Jesus Reign, they would Murmur too.

'Twould not have been foreign to the Purpose, as an Answer to the History of
Standing Armies, to have Entertained the World with a History of these
Dissenters to Government, the Murmurers of the World; who always look with
sour Faces upon the Magistrates, and cry out of so much as the little Fingers
of their Superiors. But we have not room for it here; nor to descend too far
into the General Character of them; but it is necessary to observe, that these
sort of People have one inseparable Adjunct, as an Essential and Chief Prop
both of their Nature and Design; They always Cry Woe, Woe, and fright themselves
and the World with sad Tidings. Religion, or Liberty, or both, are infallibly
the Ensigns of their Order. And I wonder we have not Ribbands in their Hats,
with No Popery, No Slavery, or No Standing Armies, No Lords of the Treasury,
etc.

If the Bottom of this Case was to be Examined, and the Authors dealt with in
their own way, Preferment always lists them on the the other side: And though I do
not say these Gentlemen who write so strenuously for Liberty, would do so; yet
they have told us plainly who did, Viz. The Lord Strafford, and Noy, and I
could name them some more. King Charles the First, say they, began the Custom
of making an Opposition to himself in the House of Commons, the Road to
Preferment; and how came it about? Truly, because he found they were Mercenary,
and made a Noise that their Mouths might be stopped; this has been too much a
Method since, no doubt.

"For Parliament Men to rail at the Court,
"And get a Preferment immediately for it.
But how comes it to pass, because private Ends lie so generally at the bottom
of such Clamor, that we never found them proof against the Offer?

And here I could give innumerable Instances of great Ones, on the other hand,
who as soon as ever the Court-Favour has failed them, and they found themselves
not Rewarded according to their Merit, turned Popular, Champions for the
Peoples Liberties, and Railers at the Court. I do not say, I mean by this, the
Lords S -- D -- Mr. H -- Mr. H -- or any body else in particular; but whoever
the Coat fits, let them wear it.

This Evil Spirit of Discontent is now at Work under the best Reign, and the
mildest Government that ever England knew; particularly so, in suffering the
Affairs of the Government to be thus disputed in Print, by, not an Author or
Single Person, but a whole Club of Mistaken Politicians, who in any Reign but
this would have been used as they deserved.

Had such a Cabal of the best Men in the Nation attempted the like in Queen
Eliabeth's Reign, who we must all acknowledge was a true English Queen, and
Governed the Nation with a Matchless Prudence, they would have been very
severely bandled; but full Liberty is given them now to say almost any thing;
and truly they take the Extent of it, even to Indecency and Ill Manners. For
they Treat the King himself with Jeers and Banter, and make Ridiculous
Encomiums on him, to expose His Mijesty to very Scurrilous Reflections.

This is so mean a Way of Writing, that I shall not descend to Returns in kind,
but shall use them like Gentlemen, whether they behave themselves so or no, and
leave that to themselves.

A BRIEF REPLY TO THE History of Standing Armies.
THE Outcry against an Army in England is carried on with so high a hand, that
nothing can be said to it with any hope of Effect on the Complainants. They go
on with their own Arguments, never thinking any thing that is or can be said to
them, worth while to take notice of: For it seems to be more their Design to
render the Government suspected, than to argue fairly whether it be really true
or not, That an Army must be our ruin.

I have considered their former Books according to their Desire, and to which
they refer in this, and the several Answers to them; some of which seem to me
to carry a great Weight with them; but to them are of so small a Consequence,
that they do not think them worth a notice.

They have now given the World what they call a History of Standing Armies, in
which they have been guilty of some Mistakes, some Omissions, and some
Contradictions; and though the Historical part might very well have been omitted,
as being nothing at all to the purpose; yet it is very proper to tell them,

First, It Is a Mistake that the Spaniards did any thing to purpose in the
Seventeen Provinces with 9000 Men, which they call a Standing Army; and if they
please to review Strada and Bentivoglio, their own Author, they will find that
the Duke D' Alva and Don Lewis de Requescens had very great Armies at the
Bittle near Groningen, against Count Lodowick of Nassau, and at the Sieges of
Harlem and Mons; the Duke D' Alva brought Fourteen thousand Men with him at
first; raised Twenty-four thousand more at another time against the Siege of
Mons; and when the Count D'Egmont presented the Petition against the Foreign
Forces, they alleged the Spaniards had Thirty thousand Men in Pay, besides the
Troops of the Country.

As to other Armies, I wonder the Authors did not instance the small Forces
with which the Spaniards conquered the Mighty Empires of Mexico and Peru; in
all which Work, I never yet read that they had above 800 Horse and 5750 Foot.

Armies, as well as every thing else, are great or small in proportion; and
4000 Archers in Cheshire raised by Richard the Second, though they only made
way to their Master's Ruin, were really a more formidable Force than Twenty
thousand men in Arms can be now.

The Authors (for I am informed their Name is Legion) have carried on their
History to Queen Mary, and there break off, and tell us, the Standing Forces
were then 1200 men, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign 3500; where, by the way, it is to
be noted, they grant, that it has all along been allowed to have a Standing
Force in England for above 140 Years past; for we are not now arguing the
Quantity, but the Thing, A Standing Army: And they have often in former Papers
asserted, That any Standing Forces are destructive of our Constitution, and
inconsistent with the English Liberty; and yet our Constitution consisted very
well in Queen Elizabeth's time. -- Nor have these Gentlemen given their
Quotations faithfully; for they have been told, and are not ignorant, That,
First, whereas Queen Mary had but 1200 men, she shamefully lost Calais to the
French, for want of Strength to relieve it. Indeed if she had raised the
Militia, they might have kept the French from coming on to take Dover, but if
she had had 10000 men in Pay, Calais, which had been ours for some Ages before,
had been ours still; and if it had, the Loss of Dunkirk had not been so much to
our disadvantage. Then, as to Queen Elizabeth, they omit that she always had a
very good Army in the Low Countries, which to her was a Nursery of Soldiers:
And in the time of her apprehension of an Invasion, I would ask how many she
transported hither for her own Defense; for the Armies she prepared, at Tilbury
Camp 44000, and 20000 at Plymouth, were not all Militia, but Soldiers
disciplined and trained in the Wars in Ireland and Holland.

What the Authors say Queen Elizabeth did, and with what Glory she reigned, and
how she left us when she died, is all true, and much more; and what her Revenue
was, and what Taxes she had, for ought we know may be so: But I hope these
Gentlemen will excuse me for saying they very much misrepresent the Cise, when
they would tell us what Revenues she had; as if those Revenues performed all
the Great Things she did: They ought to have told us also what Taxes she had,
and how she took from the Spaniard above 60 Millions of Pieces of Eight at
several times, at the West Indies. at Cadiz, and at Sea; which together with
what Subsidies, Customs of Towns, and Interests the Dutch paid her, were
Infinite: And with this she did all those great things, and with this she
always kept an Army on foot, and left them so after the Peace; by the same
token that King James let 3000 of them starve and desert for want of
Subsistence, on the Dutch refusing to pay the Garrisons of the Brill, Ramekins,
and Flushing.

I shall not enter into the History of King James the First, King Charles the
First, or his Sons; the Historical part does not argue either way in this Case,
as I understand the Point: The Question before us is not so much what has been,
or has not been, but what is now needful to be done; and I wish these Gentlemen
would admit a calm Argument; in which Case I offer to prove, First, That it is
absolutely necessary to have some Standing Force; and then, That with Consent
of Parliament it is not Illegal.

I remember one Reply to the former Argument entered into the Historical part of
the matter, and underlook to prove, That every Government in England had for
many Years maintained some Standing Force; and it is too true to be denied.

Then they descend to examine the Reign of King James the First, and of K.
Charles the First; and though they grant they had no Armies, yet they reckon up
all the Tyrannies and Oppressions they were guilty of; how they Enslaved the
Nation, Bussoon'd the Parliament, Oppressed the Subjects, Levied Taxes; but all
without a Standing Army: Nay, when King Charles the First affronted the House
of Commons, he was fain, as these Authors themselves say, to Rifle the Taverns,
Gaming-houses, and Brothel-houses, to pick out 3 or 400 Men; which if true,
though I do not fee it deserves any credit; yet it is plain he could have no Army,
no, not so much as any Guards. Now if all this can be done by a King without an
Army, why then the having an Army can do no more; the Mischief does not lie in
an Army, but in the Tyrant.

The Authors conclude of King Charles the First having No Army to support him,
his Tyranny was precarious, and at last his ruin. And may we not say so of his
Son, who had a great Army, and as Mercenary as any English Army ever was? And
yet though he had an Army to support him, his Tyranny was precarious, and at last
his ruin: So that Tyranny is a Weed that never throve in England; it always
poisoned the Planter; and an Army, or no Army, it is all one.

This is only touched at, to let the World know, that these Gentlemen have not
been faithful Historians; for that they have not fairly stated the Case, but
left out such things as are really true, because against their purpose; which
is not a fair way of Arguing.

But if the Case must be debated, I think it is very proper to reduce it to Two
Heads: First, Whether a Standing Army, in time of Peace, may not be Lawful?
Secondly, Whether it be not Expedient?


As to the first Question, it has really been proved in a small Discourse
formerly published, entitled, An Argument, showing that a Standing Army is not
inconsistent, etc. which these Gentlemen never thought fit to Answer, and now
do tacitly acknowledge to be true, but say it is nevertheless dangerous:
However, if it may be Legal then, it cannot be true that it is destructive of
our Liberty and Constitution; for that can never be destructive of our
Constitution which can be Legal; That were to make a thing Lawful and Unlawful
at the same time.

A Standing Army, with Consent of Parliament, is a Legal Army; and if the
Legislative Power erect an Army, it is as much a Qualification to the Army, as a
Charter is to a Corporation; for what else do these Gentlemen call an
Establishment? that cannot be Illegal which is done by Parliament. The Titles
of a Bankrupt House of Lords, a Pensioner House of Commons, a flattering
Clergy, and a prostituted Ministry, are virulent Phrases, and savor both of
Passion and Ill Manners. We have them not now, nor am I convinced we ever had,
nor hope we ever shall.

And yet if they were so, they are the Parliament of England; and what they do,
is the Act of the whole Kingdom, and cannot be Illegal.

I shall not spend time to prove what the Authors own, and cannot deny. I
therefore lay down the first Head as proved before, and granted by our
Adversaries;

That a Standing Army in time of Peace with Consent of Parliament, is not
inconsistent with a Free Government, and is a Legal Army.

The Second main Argument is, Whether it be necessary for all things that are
lawful, are not expedient. Whether there be so much need of an Army, as that we
should run the hazards that we are told we shall be exposed to, from them.

That we have very great Reason to be always in a Posture fit to maintain the
Peace purchased now with so much Blood and Treasure, I believe no Body will
dispute. Whether with or without an Army, I don't yet debate. That an Army was
the procuring Cause of this Peace, I hope it will be allowed me; and that had
we not appeared in a very powerful Figure, the Terms had not been so good, and
Lewis the 14th would not have parted with so many Vast Countries, Impregnable
Fortifications, and Sovereign Titles; our Army in Conjunction with our Allies
have under God's Providence obtained this. Now, whether it be proper to let go
this Lion upon Parole, and tying the French King by his Honor only, which he
has not formerly valued at much in such Cases; Disband our Forces, and rely
upon the League? This is the direct Question.

If the King of France were so much to be depended upon, the Spaniard and the
Emperor need not have strained so hard for the strong Towns of Brisac, Friburg,
Philipsburgh, Mons, Aeth, Luxemburgh, and Charleroy, which are very chargeable
to keep, and no real Profit to them; and the King of France would readily have
given up Franche-Compte, Burgundy, and vast Territories of Land instead of
them, with large Revenues and Advantages; but these are given as Pledges of the
Peace, and are maintained by the Confederates at a vast Charge, that they might
have a sufficient Strength to oblige the French King to perform the Stipulation
of the League.

Now I do not know what vast Securities these Gentlemen may flatter themselves
with; but to me it seems one of the most ridiculous things in the World to be
wholly Disarmed at such a time, when all the Nations in the World have Forces
in Pay.

I am willing to give the Gentlemen of the Club all the Latitude in Argument
they can desire, and therefore I Will grant that the French King has surrendered
all the Towns and Countries he was to surrender, though he really has not. That
King James is neither in Power nor Person at all formidable, nor indeed worth
mentioning in the Case. That the King of Spain is not Dead, nor like to be so.
That these are not, nor ever were Arguments for a Standing Force, at least not
singly considered.

But notwithstanding all this, I cannot but say that some competent Standing
Force is absolutely necessary to preserve that Peace which has cost the Nation
so dear; and it would seem a most unaccountable Weakness to run the hazard of
it, and expose us to the uncertainty of it: We say, Temptation makes a Thief.
There is nothing in the World will be so likely to make the Peace precarious,
and allure the French to break it, as to find us Naked and Defenseless.

If it be true, that an Army may be dangerous at Home, it is as true, that
having no Army must be fatal Abroad: The danger of an Army is uncertain, and
may be none; the damage of the contrary is infallible. It Is not saying we have
formerly Conquered France, and therefore ought not to be so frighted with
Apprehensrons of it now all the French Fools they say are Dead. France now,
without Reflection upon England, is much too strong a Match for any single
Nation in Europe, and the only means to keep her within bounds, is by
Confederacies, and Leagues Offensive; how these can be maintained without
Quota's of Forces ready to unite, is a Mystery too dark for my Understanding.
Indeed the King may say to his Confederates, Truly my Subjects will not trust me
with any Soldiers, and therefore I must pay my proportion in Money. But other
Countries may refuse to keep up Forces as well as we, and so a League would be
to small purpose indeed. These things have been offered before now, and in
better Terms, and the Gentlemen with whom we argue have thought sit to forget
to speak to them.

But now we are Banter'd about a Fleet and a Militia, and these are the
Equivalents with which all the pretenses of a Standing Army are to be Answered.
Indeed a Fleet well ordered is a good thing; and a Militia well regulated, That
Black Swan, that unheard of thing, if ever it could be had would be a good
thing too. But pray, Gentlemen, give some people leave to understand things in
the World as well as you: Suppose this Fleet and this Militia to be all that
you can pretend, what would this be to a War in Flanders? It Is the carrying the
War into Flanders, that is our great Interest; the Barrier of Strong Towns
there is our best Security against France in the World: Now suppose the French
King should with 80000 men fall into those Countries like a Tempest, as he did
in 1672, without declaring War, would our Militia go over with the King to help
our Confederates? Or could our Fleet relieve Charleroy? Would raising an Army,
though it could be done in forty days, as you say King Charles did, be quick
enough? It Is strange these things are not worth while to consider: Why does the
French King keep up an Army? It Is not for fear, but to increase his Glory; and
for that very reason it would be preposterous for us to be naked.

England has always gone hand in hand with the Times; and Armed or not Armed,
as her Neighbors did, and must always do so: in the Days when we kept no
Forces at home, our Neighbous kept none abroad, and then there was no need of
it, we were as well provided as they; but now they are all strong in Men, and
shall we be naked! that is certainly to be exposed?

It Is Argued, an Army may soon be raised; King Charles the Second raised an
Army in Forty Days, and the present King very speedily. I would but desire
these Gentlemen to Examine, how it fared with both those Armies? I saw them
both and they were composed of as jolly, brave, young Fellows as ever were
seen; but being raw, and not used to hardship, the first Army lay, and rotted
in Flanders, with Agues and Fluxes, the very first Campaign; and the last did
the like at Dundalk; and so 'twill always fare with any Army of English Men,
'till they have been abroad, and inured to the Service. I appeal to any Man,
who knows the Nature of our Men; they are the worst raw Men in the World, and
the best when once got over it.

But to return to the Point: If it is necessary to preserve our Peace, and
maintain the Leagues and Confederacies, which are the Bands and Bars of it; if
it is necessary to be always ready to prevent an Affront of an Enemy? if it is
necessary to support the Reputation of our English Power? it is necessary then
to be, not only in a posture to Defend our selves at home, but to Defend our
Confederates abroad, and to assist them in any sudden Insult from the Enemy;
and this can be done neither by a Fleet, nor a Mililitia.

But to come further: We have been Invaded in England, notwithstanding our
Fleet; and that many times. Henry the Seventh Landed with an Army in spite of
Richard the Third and his Fleet. The Duke of Monmouth Landed in the West, though
King James had a very good Fleet: And had not King James's standing Army, though
that was but Two Thousand Men, there routed them; I appeal to all Men to judge,
what could the Militia have done to him? Now I Will suppose the Duke of Monmouth
had been a French Man, or any thing, he had time to Land and Invade us, and
unlade his Arms, and might have sent his Ships away again, and never have been
hindered by our Fleet; and had he been but 5000 Regular Men, he had beat King
James out of his Kingdom. Again, his Men were raw, a mere Militia, and you see
what came of it, they were Defeated by a quarter of their Number, though I must
say, they were better than any of our Militia too, by much.

Again, the Prince of Orange Landed his whole Army quickly, notwithstanding a
Fleet, and had leisure enough to have sent away all his Ships again: So
that'tis a mistake, to say we cannot be Invaded if we have a Fleet, for we have
been Invaded though we have had a good Fleet; and Demonstration is beyond
Argument. And I would undertake, without Vanity, to Invade England, from any
part beyond Sea, without any fear of the Fleet, unless you will have a Fleet
able to block up your Neighbors Ports; and when you hear of any Ships fitting
out any where, send and forbid them, as Queen Elizabeth did to Henry the 4th of
France.

Now if I could come safe on Shore, notwithstanding the Fleet, then, if you
have no Army to oppose me with, but your Country Militia, I would but ask any
understanding Soldier, how many Men he would require to Conquer the whole
Nation? Truly, not a great many; for, I dare say, 40000 of the best Militia we
have, backed with no disciplined Troops, would not Fight 8000 old Soldiers: The
Instance of the Iniskilling Men in Ireland will not bear here; for, on the one
hand, they were Men made desperate by the ruin of their Families and Estates,
and exasperated to the highest degree, and had no recourse for their Lives but
to their Arms; and on the other hand, the Irish were the most despicable
scandalous Fellows the World ever saw; Fellows that shut their Eyes when they
shot off their Muskets, and tied Strings about their right Hands to know them
from their left: These are wretched Instances, and only prove what we knew
before, that the Militia are always brave Soldiers when they have to do with
Children or Fools; but what could our Militia have done to the P. of O. old
Veteran Troops, had they been willing to have opposed him; truly just as much
as King James did, run away.

The Story of making them useful has been much talked of, and a Book was
printed to that purpose; it were a good Project, if practicable, but I think
the Attempt will never be made by any wise Man, because no such will go upon
Impossibilities.

War is no longer an Accident, but a Trade, and they that will be any thing in
it, must serve a long Apprenticeship to it: Human Wit and Industry has raised
it to such a Perfection; and it is grown such a piece of Manage, that it
requires People to make it their whole Employment; the War is now like the
Gospel, Men must be set apart for it; the Gentlemen of the Club may say what
they please, and talk fine things at home of the natural Courage of the
English, but I must tell them, Courage is now grown less a Qualification of a
Soldier than formerly; not but that it is necessary too, but Mannagement is the
principle Art of War. An Instance of this may be had no farther off than
Ireland; what a pitiful piece of Work the Irish made of a War all Men know: now
it is plain the Irish do not want Courage, for the very same Men, when sent
abroad, well Trained, and put under exact Discipline, how have they behaved
themselves in Piemont and Hungary, they are allowed to be as good Troops as any
in the Armies.

And if the state of Things alter, we must alter our Posture too, and what then
comes of the History of Standing Armies? Though there had never been any in the
World, they may be necessary now, and so absolutely necessary, as that we
cannot be safe without them.

We must now examine a little the Danger of a Standing Army at home; in which
it will appear, whether the Gentlemen of the Club are in the right, when they
turn all the Stream of the Government into one Channel, as if they all drove
but one Wh^el, and as if the whole Design of the King and his Ministers were to
obtain the despotick Power, and to Govern by an Army.

They do indeed Caress the King sometimes with large Encomiums; but on the
other hand, they speak it as directly as English can express, They intimate to
us, that he designed the Government by an Army, even before he came over; and
therefore in his Declaration omited to promise the Disbanding it. I wish these
Gentlemen would leave out their Raillery, as a thing that never helps an
Argument, -- as Mr. Dryden says.

-- For Disputants, when Reasons fail,
Have one sure Refuge left, and that is to rail.
However, we shall not treat them in the same manner. I cannot think all those
Artifices of the Court, (for a Standing Army) are true, and some of them are
plain Forgories. To tell us the Parliament thought, they might have managed
their part of the War by Sea. That the word Authority of Parliament was urged
to that Article of the Declaration of Right, about Standing Armies, by such as
designed so early to play the Game of a Standing Army: That the Kingdom of
Ireland was neglected, and London. Derry not Relieved; that a pretense for a
greater Army might be framed. These are horrid suggessions, and favor only of
ill Nature; and it may be very easy, had I leisure to examine, to prove to
those Gentlemen, that the Parliament had as great a Sense of the necessity of
Force to reduce Ireland, as the King had, and were as forward to grant Supplies
for it. When the King told the House, that 'twas not advisable to attempt it
without 20000 Men. If these Gentlemen had asked who advised his Majesty to say
so, I could have told them, Duke Schomberge himself did it.; a Man who was much
a Soldier, and as honest as ever Commanded an Army; a General of the greatest
Experience of any of his Age, who no Man could despise without our Reproach to
his Judgment; a Man used to Conquering of Kingdoms and Armies; and yet he
thought it very unsafe to Fight with that Army at Dundalk. And we were
beholding to his Conduct for the saving the whole Nation by that Caution, though
Thousands lost their Lives by it, and some foolishly reflected on him for want
of Courage; which 'twas thought, cost him his Life at the Boyne. King James had
50000 Men in Ireland, furnished with every thing necessary but a General; and
can any body say, that to attempt reducing them with less than 20000, was a
pretense to get an Army.

This is straining a Text, a Trade, (without reflection) which our Adversaries
are very ready at; but which is more useful for them, in their Socinian
Principles, than in their Politics.

By this, I must beg leave to tell the Gentlemen, it most plainly appears, that
they drive at Villifying the present Establishment, rather than at the Liberty
they talk so much of.

The next absurdity I find, is Page 23. Where, though they do not affirm, because
like cunning Disputants, they will not hamper themselves in Argument, yet they
plainly intimate, that all the omissions of our Fleet were designed to produce
this Argument from it, that a Fleet is no Security to us. As if his Majesty, or
his Ministers, should Order our Fleet to do nothing Considerable, and spend Six
or Seven Years, and as many Millions of Money, only to be able to say to the
Parliament, that a Fleet is no Security to us. This is such a thing, that I
cannot pass over, without desiring these Gentlemen to Examine a little, whether
his Majesty has not, on the contrary, more improved our Fleet and Shipping,
than any King before him ever did? Whether he has not built more Ships, and by
his own Fancy, peculiar in that way, better Ships than any of his Predecessors?
Whether the Docks, the Yards, the Stores, the Saylors, and the Ships, are not
in the best Condition that ever England knew? Whether the King has not in all
his Speeches to the Parliament, and in all the state of the Navy laid before
them, put forward, to his utmost, the greatness of the Navy? Whether the
Decoration of the Navy and Stores, are not regulated by him, to a degree never
before put in practice; and whether, now the war is over, he has not taken care
to have the greatest Fleet in the World, and in the best posture for Action?
And is all this to let us know that a Fleet is no Security to us? I blush for
these Gentlemen, when I think they should thus fly in the Faces of their own
Arguments; and abuse the Care his Majesty has taken for that Security, which
they ought to look on, with as much satisfaction, as our Enemies do with
Concern.

Besides, I do not remember that ever the King, or any of his Ministers,
offered to lessen the value of a good Fleet in any of their Speeches, or
Discourses; if so, to what end have they been so careful of it, and why have we
a Registring Act to secure Men for it, and a Royal Foundation at Greenwich
Hospital to encourage them? why so many Bounties given to the Seamen, and such
vast Stores laid in to increase and continue them?

But must we not distinguish things? Our Defense is of two sorts, and so must
be our Strength. Our Fleet is an undeniable defense and security for us; and we
will grant, to oblige them, whether so or no, that both the Fleet and our
Militia, which they are so fond of, are as great a Security at home as they can
desire; but it is plain, and they cannot pretend to deny it, they are neither of
them any thing to Fianders; which all the World will own must be the Scene of a
War when ever it begins. To say we may assist with Money, is to say nothing; for
Men may be wanting as much as Money; and are so too, and have been so this War
at an unusual rate.

These Arguments might be enlarged, even to a Twelve-penny Book, like the
Author's, if the Printer desired it; but short as they are, they cannot be
rationally confuted.

The Gentlemen who argue thus against Force, have taken upon them to lay down a
Method, how to assist Spain, in case of a War, by bringing Soldiers from Final;
not leting us know, if we did not enquire, that those Forces must Sail by
Thoulon, and that we must have a great Fleet in the Straights for that Service,
or they will be prevented; nor not enquiring which Montferrat, way those Troops
shall come at Final, while the Duke of Savoy possesses and all the higher part
of Italy for the French: If they could argue no better than they can guide a
War, if their Logic was not better than their Geography, they would make poor
work of their Argument.

But because they seem to understand such things, I would fain ask these
Gentlemen, if a War should break out now in the Empire, between the Papists and
the Protestants, which a Man, without the Spirit of Prophecy, may say is very
likely; pray which way would these Gentlemen have the King aid the Protestants
in the Palatinate, what Service could our Fleet and Militia do in this Case.
Why, say our Gentlemen, we may aid them with Money. So did King James the First,
after a most wretched manner, though his own Daughter was to lose her Patrimony
by it; and the Protestant Interest in Germany, which now is in more hazard than
ever it was since Gustavus Adolphus his time, must be supported by the Leagues
and Confederacies, which our King must make, and our Forces uphold, or it is a
great question whether it will be supported at all.

England is to be considered in several Capacities, though these Gentlemen seem
to confine themselves to England; within it self England is, at this time, the
Head of two Leagues, both which are essentially necessary to the preservation
of our Welfare: One a League of Property, and the other of Religion. One a
League against French Slavery, and the other a League against German Popery;
and we can maintain neither of these without some Strength. I could tell these
Gentlemen, That while they would disarm us to protect our Liberties, they
strike a fatal Stroke at our Religion, which, I confess, I ought not to expect
they should value, because I know their Principles to be both Irreligious and
Blasphemous.

After all that has been said, 'twere not amiss to examine what this Army is we
speak of, and how to be maintained; for these Gentlemen argue all along upon a
great Army, enough to subject a Kingdom; and to raise it up to a magnitude,
they have gone into Ireland and Scotland, and raked into the Settlement of
those Kingdoms to muster up a great Army; though after all, their Calculations
are wrong, almost a third part. In short, they have reckoned up small and great
to make up the number. To which it is conveninient to reply.

First, What Forces are maintained in Scotland and Ireland, is nothing to the
purpose; for both the Parliaments of those Kingdoms have concurred; and found
it necessary, though these Gentlemen think otherwise.

Secondly, If the King does see it proper to have some Forces ready on such
Occasions as we have discoursed, but, to ease us of our Jealousies and Fears,
keeps them in other Kingdoms, and with consent of those Kingdoms; is not the
English Nation so much the more obliged to him for his tenderness of their
Safety and Satisfaction?

Thirdly, Why do not the Gentlemen as well argue against his having the
Stad-holdership of Holland, by virtue of which he can, when ever he pleases,
command over Ten or Twenty Thousand Men from thence, to enslave us when there
is no War abroad. For it seems the Distance of the Army is no safety to us.

To go on, we have the War at an end, the King has dismissed the foreign
Troops, disbanded Ten Regiments at home, besides Horse and Dragroons; most of
the Scots abroad, sent Twelve Regiments to Ireland, and broke them there, and
reduced the Army to so small a degree, as that much cannot be feared from them,
nor fewer can hardly consist with our Safety; and yet these are the Grievances
we are to be so terrified at, that nothing but Slavery must be the consequence.

Neither has any attempt been made to make this Army perpetual, nor has any
number been prescribed. But such an Army, so proportioned, so qualified, and
such a regulation as the Parliament shall see needful, may be legal, must be
necessary, and cannot be dangerous: And to the King and Parliament we may with
Satisfaction refer it. The Parliament will consent to no Force, but such as
they shall judge safe and necessary; and the King will insist on no other Army
than the Parliament consents to; and while they agree to it, why should `we be
concerned. For while the King allows the disposal of the Army to the Vote of
the Parliament, by which they may be either continued or dismissed, no future
danger can appear; unless a Parliament shall part with that Power, which in
this Reign is not likely to be desired of them.

The CONCLUSION.
I Cannot pass over this Matter without a short Reflection upon the Persons and
Designs of the Authors of this, and the like Pamphlets against the Government,
and to enter a little into the History of their Practices for some years past.

His Majesty has found the influence of their more secret Actions, during the
War, in their Delaying and Disappointing of Funds and Supplies, which, two
Years together, prolonged the War, and had like to have been fatal to the Army
in Flanders, who went without Pay longer than any Army in the World (but
themselves) would have done; and let his Majesty know, that they would not only
Fight for him, but Starve for him, if there was occasion; and which his Majesty
took great notice of in his Speeches at the opening of the next Parliament.

After this, they set up for Malcontents, and always went about Town,
complaining of mis-management, ill Officers, State Ministers, and the like:
Angry that they were not preferred, and envying all that were; crying out, we
must have Peace, and we should be ruined by the War; magnifying the Power of
the French, which now they Undervalue so much; and saying, we should be subdued
by the Power of France, if we did not save our selves by a Peace; and the like.

At last, the King, contrary to their Expectations, and false `Prophesies,
brought the French to Terms safe and honorable; and a Peace has been obtained
as good as was not only expected, but desired.

This was no sooner done, but they strike at the Root; and now for fear of his
hurting us, we must disarm the King, and leave him no more Weapons than should
be trusted to a Child, or a `Mad Man: And in order to secure us from a Tyrant,
the whole Nation must be disarmed, our Confederates deserted, and all the
Leagues and Treaties (made for mutual Defense and Security) be broken, and the
King left unable to perform the Postulata's of his own part. In order to this,
they appear in Print; and setting up as Champions of the Peoples Liberty,
formed themselves into a Club, and appear openly both in Print, and public
Discourses; and being all of them maintainers of the most infamous Heresy of
Socinus, they bid defiance to the Son of God on one hand, and to the King and
Government on the other.

And that their Blasphemy might go hand in hand with their Politics, they
Published two Socinian Books, and two Books against the Army, almost together.

Much about the same time, from the same people, came out into the World, two
Volumes of Ludlow's Memoires; in all which, the Conduct of the Parliament
against the King is exceedingly magnified; the Government of a single Person
opposed covertly, under the Person of O. C. but in general, of any single
Person whatever; and all the Common-Wealth-Principles advanced and defended.

And having much Work of this sort to do, and being under some Fears of a
restraint, from an Act for Regulating the Press, they endeavored to ward off
that Blow by publishing a Book for the Liberty of the Press, which they
managed with such Artifice, that the Bill was not past, and so their Fears
vanished.

This was a Victory they knew how to make use of, and it was immediately
followed by a publication of Coll. Sidney's Maxims of Government, writ against
Filmer; for which the Author dyed a Martyr, and of which one of the Publishers
had the impudence to say it was the best Book, the Bible excepted, that ever
came abroad in the World.

And now from the same Forge is hammered out the History of the Standing
Armies, in which all the Artifice in the World is made use of, to set things in
a false light, to raise the Cry of Tyranny and Despotick Government, which has
been so long abdicated; to decry state Ministers, ridicule our Settlement,
banter the King, and terrify the People.

And that it might have its due force, to sow Dissension and Disagreement
between the King and his People, both these attacks made against the Army were
timed to appear just at the opening of the Parliament, and so industriously
handed about, that they have been seen in the remotest Countries of England
before they were published in London.

It Is hoped these Circumstances will a little open the Eyes of the World, and
teach us to mark such as sow Divisions among us, and not to meddle with those
who are given to Change.

But to leave the matter to the Parliament, who are proper Judges of the Fact,
and have always been very careful both of our Liberty and our Safety.

FINIS.

