A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament, Showing the Necessity of Regulating the
PRESS: CHIEFLY From the Necessity of Public Establishments in RELIGION. From
the Rights and Immunities of a National CHURCH. And the Trust reposed in the
Christian Magistrate to Protect and Defend them.
WITH A Particular ANSWER to the OBJECTIONS that of late have been Advanced
against it.

OXFORD: Printed for George West, and Henry Clements.

M. DC. XCIX.

The CONTENTS.
An Enquiry into the Duty of the Magistrate in matters of Religion: Sect. 1.
Considered, first, under a state of Nature, 1b. Secondly, under a state of
Revelation: Sect. 2. An Objection answered: Sect. 3. An Enquiry when there are
two or more Sects of Religion in any Government, why the Magistrate is under an
obligation of protecting, or rather advancing the one more than the other:
Sect. 4, and 5. The Rights and Authority of a National Church considered and
stated: Sect. 5. The Restraint of the Press demonstrated, not only as it is a
necessary provision to advance the Interests of Religion, but to preserve and
maintain the Ends and Designs of it, as professed in a National Church: Sect.
6. The Necessity of Public Establishments in Religion, and the pernicious
Influences which the Liberty of the Press has upon them, as introductory of
Skepticism, Heresy and Infidelity: Sect. 7, 8, and 9. The Argument represented
in several Instances from some late Prints: Sect. 8, 9. Objections answered. As
first, That the Attempts and Mischiefs of the Press, may as effectually be
obviated by particular Laws, and that a Restraint of the Press from the
Experience of former times has not prevented'em: Sect. 10. Secondly, That a
Restraint of the Press is a giving up of the Consciences and Judgments of
Mankind to a Party, and a Condemning them to an Implicit Faith, and is a direct
Method to involve the World in Ignorance and Error: Sect. 11. The Church of
England denies no Gospel means of Information: Sect. 12. Thirdly, That every
one, not only of Natural Right, but in point of Charity, may, and ought to
publish whatever appears to be Truth; and consequently the Restraint of the
Press, which abridges this Right, must be unlawful, and unjust: Sect. 13. The
Natural Rights of Private Persons in the Case before us, stated: Sect. 14. The
`Duty of Informing others stated: Ib. Fourthly, That the Restraint of the
Press, is an Invasion of the Liberty, and Property of an Englishman: Sect. 15.
The Conclusion, in an Address to the HONORABLE MEMBER: Sect. 16.
A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament; SHOWING The Necessity of Regulating the
PRESS: With a Particular ANSWER to the OBJECTIONS that of late have been
advanced against it.
SIR,
YOU have been pleased to solicit my Opinion in a Matter of Importance, by
way of Request, when You might have justly laid Your Commands; and I now
present it with all imaginable Deference and Humility. You have led me into a
large Field of Argument, and proposed several weighty Enquiries; but since they
are advanced with regard to a General Design, viz. The Liberty of the PRESS; I
shall not bind my self up to that Order they are proposed in, but shall speak
to them, as they will best comport with the Scheme I have projected, to evince
the Expediency of Restraining the Press.

In order to this Design, I shall reduce them to three or four General
Enquiries.

As first, How far the Duty of the Civil Governing Powers extends in Matters of
Religion?

Secondly, When there are two or more Sects of Religion in any Government, why
the Magistrate is under an Obligation of protecting, or rather advancing the
one, more than the other: And on this Head I shall consider the Rights and
Authority of a National Church.

Thirdly, Whether the Restraint of the Press is not a necessary provision, not
only to advance the Interests of the true Religion, but to preserve and
maintain the Ends and Designs of it, as professed in a National Church?

SECT. I. I begin with an Enquiry into the Duty of the Civil Governing Powers
in Matters of Religion.

And, First, It will be received as an indisputable Article, or Proposition,
That every Governing Power (of Duty as well as Right) is so far to inspect the
Affair of Religion, that nothing be advanced, that manifestly incommodes the
Rights or Interests of the Civil Polity: But whether any Government is under a
further Concern or Obligation, seems to be the Case under debate. Now it will
best be adjusted by considering the Nature and Design of Civil Government;
first under a state of Nature, and secondly under a state of Revelation.

That Government in general is an Ordinance of GOD, by Divine Institution, as
well as Allowance, and consequently that there are certain Ends and Designs
peculiar to it, established in the same Authority, are Truths that will be
easily subscribed to. But then if Government rests on a Divine Original, and
there are certain DivineEnds and Purposes appropriate to it; it cannot well be
imagined that the Civil Welfare and Conduct of Mankind, is the sole and entire
Province of the Civil Magistrate. If Religion is the most important Concern of
Mankind; and if there is Fealty, Worship, and Obedience, due from a Creature
toward a Sovereign Creator, even under the most simple state of Nature; why
should not that Great GOD, which constitutes the Civil Magistrates
Superintendants over the Secular affairs of Mankind, be as zealous to make them
Guardians of those things that are placed more near him, and them too, his
Honor and Glory? And therefore I Am persuaded it is neither Boldness nor
Arrogance to pronounce, That the Civil Governing Power, or Magistrate, was
originally constituted for the Conduct of Mankind, in all the Instances of
Human Happiness; and consequently in a Religious as well as Civil Capacity.
Indeed the inseparable Dependence and Affinity, between Civil Happiness and
Religion, (were other Arguments wanting) is alone sufficient to evince it: But
were the Experience of Mankind, and the universal Practice of all Civilized
Governments, summoned in to decide the Controversy, they must place it above
Dispute, or Cavil. If we respect the earliests Accounts of Governments, and
particularly those delivered in Sacred Story, we find the Characters of Prince
and Priest, residing in the same Person.

Before GOD had instituted a positive Economy of Religion, and a peculiar
Order of Priesthood, it was part of the Patriarchal province, not only to
instruct their People to call upon the Name of the Lord, but to wait on the
very Altar; and perform the Priestly Function of Sacrifices. As it is highly
probable from the History of the Creation, the first Governments of the World,
had their Rise and Foundation in Fathers of Families; so we are undoubtedly
instructed that they obtained the Character of Patres patrioe, by executing all
the Offices of a Parent, as well as King. Abraham had no doubt his Duty
represented as a Prince, as well as Master of a Family, under the Compliment of
a Divine Confidence: for I know him that he will command his Children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment, Genesis 18. 19. And truly since both Prince and Parent, have the Impress
of Divine Authority upon 'em; and there is such a strict Affinity and
Correspondence between 'em, from the original frame of things; if the Character
of a Parent extends to a Religious as well as Civil Capacity, it cannot well be
disputed, but that of a Prince carries the same extent and latitude. And
therefore it may safely be concluded, that it was a point of Duty in the
Magistrate, antecedent to any positive Economy of Religion, to promote the
Interests, if not execute the Spiritual Functions of Religion, as well as
advance the Welfare of the State: And very probably it was a Divine
Institution, as ancient and primitive as Government it self.

And certainly the Model of all Heathen Governments confirms the Notion. It Is
well known the Egyptian Monarchs (Famous in the earliest Records) bare the
Character of Priest, as well as King. The Chinese to this Day, look upon the
Priesthood to bear so near a Relation to that of the Empire, that the most
Solemn Mysteries of Religion, are still a Prerogative peculiar to the
Sovereign. Religion in the Eastern and Western parts of Europe, was always so
much the Business of Government, that if the public Acts and Offices of
Religion were not immediately performed by the Magistrate, they were constantly
directed, and enforced by him. If the public Defense of a Country, where its
Territories were enlarged and extended, diverted him from attending the Altar,
it was his special Care to constitute a Priesthood, and regulate the Affairs of
Religion, by public Laws and Sanctions: these are such known and allowed
Truths, and so well attested, in the Learning of the Greeks and Latins, that I
shall not now appeal to Authors; and they are all convincing Evidences, that
one End of Government, in the original Frame and Model of it, was to inspect
the Conduct of Mankind in the Affairs of Religion. Thus far not only the Duty,
but Prerogative of the Magistrate discovers it self in a State of Nature,
antecedent to Revelation.

SECT. II. It remains that we consider it under a positive Economy of Religion.

And, first, under that of the Jews. Now though GOD thought fit upon the first
positive Establishment of Religion, to institute an Order of Men, and separate
them from the rest of the People, to attend at his Altar, to offer for
themselves, and the sins of others; yet it is manifest he did not exempt the
Civil Magistrate from inspecting the Affairs of Religion. No, it was his
special Duty, to protect and defend the True Religion; to punish and suppress
Idolatry, Seducers, and Fall Prophets, and to make such wholesome provisions,
as served the cause of Religion, in the enforcement of its Public Acts and
Offices, and in the Advancement of its Ends and Designs. The Sacred Writings
have delivered so many Instances, and Rules of this Nature, that it is wholly
needless to enlarge in an express Citation. It Is well known he often directed
the Building of places of Religious Worship, enjoined Fasts; and in a word,
interposed in most of the Circumstantials of Religion. Now it is certain these
were not bare Arbitrary Offices, and the product of a Voluntary Zeal; but they
were either the immediate Instruction of Heaven, or the effects of some General
Precepts; and consequently were intended as standing Instances of Duty. If we
examine the economy of the Gospel, we must conclude, That as we have not the
least hint that any ways abridges the Rights and Authority of the Civil
Magistrate, further than they were exercised under the Law, so we do not find
the least Exemption from any Moral point of Duty in the Affairs of Religion, to
which they were antecedently bound. Now it cannot be denied, but that the
Nature and State of the Christian Church is frequently described in the
Writings of the Prophets: And among those various Descriptions, the Character
of Christian Kings and Princes, recorded by the Prophet Isaiah, is as glorious
as it is remarkable: And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens
thy nursing Mothers -- for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me, Isa. 44.
v. 23. This Passage is unanimously interpreted of the Christian Magistrate; and
certainly we are not to receive it as a Prediction of a Contingent Blessing, or
Matter of Fact, but agreeable to the Prophetic Style (which often exhibits
Duties, under simple Predictions) as carrying the Force of a Precept in it.
Thus we see the Magistrate is not only Pater Patrioe, but Pater Ecclesioe. This
is his Character, and his Duty: and certainly, if he answers the Designs of it,
he must not only cherisb, but protect, and defend the Church of Christ; and in
a word, liberally minister to it, whatever is necessary for its Support and
Preservation. Upon the whole then, we may justly conclude, That though GOD, under
the Jewish, as well as Gospel economy, was pleased to select a peculiar Order
of Men, to wait on his Altar, and more immediately prosecute all the Designs of
Religion; yet the Civil Magistrate still rightfully ministers to the same
Designs in all Cases, where GOD has not interposed by some Positive Rule, or
Precept; so that he is still the Supreme Guardian and Protector, in the economy
of Religion, as well as Civil Polity. He Is Custos utriusque Tabuloe; that is,
he is not only entrusted to enforce the Observance of all Social Virtues, upon
which the Peace and Interest of Government moves, as upon its Axis; but a True
and Orthodox Faith, and a pure Worship, and the Honor and Glory of that Great
GOD, that has made him his Vicegerent and Representative; and by whose
Protection and Blessing he is enabled to answer the Designs of his Character.

From hence the Dis-ingenuity, or rather Impiety of some late designing
Positions, abundantly discover themselves; viz. That the care of Religion is no
real Branch of the Magistrate's Office; that he is no further concerned for it,
than as it immediately conduces to the Civil Weal and Interest of every
particular Constitution or Government; and in a word, That for the advance of a
National Trade or Wealth, he may treat all Sects of Religion with equal
privileges and respect. But certainly the care of Religion can now no longer be
disputed, to be an Indispensible Duty in the Magistrate; since it appears not
only that every Positive Economy of Religion, has expressly taught it; but the
very Nature, Designs, and Reasons of the Character, dictate it.

But then, if this be admitted, we must grant that there is a True and a False
Religion, and an Orthodox and Heterodox Faith; that the true Religion is
established on certain Laws, and Immunities, which in the ordinary course of
Providence, are necessary to the Preservation of it; and consequently we must
conclude, That it is an Indispensible Duty in the Magistrate, to have recourse
to the most proper Methods for enquiring into the Reasons and Grounds of
Religion; and for distinguishing the True Religion from the False, and an
Orthodox from an Heterodox Faith; whether by applying to the proper Ministers
of Religion, separately, or in Council. And upon a fair and impartial Enquiry,
that which appears to be True and Orthodox, is to be cherisbed, defended, and
promoted, against all Attempts and Invasions of the Heterodox and Unbeliever;
even though some present Temporal Interest seem to clash and interfere with it.
These were the Unalterable Laws and Principles of the first and most pious
Christian Emperors, upon which they enlarged the Territories of the Christian
Church.

SECT. III. But to this it is popularly replied, That if Kings and Princes once
thought themselves obliged to espouse the Care of Religion, as a positive Duty
(considering the Errors and Superstitions of Mankind) it would prove the most
effectual Method, not only to obstruct the growth of the True Religion, but
endanger the Extirpation of it. But in answer to this, it is to be considered,
That the Propagation of Religion does not direct to Acts of force and violence,
much less the Protection of it; except where the Rights and Immunities of the
Established Religion are apparently invaded. Besides it is concluded the
Magistrate is not to proceed blindly, but apply himself to the True Means of
Information; and if he miscarries, though he may one day answer for any Sinister
Motives, that carried him into a wrong Determination; yet GOD will find Methods
to support his own Designs, and consequently advance the Interests of the True
Religion, by Secret and Invisible Springs, though his Ordinary and Standing
Provisions afford the most unlikely Prospect. Sometimes Persecution it self is
the most prolifick Soil for the True Religion to shoot forth and flourish in:
Christianity had not only its first Foundation in it, but we are assured
received Great Increases from it. So Tertullian in his Apologetic boasts, Nec
quicquam tamen, says he, proficit exquisitior quoeque crudelitas vestra,
ILLECEBRA EST MAGIS SECTAE. Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis. SEMEN EST
SANGUIS CHRISTIANORUM. Tertull. Apolog. page 45.

But in a word, if the Care of Religion is a standing Duty, in the Magistrate;
(as has been abundantly evinced) and if there be such a thing as a True
Religion, and sufficient Means (if duly attended to) to distinguish it from the
False; the Undoubted Rule is, That the Duty is to be pursued, and the
Consequences left to the Providential Care of the Blessed Author of it; who has
the Hearts of Kings, and the Sovereign Disposal of Grace, and will in the
Course of Affairs undoubtedly ascertain the Usefulness of his own Means, and
the Ends of Religion for which they were designed. And as for that Magistrate,
who upon a Principle of Zeal for the Honor of his Maker, shall thus carry on
the Designs of the True Religion, he will no doubt one Day be made partaker of a
Reward, that will every way answer that labor of love, which he has showed
toward his Name; he will one Day infallibly find a Remembrance, suitable to the
Supplications of that Excellent Governor Nehemiah, Remember me, O my GOD,
concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the House
of my GOD, and for the offices thereof, Neh. 13. V. 14.

SECT. IV. I proceed to the second Enquiry, viz. When there are two, or more
Sects of Religion under any Government, why the Magistrate is under an
Obligation of protecting, or rather advancing the one, more than the other?

And First, I shall consider this Argument, with regard to the Economy of the
Christian Church. And in order to this it will be requisite to enquire into the
Rights, and Authority of a National Church.

And, First, its indisputably evident the Christian Church is one Society, or
Body of Men united to CHRIST, and each other in certain External, as well as
Internal and Spiritual Bonds of Union. It Is truly a Seamless Garment; nay, it
bears the Exact Portraicture of a Natural Body, whereof CHRIST is the Head,
from whom the whole Body fitly join d' together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body, Ephesians. 4. 16. In a word, it carries the
Symmetry and Proportion of a Building, fitly framed together, growing into an
holy Temple in the LORD, Ephesians 2.21. The first Division of this Spiritual Body,
arises from the Necessity of Divine Worship; viz. into particular
Congregations. Other Distributions arise from the Necessity of Government,
which is warranted and established, by the express Canon of Scripture. Thus,
Obey them that have the rule over vou, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls, Heb. 13.17. And St. Paul's Instructions to Titus are, For this
cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that
are wanting, Chapter 1. ver. 5. And, These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with
all Authority, Chapter 20. We may add to this, the Power of Binding and Loosing,
and Excommunication it self, being expressly committed to the Ecclesiastical
Powers; and evidently demonstrating the Necessity, as well as Divine Authority
of Ecclefiastical Government.

But to return: Whatever Distributions were made, either from a Necessity of
Worship, or Government, every Branch or Part, is indispensibly bound to
maintain this Mystical Union; by a Communion in the Essentials of Faith,
Government, and Discipline: for otherwise it is impossible the Christian Church
should answer the Character of a Natural Body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth, even to the making increase of
the Body.

As for the Government of the Church, we are assured, partly from Scripture,
and partly from the earliest Antiquity, That the Order of Bishops and
Metropolitans, rests on Apostolical Institution. Both Timothy and Titus, in the
judgment of the most Learned Presbyterians, were Superior to the rest of the
Clergy, within their Districts, at least in Jurisdiction, if not Order. And
though Antiquity has not expressly fixed the Origin or Rise of Metropolitans, yet
it may justly be presumed to be Apostolical.

For First, St. Paul directs an Epistle to the Metropolitical Church, to be
communicated to the whole Province; for such was Corinth in the Province of
Achaia. To the Church of GOD, which is at Corinth, with all the Saints that are
in all Achaia. And, pursuant to this, we find the Governments of Metropolitans,
in the first Council of Nice, ranked among the (...) Ancient Customs, Can. 6.
and in that of Antioch, styled (...), The most ancient Canon in force, from the
times of our Forefathers. But that which conduces to the present Argument, is,
That all the Establishments of Church Government, and the Districts of
particular Churches, were originally modeled according to that of the State.
The Bishop presided over a City, and the adjacent Villages and Territories;
where a Temporal Magistrate was likewise placed. As the Metropolis of every
Province had its Proconsul in the State, so it had its Archbishop, or
Metropolitan in the Church. And when the Government of Patriarchs prevailed, it
was formed after the same Model, either in Imitation of the Vicars, or
Lieutenants that presided over a Diocese, composed of several Provinces; or at
least in Imitation of the Pretorian Prefects, that had several Dioceses under
their Jurisdiction.

Upon the whole then, as we are assured, That the forming a Government in the
Church, after the Model of that of the State, was by Apostolical Institution;
so we may justly conclude, that it was by the special Directions of the Holy
Spirit. And, no doubt, the great Design was to advance the Interests of
Religion, by placing every particular Church under the Protection of the State,
whenever it should become Christian. And certainly, as it was the only true
Expedient to enable the Civil Magistrate, to execute that Trust, that is lodged
in the Character of a Father, or Nursing Mother, to the Church of Christ; so
it is a considerable Argument that the Care and Protection of the True Religion
is a standing Duty, incumbent on the Civil Magistrate. For to make the
Districts of particular Churches, terminate with those of Civil Governments,
was absolutely necessary, to make the Civil Magistrate the Supreme Guardian of
the True Religion: and, since it is an Ordinance, that may very justly be
resolved into Apostolic Institution, it is a manifest Indication, that the
Civil Magistrate should be obliged punctually to answer the Character, whenever
he became Christian.

SECT. V. From hence we may gain a true Notion of the Rights and Authority of a
National Church. And truly, if we duly weight the Premises, we must conclude,
That it rests upon nothing less than Divine and Apostolic Institution. For if
the Apostles themselves constituted particular Churches, with regard to the
Districts of particular Provinces, and the Government of the State; and if it
be a standing Duty in the Christian Magistrate, to protect and advance the True
Religion, within his Dominions; we must conclude, That a Church is to be
established upon that Model of Government, which was instituted by our Savior,
or his Apostles, in every respective Nation, over which the Magistrate is to
preside, as a Father, or Guardian, and Protector; and such a Church is what in
other terms is called a National Church; and a Church thus established,
undoubtedly rests on the Authority of Divine or Apostolic Institution.

I would not be mistaken, as if I intended to deny the being of a National or
Provincial Church, till it has obtained a Civil Establishment; for it is
manifest, the Churches of Greece, and of the Proconsular Asia, had a being, and
a distinct Denomination, before Christianity was received in the Courts of
Princes. Indeed when a particular Church enjoys a Civil Establishment, it
receives, as it were, a new Authority; in as much as it becomes a Civil Right
or Property: So that unless its Constitution is Materially vicious and finful,
it is a high piece of injustice to destroy or infringe any of its Established
Rights, or Immunities. But yet since the Magistrate is only the Guardian, not
the Founder of a National Church, (its Original Authority resting on certain
positive Laws, and Sanctions, enjoined by a Power superior to that of the
Magistrate, even that of GOD Himself) wherever a Church in any Province or
Nation, professes the True Religion by an Orthodox Faith, and a pure Worship,
under Lawful Church Governors and Pastors, that is the True National Church,
in opposition to all dissenting Sects and Parties; tho it wants the Authority
of a Civil Establishment.

But to return: From hence we may easily determine the merits of the Question
in debate, I mean When there are two, or more Sects of Religion in any
Government, why the Magistrate is under an Obligation of protecting, or rather
advancing the one, more than the other?

For, First, it is abundantly demonstrated that the Christian Magistrate, ex
officio, is constituted a Guardian, Father, and Protector of the True Religion;
and therefore if in any Nation, or Government, the true Religion is professed
in an Orthodox, and a pure Worship, under lawful Church Governors and Pastors;
there the Magistrate is indispensibly boundto act as a Guardian and Protector,
in opposition to all Models, and Platforms that are advanced against it. For by
this alone he pursues the Great Design of the Apostolic Platform, in the
Institution of National Churches, as well as answers that of his Character; I
mean as he is Prophetically styled, a Father to the Church of CHRIST.

It Is certain one Great Design of Christianity, is Unity; or to range all the
Parts and Members of the Church of CHRIST into an Holy Building: and therefore,
if the Magistrate is constituted a Guardian of the True Religion, all his
Offices of Succor and Protection must be directed to this End; I mean the
maintenance of the Bonds of Catholic Unity, throughout his whole Dominions.
Without this, the Great Ends, and Proposals of so pure and holy a Religion,
cannot be accomplished; and therefore whatever Indulgences, or Exemptions the
Christian Magistrate may rightfully grant to Erroneous Judgments, or
Consciences, acted with simplicity and a pious Disposition; he cannot upon the
Laws and Economy of the Gospel, or any Authority derived to him from thence,
rightfnlly give a Positive Establishment, within the Districts of the same
Government, to two Opposite Communions, or Altars of Worship; especially when
one of them is founded in a revolt, from a pure and Orthodox National Church.
This is the very reverse to a Protector and Defender of the True Religion. For
it implies a power to pervert the Great Design of the Christian Religion; vis.
a Unity of Faith and Worship; by dissolving the Bonds of Catholic Unity, and
Authorizing the Members of CHRIST'S Mystical Body, to disband and break into
Schisms and Factions: whereas it is an External Rule, That the Magistrate can
only challenge a Power to Edification, not to Destruction. This is so far from
being a Prerogative of the Magistrate, that where a National Church is
constituted under Lawful Governors and Pastors, though there may be some
Defects, or Errors in her Faith, Discipline, or Worship; he is not to unhinge
and demolish, but to endeavor to correct and remove them, by such Means and
Instruments, as GOD, in his revealed Will, has decreed and appointed: and when
this is done, he is not to suffer any opposite Sects, or Factions, so much as to
break in upon any of her Apostolic Rights, or Immunities. For it is manifest,
the Duty of a Guardian, Parent and Protector, is to use all prudent Methods to
cultivate and improve, to advance the Interests, and enlarge the Privileges of
those under his Care; much more to defend them from Violence, or Incroachment.
To be appointed a Father, and a Protector of CHRIST'S Church, or the True
Religion, is not an Empty Name, but carries very momentous Offices and Duties
in it: it implies a Zeal for the Honor of GOD, and the True Religion; and
consequently it engages the Magistrate to study such wholesome Provisions, as
will advance the Ends and Interests of it, to the utmost Boundaries of his
Dominions: and those that thus wait for CHRIST, shall not be ashamed, Isai. 49.
v. 23.

And now, Sir, I hope I have prepared You for the main Argument You proposed,
by informing You how the Magistrate is determined, for the Interests of
Religion, and particularly those of this National Church.

SECT. VI. I shall proceed to consider, Whether the Restraint of the PRESS, is
not a Necessary Provision, not only to advance the Interests of the True
Religion, but to preserve, and maintain the Ends and Designs of it, as
professed in a National Church? And this will appear from the Necessity of a
public Establishment in Religion, and the Pernicious Influences, which the
Liberty of the Press has upon it.

It Is already concluded, that GOD has instituted a Governing Power in the
Christian Church; and the accommodating it to the Districts of the State, and
the Constituting the Civil Magistrate a Guardian, and Protector of the Church
of CHRIST, is at least a sufficient Warrant of the Lawfulness of a public
Establishment, if not an Indication of its Necessity.

Indeed since there are Governing Powers in the Church of CHRIST, we must
conclude, that GOD foresaw a great many Difficulties and Miscarriages, under
the great Revolutions and Emergencies of Human Affairs; which he has Authorized
them to adjust, correct and remove: and this will justly infer the Necessity of
public Decrees, Articles, or Canons, and that too in Matters of Faith,
Worship, and Practice. It cannot be denied, but Scripture it self has
established the Authority of such Powers, and Injunctions; and consequently
it is an indisputable Argument of their Necessity: since GOD never imparts
special Powers, or Functions, but he infallibly discerns the Necessity and
Usefulness of them. Thus we have General Rules directed to particular Churches,
in the business of Public Worship, That things be prescribed, and done
according to the Laws of Decency, Order, and Edification. And no doubt St. Paul
points at the same thing, when he reminds Titus, why he placed him over the
Church of Crete, That thou should set in order the things that are wanting:
Tit. 1. 5. So that we may justly conclude, there is a Power given to prescribe
such Laws and Rules, and make such Public Declarations, as manifestly tend to
the Edifying the Body of Christ; or as are requisite to maintain the Catholic
Laws of Unity, or the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace.

But to descend to particulars. And first, as to matters of Faith; Indeed it
will be easily granted, That the Holy Scriptures are a complete Rule of Faith;
and consequently they seem to be a competent Standard, for the Governors of
particular Churches, to try the Faith of Christians by. But yet we are assured
that they contain a Great many things, hard to be understood, which the
ignorant and unlearned wrest to their own destruction; and consequently things
of the greatest moment, and importance. Again, we are assured, that Heresies
will come, that there will arise False Christ's, and False Prophets, and Men of
corrupt Minds, who have not only erred, but are reprobate concerning the Faith.
In a word, it is impossible but Controversies and Divisions, as well as
Offenses, will come; this is the case of every Tribe, or Colony of Christians.

And is there no Judgment to be made in these Circumstances? Are these Persons
to be suffered to proceed in their Errors, and pervert the Faith of others? If
this must be so, for what End has the Blessed AUTHOR of our Religion placed
Governors and Pastors in his Church, and enforced their Authority by the
Discipline of special Censure? They cannot remonstrate against them, without
making a Judgment whether the Doctrine be of GOD, or is consonant to the Canon
of Faith. And yet it is their Duty to declare the whole Counsel of GOD in these
Cases. And certainly, if Private Pastors are Authorized to expound the Sense of
Scripture, and make a Judgment in these Matters, and expect the Directions of
the Holy Spirit, to wait on their pious Labors, and Endeavors; much more may
an Assembly, or Council of Church Governors interpose, state the Sense of
Scripture, and deliver a Definitive Sentence in express Articles and Decrees,
and expect the Influences of the same Spirit in the whole performance.
Certainly, where two or three, or more, are for these Ends gathered together,
(it may justly be presumed) GOD will be in the midst of 'em.

These are Proceedings warranted by the Practice of the College of Apostles,
and of all particular Churches, from their Days, to this very Hour: Such
Errors, Divisions, and Miscarriages concerning the Faith authorized, and gave
birth to the Confessions of Faith, in all Particular Churches. They were the
only Barriers against Heresy and Error, and indispensibly necessary, to
preserve the Unity of the Faith, and the Church of CHRIST, from Distraction and
Ruin. To affirm that Scripture in these Cases is a sufficient Rule, and reject
all Interposals, or Determinations pursuant to it, is to mistake or perplex the
Argument. For though Scripture is an adequate Rule of Faith, and Manners; yet GOD
has constituted Guardians and Trustees, to assert the Sense of Scripture, and
enforce a Faith and Practice, conformable to it: and to deny this, is in effect
to discard the necessity of any Visible Ministry; since Scripture, with the
help of private Reason, is as much an adequate Rule in this respect, as the
other; and consequently there could be no necessity of a standing Ministry.
It Is true, these Public Determinations, these Confessions of Faith, are not
established upon a Spirit of Infallibility: but they are not to be rejected, or
less necessary; because not Infallible. GOD has not thought fit to impart a
Spirit of Infallibility, in the Exercise of the Power of Excommunication; yet
Scripture establishes it as a Standing Ordinance in his Church A Spirit of
Infallibility does not accompany the Ministerial Function; and yet GOD has made
it absolutely necessary. In a word then, in as much as they are Decisions
grounded on Scripture, supported by Reason, and confirmed by the joint
Authority and Suffrage of the Church of GOD, in the earliest Ages, and of
Saints, Confessors and Martyrs; they are the most apposite Moral Instruments,
under GOD, and the use of Reason, to determine the Judgment, and satisfy the
Conscience; or at least to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, as far as concerns
the outward Peace of the Church.

In this Case, they become indispensibly necessary; there must be some External
Umpire and Decision, where Matters must at last terminate: that the public
Peace and Unity (things in the judgment of our Blessed Savior, of the greatest
value and importance) may not be sacrificed to the Dissentions, Heats, and
Animosities of Corrupt and Restless Spirits.

If such Decrees, or Injunctions are not to be imposed as Essentials of Faith,
or Terms of Communion; yet they are, in the Language of our Church, to be
received as Injunctions for the avoiding Diversity of Opinions, and for
establishing Consent touching True Religion: Or, in one word, as Articles of
Peace; so that whosoever publicly oppugns'em, is at least to be censured, as a
Breaker of the Peace of the Church.

But further, as to the Duty of Public Worship, it is undeniably evident, the
great Circumstantials of Worship are no where determined in Scripture, such as
the Time, Manner, and Place; and yet these are Moral, and inseparable
Circumstances, without which'tis impossible the Duty can be performed. And
therefore it is absolutely necessary, they should be committed to the
Determination of those Powers and Authorities, GOD has constituted in his
Church. For tho'this, or that Particular Determination be not necessary,
till'tis settled; yet it is absolutely necessary, they should be determined some
way or other. And this demonstrates the Necessity of Public Establishments, in
the Duties of Public Assemblies, and Public Worship.

Again, as to the Case of Discipline, how can that Decency, Order, and
Uniformity, which the Word of GOD so passionately recommends, be maintained
without the Establishment of Districts, and the Settlement of Time and Place?
how can the Manners of Men be animadverted on, or their Neglects, or
Irregularities in the Public Worship of GOD be censured? what must become of
the Public Duties of Admonition and Reproof, and Exclusion from the External
Means of Salvation, to the Correction of Offenders, Removing of Scandal, and
the Deterring of others? These are such clear and uncontrollable Evidences of
the Necessity of Public Establishments, that we find them in all the Churches
of the Saints, or Christian World: and the Civil Government, agreeable to the
Prophetic Character, is the professed Guardian, and Protector of them.

SECT. VII. It now remains, That we consider the Influences, which the Liberty
of the PRESS has upon an Establishment.

And certainly, where Men are under an unlimited Allowance to publish their
Sentiments of things, it is the Public Establishment, that must suffer the
sharpest attack. It Is this that bears the show of Authority and Dominion, or
stands between its Adversaries, and some beloved Interests. It Is the only Check
to the Ambition, Avarice, Luxury, or Impurity of a Licentious World. When this
is born down by Calumny and Sophistry, and brought into disgrace, there is
nothing left to obstruct a general Licentiousness. So that the greatest
Libertine may plead a Right, not only to erect his own Scheme, but to do
whatever seems right in his own Eyes. And therefore, the common Torrent of
Vice will not only bear down upon her; but those more active Furies, Envy,
Malice, Prejudice, and Revenge, will unite to form an Indictment. In a word, an
Establishment as such, is marked out as a Common Enemy, against whom every Tribe
and Sect, of how different a Make and Complexion soever, are prepared to unite
and arm: and when they may do it at so easy an Expense of Danger, or rather
under the Banner of Freedom and Liberty, no wonder if they shoot forth their
Arrows, even bitter words; and are content with nothing less, than reducing the
whole Economy to desolation and ruin.

SECT. VIII. GOD knows, we are not now left to view the force of the Argument,
in empty Theory and Notion, since we may read it in Matter of Fact, and
Observation. What Branch of our Establishment, of moment and importance, has
the Liberty of the Press left free and untouched? Has not the Divinity of our
SAVIOR, and the whole Doctrine of the Ever-blessed TRINITY (as delivered in
our Articles) been run down, and discarded, by a whole shoal of Pamphlets? Has
not the whole Design of CHRIST'S Mission been industriously overturned, and the
Doctrine of His Redemption and Satisfaction, by the Offering up of Himself,
been peremptorily rejected, as groundless, absurd, and impossible? [See Atheist
turned Deist, Sect. 42, 43, 47.] Has not Reason been asserted, to be the only
Measure of Faith; so that whatever cannot be comprehended by it, is to be
rejected from being an Article of Faith? [ Christianity not Mysterious] Has not
an Assent to this single Proposition, Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah, been
asserted to be the only explicit Article of Faith necessary to Salvation? [
The Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 43, 49. 192.] Has not Revelation it self
been disputed and rejected, as an incompetent Rule to Mankind! [ Oracles of
Reason, Let. 3. 14.]

Lastly, As to our Offices of Public Worship: Has not the Press brought
Scandal and Reproach, upon two of the Anniversary Solemnities of this Church,
though enjoined by Acts of Parliament, viz. The Martyrdom of King Charles the
First, and the Restoration of this Church and Monarchy, in the Return of King
Charles the Second? For do we not find it expressly vindicating the whole Scene
of Violence, transacted in that Bloody War against the King, and stigmatizing
the great Instruments of the Restoration. Nay more, we find the very Author
applauding himself, as having a Point of Honor done him, by being chosen one
of the King's Judges. [See Milton's (...), falsely pretended to be printed at
Amsterdam, and Ludlow's Memoirs, London, Vol. 2d. p. 871.] These are the
blessed Products of the Press, laid open, and prostituted to the Wit and Malice
of designing Men; and yet they are but the small Gleanings of that Mass of
Filth and Corruption, it has brought forth. And what can more directly tend to
a total subversion of an Establishment, and more effectually prepare. the
World, to believe the Truth of their repeated Declamations; viz. That Creeds
and Systems, are only profitable Inventions, or rather, That the whole Economy
of our Establishment is but Secular Policy, and the Arts of Priestcraft. The
Press has already publicly declared thus much; and that Coldness, or rather
Air of Contempt, that too generally prevails against that of this Church,
abundantly demonstrates the pernicious Influences of it.

But now to improve the Argument: It Is already concluded, That Ecclesiastical
Establishments, or National Churches are indispensibly necessary; they rest on
the Authority of Apostolic Institution and are confirmed from the very Nature
and Design of the Christian Religion. It Is concluded, That the Christian
Magistrate is by Divine Appointment, constituted a Guardian and Protector of
National Churches, within his respective Dominions: It Is a standing Trust
committed to him by the Laws of Natural, as well as Revealed Religion: If
therefore the Liberty of the Press, is highly destructive of the Interests of
Religion, and particularly as it is cultivated in National Churches: If it
appears not only in the Nature of the thing, but upon unquestionable Matter of
Fact, the Magistrate, who by Divine Appointment is constituted a Guardian and
Protector in the cause of Religion, is indispensibly bound to remove the
mischief, by laying a powerful Restraint on the Press. In a word, it is
concluded, If a National Establishment is any way defective, or unfound in
Faith, Worship, or Discipline, the Magistrate is to endeavor a Reform, in a
Regular and Canonical Method: and this, I Am confident, was never declined by
the Established Church of England; but if nothing of this Nature can, with any
force of Argument or Reason, be charged upon Her, then the Magistrate, ex
officio, is bound to protect and defend Her, in the Purity of Her Faith and
Worship, and in Her just Rights and Immunities, exclusive of all other Sects
and Parties; especially where the Public Peace and Unity is attempted by 'em.
If therefore the Liberty of the Press is apparently prejudicial to Her
Interests, Rights and Immunities, or the Purity of her Faith and Worship, I
cannot find how the Magistrate can fairly be supposed to discharge that Trust
GOD has laid upon Him, without laying a public Restraint upon it.

SECT. IX. But further: The Restraint of the Press is necessary, if we consider
the pernicious Influences it casts upon Religion in General, as it is the direct
Inlet to Skepticism, Heresy, and Infidelity. It Is certain the Attempts of a
Licentious Press, are almost infinite, and inconceivable. Error, as well as
Vice, is extremely prolifick, and even as numerous as the sand of the Sea; the
most virulent Poison may be gilded over, and Varnish and Color may be laid on
the foulest Cause; and consequently the Press may be the Parent of the grossest
Errors, under the Mask of Innocence, Zeal, or Charity. And truly, if
Experience, and Matter of Fact, must decide the Controversy, we are convinced,
that the Lewdest Notions that ever entered the Heart of Man, have been of late
advanced from the Press. And moreover, the Mischiefs that are this way
propagated, are much more fatal than any other.

First, Because it is the most Effectual way of Communicating 'em. A Transient
Harangue or Discourse, though never so malignant, cannot be so entirely lodged in
the Memory, as totally to infect the Judgment: and after this, it passes not
much beyond the Present Audience. But the Press is a standing Monument and
Record, that not only communicates the whole Poison, and leaves it to rest upon
the Mind or Judgment; but conveys it to Posterity.

Again, as the Mischief is more Successfully propagated; so it is more
difficulty removed. The Men of Learning, Judgment, and Probity, may be engaged
in Matters of too great Importance, to be at leisure to obviate the Mischiefs
of every Poisonous Libel; but if it happens to receive a just Confutation, it is
odds it either reaches not the deluded Reader, or loses its just Efficacy by
not presenting it self before the Infection is rivetted, and the Defense of the
Error become a Point of Interest or Honor.

But that which is more fatal than all this, is, an Unrestrained Press gives a
kind of Imprimatur to every thing that comes from it. As the Case stands, the
Generality of Mankind are scarce able, or at leisure to detect the false
Colors of an Artificial Harangue; much less enter into the Merits of any
particular Controversy; and in these Cases, where a right Judgment cannot be
made, every thing that appears in public, must pass for Orthodox, unless it
has some public Note of Distinction fixed upon it. So that the most Heterodox
Positions in this Case rest upon equal Authority with the most convincing
Truths, till they have received a Censure from the Government, either in Church
or State. And Since Paradoxes are capable of receiving a plausible Dress, and
Downright Contradictions may be advanced, under a show of Argument; what fatal
Consequences may not we justly dread, when Religion is the subject of both? The
Injudicious and Illiterate Reader is exposed to the Rack, and left to be
divided and torn in pieces, between contrary Opinions; and either hangs so long
between both, till he commences Sceptick, or Infidel, and Believes Neither; or
at least follows the Biass of Lust, and Corrupt Nature; and is carried away
with Declamation and Harangue, the Usual Artifices of a Bad Cause; and
consequently is inevitably plunged into Heresy and Error.

But further, the Mischief rises higher yet, for it is concluded, An
Unrestrained Press is often the most familiar with the Established Religion,
and never spares in bringing Disgrace on any Branch, or part of it: It Is the
Public Mark of Envy or Malice, and consequently never wants the most Furious
and Envenomed Assailant. But then, this is the direct Method to usher in the
most fatal Consequences; for it will not only sap the Foundations of an
Establishment, by bringing Her Authority into Contempt (it being the Moving
Principle of all such Attacks) but it strikes at the Reputation of Religion in
General, and makes way for resolving the whole into Sham, and Imposture. For
when the Government suffers the Press to attack a Received Article of the
Established Religion, without the least Censure, or Control; an indifferent
Judge must conclude, that both cannot be true: And because Authority does not
proceed, to Assert and Vindicate its own Establishment, or upon a fair
Estimate, establish and determine for the Truth; he will conclude, there is no
real Difference between Truth and Falsehood, and that Religion it self is
nothing but a Set of Maxims, calculated according to the several Aspects and
Interests of Government. This is so great a Truth, that I Am highly persuaded,
those public and repeated Attacks, made from the Press of late Years, upon the
Faith, Authority, Worship, and Discipline of this Church (so many Articles of
Religion having been so professedly questioned, and rejected) is the Great
Cause of that Skepticism and Infidelity, or at least Contempt of Religion,
which so visibly reigns in this Nation.

Give me leave to represent the Force of the present Arguments, in a single
Instance. It Is already concluded, that the Press has appeared in a Line of
Contradiction, to two of our Public Offices of Worship, the Anniversaries of
that Glorious Martyr King Charles the First, and the Restoration of King
Charles the Second. They are by Royal Authority, as well as Statute Law, made
part of our Public Service. The whole Body of the Clergy are indispensibly
bound to Celebrate them, and the whole Legislative Power, in a Solemn Manner,
joins in the Celebration of 'em; and yet we have Books published in
Contradiction to 'em; published in the most open and audacious Manner. For the
Press has not done its Duty, by sending 'em into the World, but they are
publicly sold in the Shops, and exposed to sale from our Public Prints, and
Term-Catalogues. Now, what dismal Consequences can we imagine must attend such
vile Practices? Our Lawgivers piously declare, That By the Murder of Our late
Dread Sovereign, the Protestant Religion has received the greatest Wound and
Reproach, and the People of England the most insupportable Shame, that was
possible for the Enemies of GOD, and the King, to bring upon us; 12. Car. II.
c. 30. But pardon me, if I pronounce the Liberty of the Press, to have advanced
some Degrees beyond this: For the Fact, with its Preliminaries, is now not only
levelled against the Authority of Law, and consequently that Blasphemy, and
Reproach that is due to it, is renewed, and heightened; but a manifest
Blasphemy and Reproach is entailed on the very Cause of Religion: Such
Allowances as these, must cause the Enemies of GOD to Blaspheme; and tell us,
that we either Worship we know not what, or that our Worship is a Solemn piece
of Mockery, or at least a piece of Lip-Devotion; or rather, that the whole of
Religion is Cheat and Imposture. For if these things be reconcilable, there can
be no Truth nor Reality in Religion; and this or that Profession, is no longer
a piece of Religion, than it runs with the Tide and Bent of a Community.

But now when things discover such a fatal Tendency as this is, if there be any
such thing as a Guardian of the Church of CHRIST, and if the Magistrate by
Divine Designation, is invested with the Character, it must be an Indispensible
Duty to exert with Vigor, and Resolution. The whole Case will turn upon a
short Issue; if upon a Due and Regular Examination, these Religious Offices are
Materially Evil, and Unwarrantable; let 'em be set aside, and abolished, that
GOD may be no longer trifled with and blasphemed; nor His Pastors loaded with
Hatred and Contempt, by being bound up to the Observance of things that are not
Warrantable: But if notwithstanding the utmost Efforts of Malice and
Declamation, they appear to be a Pious and a Just Institution, the Magistrate,
if ever, must be obliged to endeavor a speedy Redress; and since these
Mischiefs apparently derive from the Liberty of the Press, certainly the Trust
of a Guardian can never be discharged, without destroying the Evil in its
Cause: and consequently without laying a Powerful Restraint on it. When a
Mischief is thus dangerous, and destructive, it becomes the proper subject of a
Law, and is to be suppressed with all the Ensigns of Authority and Power.

And now, Sir, I hope I have, in some measure, answered Your Demands, and
discovered the Necessity of Regulating the PRESS; and that too with Regard to
the Ecclesiastical Establishment of this Nation: and therefore I Am inclined to
persuade my self, the Argument will have its just Weight, and Influence on Your
Zeal and Affection, for the Public Good, as well as Judgment. But that nothing
may intervene, to cause a Miscarriage, I shall endeavor a short return to the
most Considerable Objections, that have been advanced against it.

SECT. X. And, first, It may be objected, That the Mischiefs of the PRESS may
be effectually obviated, by Particular Laws; and that a Restraint of the PRESS
from the Experience of former Times, has not prevented 'em.

Now it must be confessed, That the Law produced in the last Parliament, may
serve as a Bridle to the Deist, Atheist, and Anti-Trinitarian; but this can by
no means obviate the Mischiefs of a Licentious Press: For there are other
Truths, and Doctrines set forth in the Christian Religion, and this Established
Church; which if publicly oppugned, must prove highly Injurious to the Main
Design of the Christian Religion, as well as the Peace of the Present
Establishment, such as the Doctrine of CHRIST'S Satisfaction, by the Sacrifice
of Himself; the Doctrine of Grance, or Divine Assistance. How these have of
late suffered, the Public has been too lately made a Witness, if not a Judge.

But certainly, the Mischiefs of the Press can never be fully obviated, unless
by the Restraint of it; or at least, by such a Law as makes it highly Penal, to
publish any thing in Writing, that is levelled against any Branch of the
Established Religion; for since National Establishments appear to be absolutely
Necessary for the Carrying on the Ends and Designs of the Gospel, that which is
amiss is to be regularly corrected; and after this is done, nothing is to be
suffered, that any-wise invades the Peace of such an Establishment.

But after all, Penal Laws of this Nature, are not so apt Instruments to
prevent the Mischiefs that usually spring from the Press, as an absolute
Restraint of it, when the Authority of a License or Imprimatur is wanting. Such
a Restraint destroys the Mischiefs in its Seeds and Principles; it stops the
Contagion in the very Spring or Fountain: whereas such Laws take place at a
Distance, it may be when the Infection is propagated to a considerable Degree.

There is a solemn Process, and a great many Formalities, and Steps to be made,
which may serve as so many Advantages, or Chances, to escape the Force of the
Law. The Author is not only to be discovered, but an Information given in, and
received too, according to the Genius and Temper of the Magistrate; and
consequently the Undertaker must have Courage enough to bear the Title of
Informer; an Office, which as the World goes, neither the Justice nor Merits of
the Cause can secure from Ignominy and Contempt. Again; there must be a
Prosecution by course of Law, and the Case examined, and tried whether it falls
within the Penalty of the Law; and all this, perhaps, without the least
Recompense to the Prosecutor, for Expenses or Attendance. In a word, a Verbal
Recantation, after the Labor and Difficulties of Conviction, may render the
Author Rectum in Curia: and after this, he may under Disguise go afresh to
work, at the small hazard of the least of Punishments. I wish some Provisions
of this Nature had not been wanting in the late Act against Profaneness and
Immorality, whereby a Pious Design may become Insignificant and Useless. For
upon this bottom, while the Press is open, I Am afraid the Enemies of our
Establishment will publish their Notions, with the Satisfaction of secret
Smiles and Triumphs.

But now if the Press were shut, till an Imprimatur is obtained, the mere want
of one is a Competent Evidence for Conviction; and though some may be so daring
to expose their Notions, at the hazard of their Safety, yet such a Restraint of
the Press gives this considerable Advantage, That whatever comes forth without
Authority, carries its own Mark in the Title Page; and consequently gives an
Alarm to the incautious READER, of Infection and Mischief.

SECT. XI. But Secondly, it is objected, That such a Restraint of the PRESS is
a giving up the Consciences, and Judgments of Mankind to a Party, and a
condemning them to an Implicit Faith, and is a direct Method to involve the
World in Ignorance and Error.

As for the First part of the Objection; If an Orthodox National Church is the
Party intended, I may safely affirm, That as it is the Duty of every Person
within her Communion, to conform to her Faith, Worship and Government; so I
hope it already appears, that it is a standing Duty in the Magistrate, as well
as Church Governors, not only to enforce all Gospel Means to bring every Soul
into the Pale of it; but to Maintain and Cultivate the Purity of its Faith and
Worship, against all the Attempts of its Enemies. If any thing is unsound and
deficient, GOD has invested a Power of using such proper Means in the
Governors of his Church, and the Believing Magistrate, as under his Divine
Protection, will secure a True and Orthodox Religion; but if nothing of this
Nature can be truly charged upon Her, when Endeavors have been made in this
kind, though there may be no foundation, by Violence and Force, to compel Men to
be of one Mind, and one Heart; yet the Magistrate is of Right, as well as Duty,
bound not to suffer her Peace to be Disturbed, or her Faith and Worship shaken
by Public Harangues, and Professed Declamations: This is no Persecution, but a
Necessary Provision, whereby the Designs of an important Trust committed to the
Magistrate, are fulfilled and answered, I mean that of a Guardian; and since it
is so, I cannot imagine why any Government should be slack in the Exercise of a
Just Power; especially since all sides are sensible how much Unanimity, in
Matters of Religion, contributes to the Public Weal of a Nation. And truly, if
to this Just Law, another as Equitable were established, That Persons who will
not content' emselves with the Communion of the Established Religion, should
thereby be incapable of any Places of Trust or Office, either in Church or
State; as we find it in Neighbor Countries, I question not but it would have
produced a greater Unanimity in Matters of Religion, than the most hopeful
Projects of Comprehension. As the Case now stands, the Tolerated Party is
envigorated with the Hopes of one Day reducing every thing to their own Model;
but certainly had an Incapaciting Clause been fixed to the last Act of Grace, I
mean that of Toleration, it would not only have proved an invincible Bulwark to
our Pure and Apostolic Establishment, but the most Healing Principle of Unity
that could have been contrived, or thought of.

SECT. XII. But to return: As to the Charge of Implicit Faith, it must be
confessed, That the Depriving Mankind of any of those Means, or Instruments
which GOD has appointed for the Discovery of His Revealed Will, is a direct
Invasion of the Privileges of a Christian, and a considerable step toward the
Introduction of an Implicit Faith. But I presume it cannot be pretended, that
an Unlimited Power of Printing is one of those Means which GOD has appointed
for the Discovery of the True Religion. If so, GOD seems to have been very much
wanting to his own Designs, in not communicating the Art by some Apostle or
Prophet, long before it obtained in the Christian World. But it is well known,
the True Religion rests upon other Foundations; it was Established in Purity
and Perfection, long before this useful Art was formed, or thought of; and I
question not, will long continue so, unless the Privilege of Printing the
lewdest and most Heretical Notions, subvert its Foundations.

As for this National Establishment, I challenge her most avowed Enemies to
produce one single Instance, wherein she denies her Members the use of any
Divine or Apostolic Means, that are Instituted for the Discovery of the True
Religion. Our Church imposes no Article of Faith upon pure Church-authorities;
she recommends every thing to the Mind and Conscience upon rational Motives,
and Convictions: She is careful to publish useful Discourses, in Matters of
Faith and Practice; and, in a word, every thing that is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. She
does not only allow, but exhort her People, To examine themselves whether they
are in the Faith: She denies 'em no Means of Information, she does not only lay
open the Well of Life, or Fountain of Living Waters, the Holy Scriptures, but
recommends 'em to their Search and Enquiry, even to the Trying of the Spirits
by them: She allows 'em to propose their Doubts and Scruples to their Spiritual
Pastors, and administers Counsel and Advice upon the force of Reason and
Scripture: In a word, as she conceals nothing of the whole Counsel of GOD, so
she admits all their Proposals, by way of Enquiry and Information: So that
there is nothing wanting of those Means GOD has instituted to enable every Man
To give a reason of the Hope that is in him.

Where then is that Nursery of Implicit Faith and Ignorance? If Men's Judgments
by all these Methods cannot, or will not be set right and informed, shall they
challenge a Right to publish Dogmatically, what they pretend to retain on no
other Authority, than that of a weak Conscience, to bear down a rightful
Establishment? Are all the Means of Information useless, and to be despised, if
this is not suffered? Must they from Examiners and Enquirers, immediately
commence Doctors and Dictators; and deliver their Sentiments with equal
Authority to that of the Established Religion? Where is that Spiritual Tyranny,
or Blind Obedience, when they may propose their Arguments, Doubts, and Scruples
to Private Pastors, or a Public Convocation; when they may depute Proxies, and
be admitted to Conferences, and Public Debates, without Passes of Safety,
without the Dread of an Inquisition, or of a Writ de Hoeretico comburendo?
These are Privileges that may be obtained for asking; and they are the most
apposite Methods for the distinguishing Truth from Falsehood: They are such as
GOD has appointed, and consequently such as GOD may be presumed to give a
Blessing to. When therefore an Establishment has done all this, shall the
Magistrate that is constituted a Guardian; and Trustee in the Church of CHRIST,
suffer the consciences of Men to be distracted, and the Public Peace of the
Church invaded, by the bold Cavils and Harangues of every Unreasonable
Gainsayer?

SECT. XIII. Thirdly, It Is objected, That every one, not only of Natural Right,
but in point of Duty, particularly that of Charity, may and ought to publish
whatever appears to be Truth, for the Information and Direction of others; and
consequently the Restraint of the Press, that abridges this Right, must be
unlawful, and unjust.

But, First, it is an indisputable Truth, That the Natural Rights and Duties of
Private Persons, are perpetually consonant to the Rights and Interests of
Public Societies; and the Exercise of the former, is for the most part to be
regulated, and determined by the latter. Again, Whatever the Rights and
Interests of Private Persons may be, the Magistrate is absolutely entrusted
with the Preservation of the Public Peace; and consequently may rightfully
suppress every thing that is levelled against any Branch of the Public
Establishment; since such Attempts unsettle the Minds of a People, and engender
intemperate Heats and Animosities, and consequently carry a direct Tendency to
Disorder and Confusion.

All Governments give a latitude for private Opinions and Sentiments; and
therefore do not usually extend their Tests or Subscriptions, beyond Places of
Trust or Public Employments: whereas it is their Care and Prudence to keep a
watchful Eye upon New Notions obtruded on the Public. Whilst an Opinion rests
in the Breasts of private Persons, the Public Peace is not exposed; but when
it is pressed upon Mankind in Public Harangues, and transmitted from the Press
too; it gives Umbrage to the Peace and Weal of the Community, and consequently
calls for the Care and Vigilance of the Magistrate. In Cases of this Nature,
the first Christian Emperors appeared as Guardians in the Church of CHRIST, and
vigorously exerted their Power and Authority, to maintain its public Peace and
Unity.

SECT. XIV. As for the Duty of Communicating our Opinions to others, with a
Design of Information, it is indisputably to be regulated by two Considerations.

First, The Importance of the Opinion, and

Secondly, The Certainty and Evidence of it.

First, If the Opinion be such as does not affect any considerable Interest of
Mankind, or correct or remove any dangerous Error, but rather serves to
entertain our Speculation and Curiosity, than regulate our Conscience or
Practice; there can be no Obligation to disturb the World by opposing
Established Doctrines or Notions, when after all they may carry in them greater
Marks or Evidences of Truth, than a private Judgment can reasonably pretend to.

Secondly, Unless our Opinions are supported by the clearest Convictions of
Reason, or Authority of Scripture, (as all matters of Importance undoubtedly
are) there can be no just Plea for Duty, to engage the rest of the World to
become Disciples or Followers. And indeed it seems highly unreasonable, that
private Persons should amuse the Minds of others by obtruding New Notions, when
it may be they rest upon bare Probabilities, or no higher Evidences than those
that have been peaceably received from Public Authority in Church and State.
If the Projections and Opinions of Men were governed by these Maxims, I Am
persuaded the Restraint of the Press (when it is thereby only committed to the
Inspection of Public Authority) would seldom be interpreted a Breach of any
Natural Rights or Duties.

SECT. XV. There now only remains an Objection no way worthy to be animadverted
on, except for its Popularity and Modern Fashionableness: It Is this, That the
Restraint of the PRESS, is an Invasion of the Liberty and Property of an
Englishman.

But I Am persuaded before the Objection can justly take place, the Privileges
of the Press should be discovered to be an Article of Magna Charta, though it
were some Centuries before Printing had its Beginning: But in a word, if the
Power of Legislation is to be crampt, and fettered in the Case before us, I
cannot see but that every Authoritative Regulation of the Actions of an English
Subject, might be disputed as a Breach of the Liberty and Property of an
Englishman, and consequently no Law could be established, without first
obtaining the Unanimous Consent of the People.

SECT. XVI. And now, Sir, I have in some measure dispatched what I proposed,
and You seem to have demanded; and though I have not expressly replied to Your
Enquiries in the very Terms, or order they were proposed; yet I have the Vanity
to presume, That I have not only made returns to the Arguments contained in
them; but dispel'd that Cloud of Objections that of late has been raised to
obstruct the Restraint of the Press. If therefore what has been already offered
has the good Fortune to carry the Balance, against Your former Sentiments, be
pleased to suffer a short Address on my part, in the case before us, as a
hearty Advocate for the Maintenance and Welfare of the Government in Church
and State.

Sir, We have been hitherto engaged in the Cause of Religion, and the Methods
of its Preservation and Support. And the late passionate Address of the last
Parliament, and His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to it, seems to Authorize
the Pursuit of the Argument. That Venerable Body wisely applied Themselves to
their Sovereign, to consult His Pleasure, as well as excite His Zeal and Piety:
and He was pleased to signify His concurrence, and remit the Managery of the
Affair to His House of Commons, as to the proper Instruments to prepare Matters
for the Formation of a just Law. It Is true, that Honorable House formed a Bill
upon the present Argument; but the Miscarriages of it, wherever justly to be
fixed, cannot conclude against, the Reasonableness or Necessity of it. I Am
confident the Eyes and Heart, the Hopes and Expectations of every Englishman,
that is acted with a true Concern for the True Religion, are fixed on the
ensuing Session; and pardon me, if I flatter My-self, That the Arguments
already suggested, demonstrate the absolute Necessity of Restraining the Press,
as an effectual Expedient to preserve the Interests of it.

The Liberty of Printing without License or Inspection, has sufficiently
discharged its poisonous Influences against the Interests of the Established
Religion; and a small tract of Time in the same Allowance, would demonstrate
its Force and Efficacy against the Interests of the Civil Polity, as
established in a Monarchy. I wish some late Essays had not asserted the Truth
of the Observation: witness those gross Insinuations the Press has presented us
with, for the preference of a Republic to that of Monarchy: [See Ludlow's
Memoirs] Witness those base and unwarrantable Characters vented, in a late
Paper, wherein the present Reign seems to be blackened by the Help of a
Prophetic Spirit, and making it an Accessory to what may come hereafter; where
every Estate of the Realm, and every Order of Men in Authority and Places of
Trust, are described like Ruffians and Paltroons, rather than Persons of
Dignity and Honor. What can be the Scope of such unmannerly Declamation, but
to bring the English Constitution into Disgrace, and prepare the Minds of the
People for Anarchy and Confusion. [See The short History of Standing Armies in
England.]

But to return: YOU, Sir, and Your Honorable Brethren, are concerned as
Trustees and Guardians in part for Religion; and since the necessity of a
National Establishment is fully demonstrated, all disinterested Persons must
conclude, That Your special Care and Inspection should be engaged to advance
that of this Nation, of which You profess Your selves Members, and from whose
Communion, by Civil Appointment, You receive Qualifications for Places of
Trust, or Public Employ. A Temporary Interest may engage a great many Men, to
declare 'emselves Members of Her Communion; but it is certain the true Test of
Membership is to use all imaginable Endeavors to maintain her Rights, and
support her Constitution; whenever she is publicly attacked in any Branch of it.

To have the Press regulated by the received Doctrines of a National Establish
meant, is to be esteemed one of her undoubted Rights and Immunities; and
therefore when Invasions of this Nature are daily made, she may justly expect
the interposal of Authority: But if she could not challenge thus much of Right,
yet since the Dissenting Sectaries have received very ample Acts of Grace,
under the present Government; the Established Religion, one would think, may
reasonably expect her tail in this kind, and command the Press in matters of
Religion, as the First Act of Grace; especially since it is no more but what
Former Reigns, by an indisputable Authority, afforded her.

But to draw toward a Conclusion: Give me leave to tell You, Sir, If the
Restraint of the Press cannot be obtained by way of Right, nor Grace and
Favor: I question not but the fatal influences it has upon Morality and
Religion, is Motive sufficient to accomplish it. I shall not resume the
Argument I have already enlarged on; but certainly it seems to be a fruitless
Attempt to suppress Immorality and Profaneness, and establish a Sense of
Religion, and Principle of Piety, whilst a latitude is permitted in the most
public manner, to dispute the most Sacred Points of Religion, to decry
National Establishments, arraign the whole Order of the Ministers of Religion,
and the Solemnities of Public Worship. It Is impossible the generality of
Mankind under these Instructions, can entertain any serious Thoughts concerning
Religion, but are rather prepared to contemn and vilify the Blessed AUTHOR of
it, and the whole Contrivance: and therefore if Morality and strict Virtue is
pursued on these terms, it is more to be ascribed to the happy Genius of
Mankind, than any Principle of Religion. In a word then, If the Honorable
Assembly of Commons is in earnest for Reformation (as I question not but they
are) what has already been offered, seems to bespeak the Regulation of the
Press to be the most likely Introduction to it.

And now, Sir, I have delivered my Sentiments with as much Sincerity as
Freedom. All that remains, is, If they happen to make You a Proselyte, I hope
You Will employ Your hearty Endeavors, in the Post You're fixed, to make the
Argument the subject of a Law; and the greatest Testimony of this will be, that
Care be taken, not only that a Law be formed, which will effectually answer the
Designs of it; but that the Forming of it be done with that Prudence and
Caution, as not to give a handle to crush it in its first Production. When.
this is accomplished, it will lay perpetual Obligations of Gratitude and
Respect toward the Instruments of it, on all those in whom the Interest of
this Government apparently consists; The True Members of the Established CHURCH
of ENGLAND.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. lin. 1. read solicit. P. 24. l. 20. read Eternal. P: 49. l. 4. dele
absolutely. P. 65. l. 20. read Tale.


