apTismon Didache OR, The Doctrine OF BAPTISMS; Reduced from its Ancient and
Modern CORRUPTIONS; and Restored to its Primitive SOUNDNESS and INTEGRITY;

According to The Word of TRUTH,

According to The Substance of FAITH, and

According to The Nature of Christ's Kingdom.

By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius
College in Cambridge.

Isa. 52. 15. That which has not been told them, they shall see; and that
which they have not heard, they shall consider. London, Printed and Sold by T.
Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden Hall-Street, 1697.

TO THE READER.
THE Doctrine of Baptisms has been dark and obscure in the Church, from the
very Primitive Times, and has had more of Humane Notion, than of Divine Truth
in it; and therefore Zuinglius, Writing, touching this Point, speaks thus in
the beginning of his Book, Entitled, De Baptis. Tom. 2. f. 57. Illud mihi
ingenue circa libri initium dicendum est, fere omnes eos, quotquot ab ipsis
Apostolorum temporibus, de Baptismo scribere instituerunt, non in paucis (quod
pace omnium hominum dictum esse velim) a scopo aberravisse: That is, In the
beginning of my Book ( says he) I must ingeniously Profess, that almost all
those that have undertaken to write of Baptism, even from the very times of the
Apostles, have (which I desire may be spoken with the favor of all) not in a
few things erred from the scope. And as he affirms, that almost all before him
had erred in many things touching Baptism, so did he himself also err as well
as they, not in a few: And it is as free for me, or any Body else, to differ
from him and other late Writers, as for them to differ from former Writers;
especially if that be true which Godly and Learned Chemnitius affirms out of
Augustine, that these things are not tanquam articuli fidei, a quibus diversum
sentire piaculum sit Anathemate dignum, Chemnit. Examen Council. T*rident. 1. de
Bapt.

And therefore, Reader, I acquaint thee before hand that, in this Point, I
shall speak much otherwise than all former or later Writers whatever, that I
have met with: And though I do not; without some Fear and Trembling, dissent
from so many worthy and gracious Men, that have been and are otherwise Minded,
yet it is the less grievous to me, because I differ from them, (I can say it in
truth before the Lord) not out of any desire to be singular, or for any Worldly
or Carnal End whatever, but only that I might cleave to the Clear and Evident
Word of God alone, even there where I see the very Faithful to leave it; seeing
I am rather to join to the Word without Men, than to join to Men without the
Word; and where I find the Holiest Men in the World and the Word parting, I am
there to leave them, and to go along with the Word.

And so, in all Love and Meekness, I tender this Discourse to thee, desiring
that if thou can not at the present agree to what is there in contained, yet
that thou would not rashly Judge and Reproach it, seeing through God's
Goodness, it may come to pass, that what thou know not now, thou may know
afterward.

But because I see this present Generation so Rooted and Built up in the
Doctrines of Men, I have the less hope that this Truth will prevail with them,
and therefore I appeal to the next Generation, which will be farther Removed
from those Evils, and will be brought nearer to the Word; but especially to
that People, whom God has, and shall form by his Spirit for himself, for these
only will be able to make Just and Righteous Judgment in this matter, seeing
they have the Anointing to be their Teacher, and the Lamb to be their Light.

THE DOCTRINE OF Baptisms, etc.
THE Lord, foreseeing how great an Evil it would be in the Church, to leave
Men either to their own or other Men's Opinions and Judgment in the things of
God, did, in the very beginning of the Gospel, command and bind all the
Faithful, to hear Christ alone; saying from Heaven (that we might give absolute
credit to his Voice) This is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear
him: And the more the Faithful have kept to the Word of Christ, the more they
have been free from Error; and the more they have left this, and turned aside
after the Doctrines of Men, (though Men in some measure Faithful and Holy) the
more have they been perverted and seduced; insomuch that the true Church of
God, and the very faithful themselves, have received, held, and maintained
diverse Errors. and False Doctrines, and Opinions, even for many Ages and
Generations; yea and have not been altogether free from some, from the very
Apostles times: And because many or most Godly, Men in former Ages, held such
and such Opinions, therefore the following Ages have taken them upon trust from
them, and have entertained them as sure and certain, though not at all
consulting in those points, with the great Doctor and Apostle of the New
Testament, Jesus Christ. And thus have the very Elect themselves been drawn
into much Error, though they have still had Christ for their Foundation, and
were built on him so firmly by Faith, that the Gates of Hell could not prevail
against him.

Now, to free the Faithful from the former mistake, (and consequently from all
Error) there is no other way than this, wholly to forsake the Doctrines of Men,
and to lay by all those Opinions that we have sucked in from our very Cradles,
and which are now become even a Natural Religion to us; I say, utterly to lay
by, and wholly to forget all these things, and to come immediately to the pure
unerring Word of God, and to the Voice of Jesus Christ himself by his Spirit,
wherein all things are true, sincere and perfect; and not bring Hearts to the
Word, that are prepossest with Doctrines and Opinions Learned of Men, but to
come thither with Hearts and Consciences free and uningaged, and in all
meekness uprightness and simplicity of Heart, to hear what Jesus Christ, the
faithful and true Witness, will say to his Spirit, which also is the Spirit of
Truth; and to receive and believe that alone, though never so differing from
the Opinions and Doctrines of this present Age, as well as of the former, and
though perhaps the whole Nation would be offended with it.

And this is the Course that I have observed, to come to some clear and certain
Knowledge in the Doctrine of Baptism: For having Read much, and Discoursed with
many touching this Point, and having seriously considered what they say, as one
that searched after the Truth, for it self only, and for the Satisfaction of my
own Soul; I do prosess, I could not find any thing almost spoken, for my Spirit
boldly and safely to lean on, as perceiving most of what they said, to be but
the Apprehensions and Thoughts of Men, and that they spoke very much by
Conjecture and at Uncertainty in this matter: And thereupon I resolved, wholly
to withdraw from such Discourse, and to lay down whatever Opinions I had before
entertained touching this Point, and to come to the plain and manifest
Scriptures, and from thence (after much seeking God) to learn whatever the Lord
should please to teach me; choosing rather to build on the clear Word, though
alone, than on any uncertian inferences and blind conjectures of Men, though
embraced and magnified by all the World.

Now, in this inquiry from the Word, I met with that place, Heb. 6. 2. where
the Apostle speaking of some of the first and initial points of Christian
Religion, names (...), the Doctrine of Baptisms; whence I perceived that in the
Primitive Church they had the Dostrine of Baptisms in the plural number, and
therefore did apply my self to search from the Word what these Baptisms might
be, and so met with the Baptist's own Doctrine touching Baptisms mentioned Mat.
3. Mar. 1. Luke 3. and John 1. (for all the Evangelists make mention of this,
it being a matter of so great Concernment) and Luke makes mention of the ground
of this Doctrine of the Baptist, Chap. 3. 15. As the People were in Expectation
(says he) and all Men mused in their Hearts of John, whither he were the
Christ or not, John answered, saying, etc. the People, it seems, had great and
high thoughts of John, because he was the Son of the High Priest, conceived
after an extraordinary manner, his Parents being both well stricken in Age, and
past Children, by the course of Nature; and then the manner of his Life was
strange, for he lived in the Wilderness, out of the ordinary converse of the
World: And his Apparel and Diet were unusual, being Raiment of Cammels Hair,
and a Leathern Girdle about his Loins, and his Meat Locust and Wild honey; but
especially his Ministry was mighty, being in the Spirit and Power of Elias* and
his Baptism new and famous; so that all the People stood in great expectation
of some Work or event from Him, that should manifest him to be the Christ;
wherefore John, to take them off from that gross and dangerous mistake, plainly
told them all, and that openly, that he was not the Christ; but that there was
a great deal of difference between himself and the Messiah, and that both in
regard of his Person and Office.

First for his Office. For he begins to show the difference from thence,
because the newness of his Baptism was the ocasion of the Peoples conceiving,
that he was the Messiah* whereupon he vilifies his own Baptism in respect of
Christ's: says he, I indeed Baptize you with Water; that is, my Baptism is
but Water Baptism, that washes the Body only with a Corporeal Element; but one
mightier then I comes, for I am but a Creature, He the Power of God, I but a
Servant, He the Lord of all, and One so infinitely Excellent above all that I
am, that the Latchet of his Shoes I am not worthy to unloose; that is, I am
unworthy, to perform the meanest and lowest Office for Him. And having thus
first spoken meanly of his own Baptism, and then magnified Christ's Person
above his own, He (says he) shall Baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with
Fire; that is, I that am a Servant do Baptize with Water, but he that is the
Son Baptizes with the Spirit; my Bap^ism washes but the Body from the filth of
the Flesh; but his, the Soul from filth of Sin; so that how much the Spirit
excels Water, and God the Creature* so much his Baptism transcends mine.

Now hence I gather clearly, even from the Baptist's own Mouth, That John's
Baptism and Christ's were distinct Baptisms, the one Water Baptism, the other
Fire-Baptism: And though our late Writers and Teachers, have and do affirm,
that John's Baptism and Christ's make up but one entire Baptism, yet all
generally of the Ancient Christians apprehended them to be distinct; one
whereof, says, Illud manifestum est, alium fuisse Iohannis Baptismum, alium
Christi: August. contra liter* Petil. 2. c. 37. And I could produce many more
Testimonies besides, but it is not my meaning to entangle any Body with the
Authority of Men, and therefore I shall make it plain by clear Scriptures, and
Evidences from them, that John's Baptism and Christ's are distinct.

1. John's Baptism and Christ's are distinct in their Appellations in Scripture;
for John's Baptism was still so called, even when the Apostles used it; and it
was not called by their Names who administered it, but was still called John's
Baptism: Yea after Christ's Baptism came in, John's still retained its name, as
being distinct from it; and therefore, Act. 18. 24, 25. it is said, Apollos
taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only (...) the Baptism of
John.

2. The Scripture says, that Christ's Baptism was to follow John's, and did
not* accompany it at the same time, for Mat. 3. John says, (...) I do Bapize
you with Water, but he that comes after me, i. e. in order of time, (...) he
shall Baptize you: And in Luke 3. (...) I have Baptized you (...), but he shall
Baptize you; which places plainly declare, that Christ's Baptism did not go
along with John's, but was to follow it, and that he was to Baptize with the
Spirit, after John's Water Baptism had its full course, to wit, when he was
risen from the Dead, and Ascended into Heaven. And therefore Christ, after he
was risen from the Dead, and immediately before he was to ascend into Heaven,
though his Disciples had used Water Baptism, or John's Baptism, for above three
Years, yet affirms, that which John had said of Him, touching his Baptism with
the Spirit, was not yet fulfilled, but was shortly to be fulfilled, as appears
Acts 1. 4, 5, Christ being Assembled with the Apostles, commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father,
which, says he, you have heard of me; for John truly Baptizeth with Water, but
ye shall be Baptized with the Spirit, not many Days hence; and this was
fulfilled at the Day of Pentecost; whence it is evident, that Christ's Baptism
did not go along with John's, and make that up one entire Baptism with it self,
seeing it followed almost four Years after; and therefore John's Baptism and
Christ's must needs be distinct.

3. It is evident, that Christ's Baptism and John's were distinct, in as much
as the Baptism of Christ was necessary for those very Persons, who had before
been Baptized with the Baptism of John, whereas if John's Baptism had been one
and the same with Christ; that only had been sufficient; but now, those whom
John had Baptized with Water, Christ was to Baptize again with the Spirit, as
in that place before mentioned; I have Baptized you with Water, but one comes
after me, who shall Baptize you with the Spirit; even you whom I have before
Baptized with Water* And this was not a second Baptism, but the first Baptism
of the New Testament, John's Baptism being more Legal than Evangelical; and
Evangelical only in so much, as it pointed out this Baptism of Christ at hand.

Again, The Baptist himself says, I have need to be Baptized of thee; so that
the very Author or chief Minister of Water Baptism stood in need of Spiritual
Baptism himself: Paul also, Acts 19. when he found certain Disciples Baptized
only with the Baptism of John, he Baptized them again in the Name of Christ,
because they had not received the Spirit; and this Baptism into the Name of
Christ, was not the repeating of any Water, but merely the Gift of the Spirit;
for Paul Preached to them largely the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, (for the
Text relates but the Abstract of the thing) and laid his hands on them, and
through his Ministry the Holy Spirit came upon them; and this was Christ's
Baptism indeed, and no renewing of Water at all, as the Anabaptist would fain
enforce from this place.

By these things, it is evident that Christ's Baptism and John's are distinct;
and therefore as what God has joined, no Man ought to put asunder, so what God
has put asunder, no Man ought to join; as if the Baptism of Christ were
insufficient and incomplete, except we should add to it the Baptism of John;
which is exceedingly to eclipse the Brightness of the Son of God, as to draw
(...)ail over the greatest Glory of the New Testament, which is the Baptism of
the Spirit.

Object. If the ordinary Objection shall be offered against this, to wit, That
John's Doctrine was the same with Christ's, and therefore his Baptism also was
the same with his.
Answ. I answer it is most true, that John did Preach Christ clearly, both in
Regard of his Person and Offices; but this was not his proper Work, as he was
the Baptist, but in so much as he Preached Christ in the Spirit, he belongs
to the Kingdom of Christ, which is Spiritual, as also Abraham, Moses, David,
Isaiah, and all the Prophets, did in the same sense: But so far forth as he
Preached the Doctrine and Administered the Baptism of Repentance and both these
not Really and Spiritually, but only in the Letter and Sign, so far he belonged
to the Old Testament rather than to the New: Here was John in his Proper
Office. I say, so far as John Preached Christ Spiritually, he did not that as
John the Baptist, but as John a Believer: And so the same John, in regard of
his Baptists Office, belonged to the Old Testament, but according to the
Revelation which he had from the Father touching Christ, and his Faith in him,
and Confession of him, he belonged to the New, And except we learn thus to
distinguish of John's Doctrine, to wit, what he Preached as Baptist, and in his
Proper Office, and what as a Believer, who had the Revelation of the Father, we
shall never understand his Baptism aright: For John's Baptism was the Seal of
his Old Testament-Doctrine, and not of his New, or of his own immediate
Ministry, and not of Christ's; at the highest, John's Ministry and Baptism
pointed out Christ, but neither of them were the same with Christ's.

And thus having cleared from the Word, that John's Baptism is distinct from
Christ's, I shall proceed to speak of each of these Baptisms apart by
themselves, and to hold forth to others what my self have learned touching them
from the same Word*

And first I begin with John's Baptism, as being the first in order of time.

Now the Baptism of John was brought in besides the rite and manner of the Law,
and so was a sign of a great change to follow: The Jews indeed had their
Baptisms in the Law, for they washed their Members, Garments, Vessels, etc. and
by this they were cleansed from Legal Pollutions, but not from any Sin or Stain
that did cleave to their Conscience: But John was the Author or first Minister
of a new and unwonted Baptism, calling all Men to Repentance for Sin, and to
flee from the Wrath to come, and awakening them to Confession of Sin, and
Amendment of Life, and also pointing out One to come, and now at hand: Who
should do all these things for them indeed, which neither he nor his Baptism
could do.

Now touching John's Baptism I shall show,

First, The Honourableness of it in it self.

And secondly, The Weakness and Imperfectness of it in reference to Christ.

And thirdly, The Continuance and Duration of it.

1. For the Honourableness of it self: It appears in several Passages.

1st. That though the Baptism of John in it self were more Legal than
Evangelical, yet in this it did excel all the former Legal Baptisms, that it
pointed out Christ's Baptism near at hand; for as John himself was greater than
all the former Prophets, because he Pointed out with his Finger Christ the true
and great Prophet of the Church; so his Baptism was more excellent than all the
former Baptisms, because it pointed out Christ's Great and Glorious Baptism
no(...) at hand, as he says, I Baptize you with Water, and he that comes after
me shall Baptize you with the Spirit.

2. John's Baptism was from Heaven, and not from Men, it had its Institution
from God, and was not an Ordinance he took up of his own head, Luke 3. 2. It is
said, that at the beginning of John's setting forth to his Baptism and
Ministry, That the Word of God came to him in the wilderness; that is, he was
Inspired, Instructed, and Taught by a Word from God himself, touching his
Ministry Baptism, and the discovery of Christ he was to make; and John 1. 6.
There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John; and Verse 33. He that sent
me to Baptize with Water, said unto me: He went not of his own accord, but God
sent him to Baptize; so that as God was the Author of those Inferior Baptisms
of Moses, so of this more high and excellent Baptism of John; and hereupon the
Publicans that received John's Baptism, are said to justify God; and the
Pharisees and Lawyers that refused it, to reject against themselves; that is,
to their own harm, the Council of God, Luke 7. 29, 30.

2. Christ himself, who was born under the Law, and subject to the Law,
submited himself also to the Baptism of John, as the last and liveliest
Ceremony, Mat. 3. 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan to be Baptized
of him; and so Christ who had submitted himself to the Circumcision of Moses,
submitted himself also to the Baptism of John; and as he submitted himself to
all the Ceremonies of Moses, not for his own sake, but for ours, so also to the
Baptism of John. For seeing Christ was free from Sin, he stood in no need of
Repentance, and so not of that Baptism, which was the Baptism of Repentance for
the Remission of Sin; but there the Head, who was free from Sin, was Baptized
for the Body, which was full of Sin, that he might fulfill all Righteousness in
his own Person. And this was a great Honor to the Baptism of John, that Christ
(though in reference to our Flesh more than his own) submitted himself to it.

Thus it appears, that the Baptism of John was very Honorable, and of high
Account in its time, so that the very Disciples of Christ took it up, and
Christ himself suffered them, because John's Baptism was the Sign and
Forerunner of His, and because the time of his own Baptism was not yet come;
but Christ himself used it not, as John witnesses Chap. 4. 2. saying, Jesus
himself Baptized not, but his Disciples; to wit, with John's Baptism, which was
Water Baptism. For it became not the Son of God to Baptize with a Creature; nor
the Lord of all to use the Baptism of a Servant.

And thus having showed how Honorable John's Baptism was in it self, (wherein
I conceive I have not done him, though a Servant, the least Prejudice, but have
fully attributed to his Office, whatever the Word, or He himself a Messenger
from God attributes to it) I shall now proceed to show, That the Baptism of
John, how Honorable and Excellent soever, is yet far beneath and below
Christ's; yea, and most Weak and Imperfect in comparison of his.

For first, John's Baptism was with a Creature, with the Element of Water; for
the Creature could Baptize but with the Creature; that is, John with Water; and
so this was far beneath the Baptism of Christ, which was the Work of God by
God, the Work of the Father by the Son, and of the Son by the Spirit.

2. John's Baptism was tantum exterius lavacrum, but Outward, and reached the
Outward Man only; the Baptism of Water reached but the Body, and it could
pierce no deeper; and after all the washing of the Body with Water, the Soul
still remained as full of Filth, Sin and Corruption as ever; and so it was far
beneath Christ's, which reaches the Soul: The Baptism of John was the Baptism
of Bodies, but the Baptism of Christ the Baptism of Souls; and only the Baptism
of the Spirit reaches the Spirit, and attains to the Soul, Conscience, and
Inner Man, to Purge and Purify them.

3. The Baptism of John was but a Sign and Ceremony, though it had more Life
and Light in it, than any of the Signs of the Law, as being nearer to Christ,
and more newly revived by God; and so thought useful in its Season, yet the
Efficacy of it (after the manner of all Signs) was but weak.

For first, It did not give the Spirit, one drop of the Spirit; yea some who
were Baptized with John's Baptism, did not know the Way of the Lord perfectly;
that is, had no certain knowledge of Christ, the only Way to God, as Apollos,
Acts. 18. yea, some of them did not so much as know, whether there were any
Holy Ghost or no, as those Twelve Disciples, Acts 19. much less had received
the Spirit.

Secondly, Neither did it give Repentance and Remission of Sin; (for what was
the Plunging of a Man in cold Water toward Repentance and Remission of Sin?)
but these were the Works of Christ's own Baptism, which is the Baptism of the
Spirit: For no Man can repent of Sin, but by the Presence of the Righteousness
of God in his Heart, which is the work of that Spirit, which is given in
Christ's Baptism: Neither can any remit Sin but God: Our Sins are never
forgiven by God, till God dwell in us through Jesus Christ, by the Work of the
Spirit: So that Repentance was given, and Sin forgiven, not in hope only in
John's Baptism, but really and truly in Christ's, which was the real Baptism of
Repentance and Remission of Sin.

Thirdly, Neither did it give entrance into the Kingdom of God, for the Kingdom
of God is a Spiritual Kingdom, and no Earthly or Corporal thing can give
entrance into it: The Baptism in the Water of Jordan could deliver no Man up
into the Kingdom of God, but the Baptism in that River that makes glad the City
of God, Psalm. 46. 4. in that River clear as Crystal, that proceeds from the
Throne of God and of the Lamb, which is the Spirit, which delivers up all that
partake of it, first, into the Kingdom of the Son, and after through that into
the Kingdom of the Father. The Baptism of John left Men in that Old World,
wherein it found them, but the Baptism of Christ delivers them up into the new
World, or the Kingdom of God.

Now, in all these Regards, it appears that John's Baptism did not do the Work
of the Baptism of the New Testament, for then that only had been sufficient,
and there had been no need of Christ to come.

And thus you see that the Baptism of John, as it is Distinct from Christ's, so
it is far Inferior to His. And therefore great has been the mistake of many,
for several Ages, who have made John's Baptism equal to Christ's; for what is
this but to make the Servant equal to the Lord, and to set down the Creature in
the Throne of the only begotten of the Father? Tea, and it is the quite
perverting of John's Office, for John was to be a burning and shining Light, to
usher in Christ the true Light: He was to be as the Morning Star to usher in
Christ the Son of Righteousness, and was not to be so much Clouds and Darkness
to obscure him: He was but to point out Christ, and depart again, and not to
sit in equal Glory with him, on his Throne in the New Testament. John said, He
was not worthy to bear his Shoes; and therefore they do not well, who have
prepared an equal Crown for him with Christ, who is King of Kings; and Lord of
Lords.

Wherefore we must take great heed that we do not so magnify John's Office, as
to entrench on Christ's, and to make the Son, out of the Bosom of the Father,
to take up the Baptism of John a Servant, and to Administer one, entirely his
own; surely this would not have been suitable to the Glory of the only begotten
Son of God.

The third thing I propound to speak to, touching John's Baptism, is the Time
of its Durance or Continuance, and that was but very short: For John's Baptism,
as all the Ceremonies of Moses, was but for a time; yea, This being nearer the
Truth and Substance than they, was of less Duration; as the Morning Star,
though brighter than the rest of those Heavenly Lights, shines less while than
they, because the hasty Appearance of the Sun swallows it up: And so John's
Baptism was of great use a little before Christ's Manifestation to Israel, and
continued till the time of his Ascension; and then, when Christ's Baptism
began, the Shadow was to give way to the Substance, and the Sign to the Truth,
and the Letter to the Spirit, and the Servant to the Son: So that Christ's
Baptism put an end to John's, Free-Baptism to Water Baptism, and Spirit-Baptism
to Creature-Baptism: For as all the Prophets were until John, so John was until
Christ; and John must no more exceed his bounds, than Moses and the Prophets
theirs; but as the Prophets gave up to John, so John must give up to Christ.
John's Temporary Ministry had a Temporary Baptism; but the Everlasting Gospel,
(which is, that Word in our Flesh) has an Everlasting Baptism, which is the
pouring out of the Spirit. So then, John being a Servant and Forerunner of
Christ, Christ was not to take up his Baptism, but John was to resign up his
Baptism to Christ; yea, and as a Servant to deliver up all things into his
hands, as Heir and Lord: And so John's VVater-Baptism was to last but till
Christ's Fire-Baptism should come in, and then the Fire should lick up the
Water; and as Spirit Baptism should increase, VVater-Baptism should decrease.
So that John's Baptism or VVater-Baptism (which is all one) belongs not to
Christ's Kingdom, which is a Kingdom not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, not
of Signs and Shadows but of the Truth: And therefore we leave it where we found
it, even without the bounds and reach of Christ's Kingdom: For John's Office
and Baptism reached unto Christ's Kingdom, but has no place in it; and to
bring Signs and Ceremonies into the Kingdom of Truth, is (if rightly
understood) to act against Christ Glorified.

Object. But some will say, This is strange indeed, that Water Baptism should
have no place in the Kingdom of Christ: And therefore pray stay a little, for
we have many things to object against it.

Object. 1. Why, this would rob us of our Christendom.
I Answ. No: For it was not Water but Spirit Baptism that makes us Christians;
and Water Baptism has been an unlawful blending or mixing of the Church and
World together; so that hitherto they could not be well differenced from each
other, to the great prejudice of the Congregations of Christ.

Object. 2. But have so many Ages erred, that have used Water Baptism?
Answ. For the Errors of former Ages, and their great mistakes in many of the
Truths of God, I have nothing to say, but that of the Apostle, How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out.

3. Object. But you are the first Men, for ought we know, that ever opposed it.
Answ. One single mean Man, with the Word, may very justly and lawfully
Contradict the whole World without it: Truth is not to be Judged by Multitudes,
or an Unity, but by the Word.

4. Object. But Christ himself was Baptized with Water, and surely that
perpetuates it in the Church.
Answ. Christ's being Baptized with Water, under John, no more perpetuates
Water Baptism in the Christian Church, than his being Circumcised under Moses,
perpetuates Circumcision in the Christian Church; or his submitting to other
Mosaical Ceremonies perpetuates them; Christ brings no Temporal or Carnal
thing, into his Everlasting or Spiritual Kingdom, though himself submitted to
them under their several Dispensations in the season of them.

5. Object. But Christ Iustifies and Commands Water Baptism in John 3. Except a
Man be born of Water, etc. And Mat. 28. Teach and Baptize.
Answ. I confess these are places that many have mistaken, to justify the
practice of Water Baptism; but I shall show you, that they do indeed
misunderstand them. For that first place, John 3. 5. Except a Man be born
(...), of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; I
confess, many of the Ancients have by Water here understood Material Water, and
have interpreted the place of External Baptism, which was John's only: And
hereupon diverse of them have exceedingly magnified Water, and ascribed it to
the Washing of Souls, and the Regeneration of Christians in some measure, they
not considering, in the mean time, what Christ says in the very next Verse,
That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, but that which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit; by which they might have learned, that outward and corporal Water
can do nothing but outward and corporal things, and can contribute nothing to
the cleansing of Souls and Consciences from Sin.

So that this place cannot be understood of Corporeal Water; and I could
produce the Testimonies of many Godly Men, of good Note, to this purpose, but
do forbear, because I would not have our Faith built upon the Authorities of
Men; but the thing is evident from the Text it self, for it says, Except a Man
be born of Water, which shows the Water he speaks of, must be such as is able
to give a new Birth, and to make a Man a new, that is, a Spiritual, Holy,
Heavenly Creature; and no Water can do this, but the Spirit; and therefore
Christ adds to Water the Spirit by way of explication; as if he had said, No
Man can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be born again of Water; but
the Water I speak of, is no Material Water, but the Spirit, which is able to
produce in us a Heavenly Nature, through which only we can have an entrance
into a Heavenly Kingdom, seeing Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God; so that the Water Christ means in this place is the Spirit: And many other
places give witness to this, John 4. 10. If thou did know who it is that
says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou woudst have asked of him, and he would
have given thee Living Water: And Verse 13, 14. Jesus said unto her, Whosoever
drinks of this Water (meaning the Water of the Well, called Jacobs Well) shall
thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the Water that I shall give him
shall never thirst, but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well
of Water, springing up unto Everlasting Life; and John 7. 37, 38. Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; he that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of Living Water; but this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on
him should receive.

Now by Water in all these places, is not meant Material Water, but the Spirit,
as Christ himself explicates; and sure his Testimony alone is sufficient.

But again, if in this place, Except a Man be born of Water and Spirit, you
will needs understand Material Water; why then, upon the same ground, you must
needs understand that place in Matthew of Material Fire, where it is said, Mat.
3. 11. He shall Baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with Fire; which is absurd
to very reason to think: But Water and Fire, in each place, added to the
Spirit, show only the Efficacy of the Spirit; and so you may as well bring in
the use of Material Fire in Baptism, from the Text in Mat. as of Material
Water, from the Text in John. So that this place in John, proves no Authority
of Christ for Water Baptism, in his Kingdom, which is the Church of the New
Testament.

Now the other place, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye and teach all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, is also of
as little force as the former, to prove Water Baptism to be an Institution of
Christ. Indeed I find, that where*ever Men have met with the word Baptism or
Baptize in the Scriptures, presently their thoughts have descended to Material
Water; they not so well considering or understanding that Water, which is the
Spirit, which is the only Water that performs all the Baptism in the Kingdom of
God.

Now for that place, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, they understand it
thus, Teach them, and Baptize them with Material Water, using this Form of
words, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. But herein they Err from
the Mind of Christ: For by these words Christ leads his Disciples from John's
Baptism to his own; as if he had said, John indeed Baptized with Water, and ye
have hitherto used his Baptism, but I shall now shortly Baptize you with my own
Baptism of the Spirit; and from that time I would have you go teach all
Nations, and by the Ministration of the Spirit, not Baptize them, or dip them
in cold Water, (as John did in his own Baptism, and you in his) but Baptize
them, or dip them into the Name of God the Father, Son, and Spirit; and note,
that he says not here (...), in the Name, but (...) into the Name of the
Father, etc. and by the Name of God, is meant the Power and Virtue of God, or
God himself; as Mark 16. Christ says, In my Name they shall cast out Devils;
that is in my Power and Virtue; so that the sense lies thus, Teach the Nations,
and Baptize them into the Name, etc. that is, by your Ministry, which shall be
of the Spirit* and not of the Letter; you shall Baptize them, or Dip them, or
interest them into the Name of God, who is the Father, Son, and Spirit, as he
has discovered himself, in his last and most glorious discovery of himself in
the Gospel; you shall (I say) dip them into his Name, or sprinkle his Name upon
them, that they may be Holy, Just, True, Merciful, Righteous, Good, etc. that
is, your Ministry, after you have received the Spirit, shall have such
Efficacy, that it shall Cloth Men with the Name of God, and transform them
into his very Nature.

So that this place cannot be understood of Water, but instead of Baptizing in
Material Water, as John, he tells them, they should Baptize into the Name of
God, in such sort, that they that were before Sinful, Corrupt, and Evil Men,
should now be taken up into the glory of the Name of God. Neither can this
place be understood of a form of Words, which the Apostles and their Successors
should use in Baptizing, as most Men have Thought and Taught, seeing no place
of Scripture can be named, wherein the Apostles in Baptizing, used this Form of
words, saying, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit; which
they had undoubtedly done, if Christ had Commanded it as an Absolute Form. And
because many will presently be ready to be enraged at this Assertion, I will a
little cool their Heat with what Zuinglius says of this place, who was one of
the greatest Enemies to the Anabaptists that was in his time; Christus Jesus
(says he) baptismi formulam, qua uteremur his verbis, non instituit,
quem-admodum Theologi hactenus falso tradierunt. Zuing. lib. de Bap. p. 56.
tom. 2 Oper. that is, Jesus Christ did not in these words institute a Form of
Baptism, which we should use, as Divines have hitherto falsely taught: And he
affirms it upon the same ground I have mentioned before.

Again, if this place, Go Teach and Baptize, be meant Water Baptism, Paul did
very ill observe the Command of Christ, who Baptized but two or three believing
Families a^ the most, with Water Baptism, and yet Preached the Word in a
Circuit from Jerusalem to Illiricum, Acts 15. 19. through many Kingdoms,
Countries, Villages, People; but, I say, Paul, though he used not
Water Baptism, yet did punctually fulfill the Command of Christ, and did Teach
them, and Baptize them into the Name of God. So that no question there were
many Churches Planted in Paul's time, who believed in Christ, and received the
Spirit, and walked in Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and with one
another in the Father and the Son, who never were washed at all with Water
Baptism; but Paul knew well, that no outward thing is of any account in the
Kingdom of God; and that as Circumcision and Uncircumcision were nothing, so
neither Water Baptism nor the want of it, were any thing, but a new Creature is
ALL; and if there be Faith and the Spirit, they are sufficient to the Kingdom
of God, without any outward Ceremonies whatsoever.

So that neither of these two places prove any Institution of Water Baptism of
Christ, but that still remains John's Baptism, and not Christ's.

6. Object. The last, and that which seems the strongest Objection, is, That
the Apostles practice Water Baptism, not only before Christ's Baptism came in,
but after; and this is most evident in very many places in the Acts of the
Apostles.
Answ. I answer, True indeed, the Apostles did practice Water Baptism, but not
from Christ, but from John, whose Baptism they took up; and an Outward Ceremony
of Honor and Account is not easily and suddenly laid down; and hence some of
the Apostles used Circumcision, and that after the Ascension of Christ; for
Circumcision was an honorable Ceremony used from Abraham's time, and so they
could not (no not in the time of the New Testament) suddenly and abruptly leave
it off, but they did use it for a time for their sakes who were weak, well
knowing that the Circumcision without hands, would by degrees put an end to the
Circumcision made with hands. For Ceremonies are best laid down, and old
Customs best laid aside, by the efficacy of the Spirit and Power of
Righteousness. And so in like manner the Apostles used the Baptism of John, or
VVater-Baptism, it having been of high account in the dawning of the Day of the
Gospel, and for the present still continuing so; but they knew, that Spirit, or
Fire-Baptism, would by degrees consume Water Baptism, and lick up all the drops
of it; for so John himself intimates, saying, He must increase, but I must
decrease; that is, the Truth must eat out the Ceremony, and the Substance the
Sign, and the more his Ministry and Baptism come in, mine shall go out; and the
Ministry of the Son shall swallow up the Ministry of the Servant as the
Sun-light does the Moonlight; and the Baptism of Fire shall devour the Baptism
of Water; and his Spirit-Baptism, by degrees shall put an end to my
Water Baptism: And therefore Paul (as you have heard) after he had used this
Baptism twice or thrice, quite for bore it, and yet planted many Churches of
Christ; and probably by degrees did other Apostles too; for they knew, that
Christ's Baptism included John's, and was fully sufficient of it self without
it; and therefore we find Paul teaching in Christ's Kingdom but One Baptism,
and this the Baptism of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. from which the Church of the New
Testament, both Jews and Gentiles, was to take its beginning, and not from
outward Elements* or Water washing.

Wherefore seeing these things are so, the Anabaptists have extremely mistaken
who have made their Water washing so Essential a work of the New Testament,
that they would neither hear the Word, nor have Christian Communion with any
one that was not so washed; yea though they were convinced touching them, that
they had received the Spirit: This, I say, has been the great Error of very
many honest and well-meaning People, through misunderstanding the Word, to make
washing with material Water so necessary a thing in Spiritual Worship, yea, and
more Essential to the Communion of Saints, than the very Spirit it self, whom I
do not therefore Judge, but Pity.

And this much for Water Baptism, which was John's, and belonged only to that
middle Ministry, betwixt the Prophets and Christ.

Now the other Baptism I am to speak of, is Christ's, which is Spirit or
Fire-Baptism; and this is the one and only Baptism of the New Testament, as we
find Paul affirming, Ephesians. 4. 6. where he says, that in Christ's Kingdom, where
is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, and one Lord, and
one Faith, there is also but (...), one Baptism; and this is the Baptism of the
Spirit, as the Apostle elsewhere shows, saying, 1 Cor. 12 13. For by one Spirit
we are all Baptized into one Body, and have been made all to drink into one
Spirit.

Now this Spirit*Baptism did not go along with John's Water Baptism, but
followed it about four Years after (as you have heard) and as appears by the
forementioned place of Christ, Act. 1. 5. where he tells his Disciples, saying,
John verily Baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Spirit
not many days hence; and this Promise of Christ, and of the Father, was
fulfilled at the day of Pentecost, when the Apostles being all met together,
there came a Sound from Heaven as of a mighty rushing Wind, and it filled the
House where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven Tongues like
as of Fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the
Spirit. Here was the first beginning of Christ's or Spirit-Baptism, for it
began not till after the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, and his sitting down
on the Throne of God; and John the Apostle also witnesses to this, Chap. 7.
saying, The Spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet Glorified; but
as soon as he was Glorified, then did he begin to Baptize with the Spirit; not
the Apostles only, but also the Jews and Gentiles, and all sorts of People that
did believe in his Name through the Word of the Gospel* So that then Christ's
Baptism began to take place, and to prevail, as you may see Acts 8. When the
Apostl^s that were at Jerusalem had heard that Samaria had received the Word of
God by the Preaching of Philip, they sent unto them Peter and John, who, when
they were come down, Prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit,
for as yet he was fallen on none of them: (only, says the Text, they were
Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, i. e. they had only been Baptized with
John's Baptism, who only Baptized with Water, saying, that they should believe
on Christ that was to come after: For John's Baptism was yet usual, inasmuch as
Christ's Bap^ism was but new begun:) Then did the Apostles lay their hands on
them, and they received the Holy Spirit: So that here now was the Progress of
Spirit-Baptism. And after, when Peter Preached to Cornelius, and his Family and
Friends, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, Act. 10. And Peter gives this account
to those of the Circumcision at Jerusalem, Act. 11. 15. And as I began to
speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them as on us at the beginning; then remembered I
the Word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed Baptized with Water, but ye
shall be Baptized with the Holy Spirit: So that Peter evidently declares, the
gift of the Spirit by the Ministry of the Gospel, to be the Baptism of Christ,
or the Baptism of the Holy Spirit and Fire, which Christ promised at his
Ascension into Heaven.

And this is the only Baptism wherein all the Church of the New Testament are
to partake with Christ, I say not the Baptism of Water, but of the Spirit: He
and we drinking into one Spirit, and the same Spirit descending on Us as did on
Him. The pouring out of the Spirit on the Flesh of Christ, was his New
Testament Baptism, and it is ours too; and all our true and sound comfort and
happiness lies in this, that we are Baptized with the same Spirit that. He was;
for it would be as little Spiritual Comfort to be dipped in the same Water
with Christ, as to eat with him at the same Table, or to drink with him in the
same Cup, or to go along with him in the same Ship, as Judas did, and diverse of
the unbelieving Jews; but to drink with him in one Spirit, is to partake of one
Flesh with him, and to be one Christ with him; and this is a Comfort indeed*

Now the Outward Instrument of Christ's, or Spirit-Baptism, is not Material
Water, but the Word, as Christ shows, Mat. 28. where he says, Teach and
Baptize, showing that Teaching the Word is the outward means of Baptizing with
the Spirit. And again, John 17. Now are you clean through the Word, not which
Moses, but which I have spoken to you (and therefore is the Gospel called the
Ministration of the Spirit, because it proceeds from the Spirit, and
Communicates the Spirit, and Christ Baptizes with the Spirit through the
Ministration of the Spirit, which is the Preaching of the Gospel) and Ephesians. 5.
26. Christ gave himself for his Church that he might sanctify and cleanse it,
(...), with the washing of Water by the Word; that is, Christ cleanses his
Church by such a washing of Water, as is brought about by the Word and the
Water with which the Word washes in the Spirit; for by the Word the Spirit
is given, and the Word cleanses by the Spirit, and the Spirit by the Word:
And therefore it is also said, 1 Cor. 7. 1. Having these Promises, Let us
cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

From all this it appears, that Spirit-Baptism is not to be performed by Water,
but by the Word; and no Man under the New Testament, receives the Spirit
through the Baptism of Water, but through the Ministry of the New Testament,
which is the only Ministration of the Spirit.

To conclude, this Baptism of the Spirit, that is performed only by the Word,
is that Baptism of which so many excellent things are spoken in the New
Testament: As,

1. This Baptism of the Spirit gives a new Nature, and this Nature is a Divine
Nature, or the Nature of God; and hence it is said, Exept a Man be born of
Water and the Spirit; So that the Baptism of the Spirit gives a new Birth, and
so a new Nature: And again, That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; so that
the Baptism of the Spirit makes us Spirit, and through the Baptism of the
Spirit, we become that which the Spirit it self is: And so the true Foundation
of Christianity begins from Faith and the new Creature, and not from
Waterwashing.

2. This Baptism gives a new Name, not John or Thomas, etc. but as Christ
says, Rev. 3. 12. I will write upon him (...), my new Name: Our own Name is
Sin, and Ignorance, and Pride, and Injustice, and Envy, and Covetousness and
Uncleanness, and all Evil; and this is the Name which the first Adam wrote
upon; but the Name the second Adam writes on us, is Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Truth, and Love, and Meekness, and Wisdom, and all Good, and this
is the Name the second Adam writes on us, or his own new Name; for Christ
himself was Baptized by the Spirit into the Name of God; that is, was taken up
into God, and the things of God, which are Himself, as into the Truth, Wisdom,
Justice, Mercy, Power, etc. and all the whole Flesh or Humanity of Christ, even
all his Members are Baptized into the same Name of God with Him, and so are
called by his new Name; So that this Name of Christ, this new Name which is
given us by God through the Baptism of the Spirit, is infinitely better than
that Name which is given us by Parents or Godfathers in Water Baptism.

3. Christ's Baptism translates us into a new World: Except a Man be born of
that Water* which is the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: No
Man can possibly enter into the Church of the New Testament, which is the
Kingdom of God, but through the Baptism of the Spirit; the Baptism of the
Spirit makes a new Creature, and this new Creature enters into a new World,
which is the new Jerusalem that comes down from God out of Heaven.

4. Spirit-Baptism inables us to the same Work with Christ, that is, to the
Ministry of the New Testament, says Christ, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
for he has Anointed me to Preach, Isa. 61. 1. And he began his Ministry from
his Spirit-Baptism, which did immediately follow his Water Baptism, but was in
no sort one Baptism with it; and having, through the opening the Heavens,
received the Spirit which taught him the Name of God, he presently began to
Teach the Name of God to others, and Christ himself was not a Minister of the
New Testament but through the Baptism of the Spirit. Now all Believers that are
Anointed with him in his Unction, or which is all one, are Baptized with him in
one Baptism of Spirit, are Anointed and Baptized to the same Ministry: For the
Anointing of the Spirit is the teaching of God, and they that are taught of God
themselves, ought also to teach others: and the Spirit of Christ is the Spirit
of Prophecy, and they that have received that Spirit must Prophecy, as it is
written, It shall come to pass in the last days, that I will pour out my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy; which very place
Peter, Act. 2. applies to the Baptism of the Spirit; so that this
Spirit-Baptism of Christ, makes all Prophets that partake of it.

5. Spirit-Baptism makes all those One with Christ the Head, who partake of it,
Gal. 3. 27. As many as havebeen Baptized into Christ have put on Christ; so
that by the true Baptism of the New Testament we do actually put on Christ, and
are made one with Christ, and this is not done by any Water-washing, but by the
Spirit; for through the gift of the Spirit only are we made one Flesh with
Christ, yea, through this we necessarily become one Spirit with him too, as it
is said, He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit; so that not through Water
but Spirit-Baptism do we put on Christ, the Spirit carrying Us into Christ, and
bringing Christ into Us, and being one and the same Spirit in both; and this is
to be Baptized into Christ.

Now this Baptism that makes us one with Christ, makes us to partake hoth of
his Death and Resurrection.

1. Through Baptism of the Spirit we are dipped into the Death of Christ, Romans 6.
3, 4. Know ye not that somany of us as are Baptized into Jesus Christ, are
Baptized into his Death? And this is, as the Apostles unfolds it, verse. 6. The
Crucifying of the old man with him, that the Body of Sin may be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve Sin: And all this is done, not through any
Water-wash, but through the gift of the Spirit; for it is through the Spirit
only that we are able to mortify the deeds of the Flesh* and nothing but the
presence of the Spirit in us is the destruction of Sin; so that the Spirit of
Christ Baptizes us into the death of Christ.

2. Spirit-Baptism makes us partake of his Resurrection as well as of his
Death, yea, therefore do we dye with him, that we may live a better life, Romans
6. 3, 4. Therefore we are Buried with him by Baptism (that is, Spirit-Baptism)
into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the
Father, i. e. The Spirit, so should we also live in newness of Life; for if we
have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection, Where you see the same Baptism of the Spirit
that makes us Dye with Christ, does also quicken us into his Resurrection, and
deprives us of our own Life; not that we remain Dead, but that it may
communicate to us a better Life than our own, even the Life of Christ himself,
that we that are Men may Live the very Life of the Son of God in our own Souls
and Bodies, and may be quickened with him, and raised up with him, and set in
Heavenly places in him.

6. As Spirit-Baptism makes us One with Christ the Head, so with the Church the
Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit; so that by drinking into one Spirit with the
Church, we become one Body with it, and no other-ways: I say, not by being dipped
into the same Water, but by receiving the same Spirit do we become one Body
with the Church; and it is not being of one Judgment, or Opinion, or Form, or
the like, that makes Men one true Church or Body of Christ, but the being of
one Spirit; and there are no more of that Church, which is the Body of Christ,
than they that are Baptized with that one Spirit of Christ.

7. Spirit-Baptism it truly washes and cleanses from Sin: What Water Baptism
does in the Sign; this does in the Truth, even cleanses from all Carnal and
Spiritual Filthiness: And no man is cleansed from Sin but by the washing of the
Spirit; the pouring forth of the Spirit on all Flesh, is the killing of Sin in
all Flesh, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were some of you, but ye are WASHED, but
ye are Sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ by the SPIRIT of our
God: So that Spirit-Baptism cleanses from all Sin whatever it is, and there is
no man cleansed from Sin, but through this Baptism.

And again, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Christ gave himself for the Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish; and nothing does
thus purify the Church, till it be without spot, wrinkle, or blemish, and till
it be perfectly holy, but the Baptism of the Spirit. And therefore, though the
Baptism of John was administered but once, yet the Baptism of Christ is a
continued Baptism, for as long as Corruption is in the Flesh, the Baptism of
the Spirit is in use: So that the Nature and Life of a Christian are under a
constant and continual Baptism, God every day pouring forth his Spirit upon a
Believer, for the purifying and sanctifying of him, and making him meet for the
immediate presence of God, whither no unclean thing comes, nor the least
uncleanness in any thing.

8. Spirit-Baptism saves: Whatever in us is washed with the Spirit, is saved as
well as sanctified; and how much any one has received of the Spirit, so much
is he already saved: Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he has saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: Where the Apostle teaches us how
God saves, and that is not by John's Baptism or Water-washing, but by the Laver
of Regeneration, which is the renewing of the Holy Spirit, poured on us
abundantly through Christ; so that he calls the Baptism of the Spirit, the
Laver of Regeneration, such a Laver as renews the old Nature, yea and begets a
new One, so that a man through this Baptism is wholly changed, not in a few
good Works, but in his whole Nature; and from his newness of Nature flows
newness of Life, so that he is no more as he was, but is, and lives, and loves,
and thinks, and speaks, and acts otherways than he was wont; and this cannot be
the work of Water in any measure, but wholly of the Spirit; for where men are
destitute of the Spirit, though washed with Water a thousand times, there is no
change of Nature in them; but the change of Nature, wrought by Spirit-Baptism,
is so much present Salvation, even in this present World. There is another
Scripture witnesses the same thing, and it is 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. A few (that is
Eight Souls) were saved by Water, to to which figure Baptism answering, does
now also save us, not that whereby the filth of the Flesh is cast away, but
whereby a good Conscience answers well to God by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Peter having said that Baptism answers to the Flood, and saves the
Church now, as the Flood did the Church then, yea says he, but I mean not the
outward Baptism, or the washing away of the filth of the Body, but the answer
of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Which
place is difficult; but I thus conceive it. The efficacy of Christ's
Resurrection is the gift of the Spirit, and the Spirit of Christ, in a
Believer, rectifies his Conscience, and makes it good, so that it can return a
sweet answer to God upon every word of his; for the work of the Spirit in the
heart, answers every word of Faith spoken from God; particularly it can say to
God, I was indeed filthy and unclean throughout, but I am now washed, and
justified, and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
my God; and this Spirit-Baptism is that that saves, and not the Water, which
puts away the filth of the Flesh only, but leaves the filth of the Spirit as
much as ever.

So that, in this place, Peter puts an end to Baptism in the Flesh, as Paul,
Romans 2. 28. puts an end to Circumcision in the Flesh, saying, He is not a Jew
which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
Flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the
Heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of
God: That is, says Paul, in the Kingdom of Christ, where all things are
Spiritual: Circumcision in the Spirit puts an end to Circumcision in the Flesh:
And in the same Kingdom of Christ, says Peter, Baptism in the Spirit puts an
end to Baptism in the Flesh; for he is not a Christian who is one outwardly,
neither is that Baptism which is outward in the Flesh, but he is a Christian
who is one inwardly, and Baptism is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in
the Letter, whose praise also, is not of Men but of God. For under the Gospel,
which is the Ministration of the Spirit (as ye have been often minded) we can
find nothing among all outward things, through the use and exercise whereof we
may attain the cleanness and purity of Righteousness in our Natures; and
therefore Christ has put an end to all outward, carnal, and earthly things of
the first Testament, by the Inward and Spiritual and Heavenly things of a
second and better Testament: And by his own Death and Resurrection only, not
without us; but within us, through the power and efficacy of his Spirit, all
the Baptism of the New Testament is fully and perfectly performed.

And thus, in all these particulars, you see the infinite excellency and glory
of the Spirit-Baptism above Water Baptism, and this only is sufficient in the
Days of the Gospel, as being the True and Proper Baptism of the New Testament:
For as Christ himself only is sufficient to the Faithful without John, though
John were of use in this season to point our Christ; so the Baptism of Christ
only is sufficient to the Faithful, without the Baptism of John, though the
Baptism of John were of use in its season, to point out the Baptism of Christ;
and the Baptist himself was of this Judgment, who said to Christ, I have need
to be Baptized of thee; which he means not of Water Baptism (for so Christ
himself as you have heard, did not Baptize) but with the Baptism of the Spirit,
and so the Baptist himself, who was never Baptized with Water, neither by
Christ nor the Apostles, nor any Body else, yet was Baptized with the Spirit,
and the Baptism of the Spirit was sufficient for the Baptist, without any
Water Baptism; and so Christ's Spirit-Baptism, by the Word, is sufficient for
all the faithful now, without John's Water Baptism; for he that is truly washed
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and has the Holy Ghost in him to
renew his nature, and to conform him exactly to Christ's own Image, and to work
him in this present World into the true similitude of Heaven, and to be in him
a Fountain of Water springing up unto everlasting Life, what need has he of
cold material Water to be poured on his Body, under the pretense of any sign
whatever, either of Moses or John, when as, he has the Truth, Substance, and
Heavenly thing it self?

Now this, it may be, may seem strange and dangerous to some of low, and
fleshly and customary Religion; but let all such (if it be possible) consider,
that where the Substance comes; the Shadow is at an end, and the Ceremony were
the Truth comes, and the Creature where God comes: And if they understand not
this for the present, I hope they may understand it afterward; for we speak
not at uncertainties in this point, but what we have in some measure seen, and
felt, and handled of the Word of Life, that we deliver to you, that ye may have
fellowship with us? and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ, through the Spirit.

FINIS.

