The Order of the Inspirati
MAHOMET receives his Law by Inspiration.

APPOLONI.us TYANEUS in Domitians time

Edw Kelly Prophet or Seer to Dr. Dee.

Roger Bacon an English man

PARACELSUS Receipts from the Inspiration of Spirits.

Dr. Dee avoucheth his Stone is brought by Angelical Ministry.



A TRUE and FAITHFUL RELATION OF What passed for many Years Between DR. JOHN
DEE (A Mathematician of Great Fame in Q. ELIZ. and King JAMES their Reigns)
and SOME SPIRITS: TENDING (had it Succeeded) To a General Alteration of most
STATES and KINGDOMS in the World.

His Private Conferences with RODOLPHE Emperor of Germany, STEPHEN K of Poland,
and diverse other PRINCES about it.

The Particulars of his Cause, as it was agitated in the Emperors Court; By the
POPES Intervention: His Banishment, and Restoration in part.

AS ALSO The LETTERS of Sundry Great Men and PRINCES (some whereof were present
at some of these Conferences and Apparitions of SPIRITS:) to the said D. DEE.

OUT OF The Original Copy, written with Dr. DEES own Hand: Kept in the LIBRARY
of Sir THO. COTTON, Knight. Baronet.

WITH A PREFACE Confirming the Reality (as to the Point of SPIRITS) of This
RELATION: and showing the several good USES that a Sober Christian may make of
All.

BY MERIC. CASAUBON, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell, for T. GARTHWAIT, and sold at the Little North
door of S. Paul's, and by other Stationers. 1659.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715
GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F. D.



PREFACE.
WHAT is here presented unto thee (Christian Reader) being a True and Faithful
Relation, etc. (as the Title bears, and will be further cleared by this
Preface) though by the carriage of it, in some respects, and by the Nature of
it too, it might be deemed and termed, A Work of Darkness: Yet it is no other
then what with great tenderness and circumspection, was tendered to men of
highest Dignity in Europe, Kings and Princes, and by all ( England excepted)
listened unto for a while with good respect. By some gladly embraced and
entertained for a long time; the Fame whereof being carried unto Rome, it made
the Pope to bestir himself, not knowing what the event of it might be, and how
much it might concern him. And indeed, filled all men, Learned and Unlearned in
most places with great wonder and astonishment: all which things will be showed
and made good (to the utmost of what we have said) in the Contents of this
book, by unquestionable Records and evidences. And therefore I make no question
but there will be men enough found in the world whose curiosity will lead them
to Read what I think is not to be paralleled in that Kind by any book that
has been set out in any Age to read: I say, though it be to no other end then
to satisfy their curiosity. But whatsoever other men, according to their
several inclinations, may propose to themselves in the reading of it, yet I may
and must here profess in the first place, in Truth and Sincerity, that the end
that I propose to my self (so far as I have contributed to the Publishing of
the Work) is not to satisfy curiosity, but to do good, and promote Religion.
When we were first acquainted with the Book, and were offered the reading of
it, having but lately been conversant in a Subject of much Affinity; to wit, of
Mistaken Inspiration and Possession, through ignorance of Natural causes (which
labor of ours, as it was our aim at the first in publishing of it, to do
good, so we have had good reason since to believe, that we did not altogether
miss of what we aimed at) we could not but gladly accept of it. And as we
gladly accepted, so we read unto the end with equal eagerness and Alacrity:
Which when we had done, truly it was our Opinion, That the Publishing of it
could not but be very Seasonable and Useful, as against Atheists at all times,
so in these Times especially, when the Spirit of Error and Illusion, not in
professed Anabaptists only, even of the worst kind that former Ages have known
and abhorred, does so much prevail, but in many also, who though they disclaim
and detest openly (and heartily too, I hope, most of them) the fruits and
effects that such causes have produced in others, yet ground themselves
nevertheless upon the same principles of Supposed Inspiration and immaginary
Revelations; and upon that account deem themselves, if not the Only, yet much
better Christians then others. And I was much Confirmed in this Judgment when I
was told (as indeed I was, at the first, by them that knew very well) that the
Most Reverend, Pious and Learned Archbishop of Armagh, lately deceased, upon
reading of the said book, before his death, had declared himself to the same
purpose, and wished it Printed. But because it is very possible, that every
Reader will not at the first be so well able of himself to make that good use
by good and Rational Inferences and Observations of this sad Story as is aimed
at, my chiefest aim in this Preface is to help such. And because it is not
less probable that this Licentious Age will afford very many, who with the
(...) of old (that is, Jewish Epicures) believe no Spirit, or Angel, or
Resurrection; who therefore being prepossessed with prejudice when they hear of
so many Spirits as are here mentioned, and so many strange Apparitions, in
several Kinds, will not only fling back themselves, but will be ready to laugh
at any other that give any credit to such things. Although I will not take upon
me to convert any by Reason that are engaged into such an opinion by a wicked
life, that is, Unjust practices, Luxurious lewd courses, open profaneness,
under the name of Wit and Galantry, and the like, because, I think, it is very
just with God to leave such to the error and blindness of their Judgments; so
that without a Miracle there can be little hopes of such. Yet I shall hope that
such as are Rational men, sober in their Lives and Conversations, such as I
have known my self; yea, men of excellent parts in other things, men that are
both willing to hear and able to consider: that such, I say, may receive some
satisfaction by what I shall say and propose to their Ingenuous consideration
in this matter. Were we to argue the case by Scripture, the business would
soon be at an end; there being no one Controverted point among men, that I know
of, that can receive a more Ample, Full, Clear and speedy determination, then
this business of Spirits, and Witches, and Apparitions may, if the Word of God
might be Judge. But I will suppose that I have to do with such, who though they
do not altogether deny the Word of God, yet will not easily, however, admit of
any thing that they think contrary to Reason, or at least not to be maintained
by Reason. I shall therefore forbear all Scripture Proofs and Testimonies in
this particular, and desire the Christian Reader (who otherwise might justly
take offense) to take notice upon what ground it is that I forbear.

But though I will not use any Scripture for proof, yet by way of Application I
hope I may be allowed to use some Scripture words, which may direct us
perchance to a good Method in the examination of this business. The Apostle
says in a place, (...) ( professing themselves to be wise, they became fools)
I shall not enquire of whom, and upon what occasion it was spoken: I draw no
argument from it; only because there is a show of great Wisdom in this Opinion;
and yet, as I conceive, as much of Error and falsehood (that is, Folly, as the
word is often used) as in any other false opinion that is less popular. I will
frame my discourse to this issue, first, to enquire what it is that makes it so
popular and plausible, among them especially that pretend to more then ordinary
Wisdom; and then secondly, lay it open (as I am able) to the view in its right
colors, that the Folly or falsehood of it may be discernable even to ordinary
judgments.

(...) then, (as for them that deny Spirits, etc.) we say, The world is full of
imposture; to know this, to observe it in all Trades, in all Professions, in
all ranks and degrees of men, is to know the world, and that is to be wise.
Though we call them Juglers, yet they deserve to be thought the plainest
dealing men of the world that show their tricks openly in the streets for
money; for they profess what they are. They are the truest Juglers that do
their feats (and they for money too, most of them) under the Veil and Reputation
of Holiness, Sanctity, (or, Saintship) Religion, Virtue, Justice, Friendship;
fine words to catch men that are of easy Belief, and thinks that every thing
that glisters must needs be gold. Hence it is, that men that have had the
Reputation of Wise men in the world; have commended this unto us as greatest
Wisdom, NOT EASILY TO BELIEVE: (...) Epicharmus got more credit for this one
saying (and has done more good too, perchance) then many that have been the
Authors of vast Volumes. Now if those things that are exposed to sense, the
proper Objects of our Eyes and Ears, be liable to so much Imposture and
Deceit, that the wisest can scarce know what to believe: How much more caution
do we need in those things that are so much above Sense, and in some respects
contrary to Sense (and that is Spirits) that we be not deceived? If we consider
the Nature of man, his Bodily frame, the Affections of his soul, the Faculties
of his mind, we shall have no occasion at all to wonder if most men are apt to
believe and to be cheated. But as no cause to wonder, so as little cause to
imitate: Felix qui rerum potuit cognoscere causas! (...) a desire of, or to
strange things that may cause amazement, is the proper affection of the vulgar,
that is, of most men, which they bring into the world with them, (it is the
observation of the wisest of men that have written concerning the affairs and
actions of men) and cannot be rid of but by wisdom, which is the happiness of
few: Errandi, non necessitas tantum, sed amor. Seneca somewhere speaking of the
Nature of Man; There was a time when the world was much governed by Oracles;
private men went unto them as unto God, Kings and Princes sent unto them to be
advised about greatest matters: and so much faith was ascribed unto them,
generally, that the very word became a Proverb appliable unto those things,
whereof no question can be made. Yet those very ancient Heathens, that tell us
of these Oracles, tell us of their vanity; and though they say not, That all
were false and counterfeit, yet whilst they acknowledge it of some, they give
us just occasion to suspect that it might have been found as true of the rest
also, had like care been taken to examine the truth of them also.

Again, there was a time (and that time not many hundred years yet past) when
Miracles were the only discourse and delight of men: Ghosts and Spirits were in
every house; and so prone were men to receive what was delivered unto them in
that kind, that Miracle-makers were much put to it, not to make their stories
probable, (for that was not stood upon) but to make them wonderful enough;
insomuch that some have been forced See the Life of Albertus M.
to complain publicly of the credulity of the people, who yet themselves tell
us much more, I dare say, then was ever true. As of Miracles, so of Exorcismes:
How many Devils and Spirits have been driven out of men and women, supposed to
be possessed, by solemn Exorcismes, to the great wonder of the beholders, which
afterward upon further search and examination, have been convicted to have
been nothing but the artifices and subtle contrivances of men? Sentences and
Judgments have passed upon such cheats when they have been discovered in most
places of Europe, which have been published. But they have done strange things
though (some that were thought possessed) and things impossible, to ordinary
sense, to be done by Nature. It is very true, some have: But they that know
what strange things may be done to the amazement of all not acquainted with
such mysteries, by long Use and Custom, they will not easily wonder (so as to
make a supernatural thing of it) though they see things, which, to their sight
and of most, cannot but seem very wonderful, and almost impossible. As for the
bodily temper of man and of his Brain, it has been sufficiently by some late
books of that subject ( Enthufiasme) both by reasons from Nature, and by sundry
examples proved, that a very little distemper of the brain, scarce discernable
unto any, but those that are well versed in the study of Natural causes, is
enough to represent Spirits, Angels and Devils, (...) and Stories of Heaven and
Hell to the Fancy: by which sober kind of Madness and deliration, so little
understood vulgarly, many have been, and are daily deceived; and from these
things, through the ignorance of men, strange things sometimes have ensued, and
the peace of Commonweals has suffered not a little.

Aristotle, in his Meteors, tells of one that always saw (so he thought, at
least) another man's shape before his eyes, and how they happened unto him
naturally, he gives a reason. Hyppocrates, (...) (a very short Discourse, but
full of excellent matter) shows how some, both men and women, through Natural
causes, come to fancy to themselves that they see (...) Devils and Spirits, and
to be tormented in their Souls, even to the making away of themselves by their
own hands. The Author of the book, De Morbo Sacro, (very ancient too, but not
right Hyppocrates, as many are of opinion) has excellent matter too, to the
same purpose; but I have not the book at this time by me. Hyppocrates, (where
before) shows how many in that case were gulled by the Priests of those
times, making them believe, That this happened to them through the anger of
some god. They that are verst in the Optics know, That there is a way, through
the help of glasses that shall not be seen, to make moving shadows that shall
appear like Ghosts, to the great terror of the ignorant beholder: and it is
said, That pretended Astrologers and Fortune Tellers cheat many by those
sights. It is the opinion of some Jewish Rabbis, That what Ghosts or Souls are
raised by Necromancy, they always appear inverso corpore, that is, their head
dowards and feet upwards. Though nothing is to be wondered at in Rabbis, who
(commonly) are as full of ridiculous conceits as ever came into the head of any
Bedlam: Yet my opinion is, That the first ground of this wild conceit was, some
appearance by the Species of an object, gathered through a little glass into a
dark room. For so indeed the objects must appear inverso corpore if it be done
in a high room, and the objects from whence the Spiecies are gathered be lower
then the glass through which they pass. And the reason of it is very
Demonstrable to the sight of any reasonable man. Certainly, by this secret
(which yet is no great secret, being commonly seen and practiced among them
that are any thing curious) strange things may be done by a Cunning-man, to
their great amazement that know not the cause. There would be no end if I
should attempt to gather from several Authors what has been invented by men,
and what may be done by Art to cheat men in matters of this nature. Let any
man, that is yet a stranger to it, but read the life of Alexander the false
Prophet, or Prognosticator, written by Lucian, and he shall see notable
examples of successeful Cheats and Impostures, scarce credible indeed, but that
the thing was yet then fresh and famous, and that all circumstances of History
confirm the truth of the relation. And let him that reads it judge, what dull
and dry fellows the Mountebank-Astrologers, Prognosticators and Fortune Tellers
of these days are, to this Noble, Renowned Alexander. Only let him know that
reads, that Lucian was a professed Atheist, and therefore no wonder if he find
Epicurus spoken of with great respect, whom all Atheists, and Atheistically
inclined are so much obliged to honor. This excepted, I think, the Story is
very worthy to be known, and much more worthy to be read by all men
(considering the good use that may be made of it) then many books that are
daily translated out of other languages.

But lastly, If there were any such thing, really as Devils and Spirits that
use to appear unto men; to whom should they (probably) sooner appear, then to
such as daily call upon them, and devote their Souls and Bodies unto them by
dreadful Oaths and Imprecations? And again, then to such, who through damnable
curiosity have many times used the means (the best they could find in books, by
Magical Circles, Characters and Invocations) and yet never, neither the one nor
the other saw any thing?

I have said as much as I mean to say (though somewhat perchance might be
added) to show the plausiblenesse of the opinion, in opposition to vulgar
apprehensions and capacities, whereby (as I conceive, for I have not wittingly
omitted any thing that I thought material) it chiefly intitles it self to
wisdom, and more then ordinary prudence, which all men generally are ambitious
of. Yet I would not have it thought that all men that hold this conclusion,
That there be no Spirits, etc. go so rationally to work, or can give this
account or any other more rational and plausible for what they hold. God knows
there be many in the world, men of no learning, and mean capacities, who can
speak as peremptorily as the best, not because they have considered of it, and
understand the grounds of either opinion, but because they know, or have heard
it is the opinion of some Learned, and they hope they shall be thought learned
too if they hold with them. Besides an ordinary (for some have been learned)
Epicurean, who makes it his Motto (to himself and in his heart) (...) and seeks
his ease in this world ((...) their own word, which imports Tranquillity both of
mind and body; a good word but ill applied) as his summum bonum, or chiefest
happiness: It is a great ease to him when any strange things does happen by
Witches, Wizards and the like; and other some to satisfy their faith, others
their reason and curiosity, are put to it to enquire of men by conference, and
to search into books ancient and late, Sacred and Profane, and all little
enough. A great ease, I say, for him, then, and upon all such occasions, to
possess his Soul in secure ignorance, and to save his credit (yea, and to gain
(...) with some) by barely saying, Fabula est, I do not believe it. We shall
hear some of them by and by acknowledge, in effect, as much as I have said: I
impose nothing upon them. I will not take upon me to judge of a book that I
never read; I cannot say that I ever saw it. But because I have heard some men
magnify an English book written of this subject to prove that there be no
Witches, I will impart unto the Reader that has not observed it, the judgment
of one of the Learned men that ever England saw (I wish he had been more
gently dealt with when time was) of that book, whereby it may appear (if his
judgment be right, as I am very inclinable to believe, because of his great
Learning, and wonted circumspection in his censures) what great undertakers
many men are upon very little ground, and how prone others to extol what does
favor their cause, though to the prejudice of their better judgments, if they
would judge impartially. Dr. Rainolds in those elaborate Praelectiones de
libris Apocryphis, where he does censure some opinions of Bodinus as
prejudicial to the Christian Faith. Reginaldus Scotus, nostras, (says he) qui
contrariam Bodino insanit insaniam, ait Papistas confiteri, non posse Demonas
ne audire quidem nomen Jehovae. Acceperat ille a Bodino, and attribuit Papistis
in genere, tanquam omnes Papistae in eo conspirarent. Pergit ipse, and quoniam
animadverterat quasdam faeminas maleficas, aliquando istius modi narrationes
ementiri, putavit omnia esse ficta; ex imperitia Dialecticae, and aliarum
bonarum artium: Ut qui nullo judicio, nulla methodo, (...) optimarum artium
scientia, eodem modo aggressus sit hanc rem, quomodo Poeta loquitur, -- Tenet
insatiabile quosdam Scribendi cacoethes:

and eodem (...) medo ratiocinatur, etc. We have been the more willing to
produce this passage out of the writings of that Learned man, because we also
in our answers may have occasion to say somewhat to the same purpose; not of
that Author or his book, which he judges, any thing, but of the ground upon
which he builded, which we shall find to be the same upon which others also,
that deny Spirits have gone upon. But we will go Methodically to work, and take
every thing in order, as we have proposed in the objections.

First, We said, The world was full of Imposture. It is granted, of Impostors
and Impostures. But what then shall the conclusion be, That (...) there is no
truth in the world, or at least not to be attained unto by mortal man? Truly,
many books of old have been written to that effect. Sextus (...) is yet extant,
a very learned book it cannot be denied, and of excellent use for the
understanding of ancient Authors, Philosophers especially. I could name some
Christians also, by profession, men of great learning that have gone very far
that way. But this will not be granted by some I am sure that are or have been
thought great oppugners of the common opinion about Witches and Spirits; some
Physicians I mean, and Naturalists by their profession. But may not we argue as
plausibly against that which they profess, as they have done or can do against
Spirits and Apparitions? We would be loath to make so long a digression; we
have had occasion elsewhere to say somewhat to this purpose: and they that will
be so curious may see what has been written by Cornel. Agrippa (who is very
large upon this subject) about it, not to name any others. It is not yet a full
twelve-moneth, that a friend of mine, a Gentleman of quality, brought his Lady
to London (some 60 miles and upwards from his ordinary dwelling) to have the
advice of Physicians about his wife (a very Virtuous and Religious Lady)
troubled with a weak stomach and ill digestion, which caused (...) symptoms. I
think he had the advice of no less then a dozen first and last: I am sure he
named unto me five or six of the chiefest in Credit and practice that the Town
affords. Not one of them did agree in their opinions, either concerning the
Cause, or the means to be used for a Cure. So that the Gentleman went away more
unsatisfied then he came. What he did I know not: I know what some men
would have inferred upon this. Yet I, for my part, for the benefit that I have
received by it, and the effects that I have seen of it, both upon my self, and
others in my lifetime, upon several occasions (where learned Artists, not
Empiricks have been employed) though all the world should be of another
opinion, I think my self bound to honor, as the profession, so all Learned,
Ingenious Professors of it: and I make no question but the worst of Agrippa's
objections, by any man of competent judgment and experience, may easily be
answered. I say therefore that as in other things of the world, so in matters
of Spirits and Apparitions, though liable to much error and imposture, yet it
does not follow but there may be reality of truth and certainty discernable
unto them that will take the pains to search things unto the bottom, where
truth commonly is to be found, and are naturally endowed with competent
judgments to discern between specious arguments and solidity of truth.

But this proves nothing. No: but the removing of this common objection may
dispose the Reader, I hope, to consider of what we have to say with less
prejudice. And that shall be our next task, what we have to say for Spirits,
etc. before we come to particular Objections. Wherein nevertheless I will be
no longcr then I must at this time, because I shall have a more proper place in
two several Tractates, the one whereof has been a long time in loose notes and
papers, not yet digested, to wit, my Second Part of Enthusiasme: the other, in
my head yet wholly, but in better readiness to be brought to light, because of
later conception; to wit, A Discourse of Credulity and Incredulity, in things
Natural, Civil and Divine, or Theological. We shall meet there with many cases
not so necessary here to be spoken of, which will help very much to clear this
business.

But here I say, first of all, It is a Maxim of Aristotle's the great Oracle of
Nature, which many have taken notice of, and applied to their several purposes:
(...) That which is generally believed, is most likely to be true. Who also in
another place of the same book does approve the saying of Hesiod, (...) Now if
any opinion whereof question is made can justly pretend to a general assent and
consent of all people, places, ages of the world, I think, nay, I know, and it
will be proved that this of Witches, Spirits, and Apparitions may. I do not
know scarce any ancient book extant of Philosopher or Historian (the Writings
of professed Epicureans excepted, of Aristotle we shall give an account by and
by) but does afford some pregnant relation, testimony or passage to the
confirmation of this truth. I dare say, should a man collect the relations and
testimonies out of several Authors and books (that are come to our knowledge)
within the compass of two thousand years, of Authors well accounted of,
generally, and whose testimonies (Historians especially) we receive in other
things; a man might make a book of the biggest size and form that ordinary
books (which we call Folioes) are. It is true, many Authors may write one
thing which may prove false, as the famous history of the Phoenix, perchance,
or some such; but upon examination it will appear that those many take all
from one or two at the most, who first delivered it. They add nothing in
confirmation of their own knowledge or experience. But here it is quite
otherwise; those many Authors that I speak of (Historians especially of
several ages) they tell us different things that happened in their own times, in
diverse places of the world: and of many of them we may say they were such as
knew little of former books, or stories of other Nations but their own. Within
these 200 years the world, we know, by the benefit of Navigation has been more
open and known then before; yea, a great part of the world discovered that was
not known before. I have read many books, the best I could meet with, in
several Languages, of diverse Voyages into all parts of the world: I have
conversed with many Travelers, whom I judged sober and discreet. I never read
any book of that argument, nor yet met with man, that I have had the
opportunity to confer with, but was able of his own knowledge to say somewhat
whereby my belief of these things might be confirmed.

Now for the Epicureans (of all Philosophers the most inconsiderable in matters
of knowledge, as former ages have described them) no man need to wonder if they
denied those things which by the solemn engagement of their Sect they were
bound and resolved, notwithstanding any sight or sense, experience or evidence
to the contrary, not to believe, at least not to acknowledge. This does clearly
appear by one that may be believed (though I have met with it in more) in such
things. Lucian (himself a professed Epicurean Atheist) who does commend
Democritus, Epicurus and Met rodorus (the most famous of that Sect) for their
(...) as he calls it, their fixed, irrevokeable, unconquerable resolution, when
they saw any strange thing that by others was admired as miraculous, if they
could find the cause or give a probable guess, well and good, if not, yet not
to depart from their first resolution, and still to believe and to maintain
that it was false and impossible: It is a notable passage, and which
excellent use may be made of. I will therefore set down his own words for
their sake that understand the Language: -- (...) (speaking of some of
Alexander the false Prophet his devices) (...) in Alex. Ald. ed. p. 179.
(...) Who doubts that this is the resolution of many also in these days, not
of them only who are Epicureans, whose manner of living (as we have said
before) does engage them to this opinion, but of others also, who think it not
for their credit (the vanity of which belief nevertheless might easily appear,
there being nothing so mean and ordinary in the world wherein the Wisdom of
the vvisest, in the consideration of the causes, by the confession of best
Naturalists, may not be posed) to believe any thing that they cannot give a
probable reason of. Not to be wondered then if we see many, notwithstanding
daily experience to the contrary, to stick so close to those tenets which they
have wedded themselves unto with so firm a resolution from the beginning, never
to leave them, be they right or wrong.

As for Aristotle, I confess his authority is very great with me; not because
I am superstitiously addicted to any of his opinions, which I shall ever be
ready to forsake when better shall be showed unto me. but because (besides the
judgment of all accounted wise and learned in former ages) I am convicted in my
judgment, that so much solid reason in all Arts and Sciences never issued from
mortal man (known unto us by his writings) without supernatural illumination.
Well: Aristotle does not acknowledge Spirits, he mentions them not in any place.
Let it be granted: And why should it be a wonder to any man that knows the
(...) and purpose of Aristotle's Philosophy? He lived when Plato lived; he had
been his fellow Scholar under Socrates, and for some time his Scholar; but
afterward he became his aemulus, and pleased himself very much to oppose his
Doctrine, insomuch as he is censured by some Ancients for his ingratitude. The
truth is, Plato's writings are full of Prodigies, Apparitions of Souls, pains
of Hell and Purgatory, Revelations of the gods, and the like. Wherein he is so
bold that he is fain to excuse himself sometimes, and does not desire that any
man should believe him, according to the letter of his relations, but in gross
only, that somewhat was true to that effect. Indeed he has many divine
passages, yea, whole Treatises, that can never be sufficiently admired in their
kind; but too full of tales, for a Philosopher, it cannot be denied. Aristotle
therefore resolved upon a quite contrary way: He would meddle with nothing but
what had some apparent ground in Nature. Not that he precisely denied all other
things, but because he did not think that it was the part of a Philosopher to
meddle with those things that no probable reason could be given of. This does
clearly appear by a Divine passage of his, De part. (...). l. 1. c. 5. where he
divides Substances in (...) Eternal and Incorruptible, that is, in effect,
Spiritual (for even Spirits that were created might be termed (...) that is,
properly, That have not their beginning by (...); but we will easily grant,
that the creation of Angels, good or bad, was not known to Aristotle: (we may
understand God, and Intelligences) and those, that (...) that is, are (...). He
goes on, As for Divine Substances, which we honor, we can say but little of
them though we (...) it, because so little of them is exposed to sense [and
Reason.] Mortal things that we are familiarly acquainted and daily converse
with, we may know if we take pains. But much more should we rejoice in the
knowledge (yea though we know but a very little part) of things Divine for their
excellency, then in the knowledge of these worldly things though never so
perfect and general But the comfort that we have of them (which does make some
(...)) is the certainty, and that they come within the compass of Sciences.
What could be said more Divinely by a man that had nothing by revelation?
Truly, there appears unto me (if I may speak without offense and
misconstruction) more Divinity in those words, then in some books that pretend
to nothing else. Add to this another place of his in his Metaphysics, where he
says, That though things supernatural be of themselves clear and certain, yet
to us they are not so, who see them only with Owls eyes. Can we say then that
Aristotle denied those things that he forbore to write of, because they were
(their natures and their qualities) above the knowledge of man? Neither is it
absolutely true that Aristotle never wrote of Spirits and (...). Cicero in his
first book De Divinatione, has a long story out of him of a shape or Spirit
that appeared in a dream to one Eudemus (his familiar friend and quaintance)
and foretold him strange things that came to pass. Clemens exandrinus has a
strange story out of him, of a Magical Ring, one or two, hich Excestus, King of
the Phocenses did use, and foresaw things future them. It is to be found and
seen among the fragments of Aristotle's (...) that he did not deny Witches, may
appear by that mention he makes of them in more then one place. How much he
ascribed to common report and experience, though no reason could be given, does
appear by his 'reface to his Treatise De Divinatione per insomnia: where he
proposes the case, how hard it is for a rational man to believe any thing upon
report which he can see no reason for; nay, which seems contrary to reason:
as, for a man to foretell by dream what shall happen in another Kingdom far off
without any apparent cause. But on the other side, says he, not less hard to
deny that which all men, or most men, do believe, to wit, that there be such
predictions. For to say (his own words) that such dreams come from God, besides
what else might be objected (which might easily be understood by them that
understand his Doctrine) it is most unreasonable to believe that God would send
them to men either vicious in their lives, or idiots and fools, of all men the
most vile and contemptible, who have been observed to have such dreams oftener
then better and wiser men. So leaving the business undetermined, he does
proceed to the consideration of those Prophetic dreams, for which some
probable reason may be given. Yet in the second Chapter he says directly, That
though dreams be not (...) yet they may be perchance The Latin Interpreter
translates it Domoria; and I know not how it can be better expressed, though
liable to ambiguity.
(...) for such he acknowledges Nature to be, not (...) but (...) only. I will
not enquire further into the meaning of these words; it is not to be done in
few words. It plainly appears that nothing troubled him so much (for he repeats
the objection twice or thrice) as that God should be thought to favor either
wicked men or fools. I wish no worse Doctrine had ever been Printed or Preached
concerning God. But still let it be remembered that he knew of no Divine Word or
Revelation. Yet Jul. Scaliger in his Commentaries upon Hypocrates De Insomniis,
does wonder that Aristotle should stick so much at this, and seems himself to
give a reason grounded in Nature. Indeed he says somewhat as to the case of
fools and idiots, but nothing (that I remember) that reaches to wicked men
also. Let these things be considered, and let the Reader judge of how different
temper Aristotle was from that of ancient or later Epicures. This mention of
Aristotle and Plato puts me in mind of Socrates their Master, his Familiar
Spirit; no Shape but a Voice only, by which his life and actions were much
directed. The thing is attested by so many, so grave Authors whereof some lived
at the very time, others not long after, or in times not very remote, that I
know not how it can be questioned by any man. Neither indeed is it, that I
remember, by any Heathens or Christians of ancient times, and there have been
books written of it, diverse, in Greek and Latin, whereof some are yet extant.
But whether it were a good Spirit or an evil, some men have doubted, and it is
free for any man to think what he pleases of it. For my part I ever had a
Reverend opinion of Socrates, and do believe (if there be no impiety in it, as
I hope not) that he was, as among Heathens in some respect, a forerunner of
Christ, to dispose them the better when the time should come to embrace (and it
did it effectually) the Gospel. Many other Philosophers, that have been of
greatest fame, were certainly great Magicians, as Orpheus, Pythagoras,
Empedocles, and the like, as by those things that have been written of them by
several ancient authors may be collected. But above all I give the pre-eminence
to Apollonius Thianeus, a man of later times, and of whom we may speak with
more confidence and certainty. This was the man whom ancient Heathens very
tenacious of their former worship and superstitions, did pitch upon to oppose
unto Christ. His Life has been written by diverse, four of them were joined
together and opposed to the four Gospels: and Hierocles, a famous Philosopher
of those times, made a Collation of his Miracles with those of Christ's, who was
answered by Eusebius, yet extant. Sure it is, they prevailed so much, that he
was for a long time worshipped by many, and in sundry places as a very God;
yea, by some Roman Emperors, as we find in History. Philostratus has written
his Life in very Elegant style (as Photius judged) in 8 books, which are
extant. And though they contain many fabulous things, as any man may expect by
the undertaking, yet have they so much truth and variety of ancient learning,
that I think they deserve to be better known then commonly they are; but cannot
be understood, I am sure, as they should be, by any translation either Latin
or French that ever I saw: For the Paris Edition, though it boast of great
things (as the manner is) yet how Tittle was performed may easily appear unto
any that will take the pains to compare it with the former edition of Aldus:
Which I speak not to find fault, but because I wish that some able man would
undertake the work; there is not any book, by the Translations yet extant, that
more needs it. What use Scaliger made of him, may appear by his frequent
quotations in his Notes upon Eusebius, in the History of those times. As for
Appollonius his Miracles or wonderful Acts (which is our business here) though
many things have been added, some, probably, done by Imposture, yet I do not
see how it can be doubted but he did many strange things by the help of
Spirits, which things may be judged by due observation of circumstances; as for
example, That being convented before Domitian the Emperor in the presence of
many, he presently vanished and was seen a great way off (at Puteoli I think)
about the same time. That at the very time when Domitian was killed at Rome, he
spoke of it publicly and of the manner of it at Ephesus: and so of many
others, which seem to me (as unto most) almost unquestionable. The greatest
wonder to me is, that such was his port and outward appearance of Sanctity and
Simplicity, that even Christians have thought reverently of him, and believed
that he did his wonders by the power of God, or by secret Philosophy and
knowledge of Nature not revealed unto other men. So Justine Martyr, one of the
ancient Fathers of the Church judged of him, as is well known. Most later
Philosophers that lived about Julians time, and before that, as also the
Emperors themselves, many of them, were great Magicians and Necromancers, as
may easily appear, partly by their own writings, and partly by the History of
those times.

I do very much wonder whether any man, being a Scholar, and not strongly
prepossessed, that does not believe Spirits, etc. can say that he ever read the
books of Trials and Confessions of Witches and Wizards, such I mean, as have
been written by learned and judicious men. Such as, for example, I account
Nichol. Remigius, his Demonolatria: ex judiciis capitalibus 900 plus minus
hominum, etc. grounded especially upon the Confessions and Condemnations of no
less then 900 men and women in Lorraine within the compass of few years. That
he was a learned man, I think no body will deny that has read him; and that he
was no very credulous and superstitious man (though a Papist) that also is most
certain: and I have wondered at his liberty many times. I know not how it is now
in those places; but by what I have read and heard of the doings of Witches and
Sorcerers in Geneva and Savoy in former times (I could say somewhat of my self,
how my life was preserved there very strangely, but my witnesses are not, and I
will not bring their credit in question for such a business.) I am of opinion,
That he that should have maintained there that there was no such thing as
Witches, or Spirits, etc. would have been thought by most either mad and
brainsick (so frequent and visible were the effects to sober eyes) or a Witch
himself. For indeed it is ordinary enough, that those that are so really, are
very willing (which deceives many) to be thought Impostors, and there is good
reason for it: I should sooner suspect him an Impostor that does profess
himself (except it be by way of confession, as many have done) and is ambitious
to be counted a Witch or Sorcerer. I remember I saw a book some years ago,
entitled, De l'inconstance des mauvais Anges and Demons, printed at Paris
1612. in quarto, and another of the same Author, and size, entitled,
L'incredulite and mescreauce du sortilege, Paris 1642. Strange stories are told
there of a Province of France, about that time (or little before) marvellously
infested with Witches and Sorcerers, insomuch that people did not know one
another (in some one place) in the streets, by reason of evil Spirits appearing
publicly in the shape of men; and that the proceedings of justice (which does
not happen often) were sometimes disturbed by them. I think the Author himself
was one that was sent to the place by the King with some authority, and to make
report. But as I do not altogether trust my memory, having had but a sight of
the books (it was at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard:) So I beseech the
Reader not to rest upon this account that I give him upon my best remembrance,
but to peruse the books himself. I am confident he may receive good
satisfaction, being things that were not done in a corner, but very publicly
and well attested as I remember. However the reader must give me leave (though
it be not to this purpose, lest my silence Tom 11. p. 608. Mer. Cas. Pietas.
be drawn to the prejudice of the truth) to tell him, that I met with one great
falsehood there concerning my own father (of Bl. M.) which I have abundantly
refuted, and all others of that nature, when I was yet very young. But that (as
I conceive) which in all these stories would most puzzle a rational man, is the
signs which are set down by many how witches may be known, as Teats, swimming
upon the water, dry eyes, and the like: which things indeed have some ground of
truth, being limited to particular times and places, but are not of Voss. de
Idolol. 111. 180, 181.
general application. Mr. Vossius had therefore reason to find fault with
Springerus and Bodinus for making that a certain token of a Witch that she
cannot weep. Who also in the same place does well except against the trial of
(...) as he calls it (commonly, purgatio per aquam frigidam) condemned by many.
But he had done well to have limited his exception, and to have showed how, and
when, and how far such observations may be used. Forcertainly they are not
altogether to be neglected. But the reasons of such observations or marks that
are given by some, are so ridiculous, that they would make a sober man (that
has not patience enough to ponder all things diligently) to suspect all the
rest. So one tells us, That when the Cock croweth the solemn meetings of Witches
(which opinion perchance may prove ancient enough, as we shall show elsewhere)
are dissolved: and he thinks a reason may be because of the crowing of the Cock
in the Gospel, when St. Peter denied Christ. Another tells us, That Witches
being well beaten trunco vitis (with a Vine stick or club) Maleficia illata
solvere saevillina coguntur, have no more force to do hurt, or, that the party
bewitched recovereth. And the reason (he thinks, and yet he no ordinary man
neither) ex mysterio vini and vineae dilectae Deo, ex cujus mysterio So in my
Copy, it may be it should be, vitis and vin.
quotidie Sacramentum Sacrosancti Sanguinis Domini conficitur, etc. But I shall
have a more proper place for the full examination of these things in one of the
two Treatises before mentioned. It cannot be denied but this whole business of
Witches, what through ignorance, what through malice, is very liable to many
mistakes and diverse impostures. And it were to be wished that in all such
Trials some prudent Divines, and learned experienced Physicians might be
joined. But hence to conclude with Wierius (who nevertheless does acknowledge
Spirits, and the Illusions and Apparitions of Devils, and their mischievous
opperations as much as any, and tells as strange things of them) and some
others, that therefore there are no Witches and Sorcerers, is as if a man
should deny the power of herbs because a thousand things have been written of
them of old, and are yet daily falsely and superstitiously. And indeed it so
fell out once in Rome, as by Pliny is recorded at large, Where when some
ascribed such power unto Herbs, as though Sun and Moon had been subject unto
them, the dead might be raised, armies vanquished, and what not! which was not
very well relished by many: at last came Asclepiades, who persuaded men that
were very well disposed to be persuaded, that all Physical use of Herbs and
Simples was a mere cheat, and that men were better want them, there being other
means easier and less troublesome to restore health and overcome diseases,
which he professed to teach: and prevailed so far for a while, that they were
laid aside, and a new course of Physic introduced. Which for a while, as I
said, (so prone are men commonly to entertain new divices) gave good content
generally. It is well observed by Aristotle (and I think a great part of humane
wisdom depends on it) that in all things of the world that are commendable,
as there is somewhat which is true and real, so somewhat also which is
counterfeit and false. There is beauty Natural, says he, and there is
Artificial beauty by painting and trimming. A true, sound, healthy complexion,
and that which makes a good show, but is not sound. True, real gold and silver,
but diverse things also that may be taken for gold and silver at a distance, or
by them that judge at the outward appearance. So, true, sound Ratiocination,
and that which seems so to the unlearned, or to corrupt judgments, though it be
very false. They that consider well of this, may the sooner come to the
knowledge of truth in all things.

Well: we go on.

There was in Aix (Aquae Sextiae anciently, now Aquensis Civitas) in Provence
(a County of France so called) in the year of the Lord 1611. a Romish Priest
tried, convicted, and by Sentence of the Court or Parliament condemned to be
burned alive for abominable practices, and horrid things by him upon diverse
(some persons of quality) committed with and by the Devil. He had long desired
it and sought it; at last the devil appeared to him in the habit of a
Gentleman. The story is in diverse books, French and Latin, and translated (at
that time I believe) in diverse languages. I would go forty miles with all my
heart to meet with that man that could tell me any thing whereby I might but
probably be induced to believe, or at least to suspect, that there might be
some mistake in the particulars of his Sentence. For my reason, I must
confess, was never more posed in any thing that ever I read of that nature.
Gassendus indeed in Pereskius his life, has somewhat (as I remember) of
Pereskius his Opinion, as if he thought some of those things he confessed might
be ascribed unto imagination; but I see no reason given: neither are the things
of that nature, that can admit any such suspicion. Besides, Tristan, of the
Lives of the Emperors and their Coins, will tell you somewhat which may make a
doubt, whether Gassendus ought to be believed in all things that he reports
concerning that famous man. I am not very much satisfied of what Religion
(though truly a very learned man) Gassendus was. And by the way (which is
somewhat to the case of Witches in general) if I be not mistaken (for I have it
not at this time) there is a relation in that very book of somewhat that happened
to Pereskius by Witches when he was a child. That wicked Sorcerer which was
burned at Aix, foretold before his death that some misfortune would be done at
the time and place of his execution, which happened accordingly, and very
strangely too. Somewhat again, I must confess, I have seen printed ( Mimica
Diaboli, etc.) to take away the scandal of some part of his confession, or the
Devils saying of Mass, etc. some part of which things might perchance with
some color be ascribed to imagination: but that is not it that troubles me.
But enough of him

What man is he, that pretends to learning, that has not heard, and does not
honor the memory of Joachimus Camerarius, that great light of Germany? so wise
(and for his wisdom, and other excellent parts, sought unto by many Princes) so
moderate a man (an excellent temper for the attaining of Truth) and so versed
in all kind of learning, that we shall scarce among all the learned of these
later Times find another so generally accomplished. The strangest relations
that ever I read, or at least as strange as any I have read of Witches, and
Sorcerers, and Spirits, I have read in him: such as either upon his own
knowledge he does relate, or such as he believed true upon the testimony of
others known unto him. The last work that he ever went about for the public
was, De generibus Divinationum, but he did not live (the more the pity) to make
an end of it. But so much as he had done was set out by one of his learned
sons, Lipsiae, (...) Dom. 1576. There p 33- he has these words, De Spirituum
vero, quae sunt Graecis (...) admirabili non solum efficacitate, sed manifesta
Specie, quae (...) perbibentur, praesentia; incredibiles extant passim (...)
narrationes, and nostris tempombus super antia fidem comperta sunt, extra etiam
(...) de quibus postea aicetur. So p. 89. and p. 151. again and more fully. But
his strangest relations are in his Proaemium to Plutarchs two Treatises, De
Defectu Oraculorum, and De. Figura E I Consecrata Delphis, set out by him with
Notes. Here I could come in with a whole cloud of witnesses, name hundreds of
men of all Nations and professions that have lived within this last hundred
years, and not any among them but such as have had, and have yet generally the
reputation of Honest, Sober, Learned and Judicious, who all have been of this
opinion that we maintain. But because we have to do with them especially who by
their Profession pretend to the Knowledge of Nature above other men, I will
confine my self for further testimony to them that have been of that
Profession. I have been somewhat curious for one of my Calling, that had no
other end but to attain to some Knowledge of Nature, without which a man may
quickly be lead into manifold delusions and Impostures. I have read some,
looked into many I do not remember I have met with any professed Physician or
Naturalist (some one or two excepted, which have been or shall be named) who
made any question of these things. Sure I am, I have met with diverse strange
relations in sundry of them, of things that themselves were present at, and saw
with their own eyes, where they could have no end, that any man can probably
suspect, but to acknowledge the truth, though with some disparagement to
themselves (according to the judgment of many) in the free confession of their
own ignorance and disability to give reasons, and to penetrate into causes.
Well: what then shall we say to such as Jul. Caesar, Scaliger, Fernelius,
Sennertus, the wonders and Oracles of their times? As Physicians so
Philosophers, men of that profound wisdom and experience (much improved in some
of them by long life) as their writings show them to have been to this day.
What shall we make of them? or what do they make of themselves, that will
censure such men as either cheaters or ignorant idiots? Henericus Saxonia, a
Learned Professor and Practiser of Physic in Padua, in that Book he has
written of that horrible Polonian Disease, which he calls Pticam, which turns
men's hairs (in sight) to Snakes and Serpents; in that book he does ascribe so
much to the power of Witches and Sorcerers in causing Diseases, not private
only but even public, as Pestilences and the like, as himself confesses he
could never have believed, until he was convicted by manifest experience; and
indeed is wonderful, and may well be thought incredible unto most, yet is
maintained and asserted by Sennertus (...) and in his sixth book (as I
remember, De (...) a fascino, incantatione, and veneficiis inductis. I will
forbear the names of many men of fame and credit, Physicians too, because most
of them are named (and commonly enough known) by Sennertus upon this occasion.
There is one, whom I think inferior to none, though perchance not so commonly
known or read, and that is, Georgius Raqusaius a Venetian, who by his first
education and profession was an Astrologer, cast many Nativities, and took upon
him to Prognosticate; but afterward conscious to himself of the vanity of the
Art (that is, when the Devil does not intermeddle, as always must be
understood: for some Astrologers have been Magicians withal, and have done
strange things) gave it over, and has written against it very Learnedly and
Solidly. Read him, if you please, in his Chapters De Magis, De Oraculis; yea,
through his whole Book De Divinatione, and you may be satisfied what he thought
of these things: he also was a Physician. But I must not omit the Learned
Author that set out Musoeum Veronense, a great Naturalist and a Physician too;
he handles it at the end of that work somewhat roundly and to the quick, I must
confess, but very (...) and Solidly, in my judgment, against those pretended
Peripateticians, that would be thought to defend the opinion of Aristotle
herein. I could say somewhat of ancienter Physicianstoo, and give some account
of those many Spells and Charms that are in Trallienus, in all his books; an
ancicnt Physician, in high esteem with some eminent Physicians of these late
times, as they themselves have told me; though not for his Charms, but for his
other learning and excellent experience, which they had found good use of But
this I reserve for another place and work. And this mention of that eminent
Physician who commended Trallienus unto me, puts me in mind of what he imparted
himself, not long before his death, of his own knowledge and experience; and
particularly of the (...) he gave me of the examination of a Conjurer in
Salisbury, at which, he said, none were present but King James, (of most
Blessed Memory) the Duke of Buckingham, and himself: It is likely some others
may have heard the same, and I had rather any body should tell it then I, who
was then a patient under him, and (...) not, were I put to it, trust to my
memory for every circumstance

Hitherto I have gone by Authorities rather then Arguments, partly because I
thought that the (...) and the clearest way for every bodies capacity, and
partly, because such Arguments (if any besides these we have here) as have been
used against this opinion, may be found fully answered in those I have cited.
The truth is, it is a Subject of that nature as does not admit of many
Arguments, such especially as may pretend to subtilty of Reason, Sight, Sense,
and Experience (upon which most Humane Knowledge is grounded) generally
approved and certain, is our best Argument. But before I give over, I will use
one Argument which perchance may prove of some force and validity, and that is,
A consideration of the strange shifts and evasions and notorious absurdities
that these men are put to, who not being able to deny the (...) or matter of
Fact, would seem to say somewhat rather then to acknowledge Spirits, and Devils,
and Witchcraft. Pomponatius, who has not heard of? I once had the book, I know
not now what is become of it. But I remember well, I never was more weary of
reading then when I read him; nothing that ever I read or heard of Legends and
old woman's tales did seem to me more groundless and incredible. But because
those men bear themselves very much upon the power of imagination (which indeed
is very great, and does produce strange effects) I shall commend to the sober
Reader that has not yet met with him, Tho. Eienus his Learned Tractat, De
Viribus Imaginationis, a very Rational and Philosophical discourse. Of their
miserable shifts and evasions in general, the Author or Observator rather of
Musaeum Veronense, before quoted, will give you a good account. I have at this
present in my hands the writings of a Physician, Augerius Ferrerius by name.
What he was for a Physician I know not; all (I doubt) of that profession will
not allow very well of his Preface to his Castigationes Practicae Medicinae,
whatever they think of the Castigationes themselves. But in general, his Style,
and various reading, and knowledge of good Authors, speak him a Learned man
sufficiently. Thuanus in his History gives him a most ample Elogium, and makes
him to have been Jul. C. Scaliger his intimate acquaintance and much respected
by him. But I doubt whether Thuanus had ever seen this book of his: it does not
appear by that Elogium that he had. Well, this Learned man in his Chapter De
Homerica (so he calls it) Medicatione, where he treats of cures done by Charms
and Spells, by Words and Characters, which others impute commonly to Witchcraft:
first, for the (...) he does not deny it: ( Nam iis quae senfibus exposita sunt
contravenire, sani (...) non est.) He thinks them little better then mad men
that will deny that which is approved by so visible experience. Yet it seems he
was one of them that did not believe, or would not believe (though he does not
say so positively) Spirits and Witches, and Supernatural Operations. What then?
he plainly maintains and argues it (though he quote no Gospel for it) that
such is the nature of the Soul of man (if he know how to use it) that by a
strong faith and confidence it may work any miracle without a miracle: Verum
confidentia illa, ac firma persuasio (that you may have some of his words if
you have not the book) comparatur indoctis animis per opinionem quam de
Caracteribus and sacris verbis conceperunt. Doctis and rerum intelligentiam
habentibus, nihil opus est externi, sed cognita vi animi, per eam miracula
edere possunt. etc. And again alittle after, Doctus vero and sibi constans solo
verbo sanabit. I do not hence conclude that this Ferrerius, though he speak as
though he were, and names no body else, that he was the first or only that has
been of this opinion. Avicenne the Arab was the first, as I take it, that set
it on foot: some others have followed him in it. But since these men acknowledge
the strange effects that others deny, let the sober Reader judge whether of the
two more likely to grant Spirits and Devils, or to make the Soul of man (of
every man, naturally) either a God or a Devil. But let men take heed how they
attempt to do Miracles by their strong faith and confidence, for that is the
ready way to bring the Devil unto them, and that is it which has made many
Witches and Sorcerers. As for that Faith whereby men did work Miracles in the
Primitive times, spoken of in the Gospel, commonly called, The Faith of
Miracles, that is quite another thing, which I shall not need to speak of in
this place. Of a strong confidence in God, even in them that are not otherwise
very godly, whether it may not, according to Gods first order and appointment,
produce sometimes some strange effects; we have had a consideration elsewhere,
where we treat of Precatorie Enthusiasm. But this also is quite another thing,
as may appear by what we have written of it.

But to conclude this part; upon due consideration of the premises, and what
else I have in readiness upon the same Subject (if God give me life and
health) I cannot satisfy my self how any Learned man, sober and rational, can
entertain such an opinion (simply and seriously) That there be no Devils nor
Spirits, etc. But upon this account which I give my self (leaving all men to
their own judgments herein) that if there be any such truly and really, it must
needs be because being at first prepossessed upon some plausible ground, and
being afterward taken up with other thoughts and employments, they are more
willing to stick to their former opinion without further trouble, then to take
the pains to seek further. (...) as Thucydides does very well observe. And when
we say, A Learned man, there is much ambiguity in that word. For a man may be
(not to speak of the ignorance of the common people, in those climates
especially, who think all Learning concluded in preaching; and now in these
times too, them best Preachers that in very deed have least Learning, but
preach by Instinct and Inspiration, as they call it) but a man, I say, may be a
Learned Man, a very Learned man in some one kind or profession, even to
Excellency and Admiration, who nevertheless is and may be found ignorant
enough in other kinds: but a general Learned man is a thing of a vast extent,
and not often seen. It is a business of an infinite labor, besides that it
requires Natural parts answerable; without which (judgment specially) the more
pains sometimes the more ignorance. I aim not by this at any particular man or
men ( Deum testor) I would much rather submit to the censure of others my self,
then take upon me to censure any; but the observation is of very good use, I
know it, and may give much satisfaction in many cases, and have given an
instance of it in Tertullian, and some others elsewhere.

I have done for this time; I come now to the Objections, wherein I shall not
need to be very long, because they run much upon one thing, Imposture, which
has already been spoken of and answered. But yet somewhat more particularly
shall be answered.

First, Of Miracles. It cannot be denied but the world is full of horrible
Impostures in that particular: Yet I believe, that some supernatural things, as
cures, etc. do happen in every age, for which no reason can be given, which
also for the strangeness may be called Miracles. But if we limit (with most)
the word to those things that proceed immediately from God or divine power: I
shall not be very ready to yield that many such Miracles are seen in these
Days. But I will not further argue the Case in this place. Well, let us take
Miracles in the ordinary Sense: I verily believe that many such things do
happen in many places; but that through negligence partly, and partly through
incredulity, they are not regarded oftentimes, or soon forgotten. And wiser
men, sometimes, though they know or believe such things, yet are not they very
forward to tell them, lest they bring themselves into contempt with those
supposed wise men, who will sooner laugh at any thing they do not understand,
then take the pains to rectify their ignorance or inform their judgments. I
hope I shall do no wrong to the Memory of that Venerable, Incomparable Prelate,
BISHOP ANDREWS, for Sound Learning and True Piety whilst he lived, one of the
greatest Lights of this Land; if I set down two Stories, which we may call
Miracles, both which he did believe to be true, but for one of them, it seems,
he did undertake upon his own knowledge: The one, concerning a noted, or at
least by many suspected Witch or Sorceress, which the Devil, in a strange
shape, did wait upon (or for rather) at her death. The other, concerning a man,
who after his death was restored to life to make Confession of a horrible
Murder committed upon his own Wife, for which he had never been suspected; both
these, as he related them to my F. (in familiar conversation) and my F. did
enter them for a remembrance into some of his Adversaria. In the substance I
believe there could be no mistake, but if there be any mistake in any
Circumstances, as of Names, or otherwise, that must be imputed to my F. who was
a stranger, not to the tongue only, but to all businesses (more then what might
be known by printed books, and such public ways) of England.

The First, thus: L. vetula Londinensis, cui morienti Diabolus affuit.

Mira Historia quam narrabat ut sibi compertissimam Dom. Episcopus. Fuit
quaedam L. mulier ditissima, et curiosis artibus adaictissima: vicina aedibus
Fulconis, qui fuit pater Domini Fulconis, tota Anglia celeberrimi; atque adeo
lectissimae matronae, matri ejusdem Fulconis, familiarissima. Haec per omnem
vitam sortilegiis dedita, and eo nomine infamium muliercularum amica et
patrona: Cui morienti cum adstarent qua viri, qua faeminae gravissimi;
animadversum est sub horam mortis, adstitisse ad pedes lecti hominem vultu
terribilem, vulpinis pellibus amictum, quem ipsa contentis oculis intuebatur;
ille, ipsam. Quaesitum est a janitore, quare illum admisisset ille negarae se
vel vidisse. Tandem secedunt ad fenestram duo vel tres, consilium capturi quid
illo facerent. Erat quidam Senator ingentis nominis..... qui bis Praetor
Londinensis fuit: item Pater Fulconis, et alii. Placet illis ipsum compellare
et rogare quis esset. Hoc animo repetunt priora loca sua ad lectum. Interim L.
vocem magnam edit, quasi animam ageret; omnes illam cutare, spectare,
sublevare; mox redit ad se illi ignotum illum requirunt oculis. Nusquam
apparet. An(...)orae spatium moritur aegra.



The other thus, Kalend. August. Narrabat hodie mihi rem miram, Reverendiss.
Praesul, Domin. Episcop. Eliensis: quam ille acceptam auribus suis a test
oculato and auctore, credebat esse verissimam. Est vicus in Urbe Londino, qui
dicitur, Vicus Longobardorum. In eo vico Paraecia est, and aedes paraecialis,
in qua fuit Presbyter, homo summae fidei, et notae Pietatis,..... An. 1563. quo
anno, si unquam alias, pestis grassata est per hanc Urbem Londinum. Narravit
igitur hic Parrochus et passim aliis, et ipsi quoque Dom. Episcopo sibi hoc
accidisse. Erat illi amicus in sua Paraecia insignis; vir, ut omnes
existimabant, probus et pius. Hic peste correptus advocavit Presbyterum illum
suum amicum, qui et aegrotanti affuit, et vidit morientem nec deseruit nisi
mortuum; ita Demum repetiit domum suam. Post horas satis multas a morte hujus,
cum ipse pro mortuo esset relictus in cubiculo; uxor illius idem cubiculum est
ingressa, ut ex arca promeret Lodicem, sine linteamen ad ipsum (...) ut est
moris. Ingressa audit hanc vocem, operi intenta. Quis hic est? terreri illa, et
velle egredi, sed auditur iterum vox illa: Quis hic est? Ac tandem comperto
esse mariti vocem, accedit ad illum: Quid, ait, marite; tu igitur mortuus non
es? et nos te pro mortuo compositum deserveramus. Ego vero, respondit ille,
vere mortuus fuit sed ita Deo visum, ut anima mea rediret ad corpus. Sed tu
uxor, ait, Si quid habes cibi parati, da mihi esurio enim. Dixit illa
veruecinam habere se, pullum gallinaceum, et nescio quid aliud: sed omnia
incocta, quae brevi esset paratura. Ego, ait ille, Moram non fero; panem habes,
ait, et caseum? quum annuisset, atque petiisset afferri, comedit spectante
uxore: deinde advocato Presbytero, et jussis exire e cubiculo omnibus qui
aderant; narrat illi hoc: Ego, ait, vere mortuus fui; sed jussa est anima
redire ad suum corpus, ut scelus apperiram ore meo, manibus meis admissum, de
quo nulla unquam cuiquam nota est suspicio. Priorem namque uxorem meam ipse
occidi manibus meis, tanta vafritie, ut omnes res lateret: deinde modum
perpetrati sceleris exposuit; nec ita multo post expiravit, ac vere tum mortuus
est.



There is no necessity that any body should make of either of these relations
an Article of his Faith; yet I thought them very probable, because believed by
such a man, and therefore have given them a place here. So much of Miracles.

Of Exorcismes we must say as of Miracles. One notable example of a counterfeit
Possession, and of great stirs likely to have insued upon it in France, we have
out of Ihuanus, in our late Treatise of Enthusiasme. The History of the Boy of
Bilson is extant, who by the Wisdom and Sagacity of the R R F. in God Thomas,
Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, was discovered to be an Impostor on
purpose set up and suborned to promote the Romish cause, An. Dom. 1620. Such
examples and stories most Countries have afforded good store, which are extant
in diverse Languages. Neither must it be concealed (by them that seek truth
without partiality) that some, once called Disciplinarians, now more known by
another name, have attempted to deal in those things, hoping thereby to gain
great advantage to their cause. It was a famous Story in Q. Elizabeth's Reign,
though now perchance out of the knowledge of many, and beyond the remembrance of
any living, how one Mr. D. a very zealous man of that Sect, did take upon him
by long prayers to cast out Devils, so maintained and asserted with great
vehemence by him and some others that (...)oured that cause, though upon legal
examination they proved otherwise, which occasioned many books on both sides in
those days, but two, melioris notae, as we say, written by Dr. H. concerning
Exorcismes; the one against Papists, the other against P. I have them both
somewhere yet, I hope, but can not come at them at this time, which is the
cause that I cannot particularize that business with circumstances of times,
and names or persons as I would. But there were many other books written (some
very big, which I have seen) about it, as I said before; so that the whole
business, with very little inquisition, if any have a mind, may quickly be
found out. One Bookseller in Little Britain did help me to the sight of six or
seven at once; yet one of the books then written, and as I was told, upon this
occasion much commended unto me by some very Learned, to wit, Dr. Jordan, of
the Suffocation of the Matrix, I long sought before I could meet with it. And
such was the ignorance of some Booksellers, that I could not persuade them
there was any such book extant: but now at last I have got it. All the use I
shall make of it at this time is, that whereas the whole dirft of the book
tends unto this, to show the error of many in ascribing natural diseases to
supernatural causes, which might be thought by some to favor their opinion
that believe not Witches, etc. The Author does very prudently and piously make
this profession in the Preface, I do not deny but that God does in these days
work extraordinarily for the deliverance of his children, and for other ends
best known to himself; and that among other there may be both possessions by
the Devil, and obsessions, and Witchcraft, etc. and dispossession also through
the Prayers and Supplications of his servants, which is the only means left
unto us for our relief in that case, but such examples being very rare now
adays, etc. Yet for all this I do not conclude that Mr. D. was guilty of any
Imposture: he might do it through ignorance being cozened by others. I have
heard he was an honest man, and dyed piously, and disclaimed to the very last
that he did any thing in that business otherwise then Bona Fide. I would judge
charitably, even of those men that are not guilty of much charity toward
others, whose judgments and consciences will not suffer them (though men of
approved worth and piety otherwise) to say as they say, and to do as they do in
all things. Be it granted therefore, that this business of Exorcismes is
liable to much Imposture: however, no man that hatho read the relations of men
and women possessed, in several places, with due observation of circumstances,
some of which relations, besides other persons of credit, have been attested;
yea, some penned and published by learned Physicians and Naturalists, who have
been employed about the Cure, observed their carriage, heard some of them speak
strange Languages: silly women possessed, discourse of highest points of
Philosophy, or the Mathematics and the like. No man, I say, that is not a
stranger to these things (besides what some Travelers, no way interessed in
the cause, can aver upon their own knowledge) will make any question either of
the real possession of diverse, according to relations that have been made, or
of the Devils speaking in them and by them when they have been Exorcised; and
sometimes upon bare conference. And though some Protestants are of opinion,
That it is not lawful or warrantable for any man to take upon him to Exorcise
upon such occasions, that is, (as I conceive) by way of absolute power and
authority, and by superstitious ways and means, as is ordinarily done: Yet
where a man has a Calling, as if he be lawfully Called to the Ministry, and
set over such a Parish where any happen to be possessed (as indeed my self have
a Parish, that is, right to a Parish as good B. ^
as the Laws of the Land can give me, which has been grievously haunted,
though not altogether in the same kind, this many years, to the undoing of many
there; but I must not come near it, nor have the benefit of the Law to recover
my right, though never told why) and he find himself zealously moved, yet
without presumption, I would not despair, but his prayers, with other
performances of devotion, and the assistance of some others of the same
calling, might prove available before God: but still presupposed, as most
expedient and necessary, that the opinion and resolution of some Learned and
conscionable Physician, one or more, be had in the case; and their presence
also in all actions, if it may be had, obtained. Some, it may be, will thank
me, and I hope it will offend none, it I impart unto them what I have found in
my F. his Ephemeris (or, Daily account of his life) tending to this purpose.

Anno Dom. 603. Kal Junii. Quem memsem, et reliquos omnes velis o Deus, etc.
(...) q. hetum egimus, cum matre, uxore, affine, et viro nobili, Dom. de Couns.
et nobili item matrona, D de St. Pons: qui omnes in re pietatis (...) Ecclesiam
hujus loci assidue celebravimus. Inter alios Sermones quos habui cum D. de St.
Pons, de ministro provinciae Vivaretii sumus locuti, cui nomen Mercero. Regit
ille in eo tractu plutes parvas Ecclesias; habitat a. in loco, qui dicitur,
Chasteau-double. Acceperam de eo ex valgi rumoribus, quod vim Daemonas
ejiciendi haberet: quaefivi, (...) de D. de St Pons quid rei esset. Illa serio
affirmavit, plures Daemoniacos (december aut circiter) in Ecclesiam auductos, eo
concionante primum, dein orante, (...), et Confesstone omnium fuisse sanatos.
Quosdam Demonas it a eum certis signis (...), ut res apud omnes fieret
testatissima. Porro autem omnes qui sanati sunt, (...) Catholicam Romanam ante
semper professos. Mercerum vero impatientissum far, si qnis inter loquendum,
ut fit, diceret, Mercerum Diabolos ejicere, non (...) se, (...) Ecclesiam Dei
esse nominandam, cujus precibus ardentissimis Dei aures (...). Dom et illi et
universo gregi suorum benedicat. Amen.

In English (for their sakes that understand no Latin, and that it be not
required always, for it would be very tedious) this is the effect, At such a
time, in such a place, he had the opportunity to meet with a grave (whether
Lady or Gentlewoman) Matron, one he had a very good opinion of; her name M. de
St. Pons, and having often heard by common report of a certain Protestant
Minister that was said to cast out Devils, he did accurately inform himself by
her (she living, it seems, very near, if not in the same parish) of all
particulars concerning that business; who did aver it to be most true, and
that ten, or thereabonts, Demomoniacks, or possessed men (all making profession
of the Roman Catholic Religion) had been brought to the Church (at several
times, as I take it) and that publicly, and by the general confession of all
then present, and by some notable signs (sometimes) at the going out of the
Devils; they were, upon his Praying after Sermon, all delivered. But that he
took it very hainously if any said, that he had cast out Devils; For, not I,
said he, but the earnest Prayers of the Church, have prevailed with Almighty
God to work this wonderful thing.

As for Oracles: It is true, Heathens themselves acknowledge, that some were the
jugglings of men. Sometimes Princes; sometimes private men: (as now of
Religion, of Preaching, and Praying, and Fasting; of Masses and Processions:
most Princes and States in all places) made good use of them to their own
ends; and made them speak what themselves had prompted. But a man might as
probably argue; because some have been so freely acknowledged to have been by
compact and subornation, it is the more likely, that those of which never any
suspicion was, should be true. We read of many in Herodotus: of one, which was
contrived by fraud; but there we read also, that when it came to be known
(though care had been taken that it might not:) the chief Contriver, a great
man, was banished, or prevented worse, by a voluntary Exile; and the Sacred
Virgin or Prophetess, deposed. But not to insist upon particulars, which would
be long, it is most certain, and it will clearly appear unto them that are well
read in anciedest Authors and Histories, That all Heathens, generally the
wisest and learnedest of them, those especially, that lived when Oracles were
most frequent, did really believe them to be, which they pretended unto: and
that they were so indeed, for the most part (taking it for granted that their
Gods were Devils or Evil Spirits) by many circumstances of Stories, and by
other good proofs, may be made as evident: neither was it ever doubted or
denied (always granted and presupposed, that, as in all worldly things, much
imposture did in tervene and intermingle) by ancient Christians acknowledged, I
am sure, by most, if not all. But I have spoken of them elsewhere already, and
therefore will be the shorter here.

Our last Objection was: If there be Devils and Spirits, Why do they not appear
unto them, who do what they can, as by continual curses, so by profane
curiosity to invite them? First, We say, (...) When we have good ground for the
(...) to stick at the (...) because we do not understand the reason, is as much
as to say, that we think we should be as wise as God. Aristotle did not meddle
with things that he could give no reason of; yet he did not deny them (as we
have showed) and it is one thing to require a reason of things merely natural;
and another of those that happen by a mere secret Providence. But this will
give them no great satisfaction who perchance believe a God (some) as much as
they believe a Devil. Secondly, Therefore we say, There may be some natural
reason too, upon Aristotle's grounds. Aristotle (as has been showed elsewhere)
compares the effects of Melancholy, from whence he deriveth all kind of
Enthusiasm, to the known effects of Wine. What is the reason, that some men
with little wine will quickly be drunk, and become other Creatures, being
deprived for the time of the use of reason? Others though they drink never so
much, will sooner burst then reel, or speak idly. as some in their excess grow
merry, others sad: some calm and better natured; others furious: some
talkative, others stupid. The Devil knows what tempers are best for his turn;
and by some in whom he was deceived, he has got no credit, and wished he had
never meddled with them. Some men come into the world with Cabalistical Brains;
their heads are full of mysteries; they see nothing, they read nothing, but
their brain is on work to pick somewhat out of it that is not ordinary; and out
of the very ABC that children are taught, rather then fail, they will fetch all
the Secrets of Gods Wisdom; tell you how the world was created, how governed,
and what will be the end of all things. Reason and Sense that other men go by,
they think the acorns that the old world fed upon; fools and children may be
content with them but they see into things by another Light. They commonly give
good respect unto the Scriptures (till they come to professed Anabaptists)
because they believe them the Word of God and not of men; but they reserve unto
themselves the Interpretation, and so under the title of Divine Scripture,
worship what their own fancy prompts, or the devil puts into their heads. But
of all Scriptures the Revelation and the obscure Prophesies are their delight;
for there they rove securely; and there is not any thing so prodigious or
chimerical, but they can fetch it out of some Prophecy, as they will interpret
it. These men, if they be upright in their lives and dealings, and fear God
truly, it is to be hoped that God will preserve them from further evil; but
they are of a dangerous temper; Charitable men will pity them, and sober men
will avoid them. On the other side, some there are whose brains are of a stiff
and restive mould; it will not easily receive new impressions. They will hardly
believe any thing but what they see; and yet rather not believe their eyes;
then to believe any thing that is not according to the course of nature, and
what they have been used unto. The devil may tempt such by sensual baits, and
catch them; but he will not easily attempt to delude them by magical Shows and
Apparitions. And what sober man, that believes as a God, so a devil, does
doubt, but they that make it their daily practice to damn themselves, by such
horrid oaths and curses, are as really possessed, yea far more in the possession
of the devil, then many that foam at the mouth, and speak strange languages?

But 3dly Some have tried and used the means, but could never see any thing but
what if others that never desired it really, but in some wanton curiosity,
unadvisedly, that they might be the better able to confute the simplicity of
some others as they thought, rather then that their faith wanted any such
confirmation, have tried some things, or have been present at some experiments
and have seen (with no small astonishment) more then they expected or desired?
Some persons of credit and quality, I am sure, have made it their confession
unto me, that it has so happened unto them; who have been so affected with it,
that they would not for a world be so surprised again.

But 4ly and lastly, The Confessions of some Magicians are extant in print, who
tell very particularly what means they used, what books they read, etc. and
they saw and found (if we believe them; and what should tempt them to lie, no
melancholy men, I know not) till they were weary, and Gods grace wrought upon
their hearts to bring them to repentance. There be such confessions extant, but
the Reader shall pardon me, if I give him no further account. It would much
better become them therefore, that have made such essays without success, to
repent, and to be thankful unto God, then to make that an argument, that there is
no devil, and perchance no God. There is a terrible saying (if well understood)
in the Scripture; (...) He that is filthy let him be filthy still Let them take
heed (I advise them as a friend) if they persist in their hardness of heart and
infidelity, lest God in just judgment, though they seek still, and provoke as
much as they can, will not fuffer that they shall see anything, lest they
should fear and be converted.

I Come now to Dr. DEE, and to This Book of his, which has been the occasion
of all the Discourse hitherto. As for his Person or Parentage, Education and
the like, I have but little to say more then what he says himself in his first
Letter to the Emperor (RODOLPHE) of Germany, that being yet very young he was
sought unto ( ambiverunt me) by two Emperors, CHARLES the 5th and FERDINANDO his
Brother and Successor in the Empire. Mr. Cambden indeed in the year 1572 makes
honorable mention of him, and calls him, Nobilis Mathematicus. He dedicated
his Monas Hieroglyphica to MAXIMILIAN Successor to FERDINANDO, first printed at
Antwerp, An. Dom. 1564. and afterward at Francford, 1591. and what other
places I know not. In the year 1595. he did write (and was printed 1599 I am
sure, but whether before that or no, I cannot certainly tell) A discourse
Apologetical, etc. directed to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein he
has a Catalogue of books written by himself, printed and unprinted, to the
number of 48. in all, and does also mention the books of his Library about 4000
volums in all, whereof 700 ancient Manuscripts, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. There
also does he produce a Testimony of the University of Cambridg, dated 1548. But
this whole Discourse of his being but short, for the better satisfaction of the
Reader, I thought good to have it here reprinted the next after this Preface.
His Mathematical Preface before Euclid, is that I think which of all his
writings published has been most taken notice of in England, and added much to
the worth and commendation of that Edition of Euclid. He was a married man and
diverse children, as will appear by this Relation; a great Traveller, and lived
to a great age. But as I said before, I do not pretend to give an account of
his life in general, unto others, which my self am yet a stranger to. What
concerns this Relation I am to give an account, and I hope there shall be
nothing wanting to that. Four things I propose to my self to that end,

First, Somewhat to confirm the truth and sincerity of this whole Relation.

Secondly, To answer some Objections that may be made against some parts of it.

Thirdly, To give some light to some places, and to satisfy the Reader
concerning the perfection and imperfection of the book, as also, concerning the
Original Copy.

Fourthly, and lastly, To show the many good uses that may be made of all by a
sober Christian.

1. It seems that Dr. Dee began to have the reputation of a Conjurer betimes.
He does very grievously complain of it in that Preface to Euclid but now spoken
of, about the end of it, and yet there does also term himself, An old forworn
Mathematician. For my part whether he could ever truly be so called, I yet make
some question: But I am very confident, that himself did not know or think
himself so, but a zealous worshipper of God, and a very free and sincere
Christian. How this is to be reconciled with the truth of this Relation, shall
be afterward considered of. For the truth and sincerity of the Relation, I
hope no body will so grossly mistake us as though we intended thereby to
justify what is here printed against any suspicion of forgery; as if any man
taking the advantage of Dr. Dees name and fame of a Conjurer, could be
suspected to have devised and invented these things in his own brain to abuse
the world. I should be sorry my name should appear in any kind to any book
liable to such a suspicion; and the very name and credit of that so much and so
deservedly prized Library from whence this is pretended to be taken, is
sufficient (with civil understanding men) to prevent the grossness of such a
mistake. Besides the Original Copy it self, all written with Dr. Dees own hand,
there kept and preserved. But by Truth and Sincerity, intending not only Dr.
Dee's fidelity in relating what himself believed, but also the reality of those
things that he speaks of, according to his relation: his only (but great and
dreadful) error being, that he mistook false lying Spirits for Angels of Light,
the Devil of Hell (as we commonly term him) for the God of Heaven. For the
Truth then, and Sincerity or Reality of the Relation in this sense, I shall
first appeal to the Book it self. I know it is the fashion of many (I will not
say that (I never did it my self) that are buyers of books, they will turn five
or six leaves, if they happen upon somewhat that pleases their fancy, the book
is a good book, and when they have bought it, it concerns them to think so,
because they have paid for it: but on the other side, if they light upon
somewhat that does not please (which may happen in the best) they are as ready
to condemn and cast away. It is very possible that some such buyer lighting
upon this, and in it, upon some places here and there, where some odd uncouth
things may offer themselves; things ridiculous, incredible to ordinary sense
and construction, he may be ready to judge of the whole accordingly. But for
all this, I will in the first place appeal to the book it self; but with this
respect to the Reader, that he will have patience to read in order one fourth
part of the book at least before he judge; and if by that time he be not
convicted, he shall have my good will to give it over. Not but that all the
rest, even to the end, does help very well to confirm the truth and reality of
the whole Story: but because I think there is so much in any fourth part, if
diligently read, and with due consideration, that I despair of his assent, that
is not convicted by it. For my part, when the book was first communicated unto
Sir Thomas cotton Knight (...).
me by that Right worthy Gentleman who is very studious to purchase and procure
such Records and Monuments as may advantage the truth of God (all truth is of
God) and the honor of this Land, following therein the example of his noble
Progenitor, by his very name, Sir Robert Cotton, known to all the Learned as
far as Europe extends. I read it cursorily because I was quickly convinced in
my self that it could be no counterfeit immaginarie business, and was very
desirous to see the end, so far as the book did go. Afterward, when I
understood that the said worthy Gentleman (especially, as I suppose, relying
upon my Lord of Armagh's judgment and testimony, which we have before spoken
of) was willing it should be published, and that he had committed the whole
business unto me; I read it over very exactly, and took notes of the most
remarkable passages (as they appeared unto me) truly I was so much confirmed in
this first opinion by my second reading, that I shall not be afraid to profess
that I never gave more credit to any Humane History of former times. All things
seemed unto me so simply, and yet so accurately, and with so much confirmation
of all manner of circumstances written and delivered, that I cannot yet
satisfy my self, but all judicious Readers will be of my opinion. But
nevertheless, to help them that trust not much to their own judgments, let us
see what can be said.

First, I would have them, that would be further satisfied, to read Dr. Dee in
that forecited Preface, where he does plead his own cause, to acquit himself of
that grievous crime and imputation of a Conjurer. But that was written, I must
confess, long before his Communication with Spirits: yet it is somewhat to know
what opinion he had then of them that deal with Devils and evil Spirits. But
after he was made acquainted, and in great dealings with them, and had in
readiness diverse of these his books, or others of the same Argument, containing
their several conferences and communications, to show, and the manner of their
appearing exactly set down; observe, I pray, with what confidence he did
address himself to the greatest and wisest in Europe. To Queen Elizabeth often,
and to her Council, as by many places of this Relation does appear; but more
particularly by his Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary, etc. That he
did the like to King James and his Council, may easily be gathered by the
Records (in this Relation) of 1607. but much defective. But then to the Emperor
Rodolphe, to Stephen King of Poland, and diverse other Princes and their
Deputies; the wisest and learned, their several Courts did afford for the
time: the particulars of all which addresses and transactions are very exactly
set down in the book. Nay, such was his confidence, that had it not been for
the Nuncius Apostolicus his appearing against him at the Emperors Court by
order from the Pope, he was, as by some places may be collected, resolved for
Rome also, not doubting but he should approve himself and his doings to the
Pope himself and his Cardinals. In all these his addresses and applications
being still very ready to impart all things unto them that would entertain them
with that respect he thought they deserved; yea, readily, which is very
observable, even to receive them into this Mystical Society, whom he thought
worthy, and in some capacity to promote the design; as de facto he did diverse
in several places: Albertus Alasco, Prince Palatine of Polonia, Puccius a
learned man, and Prince Rosemberg in Germany, who were long of the Society,
besides some admitted to some Actions for a while, as Stephen King of Poland,
and some others. We will easily grant (as elsewhere has been treated and
handled at large) that a distempered brain may see, yea, and hear strange
things, and entertain them with all possible confidence, as real things, and
yet all but fancy, without any real sound or Apparition. But these sights and
Apparitions that Dr. Dee gives here an account, are quite of another nature;
yea, though possibly the Devil might represent diverse of these things to the
fancy inwardly which appeared outwardly: Yet of another nature, I say, and not
without the intervention and operation of Spirits, as will easily appear to any
man by the particulars. Besides the long Speeches, Discourses, Interlocutions
upon all occasions and occurrences in the presence of more then one always;
and externally audible to different persons, for the most part or very
frequently. That these things could not be the operation of a distempered
Fancy, will be a sufficient evidence to any rational man.

Again, let his usual preparations and Prayers against an Apparition or Action
(as he called them) his extraordinary prayers upon some extraordinary
occasions, as upon Edward Kelley his temporary repentance, and another for him
when he was about to forsake him (in Latin a long one) Stephen King of Poland
being then present. And again, when his Son Arthur was to be initiated to these
Mystical Operations and Apparitions, in the place of Edward Kelley, and the
like. And again, his Humility, Piety, Patience, (O what pity that such a man
should fall into such a delusion! but we shall consider of the causes in its
right place afterward) upon all occasions, temptations, distresses, most
eminent throughout the whole Book. Let these things be well considered, and
above the rest, his large and punctual relation of that sad abominable story of
their Promiscuous, carnal Copulation, under the pretense of obedience to God.
-- Let these things, I say, be well considered, and I think no man will make
any question but the poor man did deal with all possible simplicity and
sincerity, to the utmost of his understanding at that time. And truly, this one
thing (as we said before) excepted, his mistaking of evil Spirits for good, it
does not appear by any thing but that he had his understanding, and the perfect
use of his Reason to the very last, as well as he had had any time of his life.

Again, let it be considered, that he carried with him where ever he went A
STONE, which he called his Angelical Stone, as brought unto him by an Angel,
but by a Spirit sure enough, which he showed unto many; to the Emperor among
others, or the Emperors Deputy, Dr. Curts, as I remember: But more of this
Stone afterward. We may therefore conclude surely enough, That Dr. Dee in all
this Relation did deal with all simplicity and sincerity. I shall only add,
That whereas I used the word Reality before, concerning those things that
appeared, according to this Relation: I would not be mistaken, as though I
intended that whatsoever the Devil did seem to do or represent; it was Really
and Substantially as it seemed and appeared, that would be a great and gross
mistake. The very word Apparition does rather import the contrary. All I
understand by Reality, is, that what things appeared, they did so appear by the
power and operation of Spirits, actually present and working, and were not the
effects of a depraved fancy and imagination by mere natural causes. By which,
strange things, I confess, may be presented and apprehended too, sometimes by
the parties with all confidence, as we said before, though all be but fancy and
imagination. But all circumstances well considered, make this Case here to be
of another nature; and it may be it was the policy of these Spirits to join two
of purpose in this business, to make the truth and reality of it the more
unquestionable; hoping (if God had given way) they should have passed, in time
for good Spirits abroad generally, and then we should have seen what they would
have made of it. From less beginnings, I am sure, greatest confusions have
proceeded and prevailed in the world, as we shall show elsewhere. And since
that in all this business, as we said but now, Dr. Dee did not deal alone, but
had a constant Partner or Assistant, whom sometimes himself calls his Seer,
or Skryer, one by name Edward Kelly: it will be requisite before we proceed
further, that we give some account of him also. According to Dr. Dee's own
relation here, An. Dom. 1587. April 7. Trebonae: in the particulars of his Son
Arthur's Consecration (after his manner, which he calls, His offering and
presenting of him to the service of God:) Uriel (one of his chiefest Spirits)
was the author of their Conjunction: but when and how it happened (being but
obiter mentioned there) we do not find any where; and more then what I find
here I have nothing to say: For certain it is by this whole story, from the
beginning to the end of it, that Kelley was a great Conjurer, one that daily
conversed by such art as is used by ordinary Magicians, with evil Spirits, and
knew them to be so. Yet I would suppose that he was one of the best sort of
Magicians, that dealt with Spirits by a kind of Command (as is well known some
do) and not by any Compact or agreement: this may probably be gathered from
sundry places. But that he was a Conjurer, appearereth first by that, where he
proffered to raise some evil Spirit before the Polish Prince Palatine, Albert
Lasky (of whom more by and by) for a proof of his Art. But Dr. Dee would not
suffer him to do it in his house. Wicked spirits are cast out of him to the
number of 15. P. 32. But I make no great matter of that in point of proof,
because all there upon his bare report only. But see p. 63. etc. where it is
laid to his charge, and he answers for himself and his Spirits. See also
where at last he yielded to bury not to burn his Magical books. But read his
own confession (where you shall find him speak like one that knew very well
what did belong to the Art) and the record made by Dr. Dee concerning a shrewd
contest that happened between Dr. Dee and him, (it was about some Magical things)
wherein Edward Kelly carried himself so fiercely, that Dr. Dee being afraid of
his life, was forced to call for help. Peruse well this place and I presume you
will require no further light as to this particular concerning Kelly.

As for the several Epistles (in Latin most) that will be found here, as also
Narratives of several meetings and conferences, they carry so much light with
them, being set out with so many remarkable circumstances of time, place,
persons, etc. that no man of judgment that has any knowledge of the world,
will or can make any scruple of the sincerity and fidelity of either reports or
Deeds and monuments (such I account the Letters to be) herein contained. A man
might with little labor (that had all kind of books at command) have found
somewhat concerning most (outlandish) persons in them mentioned. I could not
intend it, and I think it would have been a needless labor. If any make any
question let them make search, I dare warrant it unto them they shall find all
things to agree punctually. But because Albert Lasky (next to Edward Kelley) is
the man most interressed in this story, I will give you some account of him out
of Mr. Cambden his Annals.

Anno Dom. 1583. E Polonia, Russiae vicina hac aestate venit in Angliam ut
Reginam inviseret, Albertus Alasco, Palatinus Siradiensis vir eruditus,
corporis lineamentis barba promisissima, vestitu decoro, and pervenusto; qui
perbenigne ab ipsa nobilibusque magnoque honor and lautitiis, et ab Accademia
Oxoniensi eruditis oblectationibus, atque variis spectaculis exceptus, post. 4.
menses aere alieno oppressus, clam recessit.

But of all Letters here exhibited, I am most taken, I must confess, with the
Bishops Letter that was Nuncius Apostolicus: he seems to me to speak to the
case very pertinently (take Puccius his account along in his long letter to Dr.
Dee, of his conference with the said Bishop concerning the same business) and
to have carried himself toward Dr. Dee very moderately and friendly.

II. Now to Objections:

The first shall be this: Although it is very probable that Dr. Dee himself
dealt simply and sincerely; yet since he himself saw nothing (for so himself
acknowledges in some places) but by Kelley's eyes, and heard nothing but with
his ears. Is it not possible that Kelley being a cunning man, and well
practiced in these things might impose upon the credulity of Dr. Dee (a good
innocent man) and the rather, because by this office under the Doctor he got 50
l. by the year, as appears. Truly this is plausible as it is proposed; and
like enough that it might go a great way with them that are soon taken, and
therefore seldom see any thing in the truth or true nature of it, but in the
outward appearance of it only. But read and observe it diligently and you will
find it far otherwise: It is true indeed, that ordinarily, Dr. Dee saw not
himself; his business was to write what was seen (but in his presence though)
and heard by Kelley. Yet that himself heard often immediately appears by many
places; I shall not need any quotations for that himself feels as well as
Kelley. In the relation of the Holy Stone, how taken away by one that came in
at a window in the shape of a man, and how restored; both saw certainly. In the
story of the Holy Books, how burned and how restored again (part of them at
least) which Dr Dee made a great Miracle of, as appears by some of those
places; there also both saw certainly. And Albert Lasky, the Polonian Palatine
saw as well as Kelley. Besides, it does clearly appear throughout all the book
that Kelley (though sometimes with much ado persuaded for a while to think
better of them) had generally no other opinion of these Apparitions but that
they were mere illusions of the Devil and evil Spirits, such as himself could
command by his art when he listed, and was acquainted with, insomuch that we
find him for this very cause forsaking, or desirous to forsake Dr. Dee, who was
much troubled about it; and is forced in a place to Pawn his Soul unto him (to
use his own words) that it was not so, and that they were good Spirits sent
from God in great favor unto them. But for all this Kelley would not be
satisfied, but would have his Declaration or Protestation of his suspicion to
the contrary entered into the book; which you shall find, and it will be worth
your reading. I could further allege, that if a man considers the things
delivered here upon several occasions, being of a different nature, some Moral,
some Physical, some Metaphysical, and Theological of highest points (though
sometimes wild enough, and not warrantable; yet for the most part very remote
from vulgar capacities) he will not easily believe that Kelley, who scarce
understood Latin) not to speak of some things delivered in Greek in some
places) and betook himself to the study of Logic long after he had entered
himself into this course, could utter such things: no, nor any man living
perchance, that had not made it his study all his lifetime. But that which
must needs end this quarrel (if any man will be pertinacious) and put all
things out of doubt, is, that not Kelley only served in this place of Seer or
Skryer, but others also, as his son Arthur, and in his latter days, when
Kelley was either gone or sick, one Bartholomew, as will be found in all the
Actions and Apparitions of the year 1607. which (as I suspect) was the last
year of the Doctors life, or beyond which I think he did not live long.

Secondly, It may be objected, or stuck at least, How Dr. Dee, so good, so
innocent, yea, so pious a man, and so sincere a Christian as by these papers
(his delusion and the effects of it still excepted) he does seem to have been,
God would permit such a one to be so deluded and abused, so rackt in his soul,
so hurried in his body for so long a time, notwithstanding his frequent,
earnest, zealous prayers and addresses unto God, by evil Spirits (even to his
dying day, for ought we know) as he is here by his own relation set out unto
us? Truly, if a man shall consider the whole carriage of this business, from
the beginning to the end, according to this true and faithful (for I think I
may so speak with confidence) account of it here presented unto us, this poor
man, how from time to time shamefully, grossly delayed, deluded, quarrelled
without cause, still toled on with some shows and appearances, and yet still
frustrated and put off: his many pangs and agonies about it, his sad condition
after so many. years toil, travel, drudgery and earnest expectation, at the
very last (as appears by the Actions and apparitions of the year 1607.) I can
not tell whether I should make him an object of more horror or compassion; but
of both certainly in a great measure to any man that has any sense of
Humanity, and in the examples of others of humane frailty: and again, any
regard of parts and worth, such as were in this man in a high degree. True it
is, that he had joys withal and comforts, imaginary, delusory, it is true; yet
such as he enjoyed and kept up his heart, and made him outwardly cheerful often
times, I make no question; such as the Saints (as they call themselves) and
Schismatics of these and former times have ever been very prone to boast of,
persuading themselves that they are the effects of Gods blessed Spirit. But
even in these his joys and comforts, the fruits and fancies of his deluded soul
(as in many others of a distempered brain) is not he an object of great
compaspassion to any, both sober and charitable? If this then were his case
indeed, what shall we say? if nothing else, I know not but it ought to satisfy
a rational, sober, humble man: If we say, That it is not in man to give an
account of all Gods judgments, neither is there any ground for us to murmule
because we do not understand them, or that they often seem contrary to the
judgment of humane reason, because it is against all Reason as well as
Religion, to believe that a creature so much inferior to God, by nature as man
is, should see every thing as he sees, and think as he thinks; and
consequently judge and determine in and of all things as God judges and
determines. The Apostle therefore not without cause, would have all private
judgments (for of public for the maintenance of peace and order among men, it
is another case) deferred to that time, when the hearts of all men shall be
laid open, all hidden things and secret counsels revealed. But we have enough
to say in this case without it. For if Pride and Curiosity were enough to undo
our first Parent, and in him all mankind, when otherwise innocent, and in
possession of Paradise. Should we wonder if it had the same event in Dr. Dee,
though otherwise, as he does appear to us, innocent, and well qualified? That
this was his case and error, I will appeal to his own confession (though he
makes it his boast) in more then one of his Letters or addresses, where he
professes, That for diverse years he had been an earnest suter unto God in
prayer for Wisdom; that is, as he interprets himself, That he might understand
the secrets of Nature that had not been revealed unto men hitherto; to the end,
as he professes, and his own deceitful heart it may be suggested unto him,
That he might glorify God; but certainly, that himself might become a glorious
man in the world, and be admired, yea, adored every where almost, as he might
be sure it would be, had he compassed his desire. And what do we think should
put him upon such a desire, with hopes to obtain it, but an opinion he had of
himself as an extraordinary man, both for parts, and for favor with God? But
however, had he been to the utmost of what he could think of himself, besides
his Spiritual pride of thinking so of himself (as great a sin as any in the
eyes of God) his praying for such a thing with so much importunity, was a great
tempting of God, and deserving greatest judgments. Had he indeed been a suter
unto God for such Wisdom as the Prophet Jeremie describes (11. v. 24, 25.) Let
not the Wise man glory in his wisdom, etc. but let him that glories, etc. And
for such knowledge as our Savior commands, Joh. 17. 3. And this is life
eternal, that they may know thee, etc. And his blessed Apostle (1 Cor. (...).
2.) For I determined not to know any thing, etc. he had had good warrant for
his prayers, and it is very likely that God would have granted him his request,
so far as might have concerned his own salvation and eternal happiness.
Besides, it is lawful (nay fit) for a man to pray for Gods blessing upon his
labors, for competency of wit and capacity that he may do well in his vocation
and glorify God. But for a man to aspire to such eminency above other men, and
by means that are not ordinary (as that conceited Philosophers Stone, and the
like) and to interest God by earnest solicitations in his ambitions extravagant
desires; that God, who has said of himself, That he resists the proud, but
gives grace unto the humble, must needs be so great and so high a provocation
(if well considered) as that I begin to doubt whether it be charity to pity him
that suffered so justly and deservedly. I do not know but it is as lawful for
any man obscurely born to pray for a Kingdom, for a Common Soldier that he may
have strength to encounter thousands, or for an ordinary Maid, that she may
become the fairest of women. In all these it is possible to glorify God, we
grant, were it fit for us to prescribe unto God, neglecting those that he has
appointed, by what means he should be glorified; and could we secure our selves
that in pretending to Gods glory we do not seek our own. I wish that our great
undertakers and reformers (such is their wisdom they think) of Arts and
Sciences would seriously think of this; they especially who take upon
themselves to make all men wise and of one mind, and to reconcile all doubts
and difficulties in Religion, and otherwise; in a word, to make Truth to be
embraced by all men. Should these men tell us that if they had had the creating
of the world, and the ordering of all things (and there be, I think, in the
world that have said little less) from the beginning, they would have made an
other guess of things then God had done: We would have considerd of it
perchance what might be the ground in any mortal man of such wonderful
confidence. But such being the condition of the world, as it is, and such of
men, naturally; or to speak as a Christian, since the fall of Adam, and the
consequencies of it, the curse of God, etc. to make all men wise, of one mind,
good, religious, without an infinite omnipotent power, such as of nothing was
able to create a world: can any man (sober and wise) hear it; hear it with
patience, that thinks it impossible, yea strange, that Castles should be built
in the air, or the heavens battered with great guns? And yet such books are
read, yea and much set by, by some men. My judgment is, That they are to be
pityed (if distemper be the cause, as I believe it is in some) that boast of
such things; but if wise and politic, to get credit and money (as some I
believe) it is a great argument of their confidence, that there be many in the
word that are not very wise. But to return to Dr. Dee: It might be further
added and proved by examples, that some men of transcendent holiness and
mortification (in the sight of men) so sequestered from the world (some of them)
and the vanities of it, that for many years they had conversed with God alone
in a manner; yet through pride and conceit of their own parts and favor with
God, fell into delusions and temptations, if not altogether the same, yet not
less strange and dreadful. Such examples Ecclesiastical Story will afford, and
other books of that nature, but I have them not at this time, and I conceive I
have said enough to this (...).

But of his Praying too, somewhat would be observed. His Spirits tell him
somewhere, that he had the Gift of Praying. Truly I believe he had, as it is
ordinarily called: that it is, that he could express himself very fluently and
earnestly in Prayer, and that he did it often to his own great contentment. Let
no man wonder at this; I have showed elsewhere that some that have been very
wicked, yea, some that dyed for blasphemy, and with blasphemy in their mouth to
the last gasp, have had it in a great measure, and done much mischief by it. It
is no disparagement to Prayer, no more then it is to the best things of the
world (and what better and more heavenly then prayer well used?) if they be
abused. And it is commonly observed, that the corruption of best things is most
dangerous. What bred those pernicious heretics that so long troubled the
world, and could not be (...) but by absolute destruction, but long affected
prayers (therefore called Euchites or Messaliani, that is to say, the Prayers)
and Enthusiasms? And as to that point of inward joy and comptacency, which some
Schismatics and wicked men find in themselves at their prayers, which ignorant
deluded people think to be an argument of the Spirit: It is certain, and is a
mystery of nature that has (may I speak it without bragging) been brought to
light (of late years at least) by my self and fully discovered, That not only
the inward heat of mental conception (where there is any vigor) but also the
music of outward words, is able to occasion it. Indeed it is a point that does
deserve to be well considered of in these times especially. For when young
boys and illiterate men (and the number is likely to increase now that
Catechizing is so much neglected) are turned loose to exercise themselves in
this gift (as they call it) and when by long practice they have attained to
some readiness and volubility, which does occasion some inward lightsomeness
and excitations, or perchance somewhat that may have some resemblance to
spiritual sorrow and compunction, they presently think themselves inspired, and
so they become Saints before they know what it is to be Christians. And if they
can Pray by inspiration, why not Preach also? So comes in Anabaptism by
degrees, which will be the ruin of all Religion and civil Government where
ever it prevails. And I believe that this fond foolish conceit of Inspiration,
as it has been the occasion of much other mischief, so of that horrid
sacrilege, shall I call it, or profanation (I hope I may do either without
offense, for it is not done by any public Authority that I know of) the
casting and banishing of THE LORDS PRAYER out of many private houses and
Churches; then which, I think, Christ never received a greater affront from any
that called themselves Christians. I am not so uncharitable as to believe that
it is done in direct opposition to Christ by any real Christians, but in a
furious zeal by many, I believe, against set prayers. But this is not a place
to dispute it: Certainly, as the Lords Prayer is a Prayer of most incredible
comfort to them that use it devoutly and upon good grounds (a good foundation
of Religion and sound Faith, I mean) so I believe that set Prayers in general
are of more concernment to the settling of Peace in the Commonwealth then many
men are aware of. But let this (...) for my opinion; there be worse I am sure
that pass currently.

Again, A man may wonder (I cannot tell whether an objection may be made of it)
that Dr. Dee, though he were at the first deluded (to which his own pride and
presumption did expose him) as many have been; yet afterward in process of
time when he found himself so deluded and shuffled with; when Edward Kelley did
use such pregnant arguments to him (as he did more then once) to persuade him
that they were evil Spirits that appeared unto them; nay, when he had found by
certain experience, that his Spirits had told him many lies, foretold many
things concerning Princes and Kingdoms, very particularly limited with
circumstances of time, which when the time was expired did (...) at all come to
pass; yet for all this he durst pawn his Soul for them that they were good
Spirits, and continued in his confidence (so far as our Relation goes) to the
last. I answer, Such is the power of this kind of Spiritual delusion, it does
so possess them whom it has once taken hold of, that they seldom, any of them,
recover themselves. In the days of Martin Luther (2 great and zealous reformer
of Religion, but one that would have detested them as the worst of Infidels
that had used the Lords Prayer, as some have done in our days, as appears by
what he says of it in more then one place) there lived one Michael Stifelius,
who applying to himself some place of the Apocalypse, took upon him to
Prophecy. He had foretold that in the year of the Lord 1533. before the 29 of
September the end of the world, and Christ's coming to Judgment would be. He did
show so much confidence, that some write, Luther himself was somewhat startled
at the first. But that day past, he came a second time to Luther with new
Calculations, and had digested the whole business into 22. Articles, the effect
of which was to demonstrate that the end of the world would be in October
following. But now Luther thought he had had trial enough, and gave so little
credit to him, that he (though he loved the man) silenced him for a time; which
our Apocalyptical Prophet took very ill at his hands, and wondered much at his
incredulity. Well, that month and some after that over, our Prophet (who had
made no little stir in the Country by his Prophesying) was cast into prison for
his obstinacy. After a while Luther visited him, thinking by that time to find
him of another mind. But so far was he from acknowledging his error, that he
down right railed at Luther for giving him good counsel. And some write that to
his dying day (having lived to the age of 80. years) he never recanted. And was
not this the case of learned Postellus, who fallen into some grievous wild
fancies in his latter days, though sound enough still in other things, could
never be reclaimed though means were used from time to time the best and
gentlest (in respect to his worth and person) that could be thought of? But
what talk we of particular men? Consider the Anabaptists in general. Above an
hundred years ago they troubled Germany very much: it cost many thousands their
lives. They roved up and down. No sooner destroyed in one place but they sprung
(whilst that season lasted) in another. Their pretenses every where were the
same; Revelations and the Spirit: the wickedness of Princes and Magistrates,
and Christ Jesus to be set up in his Throne. Well, at last they were destroyed
in most places. Stories of them have been written in all Languages, read every
where, and their lamentable end. Can all this hinder but that upon every
opportunity of a confused and confounded Government, they start up again in the
same shape and form as before; the same pretenses, the same Scriptures, for all
the world, miserably detorted and abused, to raise tumults and seditions in all
places. Such is the wretchedness of man that is once out of the right way of
Reason and Sobriety. But withal we must say in this particular case of Dr.
Dee's, though his obstinacy was great and mavelous, yet it must be
acknowledged, that great was the diligence and subtility of his Spirits to keep
their hold: and some things sometimes happened (as his danger and preservation
about Gravesend, when he first, here related, went out of the Realm) very
strangely, and such was the unhappiness of his misapplyed zeal, that he made a
Providence of whatsoever happened unto him as he desired.

So much for Dr. Dee himself. But of his Spirits a greater question perchance
may be moved: If evil, wicked, lying Spirits (as we have reason to believe, and
no man I think will question) how came they to be such perswaders to Piety and
godliness, yea, such preachers of Christ, his Incarnation, his Passion, and
other Mysteries of the Christian Faith, not only by them here acknowledged, but
in some places very Scholastically set out and declared? It seems somewhat
contrary to reason and as contrary to the words of our Savior, Every Kingdom
divided against it self, etc. But first, to the matter of fact: The Devils we
know even in the Gospel did acknowledge, nay, in some manner proclaim Christ to
be the Son of God: which is the main Article he did contest with Christ by
Scripture Authority; and by S. Paul's testimony, can transform himself, when he
list into an Angel of light. And in some relations well attested, of
Possessions and public Exorcisms that have been used; we find the Devil often
speaking by the mouth of women, rather like a Monk out of the Pulpit,
persuading to temperance, rebuking vices, expounding of mysteries, and the
like, then as one that were an enemy to truth and godliness. Insomuch that some
have been ready to make a great mystery and triumph of it, thereby to convict
Heretics and Atheists, in time, more effectually, then they have been by any
other means that have been used hitherto: and ascribing the whole business not
to the Devil himself, but the great power and Providence of God, as forcing him
against his will to be an instrument of his Truth. For my part, I see cause
enough to believe that such things, there contained at large, might come from
the Devil; that is, might truly and really be spoken by persons possessed and
inspired by the Devil. But that they are employed by God to that end, I shall
not easily grant. I rather suspect that whatsoever comes from them in that
kind, though it be good in it self, yet they may have a mischievous end in it;
and that I believe will soon appear if they can once gain so much credit among
men as to be believed to be sent by God to bear testimony to the truth. A man
may see somewhat already by those very Relations, and that account that is
given us there. And therefore I do not wonder if even among the more sober
Papists this project (as the relater and publisher complains) has found
opposition. The Devil is very cunning; a notable Politician. S. Paul knew him
so, and therefore he uses many words to set out his frauds. He can lay the
foundation of a plot, if need be, a hundred years before the effects shall
appear. But then he has his end. It is not good trusting of him, or dealing
with him upon any pretense. Can any man speak better then he does by the mouth
of Anabaptists and Schismatics? And this he will do for many years together if
need be, that they that at first stood off may be won by time. But let them be
once absolute masters, and then he will appear in his own shape. There is one
thing which I wonder much more at in those Relations I have mentioned, and that
is, that the Devil himself should turn such a fierce accuser of them that have
served him so long, Witches and Magicians. I know he does here so too in some
kind, in more then one place. He does much inveigh against Devils and all that
have to do with them, Megicians, etc. But that is in general only, or in
Kelley's particular case, upon whom he had another hold, which he made more
reckoning of, to wit, as he appeared to them as an Angel of light. Any thing to
maintain his interest there, and their good opinion of him; for he had great
hopes from that plot. But that he should pursue so ridgedly particular men and
women whom he had used so long, to death, and do the part of an informer
against them, may seem more like unto a Kingdom divided against it self, but it
is not our case here; neither am I very well satisfied, that whatsoever the
Devil says or lays to the charge of them by whose mouth he speaks, ought to
be received for good testimony. Here it may be Wierius had some reason; for I
doubt some have been too credulous. But this by the way shall suffice.

That the Devil should lie often, or be mistaken himself, in his Prophecies, as
by many particulars of this Relation will appear, I will not look upon that, as
if any objection could be made of it. But it may be wondered, perchance, Dr. Dee
being often in so great want of moneys, that he did not know which way to turn,
what shift to make; at which time he did always with much humility address
himself to his Spirits, making his wants known unto them; and the Devil on the
other side, both by his own boasting, and by the testimony of those who could
not lie, having the goods of this world (though still under God) much at his
disposing, and always, as he seemed, very desirous to give Dr. Dee all
possible satisfaction: that in this case, once or twice perchance excepted,
when the Dr. was well furnished (for which the Spirits had his thanks) at all
other times he was still, to his very great grief and perplexity, left to
himself to shift as he could, and some pretense, why not otherwise supplied,
cunningly devised by them that were so able, and to whom he was so dear. But I
must remember my self: I said so able; but in some places his Spirits tell him
plainly, It was not in their power, because no part of their Commission, or
because it did not belong unto them (such as dealt with him) to meddle with the
Treasures of the earth: and sometimes that they were things beneath their
cognizance or intermedling. Of the different nature of Spirits, we shall say
somewhat by and by, that may have some relation to this also, perchance. But
granting that the Devil generally has power enough both to find money and to
gratify with it where he sees cause. Yet in this case of Witches and
Magicians, direct or indirect, it is certain and observed by many as an
argument of Gods great Providence over men, that generally he has not: It is
in very deed a great Argument of a superior overruling power and Providence.
For if men of all professions will hazard (their Souls) so far as we see daily
to get money and estates by indirect unconscionable ways, though they are not
always sure, and that it be long oftentimes before it comes, and oftentimes
prove their ruin, even in this world, through many casualties; as alterations
of times, and the like: what would it be if it were in the power of the D. to
help every one that came unto him, yielding but to such and such conditions,
according as they could agree?

Hitherto I have considered what I thought might be objected by others. I have
one objection more, which to me was more considerable (as an objection, I mean,
not so readily answered) then all the rest: Devils, we think generally, both by
their nature as Spirits, and by the advantage of long experience (a very great
advantage indeed in point of knowledge) cannot but have perfect knowledge of all
natural things, and all secrets of Nature, which do not require an infinite
understanding; which by that measure of knowledge that even men have attained
unto in a little time, is not likely to be so necessary in most things. But
lest any man should quarrel at the word Perfect, because all perfection belongs
unto God properly, it shall suffice to say, That the knowledge Devils have of
things Natural and Humane is incomparably greater then man is capable of. If
so, how comes it to pass that in many places of this Relation we find him
acting his part rather as a Sophister (that I say not a Juggler) then a perfect
Philosopher; as a Quack, or an Empirick sometimes, then a True, genuine
Naturalist. And for language (not to speak of his Divinity, which he might
disguise of purpose to his own ends) rather as one that had learned Latin by
reading of barbarous books, of the middle age, for the most part, then of one
that had been of Augustus his time, and long before that. But that which is
strangest of all is, that as in one place the Spirits were discovered by Ed.
Kelley to steal out of Agrippa or Trithemius (so he thought at least) so in
diverse other places, by the phrase, and by the doctrine and opinions a man may
trace noted Chemical and Cabalistical Authors of later times; yea, (if I be not
much mistaken) and Paracelsus himself, that prodigious creature, for whom and
against whom so much has been written since he lived; these things may seem
strange, but I think they may be answered. For first, we say, The Devil is not
ambitious to show himself and his abilities before men, but his way is (so
observed by many) to fit himself (for matter and words) to the genius and
capacity of those that he deals with. Dr. Dee, of himself, long before any
Apparition, was a Cabalistical man, up to the ears, as I may say; as may appear
to any man by his Monas Hieroglyphica, a book much valued by himself, and by
him Dedicated at the first to Maximilian the Emperor, and since presented (as
here related by himself) to Rodoiphe as a choice piece. It may be thought so by
those who esteem such books as Dr. Floid, Dr. Alabaster, and of late Gafarell,
and the like. For my part I have read him; it is soon don, it is but a little
book: but I must profess that I can extract no sense nor reason (sound and
solid) out of it: neither yet does it seem to me very dark or mystical. Sure we
are that those Spirits did act their parts so well with Dr. Dee, that for the
most part (in most Actions) they came off with good credit; and we find the Dr.
every where almost extolling his Spiritual teachers and instructers, and
praising God for them. Little reason therefore have we to except against any
thing (in this kind) that gave him content, which was their aim and business.

Secondly, I say, If any thing relish here of Trithemius or Paracelsus, or any
such, well may we conclude from thence, that the Devil is like himself. This is
the truest inference. It is he that inspired Trithemius and Paracelsus, etc.
that speaks here; and wonder ye if he speaks like them? I do not expect that
all men will be of my opinion; yet I speak no Paradoxes: I have both reason and
authority good and plausible, I think, for what I say; but to argue the case at
large would be tedious Of Trithemius somewhat more afterward will be said. But
we must go far beyond that time. A thousand years and above, before either of
them was born, was the BOOK OF ENOCH well known in the world; and then also was
Lingua Adami (upon which two most of the Cabala stands) much talked of, as
appears by Greg. Nissen his learned books against Eunomius the Heretic. To
speak more particularly (because so much of it in this Relation) the BOOK OF
ENOCH was written before Christ; and it is thought by some very learned (though
denied by others) that it is the very book that S. Jude intended. A great
fragment of it in Greek (it was written in Hebrew first) is to be seen in
Scaliger (that incomparable man, the wonder of his Age, if not rather of all
Ages) his learned Notes upon Eusebius. It was so famous a book anciently that
even Heathens took notice of it, and grounded upon it objections against
Christians. It may appear by Origin against Celsus, in his book 5. p. 275.
(...) (says he) (...) But S. Jerome and S. Augustine speak of it more
peremptorily as a fabulous book, and not allowed by the Church. How much of it
is extant, besides what we have in Scaliger, I know not; nor what part it is so
often mentioned in this Relation. By what I have seen it does appear to me a
very superstitious, foolish, fabulous writing; or to conclude all in one word,
Cabalistical, such as the Devil might own very well, and in all probability was
the author of. As for that conceit of the tongue which was spoken by Adam in
Paradise, we have already said that it is no late invention; and I make no
question but it proceeded from the same Author. Yea, those very Characters
commended unto Dr. Dee by his Spirits for holy, and mystical, and the original
Characters (as I take it) of the holy tongue, they are no other, for the most
part but such as were set out and published long ago by one Theseus Ambrosus
out of Magical books, as himself professes: you shall have a view of them in
some of the Tables at the end of the Preface. Some letters are the same, others
have much resemblace in the substance; and in transcribing it is likely they
might suffer some alteration. But it may be too the Spirits did not intend they
should be taken for the same, because exploded by learned men, and therefore
altered the forms and figures of most of them of purpose that they might seem
new, and take the better. So that in (...) this the Devil is but still constant
unto himself, and this constancy stands him in good stead, to add the more
weight and to gain credit to his Impostures. Not to be wondered therefore if the
same things be found elsewhere, where the D. has an hand.

With Cabalistical writings we may join Chemical, here also mentioned in many
places. I have nothing to say to Chymistrie as it is merely natural, and keeps
it self within the compass of sobriety. It may well go for a part of Physic,
for ought I know, though many great Physicians, because of the abuse and danger
of it, as I conceive, have done their best (formerly) to cry it down. I my self
have seen strange things done by it: and it cannot be denied but the wonders of
God and Nature are as eminently visible in the experiments of that Art as any
other natural thing. However, it is not improbable that diverse secrets of it
came to the knowledge of man by the Revelation of Spirits. And the practice and
profession of it in most (them especially that profess nothing else) is
accompanied with so much Superstition and Imposture, as it. would make a sober
man, that tendreth the preservation of himself in his right wits, to be afraid
of it. Of the Transmutation of Metals, what may be done by Art I will not take
upon me to determine: I am apt enough to believe that some strange things (in
that kind) may be done, if a man will go to the cost of it, and undergo the
trouble upon so much uncertainty of the event. But that which we call
ordinarily, and most understand by it, The Philosophers Stone, is certainly a
mere cheat, the first author and inventor whereof was no other then the Devil.
Legi etiam Spiritum supernorum revelatione traditam antiquitus artem faciendi
Auri, and me aetate idem usu evenisse, etc. says one ( Jo. Franc. Picus
Mirandula) of the learned Author that I have seen of that subject, in defense
of it, I meant. If he mean Supernos Spiritus, such as appear in form of Angels
of Light, such as deluded Dr. Dee, and daily does those that hunt after
Revelations, and Prophecies, and unlawful Curiosities, I grant it. But that any
good Angels did ever meddle in a practice commonly attended with so much
imposture, impiety, cousenage as this commonly is, I shall not easily grant.
Though I must add, I make great difference (if we will speak properly) between
Arts faciendi auri (a thing I do not deny to be feasible by natural means) and
that we call the Philosophers Stone, as before already intimated. And for that
objection of his, why evil Spirits should not be the Authors or revealers of it
unto any (though otherwise for some other reasons he thinks it probable)
because it is not likely that God would suffer (...) to give such power unto
men like themselves, whom only among men they favor and respect, that is,
wicked ungodly men. First, I answer, That is a very weak objection, since we
know by constant experience of present and future Ages, that they are not of
the best of men commonly that are the greatest and richest. But Secondly, There
is no great cause to fear that any thing hitherto revealed (or hereafter to be
revealed, I believe) of this secret, should enable men (good or bad) to do much
hurt in the world. The greatest hurt is to themselves who are deluded (yea, and
beggerd many first or last) and to some few not very wise whom they cosen as
themselves have been cousened. And for this that they can do no more, we are
beholding not to the Devil who certainly would not be vvanting to himself or to
any opportunity to do mischief by himself or his Agents, but to God who does
not give him the power: So much to (...), out of my respect to his name, and
for the better satisfaction to the Reader. I owe the sight and use of the book
to my Learned friend Dr. Windett before mentioned --. I am much confirmed in
that opinion (of the Devil being the Author) by what I find of it in the book
which has given me this occasion to speak of it. Were there nothing else but
the gross and impudent forgeries that have been used to commend it unto men,
some entituling the Invention to Adam himself, others to Solomon, and the like;
and the many books that have been counterfeited to the same end; and again the
most ridiculous and profane applying and expounding of Scriptures, a thing
usually done by most that are abettors of it, those things were enough to make
a man to abhor it. Sure enough it is, that not only Dr. Dee, but others also
who had part of that precious Powder brought unto them by Spirits, and
expected great matters of it, were all cheated and gulled (and I believe it
cost some of them a good deal of money; Prince Rosemberg particularly) by those
Spiritual Chemists. Let them consider of it that have been dealing in such
things as they shall see cause.

So still we see, that in all these things, as we said before, the Devil is not
beholding to others, (as might be suspected) but others have been beholding to
him: As for his Divinity, in highest points, if he spoke the truth, it was for
his own ends, as we said before: He can do it, who makes any question? In
controverted points, we may observe, that he does serve the scene and present
occasion; and I make no question, but had Dr. Dee gone to Constantinople, and
been entertained there with respect, his Spirits there would have showed
themselves as good Mahometans, as elsewhere good Roman Catholics, or
Protestants.

We have somewhere a very pretty Tale, (I would say a curious Observation, if I
thought it true) concerning the nature of the Serpent or Addar, handsomely
expressed, how she traineth her young ones to set them out abroad into the
world, that they may shift for themselves. Twenty days, as I remember, are
spent in that work: Now whether it be so really, I cannot say certainly, but I
suspect it. It is not in Aristotle, and I looked in Aldrovandus, and I could
not find it: But whether it be so or no, let no body wonder; for this was the
manner of Preaching formerly (and may be yet perchance in some places) among
Monks and Friars in great request. They would make a story of Man, or Beasts,
as they thought fit themselves, and their Fancies best served; pretty and
witty, as much as they could; whether it had any ground of truth, or no, no man
required: The moralization was good. If the Devil have done so here, it was not
through ignorance (for he is too good a Naturalist; and I believe there is
somewhat even in Nature, though we know it not, why both in sacred and profane
History, Spirits and Serpents are so often joined) of which is true and real;
but as has been said, it served his turn, and that is enough. And although,
having considered it as an Objection, how the Devil comes to speak so much
truth, as will be found in this Book; no man, I think, will expect I should
give an account of any false Doctrine or Divinity, that it may contain: Yet one
point I think fit to take notice of, and protest against it; as false,
erroneous, and of dangerous consequence, and that is, where it is said, That a
man (in some cases) may kill another man (Prince or other) without apparent
cause, or lawful Authority, and therefore punishable by the Laws of Man; who
nevertheless, may expect a great reward at the hands of God for his act: How
this may agree with the Principles of New Lights, and Anabaptistical Divinity,
I know not; it is very contrary to the Principles of that Orthodox Divinity,
lately professed and established by Law in England.

I have now said in this main Objection, (as I apprehended it) what I think was
most proper and pertinent, and I hope may satisfy. But I have somewhat else to
say, which in this case of Devils and Spirits in general, I think it very
considerable, and may satisfy perchance, in some cases, where nothing else
can. We talk of Spirits, and read of Spirits often, but I think it is very
little that we know (the best ofus all) of them, of their nature or
differences: And how then can it be expected that we should resolve all doubts?
And though I think it is not much that any man ever knew and rightly
apprehended, or can, as he is a man in this business; yet my opinion is,
(though I know it is much gainsaid and opposed) that ancient Platonic
Philosophers of the latter times, understood much more then most Christians; I
do not write this, as though I thought, or would have any thought by others to
be the worse Christians for being ignorant in these things; but rather, in my
opinion, any man the better Christian, by much, who does not regard it or
desire it: For my part, although I must acknowledge that some scruples of my
mind, did induce me to lock into many (...), until I was satisfied, which
otherwise I had never done; yet I profess to believe, that it is so little that
can be known by man in this subject, and subject to so much illusion, as that I
think no study is more vain and foolish; and that I would not go three steps
out of my doors (more then what I did to satisfy my mind in some matters of
Faith, if any such scruple did arise) to know as much as the profoundest
Platonic or Philosopher yea, or Magician of them all ever knew. Certainly he
is but a weak Christian, when so many high Mysteries are proposed unto us in
Christ by his Gospel, and of so much consequence, that cannot bestow his time
better: They that have any hopes, through Faith in Christ, and a godly life, to
be admitted one day into the presenceof God, and to see face to face, as God
has promised; will they hazard so glorious a hope, by prying through
unseasonable, unprofitable curiosity, into the nature of these vassal Spirits,
which God has forbidden: But because it does concern Religion in general, that
we believe Spirits; and when Objections are made that cannot be answered, many
are scandalized, and Atheists ready to take the advantage of it; I say, that it
should be no wonder to any, sober and rational, if we cannot resolve all
doubts, since it is so little that we know, or can know, beyond the bare (...)
in this matter: Most Christians are bred in and to this opinion, that all
Spirits, (so commonly called) are either Angels of Heaven, or Devils of Hell: I
know no Scripture for it, or determination of any general Council, that I
remember, at this time at least, and so long I do not think my self bound
against apparent reason: For the conceit of all evil Spirits or Devils being in
Hell, I think learned Mr. Meade has taken that to task in some of his Works,
and sufficiently confuted it: The very word Spirit, is a term of great
Ambiguity; We understand by it, commonly, substances, that are
altogetherimmaterial. Many of the ancient Fathers, it is well known, did not
allow of any such at all, besides God: But we think that to have no visible
Body, and to be purely immaterial, is all one: God knows how many degrees there
may be between these, but we cannot know it, neither does it concern our
salvation for which we have reason to praise God: But if it were so, that all
Spirits are either Devils or Angels, what shall we make of these that are found
in mines, of which learned Agricola has written; of those that have been time
out of mind called (...) (from whence probably, as we have said elsewhere,
Gobelin in English is derived) who live in private Houses, about old Walls, and
stalks of Wood, harmless otherwise, but very thievish, so frequent and so known
in some Countries, that a man may as well doubt whether there be any Horses in
England, because there are none in some parts of the World; not found in all
America, I think, till some were carried thither: Neither can I believe, that
those Spirits that please themselves in nothing else but harmless sports and
wantonness, such as have been known in all Ages; such as did use to shave the
hairs of Plinius Secundus his Servants in the Night, as himself relates (a very
creditable man, I am sure) in his Epistles, and the like; that such Spirits, I
say, have any relation either to Heaven or to Hell: We might insist in more
particulars, but we do not desire to dwell upon it at this time; and there is
yet somewhat else to be said: And what I have said of some Platonicks, I did
not intend thereby to justify all their absurd or superstitious Opinions in
this Argument of Spirits: As they have searched furrher into it then others
(besides damnable experience, having confounded Magic with Philosophy, yea
almost turned all Philosophy into Magic) so it was consequent, they would fall
into more Errors and Absurdities; yet withal, they have found somewhat that
does better agree with daily experience, then what is commonly known or
believed. Sinesius was a Bishop, but as he does appear to us in his Writings, a
better Platonic then a Christian: In a place (in his Treatise De insomniis) he
shows how evil Spirits come to inhabit men and to possess their Brains: His
terms are very course, and apparently ridiculous; but there may be some truth
in the Opinion: For if there were not a very near and intimate conjunction, it
were to be wondered how the Devil comes to know the very thoughts of Witches
and Magicians, as is found by experience, averred by more then one: And in this
very Book, if I be not mistaken, somewhat may be observed to that purpose: It
is possible there may be more kinds of possession then one, and that some men,
that never were suspected, have had a spirit (besides their own) resident in
them, all, or most part of their lives.

I have done, with what I could think of, upon which objection can be made: The
next thing is to make the way clearer to the Reader, by some consideration of
the method of the Books, and explanation of some terms and phrases there ufed,
at which perchance some may stick at the first: At the very beginning a man may
be to seek, it the Title of it, Liber sexti mysteriorum, and sancti parallelus,
novalisque. 1583. both as it relates to that which follows, and as it reflects
upon somewhat before, by which it may be inferred that the book begins here
abruptly and imperfectly: of this I am now ready to give an account to the
Reader, and it is very fit it should be done.

First concerning Titles, such as will be found here many more besides this,
the whole book, or relation being subdivided into many parts; in general I say,
that according to the Doctors genius (we have said before he was very
Cabalistical, that is, full of whimsies and crotchets, under the notion of
Mysteries, a thing that some very able, otherwise, have been subject unto) and
the high opinion he had of these actions and apparitions; they are mostly very
concealed, and (to speak the truth) fantastic, which must make them the
Obscurer: I could give the Reader a view of them all here put together, but it
would be superfluous: There be some fourteen or fifteen Divisions in all now
remaining, and so many Titles: There is a Table at the beginning, that does
refer to the beginning of every division, where the Title also will be found:
But at the end of the viii. Division, I find these words, Sequitur liber 24.
qui hac die etiam inceptus est, a meridie: horam circiter tertiam, per ipsum
Lavanael: But I find nothing following, (but some vacant sheets, till we come
to the ix. Division, Mysteriorum pragensium, etc. And the last Division has
only some Fables, and before them, some five or six pages of unknown mystical
words, which we know not what to make of; but of that more afterward: The main
business to be resolved here (as I take it) is what it is that we have, and
what we have not, so far as can be gathered by what remains; we shall see
what we can say to it. In the year of the Lord, One thousand five hundred
eighty four, September the third, (being a Monday) Dr. Dee first appeared
(being presented by Honorable persons, and expected) before the Emperor
Rodolph. Among other things he then told him, That for these two years and a
half Gods holy Angels had used to inform him: Our Book, or first Action here,
begins 28 May, 1583. According to this reckoning, it must be, that above a
year and three Months before, began the first Apparition: The account then of
fifteen Months from the first Apparition, we want: How much (in bulk) that
might come to, I cannot tell; neither will I warrant all perfect from this 28
of May, 1583 to the fourth of April 1587. though for the most part the
coherence is right enough to that time: But from thence to the twentieth of
March, 1607. is a vast chasma or hiatus, of no less then twenty years: How this
has happened, I cannot tell certainly; what I guess, is this, some years after
Dr. Dees death () Sir Robert Cotton bought his Library (what then remained of
it) with his Magical Table, (of which afterward) and the Original Manuscript,
written With his own hand, whereof this is a Copy: The Book had been buried in
the Earth, how long, years or months, I know not; but so long, though it was
carefully kept since, yet it retained so much of the Earth, that it began to
moulder and perish some years ago, which when Sir Thomas C. (before mentioned)
observed, he was at the charges to have it written out, before it should be too
late: Now full fifty years, or not many wanting, being passed since this
Original came to Sir Robert, it is very likely, that had any more in all that
time been heard of, Sir Robert, or Sir Thomas, his Son and Heir, would have
heard of it, and got it as soon as any body else: And because no more has been
heard of all this while, it is more then probable that no more is extant, not
in England, nor I think any where else: Happily the rest might perish, some
part, (if not all) even whilst the Doctor lived; and we shall find in this
Relation, That a good part of his holy Books were burned, but (which is more
strange) a great part of them, by the help of Spirits, recovered and restored:
Or it may be, that since his death, the rest (the place where they lay being
unknown) might rot in the earth; now if, as probably no more be extant, we may
account this that we have here, in that respect perfect, because here is all
that can be had. But if any, (as it is the nature of many, if not most, rather
to desire that which cannot be had, then to content themselves with that which
may) shall much lament the loss of the rest, and be less pleased with this,
because so much (though indeed we know not certainly whether much or little) is
wanting; I would desire them to consider with themselves, in case there had
been twice or thrice as much more as all this comes too, what should have been
done with it? For my part, for so much as is here set out (all we had) I
thought it would do best, though somewhat long, yet as a thing very
extraordinary, and of great consequence to many good purposes and uses; I
thought, I say, it would do best to have it all Printed; Yet we had some
consideration about it, and it may be some others would have thought that less
might have served the turn: But I hope more will be of my mind, and there be
but few actions but afford somewhat that is extraordinary, and for some respect
or other observable and useful; Howsoever, I am confident, if all had been
extant, (supposing that the rest would have made much more) that none or very
few would have thought fit to have (...) all; and if it had once come to a
contraction or abridgement it may be much less then this must have served: It
is free for all men to think as they please; for my part all things considered,
I find no great want of the rest; and if I were put to it, I cannot tell
whether I can say, that I wish more were extant: yet it (...) great content,
(and I hope there is no Blasphemy or Superstition in it, if I (...) it to
providence) that after that long intermission, or hiatus, we have yet the (...)
Actions of all, whereby it might appear, after many goodly shows and promises,
so much hope and expectation; so many Prayers, so many Thank (...) and
Humiliations, what the end is of dealing with Devils, and using means that are
not lawful, to compass ambirious unwarrantable desires. Besides, be (...) more
or less that is wanting, yet I am confident we have the chiefest parts here
preserved; as part cularly, an exact account of his addresses and dealings with
the Emperor, and other great men and Princes, in the vii. and some following
Divisions; and that sad story of their promiscuous Copulation, under the
persuasion of obedience to God, very particularly related in the twelfth
Division; wherein as the cunning and malice of (...) Spirits, to lead away from
God, when they most pretend to God and godliness; so the danger of affected
singularity and (...), (the first ground of all this mischief) of Spiritual
pride and self conceir, is eminently set out to every man's observation, that is
not already far engaged (as in these times too to many) in such Principles.

But yet nevertheless I must acknowledge, that there is one part of the story
wanting, which I believe by most will be much desired: For whereas at the very
beginning, mention is made of a Stone, and that Stone not only there meant
oned, but afterward in every action almost, and apparition, throughout the
whole Book to the very end, still occurring and commemorated as a principal
thing; what it was, and how he came by it yea and what became of it, would be
known, if by any means it might: All that we are able to say of it, is this, It
was a stone in which, and out of which, by persons that were qualified for it,
and admitted to the sight of it; all Shapes and Figures mentioned in every
Action were seen, and voices heard: The form of it (...) round, as appears by
some course representations of it in the Margins, as page 395. 399. b. 413 b.
and it seems to have been of a pretty bigness: It seems it was most like unto
Cry al, (...) is called sometimes, as page 80. Inspecto Chrystallo, and page
177. b. nihil visibile apparuit in Chrystallo Sacrato, praeter ipsius crystalli
visibili formam. (...) very body knows by common experience, that smooth things
are fittest for representations, as Glasses and the like; but ordinarily such
things only are represented, as stand opposite and are visible in their
substance. But it is a secret of Magic (which happily may be grounded, in part
at least, upon some natural reason, not known unto us) to represent Objects
(externally not visible) in smooth things: And Roger Bacon (alias Bacun) in a
Manuscriptinscribed, De dictis and factis falsorum Mathematicorum and Daemonum,
communicated unto me by my I earned and much esteemed Friend, Dr. Windett,
Professor of Physic in London has an Observation to that purpose, in these
words, Hiis Mathematicis in malitia sua completis apparent Daemones
sensibilitur in forma humana and aliis formis variis, and dicunt and faciunt
multa eis mirabilia secundum quod Deus permittit. Aliquando apparent imaginary
ut in ung ue pueri virginis carminati; and in pelvibus and ensibus, and in
spathula arietis secundum modum eorum consecratis, and in caeteris rebus
politic: and Daemones ostendunt eis omnia quae petunt, secundum quod Deus
permittit. Vnde pueri sic inspicientes res politas vident imaginary res
furtive acceptas and ad quem locum deportatae sunt, and quae personae
asportaverunt; and sic de aliis, multis, daemones apparentes omnia haec illis
ostendunt.

Joach. Camerarius (that worthy man before spoken of) in his Proemium to
Plutarch, De Oraeulis, etc. has a strange Story upon the credit of a friend of
his whom he much respected (as himself professes) for his Piety and Wisdom. A
Gentleman of Norimberg had a Crystal (how he came by it is there to be read)
which had this virtue: Si qua de re certior fieri vellet, etc. if he desired to
know any thing past or future, that concerned him, yea, or any other (in most
things) let a young Boy ( Castum, one that was not yet of Age, etc.) look into
it, be should first see a man in it, so and so apparelled and afterward what
he desired. No other but a Boy, so qualified, could see any thing in it. This
Crystal became very famous in those parts; yea some learned men came to it to
be satisfied in doubtful points, and had their questions resolved: Yet at last,
(as well it deserved) it was broken in pieces by Camerarius his Friend. Many
such (...) are to be found of Magical Stones and Crystals: And though
Fernelius, De abditis rerum causis; and after him (as I remember) one, in worth
and esteem of all men, not inferior to Fernelius, Dr. Harvey, lately deceased,
turns the relation of a strange stone brought to one of the late Kings of
France, into an Allegory, or Physical explication of the power and proprieties
of the Element of Fire; yet I am not satisfied, but that the relation might be
literally true: For so it is, (as I remember here also, for I have none of
those Books by me at this time) related by Thuanus, and so by some others, very
learned, understood.

Now for the manner how he came by it, the particulars of the story cannot be
had by this here preserved, but only this in general, That it was brought unto
him by some, whom he thought to be Angels: So we find him telling the Emperor,
That the Angels of God had brought to him a Stone of that value, that no
earthly Kingdom is of that worthiness, as to be compared to the virtue or
dignity thereof. Page 272. in his conference with Dr. Curts, appointed by the
Emperor to treat with him; and also let him see the stone brought me by
Angelical Ministry: And we find this Note recorded, [ Prague, Tuesday 25
Septembris, I went to Dinner to the Spanish Ambassador, and carried with me the
Stone brought me by an Angel, and the fourth Book, wherein the manner of the
bringing of it is expressed.] And for the use of the Stone, besides what has
been said, this is observable: Some Spirits being in sight of E. K. out of the
Stone, Dr. Dee would have the Stone brought forth, but E. K. said, He had
rather see them thus, out of the Stone; to which the Doctor replies, That in
the Stone they had warrant that no wicked Spirits should enter; but without the
Stone illuders might deal with them, unless God prevented it, etc. From which
passage also we may learn, as from diverse others in the Book that although the
stone (as we said before) was the place, in which, and out of which,
ordinarily, most Apparitions were framed, yet it was not so always: For we
shall meet with diverse things in that kind that were seen and heard, without
any reference to the Stone: From the same place also we may learn, that the
said Stone was the same he also called the Shew-stone; as in many places
besides. However, it is certain enough that he had more Stones then one, which
he accounted sacred; observe Principal Stone, and this other Stone; and first
Sanctified Stone, usual Shew-stone, and Holy-stone, may be thought opposed and
different; but I understand it otherwise: This is the account we can give of
this principal Holy-Stone. And to supply the defect of the manner how it was
brought to him, the Reader, if he please, may find some satisfaction, if he
read the manner how it was taken away, and restored, very particularly set down,
as before (upon another occasion) was observed.

Besides this Stone or Stones there are diverse other sacred things mentioned,
that belonged to this personated Sanctuary, but nothing more frequently
mentioned then Curtains; a Curtain or Vail, as it is sometimes called. A man
would think at first, perchance, that it was somewhat outward, but it will be
found otherwise; it was seen in the Stone, and appeared of different forms and
colors, as they that read will quickly find.

Next unto these the Holy Table is chiefly considerable, ordering of it is
referred to Dr. Dee, which he durst not take upon himself, until he had warrant
from his Spiritual Teachers: This Table, which may well be called Magical, is
preserved and to be seen in Sir Thomas Cottons Library (from whence we had the
rest) and by his leave is here represented in a brass Cut; mention is made of
it, as I take it, where Dr. Dee proposes to his Teachers, Whether the Table
(for the middle cross of uniting the 4 principal parts) be made perfect or no:
You may see more of it, it is also called League Table; Table of Covenant, men's
a foederis in some places: The Pedestal of it is mentioned in two or three
places, and indeed a very curious Frame belonging unto it, yet to be seen in
the said Library. But I know not what to make of that, neither Nalu: nor the
Table appears; and the round Table or Globe appeared not. I believe it must
be understood of somewhat that had appeared before in the stone. The Reader
that will be so curious, by careful reading may soon find it out; I was not
willing to bestow too much time upon it.

But here remains a main business whereof we are to give an account to the
Reader: There were many Tables or Schemes at the end of the Book, containing
Letters, a. b. c. etc. disposed into little squares, with an Inscription over
each Table in that unknown Character (before spoken of) expressed in usual
Letters how it should be read. There is one for a Specimen here at the end of
the Preface; the rest were omitted, because it was judged needless, except it
were to increase the price of the Printed book. For first, Dr. Dee himself,
though he took a great deal of pains to understand the Mystery of them, and had
great hopes given him from time to time to reap the benefit (himself complains
of it in more then one place) of his toilsome work and long patience, yet it
never came to any thing: and if he made nothing of them (to benefit himself
thereby) what hopes had we? Besides, we may judge of these Tables, and all this
mystery of Letters, by what we have seen in others of the same kind. Johannes
Trithemius was a man that was supposed by most to have dealt with Spirits a
long time, and to have been instructed by them in some of those secrets that he
pretends unto by his Books. I know some have thought him innocent, or at least,
have attempted to justify him: Some affect such things to show (...) wit, and
think they shall be thought much wiser then other men, if they contradict
received (...) though their vanity and strong conceit of their own parts, be
their chief, if not only ground. Learned and Judicious (...) Vossius, has
showed himself very willing to think the best of him and his Books; yet he
gives it over at last, and rather concludes on the contrary. They that dare
defend Apollonius, the greatest upholder of Ethnicism that ever was, and by
most (...) accounted either a God, or a Magician, need not stick at any thing
in this kind: But say he was, what any man will have of him, ( Frithemius we
speak of, his Polygraphy, he set out in his life time, dedicated to the then
Emperor: He tells the World of the greatest wonders to be done by it, that ever
were heard of: All Wisdom and Arts, all Languages, Eloquence, and what not,
included in it. But I never heard of any man that could make any thing of it or
reaped any benefit in any kind; (...) I think is the reason that his
Steganography. (...) and prom sed in this first work was so long after his
death before it was Printed: It was expected it would have given some light to
the first; but neither of that, nor of this latter, could ever any thing, that
ever I could hear, bemade by any man. I have good ground for what I say: For
besides what others have acknowledged, I find learned Viginaire, (who in his
old age was (...) himself very Cabalistical, or it may be had some disposition
that way, though very learned otherwise, from his natural temper) as much
grounded in that book, as any man before him: He does plainly profess he could
make nothing of it: And truly if he could not, that had bestowed so much time
and pains in those unprofitable studies, I see little hopes that any man (...)
should. It would make a man almost hate Learning, to see what dotage, even the
(...) learned, are subject unto: I could bless them that know but little, so
(...) knew it is but little that they know, and were (...): But it (...) falls
out otherwise, that they that know but little, think that little to be much,
and are very proud of it; whereas much knowledge (or to speak properly more
knowledge) f well used, has this advantage, that it (...) men (...) of their
ignorance. The reading of Vigenaires book of Ciphers (which I once thought a
rare piece, as many other things of the same Author, which I had read) has
expressed these words from me in this place; and because thath so much affinity
with our present Theme, I was the bolder; But to return. Upon this
consideration, the Reader I hope, will not be sorry the rest of the Tables
(being many in number) were omitted. Though I must add withal, had I known or
thought any use could be made of them, having no better opinion of the Author
(him or them) I mean, from whom Dr. Dee had them) I should not have been very
forward to have had a hand in their coming abroad.

I should have told the Reader before but it may do well enough here, that
besides the particulars before specified, there were other things that belonged
to this holy Furniture (as Dr. Dee somewhere does speak) whereof mention is
made in some places: as Carpet, Candlestick, Taper, Table-Cloth, Cushion; and
some others perchance. But I know nothing needs be observed upon any of these.
I make no question but the Devil in all these things had a respect to the
Ceremonial Law especially; as also in those words, Move not, for the place is
holy, often repeated, which are also elsewhere expounded: The Interlocutors in
all this relation, are, D. (that is, Dr. Dee) and E. K. that is Edw. Kelley;
and the Spirits, to the number of some twenty, or thereabouts, so many named: (
Madini, Esemeli, Merifri, Ath, Galuah, Il, Jubenladece, Gabriel, Jam,
Moreorgran, Aph, Lasben, Uriel, Naluage, Mapsama, Aue, Ilemese, Gaza, Vaa,
Leveanael, Ben,) at least, but whether all Interlocutors, I know not, because I
do not remember, neither does it much concern.

There be diverse marginal Notes and Observations, which being of Dr. Dee his
own, are for the most part not inconsiderable, and some very remarkable, all
therefore here exhibited; but whereas in some places he had attempted to
represent the apparition, or some part of it, in Figures also; this being done
but sometimes, and in case it had been done oftener (except it were to satisfy
the childish humor of many Buyers of Books in this Age, when because they buy
not to read, must have somewhat to look upon; whence it comes to pass, that
much trash does pass for good ware, for the trimming sake, and on the contrary)
of little use, no notice is taken of it; except some Figure be in the Text it
self, and of some consequence, for the better understanding of the rest.

The Greek, p. 25. b. is exactly set out, as it was found, and yet to be seen
in the original, written by Dr. Dee himself: But little or nothing can be made
of it, as it is written; and it is a sign that Dr. Dee who writ it, as Edw.
Kelley reported it unto him, and afterward plodded upon it (as does appear by
some Conjectures and Interpretations found in the original, and here also
exhibited) as well as he could. was no very perfect Grecian; much less Edw.
Kelley, who could not so much as read it, which made Dr. Dee to write some
things that he would not have Kelley to read, in Greek Characters, though the
words were English: I would not alter any thing that was in the Original: But
the words, I believe spoken by the Spirit, (and so the Greek is warrantable
enough) were these, (...) This I think was intended of Edw. Kelley, who was
ever and anon upon projects to break with Dr. Dee, and to be gone, as here
presently after, and in diverse other places of this relation; nay, did really
forsake him sometimes for some time: The sense verbatim is this: This fellow
(or Friend) will overthrow this work (of Apparitions you must understand, to
which he was requisite, because the Devil had not that power over Dr. Dees
Body, to fit it, though he did promise it him, for such sights.) His baggage
(or furniture) is in a readiness. And he does very much endeavor: To withdraw
himself from this common friendship. Take heed, that you give him no occasion:
For he does mightily plot by art and cunning: How he may leave you for ever.
(...) in the first line, may seem unusual, for (...) or (...) but it is an
elegant Metaphore. (...) for (...) is not usual; and happily it should have
been (...) and so uttered; but that is nothing. Certainly he that could speak
so much Greek, (called here Syrian, to jeer Ed. Kelley) could not want Latin at
any time to express himself; which nevertheless, might be thought, where we
find him speaking English, to them that understood it not; so that Dr. Dee was
fain to interpret it. But we cannot give an account of all his fetches and
projects: He had a consideration, I make no question.

I cannot think of any thing else that the Reader need to be told, that is of
this nature, and it may be some what might have been spared: However the Reader
will consider, that as in all Books, so in this: It is one thing to read from
the beginning, and so to go on with heed and observation, without skipping; and
another thing to read here and there, which would require a perpetual Comment,
which is the wretchedness of most Readers, in these (...) days of Learning; and
therefore they have Comments (or Rhapsodies rather) accordingly; similes habent
labra lactuses, never more true of any thing.

It may be some will wonder what made the Spirits to fall upon English
Genealogies and Stories; it is at very beginning, therefore I take notice of it
for the Readers sake, that is yet (and cannot otherwise) a stranger to the
Book: The business is, Dr. Dee was (...) grown into great league and
confederacy with Albert Lasky, (or a lasco rather) a great man of Polonia. You
had before what Cambden (...) of him of his coming to England, at this
verytime, and his going away, which does very well agree with our dates here.
It seems, though nobly born, and to great dignity, yet his thoughts did aspire
much higher; and though no rich man, for a man of his rank and quality, yet
expecting such matters from Dr. Dee and his Spirits, as he did, he could find
money enough to supply their wants upon occasion. The Spirits were very glad of
the occasion, and did what they could to (...) him according to his humor:
Being then at that very time upon deliberations, that much depended of Alb.
Laskey and his good opinion; among other things, his Pedigree, which must needs
please a vain man very well, was taken into consideration: That every thing
there said, does exactly agree to the truth, as I do not warrant it so neither
am I at leisure at this time to take the pains to examine. We must never look
further in those things that are (...) by such, then if it were, or be
pertinent (true or false) to their end and present occasion. Besides, it is
very possible, (which I desire the Reader to take good notice of) that both
here and elsewhere the Transcribers, as they could not read sometimes, and were
forced to leave some blancks (though seldom to any considerable prejudice of
the sense) so they might mistake also, having to do with an Original that was
(and is yet to be seen) so defaced and worm-eaten as this is, written (as we
have said) by Dr. Dee himself.

Besides the authentickness of the Original Copy, written by Dr. Dee himself;
the Reader may know, that the Originals of the Letters that are here exhibited,
are all, ormost of them yet preserved, and to be seen in Sir Tho. Cottons
Library.

IV. I am now come to the last of the four things that I promised, to show the
several good uses that may be made of this Book, and which were principally
looked upon in the publishing of it. This order indeed I proposed to my self,
but great part of this occasion offering it self upon other matter, is already
performed in the former Discourse, so that but little is now left to be done.
However I will sum them up, and represent them together, that every Reader may
have them in readiness and in view for his use the better.

The first is against Atheists, and such as do not believe that there be any
Devils or Spirits: We have argued it, I confess, pretty largely, at the
beginning of this Discourse or Preface, and I hope some may receive competent
sat sfaction by what we have said: But if no Argument had been used, (setting
aside Scripture Authority, which would be impertinent against Atheists) I do
not know what can be more convincing then this sad Story, so exactly so
particularly, so faithfully delivered. Truly, they must see further then I do,
that can find what to answer (rationally) and to oppose: This is a great
point, and a great ground of Religion; but this is not all: For if there be
Spirits indeed, so wicked and malicious, so studious and so (...), to (...)
men, and to do mischief, which is their end, all which is so fully represented
in this Relation; then certainly must it follow, that there is a great
overruling Power, that takes care of the Earth, and of the Inhabitants of it;
of them especially that adore that Power, and worship it with true affection
and sincerity: For without this over ruling Power, what a miserable World
should we have? What man so sober or innocent, that could enjoy himself at any
time with any comfort or security? But again, what man can read this sad story,
and can be so persuaded of his own Wisdom or innocence, but will in some degree
reflect upon himself, and will be moved to praise God, that notwithstanding
many provocations in several kinds (as damnable curiosity, open profaneness,
frequent Oaths, Curses, Perjuries, scandalous Life, and the like) God has
been pleased to protect and preserve him from the force and violence of such
enemies of mankind?

I said before, from les, beginnings greatest confusions had ensued, which is
very true as in the case of Bacchus particularly many Ages before; and in the
case of Mahomet afterward, (two notable lewd Euthusiasts, by whom as
Instruments, evil Spirits, by Gods permission, brought great alterations in
Governments, and wrought much mischief and (...) among Men and Women) we shall
elsewhere show more at large. By due consideration of all Circumstances, as
chiefly their confident and reiterated Addresses unto, and Attempts upon so
many great men in Power and Authority, and the like; I am much of opinion that
these Spirits had as great hopes of Dr. Dee, as ever they had of Bacchus or
Mahomet. But God was not (...) at that time to permit that their malice and
subtilty should prevail. And I think, if we consider it well, we have reason to
(...) God for it. England might have been overrun with Anabaptism (when I say
Anabaptism, I mean Anabaptism confirmed and in full power, not as it appears in
its first pretentions) long before this: God be thanked that it was not then,
and God keep it from it still, I hope is the Prayer of all truly sober and
Religious And in very deed I know no reason, but the Wisdom and prudence of
their Majesty's Council that then were, in opposing Dr. Dees (...) addresses
and Solicitations, may (under God) challenge and (...) some part of our Thanks
and Acknowledgement.

Again, The Devil we see can Pray and Preach, (as to outward appearance we
mean; for truly and really, God forbid that any thing sacred and holy should be
thought to proceed from Devils) and talk of Sanctity and Mortification, as well
as the best. And what he can in his own person, or by himself immediately,
there is no question, but he does by his Ministers and Instruments much more,
more ordinarily and frequently I mean: Let any man judge then, whether it be
the part of a sober wise man, not only to hear such men as can give no account
of their calling, but also to follow them, to embrace their Doctrine, to be of
their number or Congregation; and all this, upon this account, because they can
pray and preach very well, (as they think and judge at least) and talk very
godlily and zealously? How much more inexcusable they that will clave unto
such, though they see and know them scandalous in their Lives, Proud, Insolent,
Ignorant, Seditious, Intolerable, because they can pray, and preach, and talk,
as best agrees with their own humor, and gives them best content? Can any man
think they follow God in this, who would have all things done in order, and is
not a God of Confusion, (1 Cor. 14. 33, 40.) when all they do, tends to nothing
else but disorder and confusion? I confess it is possible, that men lawfully
called may prove bad enough, we have diverse examples in the Scripture. But if a
man, simply and ignorantly be misled by such, certainly his judgment will be
much lighter then they can expect, who will not use the means that God has
ordained, in so great and weighty a business as the salvation of Souls is. I
know not what these men can say for themselves, except it be, that they are
resolved to make use of the Liberty of the times to please their humor; they
may do it, but if that bring them to Heaven, they have good luck.

But the business of praying, is that I would principally insist upon: You see
here how Dr. Dee, where he gives an account of himself to the Emperor, and
others, bears himself much upon this, that so many years he had been an earnest
Suitor unto God by Prayer to obtain Wisdom, such wisdom as he was ambitious of.
I believe him, that he had prayed very earnestly, and with much importunity
many times: This was the thing that made him so confident of his Spirits, that
they must needs be good Spirits and Angels. I know a man, I have no comfort to
tell it, but that I would not conceal any thing that may be a warning unto
others, and yet I will have a respect unto him too: But I knew one, a very
innocent man (in his outward conversation, and as I believe very really)
Humble, Religious, very Learned and Orthodox, and one that had suffered for his
Conscience, as others have done in these times: This worthy man, being engaged
in a controverted Argument, upon which his fancy had wrought very much, or
rather which had much wrought upon his fancy; he had written much, filled much
Paper, and was desirous to communicate unto me as his friend what he had done:
But when I perceived that the drift of his writing was out of the Law and the
Prophets, to show the necessity of some things which I thought of a more
indifferent nature; I was not willing to meddle with it; and begun to argue
against his main drift, and to show my disliking. After many words to and fro,
he began to press me with this, that he had often prayed with much earnestness,
and he was very confident that God had heard his Prayers: Yea, he proceeded so
far, that if God were true, he could not be deceived, and used many other words
to the same purpose, at which I was much amazed, but could do no good upon him,
such was his confidence and violence upon this occasion, though otherwise a
very moderate ingenuous man: And thus I found him more then once, or twice.
Truly, I think God was very merciful unto him, that took him away in good time.
But certainly this business of Prayer and praising, is a business as of great
comfort (the greatest that mortal man is capable of upon earth) so of much more
danger and delusion, then many do believe. And if caution and circumspection be
to be used in any thing that belongs to Religion, I think it ought in Prayer,
as much as any thing. And since I have adventured to tell one story upon mine
own credit, I will tell one more upon better authority, which I have long
desired (for the observableness of it) to communicate unto the world, and to
that end, had once inserted it in a Treatise of mine, which I thought would
have been Printed, but it was not: I will first give the English of it, that
all men may reap the benefit, and then set it down in the words of my Author
(mine own Father Isaac Casaubon, of b. m.) as I have it to show under his hand.

At a Consistory in Geneva, upon a Friday, 18 July, 1589. The case of one Mr.
Nicholas being there proposed to the Assembly to be considered of, who was wont
to insinuate himself into private Houses, under pretense of praying, and made
small congregations: The business was disliked by the Pastors; First, because
nothing in the Church of God ought to be done without order. Secondly, because
to turn such duties of Religion to matter of Traffic to get money only,
(without any other end or calling) was not lawful. Thirdly and lastly, his
battalogy, (or vain repetition of words) was not to be suffered: Then upon this
occasion it was related by Mr. Beza, that the Saturday before, whilst that
sharp conflict was, which we had before our eyes, ( to wit, between the
Genevians, and the Duke of Savoys Forces) that a certain Woman addressed her
self to him, saying, What Mr. Beza, will you make Prayers here? To which he had
answered, No: What, do you think I do behold these things with mine eyes only.
and do not pray to God in my heart? Giving this reason for his answer he had
made to the Woman: [ It is not so expressed in the Latin, that the following
words were Beza's words, but the coherence of matter does so require it] That
Prayer was certainly a holy thing, which it did not become any man to apply
himself unto, ( or to undertake) without due preparation: And that they were
deceived, who thought it so easy a thing to pray rightly: And that care also
should be taken lest [ under a color of zeal and devotion] a way be made to
superstition: The Latin words are these, [Die Veneris, Julii 18. 1589. Cum
relatum esset in coetum, de Mag. Nicolao, qui insinuaret se in domos varias
(...) and ita aliquando coetus, etst paruos, coire solitos, pastoribus res
improbata est: Primum, quia extra ordinem, nihil in Dei Ecclesia fieri debet:
Deinde, quia (...) facere (...) nefas. Tertio, hominis (...) non ferenda
Narratum est tum a B se die Sabbathi proxime praecedente, dum acerrimum illud
praelium committeretur, quod nobis erat ante oculos, interrogatum a
mulieracula, Quid tu D. B. vis preces hic facere? Respondisse, Nequaquam. Tu ne
enim (ait) me putas, haec oculis tantum spectare, nec vota in animo ad Deum
Opt. Max. fundere? Omnino, res sancta (...) ad quam non nisi meditatum oporteat
accedere, falluntur enim qui rem putant esse facilem, preces been concipere.
Simul cavendum, ne alicui superstitioni viam imprudentes aperiamus.]



In the last place, All men may take warning by this example, how they put
themselves out of the protection of Almighty God, either by presumptuous
unlawful wishes and desires, or by seeking not unto Devils only, directly
(which Dr. Dee certainly never did, but abhorred the thought of it in his
heart) but unto them that have next relation unto Devils, as Witches, Wizzards,
Conjurers, Astrologers, (that take upon them to foretell humane events) Fortune
tellers, and the like, yea and all Books of that subject, which I doubt, were a
great occasion of Dr. Dees delusion: That men are commonly cheated by such, is
sure enough; and those that are not very fools, would take heed how they deal
with them, and avoid them, to avoid the Imputation of Fools; but those that are
wise, much more, if they can more then cheat; for the more they can do, the
more they know they have of the Devil in them: Wretched people! that will not,
dare not trust God, who as he is the only fountain of goodness, so only knows
what is good for every man. They may rejoice for a time, and applaud themselves
in their conceited successes, but misery, if they repent not, will be their
end; and it is a great sign that God is very angry with them, when he does
suffer them to thrive by means which Himself has cursed.

POSTCRIPT.
SInce this Preface was written, and almost printed, I was showed a Book,
entitled, Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum, etc. by Elias Ashmole Esquire and in some
Annotations there, at the end, an account concerning Dr. Dee and Edw. Kelley,
(there styled Sir Edward Kelley) out of a Diary of Dr. Dees, all written with
his own hand: As I do not question the Gentleman's fidelity in this business, so
I make as little question but Dr. Dee's own hand will be found to agree in all
matters of Fact both here and there, if any shall take the pains to compare.
And it may be the Reader may receive some further satisfaction in some
particulars by his labor, which is the reason that I mention the Book here,
being but lately come to my knowledge; His Judgment either concerning Dr. Dee,
or Kelley, I meddle not with; and it may be, had he seen what is here to be
seen, he would have been of another opinion in some things: Here is enough, I
am sure, to satisfy any man that is not very much preoccupied, or otherwise
engaged by particular ends. As for those Reports concerning Kelley, (some
whereof concern Dr. Dee also) he tells us of; as I believe him, that he has
heard so, so I must (and may truly) profess, that I have met with far contrary,
and in my judgment, and by this account here given us by Dr. Dee, much more
probable: And particularly, that Kelley was put in Prison by the Emperor, for a
notable Chemical cheat that he had put upon him; the particulars whereof,
though they were fully related unto me, yet I will not adventure upon, lest I
mistake in some terms of art, or petty circumstance of fact. And let the Reader
judge by that account, Dr. Dee (who best knew) does give us here throughout the
whole Book of this Kelley, whether Wevers Story in his Funeral Monum. page 45,
46. of damnable Necromancy, and other Diabolical Conjuration, practiced by
Kelley in Lancashire, be not (besides what is there said and attested) much
more probable, then any thing that has been or can be said by others, to his
justification or commendation: Which indeed does make Doctor Dee's case
altogether inexcusable, that believing and knowing the man to be such a one, he
would have to do with him, and expected good by his Ministeries; but that the
Doctor his Faith, and his intellectualls (through Gods just judgment, as we
have said) were so much in the power and government of his Spirits, that they
might persuade him to any thing, under color of doing service unto God, yea
had it been to cut his own Fathers throat, as we see in the Relation, that they
persuaded him to lie with another man's Wife, and prostitute his own to a vile,
and, by himself belived, Diabolical man.

Besides, I have been told by many, that Dr. Dee, very poor and every way
miserable, dyed at Mortlack, here about London, which does not seem to agree
with the report in those Annotations: But enough of them: Neither indeed have I
said any thing at all of purpose to oppose the Author, but to give this further
satisfaction to the Reader, or rather to the truth, which I thought I was bound
to do.

The passage in Wevers Funeral Monuments, page 45, 46. concerning Kelley, for
their satisfaction that have not the Book, is this; Kelley, (otherwise called
Talbot) that famous English Alchymist of our times, who flying out of his own
Country (after he had lost both his ears at Lancaster) was entertained by
Rodolph the second, and last of that Christian name, Emperor of Germany; for
whom Elizabeth of famous memory, sent (very secretly) Captain Peter Gwyn, with
some others, to persuade him to return back to his own Native home, which he
was willing to do; and thinking to escape away in the night, by stealth, as he
was clammering over a Wall in his own House in Pragne (which bears his name to
this day, and sometimes was an old Sanctuary) he sell down from the
Battlements, broke his legs, and bruised his body, of which hurts within a
while after, he departed this World.

Sed quorsum haec? you will say: Then thus, This Diabolical questioning of the
dead, for the knowledge of future accidents, was put in practice by the said
Kelley, who upon a certain Night, in the Park of Walton in le dale, in the
County of Lancaster, with one Paul Waring, (his fellow-companion in such Deeds
of darkness) invocated some one of the Infernal Regiment, to know certain
passages in the life, as also what might be known by the Devils foresight, of
the manner and time of the death of a Noble young Gentleman, as then in
Wardship. The Black Ceremonies of that Night being ended, Kelley demanded of
one of the Gentleman's servants, what Corse was the last buried in Law
Churchyard, a Church thereunto adjoining, who told him of a poor man that was
buried there but the same day: He and the said Waring, entreated this foresaid
servant to go with them to the Grave of the man so lately interred, which he
did; and withal, did help them to dig up the Carcass of the poor Catiff, whom
by their Incantations, they made him (or rather some evil Spirit through his
Organs) to speak, who delivered strange Predictions concerning the said
Gentleman. I was told thus much by the said Serving-man, a Secondary Actor in
that dismal abhorred business; and diverse Gentlemen and others are now living
in Lancashire, to whom he has related this Story. And the Gentlemen himself
(whose memory I am bound to honor) told me a little before his death, of this
Conjuration by Kelley, as he had it by relation from his said Servant and
Tenant, only some circumstances excepted, which he thought not fitting to come
to his Masters knowledge.

Dr. Dee's Apology, Sent to the Archbishop of CANTERBURY. 1594/5. OR, A Letter
containing a most brief Discourse Apogeticall, with a plain Demonstration, and
fervent Protestation for the lawful, sincere, very faithful and Christian
course of the Philosophical Studies and Exercises, of a certain studious
Gentleman: An ancient Servant to Her most Excellent Majesty Royal.
To the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
and Metropolitan of all England, one of Her Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council: my singular good Lord.
MOst humbly and heartily I crave your Graces pardon, if I offend any thing, to
send, or present unto your Graces hand, so simple a Discourse as this is:
Although, by some sage and discreet my friends their opinion, it is thought not
to be impertinent, to my most needful suits, presently in hand, (before her
most Excellent Majesty Royal, your Lordships good Grace, and other the Right
Honorable Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council) to make some part of my
former studies, and studious exercises (within and for these 46 years last
past, used and continued) to be first known and discovered unto your Grace, and
other the right Honorable, my good Lords of her Majesty's privy Council: And
secondly, afterward, the same to be permitted to come to public view: Not so
much, to stop the mouths, and, at length to stay the impudent attempts, of the
rash, and malicious devisers, and contrivers of most untrue, foolish, and
wicked reports, and fables, of, and concerning my foresaid studious exercises,
passed over, with my great, (yea incredible) pains, travells, cares, and
costs, in the search, and learning of true Philosophy; As, therein, So, to
certify, and satisfy the godly and unpartiall Christian hearer, or reader
hereof: That, by his own judgment, (upon his due consideration, and
examination of this, no little parcel, of the particulars of my foresaid
studies, and exercises philosophical annexed) He will, or may, be sufficiently
informed, and persuaded; That I have wonderfully labored, to find, follow,
use, and haunt the true, straight, and most narrow path, leading all true,
devout, zealous, faithful, and constant Christian students, ex valle hac
miseriae, and miseria istius vallis: and tenebrarum Regno; and tenebris istius
Regni, ad montem sanctum Syon, and ad coelestia tabernacula. All thanks, are
most due, therefore, unto the Almighty: Seeing, it so pleased him, (even from
my youth, by his divine favor, grace, and help) to insinuate into my heart, an
insatiable zeal, and desire, to know his truth: And in him, and by him,
incessantly to seek, and listen after the same; by the true Philosophical
method and harmony proceeding and ascending, (as it were) gradatim, from things
visible, to consider of things invisible: from things bodily, to conceive of
things spiritual: from things transitory, and momentary, to mediate of things
permanent: by things mortal ( visible and invisible) to have some perseverance
of immortality. And to conclude, most brieflly; by the most mervailous frame of
the whole World, philosophically viewed, and circumspectly weighed, numbered,
and measured (according to the talent, and gift of GOD, from above allotted, for
his divine purposes effecting) most faithfully to love, honor, and glorify
always, the Framer, and Creator thereof. In whose workmanship, his infinite
goodness, unsearchable wisdom, and Almighty power, yea, his everlasting power,
and divinity, may (by innumerable means) be manifested, and demonstrated. The
truth of which my zealous, careful, and constant intent, and endeavor
specified, may (I hope) easily appear by the whole, full and due survey, and
consideration of all the Books, Treatises, and Discourses, whose Titles only,
are, at this time, here annexed, and expressed: As they are set down in the
sixth Chapter, of another little Rhapsodicall Treatise, entitled, the
Compendious Rehearsal, etc. written above two years since: for those her
Majesty's two honorable Comissioners; which her most Excellent Majesty had most
graciously sent to my poor Cottage in Mortclacke: to understand the matters,
and causes at full; through which, I was so extremely urged to procure at her
Majesty's hands such Honorable Surveyors and witnesses to be assigned, for the
due proof of the contents, of my most humble and (...) supplicat on, exhibited
unto her most Excellent Majesty, at Hampton Court, An 1592. November. 9. Thus
therefore (as follows) is the said 6. Chapter there, recorded.

My labors and pains bestowed at diverse times, to pleasure my native Country:
by writing of sundry BOOKS, and Treatises: some in Latin, some in English, and
some of them, written, at her Majesty's commandment.

Of which BOOKS, and Treatises, some are printed, and some unprinted. The
printed BOOKS: and Treatises are these following:

1. PRopaedeumata Aphoristica, De praestantioribus quibusdam Naturae vir.
tutibus. Aphorismi. 120. Anno. 1558. 2. Monas Hieroglyphica, Mathematice,
Anagogiceque explicata; ad Maximisianum (Dei gratia) Romanorum, Bohemiae, and
Hungariae, Regem sapientissimum, Anno 1564. 3. Epistola ad eximium Ducis Vrbini
Mathematicum (Fredaricum Commandinum) praefixa libello Machometi Bagdedini, De
superficierum Divisionibus; edito in lucem, opera mea, and ejusdem Commandini
Vrbinatis; Impressa Pisauri. Anno 1570. 4. The Brytish Monarchy (otherwise
called the Petty Navy Royal:) for the politic security; abundant wealth, and
the triumphant state of this Kingdom, (with Gods favor,) procuring, Anno
1576. 5. My Mathematical preface annexed to Euclide, (by the right worshipful
Sir Henry Billingsley Knight, in the English language first published) written
at the earnest request of sundry right worshipful Knights, and other very well
learned men. Wherein are many Arts, of me wholly invented (by name, definition,
propriety and use,) more then either the Grecian, or Roman Mathematicians,
have left to our knowledge, Anno 1570. 6. My diverse and many Annotations, and
Inventions Mathematical, added in sundry places of the foresaid English
Euclide, after the tenth Book of the same. Anno 1570. 7. Epistola prefixa
Ephemeridibus Johannis Field Angli, cui rationem declaraveram Ephemerides
conscribendi. Anno 1557. 8. Paralaticae Commentationis, Praxeosque Nucleus
quidam. Anno 1573.
The unprinted Books and Treatises, are these: some, perfectly finished: and
some, yet unfinished.

9. THe first great volume of Famous and rich Discoveries: wherein (also) is
the History of King Solomon, every three years, his Ophirian Voyage. The
Originals of Presbyter Joannes: and of the first great Cham, and his successors
for many years following: The description of diverse wonderful Isles in the
Northern, Scythian, Tartarian, and the other most Northern Seas, and near
under the North Pole: by Record, written above 1200. years since: with diverse
other rarities, Anno 1576. 10. The Brytish Complement, of the perfect Art of
Navigation; A great volume: in which, are contained our Queen Elizabeth her
Arithmeticall Tables Gubernautick: for Navigation by the Paradoxall compass
(of me, invented anno (...).) and Navigation by great Circles: and for
longitudes, and latitudes; and the variation of the compass finding most
easily, and speedily: yea, (if need be) in one minute of time, and sometime,
without sight of Sun, Moon or Star; with many other new and needful inventions
Gubernautick, Anno 1576. 11. Her Majesty's Title Royal, to many foreign
Countries, Kingdoms, and Provinces, by good testimony and sufficient proof
recorded: and in 12. Velum Skins of Parchment, fair written: for her Majesty's
use: and at her Majesty's commandment, Anno 1578. 12. De (...) Nomine,
Authoritate, and Potentia: dedicated to her Majesty, Anno 1579. 13.
Prolegomena and Dictata Parisiensia, in Euclidis Elementorum Geometricorum,
librum primum, and secundum; in Collegio Rhemensi, An. 1550. 14. De usu Globi
Coelestis: ad Regem Edoardum sextum. An. 1550. 15. The Art of Logic, in
English, Anno 1547. 16. The 13. Sophistical Fallacians, with their
discoveries, written in English meter, Anno. 1548. 17. Mercurius Coelestis:
libri 24. written at Lovayn, An. 1549. 18. De Nubium, Solis, Lunae, ac
reliquorum Planetarum, immo ipfius stelliferi Coeli, ab infimo Terrae Centro,
distantiis, mutuisque intervallis, and eorundem omnium Magnitudine liber (...)
ad Edoardum Sextum, Angliae Regem, Anno 1551. 19. Aphorismi Astrologici 300.
Anno 1553. 20. The true cause, and account (not vulgar) of Floods and Ebbs:
written at the request of the Right Honorable Lady, Lady Jane, Duchess of
Northumberland, Anno 1553. 21. The Philosophical and Poetical Original
occasions of the Configurations, and names of the heavenly Asterismes, written
at the request of the same Duchess, Anno 1553. 22. The Astronomicall, and
Logisticall rules, and Canons, to calculate the Ephemerides by, and other
necessary Accounts of heavenly motions: written at the request, and for the use
of that excellent Mechanicien Master Richard Chancellor, at his last voyage into
Moschovia. Anno 1553. 23. De Acribologia Mathematica; volumen magnum: sexdecim
continens libros, Anno 1555. 24. Inventum Mechanicum, Paradoxum, De nova
ratione delineandi Circumferentiam Circularem: unde, valde rara alia excogitari
perficique poterunt problemata, Anno 1556. 25. De speculis Comburentibus: libri
sex, Anno 1557. 26. De Perspectiva illa, qua peritissimi utuntur Pictores. Anno
1557. 27. Speculum unitatis: sive Apologia pro Fratre Rogerio Bachone Anglo: in
qua docetur nihil illum per Daemoniorum fecisse auxilia, sed philosophum fuisse
maximum; naturaliterque and modis homini Christiano licitis, maximas fecisse
res, quas indoctum solet vulgus, in Daemoniorum refer facinora, Anno 1557.
28. De Annuli Astronimici multiplici usu lib. 2. Anno 1557. 29. Trochillica
Inventa, lib. 2. Anno 1558. 30. (...) lib. 3. Anno 1558. 31. De tertia and
praecipua Perspectivae part, quae de Radiorum fractione tractat, lib. 3. Anno
1559. 32. De Itinere subterraneo, lib. 2. Anno 1560. 33. De Triangulorum
rectilineorum Areis, lib. 3. demonstrati: ad exeltissimum Mathematicum Petrum
Nonium conscripti, Anno 1560. 34. Cabalae Hebraicae compendiosa tabella, Anno
1562. 35. Reipublicae Britanicae Synopsis: in English, Anno 1565. 36. De
Trigono Circinoque Analogico, Opusculum Mathematicum and Mechanicum, lib. 4.
Anno 1565. 37. De stella admiranda, in Cassiopeae Asterismo, coelitus demissa
ad orbem usque Veneris: Iterumque in Coeli penetralia perpendiculariter
retracta, post decimum sextum suae apparitionis mensem, An. 1573. 38.
Hipparchus Redivivus, Tractatulus, Anno 1573. 39. De unico Mago, and triplici
Herod, eoque Antichristiano. An. 1570. 40. Ten sundry and very rare Heraldical
Blasonings of one Crest or Cognizance, lawfully confirmed to certain ancient
Arms, lib. 1. An. 1574. 41. Atlantidis, (vulgariter, Indiae, Occidentalis
nominatae) emendatior descriptio Hydrographica, quam ulla alia adhuc evulgata,
An. 1580. 42. De modo Evangelii Jesu Christi publicandi, propagandi,
stabiliendique, inter Infideles Atlanticos: volumen magnum, libris distinctum
quatuor: quorum primus ad Serenissimam nostram Potentissimamque Reginam
Elizabetham inscribitur: Secundus, ad summos privati suae sacrae Majestatis
consilij senatores: Tertius, Hi sp aniarum Regem, Philippum: Quartus, ad
Pontificem Romanum, Anno 1581. 43. Navigationis ad Carthayum per
Septentrionalia Scythiae and Tartariae litora, Delineatio Hydrographica:
Arthuro Pit, and Carolo Jackmano Anglis, versus illas parts Navigaturis, in
manus tradita; cum admirandarum quarundam Insularum, annotatione, in illis
subpolaribus partibus jacentium, An. 1580. 44. Hemisphaerij Borealis
Geographica, atque Hydrographica descriptio: long a vulgatis chartis diversa:
Anglis quibusdam, versus Atlantidis Septentrionalia litora, navigationem
instituentibus, dono data, An. 1583. 45. The Originals, and chief points, of
our ancient Brytish Histories, discoursed upon, and examined, An. 1583. 46. An
advise and discourse about the Reformation of the vulgar Julian year, written
by her Majesty's commandment, and the Lords of the privy Council, Anno 1582.
47. Certain Considerations, and conferrings together, of these three sentences,
(aunciently accounted as Oracles ( Nosce teipsum: Homo Homini Deus: Homo Homini
Lupus, An. 1592 48. De hominis Corpore, Spiritu, and Annima: sive Microcosmicum
totius Philosophiae Naturalis Compendium, lib 1. Anno 1591.
With many other Books, Pamphlets, Discourses, Inventions, and Conclusions, in
diverse Arts and matters: whose names, need not in this Abstract to be notified:
The most part of all which, here specified, lie here before your Honors upon
the Table, on your left hand. But by other books and Writings of another sort,
(if it so please God, and that he will grant me life, health, and due
maintenance thereto, for some ten or twelve years next ensuing) I may,
hereafter make plain, and without doubt, this sentence to be true, Plura
latent, quam patent.

Thus far (my good Lord) have I set down this Catalogus, out of the foresaid
sixth Chapter, of the book, whose title is this:

49. The Compendious rehearsal of John Dee, his dutiful declaration and
proof of the course and race of his studious life, for the space of half an
hundred years, now (by Gods favor and help) fully spent, etc.

To which compendious rehearsal, does now belong an Appendix, of these two
last years: In which I have had many just occasions, to confess, that Homo
Homini Deus, and Homo Homini Lupus, was and is an Argument, worthy of the
decyphering, and large discussing: as may, one day, hereafter (by Gods help) be
published, in some manner very strange. And besides all the rehearsed Books and
Treatises of my writing, or handling hitherto, I have just cause, lately given
me to write and publish a Treatise, with Title (50.) De Horizonte AEternitatis:
to make evident, that one Andreas Libavius, in a book of his, printed the last
year, has unduly considered a phrase of my Monas Hyeroglyphica: to his
misliking, by his own unskilfulnesse in such matter: and not understanding my
apt application thereof, in one of the very principal places, of the whole
Book. And this book of It may now be here also remembered, that almost three
years after the writing of this Letter, I did somewhat satisfy the request of
an Honorable Friend in Court, by speedily penning some matter concerning her
Majesty's Sea-Soveraigntie: under this title. 51. Thalattocratia Brytannica.
mine, by Gods help and favor (shall be dedicated unto her most Excellent
Majesty Royal: And this Treatise does contain three books;

1. The first Entitled, De Horizonte: liber Mathematicus and Physicus.

2. The second, De AEternitate: liber Theologicus, Metaphysicus and
Mathematicus.

3. The third, De Horizonte AEternitatis: liber Theologicus, Mathematicus, and
Hierotechnicus. Sive, De Brytanico Maris Imperio, Collectanea (...): 4. dierum
Spacio, celeri conscripta calamo. Anno. 1597. September. 20. Mancestriae.


Truly I have great cause to praise and thank God, for your Graces very
charitable using of me: both in sundry points else, and also in your favorable
yielding to, yea and notifying the due means for the performance of her Sacred
Majesty's most gracious and bountiful disposition, resolution, and very royal
beginning, to restore and give unto me (her Ancient faithful servant) some due
maintenance to lead the rest of my old days, in some quiet and comfort: with
ability, to retain some speedy, fair, and Orthographicall writers, about
me; and the same skillful in Latin and Greek (at the least:) as well for my own
books, and Works, fair, andcorrect ly to be written (such I mean, as either her
most Excellent Majesty, out of the premises will make choice of, or command
to be finished or published: or such of them, as your grace shall think meet or
worthy for my farther labor to be bestowed on) as else for the speedy, fair,
and true writing out of other ancient Authors their good and rare works, in
greek or Latin: which by GODS Providence, have been preserved from the spoil
made of my Library, and of all my movable goods here, etc. Anno 1583. Although
that my last voyage beyond the Seas, was duly undertaken (by her Majesty's good
favor and license) as by the same words may appear in the Letter, written by
the Right Honorable Lord Treasurer, unto your Grace in my behalf, and her most
Excellent Majesty willing his Honor so to do. Anno. 1590. (...) 20. of January.
In which Library, were about 4000. books; whereof, 700. were anciently
written by hand; Some in Greek, some in Latin, some in Hebrew, And some in
other languages (as may by the whole Catalogus thereof appear.) But the great
losses and damages which in sundry sorts I have sustained, do not so much
grieve my heart, as the rash, lewd, fond, and most untrue fables, and reports
of me, and my Studies Philosophical, have done, and yet do; which commonly,
after their first hatching, and devilish devising, immediately with great
speed, are generally all the Realm overspread; and to some, seem true; to
other, they are doubtful; and to only the wise, modest, discreet, godly, and
charitable (and chiefly to such as have some acquaintance with me) they appear,
and are known to be fables, untruths, and utterly false reports, and slanders.
Well, this shall be my last charitable giving of warning, and fervent
protestation to my Countrymen, and all other in this case;

A fervent PROTESTATION.
BEfore the Almighty our GOD, and your Lordships good Grace, this day, on the
peril of my souls damnation (if I lie, or take his name in vain herein) I
take the same GOD, to be my witness; That with all my heart, with all my soul;
with all my strength, power and understanding (according to the measure
thereof, which the Almighty has given me) for the most part of the time, from
my youth hitherto, I have used and still use, good, lawful, honest, christian
and divinely prescribed means to attain to the knowledge of those truths,
which are meet, and necessary for me to know; and wherewithto do his divine
Majesty such service, as he has, does, and will call me unto, during this my
life: for his honor and glory advancing, and for the benefit, and commodity
public of this Kingdom; so much, as by the will and purpose of God, shall
lie in my skill, and hability to perform: as a true, faithful, and most
sincerely dutiful servant, to our most gracious and incomparable Queen
Elizabeth, and as a very comfortable fellow-member of the body politic,
governed under the scepter Royal of our earthly Supreme head (Queen Elizabeth)
and as a lively sympathicall, and true symetricall fellowmember of that holy
and mystical body, Catholiquely extended and placed (wheresoever) on the
earth: in the view, Knowledge, direction, protection, illumination and
consolation of the Almighty, most Blessed, most holy, most glorious,
comajesticall, coeternall, and coessentiall Trinity: The Head of that Body,
being only our Redeemer, Christ Jesus, perfect God, and perfect man: whose
return in glory, we faithfully awaite; and daily do very earnestly cry unto
him, to hasten his second coming for his elects sake; iniquity does so on this
earth abound and prevail, and true faith with Charity and Evangelicall
simplicity, have but cold; slender and uncertrin intertainment among the
worldly-wise men of this world.

Therefore (herein concluding) I beseech the Almighty God, most abundantly to
increase and confirm your Graces heavenly wisdom, and endue you with all the
rest of his heavenly gifts, for the relieving, refreshing and comforting, both
bodily and spiritually, his little flock of the faithful, yet militant here on
earth.

Amen.
An EPILOGUE.
Good my Lord, I beseech Your Grace, to allow of my plain and comfortable
Epilogus, for this matter at this time. 1. Seeing my studious exercises, and
conversation civil, may be abundantly testified, to my good credit, in the
most parts of all Christendom; and that by all degrees of Nobility, by all
degrees of the Learned, and by very many other, of godly and Christian
disposition, for the space of 46. years trial: (as appears by the Records
lately viewed by two honorable witnesses, by Commission from her Majesty;) 2.
And seeing, for these 36. years last past, I have been her most Excellent
Majesty's very true, faithful and dutiful servant; at whose Royal mouth, I
never received any one word of reproach; but all of favor, and grace: In whose
Princely Countenance, I never perceived frown toward me, or discontented
regard, or view on me: but at all times favorable, and gracious: to the great
joy and comfort of my true, faithful, and loyal heart. And (thirdly) Seeing,
the works of my hands, and words of my mouth (here before notified, in the
Schedule of my books, and writings) may bear lively witness of the thoughts
of my heart, and inclination of my mind, generally, (as all wise men do know,
and Christ himself does avouch,) It might, in manner seem needless, thus
carefully (though most briefly and speedily) to have warned or confounded the
scornful, the malicious, the proud, and the rash in their untrue reports,
opinions, and fables of my studies, or exercises Philosophical: but that, it
is of more importance, that the godly, the honest, the modest, the discreet,
grave, and charitable Christians ( English or other,) lovers of Justice, truth,
and good learning, may hereby receive certain comfort in themselves (to
perceive, that Veritas tandem praevalebit) and sufficiently be weaponed and
armed with sound truth, to defend me against such kind of my adversaries:
hereafter they will begin afresh or hold on obstinately in their former errors,
vain imaginations, false reports, and most ungodly slanders of me and my
studies. Therefore, (to make all this cause, for ever, before God and man, out
of all doubt:) Seeing, your Lordships good grace, are, as it were, our high
Priest, and chief Ecelesiasticall Minister, (under our most dread and
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth) to whose censure and judgment, I submit all
my studies and Exercises; yea all my Books past, present, and hereafter to be
written, by me (of my own skill, judgment, or opinion,) I do, at this present
time, most humbly, sincerely, and unfainedly, and in the name of Almighty God,
(yea for his honor and glory) request, and beseech your Grace, (when, and as
conveniently you may, to be well and thoroughly certified of me, what I am,
Intus and in cute: Reverendissime in Christo Pater, and Dignissime
Archipraesul, cognosce and agnosce vultum tam internum, quam externum pecoris
tui: And wherein I have used, do or shall use, pen, speech, or conversation,
otherwise then as it appertains to a faithful, careful, sincere, and humble
servant of Christ Jesu, That your Grace would vouchsafe to advertise me. So, I
trust, Ultima respondebunt primis: in such sort, as this Authentic Record in
Latin annexed ( ad perpetuam rei memoriam) does testify: having never
hitherto had occasion to show that, in any place of Christendom: to testify
better of me, then they had proof of me, themselves, by my conversation among
them: (The Almighty, therefore, be highly thanked, praised, honored, and
glorified, for ever and ever, Amen.

But now, in respect of the general intent of this brief discourse, I most
humbly, and reverently, exhibit to your Graces view, and perusing, the
original monument, and authentic Record, before mentioned, fair written in
Parchment, with the Seal whole, and perfect, duly appendant: as I have 46.
years, and somewhat longer, preserved it. The true Copy whereof, your Grace
does see, to be verbatim, as follows.

UNiversis Sanctae matris Ecclesiae filijs, ad quos praesentes literae
perventurae sunt, Vicecancellarius Caetusque omnis Regentium and non Regentium,
Universitatis Cantabrigiae, Salutem in Domino sempiternam Conditiones and Merit
a hominum in nostra Universitate studentium, affectu sincero perpendentes, eos
solos testimonio nostro ornandos esse arbitramur quos scimus ob eruditionem,
and morum, probitatem promeritos esse, ut istud beneficium a nobis
consequantur: Quamobrem, cum hoc tempore ipsa veritas testimonium nostrum sibi
postulat, vestrae pietati, per has literas significamus Quod dilectus nobis in
Christo, Johannes Dee, Artium Magister, in dicta nostra universitate foeliciter
versatus; plurimam sibi and doctrinae and honestatis laudem comparavit: De
cujus gradu, and conversatione (quae honestissima semper fuit,) ne qua uspiam
ambiguitas, aut quaestio oriri possit, apud eos, quibus hujus viri virtutes
haud satis innotuerint, visum est nobis, in dicti Johannis gratiam, has literas
nostras Testimoniales conscribere; and conscriptas, publico Academiae nostrae
sigillo, obsignare: quo, majorem apud vos authoritatem, and pondus literae
nostrae habeant, Been valete. Datum Cantabrigiae, in plena Convocatione
Magistrorum Regentium and non Regentium, Academiae praedictae: 14. Calend.
Aprilis, Anno a Christo nato. 1548. For certain due respects the very Image of
the foresaid Seal, is not here in portrature publishd; the Moto Locus very
sigillis


PERORATIO.
THe Almighty and most merciful God, the Father; for his only Son (our
Redeemer) Jesus Christ his sake: by his holy Spirit, so direct, bless, and
prosper all my studies, and exercises Philosophical, (yea, all my thoughts,
words, and deeds) henceforward, even to the very moment of my departing from
this world, That I may evidently and abundantly be found, and undoubtedly
acknowledged of the Wise and Just, to have been a zealous and (...) Student in
the School of Verity, and an Ancient Graduate in the School of Charity: to the
honor and glory of the same God Almighty; and to the sound comfort and
confirming of such as faithfully love and fear his Divine Majesty, and
unfainedly continue in labor to do good on earth: when, while, to whom, and as
they may, Amen.

Very spedily written, this twelfth even, and twelfth day, in my poor Cottage,
at Mortlake: Anno. 1595. currente a Nativitate Christi: ast, An. 1594.
Completo, a Conceptione ejusdem, cum novem praeterea mensibus, Completis.

Always, and very dutifully, at your Graces commandment: Jo. Dee.

A TABLE Of the several Actions contained in this Book; with the most
Considerable Matters, either of Fact and History; or Doctrine, in each of them.
I. Page 1. THe first apparition of Madimi, in the shape of a Girl. Alb.
Lasky, his Pedigree. This Al. L. (whereof more in the Preface,) being the first
designed by the Spirits, as a fit Instrument, under pretense of godliness and
reformation, to turn all things upsidedown in the World: But that plot failing,
then the Emperor of Germany: after him Stephen King of Poland: after him,
Prince Rosimberg, were thought upon, and applications (as will be found here,)
made unto them to that end. What alterations, and destructions of men and
kingdoms would have ensued (had God given way, as in Mahomets case, etc.) may
be collected out of sundry passages of this Book. II p. 3. Anabaptistical
exaggerations of the general wickedness, and a Promise of a general
Reformation by A. L. Of Isabel Lister tempted, and, hidden Treasures. III p. 5.
Mystical numbers, and letters, for a Magical Lamin. IV ib. Ed. Kelley, his rage
and fury, how reproved, and appeased. The Book, the Scroll, and the Powder. V
p. 9. Great threatenings of future judgments in all places. VI p. 10. Diverse
Apparitions. Of good Angels, never appearing in the shape of women; Trithemius
his assertion reproved. The Book. Divine inspiration. (See also p. 23. as thou
shall find me to move thee, and diverse other places,) promised in the writing
and ordering of it. This Book (had things succeeded) should have been instead
of a Bible; as the Alcoran, (and much of the same subject,) is among the
Mahometans. See p. 18, 20, 61. etc. A very effectual way to draw people, under
color of a New Law, new lights, and doctrines, (which Anabaptists have always
pretended unto) from Heaven. VII p. 14. Diverse mystical Apparitions, and
discourses. Charles Sled, possessed and dispossessed. VIII p. 18. The Contents,
and worthiness of the Book. IX ib. A sudden Sunshine. The Book named. Some
lines of it. Ed. Kelley's pangs, and agonies at some Visions, before Dr. Dee.
Good Angels. how to be known from evil. X p. 20. Promises to A. L. confirmed by
an oath. Ed. Kelley desirous and ready to raise a Devil by his Art, before A.
L. but not permitted by Dr. Dee. XI p. 22. Apparitions before the Lord Lasky:
The Devil Prays; and ( Anabaptistically) bewaileth the wickedness of the
World. Of Angel-Guardians. Sudden death sentenced against the L. Laskies
servant, for interrupting, though but casually, the Action. XII p. 23. The
Book, and diverse instructions about the writing of it. XIII p. 24. Apparitions
in the air. Ed. Kelley scandalized and appeased. Prayers for him in Latin and
English; composed by the Spirits. XIV p. 25. The Prayer: the use and excellency
of it. XV ib. Apparitions and Prophesies, in the presence of the Lord Lasky.
XVI. p. 26. The Book to be written ( as it is not improbable the Alcoran was:)
by Spirits. Some things uttered in Greek: (of which see in the Preface) Ed.
Kelley preparing to be gone, stayed with the promise of 50 pound yearly. XVII
p. 28. Diverse informations and cautions given (by Spirits) to Dr. Dee,
concerning secres enemies at Court, etc. Strange mysteries concerning Guardian
Angels. Al. Lasky's Seal. XVIII p. 30. New pranks of Kellyes. Dr. Dee much
perplexed. Dr. Dee himself hears, etc. More of the L. Laskies Pedigree. The
mystery of the Trinity, Faith, Hope, and Charity: Ed. Kelley (...) (in show) of
many devils. XIX p. 33. Dr. Dee, and his Company, set out of Mortlack (in
England, not far from London,) for Cracovia, in Polonia. Their danger, and
deliverance at Queenbo. ough. XX ibid, (...) Apparitions. Sermon-like stuff
delivered by the Spirits (in Latin) who tell Dr. Dee that it was they that had
preserved him in his late danger. Very likely indeed that they were the
immediate cause, as of the danger, so preservation at that time, to have the
more hold upon him for the time to come. For they tell him often of it,
afterward. A continuation of the journey. XXI p. 35. Apparitions in the
presence of the L. Lasky. Most things here in Latin, for his sake. A
continuation of the journey. XXII p. 36. Several Apparitions. Some evil spirits
(he acknowledged) appear, and blaspheme. XXIII p. 39. Sermon-like stuff, of
mortification, etc. Dockum, (in Germany) to be destroyed, men women, and
children; or saved at Dr. Dees pleasure: as his Spirits make him believe. A
continuation of the journey. XXIV p. 41. Stage-like carriage, and speeches,
(such as is seen and heard in Pulpits sometimes,) of Spirits; at which Ed.
Kelley is offended; how excused. Prophesies and threatenings of great woes. XXV
p. 43. Dr. Dee's several questions of worldly concernments, eluded by
Sermon-like stuff of Sanctification, etc. and some idle Apparitions.
Anabaptistical Predictions of great Commotions, etc. and Christ's Terrestial
kingdom, p. 46. Continuation of the journey. XXVI p. 47. Dr. Dee (to his great
grief and amazement) rebuked for his abode, and actions, in unsanctified
places. The constant practice of his spirits, when they could not perform what
they had promised, to make him believe it was for his or some of his companies
offenses, and provocations. XXVII p. 49. Glorious Promises made to Dr. Dee. His
present estate in England not very good. He doubts this present Apparition to
be illusions of Devils; and is much troubled. XXVIII p. 51. Gods Greatness,
Justice, etc. set out in a prophetical-like style. His Spirit twofold. XXIX p.
52. Some spirits tell Dr. Dee, all former apparitions were but illusions of
evil spirits, and he made a fool by them. And all this (while he supposes
these to be the temptations of the Devil,) to make him the more confident at
other times, when the Devil appeared unto him in a better shape, and did most
abuse him. XXX p. 54. A continuation of the same Project. Examples of dangerous
iliusions. XXXI p. 55. A continuation here also. Counsel given to Doctor Dee to
burn his blasphemous, (which he accounted most holy) Books. A continuation of
the journey. XXXII p. 56 The same Project here also. The conclusion of this
(personated) temptation, by the apparition of better (as is supposed) spirits.
XXXIII p. 57. Sermon-like stuff of humility, perseverance, etc. Cabalistical
doctrine of emanations, etc. Alb. Lasky excepted against, and some promises
revoked. XXXIV p. 59. Some places of the Apocalypse, and of Esdras applied to
these Actions. XXXV p. 60. Esdras again. Strange Predictions (but
Anabaptistical, and false) of the destruction of Kings and Kingdoms, within few
years after. The New Book, to be instead of the Bible. (See before, the
contents of the Sixth Action.) A continuation of their journey. XXXVI p. 62.
Apparitions: good (so esteemed) and evil spirits contest. Ed. Kelley rebuked
for his Magic. New Lights of doctrine promised. The holy Language, (not
Hebrew,) and the virtue of it. Cabale of nature. Christ's Terrestial Kingdom:
as before. XXXVII p. 65. Christ to be revealed. Doctor Dee's wife and maid
threatened by Apparitions. His affairs in England. Sir Henry Sidney falsely
reported dead, by spirits. Alb. Lasky conspired against. Cracovia promised to
Doctor Dee a place of rest: (and again p. 70.) XXXVIII p. 69 Doctor Dee's
questions, not answered. XXXIX ibid. The questions again. Mystical, and
Cabalistical elusions. Some things obscurely answered. XL p. 71. Alb. Lasky in
part rejected, as unworthy: yet, to be King of Moldavia. Their coming to
Cracovia. XLI p. 73. These Visions and Actions magnified, as incomparable
mercies and favors. The Trinity acknowledged. Cabalistical mysteries. XLII p.
76. Great mysteries promised. 49 Tables. 49 Calls, etc. Their virtue. XLIII p.
77. An illusion. A further progress in the Cabale of Tables and Calls: with
show (in the spirits) of mavelous reverence. XLIV (p. 78.) The first Table.
Mystical numbers and letters, etc. XLV p. 80. Ed. Kelley, a Magician, and for
it, reproved. Further proceeding in the promised Cabale. Great opposition of
wicked spirits (in show) whilst this wonderful Cabale is delivered. XLVI p.
82. A Prayer, (in words zealous) used by the spirits, prescribed to Doctor Dee,
etc. Proceedings in the Cabale. More opposition (in show) of wicked spirits.
Bodily reverences, and prayers, often used. The first Call ended. The use and
virtue of it. XVII p. 88. More opposition (in show) of wicked spirits. XLVIII
p. 89 The Sabbath (or Sunday) to be kept. XLIX ib. More opposition: yet the
work proceeds. L p. 91. Nothing appears. Ed. Kelley (upon good grounds)
very confident, that they were Devils all, that had appeared hitherto: and
their pretended mysteries, very fopperies, etc. LI ib. Kelley, of that mind
still, and resolved to brain Doctor Dee. Doctor Dee's great confidence (but
upon little grounds: whereof see in the Preface:) of the contrary. LII ib.
Kelley reproved. The mystery of Numbers. The Creation: Fall of Adam. The
language he spoke, etc. Ed. Kelley reconciled. LIII p. 93. Somewhat heard by
Doctor Dee also, to his wondering. Sermon-like stuff of Predestination,
Election, etc. delivered by spirits. The Keys: Their use and virtue. Move not,
etc. (often repeated) explained. The work goes on. LIVE p. 199. The work goes
on, but not without (as is conceived) opposition. LV p. 102. Mystical
Apparitions: explained and applied to Doctor Dee, etc. The holy Book to be
written by God himself according to promise. LVI p. 104. A prayer: the work
goes on. LVII p. 111. Mystical Apparitions explained. New instructions for
future Actions. The Days, the dress of the place. LVIII p. 115. A parable
against Ed. Kelley, who contesteth with the spirits about the lawfulness of
his Magic: yeildeth nevertheless to bury in the ground his Magical Books, and
Characters: which is accepted, so one of 27 be burned. An Apparition showing
(as it proved) the present estate of A. L. LIX p. 118. Kelley's obedience. The
work goes on. The former ceremonies used. LIX.... Ed. Kelley at last very well
satisfied, that all is from God: and very devout. LX p. 138. Gods power. He not
tied to time. The Incarnation of Christ acknowledged. Warnings to Al. L. and
promises. LXI p. 139. Calls, Aires: What and how to be used. Divisions, and
Governments of Angels. Divisions of the Earth. Al. Lasky, his case. Mapsama, or
Dic nobis, under Gabriel. Jes s acknowledged. Good Instructions, Humility, etc.
A good Prayer, ill applied. LXII p. 146. An illuder. Obedience, Faith, without
which, Gods promises not irrevocable. Examples in Scripture. The Cabale of
Calls, etc. as before. LXIII p. 153. Ed. Kelley doubtful again. The parts of
the Earth: revealed unto Ptolemy; by an Angel. Some Characters and Prophesies
of diverse places of the World. ( Some mistaken, I believe,) Constantinople. The
Turk. The Ark of Noah. The place of Paradise. Eli; Enoch, John: where reserved.
A contradiction observed by Doctor Dee, not answered by the spirits. Rome. The
spirits, (upon good grounds) suspected, and answered by Ed. Kelley, for
illuders, and cozeners: who is opposed by Doctor Dee, with much confidence, and
some appearance of reason. Some mistakes in the writing, from what cause. LXIV
p. 159. Ed. Kelley very bold (and perverse, as censured by Doctor Dee,) with
the spirits: ( yet not without good ground of reason; all well considered.) The
Book: the leaves, dimensions, and other particulars of it: Not to be written,
but by Angels. Al. Lasky yet in favor. LXV p. 160. God all in all. The Devil
in perpetual opposition. How dangerous ( truly spoken, though by the Devil,) to
deal with him. Infidelity punished. Anabaptistical Prophesies and Promises. Al.
Lasky suspected. LXVI p. 162. Ed. K. reproved, and exborted to repent;
earnestly, yea with tears, in show. Devils and their business, both with good
and bad. Some Cabalistical stuff, promised. p. 164. Ed. Kelley's Confession of
heretical, damnable opinions by him held and believed. His repentance,
abjuration of Magical arts and practices; conversion unto God; believed by
Doctor Dee (upon great probabilities) to be hearty and sincere. His thanks to
God for it. 165. More of Kelley's conversion. No Apparition, and why: diverse
conjectures of Dr. Dee. LXXVII p. 166. Apparitions to comfort and confirm Al.
Lasky. LXVIII Visions and Apparitions to Ed. Kelley, first alone: then in the
presence of Doctor Dee: The visitation: the mercies, of God: Great promises.
Exposition (by spirits) of the Vision. Ed. Kelley tempted, and doubtful again.
LXIX p. 171. A Vision to Ed. Kelley, and Al. Lasky: with promises out of the
Psalms. LXX p. 171. Furniture of the Table: crosses, etc. The Table of the
Earth: Governor, Angels, etc. The Book, (the title of it, Let those, etc.) and
doctrine of Enoch, revealed unto him by special favor: counterfeited by D.
and Magicians: their Characters. Mystical Tables, Figures, Words, etc. Linea
spiritus Sancti (a horrible profanation; but such are most Cabalistical
mysteries) mystical crosses, etc. Solomon's knowledge, (if you will believe
them) how far it extended. LXXI p. 178. The Cabale goes on. The wonderful
extent of it. Diseases how to be cured, or procured by it. Money coined, and
uncoined, given by whom. LXXII p. 181. LXXIII p. 183. The secrets of States,
(so Trithemius too: we have his Tables: but never was any man the wiser:
whereof more in the Preface:) Medicine: Christ his earthly Kingdom. All things
in these Tables. Ave suddenly gone: Madimi appears: Doctor Dee wants money,
but can get none. A gingling (but false) Prophecy, concerning the Emperor to
succeed Rodolph. (See also p. 243.) Ed. Kelley, his rage and reviling, much
distiked by Dr. Dee; repented of by Kelley himself: taken notice of (his
repeutance) by the spirits. An extraordinary extraordinary (so apprebesided by
D. Dee) storm of Thunder and Rain. LXXIV ibid. More Cabalistical instructions
(somewhat like Magic, as Kelley thought:) concerning the practice of it.
Dreadful Prophesies, of sudden alterations in the World. Al. Lasky, in favor.
The Book to be prepared, etc. Ed. Kelley a perfect Magician, by his own
acknowledgement. LXXV p. 185. Patience and Humility, commended. A pretty
similitude (if true: whereof see in the Preface:) of the Adders dealing with
her young. Infidelity, how great a sin. Yet Ed. Kelley still incredulous, for
all this, and very resolute. LXXVI 186. Christ, his coming in Triumph, etc. The
Book of Invocation. Satan's (Pretended) opposition. Some Prophesies, Promises,
and Instructions. LXXVII p. 187. Some questions, belonging to the Cabale,
partly eluded, partly answered. Invocations of good Angels. Set Prayers not
allowed, and why. Evil spirits, how to be dealt with. The Book of Invocations:
and now, Set Prayers allowed of. LXXVIII p. 189. Sermon-like stuff, of the use
of (...), etc. Some promises to Doctor Dee and Ed. Kelley. A Progress in the
Cabale of Calls. LXXIX p. 195. Doctor Dee and his fellow reproved. Doctor Dee,
with great humility, does answer for himself. Enoch: the Book delivered unto
him (the same in substance, as this, they say:) by God. His Prayer, Humility
etc. LXXX LXXXI p. 197. The spirits appoint their time, and appear. The precise
time of Christ's coming; and other Prophesies, not revealed unto men, for three
reasons. LXXXII LXXXIII p. 198. 199. The spirits, etc. as before. The nineteen
Calls, and their beginnings. LXXXIV p. 200. More Calls and mysteries; but not
without (pretended,) opposition of wicked spirits. Adam's fall. The Curse upon
it, and the effect of it. LXXXV p. 206. More Calls and Aires. An apparent
contradiction observed by Doctor Dee; but cunningly evaded by the spirits.
Doctor Dee, his Hymn, and spiritual (but not from God, because not well
grounded:) rejoicing, and thank giving. His son Roland in great danger. LXXXVI
p. 210. Doctor Dee's contest with his spirits: he asserts his own innocence,
and (to the utmost of his power) obedience: but is baffled by the spirits. Al.
L. rejected. LXXXVII p. 211. The same contest prosecuted here also: with some
threatenings. Their coming to Prague. Some Chimical gibbrish (fit stuff to amuse
unsettled brains:) found in the house, concerning the Philosophers Stone. Read
there, ( and. si rubeo m. sit nupta m, etc. p. 213. Some conjectures, and
meditations of Doctor Dee's, upon some places of Scripture. LXXXVIII The VI
Viol: in the Apocalypse; as understood by Doctor Dee. A very good blessing,
pronounced by an evil spirit. Diverse Woes denounced. Somewhat of Doctor Dee's
Wife: Al. Lasky. Doctor Dee, sent to Rodolphus Emperor, with a message, as
from God. LXXXIX p. 217. The Angelical Book. New orders about it. Al. Lasky,
though rejected, yet to be great for a while. Inspiration promised to Dr. Dee,
about a Letter to the Emperor. A Copy of the said Letter (by inspiration
probably enough of spirits, as a man may ghuesse by the stuff,) to the
Emperor. Secrecy desired. XC p. 219. Sermon-like stuff. The power of God.
Several Woes. The Trinity, etc. Dr. Dee not being willing to be put off longer,
the spirits, (against their wills) make some progress in the Cabale. Doctor
Dee, in the execution of Gods will, to proceed with fury, etc. XCI p. 222.
Doctor Dee, sharply reproved (by examples out of the Scriptures, etc.) for
choosing (when it was put to his choice) rather present performance, than longer
delay. XCII p. 223. The same matter here also. The years of Doctor Dee's life,
73. and a half; ( which perchance might come very near to the truth, if we
could certainly know when he died:) determined. Ed. Kelley to die violently: (
and so he did: for endeavoring an escape out of prison, he brake a leg, and
died of it; as generally reported:) Doctor Dee does repent and revoke his
choice; in very good language, had it been upon a good ground. Doctor Dee's
Letter to the King of Spain his Agent (or Ambassador) with the Emperor, about
his Letter; and means of access, to the Emperor. XCIII Several questions
proposed by Doctor Dee. The spirits shrewdly put to it about a lie which they
had told; and yet by the help of Cabalistical querks and distinctions, (but
especially, of Anabaptistical infatuations in Doctor Dee,) they come off with
credit. In what sense Doctor Dee might truly say, That himself had seen,
whatsoever Ed. Kelley had seen. Doctor Dee his Letter, and Present, graciously
received by the Emperor. XCIV p. 228. Apparitions, not in the Stone. The
privilege of apparition in the Stone. The Mystery of the Trinity. Reason an
enemy to God, (to Delusion indeed, and wildness: sound, and sober Reason:) as
the spirits would have it. The Emperor threatened. The names of the spirits now
appearing, and how to be found in the Cabalistical Tables. Some drunken pranks
of Kelley's, and why here recorded. A letter of the Spanish Ambassador his
Secretary to Doctor Dee, whereby he does signify the Emperors desire and
appointment, to have him come to him. Octavius Spinola, Chamberlain, etc.
brings him to him. An account of what was said on both sides. Doctor Dee's
Monas, (of which, see more in the Preface:) his Revelations and Visions: His
Angelical Stone, etc. XCV p. 231. Kelly's former miscarriage taken notice of:
the cause of it: It is forgiven. Doctor Dee, etc. Their Office magnified.
Kingdoms of the Earth to be destroyed. Jerusalem restored. Christ to Reign.
Other Predictions, very strange, ( but not true) and the certain year. Rodolph.
Emperor, to be exalted. Stephen King of Poland, to be destroyed. Enoch's
Tables. Doctor Dee his Prayer, and Kelley's Vow. Doctors Dee's Letter to
Octavius Spinola, to be communicated to the Emperor: but not delivered at that
time, by reason of the Emperor his absence. XCVI p. 235. Ga. Za. Vaa: spirits
invited: that is, called upon by Doctor Dee: their answer interpreted by him.
The former Letter, (with some alterations) delivered, and the Emperors very
gracious answer to it, by the said Spinola. Doctor Curtzius, a Doctor of the
Laws, one of the Emperors Privy Council; accounted very Learned: appointed by
the Emperor to deal with Doctor Dee, in his behalf. XCVII p. 237. Doctor Dee
asks counsel, (of God, he thought:) but first encountereth with Pilosus, (an
evil spirit: (...) as I take it:) and his temptations. Ed. Kelley very penitent
still, but desirous, (as unfit) to be out of his Office. The spirits appear.
Reconciliation: twofold: (with God, with the Church, etc. Purgatory. The body
of Christ, The case of Rodolph. Emperor, in case he obey, or disobey. The
spirit of Choice in Doctor Dee, explained. Doctor Curtz allowed of. p. 239.
Doctor Curtz, and Doctor Dee, (after some Complements by Messengers) meet.
Their conference of six hours. Doctor Dee's Relation of himself, his Studies,
his Suite; (and therein, though not apprehended by himself, his intolerable
presumption, pride, high opinion of himself, etc.) Revelations, Books, and
wonderful confidence; as of most, that are so deluded. Ed. Kelley strangely
tempted. Doctor Dee's mistrust of Doctor Curtz, upon what grounds. XCVIII p.
240. Lying: and froward silence: not ordinarily expounded. Reconciliation to
the Church. The sin against the Holy Ghost: what it is. Complaints; and
Prophesies against the Emperor, and Doctor Curtz, because of their infidelity,
and disobedience. Doctor Dee in high favor: England given to him, and for his
sake, not destroyed: Yet the Crown there, to be transferred, etc. Doctor Dee
warranted, and commanded to write to the Emperor, that he could make the
Philosophers Stone: though, yet, he could not, but is promised it; and the gift
of healing: (which diver Enthusiasis have boasted of; and if they have done any
thing really, there is no question but they have done it by the help of
spirits. How safe therefore it is to go unto such, let men consider.) Ed.
Kelley prays for Doctor Curtz his sudden death, but not heard. XCIX p. 243.
The same Commission, here again, about the Philosophers Stone: and the
Emperor, here also threatened: and another ( Ernestus) assigned to his place.
Reported here to be possessed by a Devil. C p. 244 Doctor Dee, comforted and
confirmed by his spirits, against slanders, and evil reports: out of
Scripture, etc. The spirits here, seem to allude to a passage of the Sibyls
Verses, (a counterfeit Book:) as Doctor Dee does observe at last, to agree with
it. They tell Doctor Dee he shall be with the Emperor in spite of the Devil:
(so they can play upon themselves, when they list, to fool men:) but did not
say true, and in that showed themselves very Devils; and that Doctor Dee might
have understood, had not his understanding been so blinded and captivated by
them. Doctor Dee invited to Dinner, by the Spanish Ambassador: who, among
other things, professes himself to be descended of Raymundus Lullius: that
this Raym. L. (if we may believe him) by a retired solitude, without Books: (
the way commended by the late Method also: but indeed the most ready way to put
men out of their wits:) of an ignorant illiterate man, became very learned: and
that he had the Philosophers Stone: whereupon he does conclude and build, that
which Doctor Dee related of himself, his visions, and revelations, etc. might
be as possible, and true. The Emperor, by him commended. p. 246. The second
Letter, written by Doctor Dee to the Emperor. His confidence as great as ever;
and particularly concerning the Philosophers Stone, which he does here promise
to the Emperor, ( being so persuaded by his spirits, though as yet, as
ignorant of it, as ever.) Doctor Dee at Dinner again with the Spanish
Ambassador. Ed. Kelley troublesome: Doctor Dee's confidence in God, and great
penury. p. 247. Dr. Dee visited by Dr. Curtz, at his own house. His complaints:
Dr. Curtz account of the Emperor (his Master) present apprehensions of this
business: Some Mathematical Books written by Dr. Dee, and Commandinus (a very
famous man) etc. p. 248. Another Letter of Doctor Dee's to the Spanish
Ambassador. His wonderful confidence, declining ( wisely: his spirits had so
instructed him,) the test of humane reason. (rostris, for mentis to be
corrected, here.) An account, (in a Postscript) of his last conference with Dr.
Curtz. CI p. 249. After a swelling Preface, (fitted for the Scene, and
Auditors) a long discourse (upon occasion of Doctor Dee his Wife's sickness:)
of true Physic, and the causes of diseases: much savouring (whereof more in
the Preface:) of Paracelsus his style, and spirits. Rare stuff, most part of
it, for a Quack. CII p. 252. CIII p. 253. The same matter prosecuted, and
particularly applied to Jane Dee, (the wife of Dr. Dee,) her present ease: Her
Disease: and the Remedy. CIV p. 253. (...) Dee reproved, as not sensible enough
of what God had done for him: which is pompously set out by the Spirits. Money
not to be expected from these spirits, who nevertheless promised them (after a
while) great plenty of all things: power to make, and mar, whom they please,
etc. Ed Kelley reproved for contriving how to deal away: Al. Lasky to prevail
against his enemies. Another meeting of Doctor Curtz, and Doctor Dee's. The
Emperors Answer, (by Doctor Curtz) to some passages of Doctor Dee's message,
delivered unto him, as from God. Doctor Dee does interpret himself. Accepts of
the Emperors profer, to do him good, etc. Dr. Curtz and Doctor Dee, together
again: but no account of his two Letters to the Emperor yet given.
Mathematical inventions, of Doctor Curtz, etc. A draught for a Pass, to be
obtained of the Emperor for Doctor Dee, etc. Doctor Dee takes notice of the
respects of two Spanish Ambassadors, and another great Man, done to him
publicly The account of some two months, from 8 October. 1584. to December. 20.
are wanting. p. 353. Their second arrival to Prage. Doctor Dee's Letter to the
Spanish Ambassador; His wonderful progress (as he thought) in high mysteries
and revelations, etc. His house there. p. 354. Doctor Dee's Letter to Doctor
Curtz: (one of the Emperors privy Council, etc. as before,) Complaint of
aspersions, ( and minis: not nimia, as printed:) Profession of good intentions
toward the Emperor, etc. CV p. 355. (ad 361.) Long parabolical, aenigmatical
Apparitions; (which Doctor Dee did not like very well, nor understand; as
appears by p. 361.) and some wild Doctrines, of the fear of the Lord;
innocence, sanctification in Christ, etc. cabalistically set out. The
Philosophers Stone, promised to the Emperor by Doctor Dee. CVI p. 361. Gods
mysteries not to be dispensed but by degrees, etc. The Philosophers Stone, a
great mystery. CVII p. 362. A Progress in the Corbale. Opposition as before.
The Lesson (see p. 387.) out of the Book of Enoch. CVIII p. 364. CIX p. 365. CX
p. 366. CXI and CXII p. 367. A further Progress. The mysteries of that worthy
Lesson highly set out, and some kind of exposition of it: but as Ed. Kelley
rightly judged, ignotum per ignotius. Reverence required. Doctor Dee in a
swound. An illusion, (so pretended.) CXIII p. 367. Doctor Dee, etc. excepted
against, as unworthy, because of their sins, and unthankfulness, for so many
mercies. Another, (whomsoever Doctor Dee would choose) upon certain cautions and
conditions, to be substituted in Ed. Kelley's place. Doctor Dee's sorrow, and
humble request about the Philosophers Stone. His desire to be instructed (by
his spirits) about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The mystery of it
cabalistically unfolded. The Trinity, Adam's fall, Christ's Incarnation. The
Doctrine of Transubstantiation: Of receiving under one kind: Of adoration of
the Eucharist: But receiving of it, not allowed. CXIV p. 373. The former
Doctrine highly magnified: as also the Lesson, in Chimical gibbrish, of
multiplication, dignification, etc. CXV ibid, More of their unworthiness,
(through sin) and incapacity, for such high things. Doctor Dee prays. Al.
Lasky rejected. Doctor Dee much troubled. CXVI p. 375. Doctor Dee very earnest
for the secret of the Philosophers Stone, so often promised: but eluded with
Sermon-like stuff of reproof: of patience, afflictions; worthy partaking;
(...), etc. CXVII p 378. Doctor Dee himself hears, and feels. More
reproves. Doctor Dee to prevail against his enemies: but commanded speedily to
(...) for Prague, to prevent imprisonment, etc. CXVIII p. 379. Here again,
hastened to be gone. Al. L. his case. CXIX ibid. They begin their journey; but
by an Apparition in the way, after some goodly promises made to Doctor Dee, for
his obedience: and Predictions ( all false) of judgments upon the Emperor,
and exaltation of Stephen King of Poland, etc. they are commanded to return
back again, and to return to Prague. Which done, Doctor Dee's Child is
christened, some of the chiefest in the Emperors Court being Godfathers, and
Godmothers. CXX p. 382. The Prophets of old times summoned: why visited, etc.
The eternal generation of Christ, the Son of God, Platonically set out. Divine
Necessity, the cause of all things: Election: Perseverance, etc. Earnest (...),
and exhortations. Christ again: The Church Militant, and Triumphant. Doctor Dee
and Ed. Kelley much taken with this goodly stuff, and confirmed in their
Error. p. 387. The precious Lesson, before spoken of, of revealing the secret
of the Philosophers Stone. CXXI p. 388. The Lesson, and some obscure words of
it, expressed in English. Ed. Kelley, desirous to be rid of his office. CXXII
p. 389. Jane Dee (Doctor Dee's wife) her earnest and humble Petition to God, (
so the poor woman thought) and his Angels, for relief in her great necessity.
The Petition answered, first with reproof; but commendation, and promises,
afterward. The spirit confesses, he had no power to procure them money: but
instead of it, pretends to give them good counsel, to get out of Prage
speedily, etc. A Record of a hot conflict between Doctor Dee, and Ed. Kelley,
about some Magical papers: in which conflict Doctor Dee thought himself in
danger of his life, and was feign to cry out for help. CXXIII p. 391. An
Apparition fitted for the occasion. The fault of Ed. Kelley's refractorinesse,
laid upon the malice and envy of the Devil, and some places of Esdras, applied
to that purpose, Ed. Kelley rebuked; but comforted and confirmed with a promise
of no evil spirit to be suffered to trouble him henceforth: and many good
exhortations: with a Parable also to that purpose. Some questions proposed by
Doctor Dee, who is referred to the Book of Enoch CXXIV p. 395. Doctor Dee, etc.
sharply reproved for not fulfilling the command of a speedy departure, with
more expedition. He acknowledges (convicted by some plausible considerations,)
his fault, and prays fervently. CXXV p. 396. The Stone shut up for twenty
days. Their journey (from Prage, to Cracovia:) and in the way, strange
whirlewinds. Some strife about their house. Al. Lasky, by whom Doctor Dee is
brought to the King: ( sustinem, for sisterem, to be corrected, etc.) delivers
his Commission, etc. He receives the Communion: so does Ed. Kelley. CXXVI p.
398. The Kings presence required by spirits, at these Apparitions. CXXVII ibid.
Superstitious prayers (by appointment of spirits) to the Angels, Governors of
Kingdoms and Nations. Stephen (King of Poland) greatly in favor (with God) and
to be the Minister of great things. Doctor Dee does apprehend, (which Kelley
does often profess to have found in himself) that the spirits knew his
thoughts. Ed. Kelley, very unquiet, and blasphemous: Yet confirmed again, by
some Apparitions; to Doctor Dee's great comfort, who still (very devoutly and
innocently, had not he brought this grievous delusion upon himself, by tempting
God so grievously:) does submit unto, and comfort himself in God. CXXVIII p.
400. Apparitions in the presence of Al. Lasky. Promises to Doctor Dee, and to
King Stephen. Al. Lasky upon conditions to be received into favor again.
Doctor Dee receives the Communion again. CXXIX p. 401. Apparitions at the Court
of the King of Poland, in the presence of Al. Lasky, (one of the Princes
Palatine of the Country) who is offered by the spirits, sudden destruction of
the King, (if he desire it,) or to see him struck with Leprosy; or otherwise
corrected, if so rather. Al. Lasky his pious and religious answer, and choice:
for which he is commended. The spirits will not endure, though requested, to
deal with the King, in the Hungarian Tongue. They promise to speak to him in
Latin. A good blessing, and formal absolution, pronounced by evil spirits.
CXXX p. 402. Doctor Dee, etc. brought to Stephen, (King of Poland,) who upon
some conditions, is willing to be present: yet makes an objection out of
Scripture, as not fully satisfied that these apparitions, etc. were from God.
To which Doctor Dee makes an accurat answer: ( by which it does appear, that
either he had studied the case very well, or was helped: as other real
Enthusiasts, by his spirits:) but very full of faults in the Copy, and so
printed. More here, I think, then in all the Latin of the Book besides. We
take notice of it in the Errata. Before the Action, a fervent Prayer of Doctor
Dee's, of his calling, revelations, Al. Laskie, King Stephen, etc. In the
Action, or Apparition, King Stephen, sharply reproved for his sins. But upon
condition of repentance, and submission to God (in this way) the Kings of the
earth ( intoxticati calice Meretricis: a phrase often used in this Book: that
is drunk with the cup of the Whore,) are to do homage unto him; and he, ( right
Anabaptisme,) to work strange execution, etc. Very lofty language, here used:
Fige pedem in Aquil. etc. XXXI p. 406. Sad complaint, (as from God) of
incredulity: The Incarnation of Christ, and thereby privilege of Christians
above the Israelits. Tears. Doctor Dee, sent with an errand to King Stephen:
and a direct promise, and profer of the Philosophers Stone. Doctor Dee delivers
his errand in Latin: (but here our records, I know not by what chance, are very
defective. King Stephen, it seems did not prove so credulous, as was expected.)
CXXXII p. 408 The spirits are angry, and command all to be shut up, for a
season, till further order. ( the account of some months is wanting.) CXXXIII
p. 409. The power of God. The Jews, and Jerusalem to be restored. And now, one
Francis Puccius (a Florentine, a zealous and learned Papist,) being
entertained, and admitted to these secrets: with great hopes of some good to be
done by this fellowship: Rome also being designed henceforth for the Scene:
(see p. 417.) the spirits apply themselves, and fit their speech to this end
and occasion. The interpretation of Scriptures. The Fathers. The Church. Luther
and Calvin, condemned. The Pope of Rome, cannot be (say the spirits) the
Antichrist: and think they prove it. Exhortations to return to the Church: and
a form of Prayer, or Thanksgiving, to that purpose. In the conclusion, the
spirits apply themselves to Puccius, personally: He is to rebuke the present
Pope, (here called, a wicked Monster,) against whom, if he will not be
persuaded, terrible judgments are denounced. The same Action (because the
spirits here rather chose to speak English, than Latin: whereof somewhat is
said in the Preface: in Latin by Doctor Dee. CXXXIV p. 417. The sum of
Francis Puccius his commission, in high Language. Future Actions, in Rome. But
here follows a hiatus of some 6 months: which bereaves us of many
particulars. In the mean time happened the sentence of banishment against
Doctor Dee, by the Popes mediation and authority; (as his Nuncio, p. 434. does
acknowledge) and so brake the purpose of going to Rome: though much driven on
by Puccius, etc. as will appear. p. 418. Doctor Dee's record of a strange
thing, (a very miracle, in his judgment,) that happened in his presence, and
sight; to wit, Books that had been burned by him, (or in his sight) restored
unto him whole and entire, by spirits, etc. CXXXV p. 419 Prince Rosimberg (you
may see his Titles p. 425.) called, and admitted into the Society, to be
partaker of the Mysteries; and the Executioner of (so supposed) Gods
judgments, etc. Prince Rosimberg, upon relation of what had been revealed,
concerning himself, accepts of it thankfully: promises amendment, and prays
for the Emperor, (whose Viceroy he was in Bohemia, etc.) that he may not be
destroyed, but repent rather. p. 421. A Letter of his (with his own hand) to
Doctor Dee, to the same purpose. Doctor Dee's Journey to Leipsig. His Letter to
Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth: wherein is observable his
wonderful confidence; and vain boasting, (though not without some grounds:) as
a very Enthusiast, and deluded man: though it cannot be denied, that some
Enthusiasts, upon less grounds, (when God has been pleased to give way) have
had far better success. p. 424. One Jul. Ascanius, his Letter to Doctor Dee,
informing him of some reports, and attempts against him in Germany, as a
Necromancer, etc. p. 425. A Letter of Doctor Dee's to Prince Rosimberg,
complaining of those reports, and attempts, by the Nuncio, etc. 426. Another,
to the Emperor, of the same subject. The sentence of Banishment against Doctor
Dee, etc. in the German Tongue. p. 429. Prince Rosimberg his questions and
petitions, miraculously (as was conceived) answered. A white paper being set
upon the Altar, whilst Mass was said: the said paper after Mass, was found
all written, and as soon as copied out, all the Letters of it vanished. A Copy
of the said paper, or (miraculous) writting. ibid. Some observations of Doctor
Dee's, upon Francis Puccius (of whom before) his carriage; whereby it did
appear unto him, that the said Puccius did not deal truly and sincerely: which
troubled Doctor Dee, who much desired to be rid of him. p. 430. A conflict of
his, with the said Puccius, about their going to Rome, etc. p. 431. A Paper
delivered by Puccius, to Doctor Dee, as from the Nuncio; by which they are
absolved from all crimes, (were they never so great and heinous) so they will
go to Rome. Puccius his inconstancy about that Paper. Doctor Dee's Letter to
the said Nuncio, upon that occasion: wherein, among other things, to tell him
of these Books that had been burned, and were (miraculously) restored; and of
many more burned ( part of these Records certainly) not yet restored, but
promised and expected. The said Letter after some contest about it, committed
to Puccius, to be carried and delivered. More of Puccius his not faithful
dealing. Some Heresies also of his. Some other things, laid to his charge by
Doctor Dee. p. 434. The Popes Nuncius, his answer to Doctor Dee: grave, and
courteous. (At the beginning of it, aut, for autem to be correct.) p. 435. A
Paper, (here inscribed and styled, Oraculum Divinum) in Kelly's absence,
written and delivered (as Doctor Dee does here record:) by spiritual and divine
means: the drift whereof is, to confirm Prince Rosimberg, At whose request, the
sentence of banishment is mitigated. p. 436. A long and submissive Letter of
Francis Puccius, to Doctor Dee, etc. where, among other things, he gives him a
very punctual account of what had passed, in discourse, between the Popes
Nuncius, and himself, concerning their cause, apparitions, high attempts, etc.
(well worth the reading.) His encounter with a Jesuit, before the said Nuncio.
What account Prince Rosimberg, and some other great men, made of them. p. 444.
Kelley, to Doctor Dee: Doctor Dee, to his Wife; but nothing considerable in
either. CXXXVI p. 444. CXXXVII p. 445. Apparitions in the Stone, (after 6
months intermission) renewed, with expressions of great devotion, in Doctor
Dee: but with many Woes and threatenings, by the spirits: who nevertheless,
Prince Rosimberg being present, promise fair to him, and give him some
instructions, how to carry himself. Francis Puccius very troublesome; but at
last quieted with the restitution (Doctor Dee, at this time, abounded with
money, 2000 Ducats in one bag: Prince Rosimberg had a good purse:) of 800.
Florens: which the said Puccius had formerly contributed for the service.
CXXXVIII p. 448. Doctor Dee makes bold to propose some questions (tending to
the secret of the Philosophers Stone; as I take it:) out of season; but is
rejected, and does humbly submit.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
Part II.
ACtion I p. 1. Sermon-like stuff: Doctor Dee (having a zeal, but not according
to knowledge) mervailously affected with it. Prince Rosimberg his expectation
of money answered, and eluded with great subtilty, by example out of Scripture,
of Abraham, David, Solomon, etc. The precious Powder he had, how and when, to
be used. Judgments to be executed upon several Great ones, (sure enough if
they had prevailed) by Prince Rosimberg, as from God. Ed. Kelley, his Wife
barren: why. He very weary of his office: reproved for it, and another (
Arthur, Doctor Dee's son,) to be substituted in his place: yea, and his portion
of the precious Powder to be taken from him, if he do not repent. II p. 4.
Arthur, first presented, and prepared by Prayer, etc. enters upon his Office:
Sees diverse things in the Stone; Lions, Men, etc. but hears not. III p. 5.
Arthur again, as before: Three Exercises in one day. IV p. 7. Arthur again, as
before: in two Exercises more. V p. 8. Ed. Kelley, in his Office again: sees
and hears, as before. Uriel, first author of Doctor Dee's and Ed. Kelley's
conjunction. A New Law promsed here again. Anabaptistical Doctrine of
committing Adultery, for Gods sake, etc. Of some words here, see the Errata. VI
p. 9. Here the spirits begin to show themselves in their own likeness
apparently, teaching doctrines of Devils: and yet still (as their instruments
at this day in diverse places) in the name of God. Doctor Dee and Ed. Kelley,
are exhorted, yea commanded, to have their Wives in common. The case argued on
both sides stiffly and eagerly. Other strange Doctrine of Devils, (noted, and
rejected in the Preface) of murder condemned by the Laws of men, approved by
God. Saint Paul impiously slandered. Great promises, in case of obedience. The
Powder. The Pope here accursed: yet Popery elsewhere justified. Kelley
scandalized: Doctor Dee in great Agony. Some secrets of distillation revealed
by spirits. The Powder again, and how E. K. came by it. Predictions of England,
etc. ( all false and foolish) Ed. Kelley his fidelity suspected. Cabalistieal
mysteries of Letters, and Numbers: not well understood by Doctor Dee, etc.
though much helped by his spirits. But at last, he has joy, ( in spirit as he
is persuaded) and resolves to obey Doctor Dee, Ed. Kelley, and their two Wives,
their sense, apprehensions, and resolutions, concerning this new doctine of
promiscuous copulation enjoined: expressed in form of a Covenant (so by them
called) with God: here first exhibited, and afterward, p. 20. completed, and
subscribed by the Parties: with a most wicked clause, or conclusion, of
dreadful imprecations to all that should hereafter come to the knowledge of it,
or bring it to knowledge: whereas it is much to the glory of God, and true
Religion, that such mysteries of Hell and darkness, should come to light, to
be abhorred by all men: and that others may be warned by such sad examples, not
to hunt after new doctrines, and pretended inspirations and revelations. p. 17.
Ed. Kelley his Declaration of his dislike, from the beginning of these Actions,
in generalle His opposition upon occasion. His dislike of this new doctrine (in
particular) as contrary to the revealed Will of God: how satisfied in some
measure: and thereupon his readiness to obey. But upon the women's professed
dislike, and (...), resolves to give over all further dealing. VII p. 19.
Apparitions. The chief Stone carried away by spirits in their fight. More
exhortutions and arguments, for compliance to this new doctrine. Offer of a
Miracle, for further confirmation. VIII p. 21. Another Apparition (upon request
made) to confirm them in their purpose of obedience. IX p. 22. Yet another to
the same purpose. The Covenant torn by Kelley, made whole again by spirits.
The great power of God: faith and obedience; the main thing. Great promises.
Judgments prouornced against Kelley his tearing the paper of Covenant. Against
others, (some already executed) for enticing him away: By which it seems Kelley
being terrified, resolves to tarry, and obey. The Stone, strangely taken away,
as strangely restored, in the presence and sight of both. X The Act of
obedience (good words, to countenance greatest villainies, never wanted: as
daily seen:) performed, is accepted by shows and speeches. Commendation of
Wisdom. Secrecy enjoined. XI Cabalistical Doctrine, of the Creation of man: The
soul of man, not the subject of sanctification, etc. Great Promises and
Predictions: (equally true) entertained, (with the Doctrine:) with comfort. p.
28. Prince Rosimberg: (the man now in favor: but miserably abused and
deluded:) two Letters of his to Doctor Dee, etc. Several questions by him
proposed, as expecting great things; and wholly to be governed by their
spirits. His confidence of a great Treasure, in the Powder delivered unto him.
p. 30. Several Questions, and Petitions of Doctor Dee's upon the former
Proposition, etc. to be offered unto God: among the rest, one for the making of
the Philosophers Stone: Another, for Kelley's being sick: for his Wife, being
barren: for his own Wife sick, etc. The Empeperour of Moscovie, his great
opinion of Doctor Dee, and favor offered. But here follows that great
hiatus, or interruption of Story, which bereaves us of many years (spoken of in
the Preface:) account. All from hence, to the end, set out unto us but the sad
and lamentable Catastrophie of this long Delusion. Kelley is no more heard of
now; yet the spirits appear still in the same shape, as before.

An. Dom. 1607. ( Stylo Jul.) Martii 20.

By this time Doctor Dee was become a very old man: If he were Sexagenarius (as
he is styled in Puccius his Letter, P. 1. 439. l. 15.) a. d. 1586. he must
needs be fourscore and upwards by this: But we need not take the word so
precisely: However if toward it then, (more or less) he must be very old now,
as I said before.


THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD PART.
Part III.
ACtion I p. 32. Raphael (pretended) sent unto Doctor Dee, to comfort him,
being (besides old Age) much afflicted with poverty and sickness. II p. 33.
The same Raphael. Of a certain Treasure somewhere under ground, (as was
supposed.) Doctor Dee's questions rather eluded, than really answered.
Put-offs, and Promises, (of wonderful Wisdom, etc.) still. III ibid. A Voice
sent to Doctor Dee, then (as it seems) alone. IV p. 34. Raphael again: who,
with many fair pretenses, and very forcible Rhetoric (to such a one as Doctor
Dee) does deliver a message unto him, of a Journey into a far Country, to be
undertaken by him in this his miserable case and condition, of purse and body,
through years, and present sickness. The danger of his disobedience herein,
and reward of obedience; the Philosophers Stone, etc. Doctor Dee is willing. (
O rare faith: or rather prodigious, but deserved infatuation!) Salisbury, iand
his Devils; if the Devil may be believed.

p. 36. Some Cases and Questions proposed, and to be proposed. It seems Doctor
Dee, at this time, took upon him to be a Cunning-man. His necessity which was
great, might put him to it to try all means: but I think he was too honest to
thrive by it. V p. 39. The same Raphael. Some questions ( I doubt, how truly)
resolved about the Treasure. The Journey hastened. The History of Tobias. VI p.
40. Raphael in the Stone: The Jewel; the Powder: in Doctor Dee's possession;
but not yet of use to him. His thankfulness, (good man.) VII p. 41. Raphael
again in the Stone. The Journey. Great Promises of Wisdom, etc. Doctor Dee's
enemies at Court. Money intended by the Emperor (so also p. 38.) to Doctor
Dee, hindered. Some Cases, concerning others, and himself, at his request
answered. VIII p. 43. Raphael: Diverse Questions and Cases by him answered. One
John Pontoys, very ambitious to serve Doctor Dee, in these Apparitions. Which
end here in our Relation: and probably, with his life: or at least, (though his
spirits had promised him, p. 34. addition of many years) not long before his
death. I cannot yet learn the direct time of his death: but much about this
time, (by all reports:) and in England, certainly. Though his sin was very
great (as in the Preface is showed:) yet because of his simple and sincere
intentions toward God, it may charitably be hoped, that God was so merciful to
him, as to let him know his error, and to repent of it, before his death. p.
46. That which follows here, is certainly intended for part of that holy
Language, which Adam in Paradise is said P. 1 p. 64, 92. to have spoken: and by
which great wonders might be wrought. I have neither faith, nor curiosity to
inquire into it any further: neither will, (I think) any sober man.
INstead of other Approbation: the Reader (besides the judgment of the late
Archbishop of Armagh: for his Piety and Learning so famous every where; spoken
of in the Preface, first page of it: and the judgment of diverse others, that
read the Book Manuscript, and wished it printed:) may consider, how sollicitous
the Devil has been, when he saw his plots (God opposing) not likely to take
effect; that these Mysteries (these Papers and Records) might not come to
light. First, by p. 418. and p. 431. (Doctor Dee's Letter to the Popes Nuncio)
and some other places of the Book, it does appear, that they were all burnt, by
command; though some afterward (upon appearance of better hopes) strangely
restored again. Again, Part II p. 21. is that horrible imprecation; whereof
more in the Table. Lastly, these remaining Papers and Records, here exhibited,
were under ground, God knows how long: and since that, though carefully
preserved, were even at the very last, when the worthy Owner took care, and was
at the cost to have them transcribed: and so at the last, (not unluckily, I
hope for the public good:) they fell into my hands.

M. C.

ERRATA: Those of the Book.
MAny will be found in the Book: a good part proceeding (besides ordinary
typographical mistakes, even where best care is used:) from the
uncorrectednesse of the Copy: which might happen, partly through the
illegiblenesse of the Original it self, in many places: and partly from
mistakes in the said Original, where most legible. The cause of which mistakes
and miswriting, you may find P. I p. 159 l. 20. etc. and besides what is there
said, it may be probably collected from P. II. p. 27. l. 43. and p. 23. l. 20.
and some other like places that Ed. Kelley for the most part, when he made
report to Doctor Dee, of voices and speeches, (such especially as were of some
length) did not know what he said himself, and so might the easier mistake. A
good part of the Greek. P. I. p. 27. was misreported, and mistaken, as is
showed in the Preface p....) and I believe never thoroughly understood by Doctor
Dee himself: It cannot therefore be expected otherwise, but that there should
be many faults in the writing: for which I would not have the innocent (the
Printers and Correctors, I mean:) to bear more blame, than comes to their
share. Yet however, though many: most are such (those places excepted where the
Original was very faulty:) as may easily be corrected by an ordinary Reader
that is conversant in books of all kinds: Or if not so easily corrected yet
such as will not bereave the Reader of the main sense and matter. Some few
passages here and there, it may be, will be found where a reasonable Scholar
may be put to it: as P. II. p. 9. L 11. alias vobismet ipsis disimperitis:
which certainly must be read, alas vobismet. ipsis disruperitis: there being a
man fest (and pertinent) allufion, in the words, to that allegorical (...) (
wing-breeding: or, bearing:) of the soul, so famous in the Books of
Philosophers; Platonists especially. That very expression is to be found in
Plato, (or Works commonly adscribed unto him:) not (...) only and (...) (which
is the same in effect:) but even (...) alas confringere, as it is here. Some
such places here and there, may be found, where the Reader must take some time
to consider, (in what is Latin, especially:) if he think it worth the while. I
have said as much as I think needful, and my leisure will afford me at this
time.

Since this written, observing that p. 403, 404. the Latin there in both
pages, is very full of faults, (far more there, than any where else: that I
have observed:) I thought it would not be amiss to correct those two pages.
The Reader may the better know what he has to do upon such occasions, though I
dare say he will not meet with the like again in the whole Book.

PAge 403. line 3, 4. read Cons. in oratione vestra r. t. q. capitula, in q.
totius orationis u. est. m. Pr. de prophetiarum and revelationum cess ib. l. 6
gratum, l. 8. Regiae. l. 9. intelligitur. ib. omnimodae D. pot. l. 12. proph.
scilicet de D. f. l. 14. completam and consummatam. l. 17. Nam ob hanc causam
c. -- scivisset. l. 18. prophetica -- praecipuus sc. l. 19. Christianos) --
collimatus and i (...) l. 20. redemptionis humanae consummatum c. l. 21. Nam
cum cons. l. 22. deponentes eum de. l. 23. ipsemet chapter l. 26. Christum --
incipiens a M. l. 27. interpretabatur. l. 28. eosdem repetebat; Haec sunt verba
quae locutus sum ad vos, cum adhue essem vob. l. 30, 31. nullae ess. prophetiae
vel revel. ipsae se. -- dicendum c. l. 32. rev. sive notabili illa B. Joannis
Ap. l. 33. (...) l. 34. Et in vl. c ei. Ap. sive Revelationis, ter, eandem u.
l. 36. Praeterea, quae er. l. 28 Actuum l. -- (...) C. l. 39. p ipse dicit, si
gl. l. 42. and ne magn. revelationum extollat me, d. e. m. stimulus c. l. 43.
colaphizet. and. Notum m. f. l. 48. Evangelistus. l. 50. (...) pl. l. 52.
scimus, and jam hac aet. l. 53. prophetiae. l. 54. u. expressae de m. Divinis
Et de locut. l. 55 invisibile q.

Page 404. l. 1. quid putandum est? -- Christi t. l. 2. Actuum. l. 3
supervenerunt. l. 5. quae facta e. s. Claudio. Ad sec. a. l. 6. asseronovit. l.
11, 12. vere p. r. discr. existimetis D. l. 13. secreta, valde l. l. 16.
nostrarum A. l. 19. actiones: Angelorum videl. D. b. l. 20 sunt cens. l. 26.
Sempiterne vere, and une D. l. 27. admonuisti. l. 29. syrtibus m. -- homicidar.
l. 30. expedivisti. l. 33. agnescimus. l. 39. mirificis -- sitiebas R. l. 34.
qui t. (...) and (...) ex animo t. s. vir. l. 41. obedientiam exhibeam. l. 42.
notos -- sustineremus, st. 43. nostras -- per 7. m. l. 44. autem -- tua maxima
gratia, f. l. 45. incolumes. 46. n strae o -- spurcitiis: l. 50. fermentanda g.
l. 51. quidam propositi nis. l. 53. viribus transglutiendo u. l. 54. Mitte ig.
n. lucem and v -- sempiterne, Vive, and Vere. l. 56 vivum -- esse: Me autem. l.
57, fidelem tuum and sincerum e. servum: l. 58. ante m. In the Margin (as I
ghuesse:) In lapide quem Ang. m. adduxit: and perscripta erat nostra a. cum
eodem.

Some things to be corrected in the Preface: the Author being then in a
Journey when it was printed, and so his intended re-view being prevented by the
quickness of the Press.
FIrst, he desires the Reader to take notice that he finds his Orthographie
altered in diverse places: as Phylosophie, and Philosopher; for Philosophy,
etc. Hyppocrates, for Hippocrates, etc, His pointing also: as, full points, for
two points: as in the second page. before Although: and before: Yet: which does
much obscure the sense. Besides this: (but I must desire the Reader first to
add the figures there, none being printed:) Page 1. line 17. read: in any age:
to read I say, etc. p. 2l. 44. First then, (as from them th. p. 3. l. 6. (...)
t. p. 4. l. 14 how that happ. p. 5. l 35. r. and others, some to s. p. 7. l. 4.
r. ingenuous prof. p. 10. l. 14. which may eas. p. 11. l. 43. So Justine M So
quoted indeed and believed by diverse; but not rightly: but however one of the
anc. p. 13. l. 19. (...). saepissime (...) p. 14. l. 7. r. by the out app. ibid
l. 37. some mischief w. be d ibid l. 40. r. as the D. p. 15. l. 36. Jul. Caesar
(...). p. 16. l. 23. and 28. Trallianus. ibid l. 43. r. Reason: sight, S. ibid
l. ult. that those m. p: 18. l. 23. these cl. p. 19. l. 37. admisisset ille
(...) se u. ib. 42. r. se. illi ign. p. 19. l. 7. deseruit n. Ib. 10. (...)
Ibid 20. aperirem. Ibid 45. th. days among others, one melioris notae, as we
say, by S. H. against (...). As afterward (some 3. or 4. years after) Popish
impostures (then used and discovered) of the same nature, for the advancement
of their cause, occasioned another of the same Author, and Subject, (
exorcismes) against Papists. I have th. -- p. 21. 18. (...) Ib. 23. adductos.
Ib. 24. cum c. s. p. 23. l. 21. Christians: ackn. Ib. 33. more sex. Ib. 35.
Sec. therefore w. p. 24 44. (...) p. 25. 44. true a. s. Chr. p. 26. 28. request
t. p. 27. 26. yea ready, wh. p. 28. 11. fors. (...), p. etc. and p..... (in
Lat. p. 27. 43. presented; and appr. p. 30. 25. true not. but in the o. Ib. 26.
obs. dilig. Ib. 30. for that P.... himself f. p. 31. 31. commends. p. 33. 7.
differences in r. Ib. 11. 12. of thing -- has d. p. 34. 36. delayed a. p. 35.
34. confused or conf. p. 35. 7. Devils w. Ibid 9. He did c. p. 37. 22. lived.
Th. 39. 6. more probably den. Ib. 17. part it is (if any part at all, and not
rather a new counterseit under an old vizor:) so often. Ib. 36. has had a h. p.
40. 7. spirituum -- mea aet. Ib. 11. d. do th. Ib. 15. Ars. fac. Ib. 23. former
a. p. 41. 23. of what is tr. p. 43. 6. they may h. f. some. perchance th. ibid
7. Synes. ibid 23. in the T. ibid 33. conceited. ibid 43. some Table. p. 44. 6.
about a y. p. 46. 7. prius ost. p. 47. 25. more of it. It is a. ibid 27.
belonged u. p. 49. 15. who b. ib. 31. 43. (...) 32. (...) 44. (...) 45. (...)
p. 50. 12. lactucas. 45. of this, occ. p. 52. 30. I knew. p. 53 5. and praying.
Postscript l. 22 ministry.

Besides these Errata's: it is fit the Reader should know that the written Copy
of the Preface had many references to the pages of the Book M S. which because
they did not agree with the printed pages, the Printer thought impertinent to
set down: which nevertheless has bred some confusion in some places; as p.
46. 47. and elsewhere: but may easily be rectified by the Table, at the
beginning. Again, some marginal quotations are omitted, which may be supplied.
P. 34. against the 3, 4. and following lines: [ Treatise of Enthusiasme: Chapter 4.
and 6. of Rhetor. and (...). Enth.] P. 36. against line 11, 12. etc. [Vera ac
memorabilis Historia de 3. Energumenis etc. Lut. Par. 1625. dedicated to the
King of France.] P. 48. against l. 6, 7. etc. [ De art Gramm. l. 1. cap. 41.
p. 141, 142.]

Lastly, I cannot give a reason of the Italica: or different letter, in some
places: but that the Printer, or some body else, have pleased their phansies
therein.

In the Table: Part I Act. VI. of the same nature. Act. LI. res. to leave Dr.
Dee. Act. LXIII. Some char. and properties. Act. CI. observe: at least. to ag.
Act. CIV. no ace. of his second L. ibid is want. Act. CVII. in the Cabale. Act.
CXIII. but reserving of it not all. CXVII. from Prag. Act. CXX. spoken of, rev.
CXXX. intoxic. CXXXV. he does tell b. of those b.

Part II Act. IX. pronounced ag.

The HOLY TABLE


A Specimen of the Tables or Book of ENOCH.




A TRUE RELATION OF Dr. DEES Actions, with spirits.
Liber Mysteriorum (and Sancti) parallelus Novalisque. D. Is Dr. Dee, E. K.
Edward Kellet See the Preface.
Lesden MAY 28. 1583.
D. AS J. and E. K. sat discoursing of the Noble Polonian Albertus A. L.
Lasci his great honor here with us obtained, his great good liking of all
States of the people, of them that either see him or hear of him, and again how
much I was beholding to God that his heart should so fervently favor me, and
that he does so much strive to suppress and confound the malice and envy of
my Countrymen against me, for my better credit winning or recovering to do God
better service hereafter thereby, etc. Suddenly, there seemed to come out of my
Oratory a Spiritual creature, like a pretty girl of 7 or 9 years of age,
attired on her head with her hair rolled up before, and hanging down very long
behind, with a gown of Green and red.
Sey,.....changeable green and red, and with a train she seemed to play up and
down..... like, and seemed to go in and out behind my books, lying on heaps,
the biggest.....and as she should ever go between them, the books seemed to
give place sufficiently, dis.... one heap from the other, while she passed
between them: And so I considered, and..... the diverse reports which E. K.
made unto me of this pretty maiden, and.....

D. I said..... Whose maiden are you?

D. Sh...... Whose man are you?

D. I am the servant of God both by my bound duty, and also (I hope) by his
Adoption.

A voice...... You shall be beaten if you tell.

..... Am not I a fine Maiden? Give me leave to play in your house, my Mother
told me she would come and dwell here.

D. She went up and down with most lively gestures of a young girl, playing by
her self, and diverse times another spoke to her from the corner of my study
by a great Perspectiveglasse, but none was seen beside her self.

..... Shall I? I will (Now she seemed to answer one in the foresaid Corner of
the Study)

..... I pray you let me tarry a little [speaking to one in the foresaid Corner]

D. Tell me who you are?

..... I pray you let me play with you a little, and I will tell you who I am.

D. In the name of Jesus then tell me. Jesus.


..... I rejoice in the name of Jesus, and I am a poor little Maiden, Madini, I
am the last but one of my Mothers children, I have little Baby-children at
home. Proles ipsius Madini.


D. Where is your home?

Ma..... I dare not tell you where I dwell, I shall be beaten.

D. You shall not be beaten for telling the truth to them that love the truth,
to the eternal truth all Creatures must be obedient.

Ma...... I warrant you I will be obedient. My Sisters say they must all come
and dwell with you. Madini her six Sisters.


D. I desire that they who love God should dwell with me, and I with them.

Ma...... I love you now you talk of God.

D. Your eldest sister her name is Esemeli. Dee.


Ma...... My sister is not so short as you make her.

D. O, I cry you mercy, she is to be pronounced Esemeli. Esemeli.


E. K. She smileth, one calls her saying, Come away Maiden.

Ma...... I will read over my Gentlewoemen first.

My Master Dee will teach me, if I say amiss.

D. Read over your Gentlewoemen as it pleases you.

Ma...... I have Gentlemen and Gentlwoemen, Look you here.

E- K. She brings a little book out of her pocket,

..... She points to a in Picture the book.

Mad...... Is not this a pretty man.

D. What is his name?

Ma..... My..... says, his name is Edward, Look you, he has a Crown upon his
head, my Mother says, that this man was Duke of York.

E. K. She looks upon a Picture in the Book with a Coronet in his hand and a
Crown upon his head.

Ma...... This was a jolly man when he was King of England.

D. How long since is it that he was King of England?

Ma...... Do you ask me such a question, I am but a little Maiden? Lo, here is
his Father Richard Plantagenet, and his Father also.

D. How call you him?

Ma...... Richard, Surely this was Richard Earl of Cambridge.

E. K. She turns the book leaves, and said.

Mad...... Here is a grim Lord, He makes me afraid.

D. Why does he make you afraid?

Ma...... He is a stern fellow, I do not know him what he is. But this was the
Duke of Clarence. This was Father to Richard Earl of Cambridge. Lo, here is
Anne his wife.

E. K. Turning over the leaf,

The same was heir to all Mortimers lands.

Edmund was her brother.

Lo, Sir, here be the wicked Mortimers.

E K. She turned over diverse leaves, and then she said

Ma...... This same is Roger Mortimer.

..... My Mother says this man was Earl of the Marches.

This same is his wife.

He had a great deal of lands by her, for she was an Heir.

This same is wild Genvill, her Father. Pronounced Jenville.


Here is a Town they call Webley. Here is Beudley. Here is Mortimers Clybery.
Here is wild Wenlock. Here is Ludlow. Here is Stanton Lacy. Genvill his wife
was Heir of all these. Here is Hugh Lacy her Father. He wears his hair
long, for he was Deputy of Ireland; That makes him look with such a writhen
face.

My sister has torn out the other two leaves, I will bring them when you have
supped.

I pray do not tell any body of me.

D. We were earnestly called for to Supper by my folks. Nsta.


After Supper.

Ma...... Here is William Lacy Father to Hugh.

Here is Richard his Father. And here is Sir Richard his Father, and here is
William, Sir Richards Brother. Here is his going into France.

D. Quo anno Christi?

Mad...... I warrant you my eldest Sister will tell you all. Here is his going
into Denmark.

My Sister will come shortly, and tell you how he married in Poland, and what
issue this William Her eldest Sister. Her Sister is to tell the rest.
had.

D. I pray declare the Pedigree down to this Albert Lascy.

Ma...... Alas, I cannot tell what is done in other Countries.

D. I know you are not Particular of this Country, but Universal for all
countries in the whole world, which is indeed but one Country, or a great
City, etc.

Mad...... Well, my sister will shortly come and tell you unlooked for, If you
judge these things well that I have spoken. Nam vera sunt. Nam verus est qui me
mifit.

Truth is all that is truth.

The Mortimer I spoke of, is the first of the six: there were six Mortimers
Earls of March. Edmond was the last, and Roger the first; that Mortimer was
the Grandfathers Grandfather of this Edmond.

E. K. There seems some one to call her, whom I hear now.

Ma..... I come.

D. She took up her Skrolls on the ground, of which some were very old, and she
put up her book.

Ma..... This may stand you in some stead.

D. Mitte lucem tuam and veritatem tuam, Jesu Christ, Lux vera, and veritatis
perennis Fons. Amen.



Monday a Meridie hora 4

D. We presented our selves, ready for instruction receiving, and presumed not
to call my Junii 2, 1583.
good Minister spiritual, but by humble prayer referred all to God his good
pleasure.

E K. The Golden Curtain which covers all the Stone hangs still, but I
hear a voice or sentence thrice repeated, thus.

A voice..... Sanctum, Signatum, and ad tempus.

D. The sense hereof may be diverse ways understood, and more then I can
imagine, but which sense is to our instruction would I feign know.

A voice...... Sanctum, quia hoc velle suum; sigillatum quia determinatum ad
tempus.

E K. Hard speeches, but he could not perfectly discern them.

A voice..... Ad tempus and ad tempus (inquam) quia rerum consummatio. All
things are at hand.

The Seat is prepared.

Justice has determined.

The Judge is not yet willing.

Mercy thrusts it self betwixt the Divinity. But it is said,

The Time shall be shortened.

E K. Saw no creature: But the voice came behind him over his head, till now:
when he espied one standing on the Table besides the silk cloth on which the
Stone stood; he seemed like a Husbandman all in red apparel, red hose close to
his legs, a red jacket, red buttoned cap on his head, yea, and red shoes. He
asked E. K. how he did, and E. K. answered, Well I thank God.

D. By your apparel it should seem you have somewhat to say concerning the
Commons of this Realm, and not of high School-points, or Sciences. I am
desirous to know who sent you? What is your message? and what is your name? for
a name you have peculiar as all Creatures else.

D. He paused a good while; whereupon I asked him if he considered my speeches?

..... I consider your speeches, for I have left nothing behind.

E. K. He kneeleth down and seems to say somewhat, his speech is quick,
round, and ready. He seems to pray in a strange Language. I perceived these
words among many other, Oh Gahire Rudna gephna oh Gahire, etc.

His Countenance was directed toward the Stone.

..... Vestra non mea facio.

E K Now he stands up.

..... Have not thou said, From whom come thou? What is thy message? [D. He
looked toward me] And have urged my name? Saying, All things have a name. It is
true; for so they have because they are. Have thou left any thing unsaid? D.
All things have a name, vide (...) Tert. part libri Eraconiersis de 30 Aeris
exercitibus. The sum of our commanded observation. Note 7.


D. You rehearse my speeches not only in general, but also in particular.

The will of God be done (to his glory) for the rest.

..... My message is from him, in whose name thou have desired it, which has
said lift up thine eyes, and look unto (behold I say) the sum of my
Commandments, 1. What I am, 2. Whose Ministers you are, and (as it is said
before) 3. To what end and purpose it is.

Then cease to plead when Judgment stands in place; For all things are
determined already. The 7 doors are opened. The 7 Governors have almost ended
their Government.

The Earth labors as sick, yea sick unto death.

The Waters pour forth weepings, and have not moisture sufficient to quench
their own sorrows.

The Air withers, for her heat is infected.

The Fire consumes and is scalded with his own heat.

The B dies above are ready to say, We are weary of our courses.

Nature would fain creep again into the bosom of her good and gracious Master.

Darkness is now heavy and sinketh down together: She has builded her self,
yea (I say) she has advanced her self into a mighty building she says, Have
done, for I am ready to receive my burden.

Hell it self is weary of Earth: For why? The son of Darkness comes now to
challenge his right: and seeing all things prepared and provided, desires to
establish himself a kingdom; saying, Antichrist his saying in the spir it of
Satan.
We are now strong enough, Let us now build us a kingdom upon earth, and Now
establish that which we could not confirm above.

And therefore, Behold the end.

When the time comes, The..... thy sorrows shall be greater than the
sweetness, the sorrows Sorrows.
(I mean) of that thou see; I mean in respect of the sweetness of thy
knowledge. Then will you lament and weep for tho e thou thoughtst were just men.

When you earnestly pray it shall be said unto you Labor. When you would take
Mercy Justice Labor.
shall say, Be it so.

Therefore (I say) thirst not overmnch: For fear least thy capacity be
confounded.

Neither move thou him which has moved all things already to the end.

But do (...) that which is commanded.

Neither prescribe thou any form to God his building.

All things shall be brought into an uniformal Order. Al. alasky.


Whom thou say that thou have not yet confirmed, confirm with good counsel.
It is said I have accepted him.

Are not these News sufficient?

It is said, (...) shall govern me a people: of himself he cannot. Therefore
let him believe, and secondly Rejoice that the Angel of God has so governed
him. That in Election he shall Notes in Election.
govern him a people.

Desires he to hear of greater blessedness?

He has also said: Then shall it be said unto him, O King. O King. Vide tamen
de ejus juturo casu in actionibus de Lask. Pride.


It follows consequently that he is called, and that to a Kingly Office: For
whosoever is Anointed in the Lord, his Kingdom is for ever.

Will he be the son of perdition? Let him then with his fathers put on the
garments of pride.

Desires he news? Tell him thou have prayed for him; the Devil envyeth him,
and his estate.

Tell him that I say so.

Say it is a shame for a Kings Son to commit theft; and for him that is called,
to do the works of unrighteousness. Studiest thou to please him? Give him
sharp and wholesome counsel. For in him (I fay) the state and alteration of the
whole World shall begin.

Would thou know from whence I came? Thoushalt.

(...) it Humbly, it is not my part to meddle any further than my charge.

But as it is said before unto thee, So shall it come to pass.

Moses had a rod whereby he was known, and the hand of God approved.

Let him use therefore to carry the rod of righteousness about him.

For we are seven: and in us is comprehended that rod wherewith Moses wrought.
As it is begun Moses 7. rod. Sanctum, signatum, ad tempus.
so I end: What ye see here is (...) [pointing to the..... and by him sealed
and for until the time.

Therefore use patience herein until the time that it is said unto thee.....

Venite, videte, (and loquimini) Judicia mea.

He that says thus (I speak of my self, and as concerning my message,) is
equal with the greatest Angels, and his name is Murifri.

Thou have written my name, and I am of thy Calendar, because thy Calendar is
of God. Murifri my Calender.


In the grounds of all thy Tables thou shall find my name.

D. I remember not any such name written by me, but it may be contained in some
new Composition, or Collection.

Mur...... It is true, for if thou badst remembered all those things which thou
have written, then should not my message need.

D. If I might without offending you, I would move two Petitions unto you, one
concerning the Soul, and the other concerning the body: Concerning the Soul, is
for one Isabel Lister, whom the wicked Enemy has sore afflicted long with
dangerous temptations, and has brought her knives to destroy her self withal;
she resists hitherto, and desires my helping counsel, which how small it is
God knows. The other is of another woman, who has great need, and is driven
to maintain her self, her husband, and three children by her hand labor, and
there is one that by dream is advertised of a place of Treasure hid in a
Cellar, which this woman has hired thereupon, and has no longer time of
hiring the said Cellar, but till Midsummer next. She, and this dreaming Maiden
dug somewhat, and found certain tokens notefied unto her: But so left off. I
would gladly have your help herein, if it pleased God.

Mur...... I answer thee, I will come again soon, and thou shall receive a
Medecin which shall teach thee to work help in the first. The second is
vanity, for it is not so, but to the intent that after great hope of this world
has infected the weaklings mind: Desperation might have the more open and
ready entrance. But yet she shall be comforted for thy sake.

D. The praise be unto God.

Mur...... I Go. One thing I have to say, be faithful in all things.

I have said.

D. I prayed, and gave thanks heartily to God for his mercies, and graces, and
so rose up.

D. Then he said write, M. 49. under V. 43 under R. 35. 1. and 47. under F. 9.
R. 33. I. 42 This shall lead thee to my name, he that sent me be amongst yon. D.
Amen, Amen, Amen.

D. Note in Tabula Collecta, (which I first gathered of the 49. good Angels) I
took the third letters out of the names, it is to wit, out of the 49th. name,
and th..... 47. 9 33. 42. which agreed very well with the letters, but the five
and thirtieth name did not yield R. in his third letter. Therefore I am..... in
the.....

Monday after supper 1583. Junii 3.


D. After supper, as we were together in my study, and attending somewhat the
return of the good messager spiritual, and said that he promised to come again
suddenly, he appeared and answered.

Mur...... So I am, write 7. 30.25. 44.37.35 46.

To the first S. to the second O. the third L. the fourth G. the fifth A. the
sixth R. the 7th. S.

D. That makes SOLGARS.

Mur..... Add the first, and last number together, it makes 53. let that be
the Center to the rest.

D. To be put to the Center of the Steptagonum.

Mur...... So. The ground hereof is to be found in the third. Table in the
first book: I mean in The third Tab^e in the first book.
the third of the seven, the Table of B. B. etc. being the first.

My name is also to be found in the same Table.

Form this upon a plate of lead: It prevails as a cure against such
infections. My promise is done.

D. How is this to be used?

Mur...... Use it upon the body molested, adding the letters of her name in a
small Circle on the back half, not the letters in their forms expressed, but
the number of such letters.

D. We know not how to number her name in our letters.

Mur...... Take them out of the second Table (any Table else of the seventh
will serve) so that D The second Table did not serve, and therefore I used the
seventh, where all the letters might be had.
thou take the numbers as thou find them placed with the letters.

D. How is this to be used about her body?

Mur...... As by discretion shall be thought best: It prevails sufficiently,
so it be done, but thus far I teach thee, and this, as concerning nature.

The health of him which sent me be amongst you. Amen.

D. Gloria and gratiarum actio perennis sit Deo nostro omnipotenti uni and
Trino, Amen. The forepart of the Lamin.
Isabel Lister, the back part of the Lamin.


Wednesday a Meridie circa 2d. 1583. Junii 5.


D. E. K. Had been ever since nine of the Clock in the morning in a mavelous
great disquietnesse of mind, fury, and rage, by reason his brother Thomas had
brought him news that a Commission was out to attache, and apprehend him as a
fellon for coining of money. Secondly, A mere untruth in every part thereof,
and a malicious lie.
that his wife was gone from Mistress Freemans house at Blohley, and how Mr.
Husey had reported him to be a cosener, and had used very bitter and grievous
reports of him now of late; and that his wife was at home with her mother at
Chipping Norton, whereupon, I considering his great disorder and encumbrance
toward him externally, and his greater offending of God with his furious
impatience internally; and remembering the whole premises of God his service to
be performed by us two (if we would be dutiful servants to his Divine Majesty)
I was touched with a great pang of Compassion, both that any Christian should
use such speeches as he used, or be of so revenging a mind and intent as he
showed himself to be: and also in respect of mine own credit to be brought in
doubt, for embracing the company of such an one, a disorderly person: And
thirdly, that the good service of God might hereby be taken from our two
executing, to our great danger, both in body and soul: Therefore to do my duty
as a man resolute (upon our uniting for Gods service) to do for him as for my
self: I made (...) communia.
God my refuge for comfort, counsel, and help in this great affliction, and
cross of temptation.

Whereupon after my vehement and humble prayers for the foresaid purpose, this
voice was heard of E. K.

I had (upon some reasonable respect) set the shew-stone with the mystery in
it, on the Table by E. K. also.

A voice...... Let the daughters of light

Take up their garments, let them open the windows of their secret Chambers,
for the voice of man has said.

Oh, show thy self to be a God; yea, perform that which thou have already
promised, gather your vestures together, for those that are sick have need of
help, you are the children of pity, and in the loins of compassion do you
dwell: For I have said, you are. And I have said, my Determination Note of
Determination undeterminable. Note tentations by the Biting worm.
shall not fail, although with the sons of men my Determinations may be
undetermined.

Come gather up your garments, for the Cankers are ripe, and the Biting-worm
seeks to gnaw into the Lily.

He has said, Let me prove them, for they are not just: Yea, let me touch
them, for they are unrighteous, I have granted him power, but without
prevailing, I have given him weapons, but they are not sharpened, his fingers
shall defile, and yet not deface: For I have appointed him a night, and have
prefixed an end thereunto, to the intent it may be known: That thus far I have
stretched his mouth.

E. K. I have heard a voice about the shew-stone very great, as though men were
beating down of mud walls.

The thumping, shuffing, and cluttering is such.

A voice...... Arise, I say, for I will be revenged against the scorning of
those; yea, of those that are sucklings.

D. After a great silence and pause, appeared one on the Table (without the
skirts of the silk sarcenet) like a woman having on a red kirtle and above
that a white garment like an Irish Mantle, on her head a round thing like a
Garland, green and like a Coronet under the Garland, but not perfectly to be
discerned; on her breast a precious Stone of white color, and on her back
another precious Stone; both which Stones were set upon a Cross, in the very
center of the Cross.

D. Your external apparel (you Daughter of Light) you perceive that we have
somewhat noted: but by the power and mercy of the external Light, we trust and
desire to understand somewhat of your internal virtue.

She said..... (...) hat do you think I am a Jewellers wife by my apparel?

D. We deem you to be the Messenger of him that has for mankind purchased the
Jewel of eternal Bliss, by the incomparable Jewel of his most precious Blood.

..... Will you have this too? A voice out of my Oratory behind me.


D. After a pretty while silence, I said, We expect the execution of the
purpose for which you are sent.

She said..... It is written that Pride was the first offense.

Githgulcag knew not himself.

Therefore he was ignorant.

E K. She is much fimbling about the Stone on her breast, and regarding it.

E. K. Now She talks with other whom I see not, her talk is very short and
quick, but I cannot perceive what she says.

She...... Read what I have said.

I read the former words.

She...... You will grant me that Pride is the greatest sin.

Pride was the cause he knew not himself.

Therefore Pride is the cause of Ignorance.

D. The Argument is good.

She...... Ignorance was the nakedness wherewithal you were first tormented,
and the first Plague that fell unto man was the want of Science.

E K. Now she speaks to other again who appear not, and they seem to answer
her again.

She...... The want of Science hinders you from knowledge of your self.

E K. She looks upon D. and smileth. Now she speaks to the unseen people
again.

She...... Whosoever therefore knows not himself, is proud.

D. God help us to know our selves for his Honor sake.

E. K. She looks upon D. and smileth.

She...... You have time enough, therefore we may take leisure.

D. [ I made speed to write.]

E. K. She talks again with her invisible company.

She...... Pride is rewarded as sin, Ergo the first offender was damned. What
say you Sir? [ speaking to E. K.]

What difference is between your mind and Pride?

E. K. Wherein am I proud?

She...... In the same wherein the Devil was first proud.

Who glorified the Devil?

E. K. God.

D. God glorified not the Devil, but before he became a Devil he was in glory.

She...... The abusing of his Glorification made him a Devil: So the abusing of
the good- A Devil. nesse of God toward this man, may make him a Devil.

The works of the Spirit quicken; the doings of the Flesh lead unto
destraction. Art thou offended to be called a Devil? Then extol not thy self
above thy Election.

No man is elected by proper name, but according to the measure of his faith,
and this faith is Faith. lively and has a quickening Spirit in it for ever.
Indeed thou art ignorant, and therefore thou art sufficiently plagued: Why do
thou boast thy self and say, This I can do?

The Reeds pipe, but it is long of the wind, and herein thou show that thou
know not thy self, for that thou art proud; pray therefore that thou may
have understanding, and cast away pride if thou will not be counted a Devil.

By true understanding you learn, first to know your selves what you are: of
whom you are, and to what end you are.

This understanding causes no self-love, but a spiritual self-love.

This understanding teaches no Blasphemy.

This understanding teaches no fury.

It teaches a man to be angry, but not wrathful. Wrath.


For we may be angry, and not offend. Wrath is to damnation.

Therefore considering that Damnation was the end of the first, which was
Pride, and Ignorance, the punishment of the second (which is very loathsome.)

Pray unto God (...) may avoid the first, and be unburdened of the second.

Consider by whom thou art counseled, and of whom the counsel is: with us
there is no cause of offense, neither is the counsel given with a weak mouth.

Will thou be well rewarded? Why studiest thou not to do well? Would thou be
one of the chosen? stand stiff and be contented with all temptations.

Is God a God of Justice?

E. K. It is true.

Be thou therefore a just servant.

No man inheriteth the Kingdom of Eternity, without he conquer in this World.

No man can challenge justly a reward, without he be a Conqueror, or do the
works of Justice.

Does the Devil persuade thee? Arm thy self against him.

Does the World not like of thee? It is for two causes; either for that thou
live well and not as a worldling, or else because thy wickedness is such as
that the World wondreth at it. If thou be in the first Rejoice, For blessed are
those whom the World hates; when they laugh at thy godliness, Be sorty and
grieve thou at their sinfulness.

If thou offend in the second fly hastily from the World: Tell the World what
thou have of hers, and let her be ashamed that thou know her.

Is thy flesh stiff-necked? Fast and pray, it does avoid temptation. Be sorry
always.


Be sorry always; For in this World there is nothing to rejoice at. For sin
only provokes to sorrow, whether it be of thy self or of another.

Be stiff against temptations, for whosoever is not armed as I am, shall be
vexed with the weapons of his adversary.

My Garland is Godliness, my Brestplate is Humility, and upon my back I wear
Patience. Her attire exfounded. The attire of spiritual creatures.


These do I wear to the intent I might show you what you should wear.

But as these things are placed in their crosses, so do the crosses always
follow them that wear them.

Art thou punished as an Apostle? Rejoice; it is a happy cross.

Art thou vexed as a Tyrant? thank God it is in this World. For blessed are
those that are punished here, to the intent their sins may be forgotten
hereafter.

I persuade to the contrary; Be humble, seek true wisdom, then are you truly
fashioned according to your Maker, and shall (...) with us, with Halleluja in
Heaven. Good Angels.


I have counseled, I have done my message thus far.

D. Your counsel is perfectly good, and your message merciful. His name be
praised and glorified that sent you. Amen.

As you were called hither, by the name of Daughters of Light: So this other
day, there was one sent hither (of that blessed company) who was accounted a
Daughter, and had six Sisters more: That Daughter her name was Madini; so of
your name we are desirous to be informed, for distinction and instructions
sake, in the trade of these mysteries.

She said...... It is good to know my name; to see whether it agree with my
Doctrine.

E. K. What can you (for all your exhortation) accuse me of?

Indeed I thank you very heartily for your exhortation and good counsel; but
how unjustly I am misused at Huseys hand, and so provoked to this extreme
affiction of mind and sundry unseemly spceches, be you Judge between Husey and
me.

She said. Whosoever has committed sin and is not reconciled, shall have the
reward of a sinner. There is a double reconciliation, the one is with God, the
other with the Conscience. But this man is not reconciled in Conscience
(repents not his wickedness) thereby it follows he (...) be reconciled
with God: Ergo he (...) be rewarded as he is. The reward of sin is to be
absent, or rather to be banished in this world from the society of God and his
Angels.

So it falls out to Regions and Countries, Cities, Kings and Subjects,
Authorities and their Good Angels our keepers.
Officers, when (I say) they are estranged with absence of their appointed and
good keepers.

Therefore it proved that the Devil is most with him, and nearest with him.

Whom the Devil is a Lord of, he br uses as his servants, and where his
service may be greatest done, there is he most alleged. His subrilties are
principal and great: And by these reasons I prove that Husey is easily to be
infected, either with envy, malice, slander, or dishonor of Gods word. John
Husey,


This is one of those Assaul's that is promised should assault you.

Who is to be blamed, be that consentech, or he in whom the procurement is?
Thou did consent and choose him for a Companion. Be not therefore angry at his
malice; for the fire that is, thou have brought in with thine own hands.

To me (...) the Enemy his industry is impossible to look into, his subtlety
is more incredible.

The Reward of good life is great: But the filthiness that sin carries with
it in this World, and leads with it into the World to come, is most horrible.

Is it not said, That a skirmish shall be (and that great) but you shall be
Conquerours? It is written, It is true and shall be never overthrown; so mighty
is his strength that has armed himself with it.

In the Serpents belly, there is nothing clean: neither with unhonest persons
(ungodly I mean) is there any pure society: Light agrees not with Darkness,
nor virtue with vice, therefore be you of one, and in one, that you may agree
and have the reward of one. Our uniting.


Behold it is said, I will part bounds between the just and the unjust, I will
suffer the Enemy to sow discord to the intent that those that are my people
may be separated and have a dwelling by themselves.

Peruse the Scripture, it is always seen that the Spirit of God forces Satan
in spite of his The necessity of Satan working against men. De futuris nisi
jussi non pronuntiant boni Angels. A Commission out for Kelly.
head to separate the evil from the good by discord, and herein the Devil
works against himself.

We good Angels keep secret the Mysteries of God; things that are to come we
always keep close with this exception, The form of our Commandment.

Truth it is that a Commission is granted not only to enquire of thee, but
also to attach thee, and that by the Council.

If he go down he shall be attached, therefore tempt not God.

D. But if he tarry here and his being here so known as it is, it is likely
that he shall be attached here to my no small grief or disgrace. What is your
counsel herein?

She said...... It is written misery shall not enter the doors of him whom the
Highest has magnified. DIXIT, and DICO, and DICTUM SIT. The world shall never
prevail 1583. The Book, the Scrowl, and Powder.
against you.

D. In respect of the Book, the Scrowl, and the Powder to be communicated, What
is your judgment or mind, seeing when he was coming from Islington with them,
he was threatened to be pulled in pieces if he came with them to me?

..... All that is spoken of, is in very deed, vanity. The book may be used to a
good purpose. The Book found.


They were wicked ones. But as these things are the least part of this action,
so are they not much to be looked after.

D. As concerning the Powder (I beseech you) what is your knowledge of it? The
Powder.


..... It is a Branch of Natures life.

It is appointed for a time, and to a purpose.

D. As concerning the earthes of the Eleven places being with expedition.....

What is now to be done with them?

..... It was a foresight of God, if they had been there now they had utterly
perished. The si Earths.


D. O Jesus, that is a mavelous thing.

..... Helas, that is nothing.

D. By nature they could not have perished in so short time.

..... I have said.

E. K. Tell us your name.

..... If you will remember my counsel, I will tell you my name.

E. K. Your counsel was by piece-meale told me, that I cannot remember it but
in general.

..... You do, and have, and I am almost HAS.

D. I understand you to be ATH, in sigillo Emeth.

ATH...... So am I in the number of Gods Elect.

D. Shall not I make means to Mr. Richard Young, as one of the higher
Commissioners Mr. Richard Young.
to do my companion here some good?

ATH...... Trouble your self when you need.

E. K. She spoke this somewhat sharply.

Get your friends to fignifie down good report of you.

Come not there in many years.

D. As concerning my writing of the holy Book, how shall I do, by reason of the
perfect writing it in the Due Characters? seeing many words are written so, as
the pronunciation and the Orthographie do hardly seem to agree?

ATH...... You shall have a Schoolmaster sufficient to read unto you.

D. Where shall I begin?

ATH...... Let him lead you to that, who is within you.

D. As concerning Isabel Lister who is vexed of a wicked spirit, how well have I
executed that which was prescribed me; or how well does it work?

ATH...... Friend, It is not of my charge.

Remember the true path that leads unto true honor, where there sits a
True and Just GOD, who grant you his Direction and establishment of perfect
life.

D Amen, Amen, Amen.

E. K. She is gone.

Junii 9. a Meridie hera 5.

D. Very long I prayed in my Oratory and at my Deske to have answer or
resolutions of diverse doubts which I had noted in a paper, and which doubts I
read over distinctly, they concerned the preparation of things about the Table
of practice, and other things above my Lamin and Stone; but answer came none,
neither in the Stone did any thing appear; no, not the Golden Curtain, but the
Stone was of his natural Diaphanitie. But I held on in pitiful manner to
request some advertisement, if for any our trespasses or offenses this unlooked
for alteration from former dealing had happened, etc.

At length a voice came from behind E. K. over his head, and said thus:

A voice...... The judgments of our God are most profound and hard in the
understanding of man.

There is silence above, let there therefore be patience amongst you. I have
said.

D. Upon this answer I began to discourse of diverse causes of this silence, and
diverse manners Silence.
of silences; and in the end I became in a great and sorrowful heaviness, and
fear of the wrath, or displeasure of God; conceived for some, our misbehaviour
toward him since our last dealing, whereupon I prayed long at my Desk,
standing for mercy, comfort, counsel, and some exposition of the former
sentence. After a long time thus passing there appeared one in the very top of
the frame of the shew-stone, much like Michael.

Who said,..... Write, for I must be gone.

Silence there is in heaven, for the Governors of the earth are now before the
Lord, the doings of their seats are now disclosed, every thing is NOTED. For
that God will be righteous in all his doings.

There is not this day any one that governs the people upon earth, but his
government is disclosed, and his government is set open, and his faults
revealed,

They without number cry, Lord, let thy vengeance come.

The earth says. Be it so.

Satan is before the Lord: He has garnished himself with Garlands as a
Conqueror, and Satan.
what he says is wonderful.

Therefore shall the Lord open his mouth, and curse the earth, and all living
creatures. For iniquity has gotten the upper hand: Publicly the States of
mankind in the world are condemned. Viols ready.


We are all silent and ready with our Viols to power the wrath of God upon
them, when he says, BE IT SO.

Therefore be you patient. For, our patience in an universal silence.

We look for the mouth of Justice: But L O: The Lord says unto the Lord, lift
up thy Yet awhile.
eyes (O God.) Behold, the Dignity of thy workmanship, yet suffer for awhile.

I have a people that will forsake their cruelty, and put off their Garments
that stink of 1583.
abomination, in whom thy name shall be magnified, and our glory in heaven more
exalted.

But as thou will, so be it.

Behold, I speak in body, because I tremble, as at the force of thy great
indignation: Notwithstanding, we will what thou will.

If therefore these wonders be so great in heaven, wonder thou not at our
silence: Therefore be patient, and say unto the earth? Why groanest thou so
hard, or why is thy body so rotten: Have not thou justly deserved these things
for thy iniquity?

I say, if you be partakers of these secrets, how much more shall you be
partakers of that sweetness, which is the eternal dew, and very bread it self
of life?

SO.

E. K. He is gone.

D. I prayed a pretty while after with thanksgiving, etc.

Soli Deo nostro omnis laus, potestas, and gloria in seculorum saecula, Amen.

Junii 14. 1583. Friday, a meridie, Hora 4.

D. The golden vayl, or curtain appeared, covering the whole stone, whereas all
other vayls and curtains before did use to cover but the more part, or those
things which were the standing implements of the action for that time.

This appeared as soon as he looked into the stone.

I made long, and often prayers of thanksgiving, calling for grace, mercy, and
wisdom: with such particular instructions as I had written down the doubts
requiring light, or resolution in them, etc.

At length appeared a woman like an old maid in a red Peticote, and with a red
silk upper bodies, her hair rould about like a Scottish woman, the same being
yellow: she stood afide from the green Sarcenet belonging to the stone, and she
said..... God speed my friends.

D. A good greeting to wish us speed by him, Amen.

E. K. I never saw this woman before.

..... It may be you have seen me, but my apparel may alter my fashion.

E. K. She seems to go in a great path before her very speedily.

D. I pray you, whither make you such a speedy journey.

..... I am going home, I have been from home this seven-night.

D. Distance of place cannot protract time in your journey homeward. Marie my
maid had angered me on Th^rsday night, with her undue speech.


..... Jesu, now he will be angry with me, as he was with his maid. D. Every
Action not yet effected, whether is it at home, or from home?

D. God grant you then to make speed homeward, and to your home, and all we to
the home where the highest may be well pleased.

..... So, so, you talk too wisely for me.

D. God make me to talk wisely indeed, and God take all vanity from my heart.
All worldly wisdom vain.


..... You may think me a vain huswife to be going thus long: But by me you may
perceive how vain all worldly wisdom is. I am in a better case then many are,
for though I be from home, yet am I going home, some there be that neither have
home, neither can go home.

E. K. Now comes a goodly tall aged man all in black, with a Hat on his head,
he has a long gray beard forked, he says to the Maid, thus:

Old man..... wihther go you maid?

Maid..... Belike Sir, you may be some kyn unto these men, for they are also
desirous to know whither I do go.

Old man...... Me thinks I should have known you before?

Maid...... If you knew me before, you may the easier know me now.

[Old man] Where have you been? and if thy gravity were as good as thy ancient
dissembling, I would tell thee.

Old man...... These words be very large, what is the cause thou will not be
acquainted with me? (I never did thee harm) and I have desired to be acquainted
with thee a long time.

Maid...... With counterfeit gravity I will never be acquainted, neither thy
age, and thy fame, nor thy hairs, nor the soberness of thy countenance can
move me to any acquaintance for that thou never delightedst in true wisdom.

Old man...... Then go your way Like an Harlot.

Maid...... If wicked words do prove an Harlot, then thou have judged thy self.

E. K. Now she goes on forward, and the Old man is gone out of fight.

There appears now a young man, sitting on the side of a Ditch, and to him
she said.

Maid...... What aileth you to weep?

Young man...... I weep for thy discourtesie.

Maid...... Thou can (...) move my conscience: No, (I say) thou can not
move me to pirty.

E. K. She licketh his tears, and says.

Maid...... Every thing else has some saltness, but here is none.

Young man...... Oh, I pray thee, do something for me.

Maid...... Oh, to qualify these tears, is no other then to dry rotten Hemp
with a mighty fire.

Young man...... I will see thee hanged before I will weep any more.

Maid...... Every thing commonly teaches of it self.

E. K. The young man went away stamping, and angry, and now she is come where a
multitude of young Children are, there is much meat on a Table, and the
Children being not high enough to reach it pulled the maid by the Clothes, and
pointed to the meat; she goes round about the Table there is but one
dish-uncovered, and that feemeth to be like dew, she puts her fingers into
the Dish, and lets the Children lick, and they fall down dead.

Maid...... Blame Justice and not me, for if the Children had ever tasted of
this meat before they might have continued.

E K Now she meets a thin visag'd man very feeble, who staggered on his
staff, and he said.

Feeble...... Help me for Gods sake.

Maid...... I will do my best.

E. K. As she came toward the man, the man fell down; She heaveth him up, and
again he falls down, and she lifts at him still.

Maid...... Good will forms, but the matter is not sufficient: This is long of
thy self.

Feeble...... Oh, I say, help me.

Maid...... It is too late to help thee, I came this way many times before, and
thou never soughtest help at my hands. It is written, he that desires not
help, till he be helpless, he shall be void of the benefit of an helper.

E. K. The feeble man goes away, and she departs from him: Now she comes
toward a man going up an hill, who had torn all his Clothes off with brambles
and briars. There stand a great many of Mawmets, little ugly fellows at the top
of the hill, who threw stones against him, and so force this climing man (or
goer up the hill) to tumble down again to the foot of the hill. The skin does
seem to be off his hands and his feet, and they very raw, with his excessive
travail with hands and feet up that hill; Now there appear men eating meat
below at the foot of the hill, who offered him meat to eat; But he labors up
the hill again, one of these men said, come let me bind up thy feet.

The Clymer...... Unto him that has no weariness, there belongs no sorrow.

E. K. She stands and vieweth him.

The Clymer...... I pray you help me.

Maid...... It is impossible for thee to get up here.

Clymer...... Of my self it is: I will never be of the mind. It is impossible.

Maid...... Come on, I will do the best I can.

E. K. She leads him over stones, and rocks.

Maid...... Thou will be knocked in pieces, ere thou come to the top.

Clymer...... Do you your good will, I feel no harm.

E. K. Now she leads him in a place, where Springs, Quick-mires, and Bogs are.

Maid...... Surely thou art best to go down, for thou will be drowned.

Clymer...... I pray you help, I will go as long as I may.

E. K. He goes forward, and sinketh almost to the throat.

Maid...... It is deeper on the further side, thou were best to go down again.

Clymer...... I feel the ground hard under my feet: I will not yet despair.

E. K. Now he comes out of those deep places, and he seems to come to a
place like the bottom of a hedge, where stand stiff thorns, piked upward, very
sharp.

Now come two, or three handsome fellows, and said, Alas, let him tarry here
and drink, we will lead him up another way to morrow.

Maid...... Farewell.

Clymer...... I pray leave me not so, let me go with you.

Maid...... I must needs be gone, I cannot tarry for thee.

Clymer...... I am yet neither hungry nor thirsty, and feel no weariness: Why
therefore should I stay.

E. K. He goes, as though the thorns pricked him, and grindeth his teeth for
pain.

Now they are come to a fair place, and then she said to one.

Maid...... Fetch meat and drink and clothes, and cure his wounds: For unto
thee belongs D Labor improbus amnia vincit.
the felicity of this place: For neither from the highest to the lowest is
there any whom I pity, but such as this is.

Clymer...... I know not how I shall use these things.

Maid...... The true Heirs have always discretion.

To thee it belongs, and for thee it is prepared.

Use it therefore without offense as thine own.

E. K. Now both he and she go into a Castle, and the doors are shut after them,
and she comes out again.

Maid...... This is written for your understanding: Let therefore your eyes be
opened, and be not blind. Neither forget what here has been opened.

D. We perceive that Felicitas via ardua est, multis obsita difficultatibus and
periculis; sed constantia and patientia perveniturad Falicitatis arcem, which
we beseech the Almighty God to grant unto us.

Maid...... Well, I will be going till you have supped: And then I will tell
you more of my mind. It will be yet six, or seven weeks journey before I can
get home.

D. Sit benedictus Deus noster nunc and semper, Amen. D Note 42. or 49. days,
remaining till the first day of August next inclusive. GALVAH.


After Supper we staid awhile, being come to the place, and though nothing was
seen, or heard, yet I spoke, assuring my self of the presence of the foresaid
maid, though as yet to us insensible.

D. We would gladly know thy name.

Maid...... My name is Galua'h, in your language I am called Finis.

E. K. She suddenly appeared as she spoke this.

D. That [ Finis] is Latin. Gal...... I.

D. You are none of those that are called filiae lucis, or filiae filiarum.
Gal.... No. filiae lucis. Filiae filiarum.


D. You will not be offended, if I propound a doubt somewhat impertinent to our
matter in hand, yet of importance for us to hear your judgment in the same.
Tritemius, says that never any good Angel was read of to have appeared forma
muliebri. I pray you to give us an An Angeli bo ni in forma (...) aliquando
appareant?
answer to this so great (...) Clark, his words, which are to be read in his
little book, Octo Questionum Maximiliani cesaris...... There Quastione Sexta.
Sancti autem Angeli, quoniam affectione nunquam variantur semper apparent in
forma virili. Nusquam enim legimus scriptum quod bonus spiritus in forma sit
visus muliebri, aut bestiae cujuscunque, sed semper in specie virili.

Gal...... You think then I have some understanding.

D. Yea, God knows, I do.

Gal...... First it is evident that the Spirits of God are incomprehensible to
those that are their inferiors: For the higher order is incomparable unto God,
And by degrees, those that are their inferiors are also incomparable unto
them. It follows therefore, that in respect of that degree in Angels things
are incomprehensible.

Angels (I say) of themselves, neither are man nor woman; Therefore they do
take forms Angeli (...) seipsis neque mares, neqne (...) neque sunt.
not according to any proportion in imagination, but according to the discreet
and appliable will both of him, and of the thing wherein they are
Administrators: For we all are Spirits ministering the will of God; and unto
whom? unto every thing within the compass of Nature: only to his glory and
the use of man. It follows, Therefore, considering that we minister not of
our Angetoram Ministeria.
selves that we should minister in that unsearchable form within the which our
executions are limited: But if Tritemius can say, That woman also has not the
Spirit of God, being formed and fashioned of the self same matter,
notwithstanding in a contrary proportion by a degree; If Tritemius can separate
the dignity of the Soul of woman from the excellency of man but according to
the form of the matter, then might his Argument be good: But because that in
man and woman there is proportion, preparation, of sanctification in eternity;
Therefore may those that are the eternal Ministers of God in proportion to
Sanctification take unto them the bodies of them both. I Hic Hac home.
mean in respect of the Form; For as in both you read Homo, so in both you find
one and the self same dignity in internal matter all one. But Tritemius spoke
in respect of the filthiness (which indeed is no filthiness) wherewith all
women are stained; and by reasons from the natural Philosophers: as a man
tasting more of nature indeed then of him which is the Workman or a
supernatural Master. He (I say) concluded his natural invention. In respect of
my self, I answer Tritemius Galvah.
thus: I am Finis, I am a beam of that Wisdom which is the end of man's
excellency.

Those also that are called Filiae and Filiae filiarum are all comprehended in
me, and do attend Apparition in the form of woman.
upon True Wisdom; which if Tritemius mark, he shall perceive that true Wisdom
is always painted with a woman's garment; For than the pureness of a Virgin,
Nothing is more commendable.

God in his judgment knows how Tritemius is rewarded Tritemius rewarded.


If you think these arguments be not sufficient, the one in respect of the
first ground, and the other in respect of the measure of my name, I will yet
allege greater.

D. These Arguments do satisfy me: But to have wherewith to stop the mouths of
others who might use Cavillation upon such matters, it were somewhat needful to
have heard your judgment: Whereas indeed our own affairs in hand are rather to
be followed at this present, and of greater Arguments or Instructions in this
matter I trust hereafter to have understanding: But as now I chiefly regard our
Action in hand.

Gal...... Begin the Book next Tuesday.

My self will be thy Director; And as my name is, so I will lead unto the end.
All other things use, according to thy judgment and proportion of his Spirit
that guides you.

Gal...... I my self will be the finger to direct thee.

D.

Gal...... The finger of God stretches over many mountains.

His Spirit comfort the weakness of many places. No sense is unfurnished
where his light remains For understand what I am, and it is a sufficient
answer.

D. At the beginning to write the Book, shall I require your instructions?

Gal...... Do so.

The Mountains of the World shall lie flat; But the Spirit of God shall never
be confounded.

E K. She sits on a rock, and has done ever since supper.

Gal...... Ah Sir I was a weary.

D. As concerning the Polonish Lord Albertus Lascy whom we are certified to be
of God elected to govern him a people, whom we are willed to love and honor,
What have you to say of him? etc.

Gal...... Ask me these things to morrow.

E. K. She smileth and casts a light from her. Smiling.


Gal...... I smile because I speak of to morrow; yea I seem to smile.

D. As concerning Isabel Lister, I pray in what case is she? in respect of the
wicked spirit A. L. which long has molested her?

Gal...... Believe, For that is the chiefest:

What is spoken by us we give but our consent to.

For he that speaks in us is to be asked no such question. note.


For when he says, it is measured.

As it was said before; The Hills and Mountains of the World may be made plain,
but the Spirit of God never confounds.

D. He that is the end of all things, and the end of ends (unto whom all honor
praise and thanksgiving is due) bless us, endue us with his graces, and
abundantly power forth his mercy upon us.

Gal...... Understand my name particularly, and not generally. D. ^.


I speak it to avoid error.

Persevere to the end.

D. Qui perseveraverit fidelis (Deo nostro) usque ad finem hic salvus erit:
which faithfulness with all constancy and patience the Blessed and Almighty
Trinity grant and confirm unto us for the glory and honor of his Name, Amen.

E. K. She is gone with a brightness.

Saturday afternoon, hor a 6. After that the noble Albertus Laskie had been
1583. J nii 15.


D. I used some discourse with me, and was new gone to London, by prayer to
God, and afterward protestation to Galuah in respect of her willing me to ask
certain matters again this day which.... yesterday were not answered: But very
long it was, above half an hour, before any thing appeared, more then the
Golden Curtain all over the Show....

At length appeared diverse confused forms of diverse Creatures, and then, by and
by, vanished away.

D. I prayed to God to banish all confusion from us and our actions, and to
send us lucem and veritatem, per unum and propter unum, and constantiam
rerum....

Then appeared he by whom (before) we were called Il, and seemed to scorn at E.
K. Il.


E. K. Here appearech Il, and he seems to mock me.

Il...... That is a gird to you Sir for your fishing.

D. E. K. had spent all that afternoon (almost) in angling, when I was very
desirous to have had his company and helping hand in this Action.

D. Shortly after this, appeared Galuah and to be in a field closed round about
with a hedge.

Gel...... Here is no way out.

I..... (...) I will do somewhat for you; It is a strange thing that wisdom
cannot find a way ^. Wisdom.


E K. This Il pulls down the hedge:

Gal...... Go thy way, thou have done but thy duty.

Il...... Farewell Dee, Farewell Kelly.

E. K, He is gone. Dee, Kelly.


Gal...... Those that taste of everlasting Bankets, fare well, and desire the
same to others.

E. K. Now she is come to a great Castle-gate, all of stone, with a drawbridge
before it. There is like a Greyhound graven or cut in the Stone over the Note.
Gate.

Gal...... It is very late, I will look if I can have my entertainment here.
1583.

E. K. She is gone in.

D. After a while she came out again.

Gal...... Be it spoken.

(...), lefa ed, and damned be this place.

Gal...... And why? Because they have puffed up their flesh, follow their own
imaginations, A voice out of the Stone.
wallowing in their (...), as Swine that tumble in mire.

Behold it is too late with this people, I can get no lodging. O ye my feet, be
a witness against them, let the winds move the dust to report their
unkindnesse.

E K. Now she goes a long a great Way, like a common highway; and the light
of the Air about her seemed somewhat dark like Evening or Twilight.

Gal...... Yea though you have too much light, I have too little.

I did but over-hear you, when you saw me not.

D. [ Note. I had spoken of too much light coming from the west window of my
Study toward the Table, where the Shew-stone stood, when we began now to attend
her coming, and thereupon she spoke this.]

E. K. Her own garments cast a light.

E. K. Now she comes amongst a company of men having gowns furred with white,
and some of them having Velvet Caps, and some Hats.

One of them said to her, What art thou?

Gal...... I know not what I am my self

Will you buy any precious Stones of me?

E. K. She takes out of her bosom a great many of precious stones uncut, or
unpolished.

E. K. These men look on them.

Gal...... Truly, they are pure and good.

E. K. They say also; Surely they seem to be good, delivering them from one to
another.

E. K. There appear two fat men; who said, let us first get money before we buy
such trifles: besides that, they have not their perfect form.

Gal...... I pray you, buy one of them of me.

Will you buy none neither?

E. K. She speaks that to them, who first praised the stones.

..... Tush, I pray thee go about thy business, do thou not perceive how they
are found fault Those men.
withal?

Gal...... Tush, Tush, they be not cut for your fashion. A voice from the stone.


Be it said.

..... Their senses are glutted with transitory vanities.

Gal...... Let them (therefore) perish vainly, because they are transitory.

E. K. Now she comes where she must clamber up a wall, having steps in This
Parable, or Prophesic is diverse times spoken afterward in the troubles of
England.
it of ragged stones; There is a fair building beyond it. There go many up
those steps: and when they are almost at the top, there meets them some, who
take them by the hand, and help them up and over into the place. Then one of
them that stood at the top of the wall (who had a furred Gown) and helping of
men up, said to her; Come away woman, will thou come up?

E. K. She says nothing to him, but stands still, and looks away from him.

E. K. Again, that man said to her, come away will thou come up?

Gal...... Unhappy are those whom thou helpest: And whose breath has infected
many, your hands are too bloody, for me to come anigh you.

E. K. Now come handsome women to the wall, and some said, good sister, I pray
you come away.

Gal...... Your voluptuous father knows me not, for his daughter, I deny
yo..... (...)

E. K. Now come two, or three brave fellows with Rapiers by their The Attire of
the wanton youth of the Court.
sides, and having hatts without bands, and their hosen pinned up, and with no
gatters; these help up people that come, and one of them said: Tarry a little,
woman, and I will help thee shortly.

Gal...... Fie upon you: your clothes are infected with abominations of your
Chamber, I will tarry time.

E. K. Now comes a big stout man to the top of the wall, and a boy with a
Crown on his head. He seems to be about 18. years old.

..... So it is, and please your Majesty: Therefore let this way be razed. The
stout big man.


E. K. He spoke to the young King upon former talk between them which I heard
not.

..... Be it done.

E. K. The wall quaketh and falls down: And some of the jolly fellows, A
voice out of the stone.
which were on the wall before, fell down, and other fellows came and dug
The wall broken down.
a great hole, or breach in the wall.

Gal...... Thanks be to God: Now, here is entrance enough.

E. K. She goes in.

The young man, or striplin (with the Crown on his head) and the other big man
embraces her: His Crown is a Triple Crown; or three Crowns one upon another.
He has a little thing in his hand, which he holds close, and over-gripeth,
so that it cannot be discerned.

..... Though thou have traveled as a woman, thou shall now be known to be a
man. The big man.


E. K. He spoke to Galvah. They embrace each other. They fetch clothes for her,
and put upon her a black Gown, a man's Gown, as the Gown of a Counselor.

She kneeleth down like a man in form, her head and all. Galvah transformed
into a man.


E. K. Then the young King spoke to her, saying,

..... What this Rod may do, work.

E. K. He gives the transformed man a Rod; one half being blood, and the other
half white, the partition of these two being long-wise.

Quae justa sunt faciet and meas mensurabit virtutes. A voice out of the stone.
The transformed man. A voice out of the stone. NOTE.


For until it was appointed, I sought it not.

Let us cleanse the Court, and examine the multitude;

For error is always covered in many.

Cursed are those that are judged by a multitude.

E. K. All they that fell off the wall, and they that would have helped her
up, they come in bound hand and foot. The transformed.


..... Root them out, O King, pity no such persons, for those be these that
never had mercy on themselves.

E. K. Now comes a woman out, having a Crown on her head: she has a long
visage.

..... Nay, let her drink as she has deserved. The big man.


E. K. The transformed man lays down the Rod before him, and begins to
vveep; and said, Let it not be said, but I pity the anointed.

..... Let her die, for she has deserved death. The big man.


E. K. Other men about her lay hand on her, and pluck the Crown off her head.

The transformed man takes up his Rod, and lays upon the top, or Crown of
that woman's head.

E. K. The young King says unto her, What will thou?

..... If it please you, pardon for my life and dignity. The woman.


E. K. The big man, and the young King talk together aside, the woman
holds her hands abroad, and knocks her breast? And a great company of them
about her are hewed in pieces, by tormenters armed.

1582.
Adjvvabo. A voice out of the stone.


E. K. The King and the big man come in again.

E. K. The King said to the transformed man; Be it as thou will, Be you The
transformed man.
two joined together. For I vvish you both well.

E. K. The woman boweth down with obeisance, and thanketh them.

E. K. The big man takes the King by the hand, and the transformed man
takes the woman by the hands, and puts her hands to the hands of the King,
and the big man; they take each other by the hand, and kiss her.

E. K. All is now on the sudden vanished away, and the transformed man is
returned again to her woman's shape, and she said.

Gal...... Now I will go with you, Sir, your journey.

E. K. She speaks to you D.

To D..... I will lead you, if you will follow me up.

But you must have broken shinns.

D. By Gods grace, and with his help I will follow you, and in respect of my
shinns breaking, the joy of the consequent effect will utterly take away the
grief of the shinns breaking.

Gal...... And to you Sir, you were best to hunt and fish after Verity.

[D. She spoke so to E. K. because he spent too much time in Fishing and
Angling.]

Gal...... Whom thou saw here shall govern over 21 Kingdoms. 21. Kingdoms.


(...). If there be no mystery in that speech, the Conquest must be great, and
the trouble great and strange.

E. K. She goes on her way along a lane.

D. We know not who should be that King so showed.

Gal...... Sure thy demands are fully answered.

Consider thou what thou seek,

And of whom thou seek,

And by whose help.

Then look to that which is declared.

I will follow my office, for in those things wherein thou art inquisitive I
have showed the End. The End.


D. Truly the occasion of my present asking you some questions, arose upon
matter concerning this Noble Polonian, of whom you bad us yesterday ask as this
day.

Gal...... Vanity hangs not at mine Elbow.

Believe thou that already spoken? spoken (I say) of him?

D. Yea forsooth, I do believe it.

Gal...... I say unto thee, His name is in the Book of Life: The Sun shall not
pass his course The Prince Alb. Laskie.
before he be a King. His Counsel shall breed Alteration of this State; yea of
the whole World.

What would thou know of him?

D. If his Kingdom shall be of Poland, or what Land else.

Gal...... Of two Kingdoms.

D. Which I beseech you?

Gal...... The one thou have repeated, and the other he seeks as right.

D. God grant him sufficient direction to do all things so, as may please the
Highest in his calling.

Gal...... He shall want no direction in any thing he desires.

D. As concerning the troubles of August next, and the dangers then, What is
the best for August. him to do? to be going home before, or to tarry here?

Gal...... Whom God has armed, No man can prevail against.

D. In respect of my own state with the Prince, I pray how much has he
prevailed to win me due credit: and in what case stands my suit, or how am I
to use my self therein? The promises are an answer to this question.


Gal...... I have told you that at large even now, and if thou look into those
things that are now told, and are now done.

D. Concerning Charles Sled, his nose gushing with blood twice yesternight and
this morning upon my charitable instructions giving him to virtue and
godliness.

Gal...... I know him not: nor any name has he with us.

D. Means he well toward me?

Gal...... Whatsoever a wicked man means it is not well; but in that sense it
is demanded he means well.

The evil spirit that possesses him was cast out of him, even at his nose, at
the presence of those Charles Sled.
that were present with thee.

D.

Gal...... Believe me we know not his name; Trouble me no move with him.

D. O Lord, though men be frail, faulty, and filthy, yet thy mercies are most
praiseworthy (among all generations) of all thy doings.

Gal...... Hold thy peace, we are now to execute the Justice of God.

D. I spoke a great while of the mercies of God and his Justice, and gave
thanks for over Calling and Election into this blessed state.

Gal...... I will take up my lodging for this night.

D. God grant me worthy of such godly ghests, God grant me a dwelling with you
where his name is eternally praised, glorified, and sanctified: To him all
Creatures render thanks, honor, and glory. Amen.

..... Amen.

D. This voice out of the Stone being taken to be the voice of God, imports
as much as (...) of the Stone.
if God himself had sealed to that as his will and decree, That all Creatures
should render thanks unto him and glory; fiant: Dignum and Justum est. Amen.

Tuesday Junii 18 An. 1583. ante meridiem circa 9.

D. I prayed first, and declared our attending this day the promise of God to
be performed, etc.

Ga..... Are four hours yet to come? and I will be ready.

Are the works of wisdom secret, until I have ascended this Hill?

Is the Harvest ready when the Corn is ripe?

Are the Laborers ready when their Instruments are prepared?

I have said.

All wisdom is reckoned by the eternal Will; and until it be said, there is no
action (...); Note.
When the Sun shines I will appear amongst you; when it is said Come, lo I am
ready. The days of your fathers were blessed; but the hour when this Book
shall be written shall be sanctified, yea in the midst of intellectual
understanding.

For herein is the Creation of Adam with his transgression. The Dignity and
wisdom be had.

The Error and horror wherein he was drowned, yea herein is the power spread
of the highest working in all Creatures.

For as there is a particular Soul or fire inflaming unto every body (I mean
reasonable) So there is an (...) fire and a general brightness giving general
light unto them, which is but One, and (...) through the whole, yea is measured
equally unto every thing from the beginning.

(...) of all things is here known:

The reward of death to those that are rewarded for life.

None are rewarded but according to their deserts: of the which there are two
kinds.

1 These are rewarded with death for their wickedness.

2. So are they rewarded with life for their constant living.

Amongst the Angels there may be error, and sin may make them fall from the
brightness of their glory.

But to the Soul of man (being once glorified) sin is utterly, yea most largely
opposite: Neither shall that dignity ever be lost, stained, or defaced, that is
obtained here with the works of righteousness and true wisdom.

Whatsoever has been from the beginning (since it was said in Divine
Determination, Be it done) is here enclosed.

Therefore should this day be Hallowed and Sanctified before the Lord by you.

For if the Prophets, did worship this day of his ascension, much more ought
you (which have tasted of the first, and shall now taste of the (...) of (...)
Judgments) (...) his coming: But with you Satan is busy; His bristles stand
up, his (...) are cast abroad. Satan.


Therefore watch and pray; For those that go to (...) put on their upper (...).
Amongst you therefore is no sound belief; Neither do you consider the (...) of
this (...): But such is the greatness and excellency of his foreknowledge,
that be (...) the enemy to carry a burden, yea sometimes to preach upon a
Stage: For it is said, He shall (...) unto the end, and place himself (...) as
he would have done above: Neither shall he be thrust out of doors till the end
be determined. Therefore watch and pray, and look about with diligence; for
those things shall be opened unto you which have not been disclosed unto the
Holy Ones.

Oh, how hard a thing it is for flesh to continue in the works of Justice!

Yea, oh how hard a thing it is for Wisdom to be acquainted with a hotchpot of
filthiness?

(...) your garments, Lift up your hearts, and rent your faults in pieces, that
there may be one (...) with one consent, and unto one end, unto him which is
One and the End of all things: and to him for and in his truth, and for the
greatness of his mercies: To whom be praise for ever.

D. Amen.

E. K. All the while she spoke there came a bright beam from the Mystical
Stone to the body of her, and at the end she mounted upward and disappeared.

D. We set up the hour glasses to measure four hours justly after this answer
and instructions.

Tuesday, After Dinner about one of the clock and the hours expired, and we
attended the mercy of the Highest.

D. At a great gladsome shining of the Sun (whereas it had not shined but a
little and inconstantly ever since his last words) one appeared on the corner
of the green silk Sarcener, by the Mystical Stone, She was like a woman as
Galvah in face, but her apparel was a man's gown furred with foynes, or, as
Gentlewomen do wear upon gowns.

D. Upon the diversity of your apparel we are to ask whether you be Galvah or
no? or have you also, as I have done, put on your Holiday-cloths?

Gal...... FEAR GOD.

E. K. She steppeth forward one step.

Gal...... My Garment is called HOXMARCH, which in your speech is called.....

D. Initium sapientiae est Timor Domini: we accknowledge it to be an old and a
true Lesson, and also the first step of the pathway to felicity.

Gal...... What is fear?

D. Fear is of two sorts: one is called filialis, the other servilis.

Gal...... Unto the Just all fear is joy; and therefore the beginning and
entrance into quietness. True quietness and rest is wisdom; For the mind that
knows has the greatest rest and quietness. The Daughter of Despair unto the
wicked is fear.

This fear is the first that accuses unto damnation: But he that is perfectly
wise, or has tasted of wisdom, knows the End.

And his fear is of the thing that is done. This is the true fear of God; and
when we fear sin, we do it because we hate it.

When we study to do good, it is a token of our fear, in that it is a token we
fear him, whom we love and for whose honor we study to do well.

This is all that may be said of lively and unlively fear.

Touching the Book, it shall be called Logah: which in your Language signifies
Speech from The Title of the Book.
GOD. Write after this sort LOGAETH: it is to be sounded Logah.

This word is of great signification, I mean in respect of the profoundnesse
thereof.

The first leaf (as you call it) is the last of the Book. D. I understand not
this unless-it be the first leaf, being indeed the last, is of the wicked
hellith one, etc. vide post 4. Folio.


And as the first leaf is a hotchpot without order; So it signifies a disorder
of the World, and is the speech of that Disorder or Prophecy.

Write the Book (after your order) backward, but alter not the form of letters,
I speak in respect of the places.

E. K. Now a beam shoots through him from the Stone and so through his head
and out of his mouth, his face being from E. K. toward D.

..... Write the 49. You have but 48 already. Write first in a paper apart. 49.


E. K. Said that Galvah her head is so on bright fire, that it cannot be looked
upon: The fire so sparkleth Loagaeth seg lovi brtnc Larzed dox ner habzilb
adnor Now Seas appear. doncha Larb vors hirobra exi vr zednip taiip chimvane
(...) lendix nor zandox.
and glistreth as when an hot iron is smitten on an Anvil, and especially at
the pronouncing of every word. It is to be noted also that upon the pronouncing
of some words, the Beasts and all Creatures of the World every one showed
themselves in their kind and form: But notably aH Serpents, Dragons, Toads, and
all ugly and hideous shapes of beasts; which all made most ugly countenances,
in a manner assaulting E. K. but contrariwise coming to, and fawning upon
Galvah. It is to be noted also that by degrees came a second beam, and a third
beam of light into Galvah from the Stone, and all the three together appeared:
the third participating of the other two.

The second beam came at the word Larb, pronounced; when also Frogs and
Serpents appeared, etc. The third beam upon the word Exi pronounced. Note
also, that the manner of the fiery brightness was such, and the grisely
countenances of the Monsters was so tedious and grievous and displeasant to E.
K. that partly the very grief of his mind and body, and partly the suspecting
the Creatures to be no good Creatures, neither such grievous sights necessary
to be exhibited with the Mysteries delivering unto us, had in a manner forced
him to leave off all: But I again with reasonable exhorting of him, and partly
the providence and decree Divine, wrought some mitigating of his grief and
disquieting.

Gal...... These are these seven.

D. Blessed and praised for ever be He who is one and three: and whom mighty
ministers or governors do incessantly glorify.

1583.
Gal...... Thy folly and weakness is great, God comfort thee.

[D. He spoke to E. K. for his excessive disquietnesse and suspecting of the
verity or goodness of Galvah.]

D. Note. Now the beams were all retired into the stone; again likewise all
the Creatures and Vermin or ugly shaped Beasts are all gone. We were willed
also diverse times to Pray
pray. At sundry pangs of E. K. his grief and disquietnesse, sundry speeches
were uttered by the spiritual Creature: among which these noted.

..... He that is angry cannot see well. From him that is perverse, God turns
his face. The Elect. Reconciliation.


The hindrance of punishment, is the mercy of God, which imputes not sin unto
them whom he bath Chosen; Therefore be patient, and reconcile thy self to God.

E. K. I do it with all humility and sincerity of mind, and beseech God to
help me with his grace; for of my self I cannot do so, yet I am Thomas Didymas,
I will believe these things, when I see the fruits of them.

D. He seemed yet again to doubt, whether this Creature and the rest,
(partakers of this action) were soundly good, and void of all halting, or
abusing us.

E K. How can you persuade me that ye be no deluders?

Gall...... I will prove it by contrary. Arguments to prove our Instructors to
be good Angels.


The servants of darkness have their Garments stained: their mouths stinck of
blasphemy, and lies, but our Garments are no such, neither do our lips speak
any untruth: and therefore we are of God, for whosoever is of the truth, is of
God.

Moreover, the Devil is known by his works: for the spirit of God controlleth
them, the spirit of God agrees with us, and uses no controlment against it,
therefore it is not Daulesse.

In one thing thou may know us differing from Devils.

The wicked spirits always abhor this word Mercy. Mercy.


But it is the Doctrine that we preach in respect toward you, we are not now
(then) evil.

But this way teaches hardness, and is a stumbling block to the wicked: but
the beauty of the (...) is not able to be expressed.

Happy are they, which are covered with the Pearls of Righteousness, and on
whose head there is a The (...) before.
Garland of godliness: For unto those belongs to taste of the Fountain of
true wisdom.

Is it not written of this book, that it teaches nature in all degrees?

The judgment hereof is Intellectual.

And wash your feet, and follow me.

D. Lord wash thou our feet, or else we shall not be clean.

Gall...... How thou art God knows: But comfort your selves in this.

That neither this Testimony can perish, neither unto you can remain any
slavery: Quia vestra This Testimony victory.
erit victoria, in him, and for him, to whom I leave you.

D. What shall I do with these 21 words now received;

Gall...... There are only the words of the first leaf.

D. I pray, how shall I bestow them, or place them.

Gall...... In them is the Divinity of the Trinity.

The Mystery of our Creation. The first leaf of the book.

The age of many years.
And the conclusion of the World.
Of me they are honored, but of me, not to be uttered: Neither did I disclose
them my self: For, they are the beams of my understanding, and the Fountain
from whence I water.

D. I beseech you, how shall I write these names in the first leaf.

Gall...... They are to be written in 5 Tables, in every Table 21 Letters.

D. How shall I place the 5 Tables upon two sides: three in the first, and 2 in
the second, or one in the first, and 4 in the second, or how else?

Gall...... As thou see cause.

D. Shall I write them in Letters of Gold?

Gall..... The writing has been referred to thy discretion with colors, and
such things as appertain to the writing thereof. Upon the first side write
three Tables, and on the second two.

D. How, thus?

Gal..... Set them down, I will direct thy judgment.

D. When, now?

Gal..... Not now.

E. K. She is gone.

D. Deo Nostro sit Laus, honor, and Gratiarum actio perennis. Amen.

Wednesday 19. Junii. Hora 2. a Meridie.

D. I made a prayer to God: and there appeared one, having two Garments in his
hands, who answered.

..... A good praise, with a wavering mind.

D. God make my mind stable, and to be seasoned with the intellectual leaven,
free of all sensible mutability.

E. K. One of these two Garments is pure white: the other is speckled of diverse
colors; he lays them down before him, he lays also a speckled Cap down
before him at his feet; he has no Cap on his head: his hair is long and
yellow, but his face cannot be seen; at the least it was turned away-ward from
E. K. continually, though E. K. changed his place.

..... You shall see my face, lo, it is white.

E. K. Now he puts on his Pied Coat, and his Pied Cap, he casts the one
side of his Gown over his shoulder, and he danceth, and says,

..... There is a God, let us be merry.

E. K. He danceth still.

There is a heaven, let us be merry.

Does this Doctrine teach you to know God, or to be skillful in the heavens?

..... Note it.

E. K. Now he puts off his Clothes again: Now he kneeleth down, and washes
his head and his neck, and his face, and shakes his Clothes, and plucketh off
the uttermost sole of his shoes, and falls prostrate on the ground, and
said:

..... Vouchsafe (O God) to take away the weariness of my body, and to cleanse
the filthiness of this dust, that I may be apt for this pureness.

E. K. Now he takes the white Garment, and puts it on him.

..... Mighty is God in his great Justice, and wonderful in his immeasurable
mercy: The heavens taste of his Glory: The earth is confounded at his wisdom.
In hell they tremble at him, as at a Revenger. This shows thee (O) to be a
God, and stretches forth thy Glory from the East unto the West; for thy
Heavens are Statutes, and thy Creatures Laws: that thou may be accounted a
God of Justice and Glory. Because thou art a God, Therefore there is a Heaven:
For unto the Prince of Righteousness, there belongs a place of Glory; Into
the which there enters none that are defiled, neither such as are blemished
with the spots of iniquity. Manus Haec bona est..... E. K. putting forth his
right hand, Haec Autem mala..... E. K. putting forth his left hand, Qui Habet
aures intelligat.

E. K. Now he sits down on the Desk-top and looks toward me.

D. This Parable is in general, somewhat understood of us: but in particular,
how it may be, or is to be applied, presently we understand not.

..... Beware lest error enter within the dwelling place of Righteousness. I
have said.

E. K. He seems now to be turned to a woman, and the very same which we call
Galvah.

E. K. Now he is come down to the usual place, on the Table.

D. I have assayed diverse ways to place the five Tables, on the two sides on
this first leaf; Is it to your likeing as I have done it, in the five little
Triangles?

Gal...... As concerning the setting down of the five Tables. it is sufficient
as it is done.

The cause why I appeared thus, was that you might avoid error.

D. I pray you to show us the means how that error was or is to incumber us.

Gal...... Whosoever takes servants of the wicked, to prove the Glory of God,
is accursed. Note.
But, O Satan, how many are thy deceits?

Note, my Companion ( E. K.) would have caused personal apparitions of some of
the reprobate spirits, before the Prince Albert Laskie in my Study, thereby to
show some experience A. L.
of his skill in such doings: But I would not consent to it: And thereupon
Galveh gave judgment and warning of such an error, of my Companion his intent,
etc.

Gal...... Behold, it is said, before he go from hence I will pour water into
him; And my Angel shall anoint him, as I have determined: Hide therefore
Nothing from him; For you belong Note of A. L.
unto him. Neither can flesh and blood work those things that I have Glorified
in him (All things that are established in God, are Glorified. I speak this for
thy understanding) Neither let your hearts be hardened; for the Earth is
condemned, and these things shall come to pass. Credit is all that I seek
(says the Lord;) for when I come, I shall be sufficiently believed. An Oath.


I take the God of Heaven and Earth to judge; and swear by him as a witness,
that these words are true, and shall endure unto the end. The general points of
man's Salvation are concluded already; Note of General points, and special gifts.
but the special gift belongs unto God. God strengthen you against his
adversary.

D. Amen.

Gal...... Soon you shall know more.

D. This Prince would gladly know, Whether it shall be best for him, with the
first opportunity, to be going homeward.

Gal...... It shall be answered soon, and what questions soever he also
demands.

D. May he be here present at the action doing?

Gal...... Those that are of this house, are not to be denied the Banquets
therein. A. L. may be present at Actions.


D. May I request you to cause some sensible apparition to appear to him, to
comfort him, and establish his mind more abundantly in the godly intent of God
his Service?

Gal...... If you follow us, let him be governed by us; But whatsoever is of
the flesh, is not of us.

E. K. She seems to weep; for the water comes forth of her eyes.

D. You perceive, how he understands of the Lord Treasurer his grudge against
him; And perhaps some other also, are of like malicious nature: What danger may
follow hereof, or incombrance?

Gal...... The sum of his life is already appointed, one jot cannot be
diminished: But he that is Almighty can augment at his pleasure. Let him
rejoice in poverty. Be sorry for his enemies. A. L. poverty.
And do the works of Justice.

E. K. She seems to put the air over her, and so to enter into a Cloud of
invisibility, and so disappear.

D. Deo gratias agamus.

Wensday afternoon, circa horam 5. The Lord Albert a Lasky being present.

D. We attended of Galvah some instructions or discourse concerning the Lord
Laskie.

E. K. At length appeared before the Lord Lasky (in the air) an Angel in a
white Robe, holding a bloody Cross in his right hand, the same hand being also
bloody.

D. In nomine Jesu Christi Crucifixi, a te requiro qui Crucis Trophaeum hic
Gestas ut illa nobis signifies, quae sunt ad Christi gloriam, cui sit honor and
Laus perennis.

E. K. Now he is come from before the Lord Lasky, and stands here on the
Table: he turns himself to all the four quarters of the World; he kneeleth
down.

He prays.

..... O God, Why should the people upon earth rejoice? or wherein should the
pleasures of their sensual delights be fixed? Why does the Moon hold her
course? or why are the Stars observing an order? Why are thy people thus
scattered abroad? Because iniquity has caught the upper hand. The Doors of our
God are polluted with blasphemy, his Temples desolate, his Commandments
violated, and his Glory accounted as nothing. But will thou suffer; or can
thou hold thy hand from thy great and mighty strokes? Most High God, Most
Mighty God, Most Honorable God, have mercy upon thy people; respect the
Creation, (the Creation I say) of those, wherein thou have delighted. Suffer
not the Serpent to extol his head above thy Altars, neither let thy holy Vessel
be poisoned with his venom; For thou art Mighty and overcomest all: and who
can rebel against thy Prowess? Bend down thy mereiful eyes, Behold this
confusion: look upon thy Temple and see the desolation thereof. And then in thy
mercy (O) show thy self to be a God, and such a merciful Governor, as has
compassion upon those that are diseased, yea even unto death. Grant this
Camascheth galsuagath garnastel zurah logaah luseroth. Amen.

D. I pray you to declare unto us your name.

..... My name is Jubanladace.

D. If I should not offend you, I would gladly know of what order you are, or
how your state is in respect of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, or Vriel.

..... Jub. Unto men, according unto their deserts, and the first excellency of
their Soul, God has appointed a good Governor or Angel, from amongst the
orders of those that are Blessed: For every Soul that is good, is not of one
and the self same dignification; Therefore according to his excellency we are
appointed as Ministers from that order, whereunto his Excellency accords: To
the intent that he may be brought at last to supply those places which were
Glorified by a former; And also to the intent, that the Prince of Darkness
might be counterpoised in Gods Justice. Amongst the which I am one which am the
Keeper and Defender of this man present: which carry the Triumpt and Ensign of
Victories continually before him, as a reproach to my adversaries and his, and
to confirm the dignity whereunto he is called by the presence of this Character.

E. K. Now he heaveth up the Cross.

..... I have also sealed the same in his heart: For unto him belong great
Victories, in A. L. Judei. Victoriae.
the name, and for the name of his God. The Jews in his time shall taste of
this Cross: And with this Cross shall he overcome the Sarazens, and Paynims:
For I will establish one Faith A. L.
(says the Lord of Justice) That I may be known to be the same that I was
first among all people. Moreover I will open the hearts of all men, that he may
have free passage through them, and will not suffer him to perish with the
violence of the wicked. I will hereafter visibly appear unto him, A. L. An year
to come. Hindiance breeds exception, and sin breeds hindiance.
and will say, This is to be done. But a year is not yet come, and these things
shall, be finished. But (thus says the Lord) I have hindered him, because he
hearkened to the provocation of those that are wanton. And has consented to
those that blasphemed my name. Bid him look to the steps of his youth, and
measure the length of his body; to the intent, he may live better, and see
himself inwardly.

D. Note. At this Instant Tanfeld came rashly upon us, into my Study: we
thinking that the Study door had been shut; the Lord Laskie being gone out of
my Study, the other way through my Oratory, to take Tanfelds message from the
Court, and having dispatched him, rested without: and Tanfeld having
commendations to me, as he said, from This Tanfeld served the Lord Laskie.
some at London, fearing least he should be be sent away by and by, without
doing these, came undiscretly upon us, to our no little amazing, and great
fearing his rash opinion afterward of such things, as he could not perceive
perfectly what my Companion and I were doing: Hereupon, Jubanladace gave this
sentence, or declared this the fatal end of Tanfeld.

Juban...... It is said, He that enters in thus rashly, Lo five months are
yet to come, and fishes of the Sea shall devour his carkase.

..... As before, whatsoever he takes in hand shall prosper, for my names sake.
For thus it A. L. his anointing. Miracula and signa non sunt petenda a Deo.
is said, and these words are the words wherewithal I do anoint him; for than
the comfort of the Highest, there is not a sweeter Inunction. Look not for the
marveiles of this World, as the wicked man in his heart does; but study to
please him with whom ye might rejoice for ever. You sons of men, What do ye
seek after? Do ye hunt after the swiftness of the winds; or are you imagining
a form unto the Clouds? or go ye forth to hear the braying of an Ass, which
passes away with the swiftness of the air? Seek for true wisdom; For it
beholds the brightest, and appears unto the lowest. Cecill hates him unto
the heart, and desires he were gone hence. Many The Lord Treasures.
other do privily sting at him; I cannot properly say sting him; But (I say) I
will pour down my wrath upon them, and they shall be confounded in the midst of
their own iniquity. Let my faithful live and be like the fruitful Vinyard. Be
it so.

D. For his return homeward, What is your advice? perhaps he wants necessary
provision, and money.

Juban...... He shall be helped here, and elsewhere, miraculously. I speak as
it were to himself. Let him go, so soon as he can conveniently.

D. I say again, perhaps he wants money, but the Treasures of the Lord are
not scant, to them whom he favors.

Jub...... His help shall be strange which has not been often seen. The Queen
loves him faithfully, and has fallen out with Cecil about him: Lecester
flattereth him. His doings are looked into narrowly. But I do always inwardly
direct him, and I will minister such comfort unto him, as shall be necessary in
the midst of all his doings. When this Country shall be invaded, England.
then shall you pass into his Country, and by this means, shall his Kingdom be
established again. This is more then my duty. This is the first time he has
been here, and it is wonderful. A. L.
The second coming is not long unto, and then shall he be wonderful. Destitutus
a me, premitur a malo. He is now destitute of me.

D. Note, as soon as he had said this sentence, he seemed to sink through the
Table like a spark of fire; and seemed to make haste to his Charge, I mean the
Lord Laskie: whereby we perceive-the frailty of man to be great when he is
Destitute (yea but after this manner) of this good Angel.

Benedictum sit nomen Dei nostri nunc and in sempiterna saecula. Amen.

Thursday 20 Junii 1583. After Noone Circa 6.

Gal...... Labor in the writing of this Book diligently. See thou cleanse thy
self on both sides. Be alone while it is done: that is to say, while thou art
in doing it, henceforth and till the time come use speech with us no more;
every seventh day accepted. Every seventh day. Mondayes.


D. How shall those days be accounted?

Gal...... From Tuesday last: Tuesday being the first of the seven, and the
next Monday, the seventh, and so forth every Monday is the seventh. In a pure
action all things ought to be pure.

D. May I be writing every day, and at any time, when it shall come in my mind?

Gal...... Ever as thou shall feel me move thee. I will stir up thy desire.
Good desires stirred up by good Angels.


D. How shall I do for the letters? Shall I simply translate the letter; as I
find them?

Gal...... I.

D. The titles of the fides, are they to be written only in the holy
Characters?

Gal...... As thou say, even those words do make the holy, that thou call
them holy.

D. I believe verily, that they are holy and sanctified.

Gal...... In the last seven of the 40 days, the words of this Book shall be
distinguished. Distinction of words and accents.


D. And accented also? Gal...... I.

D. How shall I do, for the Tables where certain letters are to be written in
all the void places, seeing they will not justly agree?

Gal...... There is one superfluous: it is to be filled in order as it shows.

D. I shall not dare adventure on it without direction when I come to it.

Gal...... Thou shall want no direction.

D. For the inequality of the first 49 lines I require your advise.

Gal..... It is no question.

Gall..... Thou beginnest in the world to look up to heaven: So was it begun in
earth to look up to the doing above.

The last life is Hotchpotch of the wicked in the World, and damned in the Hell.

E. K. What is a Hotchpotch, etc. The Hotchpotch sup. ante 4. folio. To E. K.


Gal...... The greater thy folly is, the greater thy wisdom will be hereafter.

..... There are the Souls of the wicked and damned in Hell. Those that are in
the world cannot describe the least joy of those that are in heaven: Much less
those that are ignorant, declare the manifest beauty of wisdom. There shall
come a day with you, when you shall rejoice. In the mean season, rent your
hearts, and turn unto the Lord.

D. Deus in adjutorium nostrum intend, Domine ad juvandum me festina, Gloria
Patri, and filio, and S. etc. Amen.

Saturday, ante Meridiem. Hora 10. Junii 22.

D. Whiles I was writing certain prayers to good Angels, and ad proprios
nostros Angelos for A. Lasky, there appeared one very big in the air, all in a
white Garment full of plaights, and tucked up very dubble, with a myterlike
Attire on his head, and a cross on the forepart of it; He willed E. K. to
speak to me, and to tell me of his being there: But he refused, and expressly
denied it, partly by reason Galluah said that he would not deal with us, but
every seventh day (being every Monday) till the actions were ended: and
therefore he supposed this Creature to be an illuder, and partly he urged some
evident token, or proof of their well-meaning toward us in Act, etc. He went
down, and still this Creature followed him with a drawn sword, requiring him to
declare these words to me; but E. K. a long while bad him declare them himself
unto me, if he would: and said, why should he not, etc. At length my Companion
came, appeased, and contented to hear what this Creature would say, who at
length said thus:

.... The Eagles have food for their young ones, by Divine providence, and not
of themselves. Lord let me diminish the power of this wicked spirit that does
so provoke, and stir him to mischief. E. K. was yet somewhat repining to
report modally this creatures good words.


.... If the love of the fathers (O God) be great toward their Children, much
greater are thy blessings in those whom thou have chosen.

D. So, (O Lord) so.

.... Behold, I will draw threads together, and make him a Net, which shall
always be between Now he came from the air, he eared toward my west side,
and came and stood by my.... on the Table.
him and the Adversary: neither shall it diminish his understanding from the
true sight of me. It has been said, The place is holy. Write that shall be
here spoken, with devotion upon thy knees. Great is thy name (O God) and mighty
art thou in all thy workings: Thy help is strong to those that delight therein.
O magnified be thy name from generation to generation.

Oration.

Speritu and mente dico,

Sit mihi verus orandi modus: nam bonitatem Dei Laudo: O, Iram Patris meritus
sum, quia He covers his face. Now he prays somewhat in his own language.
Now he lies prostrate. Not that every sentence be used, some distinct in the
bowing of his body, or lying prostrate, or holding up his hands, etc. He
holds his hands upon high.
lumen ejus elongatur a me: Verum in nomine Christi remissionem delictorum
meorum, and confirmationem in suo Sancto Spiritu exopto. Per te, Halleluja,
resurgam, me accuso, me condemno: omnia male feci.

Omnia per te (Pater) sunt. Paratus esto exaudire. Oculos ad Coelos Elevare
nolo, egestatem quia meam nosti. Quid differes Domine, Cor meum in melius
Confortere? Vivus and non mortuus sum: Igitur Credo in te. Exaudi me Antidotum
mihi (...) monstra, quia malum meum agnosco. mitte mihi auxilium tuum de sede
Majestatis tuae: Et per Angelos bonos tuere me. Audi, Exaudi, O tu igitur
Angelus meus adfis mihi. Defend me, nec trade Corpus and animam meam in manus
inimicorum; meorum sed secundum magnam misericordiam Dei, (per potestatem tibi
traditam) me protege, adsit mecum prudentia tua, qua Diabolum and Sathanicam
fraudem vincam. Adjuva me derelictum, Confirma me debilem, Cura me sanum, sana
me aegrotum: Mihi esto spiritus super humanam sapientiam. Fac me fidelem
Operatorem: Adduc tecum Angelos de Coelis demissos Sanctos, qui me tecum in
adversis tueantur and ab omni Custodiant malo, donec illa hora venerit, quam
nemo evitare potest: Sustinuit anima mea in verbo ejus. Amen.

Glorify God ye sons of men, and praise him in the midst of your wickedness:
For he is a God that shows mercy to his people, and beholds those that are
afflicted: All honor, praise, and glory be unto him, now and for ever. Amen.

D. I beseech you, what is your name, that this mercy of God may be Recorded,
to have been bestowed upon us by your ministry.

.... Gabriel.

D. Shall I signify to the Polonian Gentleman, that we received this....
prayer from you, and so make him partner thereof.

Gabriel.... Do so.

The help of the Lord is with those, that he loves, and so be it.

D. He made the sign of a Cross over our two heads, and so went away.

Gloria sit in excelsis, Deo nostro and in terra Pax hominibus bonae
voluntatis, Amen.

Saturday, Junii 22. a Meridie, Circa 6.

D. Upon the perusing and examining, this prayer Gabriel revealed unto us, I
found certain imperfections, and some doubts, wherein we thought it good to ask
counsel, and require Gabriel's advise: That the prayer might be perfect, as he
might well like of to Gods honor and our comforts. At the length: Nothing
appearing to the eye, but the noise of a sound about E. K. his head, and
withal a mighty weight, or invisible burden on his right shoulder, as he sat
in the green Chair, by the holy Table, or place: And unto certain places of the
prayer, which I noted and repeated, those words, and answers were by Gabriel
given.

Gab..... The Preface must be in, for if our hearts be not prepared unto
prayer, our prayers are in vain.

Quid differs Domine, Cor meum in melius Comfortare.

Per te and in nomine tuo resurgam; id est, Halleluja.

The first way is more effectual. Say Angele me, but the other is more
effectual, Cura me sanum. Regard me, and look unto me, being whole.

D. As concerning the inscription, which I have written before the prayer: I
would gladly know, whether it be to your well liking of it.

Gab..... Fiant omnia ad laudem Dei. My doings are of no such regard: What I
have done be it done, so that your additions be to the honor of God, it is
sufficient. The effect of his prayer is greater, then is the form. The former
is greater then the forming. That is to say, he that has formed it, is
mightier then any virtue, wherein it is formed. Wheresoever, therefore the mind
forms it with you with perfect humility and consent, there is also the
former. As formed of him therefore, I leave you to the end of his workmanship,
which continually forms all things according to his own fashion.

Sins..... Your sins have banished me, from saying those things I would.

D. O cleanse our hearts, and wash away our sins, amplius lava me ab iniquitate
mea and a peccato meo munda me.

Gab..... Sins are never washed away, or forgotten with the highest, but with
such as are sorry, and also make satisfaction. Satisfaction.


O Lord, full sorry I am for my sins, and what satisfaction is... required I
would gladly know.

Gab..... The offense was not thine. Every one must satisfy, or else he shall
be damned.

D. Good Lord expound to us the mystery of satisfaction.

Gab..... When the Soul offends, and is consenting to wickedness, he is then
to make a spiritual satisfaction, which is the end and perfect fruit of
Contrition. For those that are truly Contrite, do truly satisfy. Another
satisfaction there is, which is external. This satisfaction is to be made for
sins committed against thy Neighbor: For if thou offend thy Neighbor, and do
him wrong, or take any thing from him, by fraud, or violence, it is a great
sin. For this, thou can never be Contrite if thou make not satisfaction, not
only confessing it, but in satisfying his desire that is NOTE. Good Angels are
to be used reverently. E. K.
offended, and that with sorrow. This is true Doctrine, and shall never be
overthrown by the spirits of false invention: which indeed is the first eye
unto the Devil. If you may offend your brother, and be therefore accursed: How
much more shall you be accursed, when you offend the messager of him that is
your Father. Behold, he says not, I have once done amiss. God be merciful
to you, that his mercies might be the greater upon you. Be mindful of my
sayings.

D. Deus misereatur nostri, and benidicat nobis, Cor mundum Creet in nobis, and
spiritum rectum ponat in proecordiis nostris,

Amen.
1583.
Wednesday, Junii 26. Hora 9. praesente D. Alberto Lasky.

D. As we were together in my study, and I standing at my Desk. There appeared
to E. K. a round Globe of white smoke over my head. Thereupon I perceived the
presence of some good spiritual Creature, and straight way appeared the good
Angel. I. L.

D. I said, Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini, and igitur nobis est gratus
laudis adventus.

I. L. Et quid tu dicis? [ad E. K. Loquutus est.]

E. K. Si bonus es, and lucis spiritus, been venisti, I. L.

I. L. Et been tibi fiet. E. K. He has a besome in his hand.

E. K. What will you do with this besomei

D. Quid cum tua scopa decrevisti facere?

I. L. Secundum Dei beneplacitum.

E. K. Here comes a big tall creature, forma humana quae facile non possit
discerni, oculi ejus videantur esse duo Carbunculi Lucentes and mirabiliter
micantes. Caput ejus videtur aureum, os videtur valde largum esse, and Caput
videtur mobile and quasi ab humeris separabile, totum reliquum Corpus videtur
esse marmor quasi.

Vox...... Fecisti tu?

[ E. K.] he said so to IL.

IL...... Feci. Decedite in Oratorium, nam magna hic dicenda sunt. Suspicor hoc
factum esse ut quietior esset antmns ipsius, E. K. and non eos suspi iendo in
(...) ejus destruereter.


Qui decedent? I L. Princeps, and tu. (Bow down thy knees brother) and here
what I do say. [To E. K. he spoke.]

Magnus ille..... Filioli hominum quid vultis?

D. Cupimus mundari a peccatis, and illuminari sapientia divina, ad ejus
honorem.

E. K. Est lumen quoddam in Aere: and ipse osculatur lumen illud.

IL...... (...), Propitius esto mihi peccatori.

K E. Propitius esto mihi peccatori, O Deus, crescit jam Corpusistius magni in
immensum quantum, quod non possit facile discerni.

Mag...... Filii hominum, quid vultis?

D. Sapientiam veram.

Mag...... O vos pueri and filii hominum, quid vultis?

D. Sapientiam in Deo, and propter Deum, veram.

Mag...... Audite, quia Justus and verus sum (inquit Dominus;) Vos nihil
impium, iniquum, vel injustum suscipite: Nam quaecunque feceritis mala, vel
negligentia, vel inscitia, vel contemptu, Singula dum profert verha, flammam ex
ore evomit.
vel etiam nimia superstitione sunt, (Sicut Scriptum est) potestate tradita
spiritibus mendacibus, ut vexarent bonos, dum affligerent malos. Sed dixit Deus
(Deus sum quidem vester) qui Spiritum Sanctum non aufero a vobis: Nam estis,
quos per potentiam confirmabo meam: Nolite igitur Cacomagi Cum perversis fieri,
qui inaniter rebus and Idolis hujus mundi potentiam ascribunt meam. Note. De
Sublunaribus Spiritibus. Argeli boni ubi seeds habent.
Sed Credit perseveranter and ad finem usque and fidem habete: quia, (per me)
omnia mundana superat sigillum, and subjiciet Daemones voluntati vestrae.
Daemones sub regionibus permanentes, and inclusi Lunaribus, Angeli mei non
sunt: Sed Caelestes, Sancti and very boni. Nonne vos homines and mortales and
non sine peccato, Cui voluntatem liberam, simul and peccare permissi: ut
intelligendo exinde malum, and me Deum vestrum agnoscatis vos. Audite igitur,
Audite filii mei,..... Calamitatem Pene omnium principium interitus. Turaci
Imperii ruina.
totius terrae omniumque viventium praedico. Bella erunt undique horrenda and
tristissima, Et peribit ad tertiam usque partem gladio and fame Terra. Erunt
caedes multorum, (pene omnium) Principum interitus, Terrae motus, quales non ab
initio mundi; Terrestris Daemonis (Turcae viz.) Imperii ruina. Nam sic
constitui.

[ E. K.] Nunc respcit vos.

D. A. L. and I were in my Oratory.

Stephanus, Poloniensis, miserrine in bello jugulatus, Cadet. Iterum dico:
Stephanus, Poloniensis Rex, miserrime in bello jugulatus, cadet. Vocabant te
iterum [respicit Alb. Lasky] ad Regnum Principes: quem etiam ego Poloniae,
Moldaviae and populi mei Ducem and regem constituero. Tunc attinges desideratam
metam and non errabis a Scopo. Quia ego sum Deus tuus, and docebo te utilia and
vera. Et dabo tibi Angelos meos adjutores and comites etiam ad secretum
quodlibet mundi. Vigilato, Orato. Igitur, Pius esto, donec venerit potestas mea
and in te, and supra vos. Interum sigillate quae vidistis, and me in publicum
producite.

[ E. K.] Now he shakes: he seems to turn his head about his shoulders. Ne
in publicum producite.


E. K. Nunc accipit ensem and percutit nubes, and crucem format antese, ab
utroque latere and post se. Creed mihi, est finis rerum: Dimitiuntur Peccata
vestra.

E. K. Cadit, quasi distractus, (vel se separans) in 4 parts, and avolut.

Vox...... Habet is que adeo Decreta sunt.

D. Misericordia Dei, sit super nos nunc, and semper. Amen.

Saturday Junii 29 a meridie hora 4.

D. While I was about to write the Title of the second side of the seventh
leaf: and ( E. K. sitting by me) Madini appeared as before like a young girl,
and I saluted her in the Name May 28. 1583. when he began Alb. Laskic his
Pedigree.
of God, as coming from God for good, and said to her, that I was wonderfully
oppressed with the Work prescribed to me to perform before August next, and
desired her to help me to one to write the holy Book as it ought to be written:
seeing I did all I could, and it seemed almost impossible for me to finish it
as it is requisite. Madami promised to help me to one to write the Book; and
thereupon appeared to her (but unseen of E. K.) her Mother

..... Madimi said also, that she was now learning of Greek and Arabic, and the
Syrian Tongue.

Mad...... Mother I pray you let him have one to write his Book.

D. I pray thee tell me Madimi, what was his name which yesterday tempted my
friend and accused me most unduly and untruely to E. K. as a murderer, and
hypocrite, and one that had injured a thousand.

Mad...... His name was Panlacarp.

D. Can the wicked Conjurers have their Devils to write Books at their
commandments, and shall not an honest Christian Philosopher have the help of
God his good Angels to write his holy Mysteries so greatly redounding to his
Glory? And seeing you are the Mother of Madimi here, I beseech you tell me your
name here: as the order of all our doings are distinctly and orderly noted.

Mother...... I am of the word, and by the word: I say, Seal up those things
thou have: And I my self will take charge of Galvah to the end. Ad evitandum
(...).

D. Truth it is, it must grow to a great mislikeing grudge, that God should
seem to have laid burdens on our shoulders, greater than we are able to bear:
and then if we fail and fail under them, he would find a cause not to perform
his promises made for carrying of those burdens.

Mother...... Whatsoever is thy part, the same will I perform. I will put thy
yoke (in this one thing) upon my shoulders.

D. Will you then write it as I should have written it?

Mother..... I have said I will.

D. Where shall I leave the Book?

Mother...... Leave it where you will: your locks are no hindrance to us. Even
when Our locks.
the time comes believe and you shall find it written.

D. You have eased my heart of a thousand pound weight.

Mother...... Because ye shall not fall into error. Do thou believe?

D. Yea verily.

Mother...... Then verily will I do it. Fides tua erit instrumentum operationis
meae; Erit, and videbitis, and nunquam peribit.

Galvah...... One thing I will teach thee. The End is greater than the
Beginning, or the Midst; For the End is witness of them both: But they both
cannot witness of the End.

Mother...... He that appeared yesterday is fast enough, now: Maiden, Say your
lesson, when I am gone.

D. I pray tell me your name.

Mad...... Mother I pray you tell your name.

Mother...... I A M; What will you more?

E. K. She flies away like a fire. Madimi falls down prostrate on her face a
while.

D. Now I shall have leisure to follow my suit, and to do all Mr. Gilberts
business.

Mad...... My Mother will speak to the Queen for you shortly. Serve you God
while I do pray.

E K. She prays vehemently. Now she comes near to us.

Madimi...... I pray you teach me to spell. [She spoke to E. K.

Mad...... This is (...), Nisi caveas isti, amic. s hoc opus subvertet, etc.

(...). It is the Syrian Tongue you do not understand it. -- (to D.)

(...)
forte (...)
(...)
alicitur, vel abstrahitur
(...)
(...) That was with Mr Henry Lee his offered friendship as he confessed after.

(...)
(...).
E. K. Unless you speak some Language which I understand, I will express no
more of this Ghybbrish. Now she prays again. Now she is gone.

D. Benedictus sit Deus, Pater Noster, Deus totius Consolationis, qui respexit
afflictionem servuli sui, and in ipso puncto necessitatis meae praestitit mihi
auxilium; ipse Solus Cordis Scrutator est and renum. Ipse est Lux mea, and
Adjutor meus, and Susceptor meus est. In Domino speravi, and liberavit me ab
angustia maxima propter gloriam Nominis sui, quod sit exaltatum and
magnificatum nunc, and in sempiterna secula. Amen, Amen, Amen.

D. My heart did throb oftentimes this day, and thought that E. K. did intend
to absent himself from me, and now upon this warning I was confirmed, and more
assured that it was so: Whereupon seeing him make such haste to ride to
Islington: I asked him why he so hasted to ride thither: And I said, if it were
to ride to Mr. Harry Lee, I would go thither also to be acquainted with him;
seeing now I had so good leisure, being eased of the book writing: Then he
said, that one told him the other day that the Duke did but flatter him, and
told Fifty pound y^arly to be provided for E K. by John Dee.
him other things, both against the Duke (or Palatine) and me, etc. I answered
for the Duke and my self; and also said, that if the forty pound annuity,
which Mr. Lee did offer him, was the chief cause of his mind settling that way
(contrary to many of his former promises to me) that then I would assure him of
fifty pound yearly, and would do my best by following of my suit, to bring it
to pass as soon as (possibly) I could, and thereupon did make him promise upon
the Bible. Then E. K. again upon the same Bible did swear unto me constant
friendship, and never to forsake me: And moreover said, that unless this had
so fallen out, he would have gone beyond the Seas, taking ship at New Castle
within eight days next: And so we plight our faith each to other, taking each
other by the hands upon these points of brotherly, and friendly fidelity during
life, which Covenant I beseech God to turn to his honor, glory, and service,
and the comfort of our brethren (his Children) here in earth.

Tuesday, Julii 2. a meridie, Circa Horam. 2.

D. While I was writing of Letters to Mr. Adrian Gilbert, into Devonshire,
Madini appeared by me in the study, before E. K. sitting in the Chair, first on
the ground, then up higher in the air; and I said, How is the mind of Mr.
Secretary toward me, me thinks it is alienated marvellously.

Mad..... Those that love the world, are hated of God. The Lord Treasurer and
he are The Lord Treasurer, and Secretary Walsingham.
joined together, and they hate thee. I heard them when they both said, thou
would go mad shortly: Whatsoever they can do against thee, assure thy self
of. They will shortly lay a bait for thee; but eschew them.

D. Lord have mercy upon me: what bait, ( I beseech you) and by whom?

Mad..... They have determined to search thy house: But they stay until the
Duke be gone.

D. What would they search it for?

Mad..... They hate the Duke, (both) unto the death.

D. And why?

Mad..... Take heed that you deal uprightly...... [She spoke to E. K.]

E. K. God the Creator be my witness of my upright dealing, with, and toward
him, (meaning D.) ever since my last coming to him.

Mad..... It is good to prevent diseases. E. K. his second oath.


E. K. By this book (taking the Bible in his hand) I swear that I do carry as
faithful a mind to him, as any man can, ever since my last coming.

Mad..... Look unto the kind of people about the Duke: and the manner of their
diligence.

D. What mean you by that? his own people mean you? or who?

Mad..... The espies.

D. Which be those?

Mad..... All, there is not one true.

D. You mean the English men.

Mad..... You are very gross, if you understand not my sayings.

D. Lord, what is thy counsel to prevent all?

Mad..... The speech is general, The wicked shall not prevail.

D. But will they enter to search my house, or no?

Mad..... Immediately after the Duke his going they will.

D. To what intent? what do they hope to find?

Mad..... They suspect the Duke is inwardly a Traitor.

D. They can by no means charge me, no not so much as of a Traiterous thought.

Mad..... Though thy thoughts be good, they cannot comprehend the doings of the
wicked. In sum, they hate thee. Trust them not. they shall go about shortly
to offer thee friendship: But be Trust them not.
thou a worm in a heap of straw.

D. I pray you expound that parable. Mad..... A heap of straw being never so
great, is no weight upon a worm, notwithstanding every straw hindroth the worms
passages. See them, and be not seen of them, do thou understand (...)?

D. I pray you make more plain your counsel.

Mad..... My counsel is plain enough.

D. When, I pray you, is the Duke likely to go away?

Mad..... In the middle of August.

D. If in the midst of August he will go, and then our practices be yet in
hand, what shall be done with such our furniture is prepared, and standing in
the Chamber of practice.

Mad..... Thou have no faith.

His going stands upon the determinated purpose of God. He is your friend
greatly, and A. L. Service.
intends to do much for you. He is prepared to do thee good, and thou art
prepared to do him service. Many men purpose, but one sets in order.

D. As concerning Adrian Gilbert, what pleases you to say of him, and his
intended voyage.

Mad..... He is not in the true faith.

D. How has it been said, then, That he should be the setter forth of God, his
faith and religion among the infidels.

Mad..... That is a mystery.

D. Whether shall it be good, that the Duke resort hither often, or tarry for the
most part at his house at London.

Mad..... Humane policy cannot prevail. As many as are not faithful in these
causes, shall die a most miserable death: and shall drink of sleep everlasting.
As in one root there are many divisions, so in the stem and branches are many
separations.

D. Give some more light (I beseech you) to the particular understanding.

Mad..... The fire that kindles all these, and wherein thy live is One,
forming them according to (whatsoever) the substance whereupon they are
grounded. So by the less you may prove the greater: That as in particular, so
likewise generally, All emanations are from one. In the first workmanship lies
secret in one unknown: And is sealed, and therefore it has an end. The son
through the Circles and Massy body, The heart in the body, The intelligence in
the inward man, The son from his own Center spreads out the beams of his
limited virtue, The Heart life to two; and yet The heart. The (...) on a fiery
shape.
the Center of life to the whole body, understanding quickneth the mind; that
mind I speak of puts on a fiery shape. It follows therefore, that every
thing (what substance soever) has a Center: From the which the Circumfluent
beams of his proper power do proceed. When these are perfectly known: Then are
things seen in their true kind. I speak this to prove, that the good Angel of
man, which is the external Center of the Soul, does carry with him the internal
Character of that thing whereof he seeks to be a Dignifier, within the which
does lie secret, the Conjunction and Separation of the proportion of their
times, betwixt the soul and body of man. O happy (therefore) is that Soul,
which beholds the glory of his dignification, and is partaker with him that
is his keeper. This known unto men, the thickness of the earth does not binder
their speeches; neither can the darkness of the lowest air obscure, or make
dark the sharpness of their eyes. This Character, (at his next coming hither)
shall be made manifest unto him.

E. K. He shows a bloody hand, holding a bloody Cross with letters on it,
like our holy letters.

D. I beseech you, how shall his provision of money from home serve his turn,
or how shall he here have help for his charges bearing?

Mad..... Your words make me a Child. Those that fish for Dolphins do not
stand upon the Note the form of a child.
ground. Those that sit in Counsel call not in the harvest people, nor account
not their works. He that stands above the Moon, sees greater things then the
earth: Is it not said, The Lord will provide? I stand above the Moon, for that
I dispose his life from above the disposition of the Moon. To ask what Jacob
his servants did, was a folly; because their master was (...): A greater
question to ask how blessed he was, then to ask how many sheep he had.

D. I am desirous to know what you meant by saying, That my words made you a
Child.

Mad..... Because you ask me Childish questions. His good Angel shall reveal
his Character unto Reverence to good (...). (...). Perhaps (...).
him, and thou shall see it, [pointing to E. K.] But take heed thou say truly;
And use great reverence, or else the feet that love thee shall carry thy Carkas
out of the doors. If be carry it upon him, it shall be a token of the Covenant
between him and God.

D. The image, or similitude thereof (mean you) made in pure Gold.

Mad..... I..... So those that shall see his Standards with that sign in them
shall perish utterly.

D. You mean, if the same be painted, or otherwise wrought in his Banners and
Penons, etc.

Mad..... Let him use it as a Covenant, between God and him.

D. How shall he frame it in Gold, solid-wise, or Lamine-wise?

Madd..... His own Angel shall reveal it.

D. Because it has been said, that in the beginning of our Country troubles we
should be packing hence into his Country; What token shall we have of that time
approaching, or at hand?

Mad...... Your watchword is told you before: When it is said unto you, Venite,
etc.

D. But (I beseech you) to be ready against that watchword, hearing what is to
be done, as concerning our wives and children into his Country.

Mad...... Miraculous is thy care (O God) upon those that are thy chosen, and
wonderful are the ways that thou have prepared for them. Thou shall take them
from the fields, and harbor them at home. Thou art merciful unto thy faithful
and hard to the heavy-hearted. Thou shall cover their legs with Boots, and
brambles shall not prick them: Their hands shall be covered with the skins of
Beasts that they may break their way through the hedges. Thy Bell shall go
before them as a watch and sure Direction: The Moon shall be clear that they
may go on boldly. Peace be amongst you.

E. K. He is now gone away in a fire. AEterno Deo nostro, sit Laus Honor, and
Gloria in seculorum (...). Amen.

Thursday Julii 4. hora 11. ante Meridiem. 1583.

Note. D. When I came home yesterday from the Court, and from London, and from
the Lord Laskie, I found that E. K. was purposed to ride forth of Town, and
intended to be away (as he expressly told me) five days: Certain Companions and
his acquaintance having so appointed with him, some tarrying for him in
Mortlucke, and some at Brainford (as was perceived this day afterward, and as
he confessed unto me.) Whereupon I thought good to signify so much unto the
Lord Laskie who meant to come and refresh himself at my house, as he was wont
before; either this day, or within two or three days after: Who also delighted
in E. K. his company, etc. Hereupon about the time of E. K. his rising I wrote
these lines, intending to send them presently to the Lord Laskie, that word
might be returned of his intent before E. K. should ride, I meaning and hoping
to persuade E. K. to tarry so long, and upon such respect.

NObilissime Princeps, in reditu, nostrum Edwardum inveni, facie quidem laeta:
sed itineri tamen, ut dicit, quinque dierum, se accingentem: Hocque matutino
tempore abitum vel iter istud ingredi (...); Reversurus (ut affirmat) post
quinque dies. Quid sit ipsa veritas, novit ille qui verus and Omnipotens Deus
est noster. Hoc volui, isto mane summo, vobis significare, ut, quid factu
optimum sit, Cogitetis: De aliis, suo tempore,

Vaestrae Celsitudinis fidelissimus Clientulus Joannes Dee.
Julii 4. 1563.

This Letter being now written, and not yet folded up, my friend E. K. was
ready and came out of his Chamber into my Study; and I told him, that I was
even now sending word to the Prince Laskie of his rideing out, and return after
five days; and so showed him the Letter: who when he came to the phrase, Quid
sit ipsa veritas, he was samewhat offended, saying, What secret meaning has
this, upon some of your two former conference? Truly (said I) even such as the
circumstance of the Letter does import, that is; Whereas you said that you
intended to return within five days, or at the same days end, it is uncertain
whether you will, or shall, return later or sooner: and therefore Quid sit ipsa
veritas of your return, or intent to return, only God does know. He would by
no means admit that my sincere exposition, but seemed suspicious of some other
undue constructions of those former words; thereupon I took the Letter and tore
it in three pieces, and sent none: But in my mind referred all to God his
disposition, assuring my self of God his most constant proceeding in his own
affairs. Shortly after said E. K. to me, Certainly here is a spiritual Creature
in my right shoulder, who sensibly says to me, Come away: So (said I) did one
say to Soul, when Soul. Evil spirits.
they would have had him away to have drowned him, whom I stayed in this Study
by force, and so hindered the Devil of his purpose then; as appears by that
unhappy man yet alive. Nay said E. K. they have told me that if I tarry here, I
shall be hanged; and if I go with this Prince he will cut off my head, and that
you mean not to keep promise with me; And therefore if I might have a thousand
pound to tarry, yea a Kingdom, I cannot: Therefore I release you of your
promise of 50 pounds yearly Stipend to me, and you need not doubt but God will
defend Fifty pound yearly stipend.
you and prosper you, and can of the very stones raise up children to Abraham:
And again I cannot abide my wife, I love her not, nay I abhor her; and there in
the house I am misliked, E. K. his wife.
because I favor her no better. To these, such his words spoken in great pangs
and disquietnesse of mind, I reposed and said, That these his doings and
sayings were not of God, and that by my whole proceeding he might perceive what
confidence I reposed in his dealing with the spiritual, our friends, seeing
even to the uttermost penny (and more than my ability served unto conveniently)
I laid out still about the.... ming of such things, as were by me to be done,
etc. Well, on the sudden, down he went; upon his Mare, and away toward
Brainford. After whose going, my Wife came up into my Study, and I said, Jane,
this man is mervallously out of quiet against his Wife, for her friends their
bitter reports against him E. K. his wives friends.
behind his back, and her silence thereat, etc. He is gone, said I, but I
beseech the Almighty God to guide him and to defend him from danger and shame;
I doubt not but God will be merciful to him, and bring him at length to such
order, as he shall be a faithful servant unto God, etc.

Note within three hours after, came E. K. up my Study stairs unbooted, for he
was come in a boat from Brainford. When I saw him I was very glad inwardly: But
I remained writing of those Records as I had yet to write of Tuesdayes last
actions. I have lent my Mare out (said he) and so am returned. It is well done
said I, and thereupon he sat down in the chair by my Table where he was wont
to sit: And it was ten of the clock then. He took up in his hand the Books
which I had brought from London of the L. Laskie, written to him in his
commendations, etc. And as he was looking earnestly on them, a Spiritual
Creature did put the Book on the outside of the parchment cover, diverse times;
and once would have taken it out of his hands: Diverse times I heard the strokes
my self; At length he said, I see here the handsome Maiden Madimi, and have
done a pretty while. Then said I to him, Why told you me no sooner? Whereupon I
took paper purposely to Note what should seem Note-worthy as follows.

D. Mistress Madimi, you are welcome in God, for good, as I hope; What is the
cause of your coming now?

Mad...... To see how you do.

D. I know you see me often, and I see you only by faith and imagination.

Mad...... [Pointing to E. K.] That sight is perfecter than his.

D. O Madimi, Shall I have any more of these grievous pangs?

Mad...... Cursed Wives, and great Devils are sore Companions.

D. In respect of the Lord Treasurer, Mr. Secretary, and Mr. Rawly; I pray you,
What worldly comfort is there to be looked for? Besides that I do principally
put my trust in God.

Mad...... Madder will stain, wicked men will offend, and are easy to be
offended.

D. And being offended will do wickedly, to the persecution of them that mean
simply.

Mad...... Or else they were not to be called wicked.

D. As concerning Alb. Laskie his Pedigree, you said your Sister would tell all.

Mad...... I told you more then all your Dog painters and Cat painters can do.

D. You spoke of William Laskie and Sir Richard Laskie his brother, of which
William going into France, and then into Denmark: and his marriage into
Poland, came this Albert Laskie, now Paladine of Soradia, etc.

Mad...... Those were two pretty men for me to meddle withal. When you set your
selves together, and agree together, I will make all agree together.

E. K. Will you Madimi lend me a hundred pound for a fortnight?

Mad...... I have swept all my money out of doors.

D. As for money we shall have that which is necessary when God sees time.

Mad...... Hear me what I say. God is the unity of all things, Love is the
unity of every Congregation (I mean true and perfect love.) The World was made
in the love of the father. You were redeemed in the love of the Father and the
Son. The Spirit of God is (yet) the love of his Church. Yet (I say): For after
it does Triumph, it is not called a Church nor a Congregation: D. we use to
call it Ecclesiae Triumphans. Note. The Angels were not redeemed.
But a Fruitful Inheritance and a Perfect Body in Christ. Take the love of the
Father from the World, and it perishes. Take the love of our Redemption away,
and we are dead. (I will not offend) put your instead of our. Take the light of
the Holy Ghost, which is the love of the Father and the Son from the Church,
and it withers. Even so take love from amongst you, and you are members of
the Devil; Therefore it is said unto you Diligite ad invicem. For love is the
Spirit of God uniting and knitting things together in a laudable proportion.
What do thou hunt after? Speak man, What do thou hunt after?

[This was said to E. K. upon some secret judgment of Madimi in him.

E. K. I hunt after nothing.

The love of God breeds faith; Faith brings forth (on the one side) Hope;
and (on the 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Charity.
other side) the works of Charity. Do thou love God? Seek thou to be
among his Elect? Why do thou not (therefore) love those things that are of
God? Herein thou show the want of faith; Herein are thy bragging words
confounded; for thou say, No man can accuse thee of evil. But thou have no
faith because thou have no hope. Will thou say, that thou have faith? Show it
me by thy love: Whosoever (therefore) loves not God, is accursed. Thou love
not God, Lo, behold, thou breakest his Commandments. Ought thou not to love
him? And have thou not faith through the love in God? Truly thou ought so
to do. Will thou let me see thy hope on this side; Let thy works stand on the
other side. And show thy self to have faith that therein thou may love God,
and be beloved of him: But if thou have none of these, thou have hate. If thou
hate God, the reward thereof is great; but the greatness is unquenchable fire.
Whosoever follows not the Commandments, hates God; If sin be the breach of
the Commandments, etc. Do thou love Silver and Gold? The one is a Thief, the
other is a Murderer. Will thou seek honor?

E. K. No.

So did Cain. But thou have a Just God that loves thee; Just and virtuous men
that delight Note this came to pass Anno (...). when he was made Baron of
Bohemia Anno 1590.
in thee; Therefore be thou virtuous: For thou shall tread the World under thy
feet: I promise thee, I have driven the Skullen-drab out of our Kitchen long
ago.

D. Do you mean worldly covetousness?

Mad...... Yea, and the first heavenly covetousness.

Carma geta Barman.

D. I beseech you, what is that to say?

Mad...... Veni ex illo Barma.

E. K. Felt and saw a spiritual Creature go out of his right thigh.

Mad...... Where are thy 14 Companions?

Bar...... They dwell here.

D. [He that was come out, seemed a great handsome man with a Sachel of a Dogs
skin by his side, and a Cap on his head, etc.]

D. O the hand of the Highest has wrought this.

Mad...... Venite Tenebrae, fugite Spiritu meo.

E. K. Here appear 14 of diverse evil favored shapes: some like Monkies, some
like Dogs, some very hairy monstrous Men, etc. They seemed to scratch each
other by the face. These seem to go about Madimi and say, Gil de pragma kures
helech.

D. What is that to say?

Mad...... Volumus hic in Nostris habitare.

D. Quae sunt illa vestra?

E. K. One of them said... Habemus hominem istum Demicilium nostrum.

Mad...... The vengeance of God is a two-edged Sword, and cutteth the
rebellious wicked ones in pieces. The hand of the Lord is like a strong oak,
when it falls it cutteth in sunder many The casting out, and utter displacing
of 15 wicked spirits, etc.
bushes. The light of his eyes expel darkness, and the sweetness of his
mouth keeps from corruption. Blessed are those whom he favors, and great
is their reward; Because you came hither without license and seek to overthrow
the liberty of God his Testament, and the light wherewithal he stretches unto
the end, and for because you are accursed it is said, I will not suffer mine to
be overthrown with temptation, though he were led away, Behold I bring back
again.

Depart unto the last Cry: Rest with the Prince of Darkness there is none.
Amen, go you thither. Et signabo vos ad finem.

E. K. He sealed them all in the forehead: the 14 and their principal, their
sealing was as if they had been branded. They sunk all 15 downward through the
floor of the Chamber, and there came a thing like a wind and plucked them by
the feet away.

E. K. Methinketh I am lighter than I was; and I seem to be empty, and to be
returned from a great amasing; for this fortnight I do not well remember what I
have done or said.

Mad...... Thou art eased of a great burden..... Love God, Love thy Friends,
Love thy Wife.

E. K. Now comes one with a red Cross in his hand and leads her away, and
so they vanished. We prayed the Psalm of thanksgiving 14 of Roffensis for E.K.
his deliverance from Barma and his 14 Companions. Amen.

D. first papers, E. K. Sal. by appeard often to him, whipping before as 6. or
7. miles distant from him think that the blessed Jubanladace had been sent to
have said somewhat unto us of his Charge (the Prince Laskie) But I found in the
end that it was a token that the Princce Laskie was pensively careful of us,
and that his good Angel was his witness and message, by that token his
peculiar Caraster as is before taught.

Omnis Spiritus Laudet Deum nostrum Vnum and Trinum. Amen.

Sequitur liber Tertiarius Sexti.

LIBER PEREGRINATIONIS PRIMAE: Videlicet A Mortlaco Angliae, Ad Craconiam
Polomiae.
Saturday, September. 21. 1583. Die Sancti Matthaei.
WE departed from Mortlack, about three of the Clock after noon: The Lord
Albert Lasky, (Vaywode of Siradia, in Polonia) meeting me on the water, as we
had appointed: And so brought night to London; and in the dead of the night, by
Wherries, we went to Greenwich to my friend Goodman Fern the Potter his house:
Where we refreshed our selves, and thither came a great Tyltboat from Graves
end to take us in, (by appointment of me and Mr. Stanley) to go to our ships,
which we had caused to ly seven, or eight mile beyond Graves end. To which
ships we came on Sunday morning by Sun rise: In the greater of them (being a
dubble Fly-boat of Denmark) my Lord Laskie, I, and E. K. with my Wife and
Children, etc. went: And in another ship (by me also hired for this passage)
went some of my Lord his men, two horse, etc. that ship was a Boyer, a pretty
ship. With little wind we straightway hoysed sail, and began our voyage in
the ship.

This 22. day we were in great danger of perishing (on the sands, called the
Spits) about There arose great raging wind, N.E. almost.
midnight: We had (by force of wind contrary) anchored by them, and the Anchor
came home, no man perceiving it, till the ship was ready to strike on the
sands. Then, upon great diligence and policy used by our Mariners in hoysing
sail, and cutting our Cable, (to leave our shote anchor) and committing our
selves to the hands of God, and most earnestly praying for a prosperous wind:
It pleased the Almighty, and most merciful God, suddenly to change the winds,
which served us to bear from the sands, and to recover Quinborrough, back again.

The 23. day (being Monday) we came to the mouth and entrance of Quinburrough
Creek, or The evident help of God at the very minute of danger deadly.
Haven. And as we made to land in small Fisher-boats, the Lord Laskie, my Wife
and Children in one boat, and I, with E. K. Marie, Elizabeth, and John Crokar,
in another, it fell so out, that at the ships side, our Fisher-boat his
sayl-yard and sail was entangled on the Maynyard of the Fly-boat (being stroke
down) so that, in our setting from the ships side, the top of our Boat being
fast above, and the winds and stream carrying the Boat off below, it inclined
so much on the one side, that the one half of the Fisher boat (well near) was
in the water, and the water came so in (by the intangling before specified, not
easily to be undone, or loosed) that my Lord, my Wife, and all that saw us
thought that of necessity our Boat must sink, and so, we to have perished. But
God in his providence and mercy had greater...... of us, so that we became
clear; the Boat half full of water, so that we sat wet to the knees, and the
water with the billow of the Sea came still beating in more and more: And in
this mean trouble; one of our two Boat-men, had lost his long Oar out of the
Boat into the water; and so not only we lacked the help of that Oar, but also
by reason they would have followed the wind and ebb, for that Oar, (contrary
to our course in hand, and not able to become by) with much ado we constrained
them with the sail, our one Oar, and the Rudder to make such shift as they
could to get to Quinborrough Town: And in the mean space E. K. with a great
Gantlet did empty most part of the water out of the Boat, else it must needs
have sunk by all man's reason. At length (to be brief) we came to the Town side,
up the crooked Creek: where, when as the Master of our ship would have taken me
out in his arms (standing in the water with his Boots) he fell with me in the
water, where I was foul arrayed in the water and Oase. God be praised for ever,
that all that great danger was ended with so small grief, or hurt.

At Quinborrough.

Wednesday, September. 25. Circa 3. a Meridie, jam pleno mari.

D. Oravimus ad Deum, ejus implorabamus auxilum, Cortina statim apparuit. Oravi
denno solus, pro auxilio, tempore necessitatis: Sex pedum altitudine apparebat
unus, in aere, quasi altera ex part nubis, inter E. K. Et illum interpositae.

E. K. Ego illum cognosco.

..... Tu habes causam me cognoscendi, and illum qui me misit, vel jam non
vixisses.

E. K. Videtur esse Michael.

D. Gratias agimus Creatori nostro, qui bonum, potentem and fidelem ministrum
suum miserit ad nostram protectionem tempore necessitatis nostrae.

Mich...... Loquor de tribus rebus, de (...) and illo qui me misit: De (...),
respectu illius quod estis, and de servitio Dei quod (...) est. O vos
potestates Coeli and terrae, colligite vos in simul, respicite Deum vestrum:
Considerate beneficia ejus; an non vos colligavit simul? Et concatenavit vos in
seipso? An non estis glorificati respectu officii vestri, ad quod praestandum
potenter assignati estis, in voluntate ejus, qui glorificat seipsum. Ecce (...)
vosmet dedidistis principi tenebrarum: vel quare vestri principes contendunt
contra altissimum: and colligitis vosmet in simul ad (...) contra ipsum, qui
est potentissimus, vel illum velletis subjugare, cujus arma sunt super omnem
fortitudinem: Quo modo audetis contendere cum ejus fortitudine? Vel quae est
causa quod tam impii esse velitis? Sed ita oportet esse: quia vobis siigilavit
gubernationem, and in vestras manus dedit violam destructionis. Sed date locum
fini vostro: Quia in ejus fortitudine dispersi eritis: Et omnium rerum
conclusioni ostia vestra debent esse aperta. Ne mirentur servi Dei, de
fortitudine temptationis: Quia magna est potestas impii and hiantis Leonis,
quando illi est cum sigillo tradita. Ne dedignemini, hac hora, scio Government.
vestram gubernationem per illum. Ecce clavis justitiae aperta mihi est.
Nihilominus vestra adhuc erit major iniquitas, and vestrum regnum erit
dispersum in ejus potenti superbia. Quam magnus est Satan qui resistit
fortitudini Dei? Quam magna, igitur, debet esse vestra humilitas, quae debet
vel superare vel mori. Sed vobis sic (...) Dominus. Aperiant venti ora sua, and
rabientes aquae profunda and potentia guttura. In omnes parts navium
vestrarum. Aperiat terra as Let the Forkots light. Michael. Gabriel.
suum, and dicat, quod devorare vellet. Tamen non Praevalebunt Quia (...) addam
(inquit Dominus) qui es fortitudo mea, Potentiam meam praevalescentem: Et vos
eritis duae flammae ignis, imo, ignis potentis suffocantis os totius Malitiae.
Idcirco, vobis been fit: Quia inimicus est fortissimus, ubi praeda est maxima.
Mementote, quod Homines sitis. Mementote, quod terra sitis. Mementote, quod
(...). Mementote, quid eratis, and ne tradatis oblivioni quid estis. In illo
enim vivitis qui omnia in sua habet subjectione. Sed ille, qui cum illo est,
Crucifixus ad gloriam, debet in medio mortalitatis componere se ipsum ad
Immortalem Potentiam. Servi Dei, semper Has provided you. Finis (...).
praevaluerunt: Sed semper per Adversitates. Qui non est de (...) mundo, vos
praeparavit, Nihilo minus debetis ea implere, quae ipse providit. Quod mundus
possit fieri novus, and ipse agnosci. Potens ipse est, Potens est ille, Aquila
illa quae cooperit magnum montem alis suis. Sed potentior est ejus fortitudo
qui numerat stellas, and montes colligit: Nam quicquid ipse loquitur, est
veritatis ignis: Et est simul Potentia and Actus, in immediata proportione.
Etiam ipse Lapped up.
qui fecit Orbem, hominem in simul compegit, and omnia operatus est, Omnia ipse
existens. Ipse est qui vobis praeceptum dedit: Et ego vobis dico, Respicite de
puncto in punctum, ad medium Coeli, and per Circulum terrae: Considerate omnia
in uno, and unum in omnibus. Ponderate, vel per rationem numerentur, vel
mensurate quemadmodum Solomon fecit, vel quemadmodum Adamo erat concessum (quod
nunc non potes sed facies) Tunc conclude, Observant omnia cursum suum: sed
verbum Domini res est...... sempiternum. Amate Deum quia Justus est. Amate vos
invicem quia...... justificati. Observate mandatum Dei quia est mensura
Justitiae.

E. K. Jam venit alter ad illum, cum Corona in Capite, quasi.... and accipit
gladium Michaelis.

Coronatus..... Ecce magna est fortitudo Dei, and Praevalebit.

Mich...... Idcirco est benedictus (...), vos justificati and nos sanctificati.

E. K. Iam faciebant signum crucis flammeae tribus vicibus, and si nauta noster
cum nova Anchora a Londino hodie redierit nonne est consilium, (...) statim
(...) navigemus, si ita ille velit, etc.

E. K. Redeunt.

Coronatus...... Ego sum de Coelo: non respicio terram; Nihilominus terra per
Coelos vivit. Sequimini vos cursum Terrenorum. Praeparate vos semen, Nos
volumus, (O Domine) in te, Of worldlings.
esse parati, cum incremento. Vestra Cura non potest praevalere, quia vestri
Inimici sunt fortes: sed quare dedecore afficior, cum sale terrestrium
vanitatum? Destruat una vanitas, aliam: Ast Electi praevalebunt in fortitudine,
contra illum Principem Vanitatis, and Regem stultorum omnium. Quia Deus noster
est sapiens, Judicia ejus imperscrutabilia, Patientia immensurabilis. Laborate
vos, and Nos gubernabimus.

E. K. Jam recedunt.

Vox...... Ne disputetis ulterius cum Deo: Victoria vestra erit.

D. Magnificetur nomen Dei nostri solius omnipotentis and optimi. Amen.

Thursday 26. Of September we went to ship, and lay in it all night at Anchor.

Friday 27. Of September we sailed from Quinburrough, and so by the lands end
into the main Sea, N. E.

Saturday 28. Of September we fell on Holland Coast, and none of our Mariners,
Master, nor Pilot knew the Coast: and therefore to the Main Sea again, with
great fear and danger, by reason we could scarcely get off from that dangerous
Coast, the wind was so scarce for that purpose.

Sunday 29. Of September we came into the Briel-haven, and there were like to
strike on ground: at length we came to an Ankor, and lay in ship all night.

Monday 30. Of September we landed, and went into the Briel.

Brielae, Octobris 2. Mane Hora 9. Die Mercurii.

E. K. Nihil apparet in Lapide, neque Cortina, neque aliud quid. Oremus
constanter, etc. Apparet Domus magna cum multis pinnaculis, valde elegantibus.
Et pavimentum videtur esse multis innatis lapidibus distinctum and videntur
multi esse gradus per quos ascenditur: and videtur esse area viridis ex dextra
part, and exaltera part esse vallis, and rivulus ex alia. Pars quae verius
solemn est, videtur quasi noviter reformata. Et circa introitum est rotundum
quoddam aedificium: fenestrae non sunt similes nostris, sed quasi essent
Templorum fenestrae.

A. L. Dixit (...) videtur esse illa arx Regia, quae Cracoviae est.

E. K. Subito descendit ignis and per totum lapidem apparet. Jam venit Cortina
solita ante domum istam.

Vox. Garil zed masch, ich na gel galaht gemp gal noch Cubanladan.

E. K. Jubanladaa. h jam apparet supra Chrystallum: and Chrystallus videtur
esse permagnus.

Jub. Deus numeravit and dies tuos and posteritatem. [E. K. Respicit A. L.]

(...). K. Jam recessit a Chrystallo versus caput ipsius A. L.

Jub. Et a pectine tuo non cadet Capillus non numeratus. Omnia been se habent.
[Hoc dixit de (...) rerum A. L. apud Lask.] Ecce (...) vim resistendi: Ast
contra legionem pugno.

D. Perditio te novit, and (...) annos tuos, and incipit esse fortis: Quia illi
est Potestas Antichristus.
data, Infernus aperit os suum contra vos, quia sciunt, quod vos glorificati
eritis in Deo. Ego vici quintum sigillum, and mihi jam resistitur in sexto.
Quae Deus facit, non participant cum humano judicio. Ecce nunc Discipulos suos
congregavit, and docet. O Coelum and terra quam magnae sunt miseriae, quae
vexabunt unum and polluent alterum? Quia boni Angeli cadent cum illo and (...)
Christum metuent. Sed illi ad tempus cadent, non in perpetuum.

D. Salvo judicio Ecclesiae Catholicoe Orthodoxae, videtur mihi quod Job de
ejusmodi Angelorum timore, five casu, and restitutione, sive purgatione
prophetaverit, Cap. 41. ubi etiam addit de miraculis ejusdem: Sub ipso erant
(...) solis, and sternet sibi aurum quasi lutum. Antea (...). Cum su latus
fuerit timebunt Angeli, and territi purgabuntur, etc.

D. O Deus quam terribile futurum est tempus illud, etc.

Jub...... (...) Dei mysteria, and Deo gratias agatis pro vestro salvo statu:
Quia mare illis abundabat contra vos, and multi perierunt. Ejus potentia
praevalebat, and commutavit vestrum cursum in locum illis incognitum: quia ab
illis non erat expectatus. Sed fugite ab hac terra, quia Maledictio Dei est
super illam. Cum illo est una veritas: Ille qui in duabus viis erat, non placet
Deo. Qui ad finem usque perdurat, quiescit cum (...). Sed ille qui pedem non
ponit inter Scorpiones non potest intrare super Gozlach.

D. Quid hoc?

Jub...... Gaudium in vera sapientia.

Jub...... Hoc nostrum est Manna, quo alimur. Sed ego sum sanctifica tus per
Creationem, (...) and ex Divina voluntate. (...) vos sanctifico: non cum mea
propria sanctificatione, sed illius Justitia, qui meam originem sanctificat.
Estote Montes in Fide, sed quasi infantes patientia. Facite quod Justum est,
and ne (...) tradatis vestram Justitiam.

E. K. Infinitae quasi locustae vel Araneae cum faciebus humanis illum circum
volitant, and quasi ignem in illum evomunt.

Jub...... Et levavit se contra vos. [Tollendo Crucem suam.]

Jub...... Fiat Justitia ejus.

E. K. Jam avolant praecipites, and quasi deorsum ruentes.

Jub...... Cavete a stramine: quia incensum, tota domum incendit.

D. Quem sensum hic perpendemus nos: Mysticum ne, an materialem?

Jub...... (...) fragilissimarum. Diabolus cum illis fraudulenter operatur:
magna est merces quietis, Sed qui apperit fores contentioni, intromittit
Serpentem. Maledicti sunt invidi: Quia illi sunt (...) qui se mutuo diligunt.
Pax inter vos sit; quia est necessaria. Quia pacis inimici sunt potentes contra
vos.

E. K. Jam loquendo, videtur minor and minor paulatim fieri.

D. De nostro decessu ex Anglia quid tandem jam Regina and sui (...) statuerunt?

Jub...... Aperit os suum, sed liquor non est satis frigidus. Jam est intus
calida, neque restingui potest. Corda sui populi do fall away. Her (...) are
weakened, her legs weaker, her shoes are full of sorrow.

E. K. The furious Monsters assail him again.

Jub...... Quis est, qui potest vivere, si transgrediatur preceptum Dei? Vel
quid de illis judicare (...), whom God imputes sin unto?

E. K. They (...) him again, and he puts his Cross toward them.

Jub...... Their misery begins, and shall have no end, till he that sits
here do end it.

E. K. The Monsters assail him still.

Jub...... The wall must be broken down, and then shall It be said. Happy art
thou which have dwelt amongst us. But if thou live righteously, and ascend the
slippery mountain, Then shall God be merciful to them for thy sake. Because
thou may be beloved, where thou art now despised, Angliae been erit propter
D. ex (...) Dei misericordia.
and have vanquished thy enemies, with the truth of virtue. He that entered into
the lowest hell, and shed his blood for your sins, be merciful unto you, and
give you peace; which is the spirit of Patience, that you may live, not like
men, but as those that do separate themselves from the world, to the true
contemplation of God his mercies.

E. K. Jam intrat in Caput, A. L. cum flamma ignis.

D. Omnis laus, honor, and gloria sit Deo nostro Omnipotenti vivo and vero.
Amen.

Thursday, Octobris 3. We came from Briel to Roterodam in a Hoy of Amsterdam,
to go within land, here we lay all night.

Friday, Octobris 4. We came to Tergowd hora 3 a meridie: where we lay within
the Town in the Ship.

Saturday, Octobris 5. We came by Harlem to Amsterdam, and lay before the Town
all night in the Ship.

Tuesday October. 8. We sailed from Amsterdam to Encusen, and Edmond Hilton went
with my goods by Sea toward Dansk.

Wensday, October. 9. We set off from Encusen early: but by reason of a contrary
wind, we came very late to Herlinghem.

Friday, (...). 11. We went within land in little Scutes from Herlinghem (by
Frainker) to Lewarden.

Saturday, October. 12. From Lewarden, we came to Dockum (in small Boats) about
3 of the clock after noon.

(...) October. (...). Apud Dockum in Frisia Occidentali.

D. Diu Chrystallus tanquam lapis nigerrimus apparuit. Tandem in ipsa lapidis
nigredine, apparuit homo nudus Crucifixus super crucem: sed tamen non mortuus;
Crucis parts infra manus, omnes sanguinolentae videbantur. Fascia linea
circumdabatur Corpus (...), (a pectore deorsum) and fines ejusdem fasciae
pendere videbantur circa genua: and sanguinolenta apparebat: and ex quinque
vulneribus ((...) erat) videbatur sanguis guttatim cadere. Tandem disparuerunt
haec omnia: and quasi deorsum subsidere videbantur; and lapis clarus factus
est, and apparebat Cortina aurea: (...) erat haec mutatio.

E. K. Jam videtur lapis esse valde magnus, and ante lapidem stare quidam
magnus, (quasi Michael) cum gladio ancipite evomente ignem ex utraque acie
(...).

Mic...... Justus and mirabilis and per maximus es tu, O Altissime Deus. [(...)
flexis hac dicit] qui tua judicia manifestas, ut possis super terram cognosci;
and ut tua gloria amplificetur, ad (...) eorum qui electi sunt, and ad dolorem,
and dedecus talium qui crucifigunt lumen mundi (unigenitum Domini nostri,
Salvatorem humani generis) quotidie. Ecce portae (...) sunt iniquitati.
Attollite oculos, and videte quo modo filii hominum stulti devenerunt esse;
quia eorum habitatio est facta nigra, Terra sigillata est ad eorum
destructionem: quia Deum dereliquerunt, and sibimet ipsis adhaeserunt; and
adhuc in parts dissecant Servatorem mundi Jesum Christum [(...) ensis sui
crucem] continuo cum blasphemis eorum sacrificiis. Ve illis, quia illos (...)
prosequimur, and ve illis qui inter illos habitant; quia iniquitate sunt
polluti. Orate, dum inter illos estis, quia vestri inimici sunt multiplicati,
quia vobis dico nuncium Domini exercituum, Regis fidelium. Relinquite
infantiam, and vivite, and ambulate per vias prudentiae; and vivite cum Deo in
domo sua. Quia (...) Iniquorum, non est habitatio vel seeds prophanis, neque
potest Nomen Domini efferri legitime, in illegitima Natione, illegitima facta,
quia dereliquerunt statuta These words were much worn out.
Altissimi. Hoc dicit Dominus; Ego sum Deus Justitiae: and juravi and non est
unus inter illos qui vivet, (...) ne una anima. Quomodo (...) esse devenerunt?
de quibus scriptum est. Absque notitia Dei: Homo ille factus est peeus. Vita
illorum, qui devorantur, and talium quos ignis consumpsit sedebit in judico
contra istam Nationem.

Blessed and Sanctified, and for evermore praised art thou...... Judge, which
have said, and Raignest for ever.

D Si multiplicati sunt inimici nostri, etc.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Si multiplicati sunt inimici nostri propter peccata nostra, ut (...) nobis
incumbat lucta, Misericordiam Dei imploramus ut ipse nostram etiam multiplicet
fortitudinem, etc.

Gab...... Pluck up your hearts, bow your knees, and audite quae dicit Dominus.
Thus says the Lord, If you will prevail against the wicked, and rejoice among
the sanctified, you must observe and keep such commandments, as are ordained by
the God of Truth, unto those that are partakers of his Covenant.

Ask Counsel of God; Remember it.

Be mild.

E. K. Gabriel also noted (...) Commandments in a pair of Tables, after he had
pronounced them.

Fast and pray.

Be Charitable.

Use true Friendship in the service of God.

Persevere to the end.

Are not these Commandments necessary to be kept of all Christian men?.

D. They are undoubtedly.

Gab...... And must of necessity be kept of those that are faithful.

[E. K. He stands as though he stood behind a Desk, and preached or taught.]

Gab...... Well thou say; Lo our enemies are multiplied, multiply thou
therefore our strength O God. Nature is subject unto you for the name of the
Lord, not as unto Kings, but as unto the Ministers of his eternal will, whereby
your justification is settled above the works of Nature already; for, behold,
(...) participate the mercies of God through his Son Christ Jesus, in (...): in
that we open unto you those things that have been sealed; even from the Just,
for the which we are become slaves unto Corruption; showing our selves in
diverse shapes, to the dishonor of our Creation: Yet are we quickened and
revived, because we are become the finger of God: and you are sanctified, and
withal justified, because you are touched with the finger of him that reviveth
all things. Therefore, Rejoice, Rejoice, be Joyful and sing Praises unto God,
and faint not: saying, Our enemies are risen up against us, yea, they are
multiplied; for thus says the Lord, and it is already spoken by the Holy Ghost.

[E. K. He makes now great obedience or reverence.]

Foelices sunt, quibus (...) spes est.

[ E. K. He looks now up unto a thing like a Throne.]

Et omne opus operatio Dei.

[ E. K. Now there comes a beam down into his head, and he is covered with a
great thing like a white cloud.]

E. K. Now the Stone is all on fire. Now the fire ascends upward, the
streaming beam stretches into his head still.

E. K. There appears a little woman a far off, and she is so clear and
transparent, that there appears a man child in her; She has a Coat as though
it were Crimson, and has a long little face, and has a strange silk attire a
bout her head..... as... Videtur esse uxor mea.

Gab...... Go woman, thy grief shall be less than it has been.

E. K. Habet multos tanquam parvos nigros canes post se. Now goes one and
tyeth their mouths with packthred.

Gab...... So God uses to give a suaffle to the wicked.

E. K. A great wind blows on Gabriel.

D. De Angliae and meo privato statu cupio aliquid audire: tum ex (...), tum
propter famae meae rationem.

Gab...... (...) paululum, and iterum venero. My Lord says, Let my servants
sit up, D. All this while we had (...).
and take their rest, I will visit them forthwith in peace.

D. After a great quarter of an hour, he came again.

E. K. He appears now clothed, with all his garment hanging with bells of
Gold, and flaming fire coming from them, with silverish flames. He has hanging
about his Crown as if they were seven Labells, the tops of which come from
above, from an uncertain place and distance.

Gab...... Venite Morvorgran. E. K. He calls with a loud voice.

E. K. Now comes a big black man, with a white face, and after him has 24.
They stand in four rows, and in every row six.

Gab...... Let me see thy seal.

Mor...... Behold power is given to me: Neither is the liquor that thou
ministrest of any taste with me; Neither shall I be overcome, for I have placed
my seat here.

Gab...... But by whose permission? Gag lah nai.

E. K. Now Morvorgran falls down on his knees, and the rest on their face.
Medicina Dei, malis, Justicia vera.

E K. They tremble that lie flat on the ground.

E. K. Morvorgran shows to Gabriel on his own left breast a Character.

Gab...... For 19 months. Behold the will of God: Because thou have conspired
and risen against the Lord, in his chosen, and have said; It is to weet those
that are subject unto thee, Let us rise up against him, and persecute his soul:
let us secretly entrap him, for, without doubt, he is rich. And because your
conspiracies are not of theft only, but [also] of murder: Therefore I seal
thee with a weaker power; And be it unto thee according unto the word of God,
that judges Righteously. From evil unto worse. From worse unto confusion. From
confusion unto desperation. From desperation unto damnation. From damnation
unto eternal death.

[ E. K. Now Gabriel did put another prick to the Character on his left breast]

Mor...... Cursed be that God, and defaced be his power; for he handles us in
unjustice, and deals with us without mercy; Because he is not merciful nor
just.

E. K. Gabriel goes from me to one of the 24. and seals them. Now thy go all
away; and he breaks off the points of their Swords. They go by him.

D. Quis est iste Morvorgran, and quo modo haec nobis instituit infer mala?

Gab...... Dockum, thou shall carry this malice unto thy grave: But I have made
weak thy strength. Blessed be those that entertain those that are anointed in
the Lord: for they also shall taste of the oil of his mercy. I had care of you,
says the Lord, neither will I suffer you to perish in the way; Therefore be
thankful, and forsake the world; for the world has forsaken you, and conspired
against you. But these things are nothing. Behold lastly, thus says the Lord.

E. K. Now comes a salet or helmet on Gabriel his head, or an half sphere; A
great noise of many voices is heard as of Pillars that fell. Now that thing is
taken off his head.

Gab...... Thus says the Lord. The world on both sides, shall rise up against
thee, and they shall envy thee.

E. K. Now comes a beam from above (again) into Gabriel his head.

Gab...... Gna semeroh Jebusan gonsag vi cap neph Jehuslach omsomna dedoilb.

E. K. Looking up, he said thus,

Hoc est Ne paveas repentino terrore: and eruentes tibi potentias Impiorum,
Laskie, Dominus. [E. K. Now comes about his face little things of smoke, and
he puts them from his face. He would open his mouth, and they come upon his
mouth. They rise out of a pit before him, inumerable. Gabriel seems to be as
big as one of us. [ E. K. They swarm continually.] Dominus ille Abraham [
Gab...... Adhuc D.. s laboro] E. K. Now comes a fire down by the same beam
that came into his head. [ E. K. Now comes another streaming beam down to
him.] erit in latere tuo, [ Adjutor meus;] E. K. Looking up...... Now comes a
bigger fire down on him.] and custodiet pedem tuum ne capiaris [ E. K. Now they
run headlong down into a great pit in the earth, and one pincheth me by the
head.] Spera igitur in dominum Deum tuum For thou shall overcome; and erit tibi
Victoria maxima, in Deo, and propter Deum, qui est Dominus and Deus exercituum.

E. K. Now the aforesaid spirits invade Gabriel again.

Gab...... What I suffer, is not lawful for man to see; Therefore Cease for a
while, and suffice nature: But return and hear of my commandment.

E. K. He is gone, but his Desk stands still.

Sunday a meridie hor a 2. October. 13.

Gab...... And hereby I teach you, that those afflictions which you suffer in
soul either for your offenses toward God, or for the imperfections of your
minds, being void of brotherly charity toward your neighbors; (And so from
you generally hereafter, how great, or how many soever) ought not to be
manifested or made open to the world: but perfectly shadowed in Charity,
bearing your own infirmities, and so the infirmity of others with quiet and
hidden mind. For the anguish of the soul is compared with prayer, dwelling in
one house which ought to laugh with the World, and to weep toward heaven. For
every sin is noted, and the least thing as well amongst the Celestial bodies,
as the Terrestiall is perfectly considered of. For sin has his end, and his
end is punishment. And so, contrariwise of Virtue, Wisdom (in the one and
twentieth Ent... ie or L...,) His ground is upon mildness, which mildness
purifieth the body and exalts the soul, making it apt and ready to behold the
heavens, receive glorious illuminations, and finally brings in the soul to
participate, with us, not earthly, but everlasting wisdom. The Son of God was
sanctified in his flesh, through mildness, and was not of this world, because
he was the mildness of his Father. Therefore be you meek: Be fervent in
meekness. Then shall you take up that Cross which Christ spoke of, following
him: which Cross is the Compassion in mildness over thy brethren, for sin
sake: Not as worldlings do, looking, but not lamenting. The other part is in
suffering mildly the afflictions of the world, and flesh: Hereby you become
Martyrs for that you mortify your selves, which is true Martyrdom. He that
forsakes the world for the love of God, in his Son Christ, shall have his
reward. But he that forsakes himself, shall be Crowned with a Diadem of Glory.
Thus says the Lord, I am jealous over you, because you have vowed your selves
unto me. But great are the temptations of the flesh, and mighty is his strength
where the spirit is weak.

But thus says God: It is better to fill up the Soul with heavenly
contemplation, and coelestical food, to reign in heaven, and to be beloved of
him: Then to pamper the filthy flesh, whose delight destroys both body and
Soul. It is written, He that bridleth not his flesh, is given to riotousnesse,
which is the sleep of death, and the slumber to destruction. But this is true
abstinence, when contemning the world you fly the delight therein: refraining
from pleasures of the body, Temperating the flesh, and making it weak, and
that, for the Lord his sake. For the flesh and spirit rejoice not at once.
Neither can the full belly groan out true prayers. Feed therefore the Soul with
the love of our society. And bridle your flesh; For it is insolent. One thing,
I say, look to your servants. See, that in one house there dwell not delighters
in virtue and holiness, mingled with such as harbor vice upon vice: Whose
drunkenness is abomination, and whose diet stirs up fornication. For
wickedness is amongst them: and they fear not God, neither do they abstain,
according as the holy Ghost by his Church has taught. Make them clean: Then
shall you feel our presence amongst you. And we will all of us defend you from
the rage of wickedness. We delight in the God of truth, and in the worshippers
of Justice. Thus says the holy Ghost: Lo, I have made me a Tabernacle, where
the God of Gods reigns in Justice. And I will sanctify those places which
rejoice in charity. Mingle therefore your Alms with charity. And let your
prayers and fasting be mingled with Alms deeds. For he that prays and fasteth
without mercy, is a liar. Moreover, let your friendship (...) such, as is of
charity, and not of this world: Neither for the worlds sake, but for the
service of God: All friendship else is vain, and of no account. Charity is the
gift (...) the Holy (...), which Holy (...) is a kindling fire, knitting things
together, through Christ Jesus; in the true wisdom of the Father: Which fire is
of no small account, neither to be reckoned of, as the Heathens have done. For
happy are those which are fed with charity. For it is the meat of us that are
anointed, which is the son of God, and the light of the world.

D Is charity the son of God?

Gab...... It is so: He that walks in charity walks in God; for charity is
the will of the father, is his own delight, and illumination of the faithful,
through his Holy Spirit. The charity of the Church, is the Holy Ghost. But he
that dwells in charity, dwells in the blood of the Lamb, which is the will
of the father, which is the Holy Ghost. Blessed are those that dwell in
charity. Persevere to the end: Not negligently, but with good will, which good
will, is called fear. Which (...) is the beginning of wisdom, the first step
into rest.

He that continues to the end, receives his reward: But he that leaves off,
is a damned Soul. Finis coronat opus.
Many men begin, but few end. Neither is your justification by the beginning,
but from the end. Paul was justified: Because he died the servant of God, and
not for his preaching sake. He that (...) to the end, is the Child of God:
inheriter of everlasting life; and equal with joy himself: Not the joy of
joys, but that joy which God has made equal with the joys of his son Christ,
in the company of the faithful. Even in this place, many persons had conspired
against you. But the strength of God has sealed them: And they shall not be
unpunished. For the Angel of the Town is sealed, and his seal is to
destruction: Thrice cursed are those which dwell within his government. But you
are safe, and shall be safely delivered from them.

In England, They condemn thy doings, and say, Thou art a Renegade. For they
say, Thou have England.
despised thy Prince.

What (...) thou know of them? Cease till you hear the number of their
destruction. England. D (...) concessa si cuperem, etc.
Desire what plague you will (says the Lord) upon this people, for their
ungratefulness, and they shall be afflicted. For the Lord is angry with them:
and he says, Judge you this wicked people, their Town, Men, Women, and
Children: And it shall be seen that the Lord, the God of Heaven and Earth, has
mercy on you.

D Non nostra, sed Dei voluntas fiat, ad ejus nominis laudem and honorem.

Gab...... Bid the fires fly from Heaven, and consume them, and it shall be
done: Or, say, Let the Earth swallow them, And they shall perish. (...) I have
made Heaven and Earth (says the Lord) and.... Justice is for my people. I am a
flaming fire amongst you, and the Rod of Justice It is said, Heave up thy
hands, and thou shall be heard. The peace of him that is the spirit of wisdom
inflame your minds with love and charity, and grant you continuance to his
glory.

D. Amen.

Deo AEterno, Omnipotenti and Misericordi sit omnis laus, honor, and Gloria.
Amen.

Tuesday 15. October. We made hard shift to get from Dockum to Angem by sun set.

Thursday 17. October. We came from Angem to Embden, going without the Isles, and
coming in at Wester Emb. We came before the Town, by six of the Clock after
noon: but could not get in at the Gates, and therefore we lay all night a
shipboard, but my Lord A. L. went over to the lodging on the other shore.

Friday 18. October. We came into the Town: My Lord lay at the white Swan toward
the waterside, and I, and E. K. with my Children and Many at the three golden
Keys, by the English house.

Sunday 20. October. This day morning about eight of the Clock we went in a litte
Hoy from Embden toward Lyre, my Lord tarried at Embden. We came late to Lyre:
and the same night we went from thence in a less Scute by Styk-husen to Oppen.

Monday 21. October. By nine of the Clock in the morning we came to Oppen: a very
simple Village, and from thence we went straight way to Oldenburgh.

Tuesday 22. October. From Oldenburgh, by Delmenhurst, to Breame: and were lodged
at an old Widow, her house, at the sign of the Crown.

Saturday Octobris 26. Hora 12. scil. in Meridie. At Breame.
D. The Lord Albert Laskie, being at Styck-husen behind us, with the Earl
John of Embden and Friesland, etc.

E. K. The Curten seems to be far backward in the stone: and the stone to be
clear between the Curten and the forepart. Under the Curten I see the legs of
men up to the knees.

D. Then appeared one, and said:

Il...... Room for a Player. Jesus, who would have thought, I should have met
you here?

E. K. He is all in his ragged Apparel, down from the Girdle steed: But above
he has a white Satin Gerken.

D. By the mercies of God we are here: And by your will and propriety, and the
power of God you are here.

Il...... Tush, doubt not of me, for I am I. L.

E. K. My thinks that the gravity of this Action requires a more grave
gesture, and more grave speeches. Bear with me, though I say so unto you.

Il...... If I must bear with thee, for speaking foolishly, which art but
flesh, and speak of thy own wisdom: How much more ought thou to be
contented with my gesture, which is appointed of him, which regards not the
outward form, but the fulfilling of his will; and the keeping of his
Commandments: which is God: whose wisdom unto the world is foolishness, but
unto them that fear him, an everlasting joy, mixed with gladness, and a
comfort of life hereafter: Partaking infallible joys, with him that is all
comeliness and beauty. How say you to this, Sir, Ha?

E. K. He turns up his heels to E. K.

E. K. I do not understand your words: for because I do only repent your
sayings.

Il...... It is the part of him that is a servant to do this duty: Of him that
watches, to look what he sees: For the greatest point of wisdom, is,
reverently, to consider thy calling. It is said, do that, which is appointed,
for he that does more, is not a true servant.

E. K. How can that be?

Il...... Speak when they time comes. Sir, here is money: but I have it very
hardly. Bear with me, for I can help thee with no more. Come on Andras, where
are you Andras?

E. K. Now comes one in a Gown to him. The Gown is bare like a prentice of
London, a young man.

Il...... Did not I bid thee go yonder, and fetch me money.

Andras..... Whither.

Il...... This is one of them that forgets his business so soon as it is
told him.

And...... Sir, I went half way.

Il...... And how then? Speak on, Speak on.

And...... Then being somewhat weary: I stayed, the rather because I met my
friends, The third day I came thither: but I found him not at home. His family
told me, that he was newly gone forth.

Il...... And you returned a Coxcombe. Well thus it is: I placed thee above my
servants, and did what I could to promote thee: and endeavored daily to make
thee free. But I am rewarded with loytring, and have brought up an idle person.
Go thy way, I will deliver thee to the Officer. The Officer shall deliver thee
to the Prison: and there thou shall be rewarded. For such as do that they are
commanded, deserve freedom: but unto those that loytre, and unto such as are
idle, vengeance, and hunger belongs.

E. K. He takes him by the arm, and delivers him to a man with a staff in
his hand: and he puts him in at a door.

E. K. Now Il himself goes into a house, which all this while appeared on the
left hand.

Il...... Come on.

[ E. K.] Now he brings another by the hand.]

Il...... My thinks you should be a fit man to do my message.

E. K. Now he whispereth him in the ear, and points out h....

Il...... I warrant the man, be not abashed. A strange matter.[Pointing to E.
K.]

Il...... I have business in Denmark, and this fellow is afraid to go thither:
Tell him, thou come from me, and that I will come my self shortly. I know he
will do so much for me, he has had much acquaintance with me.

..... I care not, if I had some man to keep me Company.

[ E.K.] This new come man said so.]

E. K. He whispereth again with this man in his ear.

Il...... These good fellows are not ready, or else they might go with thee. Go
thy way in Gods name: See that you do your business. I keep such servants, as
none in all the Country keeps.

E. K. He keeps no servants.

Il...... Meddle with that, you have to do with all. I pray this man, and that
man, and every one deceives me. Good Lord, where should a man find a true
friend now adays? I will go and tell the knave that he provide for himself.
For it will be mavelous hard weather. You were best to do so, least you blow
your Nails.

E. E. He speaks to one within the house.

Il...... Thus you see me (Masters) how I am troubled with my servants. How now
what aileth thee?

[ E. K. There comes a woman round about his house, and she seems to pass
by him. She is in English Attire.]

Il...... I will know what aileth her to cry. What aileth thee?

Woman. One of my Children is dead.

Il...... Alas poor Child: How can Children resist cold? she might have kept
it warmer. Cold pierces, where shot cannot enter.

D. This woman is not of our Company? I trust, None of our Children, shall
perish in this cold.

Il...... Ha, A, your Children? you keep them warm: It will do them no hurt.
Those that are warned, (...) danger to come: For many things are prevented by
the quality of wisdom.

D. I trust, we shall safe arrive at the place appointed, in Cracow, or
elsewhere.

D. But as concerning Vincent Seve, brother in Law to the Lord Albert Laskie, I
pray you to (...).
show us the truth of his state.

E. K. I see him walking in a street; and a thick man with him; And Gerlish
seems to comeafter him. The thick man his beard is somewhat like my Lord his
beard, he comes after Vincent. Vincent has a black satin Dubblet on, cut
with cross cuts; He has a ruff about his neck, along one edged with black,
or blue.

D. I beseech you. I. L. to show us what Town that is. Note.


Il...... Speaking to him that shows it: for I show it not.

D. O God.

Il...... I remember not the name of any such Town. Quem Deus non amat, non
novit.

E. K. Now the Town appears again, the Sea runs by it. There is an old
rotten Church standing at the Town end. The Town seems to be 60. or 80. miles
off.

E. K. It seems to be Embden in my judgment.

E. K. But Vincent and Gerlish seem not to be in one Town, or street.

D. I beseech you to say unto us whether A. L. be furnished with money, at
Grave John his hand, so as may serve our turn, or no.

Il...... If I have not told you already, I will. You grudge at me.

[ E. K.] He speaks to E. K.

Il...... Judge my words with reason, and thou shall find them true, Touch
them with understanding, and thou shall find them profound. My words are true,
Because I am sent by Truth: Note.
Neither are we to speak gravely, when we take upon us the persons of Buyers
and Sellers. Whosoever does the will of his Master truly in this World, shall
be laughed to scorn: But whosoever speaks worldly and sends out shadows, is
accounted a pillar of the Earth. Happy are those which are not foolish, neither
in works say, There is no God; Such request, such answer. Such earthly mind,
such heavenly motions. Yet Heaven speaks truth, and the Earth lies. This is
not my office which I have taken in hand; yet because I have dealt with you as
a worldling, I was the fitrest to answer your worldly expectation.

D. As you have dealt with us, not according to your office, but according to
our worldly expectation: So now do we desire to understand somewhat according
to our higher and heavenly expectation, of our doing the determined will of the
Highest.

E. K. He is gone, and all the Stone as red as blood. Vide infra.


D.

E K. Now he is come again, and stands in the fire.

Il...... Thus says the Lord, I have taught you how to live, I have set you
Statutes, and have wished you my Peace; Follow me, and I will be your God: For
unto them that are wise, shall Supra in fine diei 13. Oct. and saepe (...). A
Prophecy of An. 1584, 1585 1586, 1587, 1588.
there be more wisdom given; But unto them that are become foolish, my wisdom
is a...

These five years to come, are the Deliverance... Yea, sorrow shall bring forth
her Children. My Honor shall be defaced, and my holy Places plucked. No man
has ever seen such a world: For Now shall they say unto the Mountains, Come
and cover us, and unto the Waters, Swallow us up: for we know there is no God;
neither is there any care of Mankind. I will plague the people, and their blood
shall become Rivers. Fathers shall eat their own Children, And the Earth shall
be barren: The Beasts of the field shall perish, And the Waters shall be
poisoned. The Air shall infect her Creatures, And in the Deep shall be roaring.
Great Babylon shall be built, And the son of wickedness, shall sit in
Judgment. But I will reserve two Kingdoms untouched, And I will root out their
wickedness. Yea, thus says the Lord, (...) the North shall come a From the
North.
Whirlwind, And the Hills shall open their mouths: And there shall a Dragon
fly out, such as never was. But I will be glorified by you, and by those that
are not yet dead. And you shall have power, such as I will be glorified by.
Keep therefore the Statutes which I taught you, Forget not my words: For unto
those that look back, there is great woe. Happy are they that continue to the
end. Amen.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D......

E. K. Now he is come again.

Il...... Thus says Jehova: I am the beginning and the end, The root and life
of all Righteousness. I say, (By my self) I am with you, And will bless you
in Righteousness. Cease Vide supra.
therefore to move me; for I am Almighty, And inquire not of me, what I have
determined; For Time grows, and I am a Just God. Therefore Cease, Cease, I
say; I in my self say Cease. Call not upon my name in defiled places; Least the
wicked ones hear what I determine. I will visit you at your journyes end: I will
testify my promise to you. Be in haste therefore: At our journeyes end.
And fly from sin; And fly the society of such as are accursed: For I am
jealous over my people. Yea I will not suffer them to drink or taste of their
vessels. Be you unto me a people, that I may behold my people: And I will be
unto you both, A God for ever.

E. K. IL. says Amen, and falls all in pieces, as small as ashes.

E. K. Now all is Clear, and the Curtain is come again.

D. Deo Omnipotenti sit omnis Honor laus and gloria, in secula seculorum.

Amen.
Friday 1 November. 1588. Mane At Breame.
D. Albeit we were willed (O Lord) to Cease: yet understanding the same warning
to have been meant for Enquiring of thy Mysteries and secret Determinations,
wherein we intend now not to deal, but in matters before and last moved, and
wherein we were not fully satisfied; that now we may more expressly be
certified, and that is of three things.

First for Vincent Seve. 1.


Secondly for Edmond Hilton, gone with the Ship toward Dansk. 2.


And Thirdly, as concerning help for money for the Lord Alb. Laskie. And herein
we 3.
crave either the ministry of Jubanladaech, or of Il, or whom soever else it
shall please thy Majesty to send.

E. K. A man with a black Gown appears with a Cap, falling in his neck, with
a big Book under his arm.

D. It should seem to be Aphlafben, my good Angel.

E. K. He has a white Robe under the black Gown, which goes all under his
Gown, trailing behind him: but, the white Robe traileth not; his Gown hangs
on him, as though it were falling off his shoulders behind.

D. In the Name of Jesus, the King of Glory, are not you Aphlafben my good
Angel, by the mercy and power of God, so assigned?

E. K. He looks very anciently.

..... Impire, Most high Glory, and thanks, throughout all Creatures, be unto
thee (O eternal God) first... Secondly redeeming, and Thirdly sanctifying the
World in his Creation, Now, and for ever: And as long as it shall be said
Osanna in the Quire of the High God.... Amen.

D...... Amen...... Amen...... Amen.

..... Manifold are the Mercies of God toward man, whose baseness deserves no
such grace and most unspeakable blessing: But such is God; what he justifies
himself, in the strength of his mercy, and heveth his honor with his own
holiness. For what is man, that can justify himself? or that has any thing,
wherein his bowels can rejoice? Wherein can he determine happiness to himself?
Or how can be compare himself with the trees that are fruitful? If the life of
man be sin, then is it hateful. But who is he that hates it? But even he which
is above, and is farthest from (...). Great, therefore (O man) are thy
miseries, when naturally thou art, and love to be hated of God, whose service
is Justice, and whose delight Peace. Consider therefore the Mercies of God,
through his loving kindness toward thy weakness: And acknowledge his Power
which makes those strong which have no force of themselves. Gather not up your
own inventions; But be faithful servants, performing the will of him which
sanctifies you with obedience: for of dust you are become flesh, and of flesh
the servants of sin; that at length you might be made free, through your own
consents in the mercies of him which has entered into your weakness, and
weighed out his blood for your Redemption: Even he which has paid the
uttermost penny of your Ransom. And why? Not to the intent you should brag of
your selves. But has charged in condition you should maintain justice (...)
the works of Righteousness. Unto whom is Heaven a seat? but unto such as are
faithful servants: Wherein the Dignity of your Master is known, of whom it is
said, Blessed are those that serve the God of Hosts. If anything, now, happen
unto you, that is the riches of your Master, Be thankful for it, and consider
his liberality: And how much the more he opens his Treasures to you, Be so
much the more thankful; For unto such belongs the ownership of more, and the
reward of such as are ten times faithful. Happy are these to whom it is said,
Thou good servant. Be no Gadders, for there is no house to the house of your
Master. Take heed also, least you minister his bread, to such as are his
enemies, and so, unworthy: for unto both these belongs the reward of
unfaithfulness. Be not high-minded, when you borrow your riches, lest the
moths enter in and corrupt your garments: for Pride is the deph of sin....
Cease not to rebuke the dishonourers * as, o.... Neither maintain the honor of
any other: For he that entertaineth you, has sealed you for others, And has
strengthened you with Authority, The Rod of his Justice. Generally these things
have been spoken unto you, and these Lessons are not yet to learn: But happy
are those whom God sanctifies; being unholy, And ten times blessed are the
Temples wherein his Holiness dwells. True it is as thou say: Generally
men are sanctified, the people of the Earth through all Nations, mystically:
through the mercies of God: But where the sanctification agrees not with the
thing sanctified, there enters wickedness. The Spirit of God is not
sanctified in Hell, Neither is his holy Temple beautified with the feet of the
unrighteous. It is written, Dogs honor not bread, neither defiled places
things that are holy: For as Hell dishonors Heaven, in respect of
unrighteousness: So, those that are wicked dishonor the virtuous, and such as
are truly holy, by society: and they stink of their wickedness. For it is
written, And Satan went from the presence of the Lord, leaving a stink behind
him. The light of the Sun is taken from the Earth, by the congealed cloud. The
sins of the people, and filthiness of places, are put between virtue and the
things Sacramental. Therefore, it is not true, that thou may lawfully call
upon the Name of God in unhallowed places.

D. I crave pardon for my ignorance, and error herein: But I required not to
know of the heavenly Mysteries; Only such things I demanded information of,
which not only were above humane power to answer, (and so might seem worldly
mysteries:) but also the true good news of them, might, many ways, be comfort
unto us and ours.

..... Behold in Israel, the rough stones are acceptable Altars, And the
stinking Caves have been known unto the Lord. And why? Because the place was
holy, neither this filthiness here, nor of any thing else created, hinders:
But the filthiness of the place and Country wherein they are defiled; for in
pure places, the defield are blessed. David sanctified Saul, with the presence
of his Anointing, and his Harp spoke out the wonders of the Lord. We come unto
you here, because the wild of God in you shines: But the filthiness of this
Country (...) the beauty of our message. Not that it is obscured in us, but
hindered through wick..... from you. Therefore flee the company of Drunkards,
and such as we..... their own understanding.

[E. K. He holds up his face and hands to heavenward.

..... Drunkards and such as defile themselves are apt to know things worldly;
not as wise men do: but that the World may be a plague to their iniquity. Thou
desire pardon, and calledst th... business a worldly mystery. But the
mysteries of this world are put under the feet of the faithful: which (overseen
through God) are generally comforted and directed. Then, therefore what care
remains either of the Seas, or of the slimy Earth? where, on the one side,
thou regardest the Ship, and on the other side Money. I say unto thee, God
corrects this world and the casualties thereof, lest those that are of thee,
should (...) his name.

D. Blessed be his holy Name, and his Power magnified for ever.

..... Thy goods are safe, And the Earth shall provide for you. Be not you
careful; for unto the just, yea even the hairs of his head are numbered. I am
silent for the World; for it is not my propriety: But notwithstanding ask and
thou shall not be denied.

D. As concerning Vincent Seve, his state and being, we are very desirous to be
informed.

E. K. Vincent Seve appears here, going down by Charing Cross. There is a
tall fellow with a cut berd with him in a skie-coloured cloak. Vincent has a
great ruff: This man waits on him with a Sword. He is going down into
Westminster Ward: He is now talking with a Gentleman on horseback, who has
five men following him, with Cape-cloaks short, and mustaches; And he on horse
back is a lean visaged man with a short Cloak and a gilt Rapier; his horse has
a Velvet foot-cloth.

E. K. In Vincent his forehead is written; Where power wants, rigor weakneth.

E. K. Vincent laugheth heartily; and shows two broad teeth before. He
holds a little stick within his fingers crooking. On his left hand he has a
skar of a cut, on the nether side of his hand. Vincent has a pair of boots
on, which come straight on his legs, and very close. A great many boats appear
at White Hall. One is graffing in the Garden there. Many people are now coming
out of Westminster Church. The Gentleman on horseback alighteth now, and goes
down toward the Court before Westminster Hall. He goes now up a pair of
stairs; and there stands a fellow with a white staff. Vincent is gone in with
him; The servant walks without. The servant goes to a Waterman there. The
Waterman asks him, whether that be he; that is the Poland Bishop? The servant
asks him, what has he to do? Now the servant goes from the Waterman. Now
comes one down the stairs, and says to the Serving-man, that his Master shall
be dispatched to morrow. The servant says, He is glad of it. Now all that Show
is vanished away.

Now come there two handsome men, they have Cloaks on their shoulders, and they
have hats on like Tankard Crowns.

One of these said,

A..... I understand by the King, that he bears him great favor.

The other said,

B..... But Kings when they become rich, wax Covetous. But do you think he will
come this way?

A..... Yea mary, if he be wise; for he shall find no better friendship than in
Denmark. Here is the fellow, he has brought a bag of Amber.

E. K. He takes the fellow by the shoulder, and says; Come away. He has been
an old doer.

E. K. Now they are gone, and that Show.

E. K. Now is the first man in the black Gown come again.

..... Thus you see, the World answers for the World. Be merciful. Flee privy
leakes; for the Devil is ready at every corner. Be Humble and Obedient. That
receiving the reward of true servants, you may rejoy (...) Enheritors of
everlasting freedom; The reward of such as are (...) end. God grant you may
(...). Amen.

E. K. Now comes the Vail again which all this while was gone behind the Stone.

D. Deo nostro Omnipotenti, misericordi, and justo sit omnis honor, laus, and
gratiarum actio, nune and in secula seculorum. Amen.

D. While we were at Bream, among many other things told and delivered to E. K.
as he was by himself, by a spiritual Creature, I know not who, nor of how good
estate, or what estate he was of: This parcel among them he held in writing,
and imparted to me; And I thought my pains not ill bestowed, to keep the same
in record here.

Ganilus that, in house most fiery fairer than the Sun,
Has honor great, says, give place, your former course is run;
Therefore first framed clouds unknown draw near with mighty storms,
Wherein such bodies lie obscured, or take ten thousand forms.
Your bellies strowting long disclose, and on the harlot earth,
Seem fair to man, as when the waves as Midwife help... r birth.
Twice shall the Sun put on the heavens, and once look quarter way, (...) and a
(...) shall be An 1586, in January.

And working (...) worlds, build up a City, where men say
The Holiest stood: And Bears bring in usurping fire at hand,
And people spread return, whose new built altars flaming stand.
Whilst such as strangers were Catesy cry, and bloody knife,
With privy shame defiled bekyes, a thing n... sometime rife.
From midnight unto noon, two parts and more shall slaughter feel,
And all the World from South, taste all, down force, of fire and steel.
Small wonder though the earth at shadows fighting nothing grieve,
When mighty Seas shall dry, and heavens lie, who can live?
That mortal eyes shall see a Temple built with precious Stones,
Or Creatures strange made new in sight, of old and long dried bones.
Or Angels dwell on earth: but I whose fiery fingers can
Unloose thrice sealed Books, and utter worlds unknown to man.
I see these cursed wights, whose borders lead thy journey on,
Shall with the thirtieth month, be bought, or sold, or fully gone.
And England perish first with Moths long harbor in her skirts,
The Spaniard lose their King, and France rebel and fall by spirts.
And holy man ten days besieged at home, with these days whelps,
Till he at length made free by sudden force of virtues helps.
The Polish King has played, and friendly man shall then bear sway,
Amongst earthly friends, and such as hope of former faith decay.
At last wear highest Crown, if fall from virtue makes no loss,
And midst this coil to come in space of new come lay for toss.
Then (...), Come other times most Holy, and a Kingdom shall,
From Heaven come, and things forthwith again to Order call.
Saturday 2. Novembris we rod from Bream, two great mile to a Nunnery called
Ostarhold.

Sunday Novembris 3. we came to Fure or Fureden.

Monday November. 4. we came to bed to Harburgh.

Tuesday November. 5. we came to Buxtenhaden, and there by 9 of the clock in the
morning we took waterin two great Skutes or Boats, Horse-wagon, and our stuff
and all, and ferryed down the little water, till we entered the Elb, and so
crossed straight over to Blanken nasen: there dmed, and after dinner by coaches
we came to Hamburgh, where my Lord lay at the English house, and we at another
(...), a widows house.

Wensday November. 6. we rid to (...) 4 mile from Hamburgh, a little Village,
having left my Lord behind: and also missing my Children and servants, which
were gone before us an other way to my great grief: till by midnight, by
sending out messengers to listen and enquire after them, I heard of them. I, my
Wife, Rowland, Nurse, and Myrcopskie, my Lord his man.

Thursday, November. 7. We came to Lubek, and were there at Inn, at the sign of
the Angel, or rather St. Michael, at a Widow her house, a very honest Hostess.

Saturday, November. 9. I received Letters from the Lord Albert Laskie, of the
English men's ill dealing, and consulting with the Townsmen of Hamburgh for my
stay, and conveying back again into England, etc.

Wednesday, 13. Novembris, 1583. Mane hora 9. At Lubek.
Per horam fere, per intervalla, varias fecimus petitiones and saepe oravimus.

At length appeared a sword, two edged, fiery, or rather bloody, and a bunsh of
rags hanging at the top of it. The rags seemed of Woollen, and Linen Cloth:
like a bundle of Rags gathered out of a Taylers shop. The sword stood upright
in a manner, but leaning from E. K. his face, though it seemed to smite at E. K.

A voice. So be it, (O Lord) for thon art mighty. Be it so unto them: For they
have embraced an Harlot, and have forgotten thy jealousy.

E. K. The svvord shakes mightily. Many are the Harlots that svvarm upon the
earth, and innumerable are their Children, and such as they foster. Their
revvard is ready.

E. K. The sword now shakes again mightily.

..... He that enters into the house of the wicked is defiled: but he that
consents with an Harlot is accursed. He that delights in her secrets, shall
be stabbed. And Leprosy shall dwell in his house for ever.

D. O Lord, I trust, this respects none of us, in common sense to be
understood.

..... He that delights in light, loves not himself, but desires the love of
him, that illuminateth: But, thus says God, I will not dally with you: Neither
shall you handle me, as you have done. For, your Horedom, is wilful: and your
vanities worse. But this I leave amongst you, that you shall know that I am
righteous. For, he that despises me, is accursed; and unto him that
dissembleth my fashion, are miseries without number. So, unto them, that
enterinto the house of blasphemy, is vengeance ready at hand.

D. O Lord, what is this? Man is but earth, where the heavens dwell: neither
are the works of man acceptable, but with righteousness.

E. K. There appears a man with a Bible about his neck, like a Doctor; and he
stands miserably in fire. And so likewise appeared diverse other with Bibles
about their necks, and they in fire likewise. Still come flames from the earth,
and increase the flames of these men about them. There appears, and
endless.... me, most terrible with fire, and other most hideous shows.....
They be suddenly gone away. And all these men be now no more in sight.

A voice. Happy are those that see, and can remember. Blessed are those that
hear, and are not forgetful.

D. These words, and shows, O Jesu, make evident what......

E. K. All is gone, except the sword which stands in a Cloud, and there
comes a hand and sets a seal upon the sword.

A voice. I brought you from iniquity, to the intent you might be purified: But
the more I cleanse you, the more you are defiled.

..... I have offered of old, and it shall be told. I have promised, and it
shall be performed.

You have not kept my Commandments. And therefore you shall be plagued. He that
goes out of the way, shall receive the reward of error. For stragglers, are
spotted people. And none can be blessed, but such as dwell in the Tabernacle of
righteousness. But behold, I will tell it unto you but with greater hardness.
And I will make you know me, before I visit you in kindness. For thus says
Satan. Lo, they err still. Do Justice for thy glory sake. They enter into the
houses of Idols: And laugh with blasphemers. They are silent, when thy name is
blasphemed. Deal with them as a God: or else thou art not righteous. Therefore,
be free from Satan, that he may praise your righteousness. Yea, that he may
say, as he has said. Let me touch them. Until then; I will be just. I will
not forget this wickedness, till you be made clean. For, behold, I have sealed
it: and therefore it must be finished. For what is sealed of me, comes to
pass.

D.

A voice. He that dissembleth the image of Christ, is a liar.

D.

..... Now comes a grave man, all clothed in white, with a Mytre upon his head.

..... The God of peace is a comforting Medicine, to such, as delight in him.
The peace of the world, is the image of God: God and man, which is Jesus
Christ, the son of the living God: Which knit with the father in the spirit of
truth, (proceeding from them both..... everlasting will,) opened his mercies to
his Apostles, replenishing them fully and mightily with the will of the father,
to the comfort of the world: Which, made messagers thereof, have delivered to
the Church, full and perfect Statutes (as the Will of him, whereunto she is
united and married) to be kept inviolable, and without transgression. This
Will, Covenant, or Decree, (sealed unto the end of the world in the number of
the faithful) whosoever breaks, or dissembleth, is accursed, or damned.
Therefore says the word of God unto you: You have run astray, you have entered
into the houses of Idols. I have brought you from fire, but you are entered into
flames. And why? Because you defile your selves with the wickedness of
deceivers: Whose images you saw affirmatively, though not verily: Continually
overwhelmed with daily, and inextinguible flames: Continuing even so long, as
their error is exalted; Yea, even in the professors thereof, to their eternal
damnation. For as Christ, and his Doctrine is light and truth: So seem the
impositions of Satan to agree, or take unto themselves, shapes or likenesses
of the true image of him that saves: Whereby he trusts in himself under the
color of meekness, into the company of the faithful: Devouring their Souls
with ravening, dissembling, and false likelyhoods of truth, unable to be
decided by man. Happy are those that believe them not: For he, even he it is,
that is a liar, and is oldest in deceit. But as the father is eternal: So is
the son eternal, which eternity of the father and the son, is the holy Ghost
eternal, proceeding equally, as the finger of God, and spirit of truth, to the
general workmanship of Gods determination knit together, three Persons. [E. K.
He makes a great reverent cursie] in this omnipotency by spiritual
illumination, and through the holy Ghost delivered unto the Apostles, as the
pledge of God his mercy and promise, is always certainly linked, joined, and
engraffed into the society of those D Ecclesia Christi.
that fulfill the will of the highest perfectly, and without error, whose
strength shall continue, and glory branch out, even unto the end of this
world, and beginning of comfort. Therefore, believe: For the spirit of truth
works wonders, raises the dead, and has power to forgive sins. Through the
power of him, unto whom it is ma..... For, as Christ has all power in heaven
and in earth delivered..... So has he delivered all power in heaven and earth
to his true Church. Therefore she cannot err. For where power is without
measure, error has no number: Believe not therefore those that lie: saying,
The Church of God is infected with errors. For the offenses of few are not
counted error, but unrighteousness: Neither can the straggling feet of a few
drunken, bring infamy D (...), staggeting.
to the whole house.

D.

..... It lies not in my power to deliver you, or reconcile you from death and
Hell: The tormentry and filthiness of the world, and the wrath of God. But
yet, (That Cloud, set aside) which is between me and you) I speak afar of to
you, saying, The Justice of God, is vengeance it self: Neither has it any
contrary, but even in the midst, and Center of it self: Which is the drop and
liquor of his eternal, great, and incomprehensible Majesty of himself, his
mercy: Which, even in the midst of Justice is found out, by sorrowful
repentance, and reconciliation: Not in that it is necessary with God: But that
it is a Medicine applicable, and most healthful to the infirmities of that
man, that coveteth to be healed, released, or recovered from his soars. This
is it, that must comfort you. For, as Justice is the reward of sin, so is
mercy the reward of repentance. But mercy is the Center of light: and Justice
to be cast off, and shut within darkness. Therefore, be not negligent.

D. This whoredom, how is it committed, or of whom?

..... I teach the..... Where thy habitation was, error rained, God called thee
from it: and delivered thee by many, but unknown ways: means not to be uttered
by man. These places also are shut up from the favor of God. For their
obedience is counterfeited, and their prayers, outcries. Therefore has the
Lord opened him unto you that invented the vanity: that you might be partakers
of his knowledge, and secret judgments of the wicked. Here also you entered,
and are newly defiled: For the Devil entered in, and found him waking: And lo,
he entered yet, and he was not asleep. But he was happy, being kindled with
desire of God, else had the judgment of his body for this world been
fulfilled. Wickedness follows him: and the spirits of evil counsel are at
hand. You shall feel the sorrow thereof, and your family shall be discomforted.
But pray unto God, that it fall not out, that Satan goes about: Neither that
it come to pass, which he has power to execute. For, this token signifies
your miseries, and it is a sign of that, which is given to execution.

I have said.

The peace of God be restored unto you.

D.

E. K. Here is the man again.

..... Two words and I have done. Nothing is plainer than that which is spoken:
Nothing certainer than that which is appointed. Be you penitent, that God may
be merciful. This is all I have to say. Wash your selves, and I also will make
you clean. Resist you Satan diligently, and I will help you mightily.

D. O Lord that seal to the Sword and rags break off.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D.

E. K. Now he is here again.

..... This cloud is a separation betwixt this, yea this glorified company and
you. Look not for any light, whilst this darkness is present. Behold, my mouth
faltreth, and my lips are stayed: But pray you, and you shall not be rejected.
For the stronger you be, the mercifuller is God, and the weaker is, and shall
be, your adversary. Love together; Serve God together: Be of one heart
together. Always preach God. I am tied.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Misericordia and pax Dei sit super nos nunc and semper.

Amen.
Friday, November. 15. hora mane. Lubek.
E. K. The cloud appears, and opens, so that the Sword may be seen.

D. O Lord deal mercifully with us, as thy children, to be corrected with rod
or whip, and not with thy enemies, with sword to cut or wound us. Let not Satan
force thee to justice more mightily, than thy fatherly goodness can incline
thee to show mercy upon us.

E. K. An hand comes and nippeth off an inch of the top of the Sword, and some
of the rage are fallen down; some hanging on the hilts of the Sword, and some
are thrust through with the Sword. Now the Sword is shut up again in the Cloud.

D. Have mercy on us, O Lord, and deal with us as thy younglings and novices.

E. K. Now come in an eleven, all like Noble men. One of them has a regal Cap,
and a Gown faced with Sables. The Cap is like a Polonian Cap, but trimmed up
with rich Sables. Now comes one and brings a very rich Chair, beset with
precious Stones: Four of the Company set down this Chair, for that Principal
man. He that brought the Chair went away. They all do lovv obedience to this
principal. He sits down, and puts his Govvn over. He is a goodlier man
than the Lord A. L. The 4 pluck a thing like a Canopy over the Chair, and they
put a round Cushion under his feet. This Principal speaks as follovveth.

..... Pluck up thy heart and be merry, pine not thy Soul away with inward
groanings; for I will open unto thee the secrets of Nature, and the riches of
the World, and withal give thee such direction, that shall deliver thee from
many infirmities, both of body and mind: Ease thee of thy tedious labor, and
settle thee where thou shall have comfort.

D. Thanks be given unto the Highest, now, and ever, of all his Creatures.

..... Why do thou... within thy thought: Have thou not need of Counsel?

D. Yes, God knows; for I am half confounded.

..... Then first d... with thy self to rest thee, for this Winter. Secondly
open thy mind to desire such things as may advance thy Credit, and enrich thy
Family: Reap unto thee many friends, and lift thee up to honor; For I will
stir up the minds of Learned men, the profoundest in the World that they shall
visit thee. And I will disclose unto you such things, as shall be wonderful,
and of exceeding profit. Moreover, I will put to my hands, and help your
proceedings, that the World may talk of your wisdom hereafter. Therefore
wander not farther into unknown places, contagious, the very seats of death for
thee, and thy children, and such as are thy friends. If thou enquire of me
where, and how. Every where: or how thou will thy self. For thou shall
forthwith become rich, and thou shall be able to enrich Kings, and to help such
as are needy. Wast thou not born to use the commodity of this World? Were not
all things made for man's use?

D. Will you give me leave to speak?

..... What can thou speak hereunto? Will thou thank me for this?

D. All thanks be unto the King of Glory, etc.

D. Is it your meaning that we shall stay here, and go no farther with the Lord
Albert Laskie?

..... Yes, in the Summer; when it is more fair.

D. I beseech you, Where would you, that we should make our.... this Winter?

..... Where you will. Are you so unwise to go with him now. Let him go before,
and provide for himself, that he may the better provid for you. The weather
will be hard, and the travel unfit for children. If thou covet to live in ease,
heap not up thy wives sorrow.

D. I desire to live in quiet, that my spirit may the better attend to the
service of God

..... Well, Tarry you, and my promise shall be quickly performed. I will not
halt with you. How say you Sirs?

[ E. K. He speaks to his Company, who make cursies, and say nothing.]

D. I beseech you to appoint an apt place: This you see is no fit place.

..... I will stir thee up such friends, as shall content thee. As for dwelling
places thou shall bestow them. Well, you are contented.

D. Is it your will, that in this Town we should part from the Lord Albert
Laskie?

..... What should you do else? Are you mad men? Will you run headlong into
danger? wilfully?

D. I beseech you, shall this be nothing prejudicial to our former doings, and
order already taken and decreed for our going together?

..... What, is this contrary to reason? Well you are content.

D. As the will of the Highest is, so is mine and none other.

..... Sirrah, do you see this sword? I will be a surety for this (I warrant
thee) also.

D.

..... Your brother is clapped up in prison, How like you that? Your
housekeeper I mean.

D. And why I pray you?

..... For that, that thou may be ashamed of.

D. What is that?

..... They examine him: They say, that thou have hid diverse secret things. As
for thy Books, thou may go look them at leisure. It may be, that thy house
may be burnt for a remembrance of thee too. Well if they do, so it is: if not,
as thou will. I have told thee my fancy, and given thee my counsel, offered
thee my help, and desired to do thee good: The choice is thine.

D. O Lord the Author of all truth, and director of such as put their trust in
thee, I most humbly beseech thee to consider these premises, thus to me
propounded. If they be true, and from thee, confirm them: If they be illusions,
and not from thee, disprove them. For, hardly in my judgment, they do or can
agree with our former precepts and order taken by thee.

A voice..... He that ascends up to the top of the hill, let him believe: For
until he come thither, let him do his labor.

O Lord, I doubt of these things, and promises of ease, wealth, and honor.

A voice...... Judge the Truth, by the last Action.

O Lord, What is that Action?

A voice...... Wensdaies Action.

This Cloud (said the voice of the Lord) is put betwixt us and you: What
therefore may come between? Now judge you.

D. I suspect the whole apparition of the eleven to be an illusion. O Lord
confirm my judgment or disprove it.

A voice...... The Spirit of the Lord is not amongst you.

D. What misery are we then in? O Lord, Mercy, Mercy.

A voice...... Dispute not with God, where whoredom is great.

D. O Lord, This whoredom we understand not.

A voice...... Pray daily, with repentance, that this cloud may be taken away,
and this sword diminished. For the Seal cannot be broken, until Satan have done
his uttermost; yea the uttermost of his malice. For it is granted him and he
must strike. But pray you unto God, that the sword may be made shorter, or
plucked out of the hilt, that in striking he want power. For your sin is
abominable, and a sevenfold offense in the sight of the Lord.

D. What this whoredom is (God knows) we understand not perfectly. If the
Spirit of God be not with us, how can our prayers be acceptable?

A voice...... Thus says the Lord, Turn unto me and be sorry for your sins,
and let my Angels be witness thereof. For I swear by my self, that my Justice
shall hang over you: And when I punish you next, I will raze you from the face
of the earth. Therefore, Vow your selves unto me, and make your vessels clean;
for your habitations in my sight are nothing: neither is the substance whereof
I framed you acceptable. I am the Spirit of Truth and Understanding, and will
not be dashed in pieces with worldlings; Neither use I to dwell in defiled
places. For my Sanctuary is holy, and my Gates are without spot. And with me
there dwells no unrighteousness.

D. Lord, is it thy will we shall go with Albert Laskie to Lasco?

A voice. The Lord (...), What I have said, is true. Who rebukes me, saying my
words are untrue? The correction of him that reigns is mighty; who has
numbered it? But to his destruction. Be you holy, that my hand may be weak.

D. O Lord, the fear of thy punishment astonieth my heart: and uncertainty of
it in time, and place, does also increase my grief, etc.

A voice. The fool says in his heart: Oh, how great is thy punishment over me.
Teach me the place of thy correction: And where thou will chastise me. Who is
he that desires to meet God his vengeance, or the punishment of him that
confounds the damned? Make your hearts clean, and wipe the sin from amongst
you: And desire to be forgiven, for miserable are they that meet with
vengeance, or that know the place where she takes up her Harbor.

D. Gloria, Honor, Laus and gratiarum actio perennis sit Deo nostro (...) Nobis
vero a Deo Patre, propter Jesum Christum in Spiritu Sancto, sit Misericordia,
Pax and Consolatio in via virtutis and veritatis.

Amen.
Monday, November. 18. Hora 9. Mane. Lubek.
E. K. There appears the Cloud, wherein the sword remains enclosed.

D. O Lord, be merciful unto us, and rigorously execute not thy Justice upon
us, thy weaklings: Nor suffer Satan to Triumph, where thy glory is expected,
etc. Converte nos Deus salutaris noster, and averte iram tuam a nobis, etc.

E. K. Now comes one in a white Coat, not perfectly to be seen, but as if he
were seen through a Cipresse; and said as follows.

..... Who is he that leads out the Lion to prey? or who is he that lifts up
the feet of the young ones to devour? Who feeds the smell of the roaring
Bear, or has taught him to remember the place of his recreation? Has he also
taught the fields, to put forth their voices: and the mighty Trees to flourish
in pride? Are not the Hills glad when they bring forth Corn? When the Valleys
rejoice with threefold waters. The beasts of the wilderness have they not
known Caves: and unto such as are made tame, is there not a..... understanding?
For, who is he that teaches them, to make subject themselves, which are
ravening, or to bridle such as are of their frowardness? Even he it is, that
looks down from Heaven, and beholds the earth, and measures with his feet,
saying,

It is done.

Which enters also into the houses of men, and listeneth to that which they
call wonders. Which opens the gates of his knowledge with his own finger; And
which says unto you: How are ye become wise? Or from whence is your
understanding, are your hearts become Caves to send out Thunders? Or why are
your spirits thus vexed with holiness? Are you not a stiff-necked people, and
such as are despised? Are you not poor, and therefore hated. Since, therefore,
you are become Bastards, who teaches your lips to speak of my Church? Or has
taught you to urge me with mine own spirit?

Behold, I am mighty,

Because I am the joy of the faithful. For I am called the Temple of the Holy
ones, and the beauty of Israel. The spirit of man cries out, and pierces into
the Lord, as the swiftness of an Arrow: And he heard them. Therefore, thus
does the wind of Cabon open her mouth, and swears by the Jaspar Pillar that
stands in the Temple of Reconciliation, and it Thundereth, and is said,

Be it done.

And behold, the doors open, and the Holy Altar is covered. The beasts with
many feet bring up burnt-offerings: And there is a sacrifice that ascends up,
and it is a mighty wind, such as has not been since the beginning of days.
Open your ears therefore, and prepare your selves to hear: For this..... is
mighty, for it is of peace. My Justice (says the Lord) is sealed, and you have
sinned mightily: My arm is stretched forth, and I must be magnified: For
vengeance is gone forth, and is appeared already. But who is he that resists
the venom of the earth, or instructs man to avoid the Darts of poison? He
says unto you. Thus it is, because I have sanctified you, and have made you
holy to the earth: Therefore will I help you: But not as you desire: For your
prayers and unrighteous life shall become bands of yarn. And I will make a
contention betwixt Satan and you. If therefore you labor hard, and open
fervent minds, such as are not of the world, and can bind this sword and
cloud of vengeance fast from amongst you: Be it so unto you, for it is your own
righteousness. For Satan has reviled, and has said,

Then shall thou see.

But so long as they are Holy, and become righteousness, they are become safe:
but when they fall, Satan enters in. For the power of righteousness is become
a Conqueror, if it fight mightily. And Satan shall be confounded by a
righteous judgment.

For I have decreed it: and by my self I swear it.

I will be a righteous Judge betwixt you. Therefore, take heed you sinnot not,
nor go into death: For great is the fall of vengeance. Be not therefore defiled
with the filthiness of the wicked: Note.
Neither delight in such as counterfeit truth. For I am one fire that judges
all things. And I delight in people that are joyful with one Banquet. For those
that fill their bellies at the houses of strangers: Become enemies to me.

For I have said,

My spirit is holy, and my anointed righteous. Let the earth rise up, and
continue in her wickedness: Yea, let them say, we have found the anointed: But
my continuance is truth, and they are become liars. For my spirit works, and
behold, there are wonders in the sight of men. And wheresoever I dwell, such is
my power. Be therefore of One house, that you may eat together: Least you
banquet too much, and so become deceivers. I am one, and am known by One: And
unto One, Which One I am married unto. (And I am merciful) Whosoever abides
not therein, is an Adulterer. Avoid you darkness, for righteousness is
present, and my spirit enters. Blessed are such as believe. Amen.

Even to the, Amen.

E. K. He is gone. There appear some bands linked together, as Chains about
the Cloud.

D. Welcome be these bands.

E. K. He is here again;..... and says..... eth.

..... Why are you become dull? Why are you yet ignorant? See thou these.....
[He points, and speaks to E. K.]

E. K. I see them, I thank God.

..... These bonds are your own righteousness: And as they appear before the
Lord, so shall they bind vengeance together: But if you become weak you fall.
But pray, that you fall not: For they are the days of sorrow. The spirit of
God is twofold; present Jah agian, and present Nah gassapalan. Therefore take
heed. For, in the first, you are blessed: and it may return. But he that is
filled with the second, shall be drunken for ever. The first is power present,
and a comfort inmeasurable, glorifying, and strengthening all things that are
agreeable to it: But when they differ, it returns. The other is the spirit of
the first, and the second, Almighty, and everlasting, unmeasurable, and
inexplicable: drowning the will of man, that becomes strong in the fountain of
gladness and understanding: true wisdom her self, and not returning. Pray,
therefore, that you may be perfect: and that you may be seasoned: For it is a
salt that savoureth to the end.

The peace of God be amongst you.

E. K. He cast off his Cloudy Lawn, and went away. He seemed to be (...).

D. Yet we beseech you more expressly, and particularly to deal with us, etc.

..... It is said...... It is written...... It is true.

Cease.

D. Gloria, Laus, Honor, Triumphus and Jubilatio sit Deo nostro omnipotenti:
Nunc and semper.

Amen.
Wednesday, November. 20. Mane hor. 11. Lubek.
D. As thou have of thy mercies (O Lord) given us some show of thy favor bent
toward us: so are we desirous to understand how our Letters have wrought upon
our friend his heart to join with us to call for thy mercies, pardon and help:
for if they have, Then do we hope, our bands (of acceptable life) whereby to
bind vengeance prepared and intended against us, shall wax more and stronger:
by thy great mercy and help to thy well-pleasing in thy service hence forward.

E. K. The Cloud and bonds appear: But the bands appear fewer.

D. O Lord, is our state since yesterday become weaker with thee? And shall it
so narrowly be exacted? Thy will be done, who art holy, just, and most wise, O
God.

E. K. The bonds about the Cloud, now are only two; which before were six, or
seven. The bonds seem of a smoky ashy color, spirally going about the Cloud.

..... Judgment is the end of Justice: distributing and delivering also to
every thing, seen, heard, At length a (...).
or determined to his proper end uprightly. Are you able to deny this?

D. The end of our actions, words, and thoughts may seem twofold: One of us
intended, and meant to be good: The other not depending upon our weening, but
according to exact wisdom, what is the end of the same; here deemed the proper
end, if I understand right.

A voice. Lo, judgment is the end of Justice in things that are handled
uprightly: whereof you find the Omnipotency and Truth of him that judges
Omnipotently: Which beholding your Combat, has girded himself together, and
beholds the Lists, and be judges uprightly: For, be has sworn it. Arm not
your selves therefore as weaklings: But provide as mighty and courageous
Soldiers, for your own defense. I am without corruption (says the Lord) and
lean not with the winds of Basannah.

D. O Lord, give me leave to request thee, etc.

A voice. But I am just, and judgment her self. Enter not therefore into my
holy places: Neither kneel down before my sanctuaries; saying, the Lord has
Chosen us, He lives, and it is true for ever. For I have said, It may be
undetermined. I will also see, whether you be strong inwardly, or privily
rotten. For with the world your weakness is great. Whosoever overcomes shall
rejoice. But I will be a God in my Covenant and will hold on my promise: Fight
therefore as it becomes you, and cast off the world. Make flesh subject, and
strangle your Adversary. For unto such belongs the entrance into my Chambers,
and the use of my will, as the Horn of my glory. For it is written, light
dwells not in darkness: Neither has darkness comprehended any light: For
darkness is the Cave of error, and the reward of sinners. Thus says he,
which beholds your sorrows: And it is a fight for many days, which appears
neither in the one, nor in the other: nor gives he answer until the end.

E. K. There is one come in like a Ghost, and he takes all the hangings away,
which beautified the place like to Curtains. Now all the sides of the stone are
darkish; and the Cloud stands in the very middle thereof. Now the bands seem
brighter then..... because the place is so darkish.

D. O Lord, many days Combat is assigned us. And forasmuch as Militia est vita
hominis super Terram, we are now in a great uncertainty of our Combat ending.

E. K. There stands the number of 40. upon a great Labell, and nothing else.

D. This 40. (O Lord) what betok eneth it, days, weeks, or years? Well:
Whatsoever it be, Blessed be the name of the Highest. Our God, King, and Father.

E. K.

D.

E. K. Now is one come in very brave, like a Preacher; I take him to be an evil
one.

D. Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini. This Preacher-like Creature, says.


E. K. He says nothing; Not so much as, Amen.

..... Are you so foolish to think that the power of God will descend into so
base a place?

E. K. The power of God descending, descends to beautify the place; And
whatsoever he beautifieth, he does it mercifully: And so through his mercy he
descends among us, that put our trust in his mercies.

..... It is true; But, unto those that are righteous.

D. Christ his coming has been to save sinners. His conversation was among
sinners, halt, lame, blind, and diseased. So likewise: Now our frailty, or
impurity will not exclude his presence, or the Ministry of his faithful
Angels.

..... What, in this base manner?

D. Do you mislike the manner?

..... Can any that has any drop of wisdom like it?

D. Are you wise?

..... Or else I could not see thy imperfections.

D. Which be they? Accuse me.

..... What greater imperfection, then to imagine much more believe, that the
Angels of God, will, or may descend into so filthy a place, as this
corruptible stone is? Considering the clearness, and bigness of the air, or
the places that are prepared in man's body, for such entrances.

D. Who causes thee to come here?

..... Thy folly.

D. Art thou good, or bad?

..... I am good, or else I could not see the bad.

D. Ergo, thou art a liar, for thou sayd'st, No good Angel, would, or might
come here into this stone.

D. Thus will God be glorified against wicked Satan, and his Ministers. His
fetch was very subtle: As, To bring in doubt all the Actions performed in this
ftone. What can thou answer?

E. K. He says nothing: Neither can he say any thing. He seems to be a very
foolish Devil.

D. Mendacem oportet esse memorem. Now be packing hence.

..... I will abide here.

D. Where God will permit thee, there may thou be: But we will (as now)
cease: And we thank God highly of this comfort and victory: We beseech him,
that we may as prosperously overcome all other Diabolical assaults or
sophistical, or untrue perswafions: and all his Temptations. Amen.

Glory, Honor, power, and praise be to our Almighty and living God, the Lord
of Hosts, Jehovah, now and ever.

Amen.
Saturday, November. 23. a Meridie hora 1. Lubek.
E. K. Here appears the same bad one, sitting, who last appeared. The Cloud
with the sword appears at last: with two wreaths on one side; and two on the
other, spirally. This Creature takes the cloudy pillar, and throws it from
him diverse times.

He says. Call as long as thou will, I will keep thee for seeing any more
sights here.

D. Or Lord, attend unto thy glory: Attend unto thy honor, regard the
arrogance of this Luciferine brag against thy younglings expressed.

D. And of the Lord, Alb. Laskie, etc.

..... He shall come to destruction, as thou and thine to miserable beggary:
Because he has consented to them that are Ministers of iniquity, spirits of
falsehood.

E. K. He looks on a bare book, when he says thus.

..... The power of God enters into the Soul of man, and does visit the
Chambers of his understanding: opens his will with power. The spirits of
darkness are ready for every place, and can deceive, saying, This is of God.
Unto these you have (...): and have sworn it as a Covenant between God and you.
But I am come from God: and am entered indeed, and will make you hungry in your
own foolishness, that you may become wise. None has entered here with power
but I. And I will tarry here. And I will be a wall betwixt you, and your
imaginations: and betwixt those that have tempted you, and your weakness. For
thou have called upon God: and he has heard thee, and I am he that says so
unto thee...... Laws of salvation are ready, follow them. The way into
darkness is wide, and easy, and where light is, it increases joy. Be thou
therefore warned by me.

Nay, I have said.

D. Thou have said here, That thou art God, is that true? For thou have said,
Thou have called upon God, and he has hard thee: And I am he, that says so
unto thee.

..... I see thee: And thy wisdom is nothing: Make of me what thou can, I am
the messager of God.

..... Avoid darkness, avoid darkness, avoid darkness.

E. K. He plucketh down violently (in the stone) the Clouds, and all becomes
light in the stone.

..... Ly here with thy fellows. Those that are of wisdom, let them understand.

D. O Sapientia patris aeterni, illumina mentes nostras, ut tibi serviamus in
sanctitate, and Justitia toto vitae nostrae tempore. Amen.

..... Carmathar, a Knight of the Rhodes, was thirteen years deceived with one
that appeared (as he thought) in glory and wisdom in the image of Christ.
Antony was beguiled in diverse ways. The Prophets and Apostles have doubted in
many things; But because they faithfully believed they were not rejected. Their
hope became fruitful, and they blessed with understanding from above. If so be
also, you repent, and be sorry in that you have yielded unto the instruments of
wickedness: and follow on, as they your fathers have done, you shall also
become wise: But I say unto you, That which you have consented unto is amiss,
and false, worse then error it self. For, where have you tasted any fruit out
of that Doctrine. How poor is the power, that has been long told of in you.
You have forgotten your own knowledge, and are become of seers, blind: such as
grope their way. Such end, such beginning. For the end (...) from the
beginning: and is become a means in it self, to bring all things to pass. But
neither the end nor beginning of such things as you have handled has been
perfect, or probable: But a deceit, comprehending the image of falsehood: Yea,
much more the traps and snares into wickedness; which deserves destruction
eternally.

If this may advise you, Be it so. If these examples and probable arguments be
sound, Then necessarily you ought of duty to be counseled by me: But I have
opened my mouth and told you. Be it unto you, according to your disposition.

D. Be it unto us according to the mercies and loving kindness of the Highest;
into whose hands we commit our selves, all our doings, and intents.

..... That is well said... God be with you.

E. K. He is gone, and in the place where he stood the likeness of a little
Circle, as if a print were made with a Thimble-brim.

D. Soli Deo, Honor omnis, and Gloria.

Amen.
Monday 25. November. Mane, 8 Lubek.
E. K. Here appears straight way, (at the first looking) the same fellow E.
K. A. L. D.
that last spoke, and left the print of the little Circle behind him.

D. Orabam diu ad Deum, ut Arbiter esset inter istos. A.... number.... lum
confugimus in tempore necessitatis, etc. A te (O Deus) solo pendemus, etc.

D. Sedebamus quasi in triangulo, and se convertebat versus A. L.

..... Thou, O man, awake, shake off forgetflnesse: Lift not up thy self so
much; But close up thine ears against these deluded deluders, which carry thee
(...) into folly, and transform thee to a shadow: By whose counsel thou art
become dishonored, and by whom thou shall become a spot in the Book of (...)
Call to remembrance the Histories of the whole World, Political and
Ecclesiastical. Inquire of the Learned that have settled their judgments in
the Book of God. Open thine eyes, and behold, if any of the Prophets or
forefathers (men grounded in wisdom and deep understanding) have yielded
themselves to this unrighteousness, believing liars; consenting to untruths,
and lastly dishonouring the Name of God. Then call to mind thine own estate,
thy flourishing of thy youth, and possibilities, wherein thou may be made
perfect. Which if thou truly do, Then banish this dishonor to God and his
Angles, listen not to these S..... ersity: For the Syrenes are awake, and their
song is to destruction. I am sent from God, as a Messenger to call thee home;
for thou dishonourest God mightily. Behold thou shall be made contemptible, and
become a laughing stock. Thy honor shall be defaced, and thy posterity spotted
with ignominy. Moreover, such as are thy friends shall shake their heads,
saying, What wise man has thus been overcome? What is he that is become
foolish? Thou may desire it, and consent, as before; But I am a stumbling
block betwixt you, and will dwell in all Elements for your purposes.

E. K. He holds up his hands toward D and says,.. Nay I have told him truth.

E K. He has now gotten him a Chair, and sits down. Thou shall be hanged,
he said to E K. Declina, a malo and Fac (...). Psalm.


D. If it be truth, then it is a token that God is very merciful unto us; and
that we are in his favor highly, to give us this warning to avoid evil. Now
rests the other part, How we shall attain to good, and wisdom, from God; such
as by the true and perfect use of his creatures, we might do him some
acceptable service, with true obedience and humility, etc.

E. K. One comes to him, and says..... He goes about to take you a liar.

E. K. He goes away, and comes again.

E. K. This man which thus came and went away, and comes again, is all in
white; he has a silver Crown on his head: he speaks as follows....

..... Deny that you have done, Confess it to be false, Cry you have offended,
And let the Angels of God see you do so, (that they may carry up your prayers)
so shall you become righteous; But why do thou write words of contempt
against us? For One in our number is All; And we are, all, One. Believe us; for
of our selves we have no power to instruct you, but to deliver you the
Commandment of God. Rent your clothes, pluck those blasphemous books in pieces;
And fall down before the Lord: for he it is, that is Wisdom. I have done for
this time.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Quis est discretor Spirituum?

E. K. Now he comes in again and speaks.

..... Oh, you are a Learned man...... Truth in the second: He it is that
discrectly judges all things. If his discretion be given to you, thank God.

D. Illi ergo Committemus hanc causam: ab illo hoc donum petentes and
expectantes. Nos interim pie in Christo vivere intendimus.

E. K. He is become a great pillar of Crystal higher than a Steeple. He
ascends upward in clouds, and the little circle remains.

D. Gloria, laus, honor, and gratiarum actio sit Deo nostro omnipotenti Trino
and uni, nunc, and in secula seculorum. Amen.

Tuesday Decembris 10. After Diner, we removed from Lubek, and the Lord Alb.
Laskie went by Coach to Lord Christopher, Duke of Meckelburgh.

Thursday night we lay at Wismar. 11. December. vel 12.

Saturday morning we came to Rostoch. 14. Decembris.

Monday December. 16. Mane hora 10. Rostoch.
E. K. He is here, that said, he would dwell in omnibus Elementis, etc.

D.

..... I came from the fountain of light, where is no error nor darkness, and
have Power, (because it is given me from the Highest) Which, (Lo) is grown and
become a mighty Rock. For it is said of me, Behold I will visit them that put
their trust in me, with a comfortable strength in the time of need; For my Rock
is an everlasting strength, and the Hills of my countenance endure for ever. If
then I be the Countenance of God, and a piercing fire sent out as a flame, not
only with his great mercy, but with his good will, and that toward you,
overwhelmed, not cast down, but almost for ever buried in a lake of ignorance,
and inquenchable flame, such as consumes with ignorance, deceit it self, and a
provocation too manifest, and apparent destruction: If I then with this message
(being the message of truth) my self a mean.... sufficent Order for the
publishment thereof, can, nor may..... as of... n I am) vehemently despised
(the fruits of a good Conscience, notwithstanding steadfast) Then is he of no
power of whom I am.... because it is written. Such as rise up against my
Spirit, I will destroy them in the midst of the same fire, and will deliver
their ashes to the winds for a memory of their wickedness. But he is just,
and is without measure: knows what is, and what is to come, which has thus
said of you. Behold their ignorance is greater, and they esteem not truth. Lo I
have heard them, in the midst of their corruption; yet they are become
faithless: I minister unto them, but in vain; But behold their mouths are
closed up with idleness. O ye of little understanding, are you become so
blind, that you will not see? Are the windows of your ears made fast against
truth? Are your consciences sealed up, with a thrice burnt iron? Desire you
light, and yet refuse it? Have you craved..., and now deny it: yea utterly
disdain it?

D. That is not true.

E. K Now comes a head behind him.

..... Lo the end shall become your comfort, if you listen to the songs of my
mouth: if not, everlasting folly: and a reward of such, as are weary to hear of
Truth. Now I pinched him.....

E. K. This he said looking behind him.

D.

..... Burn those blasphemous books of thine, and I will teach thee wisdom.

D. Will you have me note down that sentence so.

..... I will.

D. What blasphemous books can I acknowledge, seeing I understand none? If they
contain Sentence, make me to perceive it; that so I may compare it, with the
Touchstone of God his word, using the Talent of such reason, as God has given
me.

..... I go, I go, I go.

E. K. Now comes a great fire down, and there appears a great huge man, with
a great sword in his hand; sire comes out at his eyes, and at his mouth. This
terrible man said,

..... Maledicti sunt, qui jurati sunt contra Nomen meum.

E. K. Now that wicked creature shakes himself.

D. In nomine Jesu Christi Redemptoris humani generis, Quis tu es?

[This was spoken to the man with the sword.]

..... Sum vires.

D. Deus in adjutorium meum intend, etc. Miserere mei Deus etc.

E. K Now the great huge one kneeleth down, and his face is (now) from meward;
he looks up toward heaven; he has very long hair, to beneath his girdle; his
Robe is long and tucked up. Now he stands up.

..... Cursed are they: Cursed are they: Cursed is he for ever. I am, I gave
thee power, and sealed thee for a time: Power to use the vehemence of thine own
poison; but not to touch my coat. Thus he says, And (I am) thou art a liar
from the beginning, and the fountain of cursednesse. Damnation is thy dwelling
place; Death is thy seat; Vengeance is the Crown of thy disglory. Because thou
have entered into my seat: Have exalted thy brightness, blasphemed my name;
wherein (in this Action) thou continuest (No point of thy charge, nor of my
permission.) Be thou accursed, weakened, overthrown, and defaced. Thou art
vanqished, Thy time is shortened. And why? I am. And I say thou fightest
against me, and not against men. I am Justice, and the strength of him that
lives, whom thou have felt, and shall feel, world without end; Therefore
Depart; Depart I say.

E. K. Now the sword stands by him, with the rags that appeared before.

..... Vengeauce, prepared for others, be thy reward: As it was delivered unto
thee, so take it with thee; That the malice which thou show to others, may
heap up thine own destruction.

Jeovah, Jeovah, Jeovascah.

E. K. The wicked Tempter falls down into a hole, and this high creature
puts the sword and rags down after him. Now this great creature appears as
small as he used to do. And it is Michael.

Mic...... Veniat Lux Domini, and fidelium Consolatio.

E. K. Now is all come in, as was before: The Vail, the feet of men appearing
under, etc.

Mic...... Thus has God dealt mercifully with you.

D. His Name be praised for ever.

Mic...... Thus has Truth vanquished darkness. Even so shall you vanquish the
World in him which is the Spirit of Power and Truth. For I have Sworn (says
the Lord) and will be merciful unto you: But cease for these days to come; for
they were days delivered: Let them be (therefore) unto you days of
Repentance: For the end of 40 days must come: And this Doctrine shall be
written unto all Nations, even unto the end of the World. The Grain is yet in
the earth, and has newly consented with the earth: But when it springs, and
bears seed, The number shall be the last.

D. A dark Parable, to my understanding, is this.

Mic...... The transparent fire of Meekness comfort and warm your souls,
rectify and make strong your bodies, to the eternal comfort of the World to
come; in the pilgrimage which you shall endure, with a heavy cross for the
Testimony of Truth.

E. K. A great many voices, say, Amen.

E. K. Now he is gone, and the golden Vail is drawn again.

D. Omnis laus, honor, Gloria, Victoria and Triumphus sit Deo nostro
omnipotenti, Vivo and vero, nunc, and in sempiterna seculorum secula. Amen.

Sunday, 22. Decembris, Mane, we went from Rostoch toward Stetin.

Wensday, 25. Decembris, on Christmas Day morning, we came to Stetin by 10 of
the clock.

Anno 1584. Stilo veteri. Stetini in Pomerania.
January 2. Mane, hora 9.
D. Veniat lux Domini, and fidelium Consolatio, etc. 40. dies, jam completi
sunt, etc. Expectamus praepotens auxilium Altissimi, etc.

E. K. I cannot see but an inch into the Stone. The Curtain appears, but more
deep into the Stone At length comes one very tall, in along white Gown, all
open, and his hair of his head hanging down to his legs. He has wings upon his
head, arms, back, and legs. He seems to descend from the Clouds, and upon
Clouds which lie sloapes wise for his defcending. He speaks as follovveth.

..... The pureness of humility, dispersed through the inward bowels of man, is
that, which is called (with you) Perseverance. Which Perseverance, beautifieth
and establishes in a true and steadfast Basis those things that are acceptable
in the sight of God, the works of man. Hence springs justification,
which.... with the love of God. Herein are you become like unto us, for that we
are the image of Perseverance, and the Glory of God. But in us it is dignified:
In you it is, and must be imperfect: For nothing is of flesh or blood, that
receives perfection.

The Emanations from God, to, and into his creatures (which agree in the Center
of the Earth as the knitting up of things) are established: So that one jot of
his Will neither can, nor may perish, wax weak, or dwell in error: Which
foreseen from the beginning, carries in it self the remembrance of all things
to the end. Through which mercy and remembrance, you are become the servants of
God: Not for your own sakes; but in that it is the Glory of him, which has
called you to this exercise: Troublesome to the World, but rewarded with Glory.
Our Calling or Exercise.


If therefore your imperfections rise up and resist the Will of God, saying,
blasphemously as you do, Let us seek other ways, Then you are not counted
perseverers, neither are your works worthy reward: But humane reason can
persuade and give judgment against these follies, much more are they damnable,
and deserve correction in the voice and judgment of such as are pure.

He that deals with the wicked is a liar, and shall have his reward: But the
end of comfort is in the pureness of spirit. But O you of little wisdom, you
rise up against the winds, and yoke your wits against the mountains: Nay you
cast your selves down headlong, where there is no mercy. For what blasphemy is
it to say, If it be the will of God, it must follow? Is not man subject to the
bringing in of his own labors? And are not they allowed to his comfort, being
brought in?

The soul of man is the Image of God, after his form, which keeps within
himself the power of his divinity in the heavenly Spirit, whereby he has
Authority to consent with God in the workmanship of his Will and Creatures:
Which Power being sealed already, gives unto man (as King of himself) to
consent to his own salvation, conjoyning and knitting himself together, either
with perseverance in the assured hope of mercy, or (with wilful drunkenness,)
to the reward of such as fall. Therefore, Become Holy. For the soul
beautifieth, when it is beautified in it self. Resist not the Will of God,
which is mighty on you: Be not obstinate.

Be humble, Rejoice not for this World: But be glad that your names are sealed,
and that you shall correct the World. Despair not through weakness; for from
whom comes strength? If puddles become Seas, the end is more wonderful: But
yet greater when sinners are called to the knowledge and performance of God his
Will, thorough his mercies. Even as one day perishes, and is not, although he
has been; Even so it is, and shall be the state of this World. For the Earth
must sing O Sanna with the Heavens, And there must be One verity. And
Jerusalem shall descend with an horn of glory to the end. The Sun and Moon
shall be witnesses, and wonder at their stay. The Kings of the Earth shall
become proud in themselves, and are unable to be tamed with man.

But I will yoke them (says the Lord) with correction; And force them one to
imitate another steps: Yea they shall tread the grapes alike; For in my
Vineyard Corruption shall not dwell with Authority: Neither shall the Prince of
Darkness usurp my further honor.

E. K. He speaks much in a smaller voice than he did. I cannot perceive it.]
He turned back and spoke.

..... I speak these things for your understanding, and that you may be
strengthened.

E. K. He turns back again (as before) and speaks I know not what.

..... My dear brethren, therefore rejoice in Comfort, and the image of Peace:
and remain faithful, that you may be fed with that food that shall preserve and
always rest before the mighty flames of Zanzor: where there dwells no
defiled Creature, nor any unrighteousness.

E. K. He turns now back again (as before) speaking. He seems now to lean
against a Pillar of Copper, great and round: And he is become less than he
was. Now he stands on the top of the Pillar, Now he kneeleth down, his back
being turned.

A voice says to him..... Swear..... [1]

He said..... It is done.

He said..... The first voice opens his mouth and says [There is a great
rumbling and roushings of falling of Towns or Houses, as it were in the Stone.]

He said..... The will of God is sealed in this Prophecy, and it shall endure.

A voice...... Swear..... [2]

He said..... I have done.

He said..... It thundereth, and it is the second voice. The effect of God his
Will, is not of time; and therefore not to be known of man, till that moment
and end of time shall appear, wherein it must be published, and finished with
power.

E. K. Now it thumbleth again very terribly, as though a whole Town should
fall down into a great Valley.

A voice..... Swear...... [3]

He said...... I have...... And it is the third, and the last voice. All things
that are crooked shall be made straight. The wind of the heavens shall walk
through all the earth. Wisdom shall sit in her Majesty, Crowned, in the top of
an Hill, with exalted glory.

It is the end.

E. K. Now all dasheth in a flame of fire, Pillar, and he, and all, and so
flies upward.

A voice...... He that has ears, let him hear.

Another voice. It shall be. Amen.

E. K. Now the Curtain comes before all, as it was at the beginning, this day.

D. O Lord, for thy great mysteries declared unto us (this day) we most humbly
thank thee. But on our parts, there remains some matter..... thy hands by
some of thy good Ministers, we desire to have some advertisement: as of the
Lord Alb. Laskie. Secondly, of Vincent Seve, etc.

E. K. A very little Creature appears, and says.

The little one. A word, and away. The hearts of Princes, are the secrets of
the Lord: Such they are, as unlock the doings of this world.

D. Of A. L. his delay in coming (contrary to our defire and expectation) I
would gladly understand the cause, etc.

The little one. Those things that are of wickedness, are not of our
remembrance. This stay shall hinder a third part of his glory. But all your
life is not of him: Nor he of you. If he Note. Of A. L: and our separating
hereafter.
become good: he shall be well rewarded. He is forward, Vincent is in France.

E. K. He is gone suddenly. This Creature stood betvveen the Curtain, and the
forepart of the stone, it was one of the least Creatures that ever I savv.

D. All Honor, praise, and thanks be to our God Almighty: now and ever. Amen.

Thursday, Januarii 9. The Lord Albert Laskie came to Stetin, Hor. 2. a Meridie:

Friday, Janurii 10. (...). Hora prima incipiebat, and per 2. horas durabat.
Stetini.

Sunday, 12. Januarii. 1584. Stetin.
D. After Dinner we were talking together of our affairs. A voice in E. K. his
head said,

Jam venit hora.

D. After Supper, as I had a desire to show to E. K. some places of St. John's
Apocalypsis, a voice said to him,

Equus albus est initium Doctrinae vestrae, Et est verbum Dei. A voice. Equus
Albus.


10. and 9. sunt Novemdecim.

D. Hereupon seeking in the 19. Chapter of the Apocalypsis: we found the Text,
Equus albus, etc. versu 11.

A voice. Ne dubites. Sum enim servus Dei. To this purpose appertain these
places of Scripture, etc. These are the days wherein the Prophet said, No
faith should be found on the earth. Vide (...). lib. 4. cap. 9. versu 7.


This Faith must be restored again, and man must glorify God in his works. I
am the light of God.

D. Then, by like, He is VRIEL.

..... I am a witness of the light. These are the times when Justice and truth
must take place. Behold, I touched him, and he became a Prophet.

D. Mean you Esdras?

Vriel. Yea, in his ninth Chapter of the fourth book. There you shall find
manifestly the Prophecy This action in Esdras prophesied of.
of this time, and this action.

D. Alak, we think the time very long, before we entered in the right trade of
our true lessons.

Ur. When you have the book of God before you, Then I will open these secrets
unto you.

D. But Alak, the time is very long thereunto, the more is our grief.

Ur. The Bible it is.

D. I meant somewhat of our other book, which is to be written.

Ur. I will speak of that also.

D. This delay is greatly to our grief, and occasion of many temptations.

Ur. The temptations of the world are nothing unto the wise, happy are they
that feel temptations with emptiness of the belly. The Timber is not yet
seasoned, or else thou should Prophecy. I mean not thee E. K.

D. Vincat manifesta veritas.

E. K. He is gone.

Honor, Gloria, Laus, and benedictio, sit Deo Nostro, qui in ALBO EQUO
Justitias suas facturus est.

Amen.
Monday, Januarii 13. Mane hora. 9. Stetin.
D. After our long discourse upon the 9th. Chapter of Esdras, etc. Vriel came,
and stood, he..... Iy. upon E. K. his head, not visibly.

Ur. Read the sixth Chapter. For faith must flourish. The world is rotten, and
is skalden in their own sins.

D. E. K. Read it, and in the 28. verse, thus it is. Florebit autem fides, and
vincetur corruptela, and ostendetur veritas, quae fine fra..... Diebus tantis,
etc.

E. K. A voice says, Open the Shew-stone:

E. K. At length appared one in a long white Garment. The Curtain went aside,
and the feet of men appear not now. This man seems twice so high as D. He
has nothing on his head, but long hair hanging down behind him. He is tied,
or girded about, as though he were tied with many girdles.

URIEL. I am Vriel [said this man] The light, and hand of him that created
Heaven and Vide.
Earth: that talked with Esdras, and did comfort him in affliction, and the
same that has talked with you: Yea, from the beginning of this action.
Therefore, gird your selves together, and hear the voice of the Lord: Listen,
(I say) to such things as are hid, (I say) to them that dwell above the
Heavens. Behold, this is the last sleep of the world: and the time, that the
power of the highest has armed himself, saying, Come, O ye strength of the
Heavens, and follow me. For the earth has cried vengeance, and has cursed
herself, and despaireth. Come (I say) For I will place the seat of
righteousness. That my Kingdom may be in One: And that my people may flourish:
Yea, even a little before the end.

And what is this? E. K. He spoke these four words in another Tune.

E. K. He looks up to heaven.

A voice. Blessed art thou, which respectest thy Justice, and not the sins of
man. An Angel now taking place.


Ur. This is the voice of the Angel that now takes place.

D. May we be so bold as to demand the name of that Angel?

Ur. No, It is not lawful. I swear by all things that are contained within
this holy book: Note, he spoke this, pointing down to the great Bible of the
Lord Alb. Laskies, upon which the Shewstone, now, stood.
By the seat of God, and him that sits thereon. That the An Oath.
words, which have been spoken in this Action, and shall be now spoken, by me,
are true: Three years are yet to come; even in this month, (that begins A
Prophecy. an. 1587. in (...). Antichristus. Si simpliciter, sic annus est
intelligendus, si (...) septenarius unus, nostrorum annorum 24. sit habendus
pro uno anno mystico: vol 42. menses, etc. Perpende.
the fourth year) shall the Son of perdition be known unto the whole world:
Suddenly creeping out of his hole like an Adder, leading out her young ones
after her, to devour the dust of the earth.

D. The sentence is dark, in respect of the time. Consider well.

D. I suspect 42 months (now and then) to be understood for an year.

Ur. This month in the fourth year, shall Antichrist be known unto all the
world. Then shall Antichristus: ^
woe, woe, dwell amongst the Kings of the earth: For they shall be chosen all
anew. Neither shall there any that rules now, or reigns as a King, or
Governor of the..... le, live unto the end of the third year: But they shall
all perish.

Their Kingdoms be overthrown.

The earth wasted. The Rivers become blood, with the blood of men and beasts
mixed together. D. (...). 42. ^ Antichrist. Superbia. A. L. (...). Elias. Our
sign.
In this time shall the Turkish state be rooted up, and cast from the earth.
And instead of him shall enter in that Devil: the father of liars, and such as
dwell in the house of Vanity. Behold, This * Prince shall fly through his
Kingdoms, as the D. They are in Paradise, they were carried upward, especially
Elias.
Greyhound after his spoil: devouring his possessions, and cutting down the
wicked: But he shall become proud. The Prophets of the Lord shall descend from
Heaven, clothed with their old Garments very fresh, and not stained. Thy eyes
shall see them. Out of these books shall the true Doctrine of the Prophets, and
Apostles be gathered: Which are not to be understood, but with the spirit of
understanding, the spirit of wisdom, and truth. Behold, I will say unto you my
self.

Come, Hear.

For, the voice of the Lord is with power. Therefore, be mild, and of humble
spirit. For lo, the time shall come. And I have seven books, such as shall be
delivered unto one of you. And 7. Libri (...) ipsi D.
I will meet thee walking in the fields. And will stretch forth my hand,
saying, Come: Then shall thine eyes see those things, that thy spirit does. And
thou shall become a man of understanding: For I will give thee bread, and thou
shall eat it, such, as shall be the bread of sufficient comfort.

E. K. It thundreth in the stone. Of thee, [pointing to E. K.] thus says the
Lord.

Thou art flesh, and become stuhborn. Thy judgment waxes dull, and thy heart
sealed: But I E. K.
will unseal thee; and thou shall be partaker: But (because thou have offended
me) not with power in worldly things, I will make thee a great Seer: Such an
one, as shall judge the Circle of things in nature. But heavenly understanding,
and spiritual knowledge shall be sealed up from thee in this world: For, thou
art become stony, and have cried out against my Saints. Notwithstanding, your
life shall be together. Thou shall be a workman of nature, looking into the
Chambers of the earth: The Treasures of men. Many things are plucked from thee,
which were thine: But not from you, because I have promised them.

What is be, that bridled the winds, D. At your prayers? Or, who is he that
preserved you from the bloody imaginations of men, [and] hatreds of the world
invincible? Is it not be, that is God of Heaven and Earth? Is it not he, that
made both flesh and Soul? Yea, even he it is, that says. Fly from the
wickedness, and society with Devils. Leave off to sin against the Lord: for he
is of great power. This is the last time that any show shall be made in this
stone. For, lo, This sentence is revoked afterward, and the stone dignified.
the promise of the most highest shall be fulfilled.

E. K. Now I see all those men, whose feet I saw before: And there sits One
in a Judgment seat, with all his teeth fiery. And there sit six, on one side
of him, and six on the other. And there sit twelve in a lower seat under them.
All the place is like Gold, garnished with precious stones, On his head is a
great stone; covering his head; a stone most bright, brighter then fire. Four
bring in a man bound. Now all is gone except Vriel.

Ur. The end of words, the beginning of deeds.

A voice. Seal it up: For, it is at an end.

D. What is your will, that I shall do with this stone.

Ur. All is said: and I am sealed for time to come.

D. Deo omnipotenti, vero, vivo, and aeterno fit omnis honor, Laus, Gloria,
Potentia, virtus and victoria: nunc and in sempiterna seculorum secula. Amen.

Wednesday, January 15. we went from Stetin to Stargart.

Sunday, January 19. we came to Posen.

Ecclesia Cathedralis Posnaniensis fundabatur anno 1025. per Winceslaum Regem
Christianum factum cujus sepulchrum in inferiori part Ecclesiae extat, lapide
egregie (...).

Saturday, January 25. (...) E. K. (...). ( i. e. Magnum adii vitae periculum
per iniquitatem E. K. contra me.)

Sunday, January 26...... Invisebam Bibliothecam Ecclesiae (...).

Monday, January 27. (...). (Rixae cum (...) breves.)

Tuesday, January 28. We went from Posen.

Thursday, Jan. 30. We came to Komin Town, over the long and dangerous Bridge,
with much cumber at one broken place, by reason of the huge Cakes (...), which
lay there.

Saturday, Februarii, 1. We passed the dangerous way of Ice, having 25 men to
cut the Ice for our (oaches to come through above two English miles long: but
for all that great help, we could not get to Vinew City that night, by reason
of the great water and Ice hard by the Town, which was broken over the banks
into the medows very deep.

(...), Februarii 2. We came over the great water, the Ice being most part
(with that nights wind) driven away out of our passage.

Monday, Feb. 3. We came by Shadek to Lasko Town, and there were lodged in the
Provost his fair house by the Church.

Prima Actio apud Lasko. Tuesday Februarii 11. Stilo veteri, ast 21. Stilo novo.
D. After our prayers of the 7 Psalms, and my particular invitation and calling
for God his help, and the ministry of his good Angels: After (I say) more than
half an hour space attendance; E. E. seemed and thought that he felt a thing
about his head, as if it clawed with Hawks claws. It continued no long time.
And toward the Easterly corner of my great Study above, seemed to E. K. clouds
to appear, far off, as at a quarter of a mile distance. Then appeared a Sea,
endless one way, and a Haven mouth with a River which fell or ran into that
mouth. And besides that River doing down into the Haven, did another River
appear by running into the Sea, without any Haven making or having. The water
of this Sea, is not like Seawater, but rather like Quicksilver. Now comes a
mountain, and swimmeth upon that main Sea. Now that mountain seems to rest
and stand before that River mouth, that is by the Haven.

A voice...... Measure me.

E. K. Now seems a great thing like a man to stand, with one leg in the
foresaid River, and with the other in the said Sea, by having a corner of
the... (...) between his said legs. His right leg is in the River, and his left
in the Sea. His right leg seems gold, and his left leg lead. The mountain
stands before him. His legs are like two posts, of the substance of the
Rainbow. He is very high: he has a face, but with many eyes and noses, but not
distinctly to be discerned. His body seems to be red Brass. He stands with
his arms abroad, and no hands appear. His right arm is of the color of
silver; His left arm seems to be black, twinkling. His head is much of the
color of that Sea wherein his left leg stands. Now begins a right hand to
appear; a fair right hand.

A voice said to this man...... Measure the water.

He answered...... It is 250 Cubits.

A voice...... Measure that foot of earth.

E. K. He points to the mountain.

Answer...... It is a cube twice doubled in himself in a straight line.

E. K. One speaks behind me, saying.

..... Measure the Sea also.

Answer...... It is 750. Cubits.

E. K. He now stoopeth to it, and takes of it in his hand. 3. in 4. efficient
12. and 3. and in se efficit 9. (...) 9. in 12. efficient. 108.


He says...... The fourth in the third, and three in himself square. The age
of Nature.

E. K Now all is gone, all is clear, and nothing appears.

D, At length after this, E. K. heard from the foresaid corner of the Study,
the noise, as of a Ship tossed and jolted of the waves of the Sea. After that
E. K. saw one that stood all covered in a white cloud by the Easterly corner of
the Table, above the Table in the Air. He said.

..... Beati sunt, quibus veritas, spes, and consolatio est: and quibus
luminaria majora inserviunt, in fortitudine and potentia eterni and Omnipotent
is Dei.

E. K. Now the cloud covers him, and abides.

E. K. Now he comes out of the cloud, and stepeth three steps forward, and the
cloud stands behind him, like a garment..... At length he said.

..... Then is their blessedness, eternal life.

E. K. I never saw him before: He is covered with a red Purple Robe, such as my
Lord, here, uses; but made somewhat like a Surplesse. His head is covered with
feathers like Down: His face is like a childs face: His neck is bare: His legs
are ba.... most white: His garment comes not but to the small of his leg. He
stands upon a white great round Table, like Crystal, all written with
letters, infinitely. On the middle of the Table is a great swelling or pommel
of the same substance the Table is of. Upon that pommel he stands. He has
nothing in his hands; neither can his hands be discerned. His Robe has no
sleeves.

He said...... Non possum diutius videri: Servus sum Altissimi: Novi Terram in
paradiso. Spiritus sum SAPIENTIAE: Nomen meum est NALVAGE.

E. K. He makes a cross upon the place where he stands.

Nal...... Beatus Pater: Beatus Filius: Beatus Spiritus Sanctus. Bea... tu... t
Mensuratio rerum and substantiarum omnium visibilium and invisibilium, verus
and sanctus est Deus in promissis suis and veritas ejus, Talis est.

E. K. Hereupon he shows a round Globe.

..... Caelum, Mundus, Angelus, Homo, Nihil, and non nihil, and omne quod est,
vel erit, Nihil est nisi splendour, Gubernatio, and unitas Dei: Quae a Centro
formata est reformata est, ab initio ad tempus mensuratum, and in perpetuum,
Laus tibi in Coelo, Laus tibi in Terra, Triumphus tibi in inferno, ubi non est
Laus, nec Gloria. Quae jam infusa sentio, doceo: Sed modo, lingua, and ideomate
praedicto.

E. K. He turns round when he speaks.

Nal...... Omnis Caro maxim est sibi applicabilis, in nature a and perfectione
sua. Igitur revelanda sunt Mysteria Dei, non ut audiantur, sed ut intelligantur.

E. K. Now comes a great smoke: now I see nothing: now he is gone.

A voice...... Hear.

[ E. K. I see no body.]

E. K. Methinketh that two speak, or else this voice gives an echo.

..... The unpatient and troublesome spirits of indignation, wrath, blasphemy,
and disobedience, continually contend, bear arms, and ravenously run wilfully,
against those that are the.... Messagers and Angles of the Dignified and
Triumphant Glory: which is now the Ministry of him that is Dignified in his
Father: To the honor and glory of those that are humble and faithful in
obedience. Yea those wicked ones keep open wars against God, and his Anointed
in Heaven and Earth, only for the safeguard and true keeping of such as love
God, and follow his Commandments, rejoice in Truth, and are visited in
Righteousness.

Dark speeches to the flesh: but words mixed with humane understanding; where
ein briefly I will manifest the envy between the wicked (in respect of their
enviousnesse) and those that are justified in Heaven; which fight in the
government of man's soul in the Creatures of God: Not in that they know they
shall overcome: But in that they are envious and proud from the beginning.

Their contention is evidently amongst you, which are joined in the service of
God: Not as Deservers, but as Chosen; whose vessels and power, are best known
unto God.

E. K. One stands on my left shoulder and says.

Sinister...... Do thou not hear, how like a fool he speaks, without all
reason? Thou art a spirit of lying. Thou art one farthest from the glory of
God. Thou art a sower of lies, and a teacher of false doctrine.

E. K. Thus faith he on my left hand.

Sinister...... Speak, for I have power over thee. Can thou deny it?

Dexter...... Thou think so, because thou had power: But the brightness
thou badst, is turned into iniquity. True it is, thou had power to banish the
wicked out of Paradise: But me thou know not; because thou have not banished
me. In respect of thy dignification (which sprang with power) I say with the
Hallelujab: But in respect of thy (...), Thus says the Lord; Posui tenebras a
tergo meo.

Sinister...... Fie upon God, that ever he created me.

Dexter...... Even thus, do they seek continually to enter into the weakest
vessel: of envy, not to triumph; for they know they shall not: but they hinder
the time with man, wherein they may offend his conscience.

E. K. I hear howling and lamenting.

Dexter...... Such are those of whom thou seek aid and comfort: Those that
appear unto To E. K.
thee, have sought thy soul; And the fruit of them, is according to their
destruction. Believe them not. It is said before. Thou dealest with devils.
What reward shall he reap, that fights against the Highest? Or takes part
with such as are banished from Righteousness? Much more shall his punishment
be, which seeks help of those that are dishonored. For dishonor..... to
imperfection, and is become a monster for destruction.

It is written.... Nothing can stand before the Lord, that is imperfect; Much
more that imperfection weakened, which obeys the imperfect. Leave, for the
kingdom of Righteousness is at hand, And thou must vow. Hear the Lord, That
thy sins may be forgiven thee: For the Prophesies of the Lord are not uttered
to the world, with the seals of the wicked. Therefore become holy, that thou
may augment the benefit of God bestowed amongst you; and render it to the
world, as the message of truth, with thanksgiving. Meum est pauca dicere.

D. Sed quis sis, Nescimus, an non idem Naluage, qui nobiscum prius egisti
hodie?

Nal...... I am.

E. K. Why call you those Devils, with whom I deal; not offending my
conscience, but intending to do good to my self and my neighbors? If you be of
God, where is the fruit of your doctrine? etc.

Nal...... If they were not Devils and enemies of truth, they would praise and
honor God in his Messengers of truth. But because these Actions are true, and
the truth of them shall be the destruction of their kingdom; Therefore
devilishly and enviously they resist the will of God. Denying Devils. This
Doctrine what it teaches.
the power; Blaspheming his truth, and infecting his vessels.

In our Doctrine there is nothing taught but the state of the world, here, and
to come. The prophesies of time, and the knitting up of God his mysteries,
opened from time to time, to those that are his sanctified: as testimonies in
the Creation and Operation of his Creatures; whereof this doctrine is a part.
The Prophets in their times were not ignorant by revelation of the good will of
their Creator. The Apostles in Christ his Kingdom, were made partakers of the
mysteries to come, of the state of man's salvation; and ending of this combat,
which is in that day, when all Creatures shall receive their reward. The Church
of God is always garnished and furnished with spiritual Revelations: as a
Mansion or Dewlling Place of the Holy Ghost.

These latter days, and end of harvest must have also Laborers: For no Age
passes away, but through the hands of God, who makes the end of his doings
known to the World: To the end, the World may consent unto him in Glory. So
that this Doctrine, is the mysteries of the word of God, sealed from the
beginning, now delivered unto man, for that Reformation which must be in One
unity established unto the end. The very part of that Circle, which
comprehends the Reformation. Note this Circle.
Mysteries of the Highest, in his Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers yet to
come, which are alive, and shall bear witness of eternal Comfort.

The fruit of our Doctrine is, that God should be praised. For of our selves we
seek no glory: But we serve you to your comfort, teaching you the will of God,
in the self same Christ, that was crucified; sold and died in the Patriarchs,
and published to the World by his Disciples, and is now taught unto you, in the
remission of sins.... greatest in the World, for the end of all things. The
very key and entrance into the secret mysteries of God, (in respect of his
determination on earth) bringing with it reward in the end of eternal glory,
which is the greatest Treasure. Those that tempt thee, do it in respect of the
fear they have of the power of God, springing in thee.

Let this suffice. The World is vain in respect of eternal joys. Heaven and
Earth passes away: The reward of the Righteous endures.

E. K.

Nal...... What do you see imperfect, in all that has been delivered?

D.

Nal...... You have 49 Tables: In those Tables are contained the mystical and
holy voices of the Angels: dignified: and in state disglorified and drent in
confusion: which pierces Heaven, and looks into the Center of the Earth: the
very language and speech of Children and Innocents, Infra; in (...)
Cracoviensi, Aprilis 21. dixit (...) linguam nunquam (...) revelatam. Let these
two places be reconciled.
such as magnify the name of God, and are pure.

Wherein, the Apostles understood the diffuse sound of the World, imperfected
for man's transgression. These Tables are to be written, not by man, but by the
finger of her which is mother to Virtue [ Madimi said her mother would write
them, An. 1583.] Wherein the whole World, (to flesh incredible) all Creatures,
and in all kinds, are numbered, in being, and multitude. The measure and
proportion of that substance, which is Transitory, and shall wax old.

These things and mysteries are your parts, and portions sealed, as well by
your own knowledge, as the fruit of your Intercession.

The knowledge of Gods Creatures.

Unto me are delivered five parts of a time: Wherein I will open, teach, and
uncover the secrets Five parts of a time.
of that speech, that holy mystery. To the intent the CABALA of NATURE, in
voice, substance of body, and measure in all parts may be known. For there is
nothing secret, but it shall be revealed, and the son of GOD shall be known in
POWER, and establish a Kingdom with righteousness in the earth, and then
comes the end.

For the earth must come under subjection, and must be made pure. That death
may be swallowed Regnum Christi faturum in terra.
in his own Kingdom, and the enemy of righteousness find no habitation. The
word of God endures for ever. His promises are just. His spirit is truth. His
judgments inscrutable. Himself Universal. He it is of whom you labor. The
promises of God in this earthly Noble man shall be fulfilled. Solomon used the
places of honor, and was exalted.

Thus says the Lord.

I have sealed him against hatred; and have made his seat open. Let him
therefore arise up, that the people may see him. For mortal men have places of
honor, and in their own Courts, they come to be exalted: Who is he that made
the earth, and dignified him with a living Soul? Even he it is that exalts,
and in whose hands the Kingdoms of the earth are settled.

Behold, the fifth time shall come, (in respect of the parts of time) and it is
the day, that has been promised. Then shall your eyes be open. Then shall you
see.

A voice. Stay there......

Nal. I obey.

E. K. Now I see him pass away over the Christalline Table, which is round
like a Cart wheel, having a great knop in the middle.

D. As concerning our ordering of the Table, and the rest of the furniture, we
are desirous to know, what is now to be done: seeing, now we are come to the end
of this first journey.

A voice. Be it thy charge. I will put to my hand.

D. Mean you it to be my charge to order these things, as my imagination shall
be instructed, by God his favor.

A voice. It is so said before.

D. Gloria, Honor, and gratiarum actio Deo omnipotenti Deo nostro Domino and
Patri Nostro: nunc, and in sempiterna seculorum saecula.

Amen.
Tuesday, February 18. a Meredie hora 3. Lasko. Stylo veteri, ast 28...... Die
stilo novo.
D. After some prayers made, E. K. saw (as he thought) Nalvage standing at my
left hand.

D. In nomine Jesu Christi Redemptoris nostri, Estis vos Nalvage?

Nal. Tu dicis.

E. K. The lower part of him is in a Cloud: but all his upper part is out, he
has a thing like a Pall hanging down behind him from his head; He has like a
round.... of boane in his hand, he seems to be as far as the Church. And I
see him, as well winking as directing my open sight on him.

Nal. What is it you require?

D. The exposition of the time delivered to you in five parts.

Nal. Read it. D. Folio precedente.


D. I read, and when I came to the place, that death may be swallowed, etc.
Nalvage said as follows.

Nal. That is the last Conquest. Go forward.

D. In reading?

Nal. I.

D. I read to the end.

Nal. The finger of the highest peruseth nature amongst you by himself, and in
her own motion. Through which action things become, that were not (by
Generation:) And in the same time vanish, as though they were not (by
corruption.) A year it is; Wherein nature looks with many eyes through.....
dwelling places: unto some as a Nurse: and to the rest as a stepmother. And so
it is meant in the Scriptures. For, a time is an year, purposed by
determination in the judgment of God; which is not known to man, how, or when
it shall happen. Another year is a time established, and presently delivered,
as the present judgment of God. This is that I speak of. A time is an year.
The parts are known amongst you.

E. K. I never heard any speak so leisurely.

Nal. Now look to your understanding. I speak of two years. One appointed in
the judgment and determination of God to come, and unknown to man. The other
the time of the judgment of God (and before determined) now present:
Notwithstanding, before determined. There is difference between an year
mystically promised, and unknown: and the time that is mystically promised and
known. Annus my sticus sumitur dupliciter: Unus, qui est Tempus cognitum Deo,
and homini E K. He speaks a language to me unknown, and looks somewhat on
one side.
non revelatum: Tempus, hoc dicitur, apud Deum. Annum nos illud computamus.
Aliud est pra finicum, cognitum Deo and Angelis, and revelatum homini: and
Annus est praesens. This last is the year I speak of.

D. What are your parts of that year?

Nal. March, April, May, June, July, August...... In illo autem die, invenietis
Christum.

The words of this Doctrine must agree, and times.

E. K. When come you with the rest of your words?

Nal. As it is given me, so I give it unto you.

A great unpatience.

[D. He was thus interrupted by E. K.] -- Must end their course in the promise
of God: [In] These weeks are the fruits of my labor to be known. For I must
unfold unto you, and Cabalistical in respect of the receiving.
open the secrets of this mystical, and Delivered speech: Whereby you may talk
in mortal sounds with such as are immortal: And you may truly know the nature,
and use of God his Creatures. Therefore, be diligent in hearing, and Receiving.
For the course of man is contrary: But the determination of God most certain.

You are answered.

..... Mean you these Lenten weeks, or the weeks of all the fore-rehersed
months?

..... Of my whole appointed time.

E. K. He stands higher up.

..... May we (without offense) require your..... at all times, as our case
requires?

Nal. Your labor is my readiness.

..... You see I have an Ague: It hat is your counsel therein?

Nal. I have to counsel you (from God.)

D. Blessed be the Fountain of counsel, and of all goodness.

E. K. He shows an house; and six, or seven on the top of it with Torches:
They are like shadows.

..... In the name of God what may this mean?

E. K. These shadows go up and down the side of the house, thrusting their
Torches into the sides of it. The house is like this very house. They go round
about the house. There are eight of them. They have claws like Eagles. When
they sit, they are like Apes. They set a fire on it, and it burns mightily;
Now your wife runs out, and seems to leap over the Galery rayl, and to ly
as dead. And now come you out of door, and the Children stand in the way toward
the Church. And you come by the yern door; and kneel, and knock your hand on
the earth. They take up your wife; her head waggleth this way and that way. You
look up to heaven still, and kneel upon one of your knees. The stone house
quivereth and quaketh, and all the roof of the house falls into the house,
down upon the Chests. And one of these baggage things laugheth. The house
burns all off. Your wife is dead, all her face is battered. The right side of
her face, her teeth and all is battered. She is bare-legged, she has a white
Peticote on. Now the apparition is all gone.

Marie seems to be pulled out of a pool of water, half alive, and half dead,
her hair hanging about her ears. They hold her up. Now they carry her out at
the Gate. You seem to run in the fields, and three, or four men after you.
You run through waters. All disappeareth; And now Nalvage appears again. He
seems to have wept.

D.

Nal...... God gives you warning that you may eschew them.

D. And how shall I eschew them?

Nal...... Thus says the Lord. Behold, I have sealed thee for my self: for my
people, and for my servant. Therefore shall thou not perish; No, not the least
hair of thy body. Fear not, be strong in faith. For I come shortly. Hearken
therefore to my voice, I say, therefore hearken to my voice: For the spirits of
wickedness, and confusion have risen up against thee: If therefore they
prevail against my purposes; Then shall it be no world: Neither are there any
heavens. But, this place is not for thee; yet, if thou will, be it unto thee. I
will seal destruction, both for a time and for ever. Be mighty therefore in me.
All the earth rages in wickedness. And sin smells thee ready now to creep
out of his hole. If thou move thy seat, it shall be more acceptable. For, even
this year shall thou see the beginning of many troubles: And the entrance of
this LASKO, into the bloody service of the world.

E. K. He seems to spit fire, and so vanish away.

O Jesu Christ, we have committed our selves into thy hand; and do submit our
wills to thy government. What should this mean of terrible destruction
threatened to my wife and maiden? And as it were frenzy, to light on me for
sorrow. These things cannot well agree with our former assured protection.

E. K. I see a little wench on the bench, all in white, she says.

..... How do you sir?...,. [making cursie to D.]

D. Better it is known to you then to my self, how I do.

..... Sir, I have been...... land, at your house, where they are all well.

D. Thanked be God.

..... Amen.... The Queen said: She was sorry that she had lost her Philosoper.
But the Lord Treasurer answered: He will come home shortly, a begging to you.

They were black. Sir, Herry Sidney died upon Wednesday last. D. Note, at
Prague, Aug. 24. I understood that Sir Henry Sidney was not dead in February
nor March, no nor in May last: Therefore this must be considered, Doctor Haget
his son told me. You may also mark how the Devil at this time did mis-inform E.
K. and so it is possible that this being a lie, was his.
A privy enemy of yours.

..... I ever took him for one of my chief friends.

..... But this it is: Truly, none can turn the Queens heart from you. I could
not come into your Study: The Queen has caused it to be sealed up. You have
been used to good Cities: It were good, you did consider CRACOVIA.
it. Little words are of great matter.

D. Where, I pray, would you wish me to settle my self first?

..... My mother would give you counsel to dwell at LASCO.

D. Do you dissent from your mother?

..... I.

D. Upon what.

..... Jesu, you think that I am an unwise maiden. The Devil brings the sound
of my mouth Note the envy and power of the Devil.
to thy ears. E. K. For I said CRACOVIA, and he spoke LASCO.

D. Seeing your mother would wish me to dwell at CRACOVIA, at what other place
would you wish me to dwell?

..... Lux ante faciem, Tenebrae post tergum.

E. K. Now I feel a hussing thing go from my head.

..... I pray you be not offended with my simplicity: My mother and I am all
one. In us is The Concord of time.
no discord: I pray you bear with me, if I say, I be the Concord of time. These
are my words. My mother would have you dwell at CRACOVIA. And I consent unto
it. Let them that be wise understand. Always pray that you may hear truly,
and receive faithfully.

D. May I before I go any further demand if you be Madimi?

..... I am so, Sir.

D. As concerning this terrible Vision here showed, what, is either the intent,
or verity of it?

Mad. Sir, will it please you to hear me?

D. The verity is most acceptable to me always. L. vid. Anno 1583. Jun. 16.
Super, ante (...) folia.


Mad...... I think your book says, This man his way is prepared, etc.

D. I trow, the words are, His seat is made open, or made manifest.

Mad...... It is so. Bear with me, I think, it is so.

D. What will you say thereof?

Mad...... And upon earth Princes have h... in their own Courts. I remember, He
was sealed at Mortlake. Contra omne malum. Then cannot the King of Poland, nor
the Chancellor, prevail against him. Yet Vendiderunt animam ejus.

D. Lord be merciful unto...; What Traiterous dealing? I beseech you to say...
(...). in that case; He is our great friend, and for the service of God
furthering.

Mad...... You met a man by the way: He is an Irish man. (But as... me, he said
he was a French man) I heard the King, when.... him to go into England. But he
could not poison him there... Therefore he followed him, all the way. But if he
return again: They say, We will exalt him. But send thou thy Army, and we will
send him. Wherefore has the King absented Conspiracy of the K. of (...). with
the (...) against A. L.
himself, but to betray his Kingdom? Truly, I can tell no other cause.

My Mother says within these few days, after be.... calls it) a little
talk, Let him go to Cracovia.... himself as David did before Saul: It may be
the people will like well of him.

Tush, Tush, Timor innatus, will never prevail. Although he hate him, he cannot
hurt him.

E. K. She says so, turning her head back to one that spoke to her.

Sir, if you tarry here, you will have great grief in this house.

D. How long (I pray you) would you wish me, to tarry here: or how soon to be
rid hence?

Mad...... Hark... He, E. K. marvelleth what I will say now.

E. K. So I did indeed.

Mad...... The Physician says, infected air is to be avoided in have. Many
Princes shall be acquainted with you, and Learned men. The good are oftentimes
stirred up to offend God, whose offendes are both wilful and rash: For
temptation is a Touchstone, and is one of the black fellows chiefest weapons.

D. I beseech you, to say somewhat of the time of our going hence.

Mad...... Tush, I pray you, Go hence as soon as you may.

D. To Cracovia, you mean.

Mad...... I.... I will now and then visit you there: And will become friend
with you, E.K. now: for you are become a good man.

D. As concerning that terrible show, what can you say of it?

Mad...... As a warning to beware that, that should be. This is the last Spear.

D. But, if I go to Cracovia, no such thing shall happen, I trust.

Mad...... So, Sir. Therefore, This is your warning.

D. Is it not, then, the will of God, that I shall set up the Table here, as
you see, we have prepared.

Mad...... Be contented. This Wilderness, is not 40 years. My Mother says, It
must not be here: yet at your request, it may be.

E. K. How can that be?

D. At man's commandment, the Sun can stand.

Mad...... He says true, Believe him..... Therefore I will not urge any thing
herein, but defer till we come to Cracovia.

D. At Cracovia, shall I set it up? And shall I require Pernns house there? Or
what house else, is, in God his determination, for me and mine?

..... As wise as I am, I cannot tell, what, yet, to say. It is the Town, where
the Sabbath day shall be celebrated.

D. But now, as concerning the house, What is your word?

Mad...... You will not be destitute of an house. Will you believe me; For I am
your true friend MADIMI. Here shall be the end of your turmoil. Be of good
cheer.

D. Did you not will us to have my chest from Torn before we go?

Mad...... I, when the black m... has called home his waters.

D. As Soon as.... n have it from Torn hither, then we are to be going.

E. K. How will my Lord agree to this?

Mad..... Now you are become a new man, both we may dwell in one house. Sir, I
promise you of my credit, you shall be to learn nothing of these things by
August.

D. By August next?

Mad...... Yea... Next.

D. Perhaps my Lord his furniture of money will not be such, as to serve for
our carriage anew, etc. Besides that, I would wish Kesmark to be redeemed,
before he should come to Cracovia: Perhaps then with the people, his credit
would be greater.

Mad...... Those that become Kings, care nothing for Farm-houses.

D I would that needless cost, here bestowed, had been saved: or that you had
told us this sooner.

Mad...... Silence now, is my best answer.

D. Do you know, (O Lord, what say I?) Have we had any name of NALVAGE,
heretofore in our Tables or Books expressed?

Mad...... What have you written, that have you written. He is a near kinsman
to my Mother. We call him, with us, Fuga terrestrium. Nalvage.


D. We beseech God, that all intermedling, and sauciness of the wicked in
these Actions may cease. You know how one clawed him, here, on the head, as
with Eagles claws.

Mad...... He may rejoice, they clawed not his soul. You are content to let me
go.

E. K. She goes away somewhat bigger, and in a long Gown.

D. Soli Deo Gloria.

Amen.
Friday, Februar. 21. a Meridie, Lasko. Martii 2. Stylo novo.
D. As I had talked of Madimi, and IL. to E. K. about Treasure hid in England:
and I was desirous to have some advertisement by Madimi, she appeared.

Mad...... I answer your inward man. I am come again.

E. K. She is bigger than she was.

Mad...... I am a little grown.

D. As concerning a medicine for my Ague, I would gladly... And as concerning
the wife of our dear friend, the Lor...

Mad...... I pray you, bear with me at this time: I am as willing to answer you
(when light comes again) as you to ask me. You may consider of many things, I
can answer them briefly. Such blessing as my Mother bestows on me, such I
give you.

E. K She smileth.

D. God grant that his good Creatures may smile on me.

Mad...... When you know me well, you will find, I have been very charitable.

E. K She goes away naked; her body being besprent with blood; at the least
that side of her toward E. K.

D. Laudetur Deus Trinus and unus, nunc and in sempiterna seculorum secula.

Amen.
Saturday, Februarii 22. 1584. ante meridiem. Lasko. [ Martii 3. Stylo novo.
D. The questions needful to be required of Madimi.

1. Good counsel for my health recovering, and confirming.

2. If the Pedestal (for the holy Table) being here made, shall be carried with
us to Cracow, rather than to make a new there: both to save time, and to have
our doings the more secret?

3. What is your knowledge and judgment of A. L. his wife, in respect of her
life past, present, and to come; for we doubt she is not our sound friend?

4. It is our very earnest desire, that the Danish Treasurer in England, in the
ten places, (seized on by E. K.) might be brought hither, very speedily:
whereby A. L. might redeem Keysmark and Lasko lands, morgaged: and also pay his
debts in Cracow, and about Cracow.

For, else, neither can he come with any credit, to Cracow, (as he is willed)
neither can he come to us, there, so commodiously, and often, as our conferences
may be requisite. And thirdly, the day of Keysmark forfeiting (without the
Emperor his favorable help) draws nigh: as in April at St. George his Day
next.

D. And by your speech of England, you give me occasion to enquire whether her
Majesty does cause my rents to be received, by my Deputy assigned or no?

Whether her Majesty, or the Council, do intend to send for me again, into
England or no?

And as concerning the red p.... which E. K. found with the book in England,
what it is: And what is the best use of it, and how that use is to be practiced
or performed?

D. after these Questions written, and a little our praying to God for his
light, verity, and help, and to send Madami, according as she willed me to note
many things, for that she could answer them briefly: we used silence a
while;... ath she appeared on my right hand between me and E. K.

..... Blessed be his name that in truth, and for the truth, sends his
Ministers to instruct them that love Truth..... Even so..... Be not pierced too
much with sight of me. [to E. K. for he looked mervallously earnestly on her.]

E. K. She seems more bright than she was; And to... and to stand in a more
bright place.

Mad...... All honor be to him that lives in Heaven and in Earth, and is
mighty in all places. Amen.

1...... Your health.

E. K. Now she is gone to the place on the Cushions on the bench, where she
stood yesterday. She does now as young children do, playing with her coats; and
at length sits down on the Cushions.

Mad...... Even as spiritual and dignified illuminations, from ascension, and
by descending, work the will of God, determined in all Creatures, diversely,
according to the measured purpose of the Highest, in dispersing his will upon
and into every one, particularly; whereby some become wise, one in this,
another in that degree; other some mighty in works, whereby health and help,
comfort and joy, is given to the faithful: Even so, ascending, does Hell
infect, sometime with error, and sometime with infirmities: So that from Heaven
springs health, from below infirmities of body and soul. Whereby we find two
immediate powers, bringing forth two properties, The one Comfort, Two immediate
powers.
with Joy; The other Infection with sorrow.

But this may be objected: Has it not been seen, that the wicked cure
diseases? and restore health? Whatsoever is of death, is sorrow; which is the
ground of spiritual and bodily infection so that evil cannot work good. How can
it therefore be that the dead revive, or restore health? The cure therefore of
all spiritual infection (I mean the infections of such, as are spiritual is in
respect of his weakness, and not of his strength; Because Satan infecting, may
become weak (whereby he cannot prevail) and so give health, by reason of
weakness: Otherwise, with power, bringing death all manner of ways.

D. E. K. thought a thing, whereunto she answered.. and he said... my thought:
she answered.... in my degree, thoughts.... known to me. I, than an.... she is
of God and in God, tha.... the thought of man.

E. K. She... I hear... a buz... ear.

..... These two immediate and supernatural properties are so dignified in
Creation and Determination, that the good Angels cannot cure, or help such
infirmities, as are brought in by the subtle infection of the wicked
themselves: Unless in body the immediate power of the second Person in Trinity
be adjoined in the aid and cure of the infected body; which is the true
Physician. And as he took upon him man his frailty, so he is chief Governor
over the same in all degrees.

If the soul be infected, the Angels have no power to... it or make it clean:
but by the will of the Father which is the Holy Ghost, descending through the
Angels into the propriety of the Church: whereby the Disease is cured.
Therefore, considering, thou art infected not naturally, but by spiritual and
wicked inflammation, stirring up thy body unto infection. We that are good
Angels, cannot minister help unless we feel the immediate power of him which
is the second, and the water of Life. Notwithstanding, as we know how the
infection grew, either locally or really: So can we find contrary places and
things for comfort.

When Herod was infected by the Devil to kill very Christ the Son of God; His
purpose was not altered by contradiction to the Devil, but by the foreknowledge
of God, which appointed Egypt for his safeguard. So it is said unto thee, It is
thought good thou should rest at CRACOVIA; Cracovia.
for it is a place sanctified, both in fore-determination, and now. Therefore
use the Sabbath, and rest from labor: Reap now, and eat the fruit of thy
labor; Press the Vine, that thou may drink, and be comforted: For the
promises of God, are not in vain; Neither are the Heavens fruitless. For as it
is said, Thou art not bound, but for the service of God: Neither shall thou
Riches.
be enriched by Princes: but shall enrich them. Flesh may speak vainly, and be
without comfort: But the promises of God, cease not, neither become uncertain.

This year to come, is of great bloodshed: prepared to stop the mouth of the
Earth, which gapeth for sorrow. Therefore thou must be separated, that the
promises of God may be fulfilled: which comes (not at your request, but at his
Determination) most abundantly.

These Boords need not, The paviment shall serve; for it is neither the Earth,
nor man's hands, (but the Finger of him that lives.) that (...).

Behold.... That the power of God might be known, therefore he has chosen
those that are not regarded, to the intent, it may be said: Lo, This is of
God... Have therefore, and stay not, for thy warning is great.

Those that are wise (to sin) in their fleshly imaginations, are deceivers of
themselves: Which with us are not to be accused, but rather unknown. For the
Kingdom of Heaven is divided from Hell: and those that are of Hell, are unknown
from us. For as... and..., naturally, know not, one another, such, and so it is
of us.

Sit tibi satis quod illam non novimus, neque virtutem ullam descendentem ab
illa vidimus. Neither is the power of God in him, for his own sake: but for the
Spirit that God has planted in him. (...). L.
For we have known him, and again have forgotten him. And yet we understand
him. But (I teach thee a Mystery) by irradiation into him: and not by reflection
from himself. As the heavens fly from the stink of the infected powers, even
so, fly thou.

Ganislay, Ganislay.

E. K. She calls one, who is now come here. D. (...) ipsius Palatinae.
E. K. He seems to have his face half like a man, and half like a woman, his
body being all covered with hair, rugged.

Began...... What will thou with me? what will thou have?

E. K. Madimi shakes her Coats, and brusheth her Coats with......

Mad...... Thus says my Mother. Beware of wild honey, and raw fruit: The one
clarified, the other ripened may become good. Those that know not wine become
drunken, but to such as know it, it brings health. Even so, this Doctrine.
For, unto him that it is tasted, being ripe, or..... or becomes comfort, and
the Key of a pr..... But unto him that tastes it wildly, and..... Worket
(...). Your knowledge is not to have, but to learn to..... So that you may be,
both having and learned. Small are the Treasures of this world, in respect of
the wisdom that judges NATVRE. For unto him that judges truly, what secret
is hidden? Those that seek the world shall be contemned of it: But he that
flies from her, shall use her as a slave, or as the second mother does her
daughter. Notwithstanding, of my self, I will be more appliable unto you, then
you shall be followers of me. For, for that cause am I become childish.
Therefore cease: He is truly Why God in his Minister, as a Child deals with
us.
wise, that says, God knows at all times what we have need of. Be not
tempters. Be patient.

5. Even as thy desire is, so are all things in England. Nothing kept back. But
for thy sake, such as are thine, are with them friendly used

6. If thou should not be called home, how should thou enjoy the benefit
of God his promise, which has said: Thou shall call her back, etc. to her
preservation. But, first these things must come to pass. The Country shall be
divided, one rise up against another. Great treasons be wrought. Yea, and one
cut another throat: And when the greatest troubles are, Then shall thou save
her life. Then shall the wall be broken down: And free passage shall be made:
And such as are skorners, and ascend up the narrow steps, or show themselves on
the walls, shall be trodden down and defaced. Here is understanding...... That
which thou, E. K. have, is a part of four, and is become the fifth: Yet it is
none of the four, dignified in a Cube, whose root is

..... I will know it shortly. Thou have no power (for time is not yet come.)
But must be brought forth shortly, that it may be known...... Made it, was 252.
Holy (but it was made by those that...... It: which is not man, neither any
thing of wickedness) which for his sins died, least he should have been
destroyed in the second death. Revealed unto thee, neither for thine own sake;
nor at thy request: But by the will of God, for a time to come.

E. K. I pray you to tell me plainly what it is.

Mad..... Be content...... I speak thus, least thou should sin, God the
father, the Son, and the holy Ghost bless you.

E. K. Now she is gone, as a mighty tall woman. Note. Madimi as a tall woman
now.


D. Veritati aeternae, sit aeterna Laus Gloria and Benedictio.

E. K.

Amen.
Wednesday, Martii 4. Mane. 1584. LASKO. Martii 14. Stylo Novo.
D. After my Petition made to God (at the instance of A. L. not present now) to
know of Maldavia Kingdom, the state to come: that is, when A. L. and by what
means he should enjoy the same (being before at Mortlak, promised unto him.)
And at my requesting that Madimi might be the Minister of his will therein: At
length appeared Madimi.

D. Gloria Patri, and filio and spiritui sancto: sicut erat in principio, and
nunc and semper, and in secula seculorum. Amen.

Mad. Amen. A certain rich man, father of an household, returned, and found all
things out of order: And lo, he looked up, and said unto his servant: Arise,
and be ready, for I will set my house in order. Go to Asson, and I will meet
thee there: And he arose up, and went unto Asson: But his master came not: At
length he said unto him. Behold, I will not dwell h..... Remove my household
(...) Banal, and he did so. And the servant prepared a feast: But his master
came not. And he said unto him the third time; why art thou sorry, or why art
thou angry?..... Oh unto me, for I am thy master. And he said: Rise, go unto
Molschecks, and thou shall meet me there. But lo, thus says the servant, my
master forgets...... and has commanded me twice, and I have prepared for
him, and he came not, and he says unto me the third time, Arise, go, and I
will meet thee: Thou shall find nie there; But he will there also deceive me:
And he sent before, and behold, his master.... But immediately after that, the
servants messenger..... The father of the household came; and he looked but his
servant was not there. And he sent for him, and commanded him to be.... and to
be brought with violence: But the servant said, deal not thus with me, for it
is violent: But the master answered, and said: What I command thee......
ghtest: For servants have no freedom of themselves. And it came to pass that
after the master had gathered together his friends: He said unto them, Arise
up, and find me one that is FAITHFUL with OBEDIENCE. Then he stretched out
his band, and he said unto his servant. Hold, take thy reward: For, from me
thou art banished. How say you, was this Justice, that he did unto his servant?

D. O Lord, we appeal to thy mercies, and we acknowledge thy judgments always
to be most just and true, etc.

Mad. The Ark of the Lord was the Covenant of OBEDIENCE. Happy are those that
enter.

E. K. There springs a thing before her I ke a Reed, but withered.

Mad. Unto thee, [E. K. pointing to the Reed,] thus says the Lord, Because
thou can not endure the end of winter, Spring on, and grow: But in the midst
of [thy] beauty, in the midst of summer, shall thy destruction be.

A. L. I will anoint thee before thy time, for my promise sake: That thou
may fall in the midst of thine own time, for thy weakness is great.

E. K. She stands and holds up her hands toward heaven, and says nothing
that I can hear.

Mad. Go, make haste: All flesh is abominable.

E. K. She speaks another way, not toward us.

Mad. I am sealed, neither can I speak any more.

E. K. Now she goes away like a three cornerd Cloud.

D. Oh Jesu have mercy on us. Oh King of Jews have mercy on us. Oh Conqueror
against Hell, death, and the Devil have mercy on us.

E. K. Now is he here, who was last here. Are you Nalvage.... In the name of
Jesus. Lord be merciful unto us, etc.

.... Is sealed; I am excepted.... I am commanded, and my Office is to teach.

E. K. He turns about with a great swistnesse, at length he stands,

D. O Lord, and our desire is to be taught of thee, in thee, and for thy
service.

Nal. To him to whom it is said, G O: Thus, I say, let him be going. For God
has stretched out his hand, and he says, I will not pluck it back, but with
vengeance.

E. K. He turns again.

D. O God, to whom is that G O, said? D. I was sick of an ague, and thereupon
did somewhat differ, awaiting also for the Lord. A. L. His help, chiefly, with
Coach, Horse, and Money.


Nal. Thou mortal man, who is the Lord of health?

D. The God of Heaven and Earth.

Nal. The Lord is angry, and he said unto thee.

Be gone. D. Vide Job. cap. 33. ecundum conjecturam meam de tribus modu Divinae
Misericordia, (...) homines, etc.


Lo, there is a day past. And if his own Angel had not made intercession for
him, he had been nothing: Seal these things, make haste.

Be going.

For the Lord is angry.

D. O God, etc.

Nal. Thus he says..... Lasky has rejoiced with an Harlot, and has measured
me, which am unknown: But he shall be rewarded.

D.

A. L. To thee it is said: Make haste, and be gone. I will fulfill my promise
in him for thy sake: But he shall fall, being none of thy acquaintance.

D. Pronounce favor and mercy on me: who in my sin..... and singleness of
heart rejoice to do what I can possibly perform.

Nal. Thus they have said against thee. Let him not go. Of them thus says the
Lord. They shall tarry where they would not. Cease, write no more.

D. Soli Deo, omnis honor and Gloria. Amen.

Monday, Martii 9. Hora 9. Mane recessimus a..... and prima nocte fuimus apud
petr.....

Tuesday, 10.

Wednesday, 11.

Thursday, 12..... At Michow we lodged at night.

Friday, martii 13. We came to Cracow, circa tertiam a Meredie, and were lodged
in the Suburbs by the Church at..... Where we remained a sevenight, and then (I
and my wife) we removed to the house in St. Stephens street, which I had hired
for a year, for 80 gylders (of 30 gr.) And Master Edward Kelly came to us on
Friday in the Easter week (by the new Gregorian Calendar) being the 27 day of
March, by the old Calendar: but the sixth day of April, by the new Calendar,
Easter day being the first day of April in Poland, by the new Gregorian
institution.

CRACOVIA. Martii 13. An. 1584.

Omnis Honor, Laus, Gloria and Gratiarum Actio, sit Deo Nostro Omnipotenti,
Trino and uni (...) and semper. Amen. D.

MENSIS MYSTICUS SAOBATICUS, Pars prima ejusdem.
Tuesday morning, Anno 1584. Aprilis 10. stilo novo Gregoriano. CRACOVIAE.
AFter our diverse prayers and contestation of our humility, obedience, and
credit in these Actions: and being come now to Cracovia, the place sanctified,
whereunto we were willed to make have, etc. At lenth appeared Nalvage.

E K. He has a Gown of white silk, with a Cape with three pendants with
tassels on the ends of them all green: it is fur, white and seems to shine,
with a wavering glittering. On his head is nothing, he has no berd. His
physiognomy is like the picture of King Edward the sixth; his hair hangs down
a quarter of the length of the Cap, somewhat curling, yellow. He has a rod or
wand in his hand, almost as big as my little finger: it is of Gold, and divided
into three equal parts, with a brighter Gold than the rest. He stands upon
his round table of Crystal, or rather Mother of Pearl: There appear an
infinite number of letters on the same, as thick as one can stand by another.
the table is somewhat inclined on one side: he stands in the very middle; his
garment covers his feet: his breast seems smooth as the down remaining of a
Swan, when all the feathers be off, so is his neck, etc. He is lean and
longvisaged.

D. The infinite mercies of God be on us: and the light of his countenance
shine on us; and his favorable countenance be on us.

Nal....... Amen, unto him that is, and was, and lives for ever.

E. K. He looks earnestly on his table, and turns him to view it.

Nal....... All things are in order. Thus says the Messenger of him which is
the God of Wisdom. Is your worthiness such, as you can merit so great mercy?
or are your (...) cleansed, and made apt to receive and hold the sweet liquor,
pure understanding it self?

D.

Has the Sun entered into your bowels, or have you tasted of the night-dew?
Where are your wedding Garments; or after what sort do you provide for your
marriage? Unseasoned you are and withered flesh, partakers of those things
which make you holy: through which partaking and the secret providence of him
that is the Highest, you became dignified to the end, and are sufficiently
washed for the time of entrance. O stiff-necked people you deserve nothing, and
yet you have the hire of such as labor. But, what, can corruption be partaker
of those things that are incorruptible? or man, which savoureth in himself, can
you savor also of the Almighty.

O you weaklings, O you of no faith, O you Cankers of the earth; Where is the
shame you have; Where are the tears you let fall; Where is the humility you are
taught to? Nay you are such as say in your hearts; if the Spring be fair, the
Harvest is like to be good: If these thing come to pass, it is the finger of
the Lord. But such is your imperfection, such are the fruits of the flesh, and
the vanity of mortality.

Notwithstanding, consider that you are servants: Do therefore the will of your
Master. You are become free: Be faithful and thankful to him that is the giver
of liberty: Nay you are become children: partakers of the counsel of him that
sits and sees, and says I am. Therefore be sober, faithful, and waver not,
for the inheritance of your Father is great: your freedom is without
recompense, and your Master the King of Justice.

Where are the people, or in what generation did they dwell, that has been
thus acquainted and drawn into familiarity with the true Servants and Angels of
God? Unto whom have those mysteries been opened. Is it not said, of those that
are sanctified, The Lord appeared unto them in a vision: But he comes to you
when you are awake: Unto them he came unlooked for, unto you he comes
requested. Arise up therefore, and be not forgetful what the Lord has done for
you; for The End makes all. Faith.
the things of this World are not, until they be done, neither is there any
thing assured, but by the end.

It was said unto Abraham, And I will destroy them. He believed it; but he
asked not, when. Great is the reward of Faith; for it gives strength: But
those that are faithful are not of this world. Notwithstanding, you have said,
(as it was said by the Disciples to Christ, when they were yet unpure, and
blind) When shall these things come to pass? Lord, what is meant by When Faith.
this, or that? Simple Faith excels all Science. For, Heaven and Earth shall
perish in their corruption: But the voices of the Lord, much more his promises,
are become Angels for ever: For as the Sun begets in the earth, and is
father of many things that live in corruption and have end: So is the God of
Heaven, the bringer forth and begetter of things celestial with life and for
ever. For why, Dixit and factum est, Every Idea in eternity is become for ever,
and what is Idea.
thought, is become a living creature. I teach you a mystery.

As the tree in sappy life, watering her self thoroughly, brings forth the
ornaments of her own beauty: So the spiritual part of man being good and
dignified, burnisheth himself, with his sound and faithful thought: I mean the
glory and show of his own beauty; for the soul of man grows, either with
beauty to salvation, or with dishonor and filthiness, to damnation.

I have done my Commandment. I have as a Schoolmaster warned you, and as a
friend counseled you: I will also teach you.

[ E. K. He speaks in a thin small voice.]

D. He used a great pause, and silence.

E. K. He stands and points with his rod to the letters of his Table, as if
he made some account or reckoning. He went out of the middle, and measured how
may steps it is about.

Nal....... Pater, Filius, Spiritus Sanctus: Fundamentum, substantia, and
principium omnium.

[ E. K. Thought in his mind, rerum, and he answered his thought, saying, What
need I say rerum? The Grammarians will be on my side. Omnium, is more than to
say omnium rerum.]

E. K. This seems to be spoken by some other, in my imagination.

Nal....... Omnium, is the thing that is my charge.

E. K. He still conferreth place to place, etc. So. E. K. Now he stands still.

Corpus omnium.... E. K. He points to the whole or round table which he
stands on.

1. The substance is attributed to God the Father.

2. The first circular mover, the circumference, God the Son, The finger of the
Father, and mover of all things.

3. The order and knitting together of the parts in their due and perfect
proportion, God the Holy Ghost. Lo, the beginning and end of all things.

E. K. He still counts and conferreth places and letters together.

Nal....... Lo, it is divided into 4 parts: whereof two are dignified: one not
yet dignified, but shall be: the other without glory or dignification.

E. K. He seems to point to some divisions.

Nal....... Understand God, as the substance of the whole, (as above said.)

E. K. He counts again.

Nal....... The substance of this part is called Vita.

E. K. He points to the uppermost part.

Nal....... Called Vita Suprema. See here three small lines.

[ E. K. Those three small lines appear in the uppermost parcel.]

Say... Gaudium, [pointing to the uppermost line.

Say... Praesentia [pointing to the second.]

...... Laudantes or Triumphantes [pointing to the third.]

E. K. Now he begins to account in the second portion,

Nal....... The Continent, Vita. [He counts again.

E. K. The four portions are of equal wideness, but not of equal clearness;
and that about the center is of fuskish or leadish color.

E. K. Now he shows three small lines in the second portion. He seems to
speak to himself somewhat.

Nal....... Say...... Potestas.... to the first line pointing. Motus...... to
the second; Ministrantes..... to the third.

E. K. Now he proceeds to the third circular portion.

Nal....... This Continent is also Vita [pointing to the third portion] non
dignificata, sed dignificanda.

Nal..... See.... E. K. There are also three lines, Actio..... in the first
line. Factum..... in the second. Confirmantes..... in the third. Sirrah, this is
true Logic.

[D. He said so to E. K. who now gave himself to study Logic diligently.]

E. K. Now he stands trembling.

Nal....... Oh qualis est Justitia inter miseros?

D..... Sed, mors est quae peperit hanc vitam.

Vita est etiam haec, sed quae peperit mors.

Say..... Luctus..... Here seem three lines also. Discordia..... Here seem
three lines also. Confundantes..... Here seem three lines also.
Those that do their duty shall receive their reward. Let my diligence teach
you diligence.

Be not angry, because you do not understand: These be means to understand. E.
K. confessed To E. K.
that he was very angry.

Nal...... Pray unto God, for I am resisted.

D. Deus in adjutorium nostrum intend, etc.

Say.... Vita Suprema. [ pointing to the uppermost line of all.] I find it (by
addition) in this Language, I ad, but written thus, toward the left hand, in
three angles I d a

Say..... Gaudium..... Mox. I find it is a name ascending and answers to the
two extremes of I ad in this manner.

I d z a o m

D. I pray you, is Mozod, a word of three letters, or of five?

Nal...... In wrote three, it is larger extended. [D. z extended is zod.]

D. Will you pardon me if I ask you another question of this extension?

Nal...... Say on: Moz in it self signifies Joy; but Mozod extended,
signifies the Joy (...) God.

D. No word in his radical form is extended.

Nal...... These doubts will at length grow easy.

Praesentia..... I find it called Zir.

So.....

I d z a o i m z r

This Lesson is greater than any that was learned in Cracovia this day.

Nal....... Potentia..... But say, Vita secunda. I ad but thus.

I d z (...) a i a o i g o d m z r v r (...) b n (...) d a z a i a B d i

I will teach you here after the distinction of them.

D. You mean of I ad diversely fignifying.

Say...... Potestas..... I find it Bab. It does ascend from the right hand to
the left.

Motio..... I find it Zna.

They will not fall out so, but they will fall out well enough.

Nal....... Vita tertia....... I ad.

D. I pray you, what is of Ministrantes?

Nal...... Look you to your Charge.

Actio..... Sor Factum..... Gru
..... Vita, quae etiam est mors.

Luctus..... Ser Discordia..... Off
f o s s e a r d i

If the order of the Table be ex spiritu Sancto,

The substance of the Father; How shall we gather the Circumference, which is
the Son?

The Son is the Image of his Father: Therefore, in his death, he must be the
Image of his father also.

If substantia be in forma Crucis, then the Son is the Image of his Father.

............. Laudantes....... Luach.

h e r v i d z s a i l a o i g o d h v m z r v r r c a b n a f o s a s d a z s
e a s i a b r d i l a n g

D. The rest I pray you to deliver us.

Nal....... Bear with me, for it is easy for you, but hard for me.

Ministrantes...... Lang. Confirmantes..... Sach.
D. Now.

Nal...... When I know, you shall.

D. As Sach.

God be merciful to man.

It is so terrible, that I tremble to gather it.

Confundantes..... Urch.

Thus I have made plain this body generally: The particulars are long, hard,
and tedious.

Thy name be blessed, O God, which can open a means, whereby thy powers
immediate may be opened unto man. Power, glory, and honor, be unto thee, for
thou art the true body of all things, and art life eternal.

E. K. Now he is suddenly vanished away with the Table.

Deo nostro sit omnis laus and gratiarum actio nunc and in sempiterna seculorum
secula.

Amen.
Thursday, Mane, Aprilis 12. 1584. (...).
D. Some delay upon our prayers made, at length appeared Nalvage in shape and
(...) as last before: He stands still.

Nal....... Benedictum sit nomen Domini in aeternum.

D. Amen.

Nal....... Audite mei fratres patienter.

The Godhead in his secret judgment keeping in his Almighty bosom, the image
and form of all things, universally, looked down upon the Earth; for he said,
Let us now go down among the sons of men: He saw that all things grew contrary
to their creation and nature; either keeping their dignities and secret virtues
shut up in obscurity, or else riotously perishing, through the imbecility and
frowardness of ignorance: So that it was said, Behold, I delight not in the
World: The Elements are defiled, the sons of men wicked, their bodies become
dunghills, and the inward parts (the secret chambers of their hearts) the dens
and dungeons of the damned: Therefore I will draw my spirit from amongst them,
and they shall become more drunken, and their ignorance such as never was: No,
not since the fall of he avens.

For, lo, the time is come, And he that is the Son of Unrighteousness, is and
lives: Unto Antichristas.
him therefore shall be given strength and power: and the Kings of the Earth
shall become mad: yea, even raging mad; yea even in the third madness, and
that in the depth of their own imaginations; and I will build my Temple in the
Woods, yea even in the Desert places; and I will become a Serpent in the
wilderness: for I have tucked up my garments and am fled away, and She In the
wilderness.
shall mourn on the Mountains without comfort.

Lo, the Thunder spoke, and the earth became misty, and full of fogge, that the
Soul of man might sleep in his own confusion. The second Thunder spoke, and
there arose spirits, such as are for Soothsayers, Witches, Charmers, and
Seducers: and they are entered into the holy places, and have taken up their
seats in man. Woe be unto the earth therefore: For, it is corrupted. Woe be
unto the earth, for she is surrendered to her adversary: Woe be unto the earth,
she is delivered into the hands of her enemy: Yea, Woe be unto the sons of men,
for their vessels are poisoned. But even then said the Lord, Lo, I will be
known in the wilderness, and will Triumph in my weakness.

And lo, he called you, and you became drunken, and foolish with the spirit of
God: And it was said Descend, for he calls, and has called: and Raphael that
brought up the prayers descended: Raphael: This Doctrine.
and he was full with the power, and spirit of God: and it became a Doctrine,
such was never from the beginning: Not painted, or carved: filed, or imagined
by man, or according to their imaginations, which are of flesh: but simple,
plain, full of strength, and the power of the holy Ghost: which Doctrine began,
as man did, nakedly from the earth: but yet, the image of perfection. This
selfsame Art is it, which is delivered unto you an infallible Doctrine,
containing in it the waters, which run through many Gates: even above the
Gate of Innocence, wherein you are taught to find out the Dignity and
Corruption of nature: also made partakers of the secret Judgments of the
Almighty to be made manifest, and to be put in execution. Which knowledge in
you is to be made perfect: two ways, by power, mediate, and immediate.
Immediately from God, in respect of his will, and secret Judgments, as unto
the Apostles. By means and tradition, as from us, opening the substance and
body of nature, according to our own image, which is the thing I have now in
hand. I am therefore to instruct and inform you, according to your Doctrine
delivered, which is contained in 49 Tables. In 49 voices, or callings: which
are the Natural Keys, to open those, not 48 Keys, or calls, and their use.
49. but 48. (for One is not to be opened) Gates of understanding, whereby you
shall have knowledge to move every Gate, and to call out as many as you please,
or shall be thought necessary, which can very well, righteously, and wisely,
open unto you the secrets of their Cities, and make you understand perfectly
the contained in the Tables. Through which knowledge you shall easily be able
to judge, not as the world does, but perfectly of the world, and of all things
contained within the Compass of Nature, and of all things which are subject to
an end.

But behold, this charge of mine is tied unto time: Therefore be diligent to
learn, diligent to Note. Take time while time is, for time will away. August
next.
hear, and that with patience: For it is neither a free School, nor a School of
continuance. For as power is not given unto me beyond the first day of August
next, so have you no strength to learn after, because I am the staff of your
Doctrine.

Nal...... I am for the comfort of the world; and not for the hindrance: Thus
says the Lord. To them that have Harvest let them reap, and unto such as have
labor let them work. As for me, I am tied to time, and am ready at all times:
For I measure not your night, nor day.

D. Thanks be unto the highest.

Nal...... Cease now with me, for no more descends.

Soli Deo Honor and Gloria.

Afternoon, the same Thursday...... After some short Ejaculations of prayers
to God, there appeared a great black masty Dog: with whom I would have
nothing to do, but expect Nalvage. He said, that he was Nalvage. We rebuked him
as an Hell-hound. At length An illuding wicked spirit.
he departed, and Nalvage appeared; but brighter then to day.

Nal...... Have you those things I told yout to day?

D. We have them in record and mind.

Nal...... Read them......

D. I did read them.

E. K. He laugheth, ha, ha, ha, etc. a great laughter: He has also a Table,
but seems not to be like the former Table of Nalvage. There are ten, or
eleven divisions in this Table, as was not in the former Table.

D. If thou art Nalvage, proceed in the Doctrine of wisdom, if thou are not
Nalvage, depart in the name of Jesus.

...... I have free will, and therefore I will be here.

D. Now I doubt nothing, but thou art a deceiver. [ Audite:] The ignorance of
the wicked A voice on the one side.
becomes dust: which showing it self is swept out of doors, and thrown on the
Dung-hills.

E. K. Now appears one like true Nalvage.

Nal...... Even so is it of the [ ] for thou have opened thy blasphemy: and
being discovered, art become more accursed: Therefore because thou art
accursed, thou art not dignified; but become a Vessel of iniquity: And
therefore have no free will. For, free will either is, or is in Free Will.
state to be dignified. Therefore, as dust I sweep thee out: and cast thee into
that Dunghill; which is the place of the greatest woe: the Dunghill, and the
reward of the unrighteous. And, because thou have thrust thy self into the
Judgments of the Lord: and have heard the secrets of the Almighty: Therefore I
seal thee tanquam truncus in Infernum.

E. K. He strikes him with an yern, like a pair of tongs; in form of a Mould
to cast Pellets in: griping his brain and underchaps, and so he fell down and
disappeared: and in his place came Nalvage.

E. K. Nalvage makes cursie toward the four quarters of the world. Nal.......
My Us is as good as thy Um.

E. K. In his heart thought that it might be, that now one Devil mastered
another, and thereupon said Um.

E. K. He is now accounting again on his Table as he did before.

Nal...... Unto this Doctrine belongs the perfect knowledge, and remembrance
of the mystical Creatures. How therefore shall I inform you, which know them
not? D (...) Characters.


D. Mean you as Babyon Boboyel, etc.

Nal....... The Characters, or Letters of the Tables.

D. You mean the mystical Letters, wherein the holy book is promised to be
written: and if the book be so written and laid open before us, and then you
will from Letter to Letter point, and we to record your instructions: Then I
trust we shall sufficiently understand, and learn your instructions.

Nal...... Also in receiving of the calls, this is to be noted: that they are
to be uttered of me, backward: and of you, in practice, forward. Backward.
These calls.


D. I understand it, for the efficacity of them; else, all things called would
appear: and so hinder our proceeding in learning.

Nal....... D P C E T E I R S M S S S

E S A I I M M N S E S. 24.


E. K. All this was in one line; in the lowermost portion: and lowermost line
thereof.

Nal...... I E E E E T N O E D M E T M M M

M M D M A E T S E A M. 27.


E. K Now he stands still.

Nal...... A E R T I S A N S S E A S D M M S E A O A 43.


V I I I I A O A O I I V I T S E I T T E V I I I I.


S D A I N.

E. K. These seemed to be taken out of diverse lines, in the three lovver
portions; but none out of the uppermost, or fourth.

Nal...... R S H D D S R R E S O L S N R E R E E

S F R H E I E E E E I E E O E T I S O E

R T T H D E O I S E O E S M E T F E D E

T S E E E E E R S E S E O R S M E T 81.


D. R. F E D E T S E E E R S E

(E E R)

S I S E H E N O E S M E F S F E E D I [I / E] O E I or F.


S S S I S E O E S H E

D S D F T E I E O R S O E D H T E T [I / E]


O E S H E O T R T E R E O E H S E R Wheresoever O follows, it may be E or I.


E E I R E S R I S O E H E E D E I E H E

D T R N D D H D N.

The rest of this Lesson, the next morning.

D. After the correcting of certain places before in the Letters he said. I
feel no more.

D. Thanks and honor be to the highest for ever.

Amen.
Friday morning, Hora 8. Aprilis 13: Cracoviae.
Not long after my Invitation, Nalvage appeared, Nutu Dei.

Nal..... Our peace, which is Triumphing patience, and glory be amongst you.

D. Amen.

Nal...... It may be said, can there be patience in the Angels, which are
exalted above the air? Patience.
For, such as were of error have their reward: Yea, forsooth my dear brethren.
For there is a continual fight between us and Satan, wherein we vanquish by
patience. This is not spoken without a cause: For as the Devil is the father of
Carping, so does he suttlely infect the Seers imagination, mingling unperfect
forms with my utterance: Water is not received without air, neither the word
of God without blasphemous insinuation. The son of God never did convert all,
neither did all that did hear him, believe him. Therefore, where the power of
God is, is also Satan: Lo, I speak not this without a cause, for I have
answered thy infection.

D. E. K. Had thought that Angels had not occasion of any patience, and so was
his thought answered.

Nal...... I find the Soul of man has no portion in this first Table. It is
the Image of the son The first Table. The Center Table.
of God, in the bosom of his father, before all the worlds. It comprehends
his incarnation, passion, and return to judgment: which he himself, in flesh,
knows not; all the rest are of understanding. The exact Center excepted.

A (Two thousand and fourteen, in the sixth Table, is) D

86. 7003. In the thirteenth Table, is I.

A In the 21th. Table. 11406 downward.

I In the last Table, one less then Number. A word, Jaida you shall
understand, what that word is before the Sun go down. Jaida is the last word of
the call.

85. H 49. ascending T 49. descending, A 909. directly, O simply.

H 2029. directly, call it Hoath.

225. From the low angle on the right side.

Continuing in the same and next square.

D 225. [The same number repeated.

A In the thirteenth Table, 740. ascending in his square.

M The 30th. Table, 13025. from the low angle in the left-side.

84........ In the square ascending.

Call it Mad.

O The 7th. Table, 99. ascending.

C The 19th. descending 409.

O The... 1. from the upper right angle, crossing to the nether left, and so
ascending 1003.

83. N The 31th. from the Center to the upper right angle, and so descending
5009. Call it Noco.

Be patient, for I told you it would be tedious:

O The 39th. from the Center descending, or the left hand, 9073.

D The 41th. from the Center ascending, and so to the right upper Angle, 27004.

R The 43th. from the upper left Angle to the right, and so still in the
Circumference. 34006.

I The 47th. ascending, 72000.

82. In the same Table descending the last.

Call it Zirdo.

P The 6th. ascending 109.

A The 9th. ascending 405.

81. L The 11th. descending 603....... Call it Lap.

D. Her, he stroke the Table on Saturday action following at my reading over of
it backward.

E The 6th. from the right Angle uppermost to the left, 700.

G The 13th. descending, 2000.

R The 17th. from the Center downward, 11004.

80. O The 32th. descending from the right Angle to the Center, 32000.

Z 47th. 194000. descending.

Call it Zorge. [Of one syllable.]

A 19th. from the left corner descending, 17200.

79. A 24th. from the Center ascending to the left Angle, 25000.

Q The same Table ascending, 33000.

Call it QAA. [Three syllables with accent on the last A.]

E The second Table, 112 ascending.

L The...... th. descending 504.

C The 19th. Table descending 1013. [That C. is called C Minor.]

I The 13th. descending, 2005. 7877.


C The 14th. descending, 2907.

Call it Cicle.

E. K. Now is he kneeling, and praying with his Rod up

76. O The 4th. ascending to the left Angle, 390.

D The 5th. descending 812.

O In the same descending, 902.

Call it O D O.

D. Here he strikes again on Saturday.

75 N The 9th descending 804. A The 11th descending 2005. This A may be an A or
an O.
R The 14th descending 5006. N The 16th descending 12004: be corrected it M.
Zamran.
A The 20th descending 17006. Z The 32th descending 40006. Call it Zanran.


I give it faster unto you, than I received it. E. K. thought it.

74 T The 4th descending 212 This may be T or D.
O The 6th ascending from the center to the left corner 1907. Call it OD or OT.
73 A The 9th ascending 500 C The 10th descending 602 Call it CA, [D. two
syllables.]
R The 16th ascending 22006. E must come after R: but without number, and so,
it is Zacare.
A The 19th descending 23012. 72 C The 30th ascending 30006. A The 39th from
the left angle descending 42012. Z The 46th ascending 312004. Call it Zacar.


Use your time of refreshing, and return Deo gratias reddamus immortales.

The same Friday after Noon, circa 3. horam.
After a short request made by me to Christ for wisdom, and verity to be
ministered by Nalvage; he appeared and spoke much to E. K. which he expressed
not to me: but a length confessed that he gave him brotherly counsel to leave
dealing as an Idolater or Fornicator against God, by asking counsel of such as
he did.

E. K. confessed that he had been that day, and some days before, dealing by
himself after his manner, to understand of my Lord Laskie, and of other matters
of Lasko, and left his questions in his window written. Nalvage told him the
devil had now taken away his questions. E. K. went down to see if it were true,
and he found it true.

Nal...... Pray..... D. We prayed.

There is an error in the last, not in the Number, but in the Letter. I will
first go through the Letters, and after come to the Numbers. How many words
have you received this day?

D. Thirteen, whereof Iaida was said to be the last of the call.

Nal...... They be more worth than the Kingdom of Poland. Be patient, for these
things are wonderful.

71 N ( The number must needs go to) the sixth, descending 309. A The 7th
ascending 360. O The 9th ascending 1000. O The 13th ascending 1050. V The 17th
ascending 2004. It is Vooan. It may be sounded Vaoan.

Add those last Numbers D. 309 360 Vooan is spoken with them that fall, but
Vaoan with them that are, and are glorified. The devils have lost the dignity
of their sounds. 1000 1050 2004 4723

D. They make 4723.

Nal...... It is called the Mystical root in the highest ascendent of
transmutation.

D. These phrases are dark; when it shall please God they may be made plain.

Nal...... It is the square of the Philosophers work.

D. you said it was a root.

Nal...... So it is a root square.

D. The square thereof is 22306729....

The word is, by interpretation, Ignis vera matter. The vain Philosophers do
think it does Lapis (...) projectionis.
beget bodies: but in truth, it conceives, and brings forth. 70 D the fifth,
ascending, 4. O the 39, ascending, 7806. call it OD. [D. drawing the O long.]

E L 17 (not 17 and the thirdth: for it is of the thirdth: and 17 it

L et may be of them both) ascending, 419.

69 O O the 18 ascending 2017.... this O must be sounded as A.

T M M the 24 from the center to the left angle, ascending, 5069.... T must be
instead of M.

L A A 30 descending, 9012.

A I I the 35 ascending, 15079.

B P P the 43, from the center to the left angle, descending 159068. Aversed.


Call it Piamo el. It is Piatel Baltale to be sounded.

As the ear is the chief sense; so, being infected, it is the greatest
hindrance. Many there be Note Intruders.
that thrust themselves between you and me: and they are increased. Power is
given again to the Show Stone; and thou shall not be hindered.

D. Shall I presently bring it forth?

Nal...... As thou will.

D. I brought forth the Stone, and it seemed marvellously brighter than before
it was wont to appear. ^


E. K. He seems to pray.

E. K. There appears to me in the Stone Michael as he was wont to appear,
with his sword in his hand, and in a long white garment, etc.

Mich....... I am the strength of the Highest, and the mighty arm of him that
is Almighty: your fellow servant, and the messager of the Highest: The powers
of the earth have risen up against God his promise shall be performed.
you: But you shall prevail, and this Doctrine shall be delivered as is
promised, and according unto time. But pray earnestly; for lo, the whole host
of Angels, such as are blessed, have cried unto the Lord, saying: Not so Lord:
Thy bread is torn in pieces, or reproachfully eaten.

Thus therefore says the Lord, Be patient, for the place is holy, and the
power of the Highest is amongst you. Receive willingly: for he that is offended
is smitten. Be comforted, and beware The dignification of the Stone.
of deceivers: for the power of the wicked is increased, and is become mighty:
But into this vessel shall enter no unclean thing, not for this time only, but
for ever.

Unto thee Nalvage thus says the Lord, gather up thy wings and enter: Do as
thou art commanded, and be multiplied. Be comforted; for Gabriel shall ascend
and stand before the Lord, Be multiplied. Gabriel.
and shall have power and descend: and he shall be yoked unto thy loins, and
thou shall become mighty; that thou may open the wonders of the Lord with
power.

E K. Now is Nalvage come into the Stone.

Mic....... Be comforted, be comforted, be comforted my brethren in the God of
Hosts: for your comfort is and shall be of the Holy Ghost. Therefore let peace
be amongst you, and be no more The holy Ghost.
babes; for wisdom dwells not amongst children. The peace of God be amongst
you: And thus much I have comforted you.

E. K. He is gone.

E. K. Now here is another.

D. It is Gabriel that came to Daniel.

Gabr....... I did so, and I am that Gabriel, and the World bears witness of
my coming.

You rebellious winds, you deceivers of the righteous, you naked substances
and things lighter than the winds, know not you that the God of your creation
has rewarded you, know you not your own weakness, know you not your state of
no return? I say headlong you all (without resistance) fall down to your
places: Be gone, sink, for I am of power, and do prevail.

Behold he has placed darkness behind him, and has made the lights of heaven
as the Lamps of his beauty. Go you that are confounded without return; for the
name of our God in his determination is invincible.

This night is a Sabbath, and a scourge to the wicked.

Nal....... I promised to expound you a word, the first you had to day, but the
last. It signifies, of the Highest.

E. K. His Table now appears very evidently to me, as that I could paint it
all.

Cease for this time, for it is a time of silence, for the wicked are
confounded: in the morning early you shall be taught plentifully: for my power
is become a hundred and fifty; and I will finish Note.
my charge, long before the time appointed.

Gabr. We are always present until the promise be ended. Rest in peace.

E. K. Gabriel seems to be all in complete harness, like skales of a Fish
from the armpits downward; with a Spear in his hand, all of fire, about a two
Note this form of (...) at this occasion.
yards long.

D. The peace of God, and his mercy, be on us now and ever. Amen.

D. If it should not offend you, I would glady ask your knowledge of the Lord
Albert Laskie our great worldly friend, and that for the service of God, if he
be past the chief danger of his present infirmity, etc.

..... When we enter into him, we know him; but from him, he is scarce known
unto us: as of (...). Laskie.
him of whom it is said, he has consented with an Harlot: we know not the end
of God his justice which is upon him.

His prayers are come to the second heaven, neither has any received
remembrance of him: But we will pray unto God to be merciful unto him, and that
for thy sake; Because thou shall not be made a laughing stock to the wicked.
Pray thou for him, that thou may work in him that Prayer for A. L.
which he works not for himself. Hold up thy hands for him; for it is a
lawful and a charitable thing: For God has granted thee a force in prayer: But
be patient and humble. We with thee, give thanks and laud unto the Lord. God
his gift to D in prayer.


Cease.

D. Lauds Deo nostro incessanter reddantur.

Amen.
Saturday, Aprilis 14. Mane. Cracoviae, 1584.
D. Oratione Dominica finita, and brevi illa oratione Psalmi 33. inspecto
Chrystallo (...) utrique Gabriel and Nalvage.

E. K. They kneel, as though they were in confession one to another, and....
about half a quarter of an hour.

Gabr.......) after me.

O beginning and fountain of all wisdom, gird up thy loins in mercy, and
shadow our weakness; Prayer.
be merciful unto us, and forgive us our trespasses: for those that rise up
saying there is no God, have risen up against us, saying, Let us confound them:
Our strength is not, neither are our bones full of marrow. Help therefore O
eternal God of mercy: help therefore O eternal God of salvation: help therefore
O eternal God of peace and comfort. Who is like unto thee in (...) of incense?
before whom the Quire of Heaven sing, O Mappa la man hallelujah: Visit us O God
with a comprehending fire, brighter than the Stars in the fourth heaven. Be
merciful unto us, and continue with us; for thou art Almighty: To whom all
things of thy breasts in Heaven and Earth, sing glory praise and honor,
Saying, Come, Come, Lord for thy mercy sake. Say so unto God kneeling.

D. I repeated it, kneeling, and E. K. likewise kneeling.

E. K. They both kneel down again, and put their foreheads together. Gabriel
seems to sit in a chair on the one side of Nalvage about 30 yards off, on
Nalvage his left hand. Nalvage stands.

...... Thus says the Lord, Who is he, that dare resist invincible strength:
Seal up the East, Gabr.... standing said.
seal up the South, Seal up the West: and unto the North put three Seals.

E. K. Now sits Nalvage in a Chair aside from his round Table, the Table
being somewhat before him.

Nal....... Name that I point to. [To E. K. he said so, as concerning the
Letters.

E. K. He flung like a thin brightness out of the Stone upon E. K. he has his
rod, which he took out of his own mouth.

... ev... He holds up his rod, and says, I am all joy, and rejoice in my
self.

E. K. He smit the round Table with his rod; and it whirled about with a great
swiftness. Now that which before seemed to be a circular and plain form,
appears to be a Globe and round Ball; corporal, when it Globe
turns.

Nal...... Say the last.

D. Piamo el.

E. K. He strikes the Table now, and though the body seem to turn, yet the
Letter seem to stand still in their places.

E. K. Now he plucketh out five Books, as if from under his Chair, and sets
them down by him; the books be green, bright, and they be three corned, D a
clasp.

Sal...... Read backward... [to E. K.] Every thing with us teaches. Read
backward. Letter without number.

Nal...... Read backward, letter without number, the letters thou had
yesterday.

D. After all read, he proceeded thus: 68 P The fourth ascending, 97. 68 PIAP.
A The sixth ascending, 112. I The eighth ascending, 207. P The ninth ascending,
307.

E. K. Now he strikes it again, and it turns.

67 A TA. T The numbers after.
66 I AAI. The first A may be an A an O or an E.
A Those are two words.


E. K. Now he strikes again, and turns: his Rod seems to be hollow like a
Reed.

65 APGOB. Call it Bogpa.


E. K. Gabriel falls down on his face, and lies prostrate, and Nalvage
holds up his Rod all the while.

DOS. He pointed beyond him in the upper Circle, it seems Also T
like a Roman C.

64 LAMAOP. Poamal Od. put out the S.


Make it two words...... It may be all one word with S. or T. but it would be
hard for your understanding.

Make a point between Poamal and Od.

E. K. Gabriel lies prostrate all this while.

63 XVDMOZ. Call it Zome.


..... With great difficulty this Letter was discerned: Nalvage himself said, he
knew it not yet; but it seemed to E. K. to be an X. Nalvage denied it to be an
X. and said he knew not yet the mystery: say the Lords prayer, for I cannot
open it. Although my power be multiplied, yet I know not this Letter. At length
he said it was V.

E. K. I can remember that word well.

Nal...... Thou shall not remember it.

62 PEV. It is called Vep.
Make a point there. D. A full point? Nal..... No, no, a stroke.
61 OLOHOL. Call it Loholo.
Long, the first syllable accented.

E. K. Now he strikes the Table.

60 SD. It is the uppermost of Call it DS.
59 SIMAPI. Pronownce it IPAMIS. Make a point at S. the A pronounced short.
58 LU. Call it UL. D, With such sound to U. as (...) yew, whereof bows are
made. 57 MAPI. Labiis claufis, [Span] [um um]... He bummed twice, signifying
two words more, which were not to be pronounced till they were read in practice.
F. K. It seems to be an e. DO. OD. As you had before.

E. K. Now Gabriel rises from his lying prostrate.

56 HOTLAB. Call it BALTOH. There is a point.
PAIP. Call it Piap.

E. K. Gabriel steppeth up, and seems to storm angerly against somewhat.

D. Belike some wicked powers would intrude their illusions, or hindrances in
these actions.

E. K. He has thrown his Dart from him: and it comes to him again.

Gabr..... Count the number of the words you have received to day.

D. Sixteen, if Poamal; Od be made two words.

Gab...... Be packing, and so many plagues be amongst you more then your plague
was before.

E. K. He seems to storm still.

Gab...... Come in.

E. K. Now there come four more.

Gab...... Art not thou Adraman? Which have fallen, and have burst thy neck
four times? And will thou now rise again, and take part anew? Go thy way
therefore, thou Seducer, enter into the fifth torment. Let thy p were be less
then it is, by as much as thou see number here.

E. K. Now they all four fall down into a pit, or Hiatum of the foundation of
the place where they stood.

E. K. Nalvage lies all this while upon his face.

Gab...... Count now again.

D. Sixteen.

Gab...... It is not so. There is an error.

Nal...... I am deceived from Ipam.

OD the next is false, and so are the rest: And so is that that follows.

ABOS. SOBA.

D. I had Baltoh.

Nal...... And Piap.

Nal...... What is this? [to E. K.] E. K...... G.

Nal...... No, it is an H.

55 HOT. There is a point, showing a stroke, called Virgula.
TOH. 54 MOH. HOM. 53 SD. DS. 52 LIPDAI. Call it IADPIL accent ad. 51 ONOG.
Call it Gono.

Gab...... Move not, for the place waxes more holy.

Nal...... Points S. D.

D S. This was corrected on Monday following to be too much.

50 ANDA. Call it ADNA.

E. K. Gabriel did throw a brightness upon E. K. after he had stroked his own
face first, E. K. started at it.

49 AZRNZ Call it Zurza. D. As... Znurza.

E. K. Nalvage kneeleth down before the Table, and uses many inclinations, and
gestures of reverence, as Priests use to do at the Alter.

48 MZRAF FARZM. 47 HALIP moreover PILAH. Three syllables. P Is distinctly
pronounced by it self.
46 HANDAI the Ark of knowledge IADNAH. [yadnah.

E. K. Nalvage comes and kisseth the Table and kneeleth down, and seems to
pray.

45 MRE with ERM 44 BAC a Rod CAB

E. K. He kneeleth down again, and uses such gestures as before.

GSN a rod

E. K. Nalvage said, Adjuva me, O mi Deus. He holds up his hand and kisseth
the Table, and uses wonderful reverence. He says again. Fer opem, O mi Deus.

43 ERNOZ delivered you ZONRENSG 42 SD and D which DS 41 RIP the holy ones Pir,
there is a point 40 ABAC govern Call it Caba. 39 ALEROHO, I made a Law Call it
Ohorela, I Nal...... There is a stop, showing a stroke made straight down thus I
38 MRASAC to whom Casarm I a stop.


E. K. Now he kisseth the Table again.

37 MASRG with admiration GRSAM a stop at M. D. as Gursam.
36 HELOBO your Garments OBOLEH 35 SBRU beautified URBS 34 SD and D which DS

E. K. Now he uses the former reverent gestures again.

33 IDLA of gathering ALDI 32 EGRP with the fire PRGE as purge.
31 PNONG Nal...... Adjuva me, O mi Deus.
I garnished GNONP 30 LIHT seats THIL a point (...).
29 ABOS whose SOBA 28 NEIZ of my hands ZIEN here a point.
27 HOLBON the palms Nobloh. 26 AT as TA. 25 HAMMOC trussed you together COMMAH
A point. 24 DO And As before O D. 23 ZMIZ of my vestures Zimz. A point. 22
AOHTON in the midst Nothoa. Here is a point before the word. A point. 21 AAQ
your garments QAA. Three syllables.

E. K. Now he uses reverence to the Table again.

20 QLOH measures HOLQ D. as Holquu.
19 SD which DS

Nal. Adjuva me mi Deus.

18. GRPLAM a through thrusting fire Malprg, as Malpurg. 17 AT as TA.

Now he prays as before, his arms extended.

16 AARG and the Moon GRAA. A point. 15 DASPZAN a Sword NAZPS AD.

E. K. Now he prays again.

14 AT as TA. 13 I is a word by it self. 12 ROR The Sun Ror. Here a point. 11
LOZ bands Zol... zod D. as ol: A point. 10 ARBOS in whose Sobra. 9 OHPNOV of
wrath Vonpho. 8 ZLAC above the firmamets Calz. 7 HSNAL in power exalted LANSH
as Lonsh. Adjuva me O Deus. 6 TLAB of Justice Balt. Here is a point. 5 DAI the
God Iad, as Yad. 4 OHOG says GOTTO. 3 GSROV over you Vorsg. Here a point. 2
FNOS Reign Sonf. 1 LO I Ol.

E. K. Now he sits down in his Chair. This is the end of the The first Call
ended.
mighty and first Call.

...... Pray that you may understand what it is.

D. Mean you presently?

Nal....... I, presently.

D. I pray to that intent.

E. K. All the Stone shows fire, and all is on fire, nothing else appearing:
not like common fire, but clear, thin, etc.

Now it waxes clear.

E. K. And now Nalvage is on the top of the Globe, and his seat remains in
the former manner of fire. Now Nalvage holds up his right hand, and the same
seems to be many hands. There is on one of his fingers an I. It vanishes
away; and so on diverse fingers are words as follow.

I midst delivered Reign of you over my a you vestures, rod says and with the
trussed the God you ark of together of Justice, as knowledge, in the moreover
power palms you exalted of lifted above my up the hands, your firmaments whose
voices of seats and wrath, I swear in garnished obedience whose with and hands
the 60
faith the fire to Son of him is gathering that as and lives a beautified and
Sword, your triumphs and garments whose the with beginning Moon admiration is
as to not, a whom nor through I end thrusting made can fire a not which Law be
measures to which your govern shines garments the as in holy ones, a the and
flame 60
in Move I the therefore am midst and the of show servant your your of Palace,
selves, the and open same reigns the your amongst mysteries God, you of the
as your true the Creation, worshipper Balance be of 60 of friendly the 60
righteousness unto 49 Highest. 49 and me; 169 truth. for

E. K. Now all the fingers be gone.

D.,

Nal....... It is the sense in your tongue of the holy and mystical Call before
delivered: which follows in practice for the moving of the second Table, the
Kings and Ministers of government: Second Table.
The uttrance of which, is of force, and moves them to visible apparition:
moved and appeared, they are forced (by the Covenant of God delivered by his
spirit) to render obedience The covenant of God. Obedience. Many keys.
and faithful society. Wherein, they will open the mysteries of their creation,
as far as shall be necessary: and give you understanding of many thousand
secrets, wherein you are yet but children; for every Table has his key: every
key opens his gate, and every gate being opened, gives knowledge of himself
of entrance, and of the mysteries of those things whereof he is an enclosure.
Within these Palaces you shall find things that are of power, as well to speak,
as to do for every [ (1) Palace] is above his [ (2) City] and every City above
his [ (3) entrance.] Note these three degrees.


Be you therefore diligent that you may enter in, not as spoilers, but as such
as deserve intertainment in the name, and through the power of the Highest. For
great are the mercies of God unto such as have faith. This is therefore the key
of the first seven, according to the proportion of the Faith. A key of the
first seven. A sign to make an end.
first Creation. No more for this time.

A sign always to make an end.

E. K. He drew a Curtain before the Stone, of white color.

The same Saturday, after Noon, hora 3 4.
The white Curtain remained about half an hour after my prayer to God, and some
invitation to Gabriel and Nalvage, at length the Curtain quaked as though wind
blew it.

E. K. Me thinks that I hear a stir within the Stone. At length they appeared.

E. K. They have very eyes which twinkle as other men's eyes do, and I had
discoursed somewhat with E. K. of the manner of skrimges. Gabr....... as I
think.
therefore I see them with my external eye, not within my imagination, as.....

...... There are two kind of visions, the one by infusion of will and
descending, the other by infusion by permission and ascending. The first is the
image of the Will of God descending into the body, and adjoined to the soul of
man, whose nature is to distinguish things of his own likeness, but shut up in
prison in the body, wants that power; and therefore being illuminated by
spiritual presence, inwardly, sees now in part, as he shall hereafter do in
the whole.

But note, that every vision is according to the soul of man in power: and so
is received of him E. K. he speaks hollowly.
that sees. The boy of man feels nothing spiritual until he be of
incorruption: Therefore uses no sense in and illumination. The other is to be
found out by his contrary.

E. K. Here is a Devil that derideth these instructions, and says, you may
know his virtue by his wisdom: he never went to He.
School.

Gab...... I know what he is: Power is given to me to resist him, but not to
touch him. He has Note. As Pater Antichristi.
ascended, and begotten him a son, wherein the people of the earth shall be
accursed. those that are in prison shut up from light, and the use of the day
comprehend not any thing, but that which enters unto them by permission, or
free will, so is the Soul of man shut up from all light, except that which
enters by the will, or suffrance of the highest.

But as obedience is the trial of dignification, so are the Ceremonies
appointed by God, the witnesses of justification. For he that violated the
outward Law was (...): But the very end of Justice to salvation is the
obedience, and submission of the Soul. How can it be that the earth and
elements shall bear witness against man in the day of Judgment, but in the
perverse use of them, contrary to God his Commandments. He is a slow
Schoolmaster, and of sma^ll understanding. The wicked spirit said.


Gab...... Cease, for the conflict is great, and must have judgment of the
Lord.

D. Sall I join my prayers with yours to our God, to drive away this wicked
scorner, and contemner of your ministry?

Gab...... Not so, you know not the secret judgments of the Lord herein. The
white Curtain was drawn.

D. Deo Nostro soli Omnipotenti sit omnis Laus, Honor, Gloria, and imperium in
secula seculorum.

Amen.
Sunday, Aprilis 15. Mane Hor. 7.
After a few prayers necessary, and invitation to Gabriel and Nalvage for their
instructions.

...... Our instructions shall grow most plentifully amongst you. But give place
to time, for A voice out of the stone. Sabbath. The Serpent labors to part
us a sunder, and hops to prevail.
this is the voice of the highest. Be holy and righteous in the works of your
hands, and keep always the Sabbath of your Redeemer hereafter: For even yet,
the Serpent is amongst us. For even yet the Serpent is amongst my holy ones,
and endeavors to cut you asunder. Therefore I say be holy even in the works
of your hands, for he thinks to prevail against you: But let your houses be
swept clean, that when the spy enters, he find nothing to feed on.

D. We ceased and gave our selves to the Sabbath: considering, intending hence
foreward to visit the Church and Assembly, to pray and meditate on God his
service.

Solus Jesus Christus est Triumphator contra mortem and Diabolum, Dominus
Noster and Deus Noster.

Amen.
Monday, 15. Aprilis. Mane, hora 6. Cracoviae.
D. After a short prayer to God for remission of sins, and sending of his
graces, and his good Ministers assigned for our instructions: and for the
avoiding away of the great enemy, etc. who held conflict against Gabriel, etc.
The white Curtain appeared still drawn before in the stone for an hour.

E. K. There appears a face standing upon two Pillars, the Curtain yet
remaining drawn: The face is fiery, and has very great teeth. The Pillars are
like Marble spotted gray, and the ground of the Pillars color white. He said,
the works of the highest are become a stumbling block, and have entered into the
breasts of a woman, and he is become angry. But when she thinks her self
happy, she shall stumble, where she would not, and become sorrowful without
comfort.

E. K. This face and Pillars became a great water swelling upward, and so
vanished away.

D. After about an hour, the Curtain was opened. All appears as before:
Gabriel sits in his Chair, and Nalvage kneeleth.

D. I prayed diverse prayers of God, and help against the wicked enemy, yet
present, and molesting us as he was permitted.

Nal...... Pray, for the mercy of God. Pray, for thou shall not be heard? So,
well said, fie upon him.

D. Thy judgment light on this wicked Rebel for this blasphemy, O God.

D. This Devil rayled against God.

Gab...... Move not, for presence of power is great.

Nal...... Number the words of the first Key.

D. I have counted them, and they seem to be 88.

Nal...... There are not so many.

87 D. Where have I misreckoned, I pray you? Perhaps Poamalzod is to be but one
word, and so are 87.

E. K. There is a great Cross over all the stone that is red: Not only over
to be impressed through the stone.

Nal...... Number the words in thy own language.

D. I have numbered them, and they seem to be 169.

D. While I numbered, the great red cross went away: and shortly after came in
again into the stone as before.

Gab...... More not, for the place is holy. You have Zurza ds Gono in the Call:
the sd is too much.

D. I will then put it out.

D. I find Zurza Adna ds Gono.

Nal...... That ds is too much. I pray you, what is then the number of them, of
you allowed?

Nal...... 86.

D. Making also Poamolzod one word? in that account?

Nal...... Set down.

1 -- 1 2 -- 1 3 -- 2 4 -- 1 5 -- 2 6 -- 2 7 -- 3 8 -- 3 9 -- 2 10 -- 2 11 -- 1
12 -- 2 13 -- 1 14 -- 1 -- 15 -- 2 16 -- 1 17 -- 2 18 -- 1 19 -- 4 20 -- 1 21
-- 1 22 -- 2 23 -- 3 24 -- 3 25 -- 1 26 -- 3 27 -- 1 28 -- 2 29 -- 3 -- 30 -- 1
31 -- 1 32 -- 2 33 -- 3 34 -- 2 35 -- 1 36 -- 1 37 -- 2 38 -- 2 39 -- 2 -- 71
40 -- 4 41 -- 2 42 -- 2 43 -- 1 44 -- 2 -- 80 45 -- 2 46 -- 3 47 -- 2 48 --
1.... 80
49 -- 5 you lifted up your voices.
50 -- 2 1.... and
51 -- 1 1.... swear
52 -- 4 1.... obedience
53 -- 1 1 and
54 -- 1 1.... faith
55 -- 2.... 102 to him that lives ^
56 -- 2 57 -- 2 58 -- 3 -- 59 -- 1 60 -- 1 61 -- 3 62 -- 3 63 -- 3 of your
palace
64 -- 1 65 -- 1 66 -- 2 67 -- 1 68 -- 2 69 -- 2 70 -- 1 71 -- 1 72 -- 1 73 --
1 74 -- 1 75 -- 3 show your selves
76 -- 1 77 -- 1 78 -- 3 79 -- 4 to be friendly unto me
-- 80 -- 1 81 -- 2 82 -- 2 83 -- 1 84 -- 5 85 -- 3 86 -- 3
Tuesday, Aprilis 17. Cracoviae.
After diverse Ejaculations appropriate to the action, and the Curtain of white
water yet remaining. E. K. thought diverse times that he saw through the white
Veil, and stone and all, nothing appearing therein. E. K. immediately fell into
a new doubting of the verity of these actions, and said he had a Vision by a
good Creature the last night, who said these Creatures with which we dealt,
would no more appear unto him. Hereupon he said that both the last days
skorner, and these our instructors were all Devils: and that he would no more
sit to receive A. B. C. And so by Letters, any Doctrine of theirs, unless they
would otherwise expressly, and lively deliver a plain rule thereof: With many
other arguments to disprove the verity of our Actions, whereupon he said, that
John your boy can well enough deliver you their Letters, and so you need not
me, etc. I referred all to God, his will, and mercies: For, as I had at his
hands only, and by his order, and for his service required wisdom and true
knowledge, so do I not doubt but God will, according to his accustomed
goodness, provide for me, that is best for my vocation here in earth, etc.

E. K. He rose, and went away: and left me alone in my Study, appointed for
these actions.

Deus in adjutorium meum intend, Domine ad adjuvandum me festina. Gloria Patri
and Filio and Spiritui Sancto, sicut erat in principio and nunc and semper and
in secula seculorum.

Amen.
Thursday, Circa 9.
As I was in my upper Study, and had gathered the holy words of the second and
third call, and had conferred them with their English delivered also unto us:
E. K. came up the stairs, and so went into his Study, and came out again, and
as he was going down the stairs I opened my Study door, and saluted him: He
thereupon came up again, and came into my Study: And there I showed him what I
had done; and how I had some understanding of those holy words, their
significations by reason of due applying the English to the word Christus, in
tending thereby to have induced E. K. to like^ the better of the manner of our
friends, due, and Methodical, proceeding with us, and told him that unless of
this strange language I should have these words delivered unto us Letter by
Letter, we might err both in Orthography, and also for want of the true
pronunciation of the words, and distinctions of the points, we might more miss
the effect expected: But as on Tuesday last, so now again he said, our Teachers
were deluders, and no good, or sufficient Teachers, who had not in two years
space made us able to understand, or do somewhat: and that he could in two
years have learned all the seven Liberal sciences, if he had first learned
Logic, etc. wherefore he would have no more to do with them any manner of way,
wished himself in England, and said that if these books were his, that he would
out of hand burn them, and that he had written to my Lord (by Pirmis) that he
took our Teachers to be decelvers, and wicked, and no good Creatures of God,
with many such speeches, and reasons (as he thought) of force to diswade
himself from any more dealing with them: But willed me to use John my Boy as my
Skryer, for that these spiritual Creatures were not bound unto him, etc. I
answered unto all these parcels and reasons, as time served declaring my
perfect trust in God, that seeing I have many years desired, and prayed for
wisdom (such as these Actions import) at his hands, and by such means as to
his Divine Majesty seems best, that he would not either mislike my prayer, or
abuse my Constant hope in his goodness and mercy: Therefore I concluded that I
referred all to the merciful will of God, and doubted nothing at the length to
be satisfied of my request, and prayer made unto him. So he went from me this
second time.... God lighten his heart with knowledge of the truth, if it be his
Divine will and pleasure.

Note. Permis. went on last Wednesday morning, and had received our Letters
after noon, on Tuesday last: But on Monday before the wicked Prince of
darkness did what he could to hinder our proceeding.

On Thursday, Tabius (brother to my Lord Laskie his wife) brought news to
Cracovia, that my Lord, Laskie was coming to Cracovia ward. Emericus came from
Kesmarks, and returned back again. Tabius rode from Cracovia toward Kesmark.

Saturday, Aprilis 21. a Meridie.
After our prayers made, appeared shortly Gabriel and Nalvage. E. K. propounded
six questions orderly, which had bred great doubt in this fantafie, and
requested their answers.

D. He would have our spiritual friends to promise him the performance of the
Prints.

Gab....... If we were Masters of our own doings, we might well promise: But we
are servants and do the will of our master. But let me ask thee one question:

Do thou not think that all things are possible with God?

E. K. I do so, and I know so.

Gab....... Then is there no cause why thou should distrust. Let him that is a
servant, and is commanded to go, go: and let not the earth rise up, and strive
against the plow man. What sin is it when the creature rises up, and says in
his heart, Let the Lord make a Covenant with me, considering he is a bond man?

[ E. K. They seem, both the voices at once, to come to my ear.]

None but he that becomes disobedient, and refuses his Master.

D....... [D would do so.

Gab. Nal....... These things, that is to say, this Doctrine, delivered by us,
is of God, and of his mercies granted unto you, which cannot be in vain: and
therefore to be performed; for the secret determinations of God are unknown
unto us.

He never heard of any man that would ask, if God would perform his promises.

E. K. By August next?

What if it were a hundred Augusts? you may be a weary before August next, as
the Children of Israel were of their Manna.

E. K. Why join you numbers with these letters, and added none with those of
the former Table.

Brother, what is the cause that all the World is made by numbers? The Numbers
we speak Numbers. Numeri Formales. P^^lius.
of, are of reason and form, and not of merchants.

D. I beseech you as concerning the powder whereof he thinks that he has
made due assay of it, as if it should have been the Philosophers Stone, and so
affirmed to be, by the minister of this action? I beseech you so to answer, the
thing, as his reason may be satisfied.

D. They gave no answer hereunto, but proceeded in the former matter of Numbers.

Gab....... Every Letter signifies the member of the substance whereof it
speaks. Every Note the property of this Method and Language.
word signifies the quiddity of the substance. The Letters are separated, and
in confusion: and therefore, are by numbers gathered together: which also
gathered signify a number: for as every greater contains his lesser, so are
the secret and unknown forms of things knit up in their parents: Where being
known in number, they are easily distinguished, so that herein we teach places
to be numbered: letters to be elected from the numbered, and proper words from
the letters, signifying substantially the thing that is spoken of in the center
of his Creator, whereby even as the mind of man moved at an ordered speech,
and is easily persuaded in things that are true, so are the creatures of God
stirred up in themselves, when they hear the words wherewithal they were nursed
and brought forth: For nothing moves, that is not persuaded: neither can any
thing be persuaded that is unknown. The Creatures of God understand you not,
you are not Understanding, Persuasion, Motion.
of their Cities: you are become enemies, because you are separated from him
that Governs the City by ignorance.

E. K. Whether is this Language known in any part of the World or no? if it be,
where and to whom?

Gab....... Man in his Creation, being made an Innocent, was also authorized
and made partaker of the Power and Spirit of God: whereby he not only did know
all things under his Creation Adam.
and spoke of them properly, naming them as they were: but also was partaker of
our presence and society, yea a speaker of the mysteries of God; yea, with God
himself: so that in innocence the power of his partakers with God, and us his
good Angles, was exalted, and so became holy in the sight of God until that
Coronzon (for so is the true name of that mighty Devil) envying his.(...). Note
two be true Languages. Adam his speech after the fall. (...) 22. Lingua
Angelica. Lingua Angelica, vel Adamica in suo innocentia S.(...).
felicity, and perceiving that the substance of his lesser part was frail and
unperfect in respect of his pure (...)sse, began to assail him, and so
prevailed: that offending so became accursed in the sight of God; and so lost
the Garden of felicity, the judgment of his understanding: but not utterly
(...) favor of God, and was driven forth (as your Scriptures record) unto the
Earth which was covered with brambles: where being as dumb, and not able to
speak, he began to learn of necessity the Language which thou, E. K. call [
1 Hebrew:] and yet not that [ 2 Hebrew] amongst you: in the which he uttered
and delivered to his posterity, the nearest knowledge he had of God his
Creatures: and from his own self divided his speech into three parts; twelve,
three, and seven: the number whereof remains, but the true forms and
pronuntiations want; and therefore is not of that force that it was in his own
dignity, much less to be compared with this that we deliver, which Adam verily
spoke in innocence, and was never uttered nor disclosed to man since till now,
wherein the power of God must work, and wisdom in her true kind be delivered:
which are not to be spoken of in any other thing, neither to be talked of with
man's imaginations; for as this Work and Gift is of God, which is all power, so
does he open it in a tongue of power, to the intent that the proportions may
agree in themselves: for it is written, Wisdom sits upon an Hill, and
beholds the four Winds, and girdeth her self together as the brightness of
the morning, which is visited with a few, and dwells alone as though she were
a Widow.

Thus you see there, the Necessity of this Tongue: The Excellency of it, And
the Cause why it is preferred before that which you call Hebrew: For it is
written, Every less, consentesh to his greater. I trust this is sufficient.

E. K. As concerning the power, What is it?

Gab....... What it is, that it is, for the knowledge of it may lead you to
error.

D. This answer offended greatly E. K. and thereupon he left off, and would
receive no more at their hands. God make him patient, and a favourer of this
Action as soon as it is needful that he should be.

D. Laudetur, magnificetur and extollatur nomen Jesu Christi in omne aevum.
Amen.

Note on Tuesday after Noon, circa horam quartam, as we two sat together, E. K.
said that 24. Aprilis. this after noon.
he thought upon the matter, Et quod jam vellet duas horas mihi concedere
singulis diebus ad recipienda illa, quae illi tradere vellent. Ego autem illi
and maximo Deo gratias egi, quia hanc esse mutationem dextra excelsi factam
vere judicavi; nam ante prandium rigidissimus erat in contraria opinione and
sententia.

Wensday, Cracoviae, Aprilis 25, Mane, hora 7.
The Vail appeared as at first almost. After half an hour Gabriel and Nalvage
appeared, after my manifold prayers and discourses.

D. Two keys we have received by the mercy of the Highest and your ministers,
the rest we attend, according to the merciful will of the Highest.

Gab....... Move not from your places, for the place is holy.

D. Show a token O Lord when thy will is, whereby to persuade thy merciful
dealings with us, and the presence of thy faithful Ministers.

D. The frame of the Stone gave a crickling, no hand touching it, or otherwise
any mortal Note.
or worldly thing moving it. I heard it very certainly, and to E. K. it seemed
the sound of a bunch of keys, as if they had quickly been shaken and strongly.

E. K. Gabriel fitteth, and Nalvage stands.

Gab....... My Brethren he arken to my voice, for I am the true servant of the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the dignity whereof is sufficient both for
the verity of the Doctrine, and the confirmation, and persuasion of your
minds: for as God is the Father of the Faithful, so he shows himself unto
the faithful: whereby you may prove the great comfort and consolation: that you
may justly gather of the mercies of God, as touching your Election.

For at what time has God appeared unto the unrighteous? or where do you read
that ever he visited the reprobate? For the reprobate has no visitation, but
in the rod of Justice:

But you may rise up among your selves, saying lo, we are froward, we want
faith. An objection. Answer.


True it is, the acts of faith, but not the roots of faith. But I say unto you,
that the power of God in his Election, is the Basis of man's purity and
acceptance.

But here there is a Caveat.

That man imagining his Predestination and perfect Election, justifies not
himself; for wheresoever this is found, or this Doctrine preached amongst you,
either simply in man, or publicly in Congregation, it is the sure sign and
token of their perpetual ignorance and confusion: For the Will and Power of God
belongs not to our measure (for it was the cause of rebellion amongst us)
much less among men, which are fighting yet for the Glory of their reward.
Behold it is a sin in him that judges of his brothers Conscience; Much more is
it a threefold error, to form the imaginations of sin, by whose imaginations
they are.

Be not proud therefore of the gifts of God, but become humble; Neither
justify your self in respect that this is the word of God delivered unto you
for your own selves: But the more you receive, be the more thankful; and the
more you be in the strength of God, the more use you the pureness of humility.

Of whom it is said, Behold my Spirit has entered, yea into my servants, and
they are become humble and meek in the sight of men: But if we be the servants
of the God of Abraham, then are Good Angels.
we the spirits of truth and understanding, for our faith is dignified in the
sight of the heavens, and we are become mighty in the power of the Almighty.
Therefore ought we to be believed.

Now if you will confess your selves to be the children of Abraham, then must
you also accept of our Doctrine: For the meat whereby Abraham lived, is the
same food we minister unto you: of whom it is said, He believed God, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness. Even so do you, that you also may be
righteous, wherein do you differ from Abraham? Were you not barren? Who has
made you fruitful?

Did God make a Covenant with Abraham? Even so he does with you. Did the Lord
in his Ministers A Covenant.
appear unto him? so does he, and will do unto you. Were the sins of Sodom (the
fifth that perished) imported into Abraham's bosom, as the secret determination
of the Lord? Are they also not manifest (...) you (even by the same God) as
touching the time and corruption of this world? Rose he not up in the morning,
and beheld the confusion, and headlong Ruins of the wicked? And shall you not
also see the ruin of him that is the son of wickedness. Yes, unless you
hinder your selves. For the promise of your God is without exception. Be
mindful therefore of your selves; and consider your calling: That you may be
still blessed in him that is the God of Abraham, who is your Father.

In these keys which we deliver, are the mysteries and secret beings and
effects of all things moving, The Keys.
and moved within the world.

In this is the life of MOTION, in whom all tongues of the world are moved, for
there is Linguae and (...).
neither speech nor silence that was or shall be to the end of the world, but
they are all as plain here, as in their own nakedness. Despise it not;
therefore..... For unto them that are hungry, it is bread, unto the thirsty
drink, and unto the naked clothing: A Serpent it is of many heads invincible.
Believe therefore, that with him you way be wise: that your humility may be
such, as may be numbered in the world. I have said. Nal. Move not, for the place
is holy.

E. K. What mean you by that sentence or phrase.

Nal. It is of two parts, the first in respect of the spirit and presence of
him that is holy: present and teaching. Secondly in respect of your consent,
which is obedience, for obedience confirms the will of God in man, and the
will of God confirms man's salvation; wherefore it is said, move not: and why?
because the place is holy. Move neither in mind, neither in body, for obedience
is the conclusion, and confirmation of your separations from the Devils.
Sacrifice is accepted, but obedience is better. You are surely answered.

E. K. I like your answer well.

Nal. Our wisdom, shall prove Rhetoric.

80 Naaq in your creation It is q a an 79 LEANANA of the secret wisdom Ananael.
78 ILPALP partakers It is Plapli. 77 OGUP as unto the partakers It is Pugo. 76
RAMAUMI apply your selves unto us It is Im ua mar. 75 DO And Od.

E. K. This letter turns so about, that I cannot well discern it.

74 GALGINU Descend Uniglag.

E. K. This letter also turns round.

73 RACAZ Move Zod a car. 72 AIHOG we say Gobia. 71 GMRASAC in whom (...). 70
MOIAA Amongst us A ai om. 69 ZLOACIM mighty Mi ca olz. 68 RAON is become Noar.

E. K. This Letter moves.

E. K. Now he makes a reverend Cursy.

67 NIAOODDO and name Od do o a in.

E. K. This letter also moves.

Od is and it must be sounded with one breath.


E. K. Gabriel shakes his spear. Nalvage.

66 MOCACAC Flourish Ca ca com. 65 ZOSUHEI his mercies Jehusoz. 64 AMCIM Behold
Micma.

E. K. Now he uses his reverent Cursies again.

63 NARIMA Your selves Amiran.

Nal. Did I not bid thou should not move?

E. K. He has thrown down his rod upon the Table.

[D. I had moved to the door, because I heard some going up and down the
chamber without: we had forgotten to shut the staire-foot door.]

D. O Lord, I did it not upon any wilful disobedience. But pardon this Fault,
and by the grace (O God) I will avoid the like fault henceforward.

Nal. It was a great fault. D. I beseech the Almighty to pardon it.

E. K. Now he is kneeled down, and all his Face is under the Table. Now he is
up again, and takes his rod in his hand, and makes a Cross with it three
times: East, West, North, and South.

Nal. Sound your word. D. Amiran.

E. K. He pronounces the i so remissely, as it is scarce heard, and in the
pronouncing of the whole word he seems not to move his lips.

62 SUHOG I say Gobus.

E. K. He made long leasurely reverence.

61 ROLOHOG lift up. Goholor.

E. K. He uses reverence again.

Nal. The next is a name mightier then the power of the same.

60 DAM of the same your God Mad.

E. K. He uses long reverent Cursy again.

E. K. Now he holds up his Rod.

59 PAIOOD In the name Do oi ap.

E. K. He holds up his rod again.

38 NAOOVDO and truth Od vooaen. 57 TLAB of Justice Balt. 56 HALANU The Skyrts
Unalah. 55 NAON thus you are become Noan. 54 DLIP on the earth Pild. 53 GSOAC
continually Caosg.

Now he uses courtesy.

52 IGRIPLAM the fires of life and increase Malpirgi. 51 RIPNAP pouring down
Panpir 50 LEEANAN my power Na na e el. 46 NUAV you might work Vaun.

E. K. He uses reverence. Now he holds up his Rod and shakes it about his
head.

48 BAATENG your governments Gnetaab 47 ED of De, is my name 46 GAONIIM the
corners Mi i no ag

E. K. He uses courtesy.

E. K. Gabriel shakes his spear.

Nal...... It may be called Mi moag or Diuph

E. K. Now he extends. Diuf

45 DO and Od 44 POZIZI Gab....... Move not.
from the highest vessels Izizop 43 NEFAF to the intent that Fafen 42 BSACOC of
time Cocasb 41 LIMOH the true ages Homil 40 ALC 456 Cla 39 SROV out Vors

E. K. He uses most reverent Cursie.

38 ILAIMPAC successively Capmiali 37 ASNOL power Lonsa 36 GRAZMOV unto every
one of you arg as in barge Vomsarg 35 AGULD giving Dluga 34 BAATEN of
government Netaab

E. K. Many sounds are heard in the stone. He kneeleth down,

33 SONLIHT in seats 12. Thilnos 32 ALAAH placed you AAla 31 DO and OD 30
GRAZLAB Stewards BALZARG arg as in barge 29 LO I made you EOL 28 ILI in the
first ILI 27 LUZROT shall rise TORZUL 26 DO and 25 ADGRB sleep as burgen to bud
as Burgda 24 TSD which DST 23 NEIZO mine own OZIEN 22 M except E M it is a word

E. K. Now he uses reverence.

21 EGSIHCI to are not Kis I Chisge 20 SIHC are, Kis Chis 19 GROTLOT the
Creatures of the earth org as in george Toltorg 18 NIIVQ wherein Qui in 17
HCOLET of death; as och in hotch pot Teloch

E. K. Now he makes.

16 HELP SOMQ or the horns Q Mos Pleh as two words 15 NIVPAT as sharp sickles,
Ta pu in You may call it Tapui also 14 SIHC are as Kis 13 LDNV the rest Vnd L

E. K. Now he makes a Cross again. it may be Vd L or Vnd L


......... Now he stoopeth down and kisseth.

12 HAPIGIG of living breath; Gi gi pah 11 LIHTO the seats Othil 10 SIHC are as
Kiss Chis 9 ZRON six Norz 8 HODNOLSO 12 Kingdoms: Os Lon doh A Cross again.
[Os signifies twelve] Londoh 7 BAIB are Biah Biab 6 NEIZA on whose hands Azien

He stoopeth and kisseth the ground.

5 HLESMOC a Circle, Com (...) 4 RIZ I am; Zir 3 DAIP your God Pi ad

He kisseth the ground. He sets his hands on the ground.

2 OHOG says Goho 1 AMCIM behold Mic ma.

Nal....... This is all.

D. Now, in the Name of Jesus, as it pleased you before, so would we gladly
have the sense hereof in English.

Nal...... Let him that has wisdom understand: For here begin the mysteries
of your world.

1 Behold, 2 says 3 your God, 4 I am 5 a Circle, 6 on whose hands 7 stand 8 12
Kingdoms; 9 six 10 are 11 the seats 12 of living breath, 13 The rest 14 are 15
as sharp Sickles, 16 or the horns 17 of death; 18 wherein 19 The Creatures of
the earth 20 are 21 to are not, 22 except 23 mine own hand, 24 Which 25 sleep
26 and 27 shall rise. 28 In the first 29 I made you 30 Stewards 31 and 32
placed you 33 in seats 12 [ or] in 12 seats 34 of government: 35 Giving 36 unto
every one of you 37 power, 38 successively, 39 over 40 456. 41 the true ages 42
of time; 43 to the intent that, 44 from the highest vessels 45 and 46 the
Corners 47 of your governments, Gal..... mighty is the God of Hosts, amongst
his people.
48 you might work 49 my power, 50 pouring down 51 The fires of life, and
increase 52 continually 53 on the earth. 54 Thus 55 you are become 56 The
skirts 57 of Justice 58 and truth. 59 In the name 60 of the same, your god, 61
lift up, 62 I say, 63 your selves. 64 Behold, 65 his mercies 66 flourish, 67
and name 68 is become 69 mighty 70 amongst us; 71 in whom 72 we say, 73 Move,
74 Descend 75 and 76 apply your selves unto us, 77 as unto 78 the partakers 79
of his secret wisdom 80 in your Creation
There are three calls in the second part D. Note.
of Cracovia, and one in the first.

These four calls are the second, the 3d. 4th. 5th. for the first Table can
have no call, it is of the Godhead.

E. E. Now all all his fingers disappear.

K. K. Now Gabriel stands up.

Gab...... Hark, O ye sons of men; is the first of nature, and the beginning
of your being in body: Whereby the things of the world have life and live. Let
him that has wisdom understand. Grow together, for this has its fruit in due
time. Albert Laskie has not done the Commandment of God; he should have been
here by this time.

D. Gloria, Laus, Honor, and Imperium sit Deo Nostro in infinita seculorum
secula. Amen.

D. Remember that on Wedsday night, April the 25. my Lord Albert Laskie came at
night to Cracovia, and lay in a little wooden building, among guards, by St.
Stenislaus Church: and on the Friday morning following intended to enter his
journey toward Kesmark, and the recovering of Kesmark: Jesus prosper his just
Cause.

Wensday morning, Aprilis 1584. Cracoviae. Jesus --
Nal........ A new Action -- Backward, as before.

52 DAIOI of him that lives for ever. Ioiad. 51 RIZ I am Zir. 50 PAL for, Lap.
49 PLERV a strong seething; Vrelp. 48 MZAZO make me Ozazm. 47 DO and Od. 46
OZLACIM in power, Micalzo. 45 NARMAZ show your selves Zamran. 44 DOQONC unto
his servants, [as C No quod.

Gab....... The place is become more holy, and he is become more meek.

Nal.......

43 AC therefore Ca. 42 RACAZ Move Zacar. [ Nal...... Make a stop there.]
41 LEHOG says the first, Go hell.

E. K. Now the Cross is come in again thinner than it was before.

40 UZROT Arise, Torzu 39 NODIAI of the all-powerful. Ia i don. 38 NINAM in the
mind Manin. 37 QO but O qua. 36 EGAT as is not Tage. 35 SROC Such Cors. 34
FORT a building, Trof. 33 NAON you are become No an. 32 PAL for Lap. 31 NOGNOZO
then the many fold winds: Ozongon. 30 AIB your voices Bia. 29 SIHC are Chis
[the I long. 28 PLACIM mightier Mi calp. 27 DO and Od 26 IRRO than the barren
stone Orri. 25 DSUL your feet Lusd. 24 SIHC are Chis [as Xis. 23 IUIG stronger
as Giui. 22 HOTLAB of righteousness Baltoh. 21 EGOO for the Chamber Ooge. 20
SBRVT in their beauty Turbs. 19 QLSROL the flowers Lors I qua. 18 ATQ or as Quu
Ta. 17 ADELCARAP for a wedding Paracleda. 16 OHLAT Cups Talho. 15 AT as Ta. 14
GMARBA I have prepared Abramg. 13 AMRASAC whom Casarma. 12 HPDAIP within the
depth of my Jaws Piadph. 11 ZAZAZI have framed Izazaz. 10 GRUPLAI the burning
flames I al purg. 9 MABOS whom S o bam. 8 L of the first A word. 7 VIIV O you
the second Viiv. 6 DLAS your voices of wonder Sald. 5 PIAAF understand Fa a ip.
4 MO Om. 3 GNOZ of the winds Zong. 2 HAAPV the wings V pa ah. 1 TGDA Can Adgt.

The first word. -- The first is the last.

1 -- Can

E. K. Now he holds up many hands and fingers as before, and on the very end
of the fingers distinctly these parcels appeared in English.

2 -- The second word -- The wing. Vpaah, is the wings, and Adgt, is Can. 3 --
of the winds, 4 -- understand your voices of winds. 5 -- O you 6 -- the
second 7 -- of the first, 8 -- whom 9 -- The burning flames 10 -- have framed
11 -- within the depth of my Jaw;, 12 -- whom 13 -- I have prepared 14 -- as 15
-- Cups 16 -- for a wedding, 17 -- or as 18 -- the flowers 19 -- in their
beauty 20 -- for the Chamber 21 -- of righteousness; 22 -- stronger 23 -- are
24 -- your feet 25 -- then the barren stone, 26 -- and 27 -- mightier 28 -- are
29 -- your voices 30 -- then the mainfold winds: 31 -- For 32 -- you are
become 33 -- a building, 34 -- Such 35 -- as is not, 36 -- But 37 -- in the
mind 38 -- of the all-powerful. 39 -- Arise, 40 -- says the first; 41 -- Move
42 -- therefore
E. K. All the Stone is become very dark.

The wicked said....... Thou shall go no further......

D. I prayed Roffensis Psalm 9. and the Lords Prayer, and the Stone became
clear, and the fingers appeared again, through the mercy of the Highest......

43 -- unto his servants; 44 -- show your selves 45 -- in power, 46 -- and This
his and him corrected, were of the wicked his subtle suggestios.
47 -- make me 48 -- a strong. [See thing,] 49 -- for 50 -- I am 51 -- of him
52 -- that lives for ever.
E. K. Now appear no more fingers.

Nal. Compare them now together.

E. K. Now he is set down in his chair.

D. I have compared the English Joints to the mystical words, and I find 12. of
each: so that they agree.

Nal. Thus you have this days labor. Now The white silk is extended over the
stone.

D. Soli Deo nostro, Deo omnipotenti, and Majestatis tremedae, and super omnia
amandae, sit omnis laus, (...) actio, and Jubilatio.

Amen.
Friday, Cracoviae, Aprilis: Mane, hora fere 9.
Oratione Dominica and aliis

Precibus ad Deum finitis, pro luce and veritate, in hanc formam, Omnipotens,
sempiterne, vere and (...) Deus noster, mitte nobis spiritum sanctum and
veritatem tuam, ut sapienter, fideliter and constanter tibi serviamus, omnibus
diebus vitae nostrae. Amen.

The white Curtain, or veyle, appeared very long.

D. It fell so out by the wonderful providence of God, that E. K. and I quietly
considered these actions, generally, and the contrary spiritual informations
given to him, apart by himself; (and sometimes) while we were receiving our
instructions, by our Schoolmasters, of which contrary power, some would rail
on God, and blaspheme his Majesty horribly, as may appear by the record of some
late Actions; But this was our conclusion, that we both desired the verity, and
that so, as best might please God, in the manner of coming by it.

D. Be Judge. O Lord, between us, sending us the verity of the judgment, for
the glory of thy Note, (...) of God required.
name, for as much as they which impugn these proceedings, do (to E. K.) as it
seems perfecter, and more wise and fruitful then our Schoolmasters, which I
took to be the true and blessed Angels, etc.

E. K. Now is the note plucked aside.

D. About an eleven of the Clock.

D. Blessed be the highest, who is Almighty.

Gab. Danida, a mighty Prophet (not the least upon the earth) opened his mouth,
and said, Behold, 14. Dies mensis Sab.
there shall a Whale come from the East, the fourtenth day of this Month, SAB.

E. K. They seem to speak both together.

Gab.. Nal. And he entered into the field, and he met with a Merchant, and he
said unto him, Thou art not for me: for thy intent dwells in the world. He
went further, and, lo, there was a field of all kind of people, diversely
recreating themselves in their own pleasures: and he yet said, Lo, these are
not for me: and he went on; and, lo, he saw, AND IT WAS A NAKED MAN.

Gab. Nal. Mark, [to E. K.]

E. K. So I do.

Gab. Nal. In his hands were diverse things; moss, leaves, flowers, and herbs;
and he wondered, saying, Why art thou naked? and he said, Lo, I am old, and am
without Garments, and these are the things wherewithal I will be clothed. And
the Prophet talked with him, and told him of the Whale.

E. K. They speak both together, that I cannot discern their voice.

And he commanded him to kneel, and he lifted up hands his to heaven and prayed
within himself; and he said also unto him, I am a Prophet, rise up, I will
bless thee in the name of my prophecy: and lo, he took him by the hand, and
went forward: and the way was rough, stony, and very sound: and, as they went,
they found men, huge and big, monstrous: and the Prophet said, These please me
not: and, as they talked on the way, they overtook a little child, And the
Phrophet ask't him his name, A Child
and he answered, He was a man: and he said, Thou please me, for thou may
be a man.

There was a Hill, and they ascended, and, after a while, the child became
weary, and sat down, A Hill.
saying with himself, This hill is troublesome, I am not able to keep company
with them; and the Prophet, missing him, went back, and found him sitting. And
he began to weep, saying, Whither will you lead me? But the Prophet comforted
him, and said: Now thou see, thou art not a man. And thus he did, ascending
sundry times? and, lo, it was the top of the hill, and the Sun was hot and
clear in the midst of the day. The Prophet said unto the child, look to the
Center of the Sun, and so he did, sted fastly.

And the Prophet said unto him, Now I have experience of thee, and I know thou will be a man; Pen, Ink, and Paper.
And he said unto him, that was naked, Here are Pen, Ink, and Paper.

And lo thou have one that can see far off, and he showed him the Seas: saying,
look unto the East: and he told him of the Whole and of his coming, and of many
mysteries. Oriens.


But the man answered him, saying, I am naked, the air is sharp, and I have no
food: How can I therefore STAY so many days? and he said unto him, Sit down,
and note, until this Child become a man. Note until.


Feed by comfort. For the Whale shall be thine, in whose belly is a Chest
swallowed of (...) and sui (...).
great value, and they were contented. Behold, the people of the country were
rich, and had conquered many Nations, so that he was a Monarch in the world;
this Monarch was skillful in all Sciences, and knew all things to come, and he
called his Counsel together, and said unto them.

Lo, thus it is; the cause why I have made those mighty banks, and have drawn
my people from the lower places and the Seas, is for that, I fear a Whale:
which, if he land in my Kingdoms, will be my destruction, and they told him
what the Prophet had said, and he began to rage, and was puffed up with anger,
and he opened his books THE SECOND TIME; and his eyes were opened, and he
understood that the (...) had ascended unto the top of the mountain, and had
taken with him a naked man, and a child: and he said to (...) Ministers,
Ascend, and bring me the child, for I will examine him, and know the Prophets
meaning, and he apparelled him richly, and gave him much, but he prevailed not.
And he said within himself, Ascend again they shall, and bring down that man.

And the servants ascended, and they found a Marble stone, and they were angry
among themselves, A marble stone.
saying, Is this a man? And lo they came unto the King, and said, Thou sendest
us forth, but we found a mighty stone not able to be moved. Where is it
therefore that thou will have us seek, that man; But he said within himself, I
will overcome the child, and he took him by the hand, and led him into his
Orchard, where he opened unto him the secrets of his books, so that he became
skilful. But, lo, the Prophet arose, and, as he walked toward the Hill, to
comfort them whom he accounted his friends, he espied the child apparalled
strangely, and in company with strangers: Strangers,
and he opened his mouth, and began to prophecy, saying.

The King has risen up against himself, for he has CHOSEN THE CHOSEN, and
has opened the secrets of his own Kingdom to his destruction, and he stretched
forth his hand, and said unto the child, Come with me: and he was unwilling,
for his pleasures were great. And he lifted up his voice and said: and he
SWEAR, And, lo, he came with him even unto the mountain: and the Prophet said
unto him, When thou wast a child, I led thee, but now thou art become a man.
stretch forth thy legs, and labor, and he was unwilling.

Thus, whilst they were talking, they that waited upon him were at his feet
armed, saying, come with us, for we are strong enough to deliver thee.

But the Prophet said unto them, GO back and tell your King, that I found him
on the way, and a stranger, and I had pity on him, and I took him for my own.
Therefore strive not, for justice must prevail. And they began to stagger as
drunkards, for they knew it was true. And the Prophet said, Now come with me, I
will yet lead thee: and they ascended. The Prophet held up his hands, and SAID,
I SEE, and behold, he that was naked arose: and said, I SEE ALSO.

And the Seas arose, and a great tempest, and broke down the banks: and entered
on the earth, Maris inundatio cum tempestate. Ventus.
doing much harm to the people of that Kingdom: And, lo, there arose a wind the
SECOND: and there were four beasts, such as are in the world, and were never
known. And they came swimming, and so landed on the Hill. And the Prophet said,
Arise, draw out your swords and kill them, and so they did.

Behold, the blood of them vanished into air, and the flesh became earth: The
entrals of them Ventus 2.
wasted away with the waters: and their bones burned with a (...) fire. The
second wind arose, and there were five Crowns: in the midst of them sat the
Father of life, with a golden head: whose Feet bathed themselves in due and
sweet Manna: and the (...), Put forth your hands: and Pater vitae.
they did so: But lo they were afraid, for he that stood in the (...) of the
Crowns, was full of beauty.

And the Prophet said, Fear not, come with me; and he opened (...) them the
secrets of the Mysteria 5 Coronarum.
Crown, for in every one of them was a golden sentence. And the secrets of the
Hill began to shake, and there was a great Earthquake.

The third wind arose: and the twelve Cedar trees that were never corrupted,
came and planted Ventus 3.
themselves in twelve places of the Hill, and they brought forth strange
fruits, not as Cedar trees do.

The Prophet said, Gather, for I know you hunger, that you may be refreshed.
While they thus Ventus 4.
talked, the fourth wind arose, and, behold, all the mountain was a flaming
fire, and there were five 5. Terrae motus
Earthquakes, such as were not since the beginning of the world.

The Prophet took them up, for they were become as dead. And suddenly The
Firmament and The Whale came.
the waters were joined together, and the Whale CAME, like unto a legion of
storms: or as the bottomless Cave of the North when it is opened: and she was
full of eyes of every side.

The Prophet said, Stand still, but they trembled. The waters sank, and fell
suddenly away, so that the Whale lay upon the Hill, roaring like a Cave of
Lions, and the Prophet took them by the hands, and led them to the Whales
mouth, saying, Go in, but they trembled vehemently; He said unto The Whales
mouth.
them the second time, Go in: and they durst not. And he swear unto them, and
they entered in, and he lifted up his voice, and cried mightily, Come away, and,
(...). they stood before him richer then an Emperor: Throne, for unto him that
was naked, were elothes given: unto him that was a child and a man, were 12
gates opened. And the Prophet cried mightily, and said, This Whale cannot die;
and lifted up his voice again and said: Within this Whale are many Chambers,
and secret dwelling places, which I will divide betwixt you on the right side
(unto the which was a child, and now a man) there are twelve opened, but unto
thee that have provided strange Garments for thy 12 18 D 18
self, and not such as men use to wear, I will give thee head, heart, and left
side, whose places (...) 36 21 A Mi^acle.
are 46. You shall enter, and be possessed this day together: And behold, the
son shall return again 21 times, and in one year, but not all, at one time. You
shall depart hence into a dwelling that shall be all one: where there is no
end, the place of comfort and inspeakable glory.

I have said.

D. As you have delivered us a parable, aenigma, or prophecy, so I beseech
you, for the setting forth of God his honor and glory, to expound what is
meant by the Whale, the naked man, the Child, etc.

Gab..... Nal..... The Prophet is in his name.

The naked man is Dee,
The Child is Kelly,
The Prince is the Devil,
The Hill is the World,
The waters are the bosom of God,
The 4 beasts are the 4 Elements,
The 12 Trees are the 12 parts of the Heavens,
The Whale is the spirit of God,
The Chambers are the degrees of wisdom,
The Thunders and winds are the ends of God his Will and Judgments.
The rest are not to be spoken:

This I take to notify to us the judgment and arbitrament of God between us,
in respect of our Petition to his Divine Majesty now made, whereby we may be
assured what to judge of the Creatures which do deal with us in this action,
and of the impugners, or diswaders of the credit of it. This I take to be sent
and delivered unto us, of the mere mercy and providence Divine regarding his
own glory, and the sincerity of my hope and confidence, which I put wholly in
him, and always will.

...... You are happy, for you believe, E. K. what am I. D. as happy if you
believe likewise. Gab Nal.


D. Are you not to deliver us our lessons orderly, as we have begun to receive?

...... Understand that, by the Prophet delivering Pen, Ink, and Paper. Gab. Nal.


D. As concerning the book writing by the highest, what shall I expect thereof?

...... There is no point of faith. Gab Nal.


D. I believe verily that it shall be written by the power of the highest.

Nal...... The power of the highest confirms me, but not my power, the
highest.

D. Be it as the will of God is.

E. K. The white Curtain is drawn.

D. Gloria Patri, and Filio, and spiritui sancto; sicut erat in principio, and
nunc, and semper, and in secula seculorum.

E. K.

Amen.
Saturday, 28. Aprilis, Mane hora 8. Cracoviae. Oratione praemissa statim
apparebant.
E. K. They are here.

Gab...... Move not, for the place is holy.

D. Holy, holy, holy, is he, who sanctifies all things that are sanctified.

E. K. He makes Crosses with his Rod toward the four parts of the Nalvage.
world, and then kneeleth down a while.

Gab...... Happy is he that has his skirts tied up, and is prepared for a
Journey, for the way shall be open unto him, and in his joints shall there
dwell no weariness: his meat shall be as the tender (...), as the sweetness
of a bullocks Cud. For unto them that have, shall be given, and from them that
have not, shall be taken away: For why, the bur cleaves to the willow stem,
but on the sands it is tossed as a feather without dwelling. Happy are they
that cleave unto the Lord, for they shall be brought unto the storehouse: and
be accounted, and accepted as the Ornaments of his beauty: But pray with me.

O thou eternal foundation and strength of all things, mortal and immortal,
which delight in thy face and in the glory of thy name,

Consider the foundation of our fragility, and enter into the weakness of our
inward parts: for we are become empty; whose salt is not, nor has any savor:
Fortify, and make us strong in thee, and in thy strength; Have mercy upon us,
Have mercy upon us, Have mercy upon us; that in this world our strength may be
in patience, and after this life, that we may ascend unto thee.

Nal...... Amen.

D. We prayed the same prayer.

E. K. Now Nalvage stands up upon his Table of Letters.

Nal...... It is a side-long Letter.

47 PALOMRON the sons of (...) Nor mo lap.

E. K. Now he kisseth the Table.

46 FAA amongst A af 45 LITSER that you may praise him Rest el.

Now he kisseth the Table, and makes most humble and low Cursies, having first
laid down his Rod.

44 GNOSILEBO As pleasant deliverers Obelisong 43 NARMAZDO And show your selves
Od Zamran

E. K Now Gabriel shakes his Dart terribly.

E. K Why shake you your dart so?

Gab...... Scholars ought to give ear to their Schoolmasters.

42 RACAZ Move Zacar. 41 LAAQ of the Creator Qa al 40 PIAOOD in the name Do oa
ip 39 ALIPADO and lives Od Api la 38 ISD which is DSI 37 DAIANERIZ I am the
Lord your God Zire nai ad

Now he uses his accustomed Cursie.

36 ELGAB for Ba gle 35 AGSOAGF visit the earth Fgaos ga 34 OD and Od. 33
IHASARQRON you sons of pleasure Nor qua sa hi 32 VGROT Arise Torgu 31 ALC 456
Cla 30 OLAT as the first Talo 29 SIHC are Chis 28 NIHSNOLDO and their powers Od
lonshin

Now he kneeleth.

27 NOAMIPAG the number of time Capi ma on 26 SIHC are Kis 25 ILAMIPAC
successively, Ca pi ma li 24 TSD which also DST

Now he falls suddenly on his knees.

23 GEGVDO and wax strong: as Wedge Od Vgeg 22 SIHC are, Kis Chis

Now he kneeleth.

21 IZDOORC The second beginnings of things Cro od zi 20 GMRASAC in whom the
gas in seurge Casarmg 19 LPRC but one; CRPL 18 OPMROC has yet numbered Corm po
17 GA None as agg in nag Ag 16 MABOS whom So bam 15 MPAM 9639; Mapm 14 (...) I
have placed O a li 13 IMRASAC under whom Ca sarmi 12 VIDVIV in the second
angle? Vi v di v

Now he lifted up his hands.

11 FNOSD which reign Dsonf

E. K. Now he goes off the Table, and kneeleth Down.

Pe de 10 DP 33 PD

Now he lifts.

9 PMROC numbered? Cormp 8 OGAVAVA the thunders of increase Ava va go 7 EGSIHCG
Are not G Chis ge 6 LOHOG saying, Go hol 5 AHPROD have looked about me, Dor pha
4 DO and Od 3 EGABAB in the south Ba bage 2 IDSAL my feet Las di 1 LIHTO I have
set O thll

E. K. The Table turns continually to his Rod end, and the Letter seems to
stand on his Rods end distinctly. That is it. This is this Call.

1 -- I have set 2 -- my feet 3 -- in the south, 4 -- and 5 -- have looked 6 --
about me, 7 -- saying, 8 -- are not 9 -- The Thunders of increase 10 --
numbered? 11 -- Thirty three 12 -- which reign 13 -- in the second Angel; 14 --
under whom 15 -- I have placed 16 -- 9639. 17 -- whom 18 -- None 19 -- has yet
numbered 20 -- but one 21 -- in whom 22 -- the second beginning of things 23 --
are, 24 -- and wax strong 25 -- which also: 26 -- successively, [or by
succession] 27 -- are 28 -- the number of time, 29 and 30 -- their powers 31 --
are 32 -- as the first 33 -- 456. 34 -- Arise 35 -- you sons of pleasure, 36 --
and 37 -- visit the earth; 38 -- for 39 -- I am the Lord your God 40 -- which
is 41 -- and lives. 42 -- In the name 43 -- of the Creator 44 -- Move 45 --
And show you selves [or appear] 46 -- as pleasant deliverers, 47 -- that you
may praise him 48 -- amongst 49 -- the sons of men. 50 --
E. K. He has now plucked the Curtain to.

D. Note.

D. Thanks be to God, now, and ever. Amen.

D. Remember to request information of such a word, as (says the Lord) is not
here to be understood, some where.

Note, the second Angel.

Monday Cracoviae, Aprilis 30. Mane hora 6
Oratione Dominica finita, and precatiuncula pro prospero successu A. L. (jam
apud Keismark, queritantis and petentis jus suum hereditarium, and aliis
brevissimis ejaculationibus, pro prospero successu in hac action tandem post
semi horam apparuerunt.

E. K. Now they are here: and Gabriel is all full of glory, he seems to light
all places.

D. O the mercies of God increased, though his determination be all one

E. K. Now he is as he was before: and in the time of this his glorious
apparition, Nalvage kneeled down, somewhat regarding toward Gabriel.

Gab...... Give unto him that has his basket open: But from him that is not
ready, depart.

E. K. There appear here, 7 other like Priests, all in white, having
BLRAHICAANHDL
long hair hanging down behind: their white garments traile after them: having
many pleits in them. Me think that I have seen one of them before, and upon
that creature appears a B upon his clothes, an L in another place, an R upon
his other shoulder, another A upon his other shoulder. There is an H upon his
breast; there is an I upon his head, and a C upon his side on his garment; and
an A under his wast behind: The Letters seem to go up and down enterchangeably
in places. There seems an V on him, also an N, a D.

Now comes a tall man by, all in white, and a great white thing rolled about
his neck, and coming down before like a tippet. They all in the Stone (being 9)
kneel down unto him.

The tall man said...... Take this Key, and power: ascend and fill thy vessel,
for the River is not pure, and made clean.

E. K. Now he is gone (that said this) in form of a great Millstone of fire.

E. K. Now they go up a Hill, with a great Tankard, as it An Hill.
were, of Bone transparent; Now he opens one door, he, I mean, that had the
Letters on his back.

1. There appears a Partridge, but it has one leg like a Kite: This
Partridge seems to sit on a green place under the gate, one leg is much
longer than the other, being like a Kites leg. This Partridge seems to halt.

He bids one of his Company take it up. There goes a bridge to the top of
that Hill, all upon arches, and under it goes a River.

He takes the Partridge and pulls all his feathers, and they fall into the
River: He cutteth off the longer leg just to the length of the other. They
about him cry, O just judgment.

Now he turns him off over the Bridge, and he flies away, for the feathers
of his wings were not pulled.

2. He goes on, and comes to another gate; and there the third man unlocketh
it, as the second next him unlocked the first Gate; he himself having the Key
first delivered him, as above is noted. There appears a thing like a Kite,
all white, very great, it has a fowl great head, he seems to be in a very
pleasant Garden, and flies from place to place of it, and beats down the
Rose trees and other fruit trees. The Garden seems very delicate and
pleasant. They go all into the Garden: and he says, Thou art of the
Wilderness, thy feathers and carkase are not worthy the spoil of the Garden.

Now the Kite scratcheth and gaspeth at this man; but he takes the Kite and
cutteth her carkase in two equal parts, from the crown of his head, and
throws one half over one side of the Bridge, and the other half over the
other side, and said, Fowls must be devoured of Fowls. The rest say, O
justitia divina, clapping their hands over their heads.

3. Now the next in order opens another Gate (going up upon the same Bridge
still.) The rest of the building from the Gate inward, seems very round and
bright: yet there appear no windows in it. It is a frame, made as though the 7
Planets moved in it. The Moon seems to be New Moon.

There stands Armor, and this man puts on, all white Harness. He seems
to kick down the Moon, and her frame or Orb; and seems to make powder of all;
For there is no mercy here, says he.

4. Now another of them goes forward to another Gate, and opens the Gate,
and goes in; there appear an infinite multitude of men.

There sits a man clothed like a Priest, having a great Crown on his head:
here are many preaching in this place. He goes to that Crowned Priest, and he
takes away diverse patches of the Vesture which he had, and the patches seemed
to be like Owls, and Apes, and such like.

He says...... A King is a King, and a Priest is a Priest.

He takes from the rest their Keys and Purses, and gives them a Staff and a
Bottle in their hands. He goes from them. He puts all that he took from
them in a house beside the Gate, and writes on He wrote Cognoscat.
the door, Cognoscat quisque suum.

Now they proceed to another Gate, and another of them opened that Gate. The
Bridge continues still, ascending upward. Now there appears (that Gate being
opened) a mavelous great Wilderness.

There comes a great number of naked wild men to him. He shakes that Gate
with his hands, and it falls in pieces, one falls on one side into the
River, and the other falls on the other side into the River,

........ Let both these places be made one. Let the spoil of the first, be the
comfort of the last: For from them that have shall be taken, and unto them that
have not shall be given.

6. E. K. Now he goes, and the last of his Company opens another Gate; he is
longer in opening of that Gate, than any of the rest.

There appears a bushy place, and there runs a great River on the very top
of the Hill, and a great Gate stands beyond the Hill, and a very rich Tower
all of precious Stones, as it seems.

Here he fills his Tankard in the River, and holds his hands up, and makes
show as he would return.

He said...... This was my coming, and should be my return.

E. K. Now they appear suddenly before the first Gate, and there the Principal
man diggeth the earth, and puts stones and brambles, and leaves aside. There
he takes out a dead carkase, and brings it to a fire, and stroketh it: a
very lean carkase it is; it seems to be a dead Lion; for it has a long tail
with a bush at the end.

He says...... Come let us take him up, and comfort him; for it is in him.

Now the Lion seems to sit up and lick himself, and to drink of the water,
and to shake himself, and to roar. The man takes of the segs or flags by, and
stroketh the Lion as he would make his hair smooth.

Now the Lion is become fair, fat, and beautiful.

He says...... Tarry you here, till I bring you word again; for I must follow
the Lion into the Wilderness.

E. K. Now all they are gone, except the two our Schoolmasters, Gabriel and
Nalvage.

Gab....... This is the Judgment of God this day. Happy is he that has
judgment to understand it.

D. Thou O Lord know the measure of our judgment: Give therefore light,
understanding, and the grace to use thy gifts duly.

Gab........ Listen unto my words, for they are a Commandment from above.
Behold (says he) I have descended to view the Earth, where I will dwell for
seven days, and twice seven days: Therefore let them be days of rest to you.
But every seventh day, I will visit you, as Now I do.

E. K. He speaks as if he spoke out of a Trunck.

D. I understand that this rest is, that every Monday, for three Mondayes else
next after other, we shall await for our lessons, as now we receive, and that
we may all the rest follow our affairs of study or household matters.

Gal....... It is so, for one day shall be as a week: But those days you must
abstain from all things that live upon the Earth.

D. You mean on these three Mondayes, ensueing next.

Gab....... You shall cover this Table with a new linen cloth.

E. K. Pointing to the Table we sat at.

D. Most willingly.

Gab....... Moreover a new Candlestick, with a Taper burning.

D. Obediently (O Lord) it shall be done.

Gab....... And the Candlestick shall be set on the midst of the Table betwixt
you two.

Note...... That a day may become a week, and a week as many years.

Gab....... For I have put on my upper garment, and have prepared to enter, and
it is shortly: and not yet.

E. K. Now he has plucked the Curtain, as if he had pulled it round about the
Stone; and it seems full of little sparks like Stars.

Gloria patri and filio and spiritui sancto; sicut erat in principio, and nunc,
and semper, and in secula seculorum.

Vide libro........ (...) pro saequentibus.

LIBRI MYSTICI APERTORII CRACOVIENSIS SABBATICI, An. 1584.
Saturday Cracoviae, 7 Maii, Mane, hora 6.
AFter prayers, appeared Gabriel and Nalvage, with the Table, and Gabriel with
his Dart in his hand. Moreover there appeared the like furniture of Table with
a white Cloth, a Candlestick, and Taper on it, with a Desk and Cushions (which
I had caused to be made with red crosses on them:) also E. K. himself and I
appeared. (...) the same Stone. In effect, all things as we had before us,
after half a quarter of an hour, that show of our furniture, and our selves,
disappeared.

E. K. Gabriel stands up, and speaks as follows.

....... A mighty City was built on the top of a mountain, in the which dwelt
many thousands. Round about the Hill, ran a fresh River, which was the only
comfort of the Town: for, of it they drank, their wives, their children, their
man-servants, their maidservants, their camels, horses, mules, and all the
beasts of their fields. The beginning of which River was a Spring, which was
unknown to the City, by reason of the.. yth from whence it descended. It came
to pass, that a Serpent groaned for her time, and lo, she brought forth:
and... were such as her self: and she lifted up her head and leaned upon her
twice writhen tail: and beheld the Sun steadfastly, (for her envy was toward
that City) and she said within her self: My children are yet young, the time
grew, and they became big: and she went unto the Spring, and smiled and said
with a laughing voice, The Earth is fallen into thee, thou art choked: but
hearken unto my voice, Thou shall receive comfort: But she would not. And she
lifted up her voice and roared; for she was full of craft and deceit. And she
said unto the shingles, through the which the Spring runs (or rather syeth)
Thou art full of emptiness, and void places. Let my children (therefore) hide
themselves within thee for a season: and they were contented; And she departed
willingly, and says within her self: Now I know I shall be Lady of the City.

And after a few years, the young Serpents became great; so that the one half
of their bodies dwelt within the Shingles, the rest troubled the passage of the
Spring: So that the Spring groaned; for, the injury that was done against her,
was great.

A great misery, for the Hill is become desolate without the water, and the
City and the beasts perish for want of drink; for the people groan, and are full
of sorrow.

This City and Serpents are 60.. now, and judgment must be had, betwixt the
Shingles and the Spring. for between lies the life and death of the City.

Thus says the Lord unto thee [ pointing to E. K.] Gird up thy self, and fit
down, Consider both parts, and give judgment: for thy mouth shall this day be
the judgment of the Lord.

E. K. Do you mean me?

E. K. As the Lord has put the Authority of Judgment into my hands, so I
beseech him to give me wisdom and understanding to judge right. And because the
judgment hereof is committed to me, I suspect some other mystery to lie hidden
in this my judgment required: But if it shall please God that my friend here,
Master Dee shall give me his advise, I shall think my self well satisfied.

....... Consider with your self (says the Lord) and give judgment against the
Shingles, for the fault is plain. Consider two points, the necessity of the
Spring, that it must come that ways: and secondly, the health of the City.

E. K. My judgment is that the Shingles and Serpent should be removed away by
an Earthquake from the place which they encumber and let, that there may be a
fit new place, and course for that Spring, to the relief of that City as before
it was.

...... Be it so as thou have said, for it is a just judgment.

Now hearken, what the Lord says. The people and City of the Hill, is the
world, which are from time to time by the mercy and spring of Gods wisdom,
relieved.. quenched: according to the extremity and necessity of their
thirsting: But the people and City are such as are of the Temple and Church of
God, which drink of his mercy to their comfort. The Camels and other beasts are
the people of the Earth, which delight in sin, and in their own imagination,
which also are relieved with those that are of the City: but the diversities of
their bodies, does cause the diversity of the ends of their comfort. The Hill
wherein the Spring is, signifies his Prophets, and such as are drunken in the
Lord: Thr^ugh whom, inwardly the mercies and will of God and of the Highest are
open from time to time, according to the secret will and determination of such
as are within the City of his Elect. But the frailties and affections of their
flesh and outward man, are their fond imaginations and loose Shingles wherein
the Serpent, the old Devil, has harbored her children the spirits of
darkness and deceit, which always resist the Will of God, and are put between
the mercies of God and his people. Moses, Daniel, Esdras, all the rest of the
Prophets: Christ his twelve, Paul the Messenger of God, they did all hurt the
Congregation of the Faithful in their flesh, until they gave sentence against
themselves (as thou have done) with amendment of life: for who is worthy to
know the secrets of our God, but he that delights in righteousness, is
obedient, full of faith, and the spirit of understanding? Be it therefore unto
thee as thou have said. Let the Shingles and Serpents be separated, that the
Fountain may feed as before. All the trash that thou have of the wicked, burn
it.

E. K. I do not know, they are wicked.

...... Their doings with thee, are the hindrance of the Will of God, and
therefore they are wicked.

...... Thou have given judgment against thy self: Take heed thou offend not
thy own soul.

D. Send down thy Spirit O Lord, and illuminate E. K. his heart with perceiving
of his wrong opinion, etc.

E. K. If Moses and Daniel were skilful in the Arts of the Egyptian Magicians,
and were not thereby hindered for being the servants of God, Why may not I deal
with these, without hindrance to the Will of God?

...... Darkness yielded unto light: the Greater excluded the lesser. The more
a man knows wickedness, the more he shall hate it, being called back. The
more they knew the shadow, so much more they delighted in the body: For the
doings of the Egyptians, seem, and are not so. The doings of the Lord are, and
continue; for as the Painter imitateth the gestures of man in his faculty, so
does the Devil the substances and things created and made by God.

Stand up and look into the whole World, into her youth, and middle age, for
they are past. Where are the monuments that Satan has builded?

E. K. Has Satan builded any monuments?

...... Yes: Has he not builded him a Fort upon the whole Earth? Has he not
the victory over the Saints? Dwells he not in the Temple of the Highest?
Triumphs he not in the Cities of the whole World?

Yes....... But without comfort, are his victories: without pleasure his
dwelling places. For he knows his time is at hand. He that now gives
freedom, shall become bound; And unto whom the whole World is as a Garden,
shall there be no one foot left. Therefore are all his pleasures vanity: all
his Triumphs smoke, and his Authority, nothing indeed, but a mere shadow: For
that that is not, cannot be; where, it is said of the Lord, it shall not be.
Neither can truth, light, or wisdom, ascend from the Earth, but descend from
the Heavens.

Compare the Earth, (into the which the Devil is thrust as into his dwelling)
with the Heavens, which are provided for the holy. Consider the pain of the
one, and the pleasure of the other: The seat of Gods Justice, and Fountain of
his Mercy: The Cave of Darkness, and the Diadem of Light. And then cry, woe,
woe, woe, unto such as err, and whose lives are but shadows: For their felicity
is such, as from whence it came; and their reward is all one, with the spirit
and prince of Darkness.

Compare fond knowledge, with true wisdom, Thy spirits of lying with us, that
are the voice of truth: The vanity that they lead thee into, and the reward of
our message: And say within thy self, peccavi. Will thou be persuaded by
experience? Consider thy imprisonments, thy affliction His life.. ned.
and shame of body. Consider the love of a few, and envy of a multitude. Weigh
with thy self the vanity of thy life; Thy rash footsteps, All that happned
unto thee, by the society, and (as thou think) comfort; but indeed the
stinging pricks of thy enemies

...... Since, we came into thee, (sent from the Lord, and calling thee, to God)
thou have be^^ delivered from them; from a place full of fornication, and the
wrath of God: exalted to the skirts of worldly honor; and have been satisfied
for the necessities of this World. Holy is the money that is gotten
righteously; but accursed are the evils that are reaped with wrong. All which
things thou have by us in blessedness, and in the knowledge of the will of
God, above all men. Besides our continual presence with thee, to the comfort of
thy Soul. Even these things are of us, and of our God. Which swear unto
Abraham, and dwells in the Temple of righteousness. Now, therefore let
experience be a Judge betwixt us and them.

But, this says the Lord. I deal with you as a Child: But the vessels that I
must use, must be Pure vessels.
pure and clean.

D. Cleanse thou us, (O Lord) Cor mundum Crea in nobis; Crea.

Gab...... They that are incredulous believe not the Lord, but drive away his
spirit: But where Increduli.
a grain is, it becomes as a mountain. The Lord is upon the earth: Take heed
thou sweep thy house clean, for unto him that is naked, shall there be Clothes
given: But be that is covered already, shall be made bare.

Consider with thy self: for the Lord speaks not once more, till thou have
fulfilled thy own judgment.

E. K. I will be contented to bury them in the field, and not to use His own
judgment is to be fulfilled.
them, or come at them: and that I will swear upon the Bible to perform: and if
they be earthly, I will commit them to the earth: and so separate those
shingles from the place near the spring: and in this manner fulfill my own
judgment: For, I will not be obstinate, but commit all things to the end.

Because thou art content to bury them; and withal, upon faith in the promises
of God, to abjure them in simplicity of heart, and external use.... simply, as
a true meaning before the face of the highest: The Lord accepts it, and it
shall be sufficient.

Further, thou have 27. Confirmations of sin, and consent with the Devil, which
your intention calls Characters, whereby those seven and twenty, (like unto
their mother) are become familiar Characters.
and pleasant with thee, they must be brought before the Lord: and offered into
his hands. For so long as they are, the wicked always vex thee: For the
Obligation burnt, the condition is void. These must be buried with the rest.

[ E. K. Which rest?]

...... But must be brought, and burnt here before the presence of God: That,
the cause diminished, the effect may perish.

E. K. I will be contented to bury them likewise, beseeching the Almighty to
accept of my intent herein, as of the rest before specified.

...... He is contented; but let one be burnt. You may suffer one to testify
the discredit of the rest. It is but according to the grounds of thy own Magic.

E. K. I do not understand your meaning herein.

Gab...... Radius partis, may be sicut totius Corporis.

E. K. I understand not that, also.

Gab....... Magic works effect in things absent, that it does in their
parts, being present.

The wicked kill the body absent, but the garment present: so are all of one
confederacy, disgraced D. I doubt that I misheard somewhat. One (...), and
abjured obedience.
by the confusion of one. Thou art contented to bury them all, upon the
confidence, and sure hope of the promises of the God of light, and to bring one
as a confirmation of thy promise to testify thy obedience as concerning the
whole: which one burnt and abjured, may be a testimony to the Angels, that thou
art obedient for God his sake, and for his testimony and truth. But this you
shall burn with Brimstone only. Whose ashes shall be kept as a testimony, till
the rest be also consumed. This you shall do the next Monday at the rising of
the Sun. That the number of the time may be of one bigness. For, before August
shall those Keys be delivered unto you: which give entrance, yea, even into
the privy Chambers of wisdom, whereof you shall have 14. the next Monday. And
this days action is not the least amongst them. Glory be to... ence.
God, and obedience unto man.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn.

D. We are desirous to know whether thus, this days action shall be finished:
and whether we shall fast still as was prescribed.

Gab...... Detract not from the day, that, which is commanded.

D. We are very desirous to understand of the present estate of the Lord Albert
Laskie: for as much as we were willed to go with him, and he linked to us in
some part of our actions: To understand of his state, would be to our great
comfort.

Gab...... It needs not, for the world her self is at hand.

D. Verily, I understand not that speech: Is he coming back again? What, We are
commanded we know: And further then our Commandment is error. He is in his
hand that knows how to use him.

E. K. I see a man climing over a Hedge, and as he clammereth over the stakes
break, and he falls down. Now he is going up between two Trees into a
Medow-ward. Now he has both the boughs in his hand, standing still on the
ground. Now he goes lower, there is a gap, and through that he is gone into
the Meadow..... so it is of Laskie..... said a voice.

D. This is dark: it may please you to give some light.

g..... This is more then enough for the matter.

Cease to ask these things here, where it is said, no impure thing should enter.

D. Gloria, laus and honor Deo Nostro Omnipotenti, Patri, filio and spiritui
Sancto, nunc and semper. Amen.

D. Note, at this present was one come, and in the house (of whom we understood
not till he was gone:) whom the Lord A. Laskie had sent to certify us, that
first he was in some cumber and hindrance. Secondly, how Fabius (his brother in
Law) and another had given him counsel, very rashly to proceed: But leaving
that. Thirdly, by the gap and open way with estate of the Commons, or Citizens,
by their great Zeal, and favor that he obtained his purpose. This (in effect)
we understood at the Messager his return after noon. Which mavelous exactly
did answer to the former show. May.


Remember that on Saturday after noon, the Chancelour came to Cracow, with 60
Coaches in his Company and train: he bringing in a close Coach (covered with
red) the Lord Samuel S. Boroskie Prisoner, whom he took on Friday night before,
at his sisters house, being separated from his Soldiers and servants, etc.

Saturday, 14 Maii, Mane hora 6 Fere. Cracoviae.
Orationem Dominicam fudimus, etc. Mitte lucem tuam and veritatem, O Deus, etc.

D. E. K. Said, he had done that with the trash specified, as he thought would
be acceptable to the Lord: And as concerning one of the 27 Characters he had
left it with me, ever since the last action, to be burnt at this days action,
and it lay ready by me.

E. K. Our instructours appeared at the very first looking of E. K. into the
shew-stone.

D. Will you that I shall now execute this burning of the Character here as a
sacrifice (to the highest) of our humility and obedience?

Gab...... Not as a sacrifice, but as a victory.

D. Shall I then do it, I pray you? As with the consent of my yoke fellow, and
so all one to be taken as his action.

...... He that does righteously offers up a sacrifice.

Nal...... It is true, that he that is obedient, and does well, is accepted
with the Lord.

E. K. I did take sacrifice to be only with blood.

Gab...... This is a sacrifice, because it is done righteously.

E. K. You said, Not, as a sacrifice, but as a victory.

Gab...... He that overcomes his enemy rejoices not for friendship sake, but
for victory. The friendship toward God is obedience. He that obeys God, is a
friend unto himself. God needs not the love, or friendship of man. Therefore
you rejoice with God, who overthrew them, and thereby comforted. For he that
dwells in the Lord is comforted.

Thou (...) thy mouth, and say before the Lord, The spirit of God has
descended.

D. Gloria Patri, etc. (...) D He notes some secret discourse, meditation, or
prayer, and also action of E. K. as I conjecture.


And he has (...) into judgment with me, and I am condemned. But where
Justice dwells, dwells also mercy. For, my Idolatry is forgotten before the
Lord.

E. K. Have you committed Idolatry?

E. K.

D. He speaks in your behalf Master Kelly.

...... I will therefore open my mouth, saying, I have erred. I will open my
mouth also, and confess my sins: And, I will vow unto the Lord against the
wicked. And I will say unto the Lord. Lo, here are the spoils of the bloody
(...). Behold, O you Angels a blasphemy, and against the highest. Behold, the
wickedresse of (...).

Bear witness with me, for I have fulfilled his Commandment. Bear witness
with me, that I...am in... and si. (...)...no:...s and...de...i e d.
return not, and rejoice; for such are the spoils of the wicked.

Gab. Art thou contented to consent hereunto?

E. K. What I have done with the rest, God, and they (if they be of God) know:
upon the foresaid conditions I am contented to have this Character to be burnt.
Let it be burnt.

D. I burnt it immediately, with the flame of brimstone, and brought the burnt
black coal or cinder thereof to the Table, and laid it on a paper.

Now O Lord, darkness is (...), let thy light shine in us, and thy truth
prevail.

Gab. It is well. D. Blessed be the name of the highest: whose mercies are
infinite. Oh, a sweet and comfortable sentence.

E. K. Now Nalvage turns round, as he was wont.

Gab. Move not, for the place is holy.

E. K. Now Nalvage puts down his rod to the Table, he makes a cross upon
the Table reverently.

Nal. All things go forwards, Let us go FORWARD also. D. In the name of Jesus.
(...). 7.


Gab. Move not, for the place is holy.

E. K. Nalvage prays.

Nal. Not BACKWARD, as you were wont to do, but FORWARD.

E. K. Now he makes three reverent Cursies, as he was wont to do, before the
Table.

SAPAH Sa pah. Sa pah.

E. K. Now he is on the top of the Table.

ZIMII Zi mii. L. (...).
DUIV Du iv. OD Od. O D....no...reth...and...ione (...).


E. K. He makes cursy.

NOAS Noas. TAQANIS Ta qu a nis. ADROCH as otch Ad roch. DORPHAL Dorphal. CAOSG
Ca osg OD Od. FAONTS Fa onts. PIRIPSOL Pir ip sol. TABLIOR Ta blior. CASARM
Casarm. AMIPZI A mip zi NAZARTH Na zarth. AF Af. OD Od. DLUGAR Dlu gar

E. K. Now he makes cursy round about to all parts of the Table, he kneeleth
down.

ZIZOP Zizop. Zod lida.

It is a Word and a Letter.

E. K. He shows it not in the Table yet.

Nal. Now I see the word of five Letters together, following letter by letter.

ZLIDA Z. d-lida. Z lida.

Stay there.

CAOSGI Ca os gi. TOLTORGI Toltorgi.

He makes now Cursy.

OD Od

E. K. He seems to read as Hebrew is read.

ZIZOP Zi zop. ZCHIS Zod chis Nal. It is better than the other, I mean that
Zod-chis being of one signification, with Zizop that Zod-chis is better to be
used. ESIASCH E siach. L L. TAUIU Ta ui u. OD Od. IAOD I a od.

E. K. Now he makes cursy again.

THILD Thild, one Syllable.

Now he ma --

DS. ds. HUBAR Hubar. PEOAL Pe o al. SOBA So ba. Camps 1. 69. 5. Julii so
expounded.


E. K. --

CORMFA Cormfa CHISTA Kista. Chis ta. LA La. VLS Vls. OD Od.

QCOCASB Q co casb. CA Ca. Sa. NIIS Ni is. OD Od. DARBS Obey Darbs-one
Syllable. QAAS Qa as. S. FETHARZI Feth ar zi.

K. E. Cursy.

E. K. He has drawn the Curtain.

It is not to be seen what he does.

D..........of 4 minutes of time the Curtain was drawn.

E. K. He is now otherwise apparelled, all the outside of his Gown is white
Furre, on his head is an attire of furre, wreathed or wrapped as the Turks use;
his head is now ike a man's head, with short hair.

OD Od. BLIORA Bli o ra Cor. 1.
IAIAL Ia ial. EDNAS Ed nas. CICLES Ci cles. BAGLE Ba gle............ ie in as
ien tle iad-as jade............. Ge jad. i l.

That is one Call.

..........b....... Move not, for the place is holly....b.


GAH Gah. SDIU es di u S di u. -- HIS Chis. EM Em. MICALZO Micalzo

E. K. Cursy, and he kisseth the Table.

PILZIN pilzen. Pilzin.

E. K The Curtain is now plucked again, for three minutes or four. Now the
Curtain is opened again. Now is he changed. Now he is His apparel.
all in black sarcenet, very plentiful of stuff, girded to him, and with the
collar high to the midst of his face.

SOBAM Sobam. EL. el argenton. HARG Harg. MIR Mir. PIZIN Pizin. BABALON
Babalon.

Put out the last Pilgin.

E. K. Why did you give us them?

Nal.........If it stand.

OD od. OBLOC ob loc. SAMVELG Sam velg. DLUGAR Dlugar. MALPURG Mal purg.
ARCAOSGI Ar ca os gi. OD od ACAM A came CANAL Sanal. Canal. SOBOLZAR So bol zar
TBLIARD Tbli ard. A or o.


It is better if the T be made an F, and pronounced F bli ard.

CAOSGI kaosgi. Ca os gi. ODCHIF kif. Od chif. ANETAB A ne tab. OD od. MIAM
Miam. TAVIV Ta viv. ODD Odd. DARSAR Darsar SOLPETH Sol peth. BIEN By en. BRITA
B ri ta.

The Curtain drawn again. Now it is opened.

He is altered in apparel; one half under the girdle is red, and above the
girdle white.

OD Od. ZAC.. AM Za came. GMICALZO G-ni calzo. SOBHAATH Sob ha ath. TRIAN Trian.
LUIAHE Lu i a he. ODECRIN O de crin.

(...).

MAD Mad. QAAON Q a a on.

That is the second.

D. Blessed.

frac37; RAAS Ra as. ISALMAN I Sal man. PARA.. IZ Pa ra di zod. OECRIMI O ecri
mi. AAO A A o. Yal. IALPIRGAH I A L pir gah.

E. K. The Curtain drawn again, and so remaind about 6 minutes.

E. K. Being weary of sitting, I would gladly have leave to walk a little. His
Apparel all one as it was.

Nal....... You may; but to sit, is more obedient.

D. E. K. walked awhile.

E K. Now, when it please you.

Gab....... I feel a staggaring mind.

D. That God which created you and us, make us to have constant minds in all
virtuous purposes.

Gab....... I swear: Move not; for the place is holy.

QUIIN Qui in. ENAY Enay. BUTMON But mon. OD Od. INOAS In o as. NI Ni.

E. K. He prays.

PARADIAL Pa ra di al. CASARMG Ca sarmg. The g as dg armg. VGEAR V ge ar. Kir.
CHIRLAN Chir lan. OD Od. ZONA.. Zo nar. LUCIFTIAN Lu cif ti an. CORSTA Cors ta.
VAULZIRN Vaul zirn. TOLHAMI Tol ha mi. SOBA Soba. LONDOH Lon doh.

The Curtain is drawn again: and after 6 minutes open.

Now he is all in a blew long vesture, with a long train; and has a little
Coronet of Silver on his head.

ODMIAM Od mi am, or Od Nuam. Kis CHISTAD Chis tad. ODES O des.

Cursie.

VM: DEA V ma de a. OD Od. PIBLIAR Pib li ar. OTHILRIT O thil rit. ODMIAM Od mi
am. Kol. CNOQUOL Cno quol. RIT Rit. ZACAR Za car. ZAMRAN Zam ran. OECRIMI O e
crimi. QADA: Q a dah. OD Od. OMICAOLZ O mi ca ol zod. AAIOM A A I om. BAGLE Ba
gle. PAPNOR Pap nor.

Cursie he makes.

IDLUGAM Id lu gam. LONSHI Lon shi. OD Od. VMPLIF Umplif. VGEGI V Ge gi.
BIGLIA.. Bigli ad.

Nal....... This is at an end.

D. Blessed be he that is the beginning and ending of all things.

E. K. The Curtain is plucked.

Now it is open, and he is all in green, with a Garland on his head.

(...) BAZMELO Baz me lo. ITA I ta PIRIPSON Pi rip son. OLN Oln. NAZAVABH Na za
vabh. OX Ox. CASARMG Casarmg. G or V RAN V ran. CHIS Chis. VGEG V geg...
SABRAMG Dsabramg. [ g not as dg.] BALTOHA Bal to ba.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn, for a while.

Now is in a Robe like a Marble color spotted, white, gray, and black.

GOHOIAD Go ho i ad. SOLAMIAN So la mi an.

Fire came suddenly out of the Stone, that made E. K. start.

TRIAN Tri an.

E. K. Now he kneeleth.

TALOLCIS Ta lol cis or sis. ABAIUONIN A ba i uo nin OD OD.

E. K. He sets his foot on a letter, pointing to it. He throws fire on E.
K. again.

AZIAGIAR A zi a gi er. He (...) his feet on all these letters.
RIOR Rior. IRGILCHISDA Ir gil chis da. DSPAAOX. Dspa a ox. BUFD Bufd. CAOSGO
Ca, or Ka os go. DSCHIS Ds chis. ODIPURAN Odi pu ran. TELOAH Te lo ah. CACRG Ca
curg. OISALMAN O i sal man. LONCHO Lon cho, or ko. OD Od. VOUINA Vo ui na.
CARBAF Car baf. NIISO Ni i so. BAGLE Ba gle. AUAUAGO A ua ua go. GOHON Go hon.
NIISO Ni i so. BAGLE Ba gle.

D. He casts fire on E. K.

MOMAO Mo ma o. SIAION Si a i on. OD Od. MABZA Mab za.

E. K. He makes a cursie, he says Mabza again.

IADOIASMOMAR Iad o i as mo mar. POILP Poilp, one syllable. NIIS Ni is, small
sound of i. ZAMRAN Zam ran.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn, white, and reddish, more red then white: Now it is
away, and all open again: Now all his Gown is yellow and yellow furre in it;
and on his head, a Hoode of yellow like Velvet, etc.

E. K. Why change you your Apparel thus:

E. K. He speaks very speedily to Gabriel, but I cannot perceive him.

CIAOFI C I A O fi. CAOSGO Ka. Ca os go. OD OD. BLI....S Bli ors. OD OD.
COR.... Cor si. TA Ta ABRAMIG A bra mig.

This is the end of that.

E. K. Now he pulls the Curtain: Now it opens again. His Apparel is now
changed again of an Ashy and brown color, in fashion as before.

Gab...... Who is to be compared to our God?

(...) MICAOLI Mi ca o li. BRANSG Bransg. P.. GEL Pur gel. NAPTA Nap ta. IALPOR
(...) I AL por. DSBRIN Ds brin.... FAFE E fa fa fe. EFAFAFI
VONPHO Von pho. (...) thus
OLANI O L a (...). OD Od. OBZA Ob za. SOBCA Kae Sob ca. VPAAH V pa ah. CHIS
Chis. TATAN Ta tan. OD Od TANAN Tra nan. BALYE Ba ly e.

E. K. Now he turns round about. He makes a cursie. So does Gabriel.

(...) LAR A lar. LUSDA Lus da. SOBOLN So boln. OD O d. CHISHOLQ Chis hol q.
CNOQVODI Cno quo di. CIAL 96
Si i. Ci al. VNAL V nal. ALDON Al don. MOM Mom. CAOSGO Ca os go. TA Ta. LA.
LLOR Las ol lor. GNAY Gnay.

E. K. He plucketh the Curtain, and quickly opens it, D. This word is the 25
word backward.
and says:

...... You must after E fa fa fe, put a P.

E. K. My thinks that I hear a rumbling, or clattering of Pewter in the stone.

E. K. After he had spoken, he shut the Curtain again: Now the Curtain is
opened again.

LIMLAL Lim lal. AMMA Am ma. CHIIS Chiis. SOBCA Ka. Sob ca. ADRID Ma drid ZCHIS
Kis. Zod Chis. OOANOAN O o A no an. CHI. Chis. AVINY A vi ny. DRILPI Dril pi.
CAOSGIN Ca os gin. OD Od BUTMONI But mo ni. PARM Parm. ZUMVI Zum vi. CNILA Cni
la. DAZI. Daz is. ETHAMZ E tham Zod. ACHILDAO Kill. A chil da o. OD Od. MIR. M
irk. M irc. OZOL O zol. CH.. Chis. PIDIAI Pi di a i. COLLA.. Col lal. VLCININ
Ul ci nin.. ASOBAMA A so bam. UCIM U cim. BAGLE Ba gle. IA. BALTOH I ad bal
toh. CHIRLAN Kir. Ch ir lan. PAR par. NII.. Ni i so. OD Od. IP Ip. O... AFE O
fa fa fe. BAGLE Ba gle. ACOCASB A co casb. ICORSCA (...) I Cors ca. VNIG V nig.
BLIOR Bli or.

E. K. Now the Curtain is drawn.

A voice. The end of that.

D. This is the fifth of this day.

E. K. Now is the Curtain open. All his Clothes are..... ry, very clear,
whitish, and bluish.

CORAXO Co rax o. CHIS Chis. CORM. Cormp. OD Od. BLANS Blans.....U....AL Lu
call. AZI........R A zi a zor. PAEB Pa eb. SOBA So ba. LILONON Li lo non. CHIS
Chis. VIRQ quu Vir q. EOPHAN E o phan. OD Od.

Between Chis and Virq, you must put in Op a word.

RACLIR Ra clir. MA........ Ma a si. BAGLE Ba gle.........SGI Ca os gi. DS ds.
IALPON Yal Jal pon. DOSIG as big. Do sig. OD Od. BASGIM Bas gim. OD. Od. OXEX
Ox ex. DAZIS Daz is.....IATRIS Si a tris. OD Od. SALBROX Sal brox. CINXIR Cynx
ir. F....BOAN Fa bo an. UNALCHIS U n al chis. CONSTABLE k. Constable. DS ds. DAOX Da ox
COCASG gas dg. 5678.
Co casg. SALMAN Salman. (...). TELOC.. Te loch. CASARMAN Casar man. HOLQ Hol
q. OD Od. Ti Ti. TA Ta. ZCHIS Zod chis. SOBA So ba. CORMF Cormf. IGA I ga.
NIISA Ni i sa. BAGLE Bagle. ABRAMG Ab ramg. g, not us dg. Nonsp. N. NCP Noncp.

... Curtain is drawn... The end of this.

....... This is the seventh.

E. K. Now is the Curtain pulled away: and quickly pulled again. Now it is open
again. He is apparelled, of color between a blew, and a red mingled; but blew
seems to be the ground. From the shoulder on the arms, is a trunk of seven
pendant labels, with laces. On his head a very broad Hat, between dun and black
color. His apparel is very long.

NONCI Non ci, si. DSONF Dsonf. BABAGE Ba ba ge. OD Od. CHIS Chis. OB Ob.
HUBAIO Hu ba i o. TIBIBP Tibibp. ALLAR Al lar. ATRAAH A tra ah. OD Od. OF Of.
DRIX Drix. FAFEN Fa fen. MIAN Mi an. AR Ar. ENAY E nay. OVOF O vof. SOBA So ba.
DOOAIN Do o a in. AAI A a i. IVONPH I vonph. SOBA So ba. VPAAH Vpa ah. CHIS
Chis. NANBA Nan ba. ZIXLAY Zix lay. DODSIH Dod sih. ODBRINT Od brint. TAXS
Taxs.

He makes Cursie.

H..... Hu (...) to. TASTE.. Tas tax. ILL.. Ill si....... Do a lim...... E o
lis...... Ol log...... Ors ba. DSCHIS Ds chis. AFFA Af fa. MICMA Mic ma. ISRO
Is to. MAD Mad. OD Od. LONSHITOX Lon shi tox. DS ds. JUMD. Jumbd. LUSDAN Lus
dan. EMOD E mod. DSOM dsom. OD Od. TLIOB Tli ob. DRILPA Dril pa. GEH jeh. Geh.
YLS as Yils. yls. MADZILODARP Mad zi lo darp,

That is the Twelfth.

........ ILS................. Di alpert................ Za car................
Go bus................... Zamran.......... O do....ICLE CICLE. QAA Qaa.

That is a call.

. This is the eighth

NAPEAI Na pe ai. BABAGEN jen. B ba gen DSBRIN Ds brin. OOAONA Ux. O O Ao na.
LRING LRING. VONPH Vonph. SOBAIAD So bai ad. IVONPOVNPH I von po vnph. AL. ON
Al don. DAXIL Dax il. OD Od. TOATAR To a tar.

E. K. The Curtain is plucked to.

A voice. That is the thirteenth.

E. K. Now it is open again.

E. K. He is now as if he had a pall, or Robe of Gold with a strange Cap of
Gold on his head.

... Ils.......... Mi ca ol zod..L. IRT Ol pirt. IALPRG Yal. I al purg. BLIORS B
liors. DS Ds. ODO Odo. BUSDIR Bus dir. OIAD O i ad. OVOARS O vo ars. CAOSGO Ca
os go. CASARMG. Ca sar mg. LA... La i ad. ERAN E ran..INTS Brints. CAFAFAM Ca
fa fam. DS Ds. IVMD I vmd. AQLO (...). A q lo. ADOHI A do hi. QZMOZ Moz. OD Od.
MAOFFAS Ma of fas. BOLP Bolp. COMOB.. IORT Co mo bli ort. PAMBT Pambt.

Curtain is now plucked to.

A voice..... That is all.

Blessed be the Creator of all, who has mercy on all.

E. K. Now he is here, apparelled as he was wont to appear.

Nal...... Thus, has the Lord kept promise with you: and will not forget the
least part of Promise of God confirmed anew. 14 To be received the Monday next.
his whole promise with you. Keep you therefore promise with the Lord; for, he
is jealous, and not to be defiled. Proceed as you now do. The next Monday you
shall have, as many.

D. Will it please you to deliver us the English of these 14 now, as you were
wont to do?

Nal...... The English will have a day by it self.

Nal...... The [D.] Third Monday to come, you shall have them all. So that, you
have but three days to labor.

D. You speak of the next Monday, and the third; and speak nothing of the
second Monday: and you said, that the English will have a day by it self: And
you say we have but three days to labor, etc.

Nal...... What I have said, is so. Go also, and refresh your selves.

[ E. K. The Curtain is drawn.]

A voice...... Stay there.

A voice...... Give God thanks, and make an end.

E. K. Prayed the 145. and 146. Psalm kneeling reverently; and I likewise in
heart consenting thereto, attentively listening.

Note..... E. K. is very well persuaded of these Actions now, thanked be the
Highest, who is Almighty.

D. Laudate Dominum de Caelis, laudate eum in excelfis: laudate eum omnes
Angeli ejus, laudate eum omnes virtutes ejus. Quia ipse dixit, and facta sunt
nobis. Non (...) taliter omni nationi. Soli Deo nostro, laus omnis, Victoria,
Triumphus, and Jubilatio,

Amen.
Monday Cracoviae Maii, 21. 1564. Mane, hora 5. Actio Tertia, Lunaris.
E. K. There appears neither Vail, nor any thing else in the Stone.

D. At length appeared one, but none of them: he is jolly and green, with a
long (like green Velvet) Robe: his hair long, like yellow Gold: nothing on his
head but his hair. He stands as though he stood in a cloud, above the usual
paviment in the air.

..... Lo the Sun shines, and men fear no rain, the clouds are dispersed, and
they look not for (...)
a tempest: But when it raineth mightily, or the heavens frown, then keep they
their houses, saying one to another, What unreasonable Tempest is this? what
Hailstones are these? Good Lord, who ever saw such winds? were there ever
such winds? So shall it be of the power of God, which holds in his hands the
winds, and scatters clouds abroad with his feet: For of his A
coming, shall it be said amongst you, My Spirit has vexed me, and I am
troubled: Why have thou God is not tied to time... performance.. means
dwelling with him.. se, are mansions.. faithful.. say.. (...).
brought in things, greater than thy self? or where shall this power dwell that
overshadoweth me? Wanting you shall desire, (as you do) and being filled you
shall think you have too much.

Flesh can never be thoroughly mortified but with death. Think not, that the
Lord is as the Sun, that keeps his continual watch through the heavens; which
because be is made for a time, is also tied to time.

He that sits and judges, keeps no course; but a continual performance of
his long-before providence: For he that uses him otherwise, shall be rejected
because his [D.] dwellings are not in the mansions of the faithful. Lift up
your ears therefore; for thus says the highest: Who made the heavens, or
spread them like a garment? Who breathed into man, the spirit of understanding?
Who overthrew the proud world with waters? Who smiled at the ruin of Pharaoh?
Who rooted the wicked out of their seats? and made them become vineyards for
my people: yea the stiff-necked generation? Who threw down the Towers of
Babylon, and the great Harlot? Who dwelt upon the Earth, and became flesh, to
pay for your wickedness? Who tumbled the stone from the Well, that the Sheep
might drink? Even he it is, that gave all these their times. He it is, that is
as able to make you understand, as those, that cast into the waters, and said,
Let us draw up our (...): which always deals with the weakest: To the intent
he might prove himself the strongest.

[ E. K. He speaks a great deal of speech as to himself, which I perceive
not.]

..... Even he it is, that will make you strong and wise, If he find you with
garments. Vest (...) opus (...).


He it is, that says unto you, Waver not, Be steadfast; for the faithful are
never unrewarded.

[ E. K. He puts his right hand out of the Stone, being grasped together.
Now he opens his hand, and it is written in; and it is so far from me, that I
cannot read it: yet he seems to be nearer to me, very much more than his
hand. The writing seems to be like the leaf of a Book. Thus it was written.

..... Have an eye to my foretelling.... Troubles. Sudden sorrow is at hand, in
all the earth. L.
No, his Ship is almost built. Laskie, if he serve me, shall be King of Poland.
If he serve another, his bowels shall fall out, before him with poison. Poison.


E. K. Now he clasped his hand together, and stayed the reading.

D. Whom is Laskie to serve (O Lord) but thee? to keep thy Laws, Statutes and
Commandments? not to depend upon any creature. Turks.


..... The King and Chancellor have sold the people of this Land, and are sworn
Turks. Return not home to Lasko (Laskie) for, if thou do, thou shall offend me.
Go to the Emperor; Not to (...). A. L. Ad Imperaterem (...) est. Return by
warning.
for I will comfort thee with his favor. Let him not return thence, till he be
warned by me.

D. You mean, from the Emperors Court?

D. I beseech you, by what token, shall he receive your warning?

..... Be thou his right hand, to his body, and his mouth to me. I will be
merciful unto him, and hold up his head. Leave off, till the seventh hour of
the day; then comes the Action.

D. Mean you the seventh hour, as from midnight last?

D. That begins at noon, if you make but 12 hours in the day: or at 11 if
you reckon common hours.

..... The seventh from the Horison: Run, that run can.

E. K. He himself runs away.

D. All Glory and Praise be to God.

Amen.
Eadem die (...), hora 7 (inchoante) in meridie. Hora planetaria.
E. K. After a quarter of an hour (almost) appeared our Instructors, as of.. e
time.

D. Gloria patri and filio and Spiritui Sancto, sicut erat in principio and
(...) and in sempiterna (...) seculorum. Amen.

Gab...... Move, move, move not, for the place is holy. Re patient a little
while.

E. K. Nalvage prays all the while.

E. K. Gabriel rises out of his Chair again, and warns as before (thrice)
that we should not move, for the place is holy. Nalvage makes a cross toward
the 4 quarters of the World, with his rod, as he was wont.

Nal...... There are 30 Calls yet to come. Those 30 are the Calls of Ni..
Princes and ^
spiritual Governors, unto whom the Earth is delivered as a portion. These
bring in and again (...)
disp.. Kings and all the Governments upon the Earth, and vary the Natures of
things: with the variation of every moment; Unto whom, the providence of the
eternal Judgment, is already (...) 12 (...). The 7 Angels. 91. Good Angels of
the Air, or Spirits dignified From the element of the fire to the (...). Note.
For a time.
opened. These are generally governed by the twelve Angles of the 12 Tribes:
which are also governed by the 7 which stand before the presence of God. Let
him that can see look up: and let him that can here, attend; for this is
wisdom. They are all spirits of the Air: not rejected, but dignified; and they
dwell and have their habitation in the air diversely, and in sundry places: for
their mansions are not alike, neither are their powers equal. Understand
therefore, that from the fire to the earth, there are 30 places or abidings:
one above and beneath another: wherein these aforesaid Creatures have their
abode, for a time.

(...) tota terra distributa sub 12. Principibus Angelis, 12. Tribuum Israel:
quorum 12. aliqui plures, aliqui pauciores parts habent sub suo regimine ex 91
partibus in quas tota terra hic demonstratur esse divisa.

A pocalypsi Johannis Testimonium, de 12 Angelis 12 Tribuum, Cap. 21.

Quando dividebat Altissimus gentes, quando separabat filios Adam, constituit
terminos populorum, juxta numerum filiorum Israel: Hoc igitur hinc egregie
patere.

They bear no name.

[E. K. What is without a name?] Name...or..th..e.


..... Their orderly place: But w.. they have, in respect of their being.
Understand them therefore, by the first, second, third.. so, thirtieth Air....
are so to be nominated, O thou the Twentieth air, O thou sixteenth Air, etc....
sometime, (yea all together) two or three, of the.. else govern, by times,
which are the Kings unto these... e to be spoken of) and bear rule together,
and at one time in the divisions.

In the first Air, the ninth, eleventh, and seventh Angel of the Tribes, bear
rule and govern. Unto the ninth, 7000. and 200. and 9 mini (...) Angels are
subject. Unto the eleventh 2000, 300, 60. Unto the seventh 5000, (...), 60, 2.

Nal...... Count the number.....

D. The whole sum of this Government amounts to 14931.

Nal...... It is right.

2. The second is divided into 3 parts, the Angel of the fourth Tribe has the
first; The Angel of the second, the second; The Angel of the second the third.
The fourth has these many 3000, 600, 30, 6. The first second of the second
2000... 0. 60. 2. The last of the second... 00, 900, 60, 2. Add these together.

D. They are..... 6660.

3. The third. The first, The ninth, The second, the seventh, The third the
tenth. The ninth..... 4400. The seventh or the second..... 3660. The tenth or
the third..... 9236.

Nal...... Number them.....

D. They are in all..... 17296.

4. Nal...... The fourth has also his three parts. The Angel of the tenth
Tribe has the first. The tenth has also the second. The twelfth has the
third.

E. K. He prays.

The first tenth..... 2360. Second tenth..... 3000. Twelfth or the third.....
6300.

Number the fourth also.

.. -- They are..... 11660.

.. is also threeford. The first of the Tribes have the first.. enth has the
second. The eleventh has the third. The first has under him 8630. The seventh
or second.... 2306. The eleventh, The third -- 5000, 800, two. Number them.

D. They are -- 16738.

E. K. He prays reverently.

Be patient for a while. These govern in the sixth. D. If I understand you
right, these.

6. These govern in the sixth place (which is to come) The Angel of the fifth
tribe, has the first part. (for there are.....) The Angel of the twelfth has
the second. The Angel of the fifth has the third part. The Angel of the
first, that is to say, of the first fifth, has subjects, 3000, 600, 20, of the
second or twelfth, 900, 200, of the third place and second fifth 7000, 200, 20.
The fifth governs in this order twice, therefore it is termed the second fifth.
Number it.

D. They are -- 20040.

7. The seventh has also three places. The fourth has the first. The third
has the second. The eleventh has the third. The fourth and the first place --
6000, 300. 60, 3. The third Angel and second place, 7000, 700, 6. The eleventh
Angel the third place, 6000, 300, 20. Number it.

D. They are 20389. so,..... it is the seventh.

8. The eight Air, has also three parts. The Angel of the fifth has the
first. The Angel of the first has the second. The Angel of the ninth has the
third. The fifth Angel and first place 4000, 300, 60, 2. She first Angel and
second place 7000, 200, 30, 6. The ninth Angel and the third place, 200, 300,
2. Number it.

D. They are -- 13900.

9. The ninth is also of three places. The third Angel has the first place.
The tenth Angel has the second. The ninth Angel has the third, the third
Angel has in the first place 9000, 900, 90, 6. The tenth Angel and the second
place 3000, 600, 20. The ninth Angel and the third place, 4 000, 200, 30.
Number them.

D. They are -- 17846.

10. The tenth has places also three. The eleventh Angel occupies the first.
The seventh Angel occupies the second. The ninth Angel occupies the third.
The eleventh Angel and first has 8000, 800, 80. The seventh Angel in the
second, 1000, 200, 30. The ninth in the third, 1000, 600 10, 7. Number them.

D. They are -- (...).

Nalvage prays.

Gabriel...... Take heed you move not.

11. The eleventh, is three as before. The first is occupied by the tenth. The
second by the sixth. The third by the third. In the first place. 3000, 400, 70,
2. In the second place, 5000, 200, 30, 6. In the third place, 5000, 200, 30, 4.
Number them.

.. -- They are 15942.

12. The twelfth has also his divisions. Three first places is of the sixth.
Second place of the eighth. Third of the second. The first has 2000, 600, 50,
8. The second, 7000, 700, 70, 2. The third 3000, 300 90, 1. Number it.

. -- They are 13821.

13. The thirteenth has three. The tenth is in the first. The first is in the
second. The seventh is in the third. The first has 8000, 100, 10, 1. The
second 3000, 300, 60. The seventh Angel in the third 4000, 200, 10, 3.

Number it.

D. They are 15684.

14. The fourteenth has threefold place as the rest. The fifth Angel occupies
the first, The seventh occupies the second, The twelfth occupies the third.
The first which is the fifth Angel, 2000, 600, 70, 3. The second has 9000,
200, 30, 6. The twelfth 800, 200, 30. Number it.

D. They are -- 20139.

Nal. Have (...).

E. K. Now he stands on the top of the Table.

Mark diligently.

OCCODON Occodon.

Answers to the Angel of the ninth, which is of the first, which occupies
the first place of the first Air. It is the name of that part of the earth
which is governed by the Angel of the ninth Tribe, and those that are under him
in the first division. The first Air.

Mark diligently.

..... Pax comb.

Answers the eleventh Angel, and is that part of the Earth which is governed
by him and his Ministers, in the second place of the first Air.

Mark

VALGARS Val gars.

It answers to the seventh Angel and to his Ministers, 5562, which are the
(...) part of the first Air.

Mark deligently.

DOAGNIS Do ag nis.

It is the first part of the second, the first part of the earth, which is
governed in the first part of the second, as it shall after appear, under the
fourth Angel.

Mark diligently. Note and understand this well, how one (...) is governed of
diverse Angels.


PACASNA Pa cas na.

It is the name of that part of the world on earth, that is governed in the
second part of the second Air, BY THE ANGEL of the second Tribe, with his
Ministers. 2362.

Thus you shall understand of all the names that follow.

D.. AL.. VA Di a li v a. The third of the second: whose governor is the.....
nons of the Tribe. The Third Air in the first place. SAMAPH. Sa ma pha.
Samatha has over it of the Tribe the ninth. The second of the third is.
VIROCHI. Ki. Virochi. Under the seventh of the Tribe. The Third place of the
Third Air. ANDISPI An dis pi. It is governed by the Tenth of the Tribe. The
fourth Air, The first part. THOTANF Tho tanf. His Governor is the Tenth of
the Tribe, whose Ministers are 2360. The second of the fourth. AXZIARG Ax zi
arg. It is governed by the tenth of the Tribe. (...) Poth nir. It is governed
by the Twelfth of the Tribe. The fifth Air, The first part. LAZDIXI Laz dix i.
Which is governed by the first of the Tribe. The second part of the fifth.
NOCAMAL No ca mal. Which is governed by the seventh of the tribe. The Third of
the Fifth. TIARPAX Ti ar pax. Which is governed by the eleventh of the Tribe,
whose Ministers are 5802. Be patient awhile.

The sixth.

Gab...... Move not..... Moses was to seek in these secrets.

Nal...... The first of the sixth whose Governor is the fifth of the Tribe.

S.XTOMP Sax tomp. The second of the sixth, whose Governor is the twelfth of
the Tribe. VAVAAMP (...) Va amp. The third of the sixth, which is governed by
the fifth of the Tribe. ZIRZIRD Zir zird. Whose Ministers are 7220 as before.
The first of the seventh is governed by the fourth Tribe. OBMACAS Ob ma cas.

K. E. Ever the Table turns to the letter under.

The second of the seventh, whose the third of GENADOL Ge na dol. The third of
by the eleventh. ASPIAON. As pi a on. The first of the eighth, whose Governor
is the fifth, etc. whose Ministers are 43 ZAINFRES Za in fres. The second of
the eighth, by the first of the Tribe, whose Ministers 7236. TODNAON Tod na on.
The third of the eighth by the ninth of the Tribe, ad under him 2303. PRISTAC
Pris tac. The ninth: the first, governed by the third, whose Ministers, 9996.
(...)
ODDIORG Od di org. The second of the ninth by the tenth, whose Ministers 3620.
CRALPIR Cral pir. Move not for the Lord is great amongst you. The last of the
ninth by the ninth of the Tribe. Ministers 4230. DOANZIN Do an Zin The first of
the tenth by the eleventh of the Tribe. LEXARPH Lex arph. Xarph. The second of
the tenth by the seventh. COMANAN Co ma nan. The third of the tenth by the
ninth. TABITOM Ta by tom. Whose Ministers are 1617. Have patience. The first of
the eleventh, governed by the tenth. Ministers 3472. MOLPAND Mol pand. The
second governed by the sixth Ministers 7236. VSN.RDA Us nar da. The third by
the third. Ministers as before 5234. PONODOL Po no dol. The first of the
twelfth, go by the sixth. TAPAMAL Ta pa mal. The second of the twelfth by the
eighth Angel. GEDOONS Ge do ons. The third of the twelfth by the second.
AMBRIOL Ambriol. The first of the thirteenth governed by the tenth. Ministers
8111. GECAOND Ge ca and The second by the first of the Tribes. LAPARIN La pa
rin. The last of the thirteenth by the seventh of the twelve. DOCEPAX Do ce
pax. Is Italia. The first of the fourteenth by the fifth of the Tribes. TEDOAND
Te do and.

This is England and Scotland too, called anciently by the name of Britania.
There lives not Britan.
a man that knows the truth of the British Originals.

D. The British Originals.

The second of the 14. by the seventh. VIVIPOS Vi vi pos. The last of the
fourteenth by the twelfth. Ministers 8230. OO.NAMB O o a namb.

E. K. Now he prays.

E. K. Now Gabriel stands up.

Gab...... The Lord pardons your fasting, and accepts the inward man,
labor also to morrow. You shall have the rest.

D. May I be bold to ask you one question?

Gab...... You may.

D. Is the Queen of England, alive, or dead?

..... She lives.

I am nothing near the earth.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn. We prayed jointly some prayers.

D. Upon my motion, for the Lord Al. Las. how to deal with the Chancelour, the
Curtain was drawn open. And he in the green, who appeared to day, came into the
stone, and said as follows.

Thus says the Lord: Join body to body, but let minds be separate, for he is
despised in the..md the Chancelour..nd Cracow.
sight of God, and is delivered over to destruction, which does tarry, till it
find him ready. Israel deceived Egypt, and saw Egypt overthrown. Let him do
what he will with him, but let him not join his mind with him.

D. We are desirous to know your name. Mapsama under Gabriel.


My name is called Dic illis. I am one under Gabriel, and the name of Jesus I
know and honor.

D. Jesus declared his name, and so have other good Creatures before unto us.

Map. My name is Mapsama.

D. Is, dic illis, the Etymology thereof?

Map. It is.

D. How much it imports for us to understand the best counsel that is to be
given to A. L. you know, etc.

Map...... I am commanded, and I have done my commandment. But see, that thou,
and he fulfill those things that are commanded you by me.

D. You said I should be his mouth to you: How shall I execute that, I pray you?

Map...... Not to me, but to God.

D. By prayer mean you?

Map...... Yea, and by presence.

D. By presence, with whom? The (...).


Map...... Thou shall go from hence with him to the Emperor: God will stir up
farther matter, by thy presence there.

D. Shall all our Lessons be finished, and sufficient power delivered unto us
according to the promise of God?

..... you shall be able to practice by Sunday.

D. By which Sunday?

..... But the practices that are the instructions of the Highest, are not but
in lawful causes and for necessity, to glorify God; and against (...).

D. What shall, then, be the hability of my skill to practice, before Sunday
nex Gates Visible Apparition. Note. Observe permission. All taught by Sunday
next practice, being called first, then practice.


Map...... These Calls touch all the parts of the World. The World may be dealt
withal, with her parts; Therefore you may do any thing. These Calls are the
keys into the Gates and Cities of wisdom. Which [Gates] are not able to be
opened, but with visible apparition.

[D. And how shall that be come unto?

Map...... Which is according to the former instructions: and to be had, by
calling of every Table. You called for wisdom, God has opened unto you, his
Judgment: He has delivered unto you the keys, that you may enter; But be
humble. Enter not of presumption, but of permission. Go not in rashly; But be
brought in willingly: For, many have ascended, but few have entered. By Sunday
you shall have all things that are necessary to be taught; then (as occasion
serves) you may practice at all times. But you being called by God, and to a
good purpose.

D. How shall we understand this Calling by God?

Map...... God stops my mouth, I will answer thee no more.

D. Misericordia Dei sit super nos, veritas ejus fulgeat and floreat in
cordibus nostris.

Amen.

D. E. K. read this prayer devoutly, and I joining my mind to his pronunciation
thereof kneeled by.

Domine Jesu Christ, Deus salutarium nostrorum. Cnjus nomen fit benedictum
(...) and quotidie: This prayer (...) miswritten in this place (...), it should
have been written the 22 of May following.
qui ascendisti super Coelum (...), ad dextram Dei patris: denuo venturus ad
judicandum in nubibus, cum potestate magna, and majestate mirabili, educ nos
vinctos in peccatis in fortitudine (...): ut dealbemur per remissionem
peccatorum super nivem; adeo ut beneplacitum sit tibi habitare in nobis, and
nos (...) te. Amen.

D. Ex Psalterio post 67 Psalmum.

Tuesday Cracoviae, Maii 22. 1584. in Whitson-week, Mane circa 7.
After our sitting, and some prayer used, appeared a very little Creature, on
the Cushion, by the Stone: saying, Put out your Candle; for you shall have
nothing to do, to day. (...).


D. What is your name that we may (...) your message for our excuse: seeing we
were bid yesterday to labor to day.

E. K. He is gone.

D. After that about half an hour, there appeared our Instructors, as before
time.

Gab...... Move, move, (...), for the place is holy.

E. K. Gabriel stands up, and after a while said.

..... The heavens are called (...), because of their obedience. The earth
accursed, because of her frowardness. Those therefore, that seek heavenly
things, ought to be obedient; lest Obedience.
with their frowardness, they be consumed in the end, burnt to ashes with
fire, as the Earth shall be for her unrighteousness.

Therefore, be you obedient, and full of Humility; using the instrument of
righteousness, (which is faith) That you may be (...) of the celestial
comforts; which are the hire of such as forsake Faith.
their frowardness It has been said unto you,.... Measure not out Gods
building. It has been said unto you,.... Continue to the end It has been also
told you,... That the Determinations of God are not as yet established upon you.

For it is written, It may, again be Vide 1. Reg. cap. 2. F. de (...)
determinatione Dei super (...) Levi: Vide etiam. Verba (...). 3. Reg. (...)
cap. 2. ut (...) Dominus sermones (...), etc. Si.
(...) I speak this for your instruction: For many have the power of God, but
not unto righteousness: as was evident amongst the Jews in the choice of their
Kings. In the very (...) of God, amongst those that entered into the holy place.
For, all that the Prophets (...) were not good. Not, that they were evil in the
time of their anointing, but because (...), and the dignity of their office was
defiled in them in the end, through their own frowardness. (...) also were
chosen in righteousness, and by the spirit of God: but they became Rebels in
the (...) house: and such as of whom it is said, Altissimus autem fuit
scandalum illis. Even so (...) may it be with you.

D. Jesus defend us from that (...).

For although, it has pleased (...), (...) show himself unto you, yet are you
not ashamed to say: If the harvest comes not in, at the (...) appointed, I
will become a runnagate.

But Euge (my brethren) Has the Lord need of you? It needs not be told you;
you know the contrary. Then it (...) you have need of God. But for what? and
why? That your For what?
souls may overcome this World, overcome the body, to the dignity of an Angel.

And because you are (...), and turned out to the field, full of brambles and
misery, lean, naked, and unarmed, to fight against him, that resists against
the might of God. Consider these last two, and then answer your selves, for the
rest.

I give you a short warning. God will fulfill his promises: And (as he has
said) by this August, Cave. (...).
you shall understand.

1. How to know and use God his Creatures, good and bad.

2. But when, and for what, is the gift of the Highest, and shall be fulfilled
in you ( If you will Note the second (...) or (...) of the Highest. The Actions
the greatest.
be obedient) when it pleases him: even with a sound from his own mouth,
saying, Venite and audite.

For these Actions are two fold: Consider it, if you can: and they are the
greatest, because they are the last, and contain all that has been done before
them. Which if you consider well, and to what you are called; you shall
perceive, that the Judgments of God, are not a Tennis-ball.

Thus much I thought to warn you my brethren. Have a little patience for the
Action. Move not from place.


He that stirs from his place shall find the reward of it.

D. After half an hour?

Gab...... Move not, Move not, Move not.

..... The fifteenth.
Three parts. The ninth has the first, The tenth has the second. The twelfth
the third.
The 16 has 3 parts.
The second has the first, The third has the second, The twelfth has the
third.
17...... The seventeenth.
The second has the first, The first has the second, The ninth has the
third.
18...... The eighteenth is of three.
1 has the fifth, 2 the seventh, 3 the twelfth.

E. K. He threw like dust out of the Stone toward my eyes.

19...... The ninteenth is also threefold.
1..... The twelfth. 2..... The eighth. 3..... The eleventh.
20 The twentieth is also threefold.
1..... fifth. 2..... third. 3..... seventh.
21 The one and twentieth, is also threefold.
1..... twelfth. 2..... eighth. 3..... sixth.
E: K. There stands one, at one of my ears, and at another, another, A
tempting (...) come in place.
howling like Dogs; and said, Ah you beggars!

Gab...... He will deceive you, take heed lest you move.

E. K. He seems to be telling money behind me.

D. Look not back in any case.

The ninth of the fifteenth has under him [D.] of the 12. 1000. 300. 60. 7. D
15. Sup... of this (...) Ternary.


The tenth of the first [D.] has under 1000. 300. 60. 7. [D.] of the 12.

The twelfth of [D.] the first 1000. 800. 80. 6.

The first of the second [D.] has under him 9000. 900. 20. and he is the
second of the twelve.

The second of the second, which is the third of the 12. 9000, 200, 30.

The third of the third, which is the twelfth of the twelfth, has under him
7000, 200, 40.

The first of the third (the second of the 12) has under him 7000, 600, 20, 3.

The second of the third, which is the first of the 12. 7000, 100, 30. 2.

The third of the third, which is the ninth of the 12. has with him, or under
him, 2000, 600, 30, 4.

18. The first of the fourth, which is the fifth of the 12. 2000, 300, 40, 6.

The second, which is the seventh of the 12. under him 7000, 600, 80, 9.

The third of the fourth, which is the twelfth of the 12. under him 9000, 200,
70, 6.

The first of the fifth, which is the twelfth of the 12. under him, 6000, 200,
30, 6.

The second which is the eighth of the 12. under him, 6000, 700, 30, 2.

The third of the fifth: which is the eleventh of the 12. under him, 2000, 300,
80, 8.

The first of the sixth, which is the fifth of the 12. under him 3000, 600, 20,
6.

The second of the sixth..... the third of the 12. 7000, 600, 20, 9.

The third, which is the seventh of the 12. under him 3000, 600, 30, 4.

21. The first of the seventh, which is the twelfth of the 12. under him 5000,
500; 30, 6.

The second of the seventh, which is the eighth of the 12. under him 5000, 600,
30, 5.

The last of the seventh, which is the sixth of the 12. under him 5000, 600,
50, 8.

Number every Air.
D. -- The 15. -- 4620 The 16. -- 28390 The 17 -- 17389 The 18 -- 19311 The 19
-- 15356 The 20 -- 14889 The 21 -- 16829
The first of the fourth seventh has three parts.

Have patience for a while.
1 -- is the twelfth of the twelve. 2 -- is the first of the twelfth. 3 -- is
the twelfth of the twelve.
23. The first of the second.
2 -- the seventh of the twelve. 1 -- the seventh of the twelve. 3 -- the
eighth of the twelve.
24. The third.
1 -- the fourth of 2 -- the tenth. 3 -- the twelfth of the twelve.
25. The fourth.
1 -- the fourth. 2 -- the second. 3 -- the twelfth of the twelve.
The fifth.
1 -- the twelfth. 2 -- the eighth. 3 -- twelfth of the twelve.
27. The sixth.
1 -- the second. 2 -- the fourth. 3 -- the fifth.
28. The seventh.
1 -- the tenth 2 -- the ninth 3 -- the sixth of the twelve.
(...)
The first of the first, which is the twelfth of the twelve, under him 2000.
200. 30. 2. The second of the first, under him 2000. 300. 20. 6. The third of
the first, which is the eleventh of under him 2000. 300. 60. 7.
.. The first of the second, which 7000. 300. 20. The second under him 7000.
200. 60. 2. The third of the second, which is the second of the 12. under him
7000. 300. 30. 3.
24
The first of the third, which is the fourth of the twelve, under him 8000.
200. The second of the third, which is the tenth of the twelve, under him 8000.
300. 60. The third of the third, which is the eleventh of the twelve, under him
8000. 200. 30. 6.
25
The first of the fourth, which is the fourth of the twelve, under him 5000.
6000. 30. 2. The second of the fourth, which is the second of the twelve, 6000.
300. 30. 3. The third of the fourth, which is the twelfth of the twelve, under
him 6000. 200. 30. 6.
26
The first of the fifth, the which is the twelfth of the 9000. 200. 30. 2. The
second of the fifth, which is the eighth of the twelve, 3000. 600. 20. The
third of the fifth, which is the twelfth of the twelve, 5000. 600. 30. 7.
27
The first of the sixth, which is the second of the twelve, has under him
7000. 200. 20. The second of the sixth, the fourth of the twelve, 7000. 500.
60. The third, which is the fifth of the twelve, 7000. 200. 60. 3.
28
The first of the seventh, the tenth of the twelve, 2000. 600. 30. The second
of the seventh, which is the ninth of the twelve, under him 7000. 200. 30. 6.
The last of the seventh, the sixth of the twelve, under him 8000. 200.
D. The 22th..... is.....6925. 23 -- 21915. 24 -- 24796. 25 -- 18201. 26 --
18489. 27 -- 22043. 28 -- 18066.
They..... I kneel to prayer. Then the Curtain was drawn.

E. K. There appears like the snuf of a Candle on the top of the stone, it is
like a little spark of fire. After this, Gabriel said by voice, Have patience.

D. After half an hour. A voice said... look to.... to E. K.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn open. Nalvage stands on the top of the Table.

Nal...... The first part of the first seven you bad to day.

The ninth.

TAHANDO. Ta ban do. The tenth, the second of the first, which is the tenth.
NOCIABI No ci a by. The third. TASTOXO Tas to x o. 16 The first of the second.
CVCARPT Cu carpt. The second. LAVACON La va con. The third is governed by the
twelfth of the twelfth. Ministers 9240. SOCHIAL Ki So chi al. 17 The third. The
first, which is the second of SIGMORF Sig morf. The second. AYDROPT Ay dropped.
The third, whose governor is the ninth of the twelve. TOCARZI To car zi. 18
The first of the fourth. NABAOMI Na ba o mi. The second. ZAFASAI Za fa sai. The
third. YALPAMB Yal pa M B. The first of the fifth. TORZOXI Tor Zox i. The
second. ABAION A ba i on. The third. OMAGRAP O ma grap. 20 The first of the
sixth. ZILDRON Zi L dron. The second of the sixth. PARZI. A Par zi ba. The
third of the sixth. TOTOCAN To to can. The first of the seventh by the twelfth.
CHIRSPA Chirs pa. The second of the seventh. TOANTOM To (...) tom. The third of
the seventh. VIXPALG Dg. Call it, Vix palg. Nal.....The last seven. The first.
OZIDAIA O-zi-dai a. The second of the last seven. PARAOAN Pa ra o an. The
third. CALZIRG Dg. Calzirg. 23 The first of the second. RONOAMB To no amb. The
second. ONIZIMP O m Zimp. The third of the second. ZAXANIN Zax a nin. 24 The
first. ORCAMIR. Or ca mir. The Ki. CHIALPS Chi alps. The third of the third.
SOAGEEL So a ge el. The first of the fourth. MIRZIND Mir zind. The second by
the second of the twelfth. OBVAORS Ob va ors. The thirds. RANGLAM Ran glam. The
first of the fifth by the twelfth of the twelfth. 26 POPHAND Po phand. The
second. NIGRANA Ni gra na. The third. kim. BAZCHIM Baz chim. The first. SAZIAMI
Sa zi a mi. The second. MATHULA Ma thu la. The third. ORPANIB Or pa nib.
28..... The first of the seventh. LABNIXP Lab nin p. The second. FOC.SNI Fo cis
Ni. The third. OXLOPAR Ox lo par.

E. K. Now he stands off the Table.

Nal...... Have patience for a while. Say on.

The twenty ninth has three parts. The first part has his Governor the third
of the 12. The second the fourth of the 3..... the fifth of the 12.
30. The thirtieth..... has 4 parts.
1 -- the twelfth. of the 12. 2 -- the fourth. of the 12. 3 -- the third. of
the 12. 4 -- the sixth. of the 12.
The first of the nine and twentieth has under him, 9632. The second..... by
the fourth of the 12. under him 4236. The fifth of the 12 that governs under
7635.
30 The twelfth of the 12. 4632.
The second..... by the fourth of the 12. under him 9636. The third..... by the
third of the under him 7632. The last..... by the sixth 5632.
(...) The earth in the first division of the 29. VASTRIM Vas trim. The second
part of 29 Air. ODRAXTI O drax ti. by the fifth of the 12. The third, whose
Ministers are 7635. GOMZIAM Gom zi am. 30..... The first of the 30..... under
the 12. TAOAGLA Ta o a gla. The second under the fourth of GEMNIMB Gem nimb.
The third under the third. ADVORPT Ad vorpt. The last..... by the sixth of the
12. DOZINAL Do zinal. The... with... none... re: but... 30.


Nal...... I have done.

D. As you gave us taste, or warning of Italia and Britania, so if it be
thought good to you, we are desirous to understand of the rest, the Application
to such names as we understand.

Nal...... Make an end for to day: Give over. Make your selves ready for to
morrows Action.

E. K. The Curtain is drawn.

D. Deo omnipotenti, Optimo, and maximo Universa machina creata laudem gloriam
and honorem reddat, nunc and in perpetuum. Amen.

D. There is a prayer written after the Action of Monday Maii 21. next here
before beginning Domine Jesu Christ, etc. which I misplaced there; for after
this days Action, it was said by E. K. and me.

LIBRI SEPTIMI APERTORII CRACOVIENSIS MYSTICI, SABBATICI, Pars Quarta; Anno
1584. Maii 23.
Wedensday, Cracoviae, Maii 23. Mane, hora 7. fere. Post orationes nostras.
THe Curtain appeared, at the first looking.

D. There happened a great storm or temptation to E. K. of doubting and
misliking our Instructors and their doings, and of contemning and condemning
any thing that I knew or could do. I bare all things patiently for God his
sake, etc. At length the Curtain was opened, and they appeared.

E. K. I am contented to see, and to make true report of what they will show;
but my heart stands against them.

Gab...... The time shall come, that the oak that is beaten with every storm
shall be a Dining-Table in the Princes Hall. able doubting


Gab...... M ve not, for the place is holy. He that doubts, does the property
of the flesh, but he that has faith, has the gift of the Holy Ghost. The
Swallow flies swift, but where she lights, there is no remembrance of her
being: such are the words of man. But our words are like unto a swift arrow,
that enters and sticks where it lights.

As man loves the Owre for the Gold that is in it, and for the end of his use;
so God loves the dungbills of the World, etc. But the enemy, the more he
lifts up himself, the greater shall be his D. I suspect this place to be
imperfect.
fall: for instead of joy, shall enter in an hundred, and instead of hundred a
thousand. But beware of those Rebels; for they are like the small stones which
are in every place of the Earth. But move not. Let us do that which is our
part: Unto others be it as they deserve. The earthly Globe appearing.


E. K. There appears a great thing like a Globe, turning upon two
axell-trees.

Nal...... (...) to the first Air..... D. I have done.

Nal...... The Earth in the first air, is this, [E. K. pointing on that Globe
to it.]

D. We beseech you to bound or determine the Countries or Portions of the
Earth, by their uttermost Longitudes and Latitudes, or by some other certain
manner.

Nal...... Our manner is, not as it is of worldlings: We determine not places
after the forms.. wards... th 15 Prin An Angel appeared to Ptolomie.
of legs, or as leaves are: neither we can imagine any thing after the fashion
of an [D] horn: as those that are Cosmographers do.

Notwithstanding the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Ptolomie, and opened unto
him the parts of the Earth: but some he was commanded to secret: and those are
Northward under your Pole. But unto you, the very true names of the World in
her Creation are delivered. ms... ng... any.. Poles. Diviniatione.


D. There appeared a great water, long and narrow, reddish, and thereby
appeared...

There appeared written Egypt. He has in his hand written Syria. And of that
he said, that it was the second of the first.

Now appeared a very fine Land and Region in which appeared a great City, in
the edge of it. There appeared written..... Mesopotamia. The third of the first.

Now appeared a large portion of the Earth, wherein appeared Bears, a great
River from The first of the second.
a Hill going into the Sea with three mouths. The word written Cappadocia.

The second of the second.

written in his hand Tuscia.

D. I pray you, do you mean Tuscia by Italy?

The third of the second: written Parva Asia.

The first -- Hircania -- D. Mare Caspium appeared by it.

The second -- Thracia --

The last Here appear people going into Caves of the ground, and dwelling in
Gold Mines under the Pole Artick.


Caves: they are long haired men, naked; Here appear great Hills, and the
veins of the

Gold Mines appear: the men seem to have baskets of leather. This is one of the
places under the Pole Artick, written..... Gosmam.

D. -- Is it so called, of the people of the Country?

Nal...... Even at this hour.

E. K. Here appears a mighty great Hill, and about it a great Cave of water.
Here appear beasts diverse: some like a Swine, with feet like a Bear, his
neither jaw hanging to his and diverse

and a mighty Hill running, with branches: there by lie things with husks on
them.

The first.

he appoints, written The b a idi.

The second -- Here the Sun shines fair. Parsadal.

The third -- Here appear people very beastly, with Mantles on their shoulders:
and beasts with long snouts.

India.

Here appear great rotten trees, very old, great Woods of them. Beyond the
Woods are great Hills. Great Fens appear, and great Marish-ground: Fowls as
big as Swans, green, scaled on their backs, in the water.

The first of the fifth -- Bactriane.

The second -- Cilicia.

The third -- Oxiana.

6. The first of the sixth -- Numidia.

The second -- Cyprus.

The third -- Parthia.

7. The first of the seventh -- Getulia.

The second -- Here is a great Desert: no Trees. in his hand -- Arabia.

The third -- Phalagon.

D. I never heard of it.

E. K. It is toward the North, where the veins of Gold; and such people appear
as before were noted. On this side them a great way D. (...) as I think.
appear men with swinish snouts, their visage is so strouted out; but to be
perceived to be of humane visage. The women have about their privities very
long hair down to their knees. The men have things on their shoulders of beasts
skins, as instead of a Jerkin or a Mandillion.

8. The first of the eighth -- Mantiana.

People appear here of reddish color.

The second -- Soxia --

On the one side of the black men

The third --

like Spaniards appear very high men with Spanish Capes without Swords by their
sides. Here appear great Towns; diverse; The name being not evident we urged,
and Gallia appeared.

8. The first -- Illyria.

The second --

..... If thou (...), thou shall never see more -- To E. K.

-- Sogdiana.

The third -- Lydia.

The first Caspis.

The second Germania.

Men like Dutchmen with leather nether stocks.

The third.

Here appear Monkies, great flocks.

Trenam.

The people have leather Coats, and no beards, thick leather, and Garthers.
They gather up thinkg.....

Nal...... These people are not known with you.

D. Are they not in Africa?

Nal...... They be. Now a dark fog covers all the stone.

Nal..... Stay awhile.

E. K. I pray you let us go to dinner. Move not, I say.

E. K. Nalvage prays. Now he points to a place.

11. The first of the eleventh. Bithynia.

The second. [A great City, and the Sea hard by it.] Graecia.

D. Is not that great City Constantinople?

Nal...... It is. There is the seat of that great Devil the Turk.

Nal...... He is but Tenant at will.

The third. Licia.

12 The first of the twelfth.

E. K. Here appear handsome men, in gathered tucked Garments, and their shoes
come up to the middle of their legs, of diverse colored leather.

Nal...... These be those beyond Hispaniola.

E. K. It is a low Country. Here appear great piles of stones like St. Andrews
Crosses. Two Notable Rivers are here, The women have great covertures over
their heads, coming from their shoulders, as the Hoyks in Flanders.

O ni Gap.

There are on this side of it, (a great way) a great number of dead Carkases.

Nal...... It is beyond Gia pan.

D. Then it is that land, which I use to call Atlantis.

Nal...... The^y stretch more near the West: They are 25 Kingdoms in it.

The second..... beyond a place where the Gese.

I India.

India in the heavenly government is divided into two parts. This is called the
greater Inde.

The third..... a great many little Isles.

Orchenii.

D. Do you mean the Isles of Orkney.

Nal...... No.

D. They seem to be the Isles of Malacha.

The first of the thirteenth..... Achaia.

The second..... Armenia.

E. K. A great old Castle stands on the side of the top of a very high Hill.
It seems to be made of wood, It seems four cornered.

D. I beseech you what is that Castle?

Nal...... It is the Ark of Noe.

The third..... Cilicia.

Nal...... You never knew this Cilicia. This is Cilicia, where the Children of
Nemrod dwell. Nimrod.

It is up in the Mountains beyond Cathay.

E. K. This people, some great Giants, and very fair. Their Apparel is Gowns
tuckt up, they are very costly Apparelled, and in their faces they have great
Jewels like precious stones hanged, they are marvellously rich apparelled in
silks.

14 The first..... Here seem as if many houses were thrown down, and Castles.
Paphlagonia. Only one Hill appears in it very long.

The second..... Phaziana.

The third..... Here be men with broad Caps like Egyptians, and many Mountains
are here on one side Chaldei.

5 The first..... Itergi. Here appear Woods, Waters, and fair Towns, but the
people are (...), (...), and have great lumps of flesh under their Throats.
They are to the South of the last Ciliciens.

There are 14 Kingdoms of them.

The second..... Macedonia.

The Th^rd..... Garamantica. People of a low stature, black, swarty people,
naked.

The first of the sixteenth..... Here like men of wild gesture, clothed like
Polonians.

This Country is..... Sauromatica.

The second..... AEthiopia.

E. K. Here are some naked, some not naked, covered with red Garments. The
houses seem like Tents, made of cloth and leather. There are great Rivers.

The third.

E. K. Now he shows by the North Pole, and the great Mountain.

Fi a cim...... Here be seven Kingdoms, their chief City is called Fiacim, all
that are of that Kings Counsel are Astronomers. The Kings name that now
governs is Gapsacar.

The first.

See thou this Country?..... Colchica. To E. K.

The second..... Cireniaca...... E. K. Hard by a great water.

The third..... Nasamonia.

The first...... Carthago.

The second..... Now appear many Crocodiles, long necked, scaled on the body,
with long tails.

..... Cox lant. A great place appears, covered about with fire. Many great
Serpents appear here of 200 foot. It appears very Eastward. No people appear
here.

E. K. There comes from Heaven like a Mist, and covers a great place, about
300 mile long, like a Park, enclosed with fire. It is on a high ground. There
come four Rivers out of it, one East, another West, another North, and another
South. The pales, or enclosure of it seem to be Arches, beset most richly with
precious stones. In the Gate of it stand three men like us, one is in a long
Gown with many pleats, the other like in a Cassek. The third in the rough skin
of a beast. In the name of Jesus: Is this the Paradise that Adam was banished
out of?

..... The very same; from hence he was turned out into the earth. This is the
true Vale of Josaphat.

D. Will you give me leave?

Say on.

It should seem this must be on the earth, not in the air.

..... It is upon the earth.

You said that from hence he was turned out into the earth.

..... The curse of God in Adam caused the earth, whereinto he was cast to be
accursed. For, if Adam had after his fall tarried in Paradise, his wickedness
would have altered the innocence of the place. Therefore is Paradise
distinguished from the earth, in respect of her purity: because the earth is
defiled, and corrupted with man. The earth is said to be sinful in respect of
the sin of man.

D. Till 45 degrees, both Northerly and Southerly, all is known in the most
part of the world: But of any such place there is no knowledge nor likelihood
by any History of these days, or of old time.

Nal...... Therefore this is cunning, and the wisdom of God. There dwells
flesh in it that shall never die, which were taken up for a testimony of Truth..

D. Elie and Enoch, by the Apocalypse do seem that they should suffer death,
under Antichrist, if we understand right. There is Elie, Enoch, and John: They
shall seem to be dead, by his power, but not dead.

The third -- Idumea.

Ninteen The first -- Parstavia.

I know it not.

The second -- Celtica.

..... That we understand commonly now for Gallia. It is that which you call
Flandria, the Low Country.

The third -- E. K. Here appear men with tallons like Lions.

They be very devils. There are five Isles of them. These be they that can
dwell in any part of the Earth, and are called Pilosi.

Nothing differs them, but in that they have bodies.

Vinsan.

20 --

The first.

E. K. Under the South Pole.

Here appear little men with long beards: their Under the South Pole.
bodies as childrens bodies.

Nal...... There dwells the wonderful Emperor of the World, and the
wonderful City of the D. A wonderful great City.
World: Here are an hundred and twelve Kingdoms. This City is a hundred forty
six leagues about.

D. You understand two English miles for a league, as in France?

Nal...... I. There dwells the true generation of Cham.

Tolpam.

The second -- Carcedonia.

The third -- Italia.

D. Italia and Britania were before applied: the third of the 13. and first of
the 14.

..... Therefore these two places to be reconciled.

He points to a great City with a River by it.

..... This is that City which shall not have one stone standing in it. This
City is in Italia

D. Is it Rome, I pray you?

Nal...... It is Rome.

E. K. Now there is come a white mist in the Stone.

Cease, said a voice.

A voice..... Stay for a while.

E. K.

Nal...... Read them in my hand as thou see them [D. He spoke to E. K.]

21 The first -- Britania.

The second -- Phenices.

The third -- Comaginen.

22 The first -- Apulia.

The second -- Marmarica.

The third -- Concava Syria.

23 The second of the seventh --

The first -- Gebal.

The second -- Elam vide (...).

The third -- Idunia.

Nal...... It is beyond Greenland.

24 The first -- Media.

The second -- Arriana.

The third -- Chaldaea.

D. I beseech you, what differs this Chaldea from Caldei before?

Nal...... You shall find the difference of it, in practice.

25 -- These people Serici.

The second -- Persia.

The third -- Gongatha -- E. K. Toward the South Pole.

26 The first -- Gorsim -- Bears and Lions here.

The second -- Hispania --

The third -- Pamphilia --

27 The first -- Oacidi.

Gal...... There be 9 Kingdoms -- Fair made people, but tawny.

The second -- Babylon.

The third -- Median -- E. K. It is much Northward.

28 The first -- Idumian.

Nal...... They are two Isles environed with an arm of the Scythian Sea, which
goes in at Maspi. Maspi.


The second -- Felix Arabia.

The third -- Metagonitiden -- It stands very Southerly.

29 The first -- Assyria.

The second -- Africa.

The third -- Bactriani.

30 The first -- Afran.

Here appear people with one eye in their head, seeming to be in their breast,
toward the Equinoctial.

The second -- Phrygia.

The third -- Creta.

The fourth -- Mauritania.

D. I remember of people called Arimaspi.

Nal...... This days Lesson is as much worth, as all between this and
Mauritania.

Note...... Here are 15, which were never known in these times.

..... The rest are.

D. I hear nothing of P lonia, Moschovia, Dania, Hibernia, Islandia, and so of
many other which I could name; what is to be thought of those? in respect of
the distribution of the whole face of the Farth?

..... Polonia and Moschovia, are of Saromatia; Denmark, Ireland, Frizeland,
Iseland, D. Are under the Regiment that (...) chiefly denotes, etc.
are of Britain: And so it is of the rest.

D. I beseech you to what part, is Atlantas and the annexed places, under the
King of Spain called the West Indies?

Nal. When these 30 appear, they can each tell what they own. Prepare for to
morrows Action.

D Most (...) --

E. K. If you prove your self true, you shall win me to God.

Nal...... You may be answered with the first words I spoke to day.

D. Deo, Opt. Max. sit omnis honor, laus and Gloria nunc and semper.

Amen.
Thursday Maii. 24.
D. Because E. K. came not, (according as it was bidden yesterday) to follow
the Action: I went to his Study door, and knocked for him: And I requested him
to come; and he refused so to do, and gave me a short and resolute answer, That
he would never more have to do with these Actions. I asked him the reason why:
He would give none: But earnestly denied to proceed. I told him that his words
Those words he spoke after the Action ended more than an hour in the Chamber
before my Study of practice.
yesternight (that he could not this day deal) did very much grieve me, etc.
whereof he made small account. So I went into my Study again, and committed the
Cause to God.

After half an hour and less, he came speedily out of his Study, and brought
in his hand one Volume of Cornelius Agrippa his works, and in one Chapter of
that Book he read the names of Countries and Provinces collected out of
Ptolomeus (as the Author there notes) Whereupon he inferred, that our
spiritual Instructors were (...) to give us a description of the World, taken
out of other Books: and therefore he would have no more to do with them. I
replied, and said, I am very glad that you have a Book of your own, wherein
these Geographical names are expressed, such as (for the most part) our
Instructors had delivered unto us: and that, according to the Tenor and form of
my request to him, so to have them expressed: for (...) more perfect
information, by those known names; to understand those 91 unknown and unheard
of names, of seven letters every one: whereby they (our Instructors I mean) are
very greatly to be thanked, and to be deemed (in all reasonable men's
judgments) most friendly, and far from cosenage, or abusing of us: And farther
I said, that I my self, had here set down on a paper, all the 91 names together
orderly, as we received them, and that 91. Names of the world or earthly
habitation.
I had here brought the description (...) Universal Chart of the World.
Geographical of the whole earthly Globe: and also Pomponius Mela set forth in
English with the Chartes thereunto belonging, fairly described by hand: To the
intent he might see the verity of their words yesterday delivered unto us: for
the performance of my request made to them, on Tuesday last in this form of
words, as the Book has it recorded thus;

D. As you gave us a taste, or warning of Italia and Britania, so, if it be
thought good to you, we are desirous to understand of the rest, the Application
to such names as we understand.

Whereby you may perceive (said I to E. K.) how your reason is marvellously
confounded by your wilful fantasy: For so much as, wherein you would find
fault, in our spiritual Instructors doings, Therein they have done that which I
requested them: as appears; and that to the intent, of known Countries we
might understand which Angels had the government: for such purposes, as
occasion might offer or require our practices to be tried in.

This ( quoth I) is to gross your error, and to wilful your wrangling: But I
do in narrower points peruse and consider their words and doings; In which
though sometimes my writings (after your declaration) has been amended by
them, yet the occasion of miswritting for the most part, has been either in
your misreporting what you saw and heard, or in my wrong hearing, or writing:
and sometime by the spiritual present correcting of my writing, and sometime
longer after, etc.

But for all this, E. K. remained of his wilful intent; and so departed to his
Study again: And I committed God his Cause, into his own hands, care and
ordering, as may be best for his honor and glory. So be it.

Monday, Maii 28. hora 10 ante meridiem.
D. I said the Lords Prayer.

E. K. Here appears nothing but the clear Stone.

Now there appears a white circle, more than usual: it is as it were a white
smoke, very large comprehending all the heavens in manner, having as it were,
the breadth of my finger in the circumference or border of it.

D. After this, an hour and an half, after diverse our discourses of my Wife her
speeches and usage toward E. K. etc.

E. K. Here appears one like him in the green that appeared last day: the
Etymology of whose name is Dic illis, and his name Mapsama.

D. In the name of Jesus, and for the honor of Jesus, we beseech you to
deliver the verity of your message.

Maps...... He lives, and he says, Arise up, and say unto them. How many
times have I opened my arms to embrace you? How often have I wept over you, as a
father? But you are still, stiff-necked and disobedient children. Lo, I cease
yet, and will not impute this wickedness unto Forte, Cease not or Cease: and
that is to be understood From (...) you.
you.

[D. O blessed God, blessed God, blessed God of mercies.]

Maps...... Because my promises may be: notwithstanding, that the sons of men,
may not say, such a day comes in the Bridegroom; nor at such a time shall the
Lilly spring: Let the day, that I will visit you in, be unknown unto you. A
(...) speech.


E. K. I thought you would say so.

Map...... But this you shall do utter part.

..... Bind up together, 48 leaves; whose skin shall bear Silver: Whose
Perimeter shall be (...). 30 inches, in length; 8, in breadth 7. ^


D. Do you require it to be parchment, or paper?

Map...... I have said.

D. What shall I, then, do, after I have caused 48 leaves to be bound?

Map...... This done, rise up, and perform your Journey, as you are commexded.

D. I have heard only of the binding of the book: Mean you after the binding
of the book Our going to the Emperors Court.
that this journey shall be entered into?

Map...... I --

D. What shall I do with the book, after I have bound it?

E. K. I will answer for him....burn it. D Perverse. Invitatio Bonorum.


Map...... The fourteenth day of your rest, even this Table-Cloath, and none
other shall be spread for a Banquet.

E. K. He points to this Diaper Table-Cloath.

Whereunto, you shall invite the Angels of the Lord: In the midst of the
Table lay down the The writing of the book by Divine means. The Emperor. Four
(...), Vide lib. 19. September. 1. 184. Sulden alteration in this year.
book and go forth; make also the doors after you. That the heavens may
justify your faith, and you may be comforted. For, man is not worthy to write
that shall be written: neither shall there be found many worthy to open that
book.

I have entered already into the Emperors heart.

But it may be he will become wilful. If he do, a hundred and twelve days
remain, and he is not.

For, I have cut down the banks, the waters may rush out, that there may be a
sudden alteration In this, now, time.

Return warned, as before was bidden, May 21. But he meant not to warn us of
any returning as appears by the nineteenth book: I herefore with humility
that doubt must be moved. Be ready always.
When I warn you, you shall return: But you please me much, if you believe. If
time govern not my providence, (repine not) but let my providence govern time:
Look neither for the Sun nor Moon, but be ready always.

For, whom I find apt, shall be made (...): And to him that is barren, shall
there be little added.

Three days before you take your voyage, shall you meet me here. Three days
before our journey to the Emperor.


For, I have something to say unto you, which shall be hidden Vide Junii 4. in
fine.
till then.

Let Lasky stretch out his lims: For I will A L. Father. Son. God Holy Ghost.
love him, and let him gape wide: And take much for the Vessel is wide, that he
shall drink of.

Let him not despair: for he that governs the winds, and dwells not in the
hands of man, be it is that shall comfort him.

Glory be to God the Father. Glory be to God the Son. Glory be to God the holy
Ghost. All the Heavens rise up, and glorify God.

D. Amen.

Map...... Hallelujah.

D. I beseech you, as concerning the rest of the Calls, or invitations: we are
most ready to The Calls, or Invitations.
receive them now.

Map...... Pray, that those three days to come, may satisfy those three days
that are past. D. Thursday, Friday, Saturday last, were lost by E. K. his
disquietnesse, God be merciful unto us.


D. I beseech you to let me understand, whether I shall take with me only this
Table-Cloath.

Map...... With the shew-stone that is made for your self.

A voice...... Cause the book to be made all ready.

D. I understand that I shall cause the leaves to be silvered, and so prepared.

D. Misericordias Domini in eternum cantabo: Ejus nomen sit benedictum ex hoc
nunc and in sempiterna seculorum secula: Ille solus est Deus Noster,
Omnipotens, eternus and vivus: Illi soli omnis honor, laus and Gloria.

Amen.
Saturday, Cracoviae. 2 Mane circa 7. Post preces aliquot and (...) meas:
statim fere apparuit.
E. K. I see him, that we call Gabriel, sitting in his Chair alone.

Gabr...... God is a spirit essential and in himself: Essential and working by
himself: Essential in all works, and dignifying them by himself: So that the
beginning and ending of all things, that GOD.
are already, or are in him already, and to come, is placed in the fountain,
and wellspring of all life, comfort, and increase: Whereby we see, that the
heavens and the mighty powers therein from the highest unto the lowest, things
that shall have an end, and the earth with all that she brings forth; yea,
the lower parts (though after another manner, and by another course) do all
hang, and are established, in and upon the unspeakable (...) in the providence
of him. How, therefore can the Heavens run awry? Or the earth, (for the (...)
sake) want a comforter? Or the lower places look for comfort? If it be so
(therefore) that the heavens cannot err: Or if the power of God be so mighty,
and so full of prevailing; If in the house of light there be no darkness, or
from the Heavens can descend no wickedness. (And why? because they are
dignified in the power of God.) What is he that should live, and distrust the
Lord? But (...), The power and quality of the The Devil.
Devil is not only manifest, but also still contendeth against the power and
will of God: stirring (...), misliked of the Devil.
up, and provoking man to fast at full Bankets, to study for good and evil. To
rise up against the Lord, and against his power. And to vex the Lord himself:
which cannot be vexed at the wickedness of the Devil. Even for this cause,
says the Lord unto you: How long will you wallow in wickedness? How long
will you be drunken with folly? How long will you rise up against the D. (...)
praevalescentem: Haec enim (...) nominis ejus est. Blasphemies. A punishment of
further and longer time yet of God his most merciful visiting of us. Dealing
with Devils. I he Devils (...).
Lord and against me? * Saying, And if this be the power of God, Are these the
Messagers of the highest? Is this the will of God? Or can it be, that he has
care of the earth? But these are the blasphemies of your mouth. But I see, I
must differ my self for a time, and must raise up a Table where there shall
eat more worthy. Consider what it is to deal with Devils: Is it not to take
part with Rebels? Is it not to be Traitors against the anointed in his own
Kingdom? Is it not a greater sin then the sin of the Devil? For why, The Devil
sins in himself, and therefore had his fall. But your sin is in your selves
and by the Devil, and therefore it is the greater. But, as it is said before,
Where is there a moniment upon the earth that the people have raised up, in the
remembrance of wickedness? Many there be that say, Lo, there is Jerusalem.
Lo, there was the Lord buried. Lo, there the floods divided themselves with all
the rest; in remembrance of the Lord: But none there is that say, Lo, in this
place the wicked have risen up and prevailed. Therefore to cleave unto the Lord
is good, and to follow a sensible Doctrine, which brings with it self the
loathsomeness of wickedness, and the study to do well, that the wicked may be
confounded. Alas! let the whole earth rise up, [thrusting up his hand] even
this hand, can gather them all together: what therefore can the Lord do when he
frowneth? O unreasonable Creatures, and worse then beasts, more ignorant then
the beasts that grase in the Mountains: Are you not afraid of the power of God,
when it becomes a skourge? For, doubt you not, to deal with those that are
wicked? (you of no faith) wherefore has the Lord made the earth, but to be
glorified in the creatures thereof? And what is he that glorifieth God on earth
but man? Think you [not] (therefore) that the Lord bath not care of his people?
Think you that there is a Seat upon earth, wherein he has not hidden the might
of his free power? Does Satan get a Soul that he is not privy of? Believe, O
you of little Faith, for it is Faith. Faith is the Key of man's conscience. The
Devil is the picklock. E. K. Very vehemently spoken. A figure of the time to
come. Vide lib. 19. Praga, 27. Aug. Vnum ovile, 950. years. Vide (...). cap.
20. Paradise. Paradise was first made, and last to be enjoyed. Regnum Dei mill
annorum de quo, cap. 20. Apocalypse. D. Antichristus. Dies novissimi isti sunt.
The last Prophecy. Bella and (...). Necessity of things, vide (...). Election.
The twofold manner of this Doctrine. The shyle for God his Barn.
the power of God, it is the Key of the whole world, which is the Key of man's
conscience: If he lock not the door, but depart and leave it open: Woe be to
that Soul, for the Prince of darkness enters, and is possessed to the eternal
woe of his dwelling place. If, therefore the earth be a Cave unto him that made
it, (as appears by his Prophets, and by the Son of God.) What are you? Or how
empty are you? When you think it is in vain, that the Lord has appeared unto
you.

But in you two is figured the time to come: For many shall cleave unto the
Lord, even at the first call: And many shall doubt of the Lord, and not believe
him for a season. But as you two shall dwell in one Center, (if you (yet) do
look forward, and step right) So shall the face of the whole earth be, for 800.
one hundred and fifty years.

(For, the fruit of Paradise shall appear, that nothing may be on earth without
comfort.

For, lo, the first shall be last,) and it shall be a Kingdom without
corruption.

Now, now, has the Serpent wallowed his fill.

Now, Now, are all things in the pride of their wickedness.

Now, now, is the Heir ready, most like his father. But woe unto the earth
through his government.

For, his Kingdom shall have an end with misery. And these are the latter
days. And this is the last Prophecy of the World.

Now, now, shall one King rise up against another: And there shall be blood
shed throughout all the World: fighting between the Devil his Kingdom, and the
Kingdom of light.

Contentions and quarrels on the earth between man and man, father and son,
wife and husband,

Kingdom and Kingdom; yea, even in the very beasts of the field shall there be
hatred. And into

them shall the spirits of Contention enter.

For, now comes the necessity of things.

E. K. He now kneeleth down.

Gab...... As for you, thus says the Lord.

I have chosen you, to enter into my barns: And have commanded you to open the
Corn, that the scattered may appear, and that which remains in the sheaf may
stand. And have entered into the first, and so into the seventh. And have
delivered unto you the Testimony of my spirit to come.

For, my Barn has been long without Threshers. And I have kept my flayles for
a long time hid in unknown places: Which flayle is the Doctrine that I deliver
unto you: Which is the Instrument of thrashing, wherewith you shall beat the
sheafs, that the Corn which is scattered, and the rest may be all one.

(But a word in the mean season.) ^, (...) Note, bidding.


If I be Master of the Barn, owner of the Corn, and deliverer of my flayle: If
all be heaven.

(And unto you, there is nothing: for you are hirelings, whose reward is
heaven.)

Then see, that you neither thresh, nor unbinde, until I bid you, let it be
sufficient unto you: that you know my house, that you know the labor I will
put you to: That I favor you so much as to entertain you the laborers within
my Barn: For within it thresheth none without my consent.

For, in you shall many people be blessed, and in you shall there be no
division: For Esau and Our uniting promised. Esau and Jacob.
Jacob shall be joined together; and their Kingdom shall be all one: For as the
Sacrifice is, so must the Priests be.

E. K. Now he kneeleth down again. Me thinks, I hear them A. L.
say, What shall become of Laskie?

E. K. And so the people say.

[Ask me no Questions: but hear, what I have to say.]

As those that desire to make a speedy Dinner, and to entertain their guests,
go suddenly out, and gather the dryest wood in the wood-pile: Not because it is
more wood than the other; but because it is dry, and most apt for the
speediness of the kitchen. So, it is with me, says the Lord. A. L. A. L. The
aptest in the world for some purposes of God. (...)


For, I respect him not in that he is a man, but in respect of the manner of
his mind and inward man, which I find in respect of my purpose, aptest in the
world: because be naturally hates the wicked, Therefore naturally I love him,
of whom I say I swear, If he follow me (says the Lord) I will be with him, as
I was with my (...), cap. 5. and 6. Michael (...) etc.
Warrier at Hiericho: And I will be mighty with him in this world, and a lover
of him for ever. But me thinks he will be Pride of A.L. suspected. Deusignis:
nos autem, materia. Necessity.
proud. If you find me weak: know you, that I am not weak, of my self; but your
own weakness may be your confusion. For I am a fire, and take hold of such
matter as I find apt.

E. K. He kneeleth again.

1. I have now told you (my Brethren) of, and of the manner of the power of God.

2. Of the nature of Hell, and of her wickedness.

3. Of the course of the World, and of the necessity of things.

4. Of your election, and of the end thereof.

5. Of Laskie, and why he is elected.

6. Now I am lastly to persuade you, by the power of God, that you make your
selves apt and Note. Apt and meet matter. Humility. Perseverance. A great
Caveat.
meet matter: and that you may stand before the Lord as acceptable: which you
shall perform if you intend your former Lessons. The ground whereof is Humility
and Perseverance, which because they have been often spoken of, I pass with
referring you to the consideration thereof.

Giving you one warning, That this Action shall never come to pass, until
there be no remembrance of wickedness, or hell, left amongst you: and yet,
after, for a time, you must have patience. For, your offices are above a
Kingdom. Hinder not the Lord in his expeditions. Remember he has commanded you
to go to the Emperor. Happy is he, that comes when We must go to the
Emperor. The place for which my Angel of Creation is sealed.
he is bid Go. And foolish is he, that goes not, when he is bidden.]

There, use thy self: for it shall be a key of thy habitation: And for that
place, is the Angel of thy Creation sealed. Love together: Be humble and
continue to the end.

D. Deo nostro immortali, invisibili, omnipotenti, and Patri misericordiarum,
ejusque filio Redemptori nostro, and Deo Spiritui Sancto, sit omnis laus,
gloria and gratiarum actio. D. I understand as yet, either the Emperors Court,
or Prage, etc.


Amen.
Monday, Cracoviae 4. Junii, Mane, hora 8.
Orationem dominicam genibus flexis recitavi, variasque juxta propositam
materiam ejaculationes habui, variasque inter nos collationes,
considerationesque ultimorum verborum ipsius Gabrielis, etc. After almost an
hour after our sitting to the Action, he appeared.

E. K. Gabriel is here again in his Chair, and his dart upright in his hand,
his dart is like a flame or staff of fire.

D. Blessed be God.

D. After his appearing, he stayed almost a quarter of an hour before he began.

Gab...... As God in his essential being, is a Spirit, without demonstration,
so are his profound providence, works, and determinations, unable to be
measured.

[ E. K. He makes cursie: but nothing appears in the Stone.]

Gabr...... Hereby may you find, that the love of God toward you (O wretches
and sinners) is more than a love: and more than can be measured, which was the
cause, that with his own finger, (delighting in the sons of Jacob,) he sealed
this saying; yea with his own finger, this show and sign of his excellent, and
more than, love toward his people.

I am a jealous God; which is as much to say, Lo, I am your friend: nay, rather
your father, God his jealousy.
and more than that, your God: which delights in you, rejoices in you, and
loves you with that affection [Jealousie] which is more than love: which is as
much to say, as my love is such toward Exodus 20. a. Deuteronomy. 5. a.
you, as I am to my self. But, O ye stiff-necked Jews, O ye Strumpets, you
despised the love of God, you committed adultery, and ran into the Temples of
Idols: which was the cause, that the same mouth, that praised you before,

[ E. K. He makes cursie often.]

.... Said also of you; It repents me that I made this people. Let me raze
them out, and make a people of To Moses Exodus 32 B (...). 9. C The J ws. The
unmeasurable love of God toward us A. L. D. E K. Exhortation to (...) and
amendment of life.
thee. This Idolatry was the cause, from time to time, that you became
Captives, and of Inheritours, Runnagates, and without a Master. Unto you also,
thus says the Lord (unto you my Brethren, I say that are here) More than the
love of a father is, is the love of God toward you: For, unto which of the
Gentiles, bath the Lord showed himself? Where dwell they, or where have they
dwelled, into whose houses have the Angels of the Lord descended, saying, thus
and thus, does the God of Heaven and earth mean to deal with the World.

Think you not, that this is more than love? Look therefore narrowly into your
selves: Uncover the doings of your life, and secret Chambers: Enter into
judgment with your selves. Unto thee I speak [To E. K.] Have thou not run
astray from the Lord, and committed Idolatry?

D. He told E. K. of his faults, which E. K. would not express to me, and I
desired him to listen to them, and to do as it appertains to a Christian, etc.

Gab...... But thus says the Lord, I am a pure Spirit that participateth not
with the defiled: God.
neither can I enter in mercy into that house which is defiled. A great saying,
my Brethren: For hereby you are monished to make your consciences clean, to
open your selves in pureness, to the Lord, that he may enter into you with
comfort. For, so long as thou dealest with wicked spirits, will the Lord keep
back his hands: and thou keep back the Lord. For shall The Lord kept back.
it not be said hereafter? Lo, is not this man known to have dealing with the
wicked? And (as the foolish voices of the people are) Is not this he that can
constrain the wicked? with further arguments, by repetition of thy doings.
Well, if thou will be the Minister of God; If thou will go forward in his
works; If thou will see the happy times that are to come, thou must abstain
from evil, and thou must sweep thy house clean: Thou must put on thy best
garments, And must become The chief Lesson. The essential Characterisation of
E. K. his soul, and so the cause of his election. (...). Of God his finding
thee fit in matter, unfit in life.
humble and meek. Let not thy life be a scandal to the will of the Lord, and to
the greatness of his works: For the power that is within thy soul (in respect
of his essential quid,) is of great force and ability to perform those things
that proceed with power: which is the cause that the wicked ones obey thee; for
they fear themselves, when they see the seal of thy Creation.

This is therefore the Cause, that God finding thee (as he passes by, by his
Angel) fit in matter, but, my brother (God knows) far unfit in life. O
Consider the dignity of thy Creation; Consider that the affection of God toward
thee, is more than love. See how he bears with thy infirmity, from time to
time. O, I say, (yet) Enter into judgment with thy self: And consider, that
thou art now at a Turning where there lies two ways: One shall be to thy
comfort, The other to thy perpetual woe. Let not good ground bring forth weeds,
lest it choke her self.

D. We will call unto God for his mercies, graces, and help, etc.

O, consider, my brother that the appearing and works of the devil are but of
necessity. That is The necessity of the Devils doings. 1 either with good men 2
or with evil men.
to say, that he that is good, by resisting of the devil may manifest and make
plain to the powers and spirits of Heaven, the strength of his faith, and
assurance of his Hope: and so, necessarily, by the promise of God, inherit
everlasting life, to the which he is elected. To the wicked, that because of
their disobedience and partaking with them, that are the Angels of darkness,
(even those, that strive against the Lord) they might worthily be damned:
according to the necessity of God his judgment. See, therefore they appear
unto thee, either for the greatness of thy wickedness, or else because they
suspect thee to be elected. If thou, therefore think thy self elected, despise
them; If thou therefore think to be a spirit dignified, and in glory, Then be
faithful in the assurance of hope, and resist the devil: that we may testify
thee, before the heavens, and before Testification Angelical of E. K. his
Conversion.
the God of Justice.

E. K. He weepeth.

D. E. K. and I also could not hold our tears.

Ah, my brother, great are the joys of Heaven. Remember what Hell is; for to
thee the An. 2582. Novembris 20. at Mortlake.
Furnace was open: Remember the vision thou had of hell, and of her powers,
at Mortlake. For nothing (my brother) is done without a cause. Remember thou
could not abide it: No not to see::. Think thyself accursed (therefore) if
thou feel it: For, if Sodom had seen it, they would have been converted.

E. K. He prays.

1. I have now told you of the Jealousy of God, and of the cause thereof.

2. I have also told you that the house of God must be clean, and without spot.

[ E. K. Now there comes a brightness about him.]

3. Lastly, I have told you, of that necessity which causes the devils to
work, and appear: and have exhorted you to the love of God and repentance,
which were the things I only had (...) speak of.

D. O Lord, seeing we are uniformly desirous that the Action may proceed, and
that we crave thy mercy and graces, as well for the pardoning of our wickedness
past, as for the confirmation of us in thy service, What shall we look for
touching the proceeding, being thus stayed to our great grief?

Gabr...... You have to receive the will of God (but what it is, I know not)
those three days, you begin your Journey. And you are also, to learn, what the
Angel is, and how many Vide Maii, 1 28. 2 3 Hyle. 4 5 6 7
Subjects he has.

D. Which Angel?

Gab...... That governs Hyleich: which is the matter of the 4 Elements: And
which only is an Element. The Princes and Governors also of the 4 Elements,
(and of their Generation, how they receive mixtion, and in what quantity) With
their Ministers that are under them.

D. I said to E K. These shall be part of your practice and portion.

[ Gab...... You are all to join jointly in the Harvest of the Lord] The Angels
also of the 48 angles of the heavens, and their Ministers: For they are these,
that have the thunders and the winds at Commandment. These make up the time,
and then, comes the Harvest. ^ The (...).


E. K. He is gone.

D. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Tu enim Altissimus,
Omnipotens, sempiternus, vivus, and verus Deus noster es: unus and Trinus: Cui
Angelicus caelestisque chorus decantat perpetuo, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus,
Dominus Deus Zebaoth.

Amen.
Friday, Cracoviae, Junii 8. Mane hora 7.
Post preces, and ejaculationes varias and gratiarum actiones pro magna
misericordia Dei, erga nos and propter E K. qui jam patefecit mihi horrenda and
multiplicia heresium, NOTA.
and blasphemiarum dogmata, quibus illi hosts Jesu Christi illum imbuerant,
and quod jam (onfessione (...)) vellet sacrosanctum mysterium corporis and
sanguinis Christi recipere, issisque malis Angelis renunciare, and omnes
illorum frauds detegere, etc.

Conversio E. K. ad Deum, abdicatis omnibus Diabolicis experimentis, etc. Nihil
apparuit hodie.

Albeit the like had never happened to us, (that I remember.) but that either
Cloud, Vail, or some Voice was perceived by E. K. Yet this Unaccustomed absence
and silence.
doing we not only took patiently; but E. K. used many good reasons to prove,
that servants ought to attend so long, as it pleased their Master to have them
await his coming to any place, to them.

And that, about our own affairs we are contented to use patience for a long
time, but to await the Lord his coming or message, is a time better spent, than
in any humane affairs, etc.

He very plainly, and at large made manifest his conversion to God from the
practices with wicked spirits: Yea, that he was ready to burn whatsoever he had
of their trash and experiments. That he would write in a book the manifold
horrible Doctrine of theirs, whereby they would have persuaded him

..... That Jesus was not God.

..... That no prayer ought to be made to Jesus.

..... That there is no (...).

..... That man's (...) does go from one body, to another childs quickening or
(...).

..... That as many men and women as are now, have always been: That is, so
many humane bodies, and humane souls, neither m re nor less, as are now, have
always been.

..... That the generati n of mankind from Adam and Eve, is not an History, but
a writing which has an other sense.

..... No Holy Ghost they acknowledged.

..... They would not suffer him to pray to Jesus Christ; but would rebuke him,
saying, that he robbed God of his honor, etc.

And so. of very many other most blasphemous Articles and Points of Doctrine,
whereof more shall be spoken in another place.

This forbearings of our Instructors presence, I did expound or conjecture to
be done greatly for the honor of God, many ways, if the same were recorded
somewhat near to the very manner of the thing as it was: for so, should appear
to the posterity, how truly it had been said before, that he should be
converted to God: How truly God did prepare E. K. his soul to be a vessel
cleansed, and so made apt for his visiting of him, in mercy and comfort. The
matter made apt.


whereby the life of E. K. (now being amended, and his dealing with the wicked
clean left off) should not be a scandal to the will of the Lord, and to the
greatness of his works: as was noted unto us in the last Action.

Also I said, that not only his Conversion recorded should be a more evident
argument of his so often repeated Election: But his patient attending this
present day, ([D] two hours and D We lest off (...) 11.
a half, and taking all things in such sort as became an humble and patient
servant,) will be a more sure and evident argument that it was no light pang,
such as he has made outward show diverse times before, but a very hearty and
sincere conversion, such as without all doubt, will be found very acceptable to
the highest.

Moreover, he declared that about nine, or ten days past, he did intend to
have gotten away secretly by the help spiritual of those, with whom he had so
long dealt: And therefore that till now, he dealt hypocritically.

But, whereas they to fore were ever accustomed to threaten him Beggary, (a
thing which he most hated and feared.)

That now he cares not if he should have want; yea, he took it neither to be
shame, or sin to beg: and that he now made more account of God his favor and
life eternal, then he does of all transitory wealth and riches, and to be
entangled within the danger of these wicked spirits their snares, with all.

Also he now perceived his great error wherein he was of late, when he would
for an assured temporal maintenance have forsaken the dealing with the wicked,
and so more willingly would have followed these actions without repining:
Saying now, that he is no perfect Christian, who for money must be hired to
forsake the Devil and his works, etc.

And as for the issue of these actions he would never either doubt, or mislike,
howsoever they fell out; assuring himself: That God would do all things best,
and for his honor, etc. Many other his sayings very glodly I omit, thinking
these sufficient here.

D. O Almighty, eternal, and most merciful God, we thank, glorify, and praise
thee; O blessed, and most glorious Trinity, we will for ever Magnify thy
unspeakable providence, Conversion.
favor, Election, and Conversion unto thee.

O Blessed Jesu, we will for ever extol thy loving kindness, and long
suffering toward us, and thy Triumphant proceeding against Satan and his
Ministers, for thy Elect sake.

O holy Ghost, the directer into all truth, and comforter of thy Elect,
confirm, and establish our Confirmation prayed for.
hearts with thy gracious, and continual zeal, and love of truth, purity of
life, Charitable humility, and constant patience to thy well-pleasing until
the end: That after this life (through the mercy of the father, and Merits of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and thy charitable embracing of us,) we may for ever
enjoy the heavenly Kingdom, among the blessed Angels, and all the dignified
company of mankind.

Amen. Amen. Amen.
Monday, Junii 11. Mane hora 7. Cracoviae.
D. After our prayers due, and thanks to the Almighty for his great mercies and
power showed in the conversion of E. K. we stayed still attending some show, as
we were accustomed to receive: and among diverse our short discourses of our
faith, hope, patience, constancy, humility, and other our duties requisite in
this action, and in the service of God: E. K. of himself said these sentences
worthy to be recorded, as the evident token of his sound and faithful turning,
and intent to cleave unto the Lord.

1. E. K. I acknowledge my sins have deserved, that this seven years I should
have no show, or sight of his good Creatures.

2. E. K. If I should sit thus for seven years, attending the pleasure of God,
I would be contented.

3. E. K. I repent me nothing of that I have done, in forsaking those I was
wont to have to do withal, etc.

E. K. In the stone nothing appeared all this while of our sitting here.

D. Nihil visible apparuit in Chrystallo sacrato, praeter ipsius Chrystalli
visibilem formam: ut E. K. dixit.

D. Hora 11. we left off, so we attended 3. hours and 3. quarters.

D. I will affirm nothing in this case, but this my conjecture may be recorded:
The cause of the nonappearance the last Friday, and now this Mounday may be
this:

1. That, as we lost and refused three days assigned by our instructours, to
finish all in; The (...) of God.
So now we shall call, and request three days, and have nothing: as, these two
days it has fallen out: and it is possible, one day more we shall have the
like nonappearance.

Or else.

2. According to the premises; Only, three days before our journey shall be
begun, Vide sup.
we shall have that delivered us, which in the three last days we should have
received, etc.

Or else.

3. That great Caveat before noted, (on Saturday Junii 2. last past) may have
some forewarning The conversion of E. K. (...) made (...).
of this our patience to be used, after our Conversion unto God: The words then
recorded are these:

This Action shall never come to pass, until there be no remembrance of
wickedness, or Hell left amongst you: And yet, after, for a time you must have
patience. For, your Offices are above a Kingdom.

To conclude; whatsoever, with God, is known and used as the true cause, we are
contented: Nothing doubting of the goodness, and wisdom, and power of God to
perform his promises and Covenant made to, and with us, for our services to be
used to his honor and glory.

Most willingly, and patiently we will attend the will and pleasure of the
highest herein. Intending hence forward (by the help of God) not to give our
selves over unto, nor easily to be inveigled, or allured of the temptations of
the world, the flesh, or Devil.

For which our disposition of mind, and all other benefits received from
above, we render most humble, hearty, and entire thanks to the Almighty, most
glorious, and blessed Trinity.

Amen, Amen, Amen.
Monday, Junii 18. Mane, hora 8. Cracoviae.
D. After the Lords prayer, and some other peculiar prayers and thanksgiving,
for the exceeding great mercies showed in the Converting and Reforming of E. K.
and my promising to record the Act thereof, as well as God should give me
grace: and also craving earnestly for comfort to be given to A. L. being
somewhat oppressed with pensiveness to see his own subjects, and servants to
triumph against him in his low estate from high, and all for lack of money and
wealth, etc.

Suddenly appeared a mighty long, and big arm and hand in the air, to catch at
the shewstone: and E. K. meaning to save it from him, put his hand on the
stone, and immediately the stone was out of the frame, we know not how, and lay
by on the Cushion, etc.

And then soon after appeared Gabriel, in all manner as he was wont, and on the
right side (...) mediam (...) ab (...).
of the stone (that is against E. K. his right hand) as he was wont.

D. Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, sicut erat in (...), and
nunc, and semper, and in secula seculorum. Amen.

Gabr...... The comfort and peace of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost be amongst
you, quicken and confirm you.

D. Amen.

E. K. I pray you what was that, that would have snatched the shewstone?

Gab...... Let his house come, that his iniquity may be seen.

E. K. I see many houses, and besides them a fair House, separated This seems
to be (...) Castle in Littaw, where the King now is.
by it self, the House is of stone and wood, and a square thing in the end of
it, like a Turret. The houses of the Town are low wooden houses, small: There
appear in that odd house fellows in red Coats, like Poland Coats. Now I see a
big man sitting within the house before the window: and the house is hanged
with Turkey Carpets, and there is wrought in one of the Carpets (just before the
door) a man on horsback, The Arms of (...).
with a sword in his hand: and the man is like the man I saw at Mortlack with a
Wart on his cheek: There stand by him two boys, they have red Coats on, one of
them is a little fair boy: There stands a man by with a sword, which he
delivers to him that sits, and he looks on it, being gilt and graven on
it, and lays it down on the D: There seems to be Magical Charactors.
Table.

Gab...... This is a sword, wherein he puts his trust, but it shall fail him.

E. K. Now that man calls the lesser boy to him, and the boy thereupon
runs along a Gallery. Now that man with the Wart goes out after, strouting
himself, and no body with him: Now he calls that lesser boy to him, and
makes sign to him, smiting one hand on another, and drawing it under his
throat: as though he threatened the boy, unless he kept secret. Now he comes
to a door and knocks, and one like an Italian lets him in. There he has
in the corner a frame of wood, and a great stone in the middle of it (of about
16 Inches square) and there is a fire on that stone, on the middle of it. Now
he takes that engine, or frame with the fire between him, and that man (like
an Italian) and carries it into another Chamber. There they have a dead man's
hand. Now he takes out os his Casket a black box of yern (as it should seem by
the blackness of it) The box is about a foot long. Now he has set down the
box, and the same is open, and therein appears an image of wax of blackish
color, like shooemakers wax. There is one like an Angel, made of red stuff,
standing at the head of the image, holding like a Skarf over the face of the
image. The image is marvellously scratched and rased, or very rudely made with
knobs and dents in the legs of it.

Now he looks four ways: And speaks (the man with the Wart The man with
the Wart (...).
on his face.)

The house aforementioned seems to stand without the stone, and Note, because
no wicked power can enter within this stone.
beyond the stone.

Now they pour blood out of a Basin upon the fire, and lay the hand upon it:
and it frieth in the fire.

Now he, and the Italian-like man, have put on Apparel, black, like Close
without any (...), but where their arms are put out.
Gowns: each of them, and the engine seems now to be set in a Chimney.

Gab...... Be it, as it was.

E. K. There be six smokes, like six men standing about them: and D. Fumi (...)
sunt spiritus qui (...), vocati ante.
they go like smokes out at a window, and there stands one like a Giant man,
and he takes them, and windeth them up as they come out at the window. Now all
that show is vanished away.

Gab...... This is the cause that Lasky is poor. This is the seventh image that
he has scraped so.

D. As it is the seventh, so (I trust) it is the last. D. Ergo, An. 1581. 6.
(...) inceperunt die Lunae. The Angel standin at the window, winding up the 6.
smokes.


Gab...... This is three years four months, and ten days, since they begun;
so long has the Angel of the Lord been ready, for thy safeguard, (O Lasky)
standing at the window: and ready to bind up mischief prepared against thee.

This mischief shall light upon his own head.

But if thou remain my servant, and do the works that are righteous, I will put
Solomon behind thee, and his riches under thy feet.

Be therefore comforted in me: for the breath thou breathest is mine, and the
body that thou dwell in, is the work of my hands.

The earth from whence thou came is mine also.

It is I, therefore, that cast down, and none but I, that raise up again.

E. K. All the stone is become full of a smoke.

Gab...... Art thou sure that the Sun shines? [ pointing to D.]


D. I am as much as my eye may judge. A. L.


Gab...... So sure it is, that he shall reign: and be the King of Poland.

D. Always I understand a condition, if he do, etc.

D. The will of God be done, to his honor, and to the comfort of his Elect.

Gab...... Make haste for your journey.

D. O Lord, the man is ready (in manner) but hability wants: and to ask thy
help herein, we dare not, but as thy will is, so be it.

Gab...... To talk with God for money is a folly, to talk with God for mercy,
is great wisdom.

D. Lord, this mighty arm and hand, which here appeared, and would have
snatched at the stone, what was it, and who sent it?

Gab...... It is a wicked power, which the Kings Enchanters have sent amongst
you, but be has his reward for returning.

D. What was his intent, I beseech you? and I marvel that his Enchanters were
able to detect any of our doings to the King.

Gab..... The King knows not your doings.

D. I beseech you, as concerning the 48 leaves, being commanded to be bound,
and to be silvered; what, if I caused seven white leaves to be bound before,
and seven behind, for the more aptness for the binding?

Gab...... Use thine own judgment. God will appear no more unto you, until
you take your Note.
journey.

D. We believe, The Lord will perform his promises.

Gab...... According to your faith be it unto you.

E. K. Now he has pulled a white Curtain about the stone, and the The white
Curtain.
stone is dark.

D. Semper laudetur qui Trinus and unus est, Omnipotens and sempiternus.

Amen.
Wednesday, Junii 20. a Meridie. 1584. Cracoviae.
D. It is first to be noted, that this morning (early) to E. K. lying in his
bed, and awake, appeared a Vision, in manner as follows: One standing by h s
beds head, who patted him on the head gently, to make him the more vigilant. He
seemed to be clothed with feathers, strangely wreathed about him all over, etc.

There appeared to him [ E. K.] four very fair Castles, standing in the four
parts of the world: out of which he heard the sound of a Trumpet. Then seemed
out of every Castle a cloth to be thrown on the ground, of more then the
breadth of a Table-cloath.

Out of that in the East, the cloth seemed to be red, which was cast.

Out of that in the South, the cloth seemed white.

Out of that in the West, the cloth seemed green, with great knops on it.

Out of that in the North, spread, or thrown out from the gate under foot, the
cloth seemed to be very black.

Out of every Gate then issued one Trumpeter, whose Trumpets were of strange
form, wreathed, and growing bigger and bigger toward the end.

After the Trumpeter followed three (...) bearers.

After them six ancient men, with white beards and staves in their hands.

Then followed a comely man, with very much Apparel on his back, his Robe
having a long train.

After him came five men, carrying up of his train.

Then followed one great Cross, and about that four lesser Crosses. These
Crosses seemed not to be on the ground, but in the air in a white Cloud. The
great Cross seemed to be of a Cloud, like the Rainbow.


These Crosses had on them, each of them ten, like men, their faces distinctly
appearing on the four parts of the Cross, all over.

After the Crosses followed 16 white Creatures.

And after them, an infinite number seemed to issue, and to spread themselves
orderly in a compass, almost before the four foresaid Castles.

Upon which Vision declared unto me, I straight way set down a Note of it;
trusting in God that it did signific good.

After noon, as E. K. sat by me, he felt on his head some strange moving:
whereby he deemed that some spiritual Creature did visit him; and as we were
continuing together, and I had red to E. K. some rare matter out of Ignatius
Epistles, Policarpus, and Martialis; some of the Sacrament, and some of the
Cross, a voice answered, and said, That it is true, that the sign of the
Cross is of great force and virtue.

After this, the spiritual Creature seemed to E. K. to be very heavy on his
right shoulder, as he sat by me in my study: And as E. K. considered the
numbers of such as he had numbered to pass out of the four Gates, (it is to
wit, 1.3.6.1.5.) The spiritual Creature said, the number 16. is a perfect
number, consisting of 1.3 6.1. and 5. He said further more, God the father is a
standing Pillar.

D. Upon which word I asked him, if I should write such matter as he was to
speak. And he answered to E. K. at his right ear.

..... If thou (...).

D. His voice was much like unto a man's voice, not base, nor hollow.

..... Divided with a straight line, is one and two.

D. What is to be divided with a straight line?

..... The Pillar.

D. In the name of Jesus, who art thou?

..... The servant of God.

D. Art thou sent from God, with good tidings or message?

..... What I am he knows, of whom I bear witness.

D. What is your name, either as you are notified among the blessed Angels, or
called by, of any mortal man? If you be of Verity, and so of Charity, you
cannot mislike my speeches.

E. K. He says nothing.

D. Belike he is not sent unto us by God: for if he were, he would do his
message.

..... I am AVE.

D. This AVE is one ex filiis filiorum, of whose order Rocle is, vide sup. lib.
2. and 4.

D. If you be AVE, In the name of Jesus, say, that all wicked Angels are justly
condemned: and, that, by the mercy of God, in the merits of Christ, mankind,
elect, is to be saved.

Ave...... The E. K. and I said now in our talk (...), That God would not visit
us but at the days of journey taking (as was last affirmed) Therefore
whatsoever came before was to be doubted as an illusion. He therefore answers
first our doubt, and then to my request he makes answer.
visitation of God, is twofold: [1.] In respect of his secret will and purpose:
and in particularity. And in that he has [2] sealed us, with the good will of
mankind to their comfort. But if I be a scandal to the word, then am I not of
righteousness: But my righteousness is of the world: Therefore, That I visit
you of my self, can be no offense. Those that are, and die in wickedness, are
dishonorable, and far from the mercies of God: For it is written, I am a God
to the living. Therefore, do I dishonor them: such (I say) as are wicked.

The mercies of God, (which is the true Manna) comfort the comforted, and
gives hope of (...) Dei.
amendment, of such as run astray, are sinners, and may return: Therefore, I
say, The mercies [of God] (which is the Fountain and sweetness of the love of
God) is a thing most blessed, most holy, most to be desired in Heaven and
Earth, and of me, the creature and servant of God, to be reverently spoken of,
and required: For, it is the food wherewith we live: even the very bread
wherewith we are rejoiced. Thus much, thou have required.

D. I did so: for so, is his Justice against the impenitent, and his mercies to
his Elect testified truly.

Ave...... Have patience: I will return after a few moments.

D. Hereupon, (in the mean space) we considered the premises: and liked very
well of the scandal, or offense, avoiding: Because it was lastly ( Junii 18)
said, God will appear no more to you, until you take your journey.

And secondly he answered my request of God his Justice against the wicked
Angels, and also of his mercies toward mankind.

D. About a quarter of an hour after, there seemed a thing to come again on
E.K. his right Note this manner of a thing felt warm on the right shoulder.
shoulder: and (as before) he caused his shoulder to be very warm where it
lighted on.

D. Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini. Hallelujah.

E. K. Amen

Ave...... The place is sanctified.

D. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, est Dominus Deus Zeboath.

Ave...... I, in the favor of God, considering (and by force of his secret
love toward you) how Satan purposes, yet, and daily to over come you, thought
good, (through the mercies of God) to prevent his malice, and the effect
thereof.

D. O blessed, be thou, our God of mercies and all comfort.

Ave...... That, (although, yet, the Harvest be not) the Vineyard might yield
some fruit: whereby God might be glorified, and you, (in despite of the world)
revived and comforted, For the glory of God.
might rejoice, and shake off the present cares to come. For if those that be
unworthy, can seem to be lifted up, and to enjoy the fruits of the Earth, by
the Tempter: Much more ought the true servants of God, to feel his fatherly
goodness. Those that trust in me (says the Lord) shall not be driven to
despair; neither will I suffer the beast of the field to tread such as I
delight in under The Earth is mine, and the glory thereof: The Heavens are mine
also, and the Comforts that are in them. Why has, (Therefore) the father of
Darkness, risen up saying.

1. I will shut up the Earth from them? 2. I will seal up the minds of men:
and they shall become barren toward them? 3. Their miseries shall be great,
even unto death?
For this cause: That he might waken the Lord, when he is asleep: That those
that trust in him, The malice of Sacan provokes his own (...) when he thought
to ^ that the (...) might be (...), and the (...) confounded. Governors of the
Earth.
might be comforted. He has sealed the Earth from you, and I will open it unto
you: He has said, you shall be poor: But I say, you shall become exceeding
rich.

1. I will bless you with a twofold blessing: That the Earth may be open unto
you (which at last, you shall contemn.

2. And that my blessing and laws may dwell amongst you: wherein you shall
rejoice unto the end.

D. O blessed, blessed, blessed, God of power, goodness, and wisdom.

Ave...... This was the cause that I appeared to thee, E. K. this morning. Now
therefore (...) unto me: for I will open unto you the secret knowledge of the
Earth, that you may deal with her, by such as govern her, at your pleasure; and
call her to a reckoning, as a Steward does the servants of his Lord.

I expound the Vision.

The 4 houses, are the 4 Angels of the Earth, which are the 4 Overseers, and
Watch-towers, that 4 Angeli Terrae.
the eternal God in his providence has placed, against the usurping blasphemy,
misuse, and stealth of the wicked and great enemy, the Devil. To the intent
that being put out to the Earth, his envious will might be bridled, the
determinations of God fulfilled, and his creatures kept and preserved, within
the compass and measure of order.

What Satan does, they suffer; And what they wink at, he wrasteth: But when he
thinks himself most assured, then feels he the bit. King.


In each of these Houses, the Chief Watchman, is a mighty Prince, a mighty
Angel of the Lord: which has under him 5 Princes (these names I must use for
your instruction. The seals and authorities 5 Princes.
of these Houses, are confirmed in the beginning of the World. Unto every one
of them, be 4 characters, (Tokens of the presence of the son of God: by whom
all things were made in Creation.)

Ensigns, upon the Image whereof, is death: whereon the Redemption of mankind
is established, and with the which he shall come to judge the Earth.

These are the Characters, and natural marks of holiness. Unto these, belong
four Angels 4 Angels.
severally. The 24 Seniors in the Apocalypse.


The 24 old men, are the 24 Seniors, that St. John remembers.

These judge the government of the Castles, and fulfill the will of God, as it
is written.

The 12 Banners are the 12 names of God, that govern all the creatures upon the
Earth, visible The (...) names of God.
and invisible, comprehending 3, 4, and 5.

Out of these Crosses, come the Angels of all the Aires: which presently give
obedience to the The Angels of the thirty Aires supra.
will of men, when they see them.

Hereby may you subvert whole Countries without Armies: which you must, and
shall do, for the glory of God.

By these you shall get the favor of all the Princes, whom you take pity of,
or wish well unto. The use in practice.


Hereby shall you know the secret Treasures of the waters, and unknown Caves of
the Earth.

And it shall be a Doctrine, for you only, the instrument of the World.

For, the rest of your Instructions, are touching the Heavens, and the time to
come: of the The higher instructions.
which, this is the last and extreme knowledge.

This will I deliver unto you, (because I have yielded you before the Lord.)

Upon Monday next, I will appear unto you: and shall be a Lesson of a few
days. On Monday next 25 Junii.


E. K. The will of God be done.

D. Amen.

Ave...... In the mean season, desire you of God, such things, as are necessary
for you.

He that fills all things, and from whom all things live, and in, and through
whom, they are A blessing.
sanctified, bless you, and confirm you in peace.

D. Amen.

D. I beseech you, to Notify this mornings Vision, by words: as all other holy
Prophets have recorded theirs.

Ave......

A Vision.

The sign of the love of God toward his faithful. Four sumptuous and
belligerant Castles, out of the which sounded Trumpets thrice.

The sign of Majesty, the Cloth of passage, was cast forth.

In the East, the cloth red; after the new smitten blood. Red. White. Green.
Black.


In the South, the cloth white, Lilly-colour.

In the West a cloth, the skins of many Dragons, green: garlick-bladed.

In the North, the cloth, Hair-coloured, Bilbery (...). The Trumpets (...)
once. The Gates open. The four Castles are moved. There issues 4 Trumpeters,
whose Trumpets are a Pyramid, six cones, wreathed. There follows out of every
Castle 3, holding up their Banners displayed, with (...), the names of God.
There follow Seniors six, alike from the 4 Gates: After them comes from every
part a King: whose Princes are five, gardant, and holding up his train. Next
(...) the Cross of 4 Angles, of the Majesty of Creation in God attended upon
every one, with 4: a white Cloud, 4 Crosses, bearing the (...) of the Covenant
of God, with the King. 40. Angels, on the 4 Crosles, attending on the (...) 16
Angels.
Prince gone out before: which were confirmed, every one, with ten Angels,
visible in countenance: After every Cross, attends 16 Angels, dispositors of
the will of those, that govern the Castles. They proceed. And, in, and about
the middle of the Court, the Ensigns keep their standings, opposite to the
middle of the Gate: The rest pause. The 24 Senators meet: They seem to consult.

I, AVE, STOOD BY THE SEER:

It vanishes.

So I leave you.

D. Omnium bonorum largitori, Omnipotenti Deo, sit aeterna laus, gratiarum
actio, honor omnis, and Jubilatio.

Amen.
Junii, 22, 23. Note.
On Friday, and especially Saturday, E. K. had great Temptations not to credit
this Action, and was said unto by a voice, how our Instructors would use
cavillation of our disordered life, to forsake us, and not to perform,
according to our expectation of the former promises to be performed by them.

A voice said, likewise, to him, that A. L. should not go to the Emperors
Court, for lack of money: for he should get none here. Likewise, it willed him
to go up into his Study and he would show him all the effect of our
Instructions received. E. K. complained to me how he was thus greivously
molested by such means, and almost brought in despair. But I comforted him as
well as I could (my self being inwardly, most sorrowful) and made my moan to
God by prayer when I was alone: for him, and our Cause. Moreover he could not
be persuaded by me that good Angels would undertake to help us to any relief by
money or treasure: affirming that it appertained to the wicked ones: seeing
they were the Lords of this World; and the kingdom of God was not of this
World, etc..... Said, that the wicked were in the world, and of the world: but
the Elect were in the world, but not of the World.

Si de (...), (...) quod suum est diligeret: quia vero de mundo non estis sed
ego elegi Joan. cap. 15. C
vos de mundo, propterea odit vos mundus.

Ergo dedi eis sermonem tuum, and (...) eos odio habuit, quia non sunt de
mundo, sicut and ego Joan. cap. 17. (...)
non (...) de mundo. Non r go (...) tollas eos de mundo, sed ut serves eos a
malo. De mundo non sunt: sicut and ego non sum de mundo, etc.

To be of the world, was to be in love with the trade of the vanities of this
world, and to follow them: And that money and riches were things indifferent:
good, if they were well used; and evil, if they were evilly used: And that,
Bonis omnia cooperabantur ad bonum; Therefore the godly (as the Patriarchs and
many now adays) might have money; but to use, not abuse it: and that such is
our case and necessary request to God, etc.

Sunday, Cracovie, Junii 24. a Meridie horam circiter tertiam.
D. Note, while at my lodging (by Saint Stephens) I was writing the Note, (on
the page going next before) of the Tentations of Friday and Saturday: E. K. was
at my Lord A. L. his lodging (at the Franciscan Friars where he lay at Physic)
and at the same time, this happened, as follows;

As my Lord A. L. and E. K. face together, conferring and consulting of our
affairs, of Gods mercies, and of sundry tentations of the spiritual enemy, and
afterward, as the Lord A. L. was reading Rofensis psalm. de Fiducia in Deum,
suddenly, upon E. K. his right shoulder, did a heavy thing seem to sit, or
rest, whereof he told the Lord A. L. And afterward was this voice uttered by
that Creature in Latin.

Lasky, veniet tempus, cum tu portabis versum sedecimum, illius Psalmi
undecimi, in vexillo tuo, and vinces inimicos tuos.

Then A. L sought in David's Psalter for the eleventh Psalm, and sixteenth verse
thereof: and while he was so about that Psalm, The voice said that he meant not
that Psalm of David, but the eleventh Psalm of Roffensis: which Psalm the Lord
A. L. was then in reading to E. K. and was about the verse, Hic labor ac dolor,
etc. being the sixth verse.

By and by after, the voice said in English.

-- Trust thou in God.

Hereupon the Lord A. L. did read forth that Psalm of Roffensis, and when he
came to the sixteenth verse thereof, being

Si ambulavero in medio tribulationis, me custodies adversus inimicos tu...
Manum tuam extendes, and dextera tua me salvabis.
Thereupon the voice said: Put to the first line of the next verse: And that
was Domine tu omnia pro me perficies.

And as he would have read further, the voice willed him to stay at those
words, and said as follows:

-- I swear unto thee by the true and living God, that this shall come to
pass. Vide Anno 1585. Junii 12 Cracoviae.


Then E. K. said unto the Creature: In the name of God, Who art thou? And he
answered in Latin, and said,

Ego Sum AVE, cras plura audietis.

D. Gloria, laus, honor and gratiarum actio perennis sit Deo Nostro,
omnipotenti and Misericordi.

Amen.
Monday 25. Junii, Mane hora 7. Cracoviae.
D. Orationem Dominicam pronunciavimus, and aliquot ali^^ or atiunculas ex
Psalmis, etc. After we had sit awhile together conferring of Ave his Vision,
etc.

A voice said, bring up the shew-stone. Ave.


D. I had set it down on the Table, behind the Cushion with the Crosses, for I
had furnished the Table with the Cloth, Candles, etc. as of late I was wont:
Hereupon I set up the stone on the Cushion.

E. K. There appears in the stone, like a white Curtain all over the stone:
After awhile it was drawn, and laid on the backside of the stone, on a heap
together.

Now here stands one in a white Garment, with a white Cerclet D. Ave.
about his head like a white smock, I remember not that ever I saw this
Creature before, his Garment is tucked up.

..... Who is he that is rich? D. Ave.


D. The Lord of all.

..... He it is that opens the Four.
storehouses, not such as fly away with the wind, but such as are pure, and
without end.

D. Blessed be his name for ever.

..... To the pure in spirit, and such as he delights in. Amen.

Dixit Dominus, Invoca nomen meum, and mittam vobis verbum quo fabricavi
terram, and responsum D. Da verbum tuum in ore me^, and sapientiam tuam in
c^rde meo fige.
dabit de se, and testimonium dabit de se, ut in testimonio vincat malos.

E. K. Now is there fire come, and has consumed this Creature all to pieces,
and he is fallen down to ashes.

Now he rises up, and he is brighter then he was before. D. Quasi figura de
terra re^^vanda.


..... So does the glory of God comfort the just, and they rise again with a
threefold glory.

D. A place was made.

E. K. Now he spreads the air, or opens it before him, and there appears
before him a square Table.

Now he takes off the Table a black Carpet. The Table of the Earth.


Now he takes off a green Carpet.

Now he takes off a white Carpet. D He takes off the colored clothes in due
order, respecting the four parts of the World.


Now he takes off a red Cloth.

And now the Table appears to be made of earth, as Potters Clay, very raw
earth.

E. K. The Table has four feet, of which two touch the ground, and two do not:
The feet seem also to be of the earth. The Table is square.

E. K. On the left corner (farthest from E. K.) did a T appear on the Table:
Out of the top of this T do four beams issue of clear color bright.

..... That part [pointing to that T] of the Table of the earth of those that
govern the earth: that is are governed by the seven Angels that are governed by
the seven that stand before God, that are governed by the living God, which is
found in the Seal of the living God, (Tan with the four) which signify the
four powers of God principal in earth, etc.

..... Move not, for the place is holy, and become holy.

..... I said not so, he said it, that bears witness of himself. Unto this,
obey the other three Angels of the Table.

E. K. On the other farther corner of the Table (on E. K. his right hand) is a
Cross like an Alphabet Cross.

This Cross, and the other T do seem to lie upon the Table, in a dim dunnish,
or a sky color. All the Table over seems to be scribled and rased with new
lines.

..... The earth is the last, which is with the Angels, but not as the Angels,
and therefore it stands The Earth.
in the Table of the seven Angels, Vide 1582. 20. Martii. lib. 2.
which stand before the presence of God in the last place, without a Letter, or
number, but figured by a Cross.

..... It is expressed in the Angle of that Table, wherein the names of the
Angels are gathered, and do appear, as of Michael and Gabriel.

D. I remember, there is an Alphabetary Cross.

E. K. Now in the corner of the Table, on the right hand to E. K. appears
another Cross, somewhat on this fashion. and there appeared these Letters and
Numbers.

b 6 Vide lib. 3. Anno 1582. Aprilis 28.
4 b

..... It is in that Table, which confisteth of 4. and 8.

E. K. In the last corner of this earthly Table appears a little round smoke,
as big as a pins head.

E. K. Now is all covered with a mist.

E. K. Now I hear a great voice of thumbling and rumbling in the stone.

E. K. Now all waxes clear again.

Now hoveringly over the Table, appear infinite sort of things like worms,
sometimes going up and sometimes down; these seem somewhat brightish.

Over these higher in the air, appear an infinite sort of small, little,
blackish things, bigger then Motes in the Sun, and they go up and down, and
sometime come among those worm-like Creatures.

..... The Lord appeared unto Enoch, and was merciful unto him, opened his
eyes, that he might Enoch.
see and judge the earth, which was unknown unto his Parents, by reason of
their fall: for the Lord said, Let us show unto Enoch, the use of the earth:
And lo, Enoch was wise, and full of the spirit of wisdom.

And he said unto the Lord, Let there be remembrance of thy mercy, and let
those that love thee taste of this after me: O let not thy mercy be forgotten.
And the Lord was pleased.

And after 50. days Enoch had written: and this was the Title of his books,
let those that fear 50. Days.
God, and are worthy read.

But behold, the people waxed wicked, and became unrighteous, and the spirit of
the Lord was far The title of Enochs books, expounded into English. ^50 Lions,
or wicked spirits seducers.
off, and gone away from them. So that those that were unworthy began to read.
And the Kings of the earth said thus against the Lord, What is it that we
cannot do? Or who is he, that can resist us? And the Lord was vexed, and he
sent in amongst them an hundred and fifty Lions, and spirits of wickedness,
error, and deceit: and they appeared unto them: For the Lord had put them
between those that are wicked, and his good Angels: And they began to
counterfeit the doings of God and his power, Counterfeiting.
for they had power given them so to do, so that the memory of Enoch washed
away: and the spirits of error began to teach them Doctrines: which from time
to time unto this age, and unto this day, has spread abroad into all parts of
the world, and is the skill and cunning of the wicked.

Hereby they speak with the Devils: not because they have power over the
Devils, but because they Wicked Magicians.
are joined unto them in the league and Discipline of their own Doctrine.

For behold, as the knowledge of the mystical figures, and the use of their
presence is the gift of God delivered to Enoch, and by Enoch his request to the
faithful, that thereby they might have the true use of Gods creatures, and of
the earth whereon they dwell: So has the Devil delivered unto the wicked the
signs, and tokens of his error and hatred toward God: whereby they in using
them, might consent with their fall: and so become partakers with them of their
reward, which is eternal damnation.

These they call Characters: a lamentable thing. For by these, many Souls have
perished. Devils Characters.


Now has it pleased God to deliver this Doctrine again out of darkness: and
to fulfill his promise with thee, for the books of Enoch: To whom he says as
he said unto Enoch. The mercy of God to Dee.


To D.
Let those that are worthy understand this, by thee, that it may be one
witness of my promise toward thee.

Come therefore, O thou Cloud, and wretched darkness, Come forth I say out of
this Table: for the Lord again has opened the earth: and she shall become
known to the worthy. The wicked power expelled out of the earth.


E. K. Now comes out of the Table a dark smoke, and there remains on the
Table a goldish slime: and the things which hovered in the air do now come,
and light down on that slime, and so mount up again.

He said...... Non omnibus sed bonis.

E. K. He takes the smoke and tieth it up.

..... I tie her not up from all men, but from the good.

Now comes a dark Cloud over all again.

D. A pause.

E. K. Now it is bright again.

He said...... Fiant omnia facillima.

..... Number.

E. K. I see lines and scribblements (as before) going athwart the lines.

E. K. I count thirteen lines downward.

..... Stay there.

E. K. I count twelve this way overthwart.



E. K. In the just middle of every square are little pricks. The Table seems
to be eighth yards square.

E. K. Now come upon these squares like Characters. They be NOTE. Characters.
the true Images of God his spiritual Creatures.

..... Write what thou see.

E. K. I cannot.

D. Endeavor to do your best, for he that bids you do, will also give you
power to do.

E. K. Did his best, at length fire flashed in his face, and shortly after he
said, I perceive they be easy to make, so that I tell the squares, by which
the lines do pass, and draw from middle prick to middle prick.

D. At length E. K. finished the Table: he said that these seemed to be
yellowish Gold. A wicked power tempting E.K.


E. K. You heard one here say, I write my own damnation.

..... He might have said, you write his damnation. Pray, and write as many more
lines.

D. After awhile E. K. did with great ease finish the four parts of the Table.

E. K. The stone is become dark.

A voice..... Cease for an hour.

D. May we pass from our places as now?

..... I.

D. After a little hour past we returned, and as we talked of the premises, he
said.

..... (...) no time.

D. He said in the stone being clear again.

..... In the name of God, be diligent, and move not for the place is holy.

..... Take the first square: write from the left hand toward the right, you
shall write small letters and great.

Say what you see [to E. K.]

r Zilaf Autlpa.

D. I find here one square among these Characters that has nothing in it.

..... It must be filled.

a r d Z a i d p a L a m.

E. K. A dim Cloud comes before mine eyes: now it is gone.

c Z o n s a v o Y a u b T o i T t X o P a c o C S i g a s o m r b z n h f m o
n d a T d i a r i o r o i b A h a o Z p i C n a b r V i x g a z d O i i i t T p
a l O a i A b a m o o o a C v c a N a o c O T t n p r a T O c a n m a g o t r o
i S h i a l r a p m z o x

E. K. Now comes a Cloud over.

Take the second, that is the third that was written. This p may stand
backward, or forward. E. K. What is the reason of that diverse setting? -- For
beginning there it will make the name of a wicked spirit.


b O a Z a R o p h a R a u N n a x o P S o n d n a i g r a n o o m a g g o r p
m n i n g b e a l r s O n i z i r l e m u i z i n r C z i a M h l m o r d i a l
h C t G a AE O c a n c h i a s o m A r b i z m i i l p i z O p a n a l a m S m
a L d O l o p i n i a n b a r x p a o c s i z i x p a x t i r V a s t r i m

..... That last word is Vastrim. D. So is the name of the first division of the
earth in the 29 air. A voice to this intent.


D. I marvel of that square that lacks this line.

..... It must be drawn from the end, or foot to that prick, before where it
comes doubble from the first top, the prick is allowed but to one, and not
twice to be accounted: So that, that stands but of six pricks: Therefore it
must be framed, and now it is of seven.

E. K. All is in a Cloud.

Now all is clear again.

d o n p a T d a n V a.. o l o a G e o o b a.. i This is the Table that has 4.
and D on the top, by me so noted.
o P a m n o O G m d n m a p l s T e d e c a o p s c m i o o n A m l o x V a r
s G d L b r i a p o i P t e a a p d o c e p s u a c n r Z i r Z a S i o d a o i
n r z f m d a l t T d n a d i r e p backword... or forward-A is arsward.
d i x o m o n s i o s p O o D p z i A p a n l i r g o a n n Q A C r a r

E. K. Now he calls again, saying, See.

D. This is the Table that had the little round smoke.

D. No, it was the Table before.

T a O A d u p t D n I m a a b c o o r o m e b b T o g c o n x m a l G m n h o
d D i a l e a o c P a c A x i o V s P s ill S a (...) i x a a r V r o i m p h a
r s l g a i o l M a m g l o i n L i r x o l a a D a g a T a p a p a L c o i d x
P a c n n d a z N x i V a a s a i i d P o n s d a s p i x r i i h t a r n d i
(...)

E. K. Now all is in a whitish cloud covered.

E. K. Now all is clear.

..... Make the first figure upon a clean paper, and thereto add the simple
letters: Then shall you hear more. Thou must make the squares of the first part
of the Table unto every square and his letters.

D. I have made the squares of the first part, and set in the letters.

Thou have in the middle line O r o i b A h a o z p i. There are 6 lines above,
and six below. That line is called linea Spiritus Sancti: and out of that line
comes the three names of Linea (...) Sancti. (...). The 3 names of God in
(...).
God, from the East gate, being of 3, 4, and 5. letters, which were the arms
of the Ensigns that were spoken of before. Oro, ibah, aozpi, I said before,
that God the Father a mighty pillar divided with a right line.

The Father himself, without the line.

The Father and Son by addition of the line.

These two lines beginning

J A i d a r etc.

That is the great Cross that came out of the East gate. (...)


D. With that line of the Holy Ghost?

..... I.

Thou have in the upper left angle in the second line a r d z a.

Thou have that makes the cross downward: first i, then the same d, o, i, g o.

D. Will you have six letters downward?

..... I.

So then have the three other crosses in their angles.

D. Will you give me leave to repeat them, for fear of erring?

I L a c z a, the down line of six letters, and P a L a m the cross line.

..... It is so.

D. Now to the other on the left fide below.

a i a o a i

the down right line. Now the cross line, is O i i i t. Ten faces on the (...).


Here those Crosses have ten faces.

D. One letter is reckoned twice which is in the (...) of the Cross: and so
should seens to be eleven.

..... This is true knowledge.

D. The last cross is thus, his down line is a O u r r z

D. The Cross is a L O a i.

D. So have I the 4 Crosses attendant on the principal Cross.

..... Here thou may see the cause, that Pilat wrote with 4 letters.

D. How does the cause appear?

..... For above every cross, stands 4 letters: Not that Pilat knew it, but
that it was the fore-determination of God.

They are thus to be read. In the upper left angle thou have r z l a:
pronounce, urzla: by D. Another pronouncing of it. The 4 Angels over every
cross of the 4. attendant crosses.
this name the first Angel appears. z l a: go then to the first r, and
pronounce it zlar. That was the first letter of the first Angel, is the last
letter of the second: as of the first r, was the first letter of the name, as r
z l a, that r is now the last letter of the name of the second Angel, beginning
at z, as z l a, and so back again to the r.

D. So that the third begins at l, whose last letter is the first of the
second name, and is called Larz, and so of the last: as a r z l, to be
pronounced arzel.

D. So that you have, of those 4 letters, 4 Angels names, here thus gathered
out: but how are they to be used? The use.


..... Let it be sufficient that you know these names. I will teach you to use
them.

D. Shall we labor by like order of every the 4 letters over the crosses to
make 4 such 4 Angels over every cross.
names?

..... They are also to be made.

D. I do know assuredly that there is very much matter in this Table. Solomon
his knowledge. Six Seniors.


..... It is true: for hitherto, stretched the knowledge of Solomon.

..... Now for your six Seniors: whose judgment is of God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. In the line De Spiritu Sancto, you have Abioro of six
letters: The second name of the second Senior is of 7. as, A (the same,
ascending) Aaix a if the third, as the second, in patre and filio, H c mord A.

Again in Spiritu Sancto, haozpi. The fifth, in patre and filio descendens hi
pot ga. The How to make the Seniors of 7. letters.
sixth, A V to Tar. If you will make them of 7 letters (because two of them,
are but of six) that is, when the wrath of God is to be increased.

Note.

Then whereas you say, Abioro, say Habioro; and where you say Haozpi, say
ahahozpi. Thou The increasing of names with a letter.
have haospi, before h is A; take that unto it and it makes Aha ozpi. And so
they consist all, of 7 letters.

Thou have b the fifth, in the left part of the line, de Spiritu Sancto: thou
have a the sixth, (the b a T a -- i --
first part of the line de patre and filio descending.) T the sixth in the
second part descending. a The first in the second part descending, or the
second ascending.

Thou have a the fifth, in aozpi.

i The sixth, and V the sixth, ascending in the part descending of the line de
patre and filio, the second and first part. Put the A or the h that stand in
the Center, to it: Thou have Bataiva or A or H.
Bataivh. You must take but To make the end of this word. The King his name
East.
one of them, either the A or the h. A, comiter, and h in extremis Judiciis.

D. So I see when the contract A, and when the contract H must end this word:
That is the mighty Prince whose train was holden up in the East.

..... Spare me now, I will open you more secrets to morrow, I am secretly
called away: but To morrow.
you shall find me the true servant of God.

E. K. Now he spreads the white Curtain over all that was laid on an heap
behind.

..... Yet one thing ere I go. Those Characters or Notes (for, so call them) are
the parts of Characters or Notes.
the whole Earth, as you may find in those names Nalvage delivered them, but by
the same spirit of God Note.
I delivered you before; To the intent you may work all the World over at one
time. Now, my love rest with you.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D. Amor Dei patris filii and Spiritus Sancti sit super nos. Amen. Semper.

Tuesday, Junii 26. (...) hora 8.
Precibus finitis, and post varias nostras considerationes de praemissis,
tandem apparuit AVE. In nomine Patris and F. and SS ficut erat, etc. Amen.

E. K. He has gathered the whole Curtain together as yesterday, and set it
behind. Now a white mist comes over all, Now the mist is gone.

Ave...... All glory and praise, be to God the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost.

D. Amen.

Ave...... Now to the purpose: Rest, for the place is holy. First, generally
what this Table contains.

1. All humane knowledge.

2. Out of it springs Physic. The general of the first table.


3. The knowledge of all elemental Creatures, amongst you. How many kinds
there are, and for what use they were created. Those that live in the air, by
themselves. Those that live in the waters, by themselves. Those that dwell in
the earth, by themselves. The property of the fire: which is the secret life of
all things.

4. The knowledge, finding and use of Metals.

The virtues of them. They are all of one matter.

The congelations, and virtues of Stones.

5. The Conjoyning and knitting together of Natures. The destruction of Nature,
and of things that may perish.

6. Moving from place to place, [as, into this Country, or that Country at
pleasure.] A bodily and a true motion.


7. The knowledge of all crafts Mechanical.

8. Transmutatio formalis, sed non essentialis.

E. K. Now a white mist covers him. D. The ninth Chapter may be added, and is
of the secrets of men knowing; whereof there is a peculiar Table.


D. -- Pause for a of --

E. K. Now he appears again

..... Look out Lexarph, with the two other that follow him, among the names of
the Earth the three last.

Lexarph, Comanan, Tabitom.

Look out the name Paraoan. Write out Paraoan in a void paper.

D. I have done.

Seek out Lexarph.

D. I have found it.

Look into the 4 parts of the Table, and take the letters that are of the least
Character. Look among the 4 parts that have the Characters: and look to the
Characters that have the least letters.

D. I have done.

..... How many letters are they?

D. Seven.

..... They must be eight.

D. They are these (as I have noted them) OA JA JA il.

..... There are 8 in the 4.

D. Afterward I found 8 letters in the 4 principal: for I had omitted Y I.

D. I suspect this was spoken to me, to my reproof, for no more diligenceused
in the search.

Dwell in darkness --

They must be made all one Character.

e x a r p h c o n a n a n t a b i t o m

Lexarph, Comanan, Tabitom.

Set down those three names, leaving out the first L [that is of Lexarph, set
them down by 5.]

Ave...... Your sickness causes me to be sick.

D. E. K. had the Migrom sore.

A great Temptation fell on E. K.: upon E. K. his taking these words to be a
scoff, which D. They be (...) names of the Teath air, answering to Caspis,
Germania, (...) in Africa.
were words of compassion and friendship.

..... The first is exarp, five in order. Set them down without the first Table:
That shall make the cross that binds the 4 Angles of the Table together. The
same that stretches from the left to right, must also stretch from the right
to the left.

D. Have I now made this cross of uniting all the 4 parts or Angels together,
as you like of?

..... I.

..... Every name, sounding of three letters, beginning out of that line, is the
name of a Devil, Wicked Angels whose names are of 3 letters. 4. Angels above
every of the lesser crosses. (...), 16 such in every of the 4. principal
quarters.
or wicked Angel, as well from the right, as from the left, excepting the [D]
4. Angels that are above the cross, which have no participation with Devils.

The letters that join those names, which may be put before the [D4.] names of
the four Angels of the four crosses in every angle, (as well from the right, as
the left,) is the name of God, whereby these Angels, are called and do appear.

D. An example (I pray you) give of this rule.

..... As, in the first of the black crosses thou have, e.

D. So it is.

In the first square of the right side thou have r. beginning the name of the
Angel Urzla: put e to it, and it changes the sound, into Erzla. Erzla is the
name of God that governs, Urzla.

D. And likewise the other three above the cross are governed by that name of
God, Erzla.

Take In the cross of union, or the black cross.
X which is the next letter: look under the Cross in the first angle; thou
have C 7. (then o, in the cross:) then n s. Call it C zoden es: It is one of
the 4 angels that serve to that cross, which are The 4 Angels serving to this
lesser (...).
ruled by this name Idoigo. It is the name of God, of six letters: Look in the
cross that descends, In that name [D Idoigo] they appear, by the Note.
Appearing by one name and doin, by another.
name [D Ardza] that is in the cross, [D Transversary] they do that they are
commanded.

D. Which they? you named only C zod n es.

Ave..... There follows Tott.

D. Which more?

D. The principal Cross transversary.

Those two, under, till you come to the Cross.

D. Do you mean Sias, f m n d?

..... Those 4 be of Physic. Physic.


D. As they do appear in the name of God Idoigo, so what shall be of the name
of God Ardza?

Ave..... The one is to call them, the other is to command them.

If it be an incurable disease (in the judgment of man) then a (...) the
letter that stands against Note.
the name, and make him The (...) his name made of five letters. The use of the
wicked powers.
up five: then he cures miraculously.

But if thou will send sickness, then take two of the letters, and add the
letter of the Cross [D the black crosse] to that, as in the second, a To.

[D. This a, is of the cross of union, or the black cross.]

..... Then he is a wicked power, and brings in disease: and when thou call
him, call him The Call of the wicked.
by the name of god, backward: for unto him, so, he is a god: and so constrain
him backward, as Ogiodi.

D. I think the Constraint must be, by the name of the Transversary backward
pronounced, Note. (...). Constraint.
as of Ardza, is back way, azdra: For ogiodi, should but cause him to appear by
the order of Idoigo, used for the 4 good Angels.

..... The name of God in the midst of the great Cross (where the name may
have A or H in the end) upon which the 4 Crosses of the first Angle attend, (or
first part of the table attends) Baatain A, o. Baataivh.
calls out the six Seniors: which give scientiam rerum humanarum and Judicum,
according to the nature of their parts: as in the East after one sort, in the
West after another, and so of the rest.

E. K. A Cloud covers him.

The upper right angle in the next cross, has the same name [D has Now he
speaks of the second little cross above, on the right side in the East
quarter.
his peculiar name] of God to call out, and to constrain.

D. Which name mean you?

Ave...... The name that is in the cross. D. llacza -- 4 Good Angels. Metals.
The wicked Angels of this portion.


The good Angels are also 4. They have power over Metals, to find them, to
gather them together, and to use them.

These, that are the wicked ones, (made by three letters) are the The table of
creation.
Princes of those wicked ones, that stood afar off in the Table of the
Creation. Lib. 4. aliter 5. Bnasp (...).


D. You mean in our fourth Book.

Ave...... These can give money coined, in Gold or Silver.

D. Which these?

D. These wicked ones mean you?

..... I.

The other give no money coined, but the metal.

D. You mean the good.

..... I.

D. As XOY.

..... EXOY.

D. I note this pronunciation.

D. The next is apa.

The third Cross is the Cross of transformation. Transformation.


D. Mean you that on the left side underneath?

..... I.

The fourth is the Cross of those Creatures that live in the four Elements, as
you call them. The four Elements.


The first Angel the air.

The second -- the water.

The third -- the earth.

The fourth -- the life, or fire of things that live.

D. Is not Acca the first Angel?

D. En pe at.

..... I. Then NP at.

D. Then O toi, and P mox. AVE. They are easy to call.

1. The knitting together of Natures lies in the four Angels that are over the
first Cross. The knitting together of natures.


D. As Vrzla, zlar? etc.

..... I.

2. The carrying from place, which place lies in the Angels of the second
Cross. (...) a (...) in locum. All handcrafts.


D. I understand in the Angels over the Cross.

3. All Hand-crafts, or Arts are in the Angels of this third Cross.

D. I understand in the Angels over the Cross.

E. K. He drew out much fire out of his mouth, and threw it from Note this rare
action of a spiritual Creature.
him now.

D. I pray you, what meant you by that?

..... For that I fulfill my Office in another place.

Stay, at this time I must also be gone.

D. When will you deal again.

Ave. After Dinner about one, or two of the Clock.

E. K. Now he spreads the Curtain.

D. Deo gratias nunc and semper agamus.

Amen.
Tuesday, Junii 26. a Meridie hora, 1 Circiter. Gloria Patri, etc. (...) lueem
tuam and veritatem tuam, O Deus, etc.
E. K. Now he is here, and the white Curtain laid behind.

4. Ave...... The Cross of the fourth, first Angle.

D. I understand the Angels over the Cross in the lower right corner.

..... Herein may you find the secrets of Kings, and so unto the lowest degree.
But you must The secrets of all (...). sixteen Angels for Medicine.
Note, That as the Augels of the first of the four Crosses in the East, which
are for Medicine: so are the first of the second, the first of the third, and
the first of the fourth; so that for Medicine there be sixteen, and so of all
the rest in their order: but that they differ in that, some be the Angels of
the East, other some of the West, and so of the rest.

Notwithstanding, to know the world before the waters, To be privy to the
doings of men, from the Note. The blessed Kingdom on earth. The earth.
waters to Christ; from Christ unto the rewarding of the wicked: The wicked
doings of the flesh, or the fond and devilish imaginations of man, or to see
what the blessed Kingdom shall be, and how the earth shall be dignified,
purged, and made clean, is a meat too sweet for your mouths.

D. Curiosity is far from our intents.

Ave...... But there is neither Patriarch nor Prophet sanctified, Martyr,
(...), these are here to be learned out. D. Maxim calm splendet and manifesta
est, in (...) coeli and in (...).
or Confessor, King, or Governor of the people upon earth, that his name,
continuance, and end, is not (like the Moon at midnight) in these Tables.

D. Mean you not the Cross of the fourth first Angle, to be that, which is of
a Qurrz. And his transversary of al Oai?

Ave...... It is so.

D. I understand not well, your account of 16 Angels for medicine.

Ave...... Are there not four principal Crosses? Every Cross has also four.
The first of every four are the Cross of medicine, so that there be sixteen.

Ave...... One book of perfect paper. One labor of a few days.

The calling them together, and the yielding of their promise, the repetition
of the names of (...), For the.. I heir (...).
God, are sufficient.

I have given you Corn: I have given you also ground. Desire God to give you
ability to till.

D. We will pray for his help that is Almighty.

..... I am free before God. Catch that catch can.

Be it now as it was before.

E. K. He mounteth up into the air, and is gone.

D. When would you that I should prepare that book, and what call you perfect:
and how many leaves would you wish me to make it of?

..... Your book is not of my charge.

D. Lord, as thou have dealt mercifully with us hitherto, and have given us the
understanding of many secrets, so in respect of this strange dealing with us,
and leaving us of Ave, we are desirous to know some cause: and therein we
require that Madimi may be sent.

E. K. She is here in the stone.

Madi...... How do you?

E. K. She makes a low cursie.

D. I declared our admiration of Ave his so sudden departure, and required her
opinion of the case.

Mad...... Surely Sir, I cannot tell: but I will go see if my mother can tell.

D. He that is the Creator of all things, be merciful unto us, and lighten
our hearts with true knowledge, as our trust is in him.

E. K. She went away, and came again after a little while.

Mad...... My mother says, you should have been at the Emperors.

D. But you see it is impossible to get thither without some good provision of
money made by our great friend A. L. I pray you, what can you say of Ave?

Mad...... My gentle brother, Ave is a good Creature: indeed you might have
made more of him.

D. I beseech you to give us some Declaration of Ave his last words.

Mad...... There is no word unperfect: My brother Ave his nature is to be plain
and short.

D. I pray you to say somewhat more plainly of Ave his last words.

Mad...... If it were the commandment of my mother, I could do it. But this is
the good will of my brother toward you.

D. As your brother has done this of his good will, so do I desire you of your
good will to do, or say somewhat to our comfort.

Mad...... Sir, I pray you, pardon me. I may not meddle with Ave his doing. I
have nothing to say to you, but I know my Mother has much to say to you

As the mighty thunder comes, so comes the promise of God.

Rodulphus the Emperor now.

If the Emperor (my mother says) do any thing against Lasky, or hinder, (she
answers in earnest) there shall be an Emperor.

A. L.

Earnest is means to be Emperor, vide 22 Sept. Prage.

D. Make your sentence more perfect.

Mad...... Therein lies a mystery.

A Mystery.

A comfortable promise.

My Mother, my Sisters, Ave, Il, my self, and the rest of us will not be from
you in your need.

D. Now is our need, as we have declared.

Mad...... Sir, Content your self: For, yet a season, you must have patience.
God bless you, for (as yet) I feel nothing to say to you.

Misericos, clemens and pius est Deus Noster: Cujus nomen sit benedictum, Nunc
and semper. Amen.

Note. About seven of the Clock this afternoon, E. K. came again up into my
study: and seeing me reading, and considering this Action, began to find talk
of it, and willed me to assay the practice of it if I understood it: And, to be
brief, by little and little fell to this issue, that he confessed himself to be
very sorry that he was so far raging in words as he was this day. Nay, (said I)
any man living, else, would have found just cause of comfort, and to give
thanks for AVE, such speeches to him, as he used unto you upon true compassion,
and no skoff, etc. B t you by and by called him Devil, and raged on (...)
against Michael and Gabriel, and the heavenly powers with most horrible
speeches, etc. He became very penitent, and acknowledged NOTA. (...) Deo grata
and acceptabilis in ipsa (...). Note this manner of a heavy thing on the
shoulder, and warm withal.
that he had offended God: and said, that surely it was of the Devil, for he
did not remember his words: but he is sure that they were not decent, and
beseeched God to forgive him: And so did I, and was very glad of this his
reforming himself, and we (being often (before) called down to supper) were
going out of my Study: and as he was almost at the door to go out, he said to
me, I feel a very heavy thing upon my shoulder: and it is warm with all:
Whereat I put to the door, and we sat down again: Verily thinking, (as it was)
that it was the presence of AVE, whereupon I said unto the Creature.

D. In the name of Jesus, Ave art thou there, he answered immediately after as
follows.

Ave..... Because thou [E. K.] (...) acknowledged my honor again: I will also
acknowledge my help toward you: But where man curses the Heavens, what holy
Creature can abide? Or where Satan is brought into possession, by free will of
man, what good Angel is he that departs not?

D. O Lord, confirm thy mercies upon us from henceforth.

Ave...... As concerning your Action, The Heavens bear witness of it. D There
was a terririble storm of thunder and rain, toward the end of our yester-dayes
Action: which, I said, was somewhat more then natural.
Yea, yesterday did the good Angels contend with the wicked: and there was a
great conflict betwixt them; and that about the love of God toward you, and
your Action. But I will visit you again in the morning, and will perform my
good will in God toward you. But (...) must pray often if thou will avoid
temptation. God be merciful to you, forgive you, and strengthen you to the end.

D. Amen, sweet Jesu, Amen.

D. When all was thus ended, I delivered to E. K. my Psalter book (with the
short prayers Mr. E. K. Penitently prays.
annexed to every Psalm) where he himself very devoutly, and penitently prayed
three of them, and I hearing also of them, gave my consent in heart to the same
prayers.

D. To God only be all praise, honor, and glory, now and ever.

Amen.
Wednesday, 27. Junii. Cracoviae. Mane horam circiter. 7.
Oratione Dominica finita, and peculiari Oratione contra Tentationes Sathanae,
apparuit ipse AVE, etc.

E. K. He is here.

D. Gloria Patri, and filio, and spiritui sancto, etc. Amen.

Ave...... In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

D. Amen.

..... Now, what is that, that is hard to you?

4. First, whether the Table (for the middle Cross of uniting the four
principal parts) be made perfect, or no.

Ave...... Thou have found out the truth of it.

D. I think a mystery did depend upon the choice of the three names, Lexarph,
Comanan, and Tabitom.

Ave...... That is not to our purpose.

D. You bad me (...) out of the Tables the Characters of fewest Letters, and I
found them to be OARA JA, and L, you said they are eight, you said there are
eight in four: I know not what this means.

Ave...... You must make up the name Paraoan. D. It is the second part of the
22 air.


D. What shall become of the L aversed?

Ave...... It may be N, or L.

D. What must I now do with that name?

Ave...... In Exarph there wants an L. which L. is of more force then the N.
D. So is not one letter superfluous, or wanting in the Tables. A Prophecy of
things at hand. NOTE. Nova Terra.
and therefore it is set in the Tables. As far as that N. stretches in the
Character, so far shall that Country be consumed with fire, and swallowed into
Hell, as Sodom was for wickedness. The end of all things is even at hand: And
the earth must be purified, and delivered to another.

The Heavens shall be 77 times above themselves. And the earth shall bring
forth without Tillage: Prophets speak of days, [as] presently, that Were.
are far off. But we speak of days that are hard at hand. For, immediately
after your being with Caesar, shall the whole world be in sudden alteration.
Battails Rodolphus Caesar. Nota, (...) malerum (...).
and bloodshed great number: The Kings of the earth shall run unto the Hills,
and say cover us.

D. O, Thou mighty God of Hosts: be our strength and comfort. (...).


..... When you hear the peoplesay, Le, there is a man-child that does great
marvails, (which is even at the door threshold.) Then, then shall you see the
calamity of the earth.

(...) let (...), the servant of God do as he is commanded: And what goodness
soever he craveth A. L.
shall follow him, for the Lord has spared him among the Kings of the earth.

Let him provide for this one journey: He shall not need to provide for the
rest: For, he that has Money, provision.
all, has provided for him.

The fifteenth day of September, that shall be twelve months, shall you set up
the sign of In Constantinople (...) 15. (...).
the Cross; even in the amidst of Constantinople.

D. Thy will be done, O Lord, to thy honor and glory.

Poland. Promissio confirmata de A. L. forte.

Ave...... In this Kingdom shall be much bloodshed, and the one shall cat
another throat. And as the Lord has promised, so shall it come to pass.

Ave...... Now to the Table.

D. Of the Principal King of Bataiva, or Baataiva, (using the last a twice) I
doubt of the perfect writing of it.

Ave...... Is it not written? It is all, most easy, and in gathering thou
can not err.

The 24 Seniors are all of one Office. But when thou will work in the East,
thou must take such as 24 Seniors. Note, This civersity of working. The four
plagues, or quarters.
bear rule there; so must thou do of the rest.

D. Do you mean the estate, in respect of any place we shall be in, or in
respect of any earthly place, accounted always the East part of the world,
wheresoever we be?

Ave...... The East and West, in respect of your Poles. What will you else of
me?

D. Whether these four Tables be joined in their right places, or no.

Ave...... They be.

Note, of the Letters in the black (...).

D. Of the Letters in the Transversary of the wicked their black Cross, I know
no (...), as of motivat; nan, etc.

Ave...... Thou shall know, when thou writest thy book. The book.


D. I desire you of the book to say somewhat more for the fashion, paper, and
binding, etc.

Ave...... Thou may use thy discretion.

D. You mean (I trust) the book that you bid me to prepare: For, the other is
not for my writing.

Ave...... It is not. I my self will stand with you, and show how to practice.
A perfect master ready.


D. Blessed be God for his ready help.

D. I will prepare the book (by the grace of God) with all speed.

D. As concerning the Offices, virtues, and powers of the three other quarters
of the Table, what shall we think of them?

The Offices of all the four quarters.

Ave...... They are all as the first.

D. Note. Thou have three names of God, out of the line of the holy Ghost, in
the principal The twelve names of God in the twelve Banners. Four days.
Fourteen days. Obedient. White linen vestures.
Cross of the first Angle, so have thou three in the second, etc.

Four days (after your book is made, that is to say, written) must you only
call upon those names of God, or on the God of Hosts, in those names:

And 14 days after you shall (in this, or in some convenient place) Call the
Angels by Petition, and by the name of God, unto the which they are obedient.

The 15 day you shall Cloth your selves, in vestures made of linen, white:
and so have the apparition, use, and practice of the Creatures. For, it is not
a labor of years, nor many days.

E. K. This is somewhat like the old fashion of Magic.

Ave...... Nay, they all played at this. Ga meant and book, only once to be
used.


You must never use the Garment after, but that once only, neither the book.

E. K. To what end is the book made then, if it be not to be used after.

D. It is made for to be used that day only.

Ave...... What will you else?

D. As you best know: we need instructions; yet necessary for us.

Ave...... Very few.

Ave...... It is a stem with fruit, but it wants leaves.

E. K. What mean you by that?

Ave...... There be more leaves then fruit, and in many actions there be more
circumstances then (...) than leaves.
matter.

D. But here is only marrow, and no bones, or flesh.

D. As concerning the great multitude that E. K. saw in the Vision standing
after the sixteen Angels, next the Gate, you made no mention in your
Description of the Vision: Therefore I would know what they are.

Ave...... (...) Ministers and servants.

E. K. * Aliter, Sendenna, as E. K. said. D. Of this wicked (...), E. K. by and
by after this Action said. Seeing his name is come to be known (and not by
(...) for I had received the Sacrament with Mr. Miniver, of whom I had him,
never to bewray or disclose his name) I will tell you somewhat of him. He
appears in many forms, till at length he appear in a Triangle of fire, and
being constrained to the Circle, he (...) form (as it (...)) of a great Giant,
and will declare before for a month to come which spirits do orderly range:
which by name being called, will do their offices, with a few other
circumstances used, etc. This, indeed was one, of whom I made most account, etc.


There shall thou see thy old Sondenna, * and many other wicked ones, that thou
have dealt withal. Hereby shall you judge truly of wicked Magic. God be with
you: I will be ready, when you need me.

D. AEterno and omnipotenti Creatori rerum omnium, visibilium and invisibilium
sit omnis laus, honor, gloria, and gratiarum actio. Amen.

D. 1. Remember, I have not yet heard any thing of the 5 Princes which held up
the train of the chief King.

2. Neither any thing of the Trumpeter which went before all. Doubts.


3. Neither of the letters in the Transversary of the black Cross.

4. Also of Declared by Gabriel and Nalvage.
Docepax Tedoand, being referred to Cilicia, Nemrodiana, and Paphlagonia in the
late exposition of the places by vulgar names: and before in the naming of them
by the names of Creation they were applied to Italia and Britania: One of those
is to be doubted of.

5. We are desirous to know the Etymologies of all the names of God which we
shall use, either to God himself, or to the Angels.

6. We require the form of our Petition or Invitation to be made to the Angels.

7. Of the 20 (and more) diversities or corrections of this principal Table, we
require your censure, which diversities I have (by conjecture) so made or
amended.

8. Whereas I was [D] willed to call 14 days, the Angels which are to be used:
so would I D. Pagina penultima (...).
know whether also I should summon the wicked here recorded (out of the black
Cross, having their offspring) likewise 14 days.

Saturday, Cracoviae, Junii 30. Mane, circa 9. horam.
Oratione dominica finita, and (...) illis 7. dubiis, quievimus paululum.
Deinde, aliquot orationes ex psalterio recitavi, iterum quievimus paululum. Ad
semihoram nihil apparuit.

At length appeared a face, very great, with wings about, adjoined to it;
afterward he seemed to be in a great Globe of fire.

..... Hearken to my voice.

Modesty, patience, and humility of heart and body, does belong to these
Actions. Tell me Note.
how many Thunders the Lord has in store for the wicked.

D. O Lord, we know not.

..... Were you ever in the secret caves of the Earth?

D. No, Lord, never.

..... Then tell me how many winds the Lord has prepared for an year?

D. Neither that can we tell: We are not of the Lord his Council in these
things of his providence.

..... Can you tell me none of these questions?

..... Can you tell what shall become of your selves?

D. God only knows, and no creature but by him: for all things are kept
uncertain until the end.

..... You beget children, know you the hour wherein they shall be born?

..... You begin labor, can you tell what point of time you shall end in?

D. God only is the Fountain of all wisdom and truth.

..... Well, then I see, you are drowned in ignorance and know nothing.

E. K. He turns round very swiftly,

..... Even as the Adder leads out her young ones, the first day one foot,
(out of her hole) not Note this similitude well.
because they should eat, but because they might acquaint themselves with the
air, and her subtlety.

The second day, one yard and more: she encompasseth her hole, and windeth to
and fro, and teachthem to creep; and so five or six days, till they know how
to move and stir their bodies.

After the seventh day, she leads them further, and faineth deceit, striking
the ground with her tail, as though it were the sound of some one at hand: And
then gaping, begins to hiss, and stirs up fear unto her young ones, so
that they enter into her mouth. And thus she does till they be 12 or 13 days
old: Then she leads them a stones-cast, and exercises them both with fear,
and hiding themselves; And when they sleep (being young and wearied with
labor) she steals from them and makes a noise amongst the leaves and small
stones, with the moving of her hinder parts:

To the intent she might see what shift her worms can make, which stirred up
with fear, and missing their mother, so learn to couch themselves in the
Chymnes of the earth; At length, after silence, the mother thrusts out her
self, and doubleth her tongue (with the sound whereof she uses to call them)
They come together and rejoice, wreathing themselves diversely about her body,
for joy: She for a recompense, suffers them to hang upon her back, and so
waltereth to her hole; where she gathers the leaves of the earth: and after
she has chewed them small and tender, with her teeth, and mingled them with
the dust, she spueth them out again, and begins to lick them by little and
little, as though she hungered, which she subtlely does, that her worms might
eat and forget their hungrynesse.

Finally, in 20 days, they become big, and as skilful in the property of their
kind... she (I say) leads them out into a fertile place, and full of dew, and
full of bushes, and places apt to cover them, where they feed, dwell, observe
their craft, and at last forsake their mother. Even so, it is with you; So the
Lord, (the true Serpent and worm) leads you out from day to day, according
to your strength: and as you grow, to the intent you might, at last be brought
unto the pleasant ^.
dew, and food of his mercy, which is Triumphing true wisdom.

But this the Lord fears of you; that, as the worms did, so you will forsake
your mother.

D. Forsake us not, O God, Confirm thy graces in us, and we shall not forsake
thee.

The nature of the Serpent, is, not to forsake his young.

D. O Lord we depend only on thee, and without thy grace and continual help,
we perish.

The Lord told Noe long before, the Flood would come, he believed him:
Therefore he is safe in NOE.
both worlds. The sons in law of Lot, sunk into Hell, for that they derided the
words of God, and believed them not. His wife became a salt-stone, for that she
looked back, and did contrary to (...).
the Commandment of God. Moses had the reward of his holiness in this world
plucked back, because he said, Can this, etc.

I, as the messenger of God, am as one that say, Cave, Take heed that you
become not son in laws, though you pass the fire, Take heed you look not back:
for if you do, you shall not see the flood, neither shall the Lord put a vail
betwixt you and vengeance, neither (I say) shall the promises of God come in
your days. If God had taken you up into the heavens and placed you before his
Throne, and told you the things that are to come, you would believe: But that
you cannot do.

The Lord is merciful, he descends into your houses, and there tells you
what is to come, where you may under land: But you believe him not. Therefore
says the Lord of you, I fear you will H.
forsake your mother: But if you do it, I say, if you do it, I will make of the
Mothes, men, that shall testify my name.

E. K. I ever told you I do not believe them, nor can believe them, nor will
desire to believe them.

..... If you be faithful, you be able to comprehend: If you be obedient and
humble, The Faith. Obedience. Humility.
Creatures of Heaven shall abide with you. Yea the Father and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost shall make his dwelling with you. If you persevere, even with faith
and humility, you shall see the wicked days that are to come, enjoy the
promises of God, and be partaker of those blessed days that follow: For wonders
unheard of, in, and of the world, are at hand. You are warned, A Caveat.
The Spirit of God rest with you.

D. Amen.

D. O Lord, shall we continue in this wavering or stiff-necked willful
blindness, and frowardly D. Cum maximis lachrymis haec a me and valde ^ferio
ad Rem dicta erant.
keep out thy mercies and graces by our fleshly sense, and unreasonable
persuasion against the verity of thy true Ministers?

1. All things are committed to thy charge.

D. O Lord as much as ever I can do by prayer or otherwise, I do, and yet I
enjoy no fruit of my long travel.

2. Thou have ground, sow if thou can.

D. How can I without further instructions and help? and now, when I require
Ave to come, he comes not: O Lord comfort me.

3. AVE shall come when thou have need of him.

D. In te Domine speravi, and spero, and sperabo. In die Tribulationis exaudies
me. Refugium meum, spes mea, vita and beatitudo mea Jesu Christ, tibi cum
Patre and Spiritu Sancto sit omnis honor, laus, Gloria and Gratiarum actio

Amen.
Monday, Cracoviae, Junii 2. Mane hora.
Oratione dominica finita, and mora aliqua interposita, and aliquot aliis ex
psalterio recitatis precibus, and post varias meas ad Deum ejaculationes.

At length Ave appeared to E. K. in the Shew-stone, etc. Post semihoram.


D. O Lord, all honor, thanks, and praise, be unto thee, who hear the
prayers of thy simple servant.

D. First, for the reforming of diversity of letters in the names written, I
require your aid, unless you will first say somewhat else.

By the same Jesus who sits on the right hand of his Father, and is the
wisdom of his Father, I request you to proceed with us.

Ave...... So that the body of Christ, now, is glorified and immortal.

D. Most true it is -- Mors illi ultra non non dominabitur.

Ave...... But as the Prophets, that were fullfiled with the Holy Ghost and
Spirit of God, before (...), tasted of him, in that he should come as a
Savior, and in the seed of man; So is the (...) of this time, Christ being
ascended, in the same Spirit. But that Christ shall come in his Adventus
Christi.
glorisied body, Triumphing against Satan, and all his enemies.

D. So be it, O Lord.

Ave...... But that the words of the Prophesies may be fulfilled, It is
necessary that the Earth swarm, and be glutted with her own fornication and
idolatry: which, what it shall be, the same spirit will open unto you.

D. Fiat voluntas Dei.

Ave...... That you may not only be wise in forsaking the world, and
foreseeing the dangers of perdition; But also preach the wonders of the same
Christ, and his great mercies, which is to come and to appear in the clouds
with his body glorified. The Lord said to Satan, I will give thee power, in the
end over their bodies, and thou shall be cast out into the fields, and that for
my Our bodies to be cast out into the fields.
names sake: But my Vineyard, and the fruit of my Harvest, shall thou not
hinder. Thus my brethren has the Lord loved you, Thus have the Treasures of
the Heavens opened themselves unto you: But your faith springs not.

D. It shall when it pleases the Highest: We beseech him to increase our faith
as shall be most for his honor and glory.

Ave...... But unto you it shall be revealled, what shall come, after Morrows,
after Days, Weeks, Prophecy. 1 -- 11
and Years: And unto you it shall be delivered, The Prophecy of the time to
come, which is twelve: of the which you have but one.

D. God make us faithful, true and discret servants. 12.


Ave...... For God will shake this earth through a riddle, and knock the
vessels in pieces, throw down the seats of the proud, and establish himself a
seat of quietness: that neither the Sun may Regnum futurum.
shine upon the unjust, nor the garments be made of many pieces.

D. All shall be in unity: unus pastor, unumovile, etc.

Ave...... Haste therefore and be gone: as the Lord has appointed you, that
you may be D. Be gone to the Emperor.
ready for him, when he brings the sickle. Purify all the vessels of your
house, and gather more into it, and when the Lord presses, he will give you
wine abundantly: And lo, the That hold up the grapes. Satan. Faithful. Spiritus
Sanctus.
forks are weary of their burdens: But be diligent, watchful, and full of care:
for Satan himself is very busy with you. After dinner I will visit you with
instructions: But O my Brethren, be faithful, and persevere; for the same
spirit that teaches the Church, teaches you.

D. To the same Holy Spirit, with the Father and the Son, be all honor, power,
glory and praise, now, and ever,

Amen.
Julii 2. After Noon, Hora 1
D. Gloria Patri, and Filio and Spiritui Sancto sicut erat in principio and
nunc and semper and in saecula seculorum. Amen.

E. K. Here he is now.

D. Nobis adsit, qui cuncta creavit.

Ave...... What will you?

D. If it please you, the solution of the former 8 questions first.

D. 1. As of the five Princes, which held up the train of the King.

Ave...... The knowledge of them helps not now.

D. 2. Secondly of the Trumpeter, what it betokened.

Ave...... It has no relation to these Tables.

D. 3. Of the letters in the Transversary, I would know your will.

Ave...... They are, as the other, but for a peculiar practice.

D. 4. For Docepax and Tedoand referred diversely, as I have noted, What is the
cause of Docepax. Tedoand.
this diversity?

Ave...... It was the fault of E. K. in reporting.

D. What is the very Truth?

Ave,..... Thou shall be taught that, when thou have their Calls, Calls.
Nalvage is to correct.


It belongs to Nalvage his correction.

D. 5. As toncerning the Etymologies of these names of God, we would be
satisfied.

Ave...... God is a Spirit, and is not able to be comprehended.

D. Some Notifying or Declaration, no full comprehension I require.

Ave..... It is no part of man's understanding. They signify all things, and
they signify nothing.

Ave..... Who can express Jehovah what it signifies. Deus significat ad id
quod agit.

D. As for the form of our Petition or Invitation of the good Angels, What sort
should it be of?

Ave..... A short and brief speech.

D. We beseech you to give us an example: we would have a confidence, it should
be of more effect.

Ave..... I may not do so.

E. K. And why?

Ave..... Invocation proceeds of the good will of man, and of the heat and
fervency of the ocation
spirit: And therefore is prayer of such effect with God.

D. We beseech you, shall we use one form to all?

Ave..... Every one, after a diverse form.

D. If the mind do dictate or prompt a diverse form, you mean.

Ave...... I know not: for I dwell not in the soul of man.

D. As concerning the diversity of certain words in these Tables, and those of
the portions of the Earth delivered by Nalvage, What say you?

Ave...... The Tables be true.

Is it Aydropl, or Andropl?

Ave...... Both names be true, and of one signification. I have delivered you
the Tables, so use them.

D. As concerning the Capital letters, have I done well?

Ave...... You have easily corrected that, and to good end; for every letter,
and part of letter, (...) use of the (...).
has his signification.

D. I beseech you say somewhat of the N in Paraoan, of which you said, so far
as that stretched, should sink to hell.

Ave...... Every letter in Paraoan, is a living fire: but all of one quality
and of one Creation: But unto N is delivered a viol of Destruction, according
to that part that he is of Paraoan the Note.


Governor.

D. It may please you to name that Place, City, or Country, under that N.

Ave...... Ask Nalvage, and he will tell you.

D. As concerning the wicked here, Shall I call or summon them all, as I do the
good ones in the name of God?

Ave...... No man calls upon the name of God in the wicked: They are servants
and vile slaves. The wicked (...) are vile laves.


D. We call upon the name of Jesus in the expulsing of devils, saying in the
name of Jesus, etc.

Ave..... That In, is against the wicked. No just man calls upon the name of
God, to allure the devil.

D. Then they are not to be named in the first summoning or invitation.

Ave..... At no time to be called.

E. K. How then shall we proceed with them?

Ave..... When the Earth lies opened unto your eyes, and when the Angels of
Light, shall offer the passages of the Earth, unto the entrance of your senses,
(chiefly of seeing) Then shall you see the Treasures of the Earth, as you go:
And the caves of the Hills shall not be unknown unto you: The Treasures of the
Earth. Our words to the wicked that keep Treasure.
Unto these, you may say, Arise, be gone, Thou art of destruction and of the
places of darkness: These are provided for the use of man. So shall thou use
the wicked, and no otherwise.

D. This is as concerning the natural Mines of the Earth.

Ave..... Not so, for they have nothing to do with the natural Mines of the
Earth, but, with that which is corrupted with man.

D. As concerning the coined they have power to bring it.

Ave. So they may: that they keep, and no other.

D. How shall we know what they keep, and what they keep not?

Ave..... Read my former words; for thou do not understand them.

D. I read it: beginning at the first line on this side, when the Angels of
Light, etc.

D. I mean of coined money that they keep not; How shall we do to serve our
necessities with it?

Ave..... The good Angels are Ministers for that purpose. The Angels of the 4
angles shall make the Earth open unto you, and shall serve your necessities
from the 4 parts of the Earth.

D. God make me a man of wisdom in all parts, I beseech him.

D. Note I had spoken somewhat of my part in Devonshire Mines: and of the Danish

Treasures which were taken of the Earth.

D. These our Questions being thus answered, now I refer the rest to your
instructions intended.

Ave..... You have the corn, and you have the ground: Make you but invocations
to sow the Invocations to be made.
seed, and the fruit shall be plentiful.

D. As concerning our usage in the 4 days in the 14 days, we would gladly
have some information.

Ave...... You would know to reap, before your corn be sown.

D. As concerning a fit place and time to call, and other circumstances, we
would learn somewhat.

Ave...... You would know where and when to call, before your invocations bear
witnesses of your readiness.

D. Then they must be written in verbis conceptis, in formal words.

Ave...... I -- a very easy matter.

D. What is the Book you mean that I should write?

Ave...... The Book consists [1] of Invocation of the names of God, and [2]
of the Angels, by The Book.
the names of God: Their offices are manifest. You did desire to be fed with
spoones, and so you are.

D. As concerning Bataiva, or Baataivh, I pray you not to be offended though I
ask again, what is the truth?

Ave...... The word is but of six letters, whereof, one is on the left side,
one on the right, two above, D. He means of the left side of the square
center of the principal (...): not perfect square, but heteromeces.
and two under; A and H are put to.

D. Sometimes or communiter, A, and in extremis Judiciis H as I was taught
before.

D. So that the word is Bataiva, or Bataivh.

E. K. I think he be gone; for he made a sign of the cross toward us, and drew
the white Curtain.

D. As we sat a while and talked of the Calls received in the holy Language,
and not yet Englished, there was a voice.

..... You shall have those Calls in English on Thursday. And so ask me no more
questions. The Calls to be had in English on Thursday next.


D. Thanks, honor, and glory, be to our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, now
and ever,

Amen.
Thursday, Cracoviae, Julii, 5. Mane, hora, 8. fere.
Oratione dominic a finita aliisque extemporaneis ejaculationibus ad Deum, and
repetito promisso ultimorum verborum de Angelica interpretatione 14. illarum
invocationum, quas a 14 Maii ultimi recepimus, tandem apparuerunt, Gabriel in
Cathedra and Nalvage.

Gabriel in his Chair, and Nalvage with the Table, or rather Globe with the
letters in it, etc.

D. Blessed be our God always, for his mercies: his graces be with us, now and
ever.

E. K. Gabriel stands up.

Gab...... Dictum est saepe vobis, perseverate usque ad finem.

D. God give us that ability.

Gab...... And why is it said so? but because you shall have many temptations
and afflictions: after which come consolation and comfort.

If the Smith prove and temper his Gold by fire, his intent is to excel in the
work that he has in hand: that thereby it might be tried, refined, and made
apt, to the end wherein it shall be used: Much more, think you, does the God of
wisdom, forge, try, and beat out, such as he intends to use in the execution
of his divine and eternal purposes. How therefore can you find fault with the
Lord? How can you say, he deals not justly with you? when he suffers you to
be proved to the uttermost. If you pay the uttermost farthing, are you not
become free? If you feel affliction and temptation, and withstand it, are you
not the more pure? the more justified? for the Vineyard and Harvest of the
Lord? O yes, my Brethren; for the more the wise man is afflicted, the more he
rejoices; And the greater his adversity is, the more he prostereth.

Is it not written? No man comes to the Lord but he is justified, purified,
and accepted. Whence therefore (if you seek to come before the Lord, that is to
say, to appear, to be blessed) shall your justification or purifying arise? Of
your own nature it cannot; for you were born sinners: But by Christ you may: In
whom you are justified, through patience, and resisting temptations. True
proof, and touch of man: But me thinks I hear you say, O, if we were rich, or
of ability. True it is, for the dust of the earth many men excel you: But in
that you speak with God, in us Our great (...) with God.
his Angels (that is to say Messagers) you are not only happy (which
happiness the others want) but you excel all the creatures of the Earth.

O my Brethren, their joy is a bitter-sweet: But the comfort that you have, is
eternal, is sweet, and a food for ever. Therefore, if you will be eternal, and
in perpetual comfort with joy, despise the world for the worlds sake: and
delight in God for his mercies; which if you truly do, Then can no Tempest
prevail, no affliction come amiss, nor no burden be too heavy for you: For it
is written, Gaudium beatorum est Christus: Cui Mundus omnia mala fecit.

O my Brethren, be contented, and suffer the world: for as Christ in
vanquishing her, did prove himself the Son of God: So shall you in resisting
her, at last overcome, and be accounted the sons of God in Christ, of whom you
are a follower. John Dee, be of comfort, for thou shall (...). Dec.


D. God be praised therefore.

E. K. And what do you say of me?

D. If I prevail, Satan shall not have his will of you: for

Gab...... But unto thee [E. K.] says the Lord, Take heed, how thou meddlest
with hell, lest it swallow thee.

Have patience, a time.

E. K. They be gone out of sight.

D. In the mean time we read over the premises twice, to our great comfort.

E. K. Now they be here again,

Now is a Cloud over them, all white like a smoke.

A voice...... Move not, for the place is holy -- By a great hollow voice.

E. K. Why should it be holy.

D. -- The Court is, where the King is: So where the Lord is present, the place
is accounted holy, and is so.

E. K. Now they be out of the Cloud.

D. After this, they made another pause: longer than before.

E. K. When shall we practice Ave his Calls, etc.

Gab...... My brother, thou have least care: Thou drawest both of God and man.
That is promised thee, shall be paid thee; and that which is to come, thou
shall be partaker of His fee of A. L. of 400 Dollers yearly.


[D. To E. K. for he has no care neither for meat, nor drink for him and his,
neither is he destitute of 400 Dollers yearly pension, and is to have some help
by Art.]

Nal...... Say the first word of the Call.

D. Sapah It is the fifth, for 4 being Englished. Gah S diu.


E. K. He holds up all his hand, and The Spirits of the fourth Angle are
on his thumb stands written -- and on the fingers orderly very big letters.

There was no word there that fignified Nine, the third word should be E M. D
It is yet a mystery to what book these, and such words have relation, they are
in every Call following.


Nine to vanne the earth Wherefore mighty and That word thou have not, it is
Acam.
Hearken unto in the firmament my voice, of waters, 7699 I have talked of you
whom continual Workmen, the first whose courses and has planted visit with
comfort I move you a Torment the earth, in power and presence, to the wicked,
and are whose works and in government shall be E. K. Like a cloud covers
between me and the things in the air. D 6 2
a Garland and a Song of honor to the righteous; continuance and the praise
giving unto them as the second of your God fiery darts and the third: in your
Creation.

Nal...... That is one.

E. K. Now he plucketh the Curtain over all.

D. Because you said that Acam betokening 7699. was to be put in his place: I
have viewed and numbered, and I find the words of the Call, more, than the
English parcells, by many: For the English parcels are 41, and the Call has
above 50.

A voice...... You have OD the fourth word of that Call; The whole Call is
placed there, and ought to be the next. Number the words of the next Call.

D. So that the next Call ought to have this English. Sapab.


E. K. Now he shows again.

Nal.... The mighty sounds nineteen -- That is Af that word have not there.
whose Peral you want that word.
Nal.... E. K. (...) came between. E.K. His eyes and the shewstone.
have entered and numbers into the third Angle, gave them are as and vessels
the first, to water the ends are become the earth and as Olives with her
Creatures, the Contents of time. in the Olive Mount, and Therefore, E. K Now
all the (...) are bowed downward.
looking with gladness they are Come ye E. K. Clouds. Forte sic.
upon the earth, E. K. Clouds.
the brothers and and of the first obey and second, your Creation, Dwelling in
the rightenesse of the heavens as continual comforters.
dwelling in the brightness and visit us in peace of the Heavens the beginning
and comfort, as of their own seats, conclude us continual comforters, which as
receivers unto whom are garnished of their mysteries, I fastened with continual
burning (...) for why? Pillars of gladness 69636. Nal.....
Our Lord and Master D 5 1
is all one.

Nal...... That is it that went before.

E. K. Now he draws the Curtain.

D. I understand this to be the English of the fifth Call; and that before of
the sixth: the Numbers of the parcels seem to agree. So that we have now the
English of the fifth and sixth Call. Thanked be God. E, M, Af. and Peoal, three
words which you said we had not, I find them in the Calls: your meaning
perhaps is some other then the common words.

E. K. Now he has opened again.

A mighty These C. al, that you have not.
upon Guard gather up their hands of fire, the Moss are with two edged swords
of the earth, Marble flaming, [as] the rich man sleeves. The ninth.
which have Nal..... That is P. you have not mark the mystery.
does Happy is he the Viols his Treasure, on whom? eight cursed they frown not:
of wrath are they For why? for two times whose the God of righteousness and
iniquities rejoices a half, they are, in them. whose in their eyes Come away,
wings are And not are Milstones, your viols. of Wormwood, greater For, and then
the earth. the time of the marrow And is such as of salt from their mouths
requires have settled run. comfort. their feet Seas in the West, of blood: 5
D 9
and Their heads West.
are measured are covered with their Ministers, with Diamond, 9996 -- That is,
and

E.K. Now he draws the Curtain.

D. As I was comparing the Call to this English, a voice said.

Nall....., It is the next Call.

D. I understand it to be the fourth Call, or

E. K. Now he opens.

The midday the first, like Come away. is as unto the Harvest For, the third
Heaven of a Widow. the Crowns made How many are there of the Temple, of
Hiacinct pillars which remain and Nal...... (...) And that you have not.
26. in the glory the Coat In whom of the earth, of him, that is, was, and
shall the Elders which are, be Crowned are and shall not see are divided.
become strange, death until Come which this house D. I understand the end of
this earth, etc.
appear I have prepared fall, to the terror for my own righteousness, and of
the earth says the Lord, the Dragon and whose long continuance sink. to our
comfort, shall be C me away. and as Buckles For, of such to the stouping
Dragons, the Thunders as 4 D 8
and have spoken: are prepared

E. K. Now he has covered all again.

D. As I was speaking of his diversities, saying, This you have not, and this
you have not. A voice said: Some you have, and some you have not, whether you
have, or have not, it is a mystery.

E. K. There is a little fire in the stone, going about it like a little Candle.

The Curtain is open, and a great Cloud over them.

Now they appear clear.

The Thunders of Judgment and wrath.

are of lamentation of a moment Ol. That you have not.
numbered and roar and weeping, with an hundred -- Torb. are harbored laid up
mighty Earthquakes. in the North, for And in the (...) the earth, a Thousand
-- Math. of an Oak, that surges whose times which branches 5678. That is Daox
that you have not.
rest not [or] labor still, are in the 24th. neither (...)...... That you have
not.
Neasts part know. 22.

E. K. Now comes a Cloud over them very white like smoke. Now they appear
again.

Which the Thunders Yea, burn any woe night time be to the earth, and here. for
day. One rock th And brings out Nal...... Math. you have it not.
her iniquity vomit out a thousand -- is, the heads even as was, of Scorpions,
the heart and shall be and of man great. live Sulphur, does Come away. mingled
his thoughts, But with poison. woe, woe, woe, not 6 10
These be woe, woe, woe, your noyses.

E. K. Now the Curtain is drawn again, after a quarter of an hour.

E. K. Now he appears.

Nal...... Consider by these, whose business you have in hand.

O you of sorrow 3663. Mian.....
that range bind up that in the South, your girdles, the Lord and and may be
magnified, are ob..... That you have not
Visit us, whose name 28. Bring down amongst you D 8 12
the Lanterns your train is wrath, etc.

..... Here must words in the end of the first Call, follow at Move, etc.

D. But this Call, it differs a little expressly.

D. They are the 14 last words, in the holy language thus: Zacar e ca, od
zamran, odo ic. Qua, Zorge, lap zirdo Noco Mad, Hoath Jaida.

Another -- spoke, it is measured, The mighty seat and and groaned, cried with
a loud voice it is as and Come away they are there were and D 7 11
whose Thunders they gathered them Number 5. O..... selves together is which
and There is no language for these words in the Call
31 -- Ga. flew became Come away. into the East, the house For and of death, I
prepare -- the Eagle of whom for you. Gabr. or, have prepared.

Note. Then begin at the first Call, Move, as before.

E. K. Now they appear.

O thou 6739. the great name the governor which weave Righteousness, of the
first flame the earth and -- I le mese: Wednes At large. Darg.....
under whose with dryness, the seat D 11 15 day, Julii 11. dixit wings which
of Honor hic deest. are know of Of the first flame. Of the first flame.


Nal..... Then move as before, etc.

O you sons Sons. Daughters.
vexing the voice of fury, all creatures of God, the daughters of the earth the
promise of the just, with age of him which which have which is called sit
Nal.... Ol....
under you Nal.....Quar.
amongst you Nal..... or extreaam Justice.
on 1636. Fury -- D 10 14
24 Behold, -- seats

..... Move, as before.

O you swords making and of the South men drunken his power, which have Nalvage.
which are which 42 -- Ux. empty. is called eyes Behold, amongst you D 9 13
to stir up the promise A bitter sting. the wrath of God of sin,

..... Move, as before, etc.

E. K. Now all is covered.

E. K. Now it is open again.

O thou mighty light, openest to the Center and burning flame of comfort the
glory of the earth, which of God In whom the secrets of Truth is called not to
be measured. 6332 in thy Kingdom Be thou Eran --
have JOY, a window of comfort 18
their abiding and unto me [14]
which

..... Move as before. D This is the 14 25 I received them in the holy Language.


O thou shall comfort separate second flame, the Just, Creatures the house of
Justice which walk great which on the earth art but with feet thou thy
beginning 8763 -- Emod.
in the god of Stretch forth
in glory, that understand and Conquer. and and D [12] 16


..... Move, etc.

E. K. They have covered all with the Curtain.

O thou vexation whose God Faxs -- Faxes or Faxis to be sounded. I find in the
Call Taxs. I find also in some words T or F indifferently used. [D. 13.] [17]
third flame, and have is Wrath in Anger. whose 7336 Gird up wings Lamps living
thy loins are going and thorns before thee, hearken. to stir up

..... Move, as before, etc.

A voice...... Upon Monday you shall have the rest.

D. The God of Hosts be praised, his name extolled, and his verity prevail to
the comfort of his Elect. Amen

A voice...... The Eternal God bless you. We have no more now. Hora 12.


D. Amen, Amen, Amen.

D. Upon my considering (immediately) of these Englished Calls, and the
Angelical Language NOTE.
belonging to them, I find that here are but 13 Englished of the 14 which are
in the third Cracovien Volume contained: and here wants the English of the
third of those 14.

Besides this, you may consider that these English Calls keep this order as
follows: and to make it a more perfect account from the beginning of the
first Call of All (being long since Englished, and three more) Then have we 18
Calls, whereof 17 are Englished.

The total sum from the very beginning. The Numbers of the Third Book,
Cracovien. The Englished Calls of this Book. 6 -- 2 -- 1 5 -- 1 -- 2 9 -- 5 --
3 8 -- 4 -- 4 10 -- 6 -- 5 12 -- 8 -- 6 11 -- 7 -- 7 15 -- 11 -- 8 14 -- 10 --
9 13 -- 9 -- 10 Note, the third of the third Book, which is the seventh, from
the beginning, is not yet Englished. Vide post Julii 11. hora 4. There is the
Call Englished.
18 -- 14 -- 11 17 -- 13 -- 12 16 -- 12 -- 13

Ergo, there lack yet 30 Calls, for the 30 Aires, etc. (besides the English of
the seventh or NOTE.
third, in the third Book contained) and so shall there be 48 Calls: For the
first Table, is no Call: Although there be letters gathered, but made into no
words; as you may see, before the first Call of all.

Saturday, Julii 7. Mane hora 6 Cracoviae.
Oratione Dominica finita, aliisque tam ad Deum quam ipsum Ave petitionibus,
requirebam Judicium ipsius Ave de meis tam ad Deum quam bonos ejus angelos
factis orationibus. Post vix quartam horae partem apparuit.

Ave...... If the words or truth of our testimony and message, were, or were
contained within the capacity of man, Then might the Devil thrust in himself,
and dissemble the Image of Truth: But because it is of Truth, and of him that
bears testimony of himself, it can neither have affinity with the flesh, nor
be spoken of in this sense.

Lo, thus, deceitfully, has the Devil entered into man.

D. Blessed be the Lord of all truth.

Ave...... Therefore seeing the word is not corruptible, Those that minister
the word, cannot dwell in corruption. I speak not this, without a cause, my
brethren.

D. I pray you to proceed, accordingly, that we may know the cause, if it be
your will: or else leaving this Caveat unto us, to proceed to the matter
wherein we required your helping hand to correct or confirm, or to do that
which is behooful.

Ave...... For, which of you have sought the Lord, for the Lord his cause or
sake?

D. That, God can be judge.

Ave...... Or in which of you has due obedience; either to the word, or unto
us that are sanctified by the word, been faithfully performed?

D. My points of error, and disobedience I beseech you to Notify, that I may
amend them.

Ave...... It may be, you will say, we have labored, and we have watched, yea
we have called on the name of the Lord. What have you done that you ought not
to do, yea, a thousand times more?

D. We vaunt nothing of any our doings, nor challenge any thing by any
perfection of our doings.

Ave...... Shall the hireling say, I have labored hard? or does the good
servant think he meriteth his wages? It is not so But you do so; Therefore you
are neither worthy of your reward, nor the name of faithful servants.

D. No Lord, we challenge nothing upon any merits; but fly unto thy mercy, and
that we crave and call for.

Ave...... You do wickedly and injustly: yea you credit the Lord, as you do
your selves: your faith is the faith of men, and not of the faithful.

Many things have I said unto you from the beginning, (says the God of
Justice) which you have heard, and not believed: But you tempt me, and provoke
me; yea you stir me up to be angry with you.

D. If thy Anger shall be on us, beside the sorrow of this world, tentations of
the feind, etc. Then are we not able to endure.

..... Answer not me, and hear what the Lord says unto thee: Satan laugheth you
to scorn; for he says unto the Lord, standing before him, Are these they whom
thou deliveredst from the The great and peculiar mercies of God showed on us.
perils of the Seas, and from the hands of the wicked, whom the winds were a
comfort to, and thy Countenance a Lanthorn? But the Lord seems not to hear
him: for he knows it is true. My brethren, you seek the world more than you
seek to perform the will of God: as though God could not rain Gold and
Margarits amongst you: As though the breath of God were not able to beat down
the whole earth before you. O you faithless Creatures: O ye hypocrites in the
Vineyard of the Lord: O you unworthy servants of such a Master. Neither unto
Abraham, nor unto Noe, nor unto any other Patriarchs or Prophets, has God done
more merciful unto, than unto you. To Abraham he said, When I return at this
time of the year, Thou shall have a son. Unto Noe he said, Build thee a Ship:
Make up the Ark, Thus and thus, it shall be: for the people shall perish.

You remember not that Joseph was sold by his brethren; or if you do, it may
be, you think it is a Genes. 27.
fable: If you think it to be true, Then consider how he escaped the Pit;
Consider he was sold, and so became a bondsman: But who changed the imagination
and sense of his brethren? who (I say) came between their Tyranny and his
innocence? What was he that made him free? that brought him before Pharaoh?
yes, and that which is more, made him reign over Pharaoh: Was it not the same
God, that deals with you?

O ye of little faith, and starvelings, withered grass, and blasted willows:
What and if you were in hell, could he not deliver you? If you become bondmen,
cannot he make you free? If you be in prison, cannot he deliver you? Cannot he
compass your neck with a chain? But Satan says, Lo, they say, they have a
long Journey: It is necessary that God comfort those that put their trust in
him. Euge, O ho O you beggarly starvelings, Has not the same God, the same
Raphael that he had... Yes verily, a thousand a hundred, and a thousand and a
hundred thousand thousands that are, and more than Raphael for the help and
comfort of the faithful.

When Herod sought to kill the son of God, in that he was man: his Father
delivered him not with a mighty wind, nor with beating down of Lords Palaces;
but by a dream appeared unto Joseph, saying, flee, Herod seeks the child his
life. Note the manner of his warning, The manner of his departure: But hear
what the Lord said in the end. Return, for he that sought the Child his life,
is now dead. Why, I say, you rotten Keeds, worse than the excrements of the
Fens, have not you greater warning? Wherefore is it said unto you, Up and be
gone, but that the Lord Up and be gone. Stephen Bather King of Poland.
sees the thoughts of man? even of him which seeks your destruction; Even of
this wicked King which seeks to destroy Laskie.

Could not the same Lord, consume that wicked monster and seller of his people,
(which (...) for a time) with the fire of his mouth? Yes, but that he has
given all things a time. Those that are righteous are often times taken away
because of temptations that are to come: But the Note of the death of the
righteous now and then Flee.
wicked are suffered to continue, because they might be more heavy, and sink
deeper: But, (for love) I say unto you, my brethren, Flee the mischiefs that
are to come, and go forward in the service of the Highest, that you may enjoy
the promises that are made you, and be partakers of the happy days to come.

Take heed of whoredom, and the provocations of the flesh. For why? those
things that we say, are not without their cause. You have but ten days to
tarry ( if you will follow my counsel) But 10. days.
But if you linger any longer, you may drink of a Cup that you would not.
Wherefore does God warn you, but that he would be just with you? Has he not
the whole Earth to serve him? Believe me, by the (...) we bear, that the good
Angels weep over you; for, as you are particularly called, so have you your
particular and unaccustomed temptations. But pray unto God, that Particular
Temptations.
you may prevail. Nititur enim, omnibus modis, Sathanas ut vos devoret.

It is said unto you, If you provide for this Journey, etc. That word is as
sure as the strongest Provide for this Journey. Spiritus Sanctus. Be gone.
rock in the world. Considering that you were warned by the same Spirit
(whereof I speak) being witness of himself, and by us, which bear witness of
him; Give ear, gird up your selves, and be gone: For, even at the very doors,
are mischief. After a while I have somewhat else to say unto you.

E. K. He covers all with the white Curtain.

D. We read and considered these premises somewhat diligently.

D. Afterward, [ Ave] he came again, and (after a pause) said as follows.

Ave...... My brother, I see thou do (...) not understand the mystery of this
Book, or work thou have in hand. But I told thee, it was the knowledge that God
delivered unto Enoch. I said also, that Enoch Enoch.
(...) 50 days. Notwithstanding, that thy labor be not frustrate, and void of
fruit, Be it unto thee, as thou have done. The Book confirmed.


D. Lord I did the best that I could conceive of it.

Ave...... I will tell thee, what the labor of Enoch was for those fifty days.

D. O Lord I thank thee.

He made, (as thou have done, thy book) Tables, of Serpasan and plain stone: as
the Angel of Nal. Ave. It is a king of slate-stone. 50 Days labor.
the Lord appointed him; saying, tell me (O Lord) the number of the days that
I shall labor in. It was answered him 50.

Then he groaned within himself, saying, Lord God the Fountain of true wisdom,
thou that openest the secrets of thy own self unto man, thou (...) nine
imperfection, and my inward darkness: How can I (therefore) speak unto them
that speak not after the voice of man; or worthily call on thy name,
considering that my (...) and fruitless, and unknown to my self? Shall the
Sands seem to invite the Mountains: or can the small Rivers entertain the
wonderful and unknown waves? (...) his prayer to God.


Can the vessel of fear, fragility, or that is of a determined proportion, lift
up himself, heave up his hands, or gather the Sun into his bosom? Lord it
cannot be: Lord my imperfection is great: Lord I am less than sand: Lord, thy
good Angels and Creatures excel me far: our proportion is not alike; our sense
agrees not: N twithstanding I am comforted; For that we have all one God, all
one beginning from thee, that we respect thee a Creator: Therefore will I call
upon thy One Creator of all things. A Seer.
name, and in thee, I will become mighty. Thou shall light me, and I will
become a Seer; I will see thy Creatures, and will magnify thee amongst them.
Those that come unto thee have the same gate, and through the same gate,
descend, such as thou sendest. Behold, I offer my house, my labor, my heart
and soul, If it will please thy Angels to dwell with me, and I with them; to
rejoice with me, that I may rejoice with them; to minister unto me, that I may
magnify thy name. Then, lo the Tables (which I have provided, and according to
thy will, prepared) I offer unto thee, and unto thy holy Angels, desiring them,
in and through thy holy names: That as thou art their light, and comfortest
them, so they, in thee will be my light and comfort. Lord they prescribe not
laws unto thee, so it is not meet that I prescribe laws unto them: What it
pleases thee to offer, they receive; So what it pleases them to offer unto
me, will I also receive. Behold I say (O Lord) If I shall call upon them in thy
name, Be it unto me in mercy, as unto the servant of the Highest. Let them also
manifest unto me, How, by what words, and at what time, I shall call them. O
Lord, Is there any that measure the heavens, that is mortal? How, therefore,
The Call of Angels.
can the heavens enter into man's imagination? Thy Creatures are the Glory of
thy countenance: Hereby thou glorifiest all things, which Glory excels and
(O Lord) is far above my understanding. It is great wisdom, to speak and talk
according to understanding with There were no Kings in (...) his time; Consider
therefore how to ask this doubt of this phrase prophetical. In (...) I find
cap. 8. that unjudged Nations had Kings long before Saul his time. Therefore
there might be some in Enoch his time: or he prophesied of them.
Kings: But to command Kings by a subjected commandment, is not wisdom, unless
it come from thee. Behold Lord, How shall I therefore ascend into the heavens?
The air will not carry me, but resi teth my folly, I fall down, for I am of the
earth. Therefore, O thou very Light and true Comfort, that can, and may,
and do command the heavens; Behold (...) these Tables unto thee, Command them
as it pleases thee: and O you Ministers, and true lights of (...), Governing
this earthly frame, and the elements wherein we live, Do for me as for the
servant of the Lord: and unto whom it has pleased the Lord to talk of you

Behold, Lord, (...) have appointed me 50 times; Ave. That is to say, thrice a
day.
Thrice 50 times will I lift my hands unto thee. Be it unto (...) is (...)
thee, and thy holy Miniters. I require nothing but thee, and through thee, and
for thy honor and glory: (...) I hope I shall be satisfied, and shall not die,
(As thou have promised) (...) thou gather the clouds together, and judge all
things: when in a moment I shall be changed and dwell with thee for ever.

These words, were thrice a days talk betwixt Enoch and God: In the end of 50
days, there Thrice a day.
appeared unto him, which are not now to be manifested nor spoken of: he
enjoyed the fruit of God his promise, and received the benefit of his faith.
Here may the wise learn wisdom: for what does man that is not corruptible?

I have not that I may say any more unto you: But believe me, I have said great
things unto you: If you will have me hereafter, I will come.

D --

..... Consider well my words, and what 1 have now said unto thee: for here thou
may learn wisdom, and also see what thou have to do.

D. I will, if it please you read over some of these Invitations which I have
made and written here in this Book.

Ave...... You may not use that word Obedientes.

D. You spoke of a first word to call, and of a second to constrain. Ave......
It signifies, it urges them more in God. I have said.

D. Note, what is meant by the name of God that was said to constrain, being
the second What is meant by the phrase or (...), in respect of good Angels.
names of two before given.

E. K. He is gone, and all covered with the Curtain.

D. All honor, praise, and glory, all thanks and power, is due to our God and
King. So be it.

Amen.
Monday, Julii, 9. Mane hora 7. three quarters, Cracoviae.
Orationibus quibusdam finitis ad Deum and deinde ad Gabrielem and Nalvage, etc.

E. K. As soon as he looked, he found the Stone covered with the white Curtain.

D. A pause of a of an hour: In which space I used sundry ejaculations to God,
and his good Angels.

D. This day was appointed, we attend therefore your instructions. At length
they appeared not, but used a voice.

A voice...... This day, but the Sun declining the fourth hour.

D. Your meaning is, that at after noon, at 4 of the clock.

The voice...... As thou have written --

D. The will of the Highest be done.

Amen.
Monday, A Meridie, hora 4.
D. As E. K. was saying to me, that he thought that the Angels might tell the
certain day and times of things to come, and that Angels could now fall no
more, etc. Of such things touching Angels; suddenly a voice was heard, as
follows.

A voice...... Herein will I talk with you, my brethren.

E. K. Gabriel only appears: neither Nalvage nor the Table appears. He
sits in a Chair, and with his fiery Dart.

Gabr...... The (...) inspired with the Holy Ghost, were assured of the coming
of their Messiah, of their Christ: But what day, or in what year was not of
man's understanding. Christ himself opened unto his Disciples his death, and the
manner thereof; but the day and hour he never disclosed. So likewise the
Scriptures speak of the coming of Christ, but the day and hour, the Son of De
secundo adventu Christi.
man knows not. But because in time to come, and for this action, (the
message of the highest) And assured, and infallible Doctrine, (in respect that
God appointed you no certain time) is necessary. For, for this cause you waver
my brethren: and may lose the benefit of God his favor, and mercies. O
weaklings examine the Prophets, look into the doing of the Apostles. There
always went a promise before the end: But the end was the benefit and fruit of
the promise. Some allege Paul, some Peter, some Daniel: But in this case
shall you allege the sayings of God, spoken in the spirit of truth by me
Gabriel, the servant of the highest. God, for three causes hides the end, and
the very time of his heavenly purposes. As after a little silence you shall
shortly hear.

E. K. A cloud covers him.

E. K. Now he appears again.

Gab...... First, by reason of his own inexplicable Est and non est esse, which
is without the circumference, strength, capable virtue, and power of man, his
intellectuality, whereby he appears to be verily one God, and
incomprehensible.

Secondly, because Lucifer with his yea sayers, (damned justly) should never
taste of his light, nor understand his secret judgments: which he would, and
might do, if they were delivered to man's imagination, and discourse: Because it
is within the circumference and compass of his Creation. Consider of these two.

E. K. Now he is covered in a white Cloud again.

D. The first reason, or cause we do not sufficiently understand, or conceive.

Deus est esse, Sanctis Deus.

Non est esse, Impiis Deus.

For, In the judgment day, God in his son, Christ, shall shut up his perpetual
and everlasting Justice, wrath, and anger, with Hell and damnation. Leaving
them, and forsaking them, and in no case to be called their (...). Fratres [mi]
non habebunt Deum. But they shall be without a guide, and without a Center.
Hereby you may understand, Esse and non est esse. To the purpose.

Thirdly, that man firmly persuaded of things spoken of by God above his
capacity to come, and unknown, might worthily in the strength of faith, and
through the effect of his promises merit his favor in Christ, and receive
eternal salvation, justly before God and his Angels. These are the three causes.

D. This last cause, if it would please you to make more plain, it should
greatly enform us and confirm us.

..... These are the three only causes, that the ends of God his determinations
are secret.

1. In the first, that God might appear omnipotent.

2. In the second, sealed up in himself from the knowledge of such as have
rebelled to their destruction.

3. In the third, that man might justly be made worthy of the places prepared
for him.

Nalvage is called away, and cannot be in Action with you till Wednesday. Then
shall you Wednesday following.
have the Calls that you look for. And so enter into the knowledge and perfect
understanding of the 49 Gates and Tables if you will.

D. O Lord, thy will and mercy be showed upon us.

Gab...... But understand that it is a labor, the hardest and the last.

D. Violenti nihil difficile: God strengthen our will and faith.

Gab...... I have nothing else to say unto you. But God be merciful unto you,
and forgive you your sins.

D. Amen.

Gab...... And that you go hence, make haste.

D.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Gloria Patri, and filio, and spiritui Sancto sicut erat in principio, and
nunc and semper, and in secula seculorum.

Amen.
Wednesday, Julii 11. Mane hora, 6. Cracoviae. Oratione dominica finita, etc.
The Curtain appeared straight way.

D. We await the promise, which you made us, O Gabriel.

A voice. Not now, but at the fourth hour, declining as before.

E. K. And why not now as well? At four of the Clock after noon.


A voice. He that labors in his own harvest labors when he list: but he
that fisheth on the Sea, must be ruled by her course.

D. Fiat voluntas Dei.

Wednesday, Julii 11. a Meridie, hora 4.
D. At the first looking the Curtain appeared to E. K. his sight.

D. When it shall please thee, O God, we are desirous to receive wisdom from
thee.

D. At six of the Clock appeared a little one, yellow, like a little Child:
his hair fine yellow, and a very amiable face.

To avoid reproach, and for the truth of the word I visit you, instead of
Nalvage, which cannot NOTE. (...).
come. I am (...) Mese, the servant of the highest, which instead of Nalvage,
will, and am able to supply D. He is one of sigillum Dei, one of the Septenarii
whereof, Ave and... are The Translation of the Call into English.
his place.

D. So be it in the name of Jesus.

Ilem...... Many, and strong are your enemies, both bodily and ghostly: But be
you strong, and you shall prevail. Many enemies bodily and ghostly.


Therefore say, what you will have me do.

D. That (if it please you) that Nalvage would have done.

The East is a house of Virgins.

D. He distinguishes it not by fingers.

I Will...... Well, you shall have fingers.

Singing praises with ornaments so bright Move, amongst such as appear, the
flames of first glory, work wonders sing praises wherein on all creatures,
unto the Creator, the Lord whose and has opened his mouth Kingdoms be mighty
and I Will..... Ni, That you have not.
and continuance amongst us, they are become are as the third for Twenty eight
and fourth unto this remembrance living dwellings, strong Towers is given in
whom and power, the strength of man places of comfort. and rejoices. The seat
of mercy our strength and and continuance. waxes strong they are apparail'd O
you servants of mercy. in our comforter.

I Will...... Lo, there you have it.

D. I pray you to consider of the form of the promise, for we were promised to
receive the Vide Supra.
Calls we looked for, and so to be fit for the 49 Gates, etc. If this you have
done, be the performance of those the words of Gabriel, or no, I pray you
consider.

I Will...... For the thirty Calls, or thirty Call, to morrow at the fourth hour,
Thursday at four of the Clock afternoon.
I will ease you sufficiently.

D. I beseech you (if I shall not offend to request it) What is the cause of
Gabriel and Nalvage their absence?

I Will...... Spiritual Contention between Satan and them, and more then man can,
or may understand.

D. Then I pray you, why was not this supply sent at the time appointed?

I Will...... It is not of God, to think that God is of time. All things are tied
unto him, and nothing can be separated from him. Notwithstanding, he may
separate himself from them. But you Nineteen Calls received.
shall understand, that these nineteen Calls.

D. There are but 18. besides the first to God.

..... There are nineteen besides the first] are the Calls, or entrances into
the The use of these 19 Calls.
knowledge of the mystical Tables: Every Table containing one whole leaf,
whereunto you need no other circumstances.

1. The first Call begins Ol Sonf. In English 1 reign. 2. The second
begins Adgt. In English Can. 3. The Call of the third Table begins Micma.
In English Behold.

E. K. A white cloud comes about him, but hides him not.

I Will...... But you must understand that in speaking of the first Table, I speak
of the second. So that the second, with you is the first.

4. As this last, behold is the fourth, but with you the third.

(...). It is the seventh: but the third of the fourteenth.

I Will...... It is the Call of the third.

5. The next -- in English is I have set Otherwise -- O thil. 6. The sixth --
The mighty sounds. Otherwise -- Saphah. 7. The seventh -- The spirits Gah. 8.
The eight -- The East ROa.

Ilem...... Look that, that you call the third.

D. It is Raas.

9. The next -- The midday the first Basenn lo, or Basemlo. 10. -- A mighty
Micaoli. 11. -- The Thunders of judgment and wrath Coraaxo.

There comes a white bright Cloud about him.

12. -- The mighty seat Sai Ox Cai al.

E. K. Every time he speaks, he pulls fire out of his mouth, and casts it
from him.

13. -- O you Nonci. 14. -- O you swords Napti.

E. K. Now a white Cloud goes round.

15. -- O you sons No Romi. 16. -- O thou the Governor Ils Tabaam.

Il...... There you lack the third word?

D. What is that?

..... Of the first flame, it answers to L al purt.

You had not the exposition of the third word.

17. O ye of the second flame. Ils (...) a purt. 18. -- O thou third flame. Ils
di al part. 19. O thou mighty light Il micalZo al part.

Thus you have not lost your labor.

E. K. Now he wrappeth the Cloud that was under him about his head.

..... God be with you.

E. K. Saw him go upward.

D. Glory be to God, praise and honor for.

Amen.
Thursday, Julii 12. a (...) 4. Cracoviae.
Ocatione Dominica finita, and breviter ad (...) quibnsdam dictis.

E. K. The Curtain appeared at the (...) looking.

D Now in the name of (...), as conceining those 30 Calls, or thirty Call, we
await your information of Ilemese.

D. After diverse parcels of our Actions past with Nalvage being read, which
were very well of us liked, at length Ilemese appeared: and after he had showed
himself (the Curtain being Ilemese.
opened) he drew the Curtain to again.

D. I then said three Prayers out of the Psalms, etc.

E. K. Now he stands as Nalvage used to do, upon the Globe with the rod in
his hand: And Gabriel sits by.

D. In the name of the eternal and everlasting God say on.

E. K. Now the Globe turns swiftly, and he points to letters thus, with the
rod which Nalvage was wont to use.

MADRIIAX O you heavens D. I think this word wants Ilemese.
as may appear by Madriax, about 44 words from the end. DSPRAF which dwell Ds
praf. LIL In the first air Lil. Kis CHISMICAOLZ are mighty Chis Micaolz.

Gab...... Move not, for the place is holy.

D. Hallowed be his name, that sanctifies whatsoever is sanctified.

SAANIR in the parts Sa a nir. (...).
CAOSGO of the earth Ca os go. OD FISIS and execute Od fisis. BALZIZRAS the
judgment Bal zi zras. Ya IAIDA of the highest Ia - i da. sa NONCA to you
Nonca. GOHULIM It is said Go hu lim.

E. E. There came a black cloud in the air about the Stone, as though it would
have hindered E. K. his sight.

Gabr...... It behooves us to do that we do even with present contention
against the wicked. Have a little patience.

The curtain is now away again, and they appear again.

Mikma MICMA Behold Micma. asper.


E. K. Now is the curtain plucked to again, and they covered.

ADOIAN the face A do i an. MAD of your God Mad. IAOD The beginning I a od.
BLIORB of Comfort Bliorb. SABAOOAONA whose eyes Sa ba o o a o na. (...).
Kis s CHI are Chis. LUCIFTIAS the brightness Lu cif ti as. PIRIPSOL of the
heavens, Pe ripsol. D S which Ds. ABRAASSA provided Abraassa Nonsf NONCF you
Noncf. NETAAIB for the government Ne ta a ib. CAOSGI of the earth, Ca of gi. OD
and Od. TILB her Tilb. ADPHAHT unspeakable Ad phaht.

I Will...... Read it.

D. The English.

I Will...... I

DAMPLOZ variety, Dam ploz. TOOAT furnishing To o at. Nonsf NONCF you Non cf.
GMICALZOMA with a power, understanding Gmi call zo ma. LRASD to dispose Lrasd
TOFGLO all things Tof glo. MARB according Marb.

[D. It follows in Libro Crae..

LIBRI CRACOVIENSIS MYSTICUS APERTORIUS, Julii, 12. 1584.
PRAETEREA PROOEMIUM MADIMIANUM, Libri primi, Pragensis Caesareique, Anno 1584.
Augusti 15. Stilo Novo.
Liber 5. Cracoviensium Mysteriorum Apertorius. Thursday, Julii 12. Anno 1584.
YARRY to the providence Yar ry. ID*UIGO *O D. Note the wicked power dazeled so
the eyes of E. K. that he could not well discern this O, but staying at it a
while concluded it to be an V: which afterward, and by and by, he corrected. of
him that sits on the holy Thrana. Id, ui-go. I d oi go.

The Curtain being plucked.

I Will...... Have Patience.

D. As we were talking of the name of God Idoigo in Enoch his Tables, a voice
said.

A voice..... Where the most force was, the Devil crept most in. Herein the
Devil thought to deceive you.

D. It must be then I doigo?

OD and Od. TORZULP rose up Torzulp. Y IAODAF in the beginning Ia o daf. GOHOL
saying, Go hol. CAOSGA The earth, Ca os ga. TABAORD let her be (...) Ta ba ord.
SAANIR by her (...) Sa a nir. OD and Od. CHRISTEOS let (...) he Chris te os.
YRPOIL division Yr po il. TIOBL in her, Ti obl. BUSDIRTILB that the glory of
her Bus dir tilb. NOALN May be No aln. PAID always pa id. ORSBA drunken Ors
ba. OD and Od. Dodrumni. DODRMNI vexed Dod rm ni. ZYLNA in it self. Zyl na.
ELZAPTILB Her course, El zap tilb. PARMGI Let it run Parm gi. PIRIPSAX with the
Heavens, Pe rip sax. OD and Od. TA as Ta. Kurlst. QURLST an handmaid. Qurlst.
Il...... Have patience a little. E. K.

E. K. Now they are here again.

BOOAPIS Let her serve them Booapis. LNIBM one season: Lnib m. Chose. OUCHO Let
it confound Ov Cho. SYMP another, Symp. OD and Od. CHRISTEOS let there be Chris
te os. AGTOLTORN no Creature Ag tol torn. Mirk. MIRC upon, Mirc. Q or Q. TIOBL
within her Ti ob l. LEL the same Lel...... one and the same. TON All Ton.
PAOMBD her members Pa Ombd. DILZMO let them differ Dil zmo. ASPIAN in their
qualities, As pi an. OD and Od. Long, or short. CHRISTEOS Let there be Chris te
os. AGLTOLTORN no one Creature Ag l ter torn. Ah. PARACH equal Ach. Pa rach.

The wicked spoke behind E. K. Note.


ASYMP with another. A symp. CORDZIZ The reasonable Creatures of the earth, or
Man. Cord ziz. DODPAL Let them vex Dod pal. OD and Od. FIFALZ weed out Fi falz.
LSMNAD one another. Ls mnad.

E. K. Now the Curtain is drawn.

A voice...... Read.

D. I read it.... ter from the beginning hitherto.

I Will...... Whereat doubt you.

D. Is it true, that before the Creation of man this kind of Malediction was
pronounced, or when else shall we understand it to have been spoken?

A voice...... True it is that one man weedeth out another. To avoid which
fault it is said, and after God the brother as thy self.

One Kingdom riset^h up against another, the servant against his Master, the
wicked son disdaineth his father. All which fell upon man when God cursed the
earth: For, perfect love was taken from amongst them, and the spirit of malice
came amongst them, to the intent they might be always at variance, and one
weed out another, and so must be, and shall be unto the end. Answer me, why
turned God Adam out into the earth.

D. Because he had transgressed the Laws to be kept in Paradise.

..... It is true. Then Adam offending, (...) punishment for his offense, in
that he was turned out into the earth. If he had been turned (...) to a blessed
place, then can you not aptly say he was turned out, for he that is turned out
goes to dishonor: Even so Adam, from innocence through If.
his fall, was turned out to corruption into a prison prepared for him before,
if he offended. God (my brother) know he would offend: he knew also how to
dishonor him. Note. In the same instant. (...) Watchmen, Keepers, (...) of
the earth.


As Jesus Christ brought all blessedness, and comfort into the world: So did
Adam, accursed, bring all misery and wretchedness into the world, and in the
same instant, when Adam was expelled; The Lord suffered the earth to be
accursed for Adams sake, and then, said the Lord these things, and gave unto
the world her time: and placed over her Keepers, Watchmen, and Princes, for
years, months, and days: [I am easy, you may understand my rule.]

D. Note, All this was answered by a voice, as concerning my question, or doubt
heretofore expressed.

..... After this, a great pause was used: In which time in my mind, I
discoursed of the Ministry Angelical, not all to have been committed to their
charge with their Creation, but afterward in diverse times, diverse offices, both
toward God and man.

A voice...... To morrow morning I will meet you here the third hour.

D. The third hour after the Sun rising mean you?

A voice...... I.

D. Let us heartily thank the Lord and praise him always: His Mercy and Grace
be upon us, now and ever.

Amen.
Friday, Julii 13. Mane hora 7. Cracoviae.
D. Oratione Dominica finita, etc.

D. At the first looking, E. K. saw the Curtain usual to appear, and somewhat
plighted, and shortly.

A voice...... Read that you have done.

D. I read hitherto that was written.

E. K. Now they appear, the Curtain being drawn away: But the round Table, or
Globe appeared not.

E. K. Now they have drawn the Curtain over them again.

D. Blessed be they that are come in the name of our God, and for his service.

E. K. Now they appear, and the Table, or Globe with them.

I Will...... The rest.

D. In the name of Jesus, and for his honor.

OD And Od. Gad. FARGT the dwelling places, Farg t. BAMS Let them forget Bams
OMAOAS their names, O ma o as. CONISBRA the work of man Co nis bra. OD and Od.
AUAVOX his pomp: A ua vox. g dg. TONUG Let them be defaced To nug. ORSCATBL his
buildings, Ors cat bl. NOASMI let them become No as mi. TABGES Caves Tab ges.
LEVITHMONG for (...) of the field Levith mong. Ki. UNCHI confound Un chi.
OMPTILE her understanding Omp tilb. ORS with darkness, Ors. BAGLE for why?
Bagle. MOOOAH it repents me Mo o Oah. OLCORDZIZ. I made man Ol cord ziz.
LCAPIMAO one while L ca pi ma o. IXOMA XIP let her be known, Ix o max ip.
ODCACOCASB and another while Od ca co cash.

Gab...... Move not, for the place is holy.

E. K. All is covered.

E. K. Now it is open.

GOSAA a stranger, Go sa a. BAGLEN because Baglen. PII she is Pi i. TIANTA the
bed Ti an ta. ABABALOND of an harlot A ba ba land. gt, or dgt. ODFAORGT and the
dwelling place Od fa orgt. lotch, or loch. TELOCVOVIM of him that is fallen. Te
loc vo v im. yax MADRIIAX O you heavens Ma dri iax. TORZU arise, Tor zu.
OADRIAX The lower heavens O adriax. ka. OROCHA underneath you O to cha. ABOAPRI
let them serve you, A bo a pri. TABAORI Govern Taba o ri. PRIAZ those Priaz.
ARTABAS that govern, Ar ta bas. dir ADRPAN Cast down A dr pan. CORSTA such as
Cor sta. DOBIX fall, Dobix. YOLCAM bring forth Yol came.

E. K. Now the Curtain is drawn.

PRIAZI with those Pri a zi. ARCOAZIOR that increase, Ar co a zior. ODQUASB and
destroy Od quasb. dg QTING the rotten Qting. RIPIR No place, Ri pir. PAAOXT let
it remain Pa a oxt. Kor SAGACOR in one number. Sa ga cor. VML Add Vml. OD and
Pur PRDZAR Diminish Prd zar. curg CACRG until Ca crg. AOIVEAE the Stars A oi ve
a e. CORMPT be numbered; Cormpt. TORZU arise, Tor zu. ZACAR Move Zacar. ODZAMRAN
and appear Od zamran. ASPT before Aspt. SIBSI the Covenant Sib si.

E. K. Now he has drawn the curtain again.

BUTMONA of his mouth, But mo na. DS which Ds. SURZAS he has sworn Sur zas.
TIA unto us Tia. BALTAN in his Justice. Baltan. ODO Open Odo. CICLE the
mysteries Cicle. QAA of your Creation, Qaa. OD and Od. OZAZMA make us Ozazma.
PLAPLI partakers Pla pli. IADNAMAD of undefiled knowledge. Iad na mad.

The first Air, is called -- Lil. The second -- Arn. The third -- Zom. 4 --
Paz. 5 -- Lit. 6 -- Maz. 7 -- Deo. 8 -- Zid. 9 -- Zip. 10 -- Zax. 11 -- Ich ik.
12 -- Lo. 13 -- Zim. 14 -- Uta. 15 -- Oxo. 16 -- Lea. 17 -- Tan. 18 -- Zen. 19
-- Pop. 20 -- Chr kar in palato very much.....
21 -- Asp. 22 -- Lin. 23 -- Tor. 24 -- Nia. 25 -- Uti. 26 -- Des. 27 -- Zaa.
28 -- Bag. 29 -- Rii. 30 -- Tex.
There is all --

Now change the name, and the Call is all one. Note. How this One Call may
serve the 30.


D. Blessed be he who only is always one.

D. I take these names to be as primus, secundus, tertius, and to 30.

A voice...... Not so, they be the substantial names of the Aires.

D. It was said they had no proper names; but were to be called, O thou of the
first Air,

O thou of the second, etc. I pray you reconcile the repugnancy of these two
places, as they should seem.

E. K. The Curtain is opened.

E. E. Now Gabriel stands up.

Gabr...... Thus has God kept promise with you, and has delivered you the
keys of his storehouses: wherein you shall find, ( if you enter wisely,
humbly, and patiently) Treasures more worth than the frames of the heavens.

But yet is not August come: Notwithstanding the Lord has kept his promise
with you before God his promise fulfilled before August. Counsel for
preparation. The reading of the Book. The letters.
the time. Therefore, Now examine your Books, Confer one place with another,
and learn to be perfect for the practice and entrance.

See that your garments be clean. Herein be not rash: Nor over hasty; For those
that are hasty and rash, and are lothsomely apparelled, may knock long before
they enter.

There is no other reading of the Book, but the appearing of the Ministers and
Creatures of God: which showing what they are themselves, show how they are
conjoined in power, and represented formally by those letters.

E. K. Now he takes the Table, and seems to wrap it up together.

D. Seeing I have moved the doubt of their names I pray you to dissolve it.

Gab...... You play with me childishly.

D. I have done.

Gab...... Think thou that we speak any thing that is not true?

Thou shall never know the mysteries of all things that have been spoken. The
mysteries of this Book Dwell together.


If you love together, and dwell together, and in one God; Then the self-same
God will be merciful unto you: Which bless you, comfort you, and strengthen
you unto the end. More I would say, but words profit not. God be amongst you.

E. K. Now they both be gone in a great flame of fire upwards.

D. Laudibuste celebrabo Domine Deus quoniam non praevaluerunt Inimici mei
super me. Domine exercituum clamavi ad te, and tu salvasti me. Convertisti
dolorem in gaudium mihi, dissolvisti luctum meum and circumdedisti me laetitia.
Misericordias tuas in aeternum cantabo. Notam faciam veritatem tuam in vita
mea. Os meum narrabit Justitiam tuam omni tempore beneficia tua: certe non novi
numerum. Sed Gratias agam donec mors rapiat, tibi psallam quamdiu fuero. Laudem
tui loquetur os meum: and omne vivens celebret nomen tuum Sanctum, in perpetuum
and semper. Laudate Dominum, O vos Angeli ejus, potentes virtute facientes
jussus ejus, obedientes voci verbi illius. Collaudate Deum Universi exercitus
ejus, Ministri ejus qui facitis voluntatem ejus. Omne quod vivit laudet te
Domine, Amen.

1584. Remember that on Saturday, the fourteenth day of July, by the Gregorian
Calender, and the fourth day of July, by the old Calender, Rowland my Child
(who was born (...) pene (...).
Anno 1583. January 28. by the old Calender) was extremely sick about noon, or
midday, and by one of the Clock ready to give up the Ghost, or rather lay for
dead, and his eyes set and sunck into his head, etc.

I made a vow, if the Lord did foresee him to be his true servant, and so would
grant him life, and confirm him his health at this danger, and from this danger
I would (during my life) on Saturdayes eat but one meal, etc.

Remember on Wednesday night the eighteenth of July, as I walked alone about
nine of the Clock in the evening, in the Chamber before my Study, (above) in
diverse places of that Chamber appeared flashes of fire, and did not lighten
abroad.

Monday, Julii 23. Mane Circiter 8. Cracoviae. Oratione Dominica finita.
D. I read Mapsama his first words of the book to be prepared of 48 leaves to
be silvered, and would gladly know what I was now to do. By and by at the first
looking into the stone.

E. K. There appeared ten Pikes, all black on the ground in a Circle as it
were, and 1 in the middle, a great Pike, standing up. And Vera, falsis, falsa,
seemed to be written in the middle of that Circle, somewhat blacker then all
the rest, which seemed to be as new molten Pitch.

A voice...... Qui non in 7. vivant in undecimo.

D. I made a short discourse to God of my sincere, and just dealing, hitherto
of the book of Enoch, written, of the book to be silvered, how hardly I can get
it performed to my contentment: (the books being laid on the Table, that of
Enoch, and that as it were silvered) etc. I craved therefore the expofition of
this dark show, and as yet nothing pleasant, or plain: My conscience is clear,
and I trust in the Lord his mercies.

E. K. After this appeared a man all black, naked all over.

..... O thou that art just, and have a clear conscience, answer me.

D. In the name of Jesus.

..... Who commanded thee to be gone? Be gone.


..... I take the Commandment to have been from God.

..... Thou have broken the Commandment of God.

D. I can in no case yield thereunto.

..... You have dishonored the Lord: which is just in the bottom of his own
breast, and gave you warning, and commanded you to go: which is the Lord of
Heaven and Earth.

D. O Lord, my first charge was in these words: Thou shall go from hence with
him to the May 21. Mane. Et a Meridie per Mapsama.... 27 Junii, per A V E.
Emperor: It was also said that he should make provision for this one voyage,
and for the rest God had provided. So that seeing I was to go with him, and he
has not yet provided (doing what he can) what shall I say, or do?

..... True it is, thou have had the victory, and thou, and thy Children have
tasted mercy. Thou art one of those, that when I command thee to leave nothing
with life, yet thou savest the fatlings to offer before him that abhors such
sacrifice.

D. Lord, I know no such act of mine: The Lord be merciful to me. For when it
should come to such a case, God knows, I would spare none.

..... O thou just man [shaking his head] thou art become a Saul.

..... Wherefore did God (answer me) take the Kingdom out of Saul his hands?

D. It appears in the Bible, because obedience was better then sacrifice.

..... Even so, if thou badst been obedient, thy obedience had been regarded.
But I say unto Reg. 1. cap. 15.
thee, the Lord owes thee nothing for thy labor: he bath paid thee to the
uttermost.

As for Lasky, I will give him over to the spirit of error: and he shall
become more poor, so A. L. His plague threatened.
that his own Children shall despise him.

But it shall not come to pass in these days. For I will keep my promise with
you. You do D. O most merciful and just God.
the Commandment of Princes, and Lords, and Masters: But when the God of
Justice (without your desert) entertaineth you, and places you, and dwells
amongst you, (which is able to give you all things) commands you to go, and
that for your own profit, you think it nothing to offend him.

But true it is, That, Obedience pleases the Lord for thererin, his Creatures
glorify him most. Obedience.
All Worship, all Honor, all Love, all Faith, all Hope, all Charity, all the
knitting together of the Heavens consists in Obedience. For if you had been
obedient, the very stones of the earth should have served your necessity. For
the Lord will not be found a liar.

D. O Lord, be merciful to me: I could not do thy Commandment in going without
A. Laskie, and him I was not able to cause to go without provision: And to our
judgment he seems marvellously to be careful to make provision: but still
he has hinderance.

..... Thou (hear thou?) the Lord forgiveth thee: but from henceforth, Dee,
Is pardoned. No more secrets of God to be opened to A. L.
he commands thee that thou open not the secrets and the judgments, which
the Lord shall open unto thee of the times to come, unto Laskie.

D. I pray you to say somewhat unto us, as concerning this book to be silvered:
Else what shall I do, if I have not direction herein, the case being so hard.

..... As concerning the book, when thou art at the end of thy journey it shall
be told.

D. Misericordias Domini in aeternum Cantabo, Amen. Hallelujah.

Amen.
Tuesday, Julii 31. Mane hora 7. Cracoviae.
Oratione Dominica finita, and variis ejaculationibus factis tam ad Gabrielem,
quam Nalvage, Ave, Mapsama, and Ilemer, quam maxim ad Deum ipsum pro suo
lumine, auxilio and protectione: tam in ipsa action quam itinere praesenti,
futuro, versus aulam Caesaris.

After a great hour attendance. At length appeared one all naked, black, and
about the stone a Circle of black.

He said...... Were you not commanded to go after ten days?

D. It is true.

..... And what follows?

D. I appeal unto the mercy of the highest, for that I have not offended upon
wilfulness.

..... Say what follows.

D. It follows that we may drink of a Cup, which we would not, etc. And also
we were willed to provide for this journey, which provision only now is made
for us two, and not yet for A. L. himself.

..... Thus says the Lord, I have stretched out my hand, and you have hindered
me.

I have brought things unto their course, but you have thrust your selves
between.

When I appointed you 10 days, did I not also tell you that the earth was
mine. 10 Days.


Am not I the God of heaven and earth, by whom you breath. The same which also
forsakes not my people in the time of need.

I have opened my wings, but you have refused my cover.

I have brought in madness into the house of the unjust, but you have
prevented D. Forte. Madness procured in the K. and he is now recovered.
my judgment.

And because you have done so, and have trusted more in the mallices of the
world then in my power.

[D. Lord we have not done so: to our knowledges.] D. A scourge to follow unto
us: Lord be merciful.


..... Therefore shall you drink of a Cup that you would not: but it shall not
fall in these days, but in the days to come.

Moreover,

[ E. K. The fire comes out of his mouth as he speaks.]

..... If you go, it is: if you go not, it also shall be.

[D. Make that dark speech plain, for I need you not.]

D. We were willed to go, but with this condition, that Laskie should make
provision.

..... I have not sealed this sin unto thee [D.] but yet I have measured out a
plague, and it shall light A. L.
upon you all. But unto Lasky I have sealed it, and it shall be heavy.

E. K. Does not A. L. use all the means he can for provision making.

..... The time shall come when I am, and will appear unto thee in a Vision, and
of seven Rods thou shall choose one, unto you both I speak: For I will not let
pass my dishonor unpunished, neither will I sell my name like an hireling.

Notwithstanding, in the midst of my fury I will be merciful unto you, when
you think I have forsaken you, then shall the Rod break in pieces.

D. Lord deal with us, as we have just cause to put our trust in thee, not
only in the principal state of our salvation, but also in this Action.

..... You go: I will not forsake you. And what I have said, that I have said.
And it is a living spirit, and shall bear witness of it self. For, great is
the God of Hosts in power, and in all his works, and words most just.

D. Lord, is it thy will that we shall go before this A. L. toward Prage?

..... If you tarry it is, and if you go, it shall be.

D. Lord make that plain unto us?

Thus says the Lord, if you tarry, it is because I am, which am strength, and
triumph against mine enemies, and so against the enemies of those that put
their trust in me: And shall be, because I am just, and because it is.

For, that I am, I am, and my spirit is justice and truth: which before, was,
is, and shall be, and after, world without end.

D. Lord, show us the light of thy countenance, and be not wrathful against us
any longer, be a comforter unto us in our journey to be undertaken.

..... Move me not, for I am gone.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Misericordia Domini sit super nos, nunc and in sempiterna seculorum secula.

Amen.
ANNO 1584.
On Wednesday the first day of August, at afternoon ( hora 3.) we entered on our
journey toward Prage, in the Kingdom of Beam, whither we came on thursday
sevenight after, by three of the Clock, that is exactly in eight days.

We came by Coach, I, E. K. and his brother, and Edmond Hilton, so that we came
to Prage Augusti 9. by the new Calender: but by the old July 30. two days
before August the old Calender.

Miserere Nostri Deus Noster neque in eternum irascaris nobis.
PRAGE 1584.
Augusti 15. Wednesday, we began on the day of the assumption of the blessed
Virgin Mary: in the excellent little Stove, or Study of D. Hageck his house
lent me, by Bethlem in old Prage. Which Study seemed in times past (Anno 1518.)
to have been the Study of some Student, or A -- skillful of the holy stone: a
name was in diverse places of the Study, noted in letters of Gold, and Silver,
Simon Baccalaureus Pragensis, and among other things manifold written very
fairly in the Study (and very many Hierogliphical Notes Philosophical, in
Birds, Fishes, Flowrs, Fruits, Leaves, and six Vessels, as for the Philosophers
works) these verses were over the door.

Immortale Decus par gloriaque illi debentur
Cujus ab ingenio est discolor hic paries.
And of the Philosophers work (on the South Side of the Study) in three lines,
uppermost was this written.

Candida si rubeo mulier nupta sit marito: Mox complectuntur, Complexa
concipiuntur. Per se solvuntur, per se quandoque perficiuntur: Vt duo que
fuerant, unum in corpore fiant: Sunt duae res primo, Sol cum Luna, tamen in
imo, Confice, videbis, fit ab hiis lapis quoque Rebus.

Lunae potentatu, peregit Sol Rebis actu: Sol adit Lunam per medium, rem facit
unam. Sol tendit velum, transit per ecliptica Coelum: Currit ubi Luna recurrit
hunc denuo sublima. Vt sibi lux detur, in sole quae retinetur. Nec abiit vere,
sed vult ipst commanere: illustrans certe defunctum corpus aperte: Si Rebus
scires, quid esset tu reperires. Haec ars est cara, brevis, levis atque rara.
Ars nostra est Ludus puero, labor mulierum; scitote omnes filii artis hujus,
quod nemo potest colligere fructus nostri Elixiris, nisi per introitum nostri
lapidis Elementati, etsi aliam viam quaerit, viam nunquam intrabit nec
attinget. Rubigo est Opus, quod fit ex solo auro, dum intraverit in suam
humiditatem. And so it ended.

MYSTERIORUM PRAGENSIUM Liber Primus, Caesareusque, Anno 1584. Stylo Novo.
Augusti 15. incoeptus ad Omnipotentis Dei Laudem, Honorem, and Gloriam. Amen.
D. FIeri potest, quod anni 1588, and aliorum supputatio, initium suum habent
ab ipsa die Passionis Christi vel Ascensionis in Caelum. Atque Conjectura
levicula.
hac (...), 33, vel 34. anni plures considerari debent: quia tot annorum
Christus erat tempore suae passionis, vel ascensionis: Addas igitur annis 1588,
34. and inde emergunt anni 1622. acqueiste numerus propius accedit ad tempus
annorum diluvii and Arcae, cujus simisitudinem Nota de Anno, 88.
fore circa secundum Christi adventum Scripturae docent:

Vel, cum post creatum Adamum, Anno Mund. 1655, Diluvium Aquae, omnia deleverit
viventia: Post Christi, (nostri Adami spiritualis) restitutionem in Caelum,
Anno 1655 (qui erit anno 1688.) expectamus Diluvium ignis, quo omnia sunt
Immutanda: vel Charitatis and ardoris Christiani magnum futurum specimen.

Non faciet Dominus DEVS verbum, nisi revelaverit Secretum suum ad servos suos,
prophetas. Leo rugiet, quis non timebit? Dominus Deus loquucus est: Quis non
prophetabit?

Amos, Cap. 3. B.
Nihil mali invenimus in homine isto: Quid si spiritus locutus est ei, aut
Angelus? Act. Apost. Cap. 23. C.

Dico enim vobis, quod multi Prophetae, and Reges voluerunt videre, quae vos
videtis, and non viderunt: and audire quae auditis, and non audierunt. Lucae
10. E. Matthaei 13. B.

Charissimi, nolite omni Spiritui credere: Sed probate Spiritus si ex Deo sint:
quoniam multi pseudoprophetae, exierunt in mundum. In hoc cognoscitur Spiritus
Dei. Omnis Spiritus qui confitetur Jesum Christum in carne venisse, ex Deo est,
etc. Johannes Epistola 1. Cap. 4. A.

Quisquis confessus fuerit, quoniam Jesus est filius Dei, Deus in eo manet, and
ipse in Deo, etc. Cap. eodem C.

Paulus ad Corinthios, Epistola, 1 Cap. 1. b.
Gratias ago Deo meo semper pro vobis, in gratia Dei, quae data est vobis in
Christo Jesu, quod in omnibus divites facti estis in illo, in omni verbo and
omni scientia (sicut testimonium Christi confirmatum est in vobis) ita ut nihil
vobis desit in ulla gracia, Expectantibus revelationem Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, qui and confirmabit vos usque in finem sine crimine, in die Adventus
domini nostri Jesu Christi. Fidelis Deus per quem vocati estis in Societatem
Filii ejus Jesu Christi Domini nostri, etc. Societas Jesu.


D. Noto Revelationem and adventum Christi secundum: deinde confirmationem quae
respicit alium adhuc finem temporis: unde de Regno Christi hic in terris,
secundum Joannis Apocalypsim, videri possit hic locus aliquem praebere gustum,
etc.

Paulus ad Corinthios, Epist. 1 cap. 1. D.
Quae stulta sunt mundi, elegit Deus, ut confundat sapientes: and infirma mundi
elegit Deus, nt confundat fortia: and ignobilia mundi, and contemptibilia
elegit Deus, and ea quae non sunt ut ea quae sunt destrueret, ut non glorietur
omnis caro in conspectu ejus. Ex ipso autem vos estis in Christo Jesu, qui
factus est nobis sapientia a Deo, and Justicia, and Sanctificatio and
Redemptio. Ut, quemadmodum scriptum est. Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur.

Paulus ad Corinthios, Epist. 1. cap. 2. C.
Nobis autem revelat Dens per Spiritum suum: Spiritus enim omnia scrutatur,
etiam profunda Dei, etc. Vide praecedentia and sequentia in eodem capite.

Pragae. Prima Actio, Anno 1584. Wedensday, Augusti 15. Mane horam circiter 9.
D. We thanked God for his safe bringing us hither, to the place appointed by
him: We desired him to direct us, as the rest of our Action requires: And
thirdly, for the Book with silver leaves, to be prepared, we required
instruction, as we were promised.

Anon after E. K. his looking into the Shew-stone, he said, I see a Garland of
white Rosebuds about the border of the Stone: They be well opened, but not full
out.

D. The great mercies of God be upon us: and we beseech him to increase our
faith in him, according to his well liking.

E. K. Amen.

E. K. But while I consider these buds better, they seem rather to be white
Lillies.

D. The eternal God of his infinite mercies, wipe away our blackness and sins,
and make us pure, and whiter than Snow.

E. K. They are 72 in number: seeming with their heads ( alternatim) D. 72
Angels.
one to bend or hang toward me, and another toward you. They seem also to move
circularly toward the East: but very slowly. In the midst of this Circle,
appears a little fire, of the color of yern, hot; ready to melt: from which
fire to every one of the said lillies, is a fiery beam extended; which beam
toward the end, is, of more whitish fiery color, than it is near the center.

A voice. -... E. K. A voice comes shouting out from the Lillies, saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy: and all the lillies are become on fire; and seem to tumble
into that fire. And now they appear again distinctly, as before: And the fire
remained in the center still: and the emanation of beams, came from it, still
to the foresaid lilly buds.

E. K. I hear a sound, as though it were of many waters, poured or streaming
down in the clifts of great Rocks and Mountains: The noise is mavelous great,
which I hear coming through the Stone: as it were of a thousand water-mills
going together.

A voice...... Est.

Another voice...... Seems to pray over, and quo modo est.

A voice...... Male and in summo: and mensuratum est.

E. K. I hear a great roaring, as if it were out of a Cloud, over ones head:
most perfectly like a thunder.

Another voice...... The Seal is broken.

Another..... Pour out the sixth Violl that the earth may D. Vide
Apocalypseos, cap. 16. sed videtur quod non sequenter ordine, veluti quis ex
textu judicaret; Ast non asseritur hic effusam esse etiamsi saepe and olim
vindicatum requirebant illi qui sub altari sunt: nondum illis erat concessum,
etc. Sic hic dici potest.
know her self [Viola Sexta.]

These are the days of woe, that are spoken of.

E. K. Now I see beyond like a Furnacemouth, as big as 4 or 5 Gates of a City.
It seems to be a quarter of a mile off: out of the Furnace-mouth seems a
mavelous smoke or smother to come. By it seems to be a great Lake of pitch:
and it plays or simpreth, as water does, when it begins to seethe. There
stands by the pit, a white man, in a white garment tucked up: his face is
mavelous fair; he says very loud.

A white spiritual Creature...... Ascend.

E. K. Now there comes out of the Lake, a thing like a Lion in the hinder
parts, and his fore part has many heads, of diverse fashions: and all upon one
trunk of a neck. He has like feathers on his neek. He has 7 heads: Three on
one side, and three on another, and one in the middle: which branch from the
neck is longer than the other, and lies backward to his taile-ward. The white
man gives him a bloody Sword: and he takes it in his forefoot.

The white man tyeth this Monster his 4 legs with a chain, that he cannot go,
but as one shackled, or fettred. Now he gives the Monster a great hammer, with
a seal at that end where the hammer strikes, and the other is fashioned like a
hatchet.

The white man said...... A horrible and terrible beast.....

E. K. This the white man said with a loud cry.

A voice out of the little fire...... Seal him, for two years of the Seven:
For, so long is his power.

The Stars, with the Earth, even to the third part, are given unto thee: The
fourth part thou shall leave untouched.

E. K. The white man takes the hammer, and strikes him in the forehead of
that head which is in the middle, and lies down backward toward his tail.

E. K. Now all this vision is vanished away. The Stone is clear.

E. K. Now Madimi appears, and she seems to be bigger than she was.

Madimi...... The blessing of God the Father, the Son, and (in the Father and
the Son) of the Holy Ghost, in power and comfort rest upon you, take hold of
you, and dwell with you, that you may be apt to receive the comfort of my
childishness? and the reward of such Innocents, as my voice bears witness
of. You both, the Spirit of God, salute you: which always comfort the Just,
and is the strength and stay of such as are Elected: of whom it is said, Mittam
illis Angelum, in Adjutorium.

D. Are you Madimi (in the name of Jesus) that I may so note of you?

Mad...... I am Madimi, and of that order, wherein the wonders of God are
wrought with Madimi est ex ordine potestatum.
power, with you, as my words are: with my self, as my creation is.

Lo, as I have often Vide 26. Junii.
promised you, so in the time of your necessity and grief, I visit you.

D. Thanks be to the Highest.

Mad...... Not as the friends of the world do, but as a comforting spirit:
exalting the servants of God, and cherishing them with celestial food: But my
mother is at hand, which opens Matter Madimi.
unto thee, the will of God. Believe me, many are the woes of the world, and
great are the sorrows that are to come: For the Lord prepares his Rainbow,
and the witnesses of his account: The Rainbow. Apocalips. 4.
and will appear in the heavens to finish all things: and the time is not long.

Blessed are those that believe; for faith shall flee from the Earth, and her
dwelling places shall be Faith shall hardly be found on the Earth.
in caves, and unknown mountains, and in parts of the Earth which the Lord has
kept secret for such as shall triumph and rejoice in the Judgment to come.

1. Woe be to women great with child, for they shall bring forth Monsters.

2. Woe be unto the Kings of the Earth, for they shall be beaten in a Mortar.

3. Woe be unto such as paint themselves, and are like unto the Prince of pride;
for they shall drink the blood of their neighbors, and of their own children.

4. Woe be unto the false preachers, yea seven woes be unto them; for they are
the teeth of the Beast.

He that has ears, let him hear. Seven Woes.


5. Woe be unto the Virgins of the Earth, for they shall disdain their
virginity, and they shall become Concubius for Satan, and despise the God of
Righteousness.

6. (...) unto the Merchants of the earth, for they are become abominable:
(...), they are ^ the earth, and the (...) meat of Kings. But they are foolish:
(...), they shall fall into the (...) that they have dug for others.

7. (...) be unto the books os the earth, for they are corrupted; and are
become a wrasting stock, and (...)
firebrand to the conscience.

Stay a season, for my mother comes.

D. We read over the premises, and so conferred of the verity and weight of
them. And all (...) while Madimi stood still in E. K. his sight (as E K. told
me:) But because we were (...) to stay, I moved no question: but (...) to have
some understanding, how my wife and children (at Craecovia) did. Hereupon
Madimi said as follows.

Mad...... Hear what I say unto thee [D.] The King of darkness whetteth his
teeth against thee, ^
and (...) with great rage to overwhelm the world upon thee: And he seeks the
destruction of thy (...), and thirdly thy overthrow: The life of thy Children;
yea, he tempts thy wise with (...), and to be (...) into her self.

D. Why with despair?]

..... But his lips are sealed, and his claws made dull: that when he would bite
he cannot: And where he (...) the blood follow to not.

But hear what thy friend says unto thee: Both in her self, and by him that
moves her to speak; As thou art the servant of the God of victory, so shall
Madami, my friend.
thou (...) in the God of stretchforth and Conquer. D. Madzilodarp. This name
of God is in ^
Thy wife, thy children, thy servants, and more then that, such as favor thee,
(...) the (...) of thy house; are under the protection and defense of such as
are of power: against whom, neither the rage of such as reign, neither the fury
of Authority (though it has the help of Satan) can prevail. For why? God has
care over thee: But thy faith is sowewhat lower. Take heed of Satan, he will
(...) himself unto thee. But beware of him. For, sin, keeps back Satan his
Traitorous information to be taken head of.
the power of God, which is oftentimes deferred for another season: Yea, even
for the wickedness of one Soul.

Lasky, I look for, but I see not: (...), I (...) my eyes after him, and cannot
find him. (...) A. L.
he has (...) himself behind some Mountain, or is creft into a Cave: for he
appears not.

D. I beseech you, what is the cause thereof? Is he not gone from Cracovia?

Mad...... Sin is the greatest Mountain, and he rejoices when he pleases
himself: and in the (...) of his flesh Crecpeth into a Cave from us.

Lo, I look for him, and cannot see him, yet see all the world over, It is ^
a sign that God is not with him.

D. I beseech you, is he not gone from Cracovia yet?

Mad...... I tell thee, I see him not; I can say nothing of him.

D. Lord, our coming hither was to come with him.

Mad...... Therefore brought I thee hither, that thou should not tarry with
him. Know thou not that God is mavelous in his works? Have thou not heard
of his secret judgments? If thou have, Think he has care over thee.

For also, thy wife and children, and the rest of thy household must be moved My
wife, children, and household must be moved to Grage.
hither.

D. When, I beseech you?

Mad...... Let that be my charge to answer thee.

E. K. Now here appears a little fire like the same, which appeared before:
but it has no beams from it, as it had before.

Mad...... Hic and haec, est Matter mea.

[ E. K. Pointing to the fire.]

E. K. She falls down on her face prostrate: Now she rises again. Matter
Maditni.
This fire enters into her mouth, she is waxen of higher stature then she was,
she has now three faces. Trinity.


D. Now it is the virtue of the Trinity in her so represented.

Mad...... I. And I have a few things to say, and I say.

E. K. I hear a mavelous noise, as of many Mountains falling.

Mad...... Arise, and believe. The time is come, that of the foolish I will
make the wise. And of such as are sinful men, my anointed: if they incline
their ear unto my voice. IF.


E. K. The noise is mavelous: And which of the mouths does speak, I cannot
discern.

Mad...... First, thou shall write unto Rodulphus, as I shall enspire thee.
Then shall thou go RODOLPHUS.
unto him, saying, That the Angel of the Lord has appeared unto thee. --

[ E. K. A great noise still.]

And rebukes him for his sins. [I never heard any such noise: it is as if half
the world were rushing down an hill.]

Mad...... If he hear thee: Then say unto him, He shall triumph, Fear thee not.
D. Either E K V 1. 263. speak not this, or (...) omitted to write it at the
first.


If he hear thee not: Say, that, The Lord, the God that made heaven and earth,
(under (...) he (...), and has his spirit) puts his soot against his breast.

[ E. K. A great noise still.]

And (...) him (...) from his seat. If Dei (...) and (...) cum D. de R.


Lo, this (I swear unto thee) I will do. If he forskae his wickedness, and
turn unto me: His seat shall be the greatest that ever was, and the Devil shall
become his prisoner.

E. K. There came great flashes of fire out of her, and so out of the stone:
and suddenly she was in her former shape again.

D. In the name of Jesus.

Mad...... Where this voice enters, no man has to say: For it is the
beginning, so it is likewise the end.

Therefore enquire not any more now, but cease: For this is the mavelous The
mavelous beginning of this last time.
beginning of this last time.

D. All thanks, Laud, Honor, Glory, and Empire be to the Eternal, Omnipotent,
and our only God of Heaven and Earth.

Amen.
Thursday, Augusti 16. 1584. Mane, circiter horam 8. Prage.
D. (...) finitis, I propounded, as concerning the book to be prepared for the
Angelical writing, etc. And because Mapsama had dealt about that point:
Therefore I required at God his hands, the Ministry of Mapsama herein: if it
were his will.

E. K. Here is Madami.

D. Blessed be the God of Heaven and Earth, who regards the sincere intent of
his silly ones.

Mad...... When seed time is past, who sows his Corn? Or what is he amongst
men that calls back the Sun a minute? So may it be said of you, which were
(...) in sowing, and therefore have let pass the benefit of time, wherein your
seed might have multiplied. Behold, your labors are in vain, in respect of
that you might have received.

..... For August is past with you the first day: And Mapsama wants, not by
himself, but Mapsama.
through your negligence: whose fingers wrought, and made an end of another
work, which was tied to time.

Nalvage was beaten back from you: But you consider not his conflict, neither
thank God for that he has finished for you: with whom [Nalvage] now, you have
no power. For the Receiver and Giver for that time, were of time.

But to the intent that the Heavens may agree, (because they are the light of
him, which is the A paper book to be prepared.
light of his father) I say unto thee that thou must prepare, of fair, and
decent paper, a book. To the intent, that the paper it self may bear witness
against you: and receive that, which should have been printed in Gold.

D. God he knows, and the Heavens, that I did the best I could, to have had
the book silvered.

Mad...... It is so: I will bear witness with thee. But where the watchmen
sleep, and do not their duty: Theft takes place, and the enemies make havoc.

The sins of Lasky are not a few; yea, they are such as have brought in the
Prince of Thieves, which had prevailed: But God was watchman at the inner
doors. For, he doubted of thy faith, and laughed God to skorn. But hear the
voice of him that sits: Leapers and desited people use not to carve at a
Kings Table: for when his Carvers become Leapers, they are not: because they
are expelled.

Even so into my Chambers, and secret judgments enters not the Incredulous,
Proud, and Skornfull sinners. But because he became worse then a Leaper, I
banished him out of my Chambers, for I am more then a King.

Notwith sanding, because I have sworn unto thee for him, I will suffer him
Jajurandum ad Dee, pro A. L.
to be exalted: But in the midst of his Triumph he shall fall, as a proud Tree
does, whose roots are uncertain.

And because thou have believed me, and have not murmured against me, I will be
Misericurdia Dei super D. Cum Imperore Rod. Prophetia de D.
just with thee, And with this Emperor shall be thy abode. And through thy
mouth shall spring a Cedar-Tree, whose top shall touch the Moon, and branches
cover the beasts of the field, the birds of the Air; yea, and a part of the
Seas. Because thou have taken pains for me, I will deal justly with thee, and
reward thee.

The sons of wickedness are proud, because of their promotion; are stout,
because of their Kingdoms and Tominions: But they must fall, because their
building does stand on Mathei 7. D.
sand.

Do my Commandment, be not afraid.

For I have new lessons to teach thee, and new books to open, such as have been
sealed in the wilderness. New lessons. New books.


E. K. She is gone.

D. As concerning the Letter to be written unto Rodolphus, O Lord, I would
gladly know the Argument, and when I should send it.

A voice...... Incipienti, dabitur.

D. I understand this thus: That, when I begin to write it shall be inspired
from God, as was said before.

A voice...... Cease.

D. Deo Nostro Immortali, Invisibili, and Omnipotenti, sit omnis honor, Laus
and Gloria: Nunc and semper.

Amen.
Friday, Augusti 17. Mane. Pragae.
D. Because I would make no delay, for the Letter writing to the Emperor
Rodolphus, I framed my self to write, beseeching God that I might so write, as
might be sufficient for the purpose, etc. And thus I wrote as follows.

Omnipotentis Nostri Creatoris (hristianorum omnium Imperatorum faelicissime, O
Rudolphe) No dicas coram Angels non est Providentia. (...), siastes, cap 5.
tam est hominibus incognita illa, quae cuncta disponit perficitque
PROVIDENTIA, rataque ipsa rerum series and coordinatio (a primo ad ultimum)
quod a plerisque, temere, (...), vel casu, hoc illove evenire modo,
existimentur omnia, quae extra praeterve suorum Consilior m (...), fieri
conspiciant. (...) quibus est men's (...) veritatis lumine collustrara, and ad
multiplices longisque intervallis distinctas rerum consecutiones considerandas,
attention, evidentissime deprehenden illi quidem, Quae, quibus praecurrisse,
tanquam causas, (...) necessarias, also priori, and interdum long
diversissimo, tempore, oportuerat. Atque ut varietatem nunc omittam exemplorum,
(quae, ex aliorum hominum inter se collatis vitis, conditionibus, factisque
adferre possim,) Exemplum satis conspicuum hoc unicum fieri possit: Nimirum
illa, (incredibilis fere) quae inter sacram Caesaream Majestatem vestram, and
humillimum (in Deo) Mancipium me vestrum (ex multiplicibus utrinque
praecurrentibus occasionibus) jam quasi instare videtur, In unum (idemque
admirandum quid) Combinatio, Divinaque conspiratio. Ambiverunt me (Juvenem)
Illustrissimi Imperatores duo: Victoriosissimus ille Carolus Quintus, and
ejusdem Frater Ferdinandus, vestrae Caesareae Majestatis Magnificentissimus
Avus. Hic, Posonii, Hungariae: ille vero, Bruxellae, Brabantiae. Hic, An. 1563.
Ille autem, Anno 1549. Ast clementissimum Imperatorem Maximilianum, Caesareae
vestrae Majestatis Patrem (Immortali glora dignum) jam (...) Hungariae
coronatum Regem, (invitissimo quidem ipso Tyranno Turcico) eodem in Posonio,
eodemque, Anno 63. in deliciis habere coepi: (...) sque rarissimas virtutes,
cum fideliter colere, tum posteritati easdem reddere commendatissimas, opere
quodam conabar Hieroglyphico. Quo etiam in labor exantlando, animus mihi
(...), Austriacae Libelli Monadis Hieroglyphicae Theoremate 20. jam ante 20
annos editi.
familiae; alium fore aliquando aliq em, in quo maxima mea spes, and (...)
Christianorum (...), Res, confirmaretur, (vel (...) poterit,) Optima,
Maximaque. Vestrae igitur Caesareae Majesti, In peratorum Romanorum (ex
Austriacorum Principum nobilissima familia) mea aetate florentium, QUARTO:
Adsum, and ego, Triplicis Alphabeti, litera D D (...)
Quarta. Atque ita (...), ut me ipsum ad pedes Caesareae Majestis vestrae
demisse osculandos offeram: plurimum gavisurus, si qua in re, Christianae
Reipublicae Imperatori tanto, talique, gratus, utilisve esse potero.

Vestrae sacrae Caesareae Majestati, soli, si haec aliquandi u constare
patiemini (neminique detegere velitis) rem facietis valde necessariam.

Superscriptio erat haec.

Screnissimo ac potentissimo Principi ac Domino Domino Rudolpho, Dei Gratia
Romanorum Imperatori semper Augusto, ac Germaniae, Hungariae, Bohemiae, etc.
Regi, Archiduci Austriae, Duci Burgundiae Stiriae Carinthiae, etc. Comiti
Tyrolis, etc. Domino meo clementissimo.

Pragae, An. 1584. Augusti 17. Caesareae Majestis Vestrae Humillimus and
fidelissimus Clientulus

Joannes Dee.

Monday, Pragae, Augusti 20. Mane circa horam 7.
D. Precibus ad Deum fusis, ex more nostro, etc.

1. I propounded: If the letter written for Rodolphus, were as it should be?

2. Secondly, because we were willed to invite the good Angels, for the book
writting, I asked how we should invite them?

3. As concerning our wives, and my familly sending for: I required, when that
should be done?

D. Quickly apparition was made.

E. K. Here is Vriel.

D. Welcome be the light of the Highest.

VRIEL...... Woe be unto the world: for her light is taken away. Woe, woe be unto
man, for the eye of light has for saken him. Woe, woe be to the understanding of
man, for it is led out, with a threefold spirit, Aliquid deest forte. The
Spirit of Pride. This Testimony to be believed upon great displeasure else
the spirit of error and ignorance. And woe be unto such as believe not the
glorious and supereminent light of this Testimony: for they are not written
with the life, neither shall their portion be with the living.

Thus says he that is a mere stone, ( which sits between the seat of light
and darkness) whose wings are great, and more than mighty: wherewith he
gathers the Stars, and the powers that hang upon the firmament of the first
and lesser light: placing them and powering them, in the Spirit of Truth; and
through his own power, the power of the word, whereby all things are, and are
comprehended: in that he is as well in the heavens of Glory, Chastity, and
Message, as also in Heavens of Glory, Chastity, Angels.
places unknown to us.

Behold, those that dig into Nature with dull Mattocks, and dull Spades, are
such, as of every congeled substance can imagine, but not judge: are foolish,
and of the world: whose imaginations, are become the instruments of vanity, and
the piercers of him which is the father of ignorance. Woe be unto them, for
their disputations and doctrines, are dogma's and dull. Woe, woe unto them, for
they are such as please themselves, and are become fathers to many lewd
children: of whom it is written, They are become stiff-necked and proud, and
the followers of their father. Therefore have I gathered my self together, and
am hidden from them; because they are proud and haters of innocence. These
teach not unto you a doctrine, neither are you partakers of their Bankets; for
the Spirit of God, is plain, pure, and most perfect. These breath not upon you,
neither are the Ornaments of your Garlands enterlaced by these: But by him are
you lifted up, that is the God of Justice, and the Discloser of his own
secrets: and the headlong drawer of things to an end. God to us is the
Discloser of his own secrets.


Therefore believe, and dream not with the world: For the world shall perish,
and all her adherents: and shall be cast into the pit of woe everlasting. Read
the Scriptures, and understand them: but wrast them not, with the wicked. Look
into the simplicity, and nakedness of God his Promise.: View the innocence of
some that received them, And let not the wickedness of those that the Lord
made virtuous, go out of your remembrance. But so Triumphs true power, so
gathers he himself together to discomfort the Serpent: Of the lightest he
makes the heaviest, and of the weakest the strongest: And in the weakest
vessels, works he his mercy. And why? Behold, lest the world, in her proud
imaginations, in the ornaments of her pearls, and most precious wits, should
brag, saying, I can compare with the Lord. Hear my voice, for it is of God. The
world brings forth no good thing, neither are the doings of man accepted; but
where the spirit of humility Humility.
dwells. Out of the depth of darkness, has God made light: And lo, the
light is great, and the darkness comprehends it not. So, in the weakest will
he be exalted.

The Spirit that speaks unto you, is he that has a Tower to build, a strong
Tower and a mighty; yea such a one, as has not been from the beginning: No,
not from the beginning. Great is the foundation Vriel has a Tower to build etc.
thereof; for, it is of Iron; But greater are her walls; for they are of
Diamond. Most great are her Turrets; for they are the seven Heads, that behold,
judge, and gather: And they are made of Truth, the Spirit of Eternity. Unto the
laying of every stone, are you made privy, D. and E. K.
And for this Tower are you provided.

1. For lo, the first has appeared, and showed himself mightily. Primus Filius
Spiritus Sanctus.


2. And the second has redeemed, and overcome Satan.

3. And lo, the third appears, and shall visibly show the power of God to all
Nations.

For Now comes the Desolation of the World, And the fall of her pride. And
this is the last Desolatio de qua Propheta loquutus est. Apocalypse. cap. 18. F.
Rod that measures, and shall be broken: For it is said, Now will I hear you
from under the Altar, Now will I revenge the blood of your brethren.

O you ignorant, and of weak faith: Know you not the times that are to come? O
you that spit out the meat of comfort: yea when it is put lovingly into your
mouths. Why are you sorrowful? Why rejoice you not, that the God of Justice is
girded, and has whetted his sword, upon a thousand thousand Mountains of fire?
Why laugh you not the world to scorn? and deride her fornication? weep not upon
her; for she is accursed: Neither wonder at her; for she will be more wonderful.

You have received this Doctrine in Chambers, and in secret D. (...). Tempus
est tacendi and tempus est I quendi veluti de (...) Christi Matthew. 17. B. Marc.
9. B Luc 9. B. 12. A. Constat. Et (...) (...) cap. 10. C. Quod in (...)
audietis, predicate super tecta, etc Luc. 12.
places: But it shall stand in the great City: and upon 7 Hills, and shall
establish her self in truth: Purify the walls, and sweep out the dust and
cobwebs (the works of the venomous) that it may be cast into the River, and
brought into no remembrance.

Yea, it shall sit in Joel, cap. 3.
Josaphat, in Judgment, against the wicked, and shall become a fire engendered
in the cave of Thunders. Therefore, When you are commanded, lift up your heads,
and Fear not.
fear not: for whom, the Heavens shall fight.

But in your selves be patient, and continue to the end: That your Crowns may
exceed the Garlands of the Earth.

Thus says the Lord, Lo, I have promised thee, that my Angel shall Promise of
visitation for the 48. great Calls, and the Holy Book wilting and practicing.
visit thee: And so it shall be. But if I now visit thee, Thus will the world
say hereafter; Lo, he has fained a Doctrine for himself. Lo he excels in
subtilty. When I gave my laws, they were not secret; neither was the place
unsanctified. When the Comforter comes, girdeth himself against the son of
Legissatio manifesta and in (...). Antichristi eversio per Spiritum SS. (...).
(...) Epist. (...) ad These. 2. cap. 2.
wickedness; Then must you be known, and seen unto the Earth.

But I will give thee the choice: Choose therefore, whether thou will banquet
Now: because I have An Election or Choice offered to D. RODOLPHUS Imp.
promised thee: Or tarry, till I see the time more convenient; For lo, if
Rodolph, hearken unto my voice, He shall wonder, and rejoice with thee: And I
will exalt him, above the Kings of earth.

Stay a while: I come again.

D. After he had stayed a while, and read over the premises, and talked of the
manner of the Choice or Election offered: and the dealing with Rudolph: we
thought good to beseech God to regard his promise, for his glory and honor,
and we most humbly to thank him that he would offer a choice to me a man of no
worthiness, nor wisdom: therefore most desirous to be entered speedily into the
School of Wisdom, wherein we might grow, and attend the opportunities of any
thing to be done or said by us; So that (if it were his will) we were, and are
desirous now to be visited, as his most merciful promise imports.

E. K. Now Vriel is here; he has a Chair, and is set down in it: A Vision.
It is like a Throne..

Here I see a green Hill: and I see thereon three men, like learned men, in
Gowns of puke-colour: they have Hats on their heads. Vriel has in his hand a
thing like a rolling-pin (of half an ell long) of Gold.

I see beyond the men, a very fair Park, enclosed with pale, piked, etc. The
Garden of Comfort.
I see Roses and Lillies, and goodly Flowers in one part of it, and fair
running waters in it, and little Hills, and all manner of Birds: And in the
middle of the Park, is a turret, and in the top of that, a round thing like a
Stone, which gives light all the Park over: but without the Park pale, it is
duskish or dark. These three men stand together upon the pitch of the bank of
the Hill that goes down toward Vriel.

There appear three diverse fair ways to the Park, two from the Hill where the
men stand, and one from the place about Vriel.

1. I see one man walk in the Park, und he picketh Flowers, and putting them to
his mouth, they smoke, as the smoke of the snuff of a candel when the candle is
put out.

2. I see likewise another man gathering of Flowers there, and he would put the
Flowers to make them stick on his Coat, but they will not hang on but fall
down, it is so bare.

3. I see a third man, who has his Robes all belayed with lace of gold, great
and small, and diverse precious Stones, and on his head a wreath like a Garland,
very broad beset with very beautiful precious Stones: and he trimmeth himself
all over with the flowers of the Park or Garden, Now the three men are come
from the Hill, before Vriel his seat.

..... I most humbly beseech you that I may have access into the Garden of
Comfort. 1. One of those men says


Uriel...... You shall: I am contented.

E. K. Now they three go toward the Garden of Comfort: they point one to
another, and seem to talk one with another. They go in the path which leads
from him [ Vriel] toward the Park.

Uriel...... These are Wise men, for they shall escape the danger of the [D]
first and the second, He means of the first and second which gathered
flowers, and of the third. Respice (...).
and shall live as the [D] third in comfort and pleasure: For behold, Those
which have entered, and now shall enter, have deserved their reward.

But some there be that enter, and respect not the end; and such shall they be
as he is, which defiles the flowers.

E. K. Now here comes a man from the Park-ward, and meets those three men,
and gives them three very rich garments: they putoff their former garments,
and put on those rich and beautiful garments.

Uriel...... Othersome there be, and go the middle way, because it is the next
and straightest, 2.
and those be such as enter with their own ornaments, which are very poor and
bare, and upon whose garments can hang no pleasure.

Some there are that enter [1] from me (for without me none enters into that
Garden) and 3. Note. (...) sine qua non: and causa proxima and (...) ut
differunt (...).
because I am the light of him that lights by Creation, therefore is there a
way perfect, and bears testimony from me, whereby they are thought worthy,
and are [2] apparelled for that place of pleasure, and so worthily enter.

Lo they enrich themselves, being made rich with the beauty of so pleasant
flowers: and they always drink of the water of wisdom to their comfort and
continuance. Blessed is be that so enters.

Three men The Garden of Comfort and Wisdom.

all worthy to enter: but only one has the proper testimony, etc.

Three men going to Uriel from this Hill

worthy to enter with Testimony.

Uriel sitting in his Throne.



1. He that defiles the flowers, was worthy to enter into our Garden: but
because he came not A defiler of the flowers. The Garden of Wisdom.
hither to my Throne, and so took the way descending from the Hill, [to (...)]
and brought into the Garden of Wisdom, his worldly apparel; which, lo, is
always as a mist between him and true wisdom, yet he thinks himself
satisfied.

2. He whose coat is bare, was also worthy: But because he thought himself
worthy, and visited not my seat, he took the middle way, where are no
ornaments: Therefore he brought in his own nakedness which is so thredbare,
that the flowers fall off it, as from a marble stone, and the waters glideth of
it, as from the back of a Falcon.

Behold, I sit: happy are those, that come unto me.

Lo, you see, you may become wise; with the [1] Cloudy, wise with the [2] bare;
and wise with Three manner of wise men.
those that are [3] advanced; and dwell in true wisdom.

The Gate that thou shall enter into, is a fire of fury, and of revenge: Fury
and Re-Open unto venge.


But be it unto thee, as thy Election is. Even from the beginning, nakedly.
Rudolph, the manner of Gods visitation: Show unto him the holy Vision: for I
will make thee unto Rudelph the Emperor must be made (...) of all. RUDOLPHUS
IMPER. (...) sides, (...).
him an hand, an arm, yea an half body. Yea I will be merciful unto him, and
seal him for my self: and he shall be thy comfort. I will put my fear into him,
and he shall be afraid to sin, and he shall become a rod to those that are
sinful.

Happy are those, whose works are a hope; and whose faith deserves the aid of
my light. This is of God, and I am the finger. Happy are those that are
directed by me. For, in me is the true path and light of direction.

E. K. He is gone.

D. As concerning this Gate (lastly spoken of) whereinto I must enter, that it
is a fire of (...), and of revenge: O Lord, I am afraid, if that phrase be of
any displeasure to me: for I referred my Election to the will of God, as was
for his honor and glory to be granted: And I have long made Petition to God
for your help, and I desire nothing that should make the highest offended with
me. But perhaps the service of God wherein I am to serve him now, (with his
Talent of wisdom to be imparted to me) consists in the execution of the
Justice of God, with a furious and revenging fire, as under the Altar they lie,
and cry for, etc. (...). cap. 6. Uriel...... His voice.


..... Thou have said --

D. All Laud, Honor, and praise be unto the Almighty, wise, and our most
merciful God: now, and ever.

Amen.
Tuesday, 21. Augusti: Ante Meridiem horam Circiter 9. Pragae. Precibus
finitis, and invito Vriele ut nos illuminaret, dirigeret, consolaretur, etc.
E. K. Vriel is here, and about his head at a little distance, is a bright part
of a Circle like a Rainbow, etc.

D. We propounded unto you yesterday (O you faithful messager of the highest)
as concerning this letter, how it is liked: when it is to be sent, and by whom,
etc.

Uriel...... O earth, how great a Monster art thou, and how great is thy
wickedness, which make Earth.
dull man's capacity, and carriest him away into an obscure and rash sense? Not
without a cause art thou hated with the highest; yea, not without a cause are
thy Garments made short.

My brethren, how long will you be grievous to the Lord, how long (I say) will
you be without understanding.

O, how long will you consider your own commodities, and neglect the harvest of
the Lord?

[D. I understand nothing of the occasion of these speeches.]

Uriel...... But behold, for you have chosen unto your selves a visitation, and
have broken the visitation of the Lord. A (...) of our choice made.


For when you were commanded you went not, and unto your selves you choose days
for advantage: Well, I say, Take your choice and become wise: for I am ready to
deliver. I say, prepare your selves, and be ready: But I fear me, (yea, I know
it) that you will become Prepare.
foggy and misty. Notwithstanding thus says the Lord: Since you will become
wise, Chastise your self for a few days, and abstain, and you shall see that I
am a God that can visit, and mightily: I am not man, that my promises may not
be, neither speak I of any thing that lives not, for I am The Promise becomes
life. God well pleased. A new promise to D.
light, and the breath of understanding. Because you have followed my
Commandments (yet some of you obstinately, and rather, as reprehenders then
obedient servants) I will put a snaffle unto Satan, and unto his Ministers, and
thou shall sit in judgment against the wicked: For I will multiply thee, and
thy household: And of thy seed; yea, even of thy seed, will I finder out a
Camber, Camber, vide Anno 1582. 15. Martii.
and will root out a people, which I have long favored. And for this cause
spared D. Forte intelligit Rolandum infantem meum cui vitam reslituit Deus
(miraculose quasi) Cracoviae, An. 1584. Julii 14. Sed Deus tu nosti quod hoc
mihi tam mirum cidetur quam virum Mariae pregnantem censeri, etc. Vide Sept.
21. Misericordiam Dei praemissam.
I him unto thee, for unto him that loves me, will I be a just rewarder. The
branches of the wicked do I cut off, and make worse then the Asses dung: But
unto the faithful will I send honor, and a Crown of rejoicing.

Hui, who is he, that I cannot reward him? Or where dwell thou, (in Heaven,
or in Earth) that art, and rejoycest not by me? If thou follow my Commandments,
and I once begin to love thee?

I have told thee that I will place thee here.

[D. In this City.] D. I must be placed here in Prage.


Uriel...... Not as a Citizen, but as an owner of many houses. But take heed,
thou be be just to me, and do what I command thee.

D. Lord thou know my heart, help, and supply my wants.

Uriel...... Behold, the Corn is not ripe, neither are the Grapes red, nor the
Sun has not yet seasoned NOT YET Stewards Overseers Laborers. The Lord his
visitation is not yet.
them; Therefore, yet, need I not Stewards, but Overseers: And as yet, Laborers
are to me as shadows. Because, not yet, no, not yet is the time of my
visitation: therefore he that brings his Syckle now, must not reap for me,
but must rejoice in himself. Happy is he that tarrieth the Lord, least
afterward the doors be shut, and the feast at an end. All wisdom (and sciences
comprehended in wisdom) that works for himself, is of the world: But the
wisdom that I give, I give openly, and without reproach: that I also rejoyoing
in the wisdom (...) be gl rified, and exalted with a Diadem of honor. When
Sodom cried for vengeance, had I it not ready? Could not I from heaven have
consumed them with the breath of my own mouth? I, in my self know it, and am
witness: But lo, in the pride of their filthiness I had regard to time: And
(that it might Time.
be known to all Nations) licensed my Angels, and gave them power: And lo, then
made a promise D. Promise to Abraham. Seth, the third sen of Adam.
unto all Nations that they should be blessed in Abraham: even the same month
that I destroyed the Sodomites. These things did I, as unto Noe: and unto Seth,
whom I l ved: I made them privy of time to come, and opened unto them my
judgments: because the world should be justly condemned. After the same manner
made I a promise unto you: Lo, after the same manner have I called you A
promise made unto us. The choice misliked. The mercies of God upon us.
to counsel. But you have chosen the lowest, and have refused the highest
places, and have regarded your own comforts, and not my visitation. I commanded
thee not to go into the woods, and to fetter Wolves: neither to saw the Tigers
teeth. I delivered you not unto the wicked, neither suffered I them to rejoice
over you: But I have brought you from death, and from the days of lamentation,
and have dealt with you as faithful brethren do in their divisions: Not that I
forget my self, but that I would be magnified, and that you might see your
wildness, and naked rashness: Many are there upon the earth, which would have
burst with gladness, and have rent their Garments in pieces. If I had touched
them with the least of these Counsels (so I call them, because they are my
secrets) Is it not sufficient that I have brought you [ [To Prage.] A sure help
promised.
.] hither fafe? Have promised you a sure help?

Lo, you wrast me, for what is he of the world, to whom I shall confirm letters?

[D. This is spoken in respect of God his judgment required of the letter.]

They grieve me, because they are the doings of man: O man, let man answer unto
thee, and let it suffice thee, that the mark whereat thou shootest is in my
hand.

My work is not a work of hours nor days. But when I command, do speedily.
When the Do the Lords Commandment speedily. Note, signs. D. I understand not
this.
Thunders fall from Heaven, and burn up the Earth, scale her face, and leave
her naked. Then, Then, will you believe.

Behold, He that is a man, being new born, is accounted a Monster.

Is it not written? Lo, the Lord looked from heaven in his visitation, and in
the midday, and groaned upon her, for she had vexed him. Happy is he that is
ready when he visits: That which I command, let it be done. For when the
Kings of the earth, say, do this: They play not also the parts of their
servants and subjects, but lo, it is done. Suffer me (I pray yo) to have that
favor.

D. Deo Nostro Misericordi, Pio, and Justo, sit omnis Honor, Laus and Gloria.

Amen.
Tuesday, 21 Augusti. Pragae.
After Dinner as we [ E. K. and D.] were in my Study, and conferring of my
choice, and very sorry that we had made our choice not of the best: E. K. saw
Vriel in the stone, which yet stood unput up: and said, he had seen him there
ever since we began: So coming to the stone he said as follows.

Uriel...... Murmur not amongst your selves: But rejoice and be glad, and sound
into the greatness of Gods mercies, which bears all your weakness, and
leads you through the foggy and perilous mists of your daily temptations even
by the hand: And now, not only gives, but also exhorts. I speak with you as
a man. Yea, let me speak with you as a man: You are oppressed with sin, and with
the world, and are not yet apt for the visitation of God. Note our unaptnesse
yet to be visited, Ecclesiastes, cap. 1.


My brethren, God has dealt mercifully with you, has opened unto you these
three ways desirous

D. In malevolam animam non introibit sapientia, nec habitabit in corpore
subdito peccatis, Ecclesiastes, cap. 1.

[ E. K. He speaks other language, I understand not.]

..... That one of you might have entered into the highest Gate. The workman and
the work must be correspondent. To D. Was said, In fac supra. To E. K. in vide.
To A. L. Tu vive.
And why? Because the workman might be able, and correspondent unto the work,
and time (of the Lord) to come. God has done may great things for you: but you
will not see them. Tarry awhile till I come again.

E. E. He is gone beyond a thing like a Hill.

D. After half a quarter of an hour he came again.

E. K. He has a pair of Tables in his hand, made as of white bone: and therein
are many names written orderly, one under another.

E. K. If I thought this to be of God, and this to be Vriel indeed, it were
another matter: but their too much familiarity makes me doubt.

D. The old saying is true in you, Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum.

Uriel...... Believe me, by Heaven and Earth, I am true Uriel.

E. K. He has another Book holden unto him, by one standing by him, who is
like a shadow.

Uriel...... Give ear, say and choose: for after this time, there is no choice.
A new choice, by God his great (...) granted. 73 and a half Dee his age.


Dee, thy age and continuance in this world, in flesh, according to the finger,
and second proportion, which you call Nature, is 73 years and a half: and here
it is [D. pointing to the other Book.]

E. K. He that is like a shadow opens the Book; it seeming to be of yern or
steel. In which Book appears diverse names, as Bamasan, Corsax, Tohomaphala,
etc.

[D. They seemed to be the names of good Angels proper to peculiar men.]

Uriel...... Thou [E. K.] do more than thou art commanded. Yet, cease a while.

[D. Because he [ E. K.] read these names.

E. K. He spreads a thing like a Cloud before them.

E. K. Now he appears again, and the other with him.

E. K. Sudsamna appears in the Book, and against it 46. Angelus (...), E. K.


Uriel...... So much shall thou [E. K.] live by nature, and die violently.

E. K. Now he is covered again.

E. K. Now he is here again.

E. K. Aflafben stands written in that Book, and 73 with a prick over the
upper part of the figure 3.

E. K. The Book is very big and full of names, and numbers against them: the
leaves are very thin.

E. K. Now Vriel opens his book himself; And there appears Aflafben my good
argel. Sudsamna E. K. his good Angel. Vita Naturae, Gratiae.
against Aflafben, 122. And against Sudsamna appears 87.

Uriel...... Beyond the which, you cannot: Notwithstanding this life, is
always given by God, or at the (...) of some one, or mo, of us his Angels. The
other is natural: notwithstanding is shortened through the sin of man. I am a
witness to my self, that these books and words are true.

E. K. Now he is in his Cloud again.

D. After a while, they appeared again, as before.

E. K. They look very gravely on their books.

Uriel...... Behold my brethren, God is ready to open his merciful storehouses
and gates of understanding unto you: But he that lives for himself, and for
the end of this shadow, limiteth his wisdom with this number: and shall both
have an end at once: But he that turns him to D. (...) King (...) did Regnum
4. cap. 20 Note.
the wall, and weepeth bitterly, shall enter into this Book: But he must not
build his own house, but an house for the Lord; Neither must he be visited by
the challenge of promise, but by the mere mercy and good will of God, and at
his pleasure and appointment: He that has understanding let him hear.

Behold, This his pen, is a pen of Steel; But that that I raze withal, is of
Gold, and a piercing Instrument. If therefore your visitation shall be after to
Augusti 23.
morrow, and that you covet to build (because you are men) Then give your names
unto the yern: But if you will remember the Lord, Our new (...) reformed choice.
and add any thing unto his building, faithfully, Then vow your names unto me,
In the name of him which created you. After this time, there is no choice.

Therefore, consider; for, never before, (but once) was this mystery, and mercy
of God opened A great mercy, and mystery.
unto man.

E. K. Now he has drawn the Cloud to him.

D. I am not able (O Lord) to give thee condign thanks for these mercies: But
thy will be done: Not as we will, nor as we have rashly and blindly (before)
chosen: But this is our choice, to be thy servants all the days of our life;
and we desire not long life so much, as the favor which adds those days,
wherein our faith may be fruitful through thy graces abounding in us. I
renounce my former choice, I challenge no promise: But require thee, O God, of
thy fatherly goodness to be my light, director, staff, strength, defense, and
comfort, now and ever, Amen. The former choice renounced. This Day.


Uriel...... Always call unto me for the Testimony and witness of the promise
of God, and the remembrance of this day.

E. K. He has written after the 122 87.
numbers in his own Book, Est, Est.

D. Ad laudem, gloriam, and honorem Dei, Esto, Esto. Amen.


Uriel...... Now deai with Rodolph. and be not slack: for until thou have
talked with Rodolphus.
him, I appear no more.

Thy haste, shall prevent the slander of wicked tongues, whom Satan has
already stirred up against thee.

D. I understand of none.

Uriel...... It is best thou understand it not at all.

E. K. He puts a Cloud over all the Stone, like a white wrink'ed Curtain:
and so disappeareth.

D. But though you appear not, yet of Madimi I may require answer, to know when
my wife and children are to be sent for, etc.

E. K. There is no answer given.

D. Fiat voluntas Dei, juxta illius beneplacitum: cui omnis laus gloria and
gratiarum Actio, nunc and in omne aevum. Amen.

D. I received letters from my wife, that she and her children are well. God
have the praise and thanks therefore.

Amen.
Friday, Augusti, 24. a Meridie. Pragae.
Being willed to deal with Rodolphus, first by letter, and then by speech: I
thought good to send the Letter before written, for the Emperor; by the Noble
Don (...) de St. Clemente, the King of Spain his Praefectus Negotiorum with
this Emperor: and thereupon by Emericus (...), the Lord Laskie his Secretary,
I wrote this to the aforesaid Don Clemente, and sent it this Bartholomew Day.

EA est hominum in terris conditio (Nobilissime vir) ut sibi soli nullus natus
esse videatur: Immo neque sibi ullus omnia sponce nascenria, vel ultro ab aliis
oblata, quae sibi maxim sunt necessaria recipiat. Mucuae inde hominum
emerserunt societates, mutuae amicitiae, mutuae operae, Mutua dona, Rerum
commutatio, and emptionis, rerumque venditionis contractus: Aliique diversi
hominum existunt status, unde hominum inter homines, and cum hominibus
multiplicia procurantur officia, commerciaque. Neque omnium istorum, sola est
utilitas vel (quae (...)) voluptas, scopus ille, vel finis, quem attingere
conantur and student: Sed aliud aliquibus, est propositum quod Divinius quidem
est, quod virtutem vel Honestatem nominare possumus; quae caelitus (...),
hominum informet mentes and orner, sibique coaptet: Adeo ut sedibus illas
reddat celestibus dignas. Illud, illud, ergo est Illustrissime vir quod
excellentiam vestram tam mihi pridie reddid (...), benignam and perhumanam;
Illud est quod vestram refricabit memoriam, and vestrum insigniter acuet
ingenium, in Causa mea, suae Caesareae Majesti tam proponenda, quam
commendanda: eoque tractanda modo, quo illa tractari Arcana debeant, quae a
paucis credantur, and a paucioribus intelligantur: verissima licet sint, and ex
sese utilissima. Quo citius Caesarea sua Majestas, mirabilent hanc and maximam
Dei, non Providentiam solum sed bonitatem etiam amplexus fuerit, eo cit us and
abundantius, meae ad illum legationis constabit sinceritas, bonitas and
utilitas. Voluissem equidem hunc inclusum libellum, (...) inclusas vestrae
(...), ipsemet atrulisse. Sed (cum venia sit dictum) ex digiti pedis mei,
offensa cuticula, non came (...) ho lie pedes venire. Proinde amico meo hoc onus
imposui, ut (cum vestrae Excellentiae manuum deosculatione) omnia mea vobis
orferat servitia: hocque, quicquid est, pro sua Caesarea Majestate, traderet
munusculi.

Prage 24. Augusti 1584. Joannes Dee.


The Superscription of this Letter was thus,

Illustrissimo Domino, Domino Don Gulielmo de Sancto Clemente serenissimi atque
Catholici Hispaniarum Regis Negotiorum apud sacram Caesaream Majestatem, etc.
Praefecto, Domino meo Observandissimo.

Monday, Augusti 27. Mane circa 9. Pragae.
Precibus finitis, I propounded to God, of Madimi four things.

First, what was the cause of the error recorded, Febr. 18. this Anno 1584. at
Lasko of Sir Henry Sidney his death?

Secondly, In what sense is this to be understood, which Madimi willed me to
say to Rodolphus, An Angel of the Lord has appeared unto me?

Thirdly, Madimi said as concerning the time of my wife and children and
household to be moved hither, Let that be my charge to answer thee?

Fourthly, Madimi willed me to write to Rodulphus: And I have done, and caused
it to be delivered to Don Wilhelmo de Sancto Clemente, the Spanish Ambassador,
to deliver it to the Emperor. God prosper it. Amen.

E. K. Here she is.

D. The eternal roots of verity bring forth fruit, to the comfort of such as
delight in the pure verity for the service of God, etc. And you Madimi, as a
Minister of the Highest in verity, are unto me welcome.

Mad...... Even as man's fingers [or a thing,] touching, moving, or forcing an
instrument Causa sine (...) Note this phrase of sound.
musical, is the cause, without the which it cannot sound, or drink up the air;
which again seeking issue, and feeling a stay, is the [objectum] cause of
concord or dissonancy, according to the inward spirit and imagination of the
thing that moves, or of the finger moving; So the earthly part of man, which
has no motion of it self, (radical) moves by touch or finger (whatsoeve)
spiritual, and sends out sounds; not according to her self, but according to
the fiery, yea invisible, and spiritual power, wherewithal it is moved.

Hereby we learn, that man's body, and his organical motions, has three manner
of movers; centraliter, Three movers in man con curring.
by the property and perfection of the Soul, a superiore, and by descension,
from the Angels or participants of understanding: E contrario, and ascending,
spirits wicked, and tempters, all moving.

But here you must note, That as the Sun depriveth the Moon in respect of her
end, which is to ^.
give light, but not of her self; So do the Angels and higher powers drown and
overshadow the soul in man when they are present: working from God and in
themselves, (as from abov) and not by the soul as any root, or first cause of
the motion.

But when the Devil enters, and ascends, he works not by force, but by
enticement, and so Note the manner of the (...) in, or by man.
allureth the soul, to grant of his possession: whereby he enters and becomes
strong.

Those that have ears let them hear; for my words are wisdom, and the grounds
of many Sciences.

Then, by a similitude, is the world wax: Man's body wax: and Mundus Humaenum
(...), etc. tanquam Cera.
the natural motions of things, naturally extended, wax also: But our purpose
is of man; which at one instant receives three impressions: Impressio
Superior, Humana, Inferior.

Missive, Natural, and Offensive.

Whereby you may perceive, That man greatly needs to pray Pray against
Temptation.
against temptation: For the last Seal, is sign of him that owes Impressio
praedominans est consideranda.
the wax, Happy are those, that can watch and pray: for such they are that
grant not any room or interest, to the wicked ascender. D. Per quae homo (...)
per cadem punitur: qui dixit Ascendam, etc. Jam ex Infernali statu, semper
ascendendo tentat.


I answer you: If you be but as a string, Challenge but your own duty: But take
heed, you be in tune.

E. K. She speaks, but I cannot express it.

D. I pray you let nothing of your words, that you utter to us, or before us,
be unrecorded.

Mad...... You are not worthy to write it: for it is the harmony of the
heavens. Stay a while; for I would open that unto you, which I perceive I may
not: but I come again.

[D. We read over the premises, and weighed them as instructions of the three
diverse movers of man's senses internally, etc. And so after a quarter of an hour

E. K. Here she is again.

Mad...... For he that purifieth his house, and straweth rushes, and
beautifieth the chambers with Garlands, is worthy to receive (because of his
aptness) such as are messagers of understanding and light. My friends and
brethren, mavelous is the God of Wisdom in all his doings and works, and full
of variety are the works of his hands.

E. K. Now she speaks again; I understand it not.

..... But to the Answer: The end of my purpose, Satan, perceiving you [E. K.]
as well to be The Answer to the first (...).
moved by him because of your own grant, as by the motion wherewithal you were
moved and illumenated: and being the father of suttlety, and a froward
understanding (...), even in this one sentence; yea, with this one lie, to
overturn, or at least to Hemish the worthiness of our message, and of your
receiving: because he saw the course of nature, and the doings of man, and that
this man Mr. Simon Hagek, young Hagek, would first visit thee. [ Satan about
this time was very busy with E. K. and declared his name to be Satan at (...).
] therefore he thrust in a shingle of his own cutting and nature: Not to the
intent it should An intended lie by Satan.
be credited, but to the intent it should be a stumbling block to the action in
time to come, which is now.

My brethren, he is a mavelous workman: and one that strikes now the most
strings, in a manner, all. But he has his reward: Therefore do I deny it to be
spoken by me, or of me.

D. So by God his Grace, I did conceive, and undoubtedly think, and of many
other things, Reformation of the Records.
besides that, I have occasion of reforming the Records: that the heavens may
agree, as the phrase was used.

Mad...... Many there are not: But such as are, gather them together, let me
sift them.

D. I thank God for that his mercy.

D. Now I beseech you to the second my present request before propounded, it
may please you to give answer.

Mad...... When the King sends a Present to a Noble man, or unto any one that
he favors, Answer to the second in a Parable.
he loves, or delights in: The Messager carries it, delivers it within
his house.

E. K. She seems to smile.

..... He to whom it is sent enjoys it, he uses it; yea, peradventure (being
a dainty dish) eats of it.

Afterward the King sends to him by the same messager, saluteth his household,
and commands him to say: Thus says the King; Go to such a man and salute
him: Tell him that I will visit him, and that I say so.

Behold, he sits still, and (...) not, neither does he the Commandment of
his Superior. For lo, says he: The King commanded me not; his messager came,
and would so. But whether the King will so, or no, I know not.

But hear thou: Thou wicked man, have thou not eaten of his meat, and
enjoyed the benefit of A (...) (...) 8 9. 10. and 11. capita Apocalypseos.
his present before? Yes, A threefold benefit, which shall continue until the
* seventh Angel, and until the third woe.

Man begets a Son, and lo, his wife is with Child, and she (...) for the
time of her deliverance: If the question be moved unto him, (his wife not yet
delivered,) whether he have issue, or fruit of his body, say thou unto me, what
shall he answer?

D. As it shall please God.

Mad...... That is no answer.

D. Then he may say, He is in hope to have the issue his wife goes great
withal, may this seem an answer, (...) beseech you?

Mad...... Though the Child be not yet born, he has issue Deliverance, is, by
reason of the issue, and not called issue of the deliverance: for he is a son
as well unborn as born.

So is it of you: Thou have prayed unto God, and he has heard thee. D. My
prayer unto God for wisdom. Wisdom.


And lo, the issue, which he gives thee is Wisdom. But (...), the Mother of it
is not yet delivered.

For, If woman know her times and seasons of deliverance: Much more does he,
DEVS Matter rerum (...), idem and Pater.
which is the Mother of all things. But thou may rejoice that there is a
time of deliverance, and that thy gift is compared to a woman with child.

For, as the one is, and shall be visible: so is wisdom granted, and shall
appear: (...) sit Deus noster, qui respicit gemitus Pauperum. E. K Not taster
of that he sees, or hears.
yea, a lively, and most perfect Creature.

Behold, the Angels of the Lord have been sent down from God, unto him [E. K.]
here is sight, which is of this household in God: He has brought unto thee that
which he tastes not himself: And yet thou doubtest, saying, How shall I say
the Angel of the Lord has appeared unto me?

Unto thee, [D] we are we have appeared: for unto thee, Note. D How the Angels
of the Lord have appeared to. D which may seem more certain (almost) then as
the phrase is (...) of the Angels appearing to Joseph, in somnis, vide
Matthaei, cap. 2.
.] sent. And because his eye has seen, therefore we have joined him unto thee,
that in the time of darkness thou might see.

D. It is to be made perfect before the time of his visitation.

And before the time of thy visitation thou must be made perfect.

And because it is of thee and not of him: Therefore does not God impute unto
him his offenses, but places in you the figure of time to come.

Supra lib. 15. 1584. Junii 2.

For some there be that naturally shall draw in the (...) of the Lord. And
other some there be, that must have their times and seasons.

For thy household affairs, I say nothing yet, neither for thy Letter sent, or
Messenger. Answer to the third and fourth demands.
Nam Deus agit in (...), sicut vult.

I have nothing else to say unto thee: but blessed be those that believe in the
Lord, for they have their reward.

E. K. She goes away, divided into a great many pieces of fire.

Deo Nostro Omnipotenti, eterno and sapienti: sit omnis honor, Laus and Gloria.
Amen.


Note. At noon, this day I received Letters from the Lord Laskie, from my wife,
and from my brother Nicolas Fromonds in England: how Mr. Gilbert, Mr. Sled, Mr.
Andreas Firmorshem, my Bookseller, used me very ill in diverse sorts.

The Dates of the Letters from England were of the 15. and 16th. day of April
1584. My wife is in great sorrow for my brother Nicholas.

At night after Sun set, Emerich Sontag brought me word from the Spanish
Ambassador, Monday, Augusti 27.
that he had delivered to the Emperor this day my Letters and Book: and that
he took them graciously and thankfully, and said that within three, or four
days he would let the Spanish Ambassador understand, when he would give me
audience.

Deus been vertat: and ad sui nomiuis honorem and Laudem.
Amen.
Saturday, Septembris 1. Ante Meridiem Circa 10. Pragae.
D. As I, and E. K. sat in my little Study: after our talk of diverse matters,
and of my expecting audience at the Emperor his hand, etc. E. K. saw three
little Creatures walk up and down in the Sunshine, about an handful from the
pavyment: and the Creatures themselves very small, not an hundfull long, like
little shadows, or smokes, and the path wherein they walked seemed yellow. They
walked a good while to and fro, till at length I suspected that they were sent
to us; and so prepared the shew-stone: But E. K. said, he had rather see them
thus out of the stone. I said that in the stone we have warrant that no wicked
thing shall enter: but without the stone, Illuders might deal with us, unless
God prevented it, etc. E. K. said again, he had rather deal thus.

..... His meaning is above thy sight. One of the 3. spiritual creatures said.
He in the middle of the Three.....


E. K. Now two of them seem to kneel down in the Sun beams.

..... Blessed be God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, the most
holy and blessed Trinity: One, true, mighty, perfect everlasting and
incomprehensible God.

[D. Amen, Amen, Amen.]

..... Which will be comprehended with those that live in the Heavens D. Rod.
his heart is to be turned by God, but I know not the meaning. D. Sunt duae
literae ultimae in linea Spiritus Sancti in Tertia Tabula.
(the true Church of God) of such as measure him by faith, and not reason:
which has sent us to do his will; Both in that he will turn his heart: And in
that he does vouchsafe to make you witnesses of his secret purposes, and
determinations in hand.

The [1] middlemost said -- I am the midst of the third, and the last [D] of
the spirit of life: Understood in this temporal controversy, and conflict of
man's Soul: but not according to his eternal and immensurable proportion.

The [2] on the right side said -- I am the second of the third, which dwell in
the spirit, and power Flagellum Dei.
of God in earth: I have power to scourge them that resist the power, will, and
commandment of God: and I am one of those that stand, and is perpetual.

For even as the father, son, and holy spirit are one, but of themselves and
being dilated, is full Trinitas and unitas Divina.
of power, and many. So are we one particularly in power, but separated;
notwithstanding, spiritually, of, and amongst others, and dilated in the will
of God, and into the branches of his determinations: but particularly living,
and jointly praising God.

E. K. Now [3] the other (the third) on the otherside stands up, and says.

3..... The Kingdom of God, and of his son Christ: (which is true God, and the
substance of his father, True God of true God) is contrary to the Kingdom of
this world.

D. The Confession and belief of the Catholic Church: not to be talked of now.

E. K. What is that, God of God?

E. K. They are disappeared: but their path appears in the air, in sunbeams
still.

D. Half a quarter of an hour they had disappeared.

E. K. They are here again.

..... Happy are those that are of his Kingdom, for it has no end; yea, happy
are those that are Filii fidei and non rationis bumanae.
the sons of says, and not of the world: which is called Reason. Which is
blind, and is scaled with the mark of destruction. Because she prosecuted, and
put to death the Son of God, the God of righteousness, and light of all that
live.

I am the last, of the first, of the fourth, and I have power to gather up the
blessings D. His name is the last 3. letters of the 1. line of the fourth Table.
of God, and to set them (if they be disdained) in a better soil.

Ejus officium est transplantatio Donorum Dei.

3. For thus says the God of Hoasts.

If he dream and will not hear me Gather up that he has, and that which Rod
if. Vide lib. 15. Maii 28. 1584.
should be given him: that his life may be short, and his house without
comfort: that he may pass away nakedly, as a shadow. Ga Za Vaa


As lo, behold, we go, and we will dwell there; yea, even in the skirts of
their Garments will we take up our habitation. And why?

Behold, this has God said: In the morning watch them, and see how they Angeli
observantes (...) opera and (...).
rise. In the day time give ear unto them, and listen unto their counsels.
Stand over them in the night, and note their filthiness. And when it exceeds
the number, strike. Strike.


We are they that must direct your practices. Note.


..... Behold, let us give Testimony of our names. One of them says.


My name is -- Ga -- E. K. He in the middle.

My name is -- Za D. The three names make one name of 7. Letters, Gazavaa.

My name is -- Vaa

So we are called by position.

Thou shall find us amongst the merciful Tables delivered unto Enoch: and so
unto you.

1. The middlemost I am of the third Table, and am extreme. D. Of the Physic
part.
2. I am of the third, but of the humanity, and the second. D. Note the third
Table here meant, is that of the South, as East, West, South, and North, their
placing is others.
3. And I am the fourth, but Angular, and extreme, Linear of the uppermost. D.
The three last Letters in the uppermost line of the fourth Table.

..... We are gone.

E. K. They are out of sight.

A voice. Follow that which is commanded thee.

D. AEterno, Omnipotenti; Trino and uni Deo, sit omnis honor Laus and Gloria.

D.
Ga -- Vltimus spiritus vivorum. Za -- Flagillator (...) potestati, voluntati,
praecepto Dei. Vaa -- Transplantator Donorum.
Monday, Septembris 3. Mane. Pragae.
D. Nota. Sathanae astutum and violentum Stratagema.
D. There was great disquietnesse in E. K. being come home from our Hosts
house, where he had lain all night upon a form: by reason he had been (which he
never was the like before, as he said) with wine overcome suddenly: yet
intending with himself to take heed of being overshot in drinking of wine:
being requested by the Hosts to give her a quart of wine upon the good bargain
he had in a Clock he bought of her for five Suckats: In this company of
drinking was Alexander, the Lord Laskie his servant, who came with us to Prage.
Unto whom E. K. (when the drink on the sudden had overcome him) said he would
cut off his head, and with his walking staff did touch him fair, and softly on
the neck, sitting before him: This Alexander being half drunken himself, by and
by took those words in great snuff, and went to defend himself, and so took
his weapon to him, and thereupon they by caused Alexander to go down: It was
supper time; and I that night refrained to suppe, and so tarrying at my
Lodging, and looking out, saw Alexander sitting on the great stone against our
Lodging: I called to him, and told him that they were at supper: And he came
over to me, and he had wept much; he complained of E. K. his former words, and
the touch of the staff, how it was against his credit to take that in good
part, and spoke many Soldiers terms of stout words, not worthy the recording.
I, thereupon went to our Hosts house, and would understand the very truth; and
there I found E. K. fast on sleep on a form, most soundly: for which I was
right sorry: And yet better pleased to perceive the words of E. K. which so
moved Alexander (being half drunken) to have been spoken by E. K. when wine,
and not wit, bare rule: and so pleaded long time with Alexander, that of words
spoken so as they were, no such exact account was to be given to him, etc. And
after two hours persuasion caused Alexander to go to bed in our Lodging, where
he used to lie, For he would have gone out, to our former Inn, in those raging
half drunken pangs, he was in: which I thought not good. This Monday morning E.
K. coming home, and seeing Alexander, as he came in; he said, they tell I
should have spoken words, which greatly offended thee yesternight, and that I
touched thee with my staff, etc. I know nothing of it, and shoke hands friendly
with Alexander. Well says Alexander, Si fuisset alius, etc. E. K. came up to
me: I told him how sorry I was for this mischance, and told him of the Watchmen
perceiving Alexander his disquiet mind, and hearing his words, they came to me
and charged me to have a care of the peace keeping (as they did indeed) And
farther said, that Alexander in his rage, said, that rather, or before, he
should cut off his head, that he would cut E. K. in pieces. So soon as I had
expressed that word of this drunken Alexander likewise, (whom now I saw quiet,
and E. K. also quiet) suddenly E. K. fell into such a rage, that he would be
revenged of him for so saying, and for railing on him in the street, as he did,
etc.

Much a do I, Emericus, and his brother, had to stop or hold him from going to
Alexander with his weapon, etc. At length we let him go in his dubblet and
hose, without a cap or hat on his head: and into the street he hasted with his
brothers Rapier drawn, and challenged Alexander to fight: But Alexander went
from him, and said. Nolo (...) Kelleie, Nolo. Hereupon E. K. took up a stone,
and threw after him, as after a dog, and so came into the house again, in a
most furious rage for that he might not fight with Alexander. The rage and
Satan his exceeding vehement Temptation.
fury was so great in words and gestures, as might plainly prove, that the
wicked enemy sought either E. K. his own destroying of himself, or of me, or
his brother, etc.

This may suffice to notify the mighty temptation and vehement working of the
subtle spiritual Note the cause of this recording.
enemy Satan, wherewith God suffered E. K. to be tempted, and almost overcome:
to my great grief, discomfort, and most great discredit: if it should (as the
truth was) have come to the Emperors understanding, except he had known me
well, etc. I was in great doubt, how God would take this offense, and devised
with my self how I might, with honesty, be aleared from the shame and danger
that might arise if these two should fight, etc. At the least it would cross
all good hope here with the Emperor, etc. for a time, till God redressed it.

After I had brought E. K. to some quietness, (by yiedling much to his humor,
etc. and 1 Comfort in time of need.
saying little:) not long after, came my messager from my wise at Cracovia: and
Hugh my servant with him, to my great comfort through her letters, and the full
satisfying of me by Hugh my servant his knowledge farther than conveniently
could be written.

About 2 of the clock after Noon, came this letter to me, of the Emperor his
sending 2 More Comfort in time of need
for me.

Nobilis, Praeclarissimeque Domine, Domine observandissime.

CAEsar, jam jam significavit Domino Legato Hispaniarum, Hero meo, ut
Dominationem vestram Rod.
ad se evocaret, ad horam secundam; qua eam audire cuperet: Dominatio vestra si
ad dictam horam venire poterit: accedet statim Dominum Octavium Spinolam, qui
est Majestati suae Caesareae a Stabulis and Cubiculis. Is enim eam, ad
Majestatem suam introducet. Quod reliquum est, me D. vestrae quam
officiosissime etiam atque (...),

Dominationis vestrae (...)

Arnoldus Vander Box.

Hereupon, I went straight up to the Castle: and in the Note the Original
letter it self is in this Book.
Ritter-Stove or Guard-Chamber I stayed a little; in the mean space I sent
Emericus to see what was of the clock: and Octavius Spinola Chamberlain and
Stall-Master in the absence of the Officer who is sent into Spain.
the Chamberlain, ( Octavius Spinola) spied him out of the Emperors Chamber
window, and called him, who came up to me, and by that time was the Chamberlain
come out to me; and by Emericus he understood that I was the man the Emperor
waited for. He came to me very Hora tertia (...) a (...).
courteously: told me of the Emperors desire to see me, and to speak with me.
So he returned to the Emperor into the privy Chamber, and came out again for
me, and led me by the skirt of the Gown through the Dining-Chamber, and the
Privy Chamber, where the Emperor sat at a Table, with a great Chest and
Standish of Silver, before him, my Monas and Letters by him, etc. I came toward
him with due reverence of three cursies, who showed me a gracious and cheerful
countenance.

Then I craved pardon at his Majesty's hand, for my boldness to send his
Majesty a Letter and the Monas Hieroglyphica (dedicated to his father.) But I
did it of sincere and entire good will I bare to his father Maximilian, and
also unto his Majesty: and that the rather, because I had good proof of the
favor which Almighty God bears unto his Majesty. He then thanked me for his
fathers Book, and did affirm, that he believed me, that I was affectionate unto
his Highness: And of my estemation with the learned of the world, he had heard
by the Spanish Ambassador; and also of my zealous mind toward his grace. And
commended the Book (...), but said, that it was too hard for his Majesty's
capcity; and added, that the Spanish Ambassador told him, that I had somewhat
to say unto him, Quod esset pro sua utilitate. I answered, So I have, and
withal looking back whether any man were in the Chamber or no, I found that we
were alone: Hereupon I began to declare that All my life time I had spent in
learning: but for this sorty years continually, in sundry manners, and in
diverse Countries, with great pain, care, and cost, I had from degree to degree,
sought to (...) the best knowledge that man might attain unto in the world: And
I found (at lengh) that neither any man living, nor any Book I could yet meet
withal, was able to teach me those truths I desired, and longed for: And
therefore I concluded with my self, to make intercession and prayer to the
giver of wisdom and all good things, to send me such wisdom, as I might know
the natures of his creatures; and also enjoy means to use them to his honor
and glory. And in this purpose made diverse assayes: and at length it pleased
God to send me his [ Uriel.
] (...), whereby I am assured of his merciful hearing of my long, fervent,
constant, and (...) prayer, in the cause before specified: And that, His holy
Angels, for these two years and a half, have used to inform me: and have
finished such works in my hands, Books finished.
to be seen, as no man's heart could have wished for so much; yea they have
brought me a Stone of that value, that no earthly Kingdom is of that
worthiness as to be compared to the A Stone brought by a good Angel.
virtue or dignity thereof, etc. And that these things be true, I protested,
and took to witness the God of Heaven and Earth, by whose Commandment I am now
before your Majesty, (said I) and have a message from him to say unto you; and
that is this:

The Angel of the Lord has appeared to me, and rebukes you for your (...). If
you will My message to the Emperor Rodolph done.
hear me, and believe me, you shall Triumph: If you will not hear me, The Lord,
the God that made Heaven and Earth, (under whom you breath, and have your
spirit) puts his foot against your breast, and will throw you headlong down
from your seat.

Moreover, the Lord has made this Covenant with me (by oath) that he will do
and perform. If you will forsake your wickedness, and turn unto him, your Seat
shall be the greatest that ever was: and the Devil shall become your prisoner:
Which Devil, I did conjecture, to be the Great Turk, (said I) This my
Commission, is from God: I feign nothing, neither am I an Hypocrite, an
Ambitious man, or doting, or dreaming in this Cause. If I speak otherwise then
I have just cause, I forsake my salvation, said I.

The Emperor said, he did believe me, and said, that he thought I loved him
unfaignedly, and said, that I should not need so earnest protestations: and
would not willingly have had me to kneel, so often as I did.

Farther I said, His Majesty was to see and understand nakedly, from the
beginning, the All the course of our Actions and Visions, nakedly to be showed
to the Emperor.
whole course of this Angelical leading, instructing, and comforting of me: for
so I was commanded, that I should from the beginning, nakedly open unto
Rodolph, the manner of God his visitation, and show unto him the holy Vision:
Which my charge I am ready to do. The Emperor said, at another time, he would
hear and understand more. I spoke yet somewhat more in the purposes before, to
the intent they might get some root, or better stick in his mind. To be short,
he thanked me, and said he would henceforward, take me to his recommendation
and ca^re, and some such words (of favor promised) he used, which I heard not
well, he spoke so low. In the end perceiving that his will was to end for this
(...), I did my duty with cursie; and at the door going out, I turned back, and
made (...), and so came into the next Chamber, where the Noble Octavius Spinola
came to me again, and with courteous Octavius Spinola.
words, offered me great friendship. I took my leave of him, and so came
through the Ritters Stove or Guard Chamber, and so down, and home. I had a
large hour audience of his Majesty.

Deus been vertat: ad sui nominis Laudem, Honorem, and Gloriam.
Amen.
Wedensday, Septembris, 5. 1584. Mane circiter horam 8. Pragae.
(...) finitis, etc. Repetivi ter hanc Sententiam Mitte lucem tuam (O Deus^)
and veritatem tuam quae nos ducat and perducat ad montem Sanctum Sion and
Tabernacula coelestis Jerusalem.

D. I have to the best of my ability, both written and spoken unto Rodolph, as
I was willed: how it works or takes place in his heart, is known to thee O
God, etc.

Now I am to receive farther instructions, what is to be done in this cause, or
else whatsoever shall please the Highest, etc.

E. K. Now here is Vriel, and a black thing like a Sarcent of silk before D.
Note, Vriel his face now not seen of the eye which had highly offended God.
his face, and over his head behind: by the rest of his garments it seems to
be Vriel.

God make all things white, and make us whiter than Snow: What that black Scarf
imports I know not; but I suspect.

Uriel...... Such as defile the seat of the Soul, and are suffocated with
drunkenness enter E. K. Had on Sunday last been mervallously drunk, etc. Satan.
not into the Kingdom of Heaven, neither can behold the ornaments of the Lord
his beauty.

See, how Satan, how he runs headlong about and through you. See, how he
makes his dwelling place within you: of whom the Lord gave you warning,
saying: Satan seeks to sift you.

Lo, he has done wickedness against the Lord, and against you; for he has
blemished the eyes of your understanding.

[ E. K. He speaks other words between, which I understand not.]

Uriel...... Is not Jesus, God, and the High Priest of the Lord, placed on the
right hand of his Jesus.
Father?

D. He is: we believe it.

Uriel...... Is not Satan (as the Zach. cap. 3. a.
Prophet sait) suffered to stand and triumph on the right hand of the Lord of
Hosts and Justice, as the open enemy of the Lord, and of his anointed.

True it is: and he has almost given you the overthrow. The overthrow almost
given.


D. Assist us O God, and be our strength against this most subtle and mighty
enemy.

Uriel...... But because he is subtle, and has power given unto him for a
time, and has striven against you, not for your own sakes, (but because you
are of the Spirit of the Highes) and against his testimony: Therefore does not
God, in his Justice impute the sins of the eye, unto the The eye E. K. the body
D.
body.

[D. Lord thy mercies are infinte, praised be thy name for ever.]

Uriel...... But commands the [D] eye to be reconciled, as the spirit of
Truth has D. By the eye is understood E.K. the (...) this action, and by the
body is understood John Dee D.
taught.

E. K. He is gone.

D. Glorified be God for his most loving kindness and infinite mercies toward
us frail, and sinful creatures: and we beseech thee to show us the light of
thy countenance, to our comfort and direction.

Amen.

Vide September. 13. of Reconciliation.

D. As I was putting up all, Vriel appeared again, with his black Scarf, as he
did before: but paused a while before he spoke any thing.

D. In thy name ( O Jesu) we attend thy words by thy messager to be uttered.

Uriel...... Give ear unto my voice.

E. K. Now he is become like a great wheel of fire, like a wagon wheel: He
thrust out his hands on the sudden, and so became like a A
wheel full of men's eyes: it turns round, it is full in all places of those
eyes, like living and seeing eyes.

Now comes fire out of it in 4 places. V


Now there is a great Eagle, which is come, and stands upon it: It A great
white Eagle.
is a white Eagle: The wheel turns still, notwithstanding that she stands
on it. I


E. K. She has in her beak, like a scrol of parchment. She has two monstrous
eyes: one like fire red; her right eye as big as my fist, and the left eye, is
Chrystal-like. She stands hovering with her S
wings spread, and her stern or tail spread.

Under the wheel is a great valley, and in it a great City, and a Hill on the
East part of it. And all toward the South are Hills. I


The City is as as big as six of Cracovia: and many ruins of houses in it there
appear.

There is one place in it covered, square like a little Chapel: It O
has a little round pinnacle in the end of it; and over it in the air, hanging
a little fire bright.

There be many like unto fowls, like Ravens, and their heads like N
unto bright fire: They fly into a Country a great way off from this City.

Now Vriel stands beside the wheel, and the wheel is as it was before: and he
as before with the Scarf.

The Eagle cries and skriketh as a Gull, or the Sea fowls do.

Vriel seems to descend from the air above, and to come to the side of the
Shew-stone.

Uriel...... The Lord has chosen you to be Witnesses, through his mercy and
sufferance, not in the D. and E. K, we are Prophers through God his mercy and
sufferance.
office of (...), but in the offices and dignities of the Prophets: which is
always beautified with the wings of the Cherubims, with the voices that cry a
thousand thousand times in a moment before the Lord, and before the Majesty of
his eternal Seat: wherein you do exceed the Which have not such presence (...).
Temples of the earth: wherein you are become separated from the world, and
whereby you are lifted up, as of the household of the Blessed, even by the very
hand and finger of the Highest.

D. Blessed, blessed, blessed, is the Lord to whom Cherubim and Seraphim
incessantly sing, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Zebaoth. Amen.

Uriel...... But that it may appear, that he it is, that reveals, which
gathers the Clouds together, Deus est qui haec (...).
and is the breath of all things that live: Because I say it may appear that
the Lord visits, and is of power, and that the imaginations of man, fly
before themselves, as the dust of the earth does before him that moves it: 1
open unto you a Seal, yet secret and not known. A Seal opened. (...) 13. cap. B.


[D. Zach. 13. -- Et erit dies una, quae nota est Domino, etc.]

Behold, now comes that day, that is known unto the Lord himself, wherein the
Kingdoms of the earth shall begin to fall: that they may perceive how they have
run astray: and how weak they are in the triumph of their pomp.

And now out of Jerusalem, out of the Church of God, and of his Son Christ,
shall pass out and Zach. cap. 13. B.
flow the water of life: That the sayings of the Angels and Spirit of the Lord,
may be verified upon the face of the earth, spoken by his anointed Zachary.

Now shall those days open themselves, which are the days of vengeance. Dies
vindicts. Regnum Christi jam stabilietur.


Now, Now shall these woes, that have been spoken of and sealed, burst out, to
the confusion of the wicked, and the establishment of his Kingdom, which is
anointed.

Behold, I teach thee.

Those that inhabit the holy City, and usurp the authority of the Highest, are
called in remembrance A Prophecy against the Clergy.
before the Lord, and they shall be scattered like unto the mighty hail, that
the spirits of the North have gathered against the day of revenge.

They are become proud, and think there is no God. They are stiff-necked; for
they are the (...) Rod. If
of wickedness. Lo, in the days of Rodolph, shall this come to pass, of whom
the Lord has said, If he hear me, and believe my words, I will place Thee [D]
unto him, as a mighty rock: Divina (...) ipsi Rodolpho (...).
I will open unto thee [D] (for his instructions, and safeguard to come) my
determinations in hand, and lo, to come. And when he has wiped away his
darkness, and offense of his soul, I will appear unto him, to the terror of
all Nations.

For I rejoice, when I exalt such as are weak: And when I help the
comfortless, am I magnified.

D. Thanks, honor, and glory, is due to thee, O our God.

Uriel...... And behold, the day of this visitation, and of the execution of my
judgments, is at An other Seal opened. An. 1588. or which 88 else?
hand: And lo I open unto you another Seal (Because I have said unto you, I am
true, and just.)

In the year eighty eight, shall you see the Sun move contrary to his course.

The Stars [ Forte leese.
] increase their light: and some of them Math. 24. C.
fall from heaven.

Then shall the Rivers run blood:

Then shall the woe be unto women with child.

Then shall the time come to pass, that this Prophecy shall be known. This
Prophecy then to be known, An. 1588. -- D. Which 88? For I have not yet had
(that I remember) the year notified to be 1588. nor yet 1688. etc. Forte An.
1688. This Prophecy is to be known An. 1588.


For lo, the Lord has prepared his Prophet, and he shall descend from the
Heavens: as it is written by Malach. cap. 4. B. Elias shall come.
Malachiah the Prophet.

Behold I will send before that day, (not that day I spoke of, but the great
day of the Lord) Elias again amongst you. D. Note two days.


In the mean season will I be merciful unto Rodolph, and will bring into his
house, such as shall be skillful: unto whom I will give my spirit, to work
Gold, Rod. The beautifying of Rodolph his seat Imperial.
Silver, and the Ornaments of his house. And he shall perceive that I bless
him, In that I have tied him to my Garments.

If, he hear thee not If Vide infra September 22.


Behold, I have one in store: Yea, such an one as cleaves unto Justice. Man is
but a Reed that is shaken with every wind. The pride of Kings, is as the
beauty of a Peacock: See how they run all astray. See how they tempt the
spirits of righteousness.

Lo, (as I have said unto thee) I reserve that wicked King, not that I will be
merciful unto him. (...).
But that he shall shortly perish with an eternal scourge.

And now hear me what I say unto thee. Hereafter, see thou tempt me not:
Neither look for my presence after this order: But for great causes. CAVE.
Uriel only in great causes is to be looked for The end of teaching, or
instructing thus.


For lo, this is the end of Teaching. Now comes in the time of warning and of
counsel.

D. Will you give me leave to speak?

Uriel...... Say.

D. I trust it shall not offend God at any time, to call for [Uriel] his light
in matters dark to us, and above our capacity. Also in Enoch his Tables
understanding and enjoying, we Enoch his Tables.
are to require help of instruction at Ave: and so of other points and
Doctrines already begun, we are to require their help, who have begun with us,
etc.

Uriel...... As far as the Lord has suffered you to enter into his Garden:
Even so far (I say) Taste, and eat.

D. The entrance yet we have not, but the manner to enter: The perfect practice
is the best entrance.

Uriel...... Man speaks not with thee: wherefore do thou wrast the Lord?
All things that are delivered thee are plain.

D. Lord, I do thus speak to be perfectly instructed in what sense your words
are to be understood, when you said: This is the end of teaching.

D. Vriel, or perhaps in the name of God.

Uriel...... Thou have called upon me, and I have heard thee.

Thou have desired comfort, and I have comforted thee.

Thou have the spirit of choice. The spirit of choice Vide 13. September.
Garden of the Lord.


Be it sufficient unto thee, that the Garden of the Lord is open unto thee:
where there is no hunger, nor thirst, but a filling spirit, a comforter.

What care is it unto me, if the Kings of the earth say: Lo, this is not of me.
Lo, this is not of the highest. Note.


D. Ex Dei lumine.

Uriel...... Behold, I am the light, and servant of God: Blessed are This
Testimony. (...) Domini.
those which believe, and are made partakers in this Testimony: by the which
you are become Prophets, and are sanctified for the coming of the Lord.

But lo, why do I speak unto you, who have defiled your selves? I will D. He
puts us in remembrance of our frailty; and offense committed before noted.
take up those things that I have, and will be gone. Lo, blessed is he that
gives ear unto the Lord.

E. K. Now all is vanished away, and he is disappeared: Wheel, Eagle, City,
and all, etc.

D. All laud, thanks, honor and glory be to the eternal, Almighty, most just
Judge, and merciful father our God, the God of Heaven and earth, whom of his
infinite goodness, we beseech to have mercy upon us, and to purify our hearts
and consciences, granting us humble contrition, and sincere confession of our
transgressions and iniquities whatsoever. Amen.

Note. While I was thus requesting God, E. K. made a vow of penance, during his
life: (in token of hearty sorrowfulness for his fault in that days action
noted) never to eat his supper, or evening meal on Saturdayes, during his life;
wherein I beseech the highest to regard E K. His vow of fasting during life.
his inward intent, and his continual memory of the Lord his mercies, in
sparing him when he most had offended him.

D. Deo Nostro vero, vivo, omnipotenti, and eterno sit omnis Honor Laus and
Benedictio, nunc and in perpeturm.

Amen.
Wednesday, September 5. NOTE.
D. The morning of this Wednesday (before I prepared my self for the former
action) I sent Emericus with two Letters to be delivered: the one to the
Spanish Ambassador (giving him thanks for his honorable dealing with the
Emperors Majesty in my behalf) and the other to the Noble Octavius Spinola:
thanking him likewise, and requiring his instruction, or advise how I might
most conveniently proceed in dealing with the Emperors Majesty: The Copy of
which Letter I thought good to record here, that the effect thereof consequent,
might have the light of the Original cause (Divine and humane) annexed.

Illustri and Magnifico Domino, Domino Octavio Spinolae, sacrae Caesareae
Majestatis a stabulis and Cubiculis Domino suo observandissimo.

ILlustris ac Magnifice Domine: Non possum satis condignas vestrae
Magnificientiae agere gratias, pro singulari illa, qua me Heri amplexi estis
humanitate and benevolentia: hominem quidem vobis incognitum, sed tamen
virtutis and veritatis studiosissimum: quique omne reliquum meae vitae
curriculum (Deo sic volente) in hoc co sumere decrevi, ut sacra sua Caesarea
Majestas clare percipiat, sibi, incredibiliter (fere) propitiam fore Dei
Omnipotentis tremendam Majestatem. Atquae quamvis videam multiplicibus multarum
Regionum negotiis, suam sacram Caesareaem Majestatem occupatissimum sepissime
teneri, neque aliis, illisque a me, suae sacrae Caesareae Majestati proponendis
causis, commode vacare, vel posse, vel evidenti aliqua ratione debere: TAMEN,
si aliquis excogitari possit modus, pro loci, temporis, and rerum occasion,
quo sua sacra Caesarea Majestas, ea penes me videre, vel ex me intelligere
dignaretur, (...) illi forent grata: Ea in re, vestrae Illustrissimae
Magnificentiae libentissime audirem vel reciperem Informationem atque Judicium.
Nam in hoc totus ero, ut tempore debito, appareat, Omnipotentis Dei, and suae
sacrae Caesareae Majestatis servitio (Maxim autem, pro Sacrosancta (...)
Catholicae and Apostolicae fidei Illustratione, ac Reipublicae Christian
defenfione, amplificationeque) Addictissimum, devotissimum, fidelissimumque me
esse, ac fore sacrae suae Caesareae Majestatis servitorem.

Opportunitatis flos mature colligi debet: Cito enim fiet marcidus.

4. Septembris 1584.

Illustrissimae Magnificentiae vestrae Paratissimus

Joannes Dee.

Emericus went and delivered my Letter to the Spanish Ambassador: But this he
brought back again; saying, that the Emperor was ridden very early abroad to
Brandeish, or elsewhere: (not certainly being known) and that this Noble
Octavius Spinola was gone with his Majesty.

Hereupon I determined with changing the Date, to Factum erat die 11. September.
sequente.
send unto him at the Emperor his Majesty's returning to Prage. Deus been
vertat.

Mr. Doctor Hagek his son was by

At noon this day

I sent Letters to my wife: to my Lord (...) and to Mr. Paul Hertoll, by the
Messager of Reichenstein, on this side Nesse.

Monday, September. Mane hora 9. Pragae.
D. Precibus finitis; I invited Ga, Za, Vaa, (as being assigned to understand
of Rodolph his doings,) that of them I might receive instructions; that my
proceedings might be answerable as occasion should be given.

E. K. There appears written in great letters upon a right hand (and no body
appearing:) the hand being very big.

Cui est habet:
Cui nihil non habebit.
E. K. And so the hand vanished out of sight: The writing was in the palm of it.

D. After that appeared the same hand again, with his writing

Face, and factum erit,
Vltra, non habeo. Vltra non habeo.

E. K. It vanished away, by and by, hand, writing, and all.

D. I take this (O Lord) in this sense: That I am to proceed, and to do as I
intended, in D Further, I have not to say, or do.
either writing to Rudolph himself, or to the Spanish Ambassador, or to
Octavius Spinola for the Emperor to give me audience, time, and place to hear,
and see the Records and Monuments, which I have to show him: And that when I
had done as was commanded me, that, Then the purpose of God shall also be done.

D. Deus, in adjutorium nostrum intend tuaque nos dirigat sapientia, ad illud
Faciendum, quod tibi maxim erit gratum.

Amen.
Tuesday, September. 11. Hora 9. fere.
Misi per Dominom Emericum Sontagium Secretarium Domini Palatini Siradiensis
literas illas ad Dominum Octavium Spinolam: quas superius descripsi; sed ubi in
illis scripseram qua me heri amplexi estis. Nunc, scripsi, qua me ante paucos
dies amplexi estis, and pro, quique omne reliquum, nunc scripsi quique
reliquum, etc. and pro incredibiliter (fere) propitiam, etc. scripsi, nunc,
Incredibiliter (fere) and modo (...), propitiam fore, etc. Et reliqua omnia
scripsi ut supra annotavi: sed datae erant hae, 11. Die. Septembris. Illae
autem priores, 4. Septembris.

Tradidit istas literas (Emericus) Magnifico Domino Spinolae; jam statim post
prandium Caesareae Majestatis, and crastina die (post missam) pro responso,
venire jussit.

Wednesday, Septembris 12. Mane.
D. This morning, when Emericus Sontag went up to the Castle for answer from
the Emperor: By the Noble Octavius Spinola, he received the effect of this
answer, which I required the same Emericus to write down with his own hand (for
sundry respects;) which his own hand writing I have annexed ad majorem rei
(...). And because his writing is not easy to be read, I have written it
plainer somewhat, as follows:

Responsum Imperatoris, per Dominum Spinolam.

Sacra Caesarea Majestas benign intellexit quae Dominus Joannes Dee, per suae
Majestis Cubicularium, Dominum Octavium Spinolam, proponi curavit: Ad quae, sua
Majestas gratiose sic se resolvit: Quod quandoquidem Latinum Sermonem non omni
ex part exact calleat: praeterea etiam variis and multiplicibus negociis
occupata, non semper ad audientiam vacare possit, videri suae Majestati ut idem
Dominus Dee, cum Magnifico Domino Doctore Kurtzio (qui and suae Majestati ab
arcanis est consiliis, satisque fidus, eruditione quoque insigni pollet)
tractare, and negotia sua concredere velit. (...) quod, sua Majestas praelibato
Domino Consiliario suo, Kurtzio, renunciari curabit. Sin vero, secus Domino
Johanni Dee videbitur, suam Majestatem quomodocunque tandem per occupationes
facere poterit, desiderio Domini Dee satisfacturam.

1584. xii. Septembris.

Emerieus Sontagius manu propria.

Pragae.

D. Which answer, both by word of month, and thus by writing being received by
me: and the said Emericus being (by the Noble Spinola) willed at Evensong time,
to bring my answer herein; which I gave him of my great good liking the same,
and most humble thanks to his Majesty, for so wise and gracious his
consideration had of the cause. I required the same Emericus to understand;
when, and how soon Doctor Curtzius should be made privy of his Majesty's
pleasure herein: and so, after my dispatching of Emericus, I endeavored my
self to render thanks unto God for his mercies, graces, and truth, in these his
affairs: beseeching him to frame my heart, tongue, and hand in such sort, as to
his Divine Majesty, my dutiful service, doing, may be acceptable: as chiefly
of me intended to his honor and glory: And secondly to the comfort of the
godly and elect: And thirdly to the confusion of the proud, arrogant, scornful
enemies of truth and virtue.

Amen.
Thursday, Septembris 13. Mane, hora 7. Pragae.
I received the Noble Octavius Spinola his answer by Emericus, as concerning my
accepting of the Emperor his gracious former answer of condescending to my
request, so much as he conveniently could: which my answer yesterday On
Wednesday.
night, late was delivered to the Noble Spinola. Whereunto he said, that my
Answer would be most acceptable unto the Emperor: and that to morrow, meaning
this Thursday) the honorable Doctor Curtz should understand the Emperors
pleasure herein. Hereupon I willed Emericus to go up to the Castle, and to
bring himself in sight of the Noble Spinola, if he could. Thereby to help his
memory, for warning and information to be given to the said Doctor Curtz: That
so we might come together, so soon, as conveniently might be.

Deo, omnis laus, honor, and gloria.
Amen.
Thursday, Septembris 13. Mane, horam circiter 9. Pragae.
D. Precibus finitis, and the case propounded of the Emperor his Answer, for
dealing with Doctor Curtz, a man of his Privy Council, faithful, learned, and
wise: upon the considerations alleged, I requested of God, his pleasure to be
signified unto me, by some of his faithful and true Messagers: whether I shall
openly and frankly deal with this Doctor, so, as the Emperor, by him may
understand that which he should have done at my mouth and hands originally: And
whether I may, both alone with the Emperor, and before, and with the said
Doctor, deal in this Action as occasion shall serve from time to time, at my
discretion, informed by his secret grace divine. --

D. Nothing appearing, or being heard, in a quarter of an hour space, I
suspected some of our misdoings, to be the cause of the Lord his refraining to
answer: and thereupon I did fall to prayer for mercy and grace, and deliverance
from the assaults and malicious purposes of the Devil against us: And that I
did the rather, because as I felt my good Angel ((...) other good friend) in
virtue, so I felt Pilosum, sensibly, busy, and as it were to errisie me with
my offenses past, or to put me out of hope, at this present, from being heard.
But I held on to pray diverse Psalms, and at length against the wicked tempters
purposely. After my prayers and assuring E. K. that the spiritual enemy was
here busy, and attended to frustrate this days Action: He answered, that
against him [ E. K.] he could not prevail, or accuse him, for his late notable
fault; for he had made a reckoning, and sorrowful bewailing for that his
trespass, to the Lord, and that he doubted not of forgiveness; and that he was
so reconciled to God, that Satan nor any other wicked accuser, could put him in
any doubt of Reconciliation
God his mercy, etc. And he spoke very well both of repentance, Gods mercies,
his justice, and of these Actions.

Mary, he confessed that by reason, he himself was an unmeet person to come
before the Emperor, or Princes, etc. and therefore if it would please God to
discharge him of further meddling, so, by reason he might seem well at ease,
etc. At length, after an hour appeared Vriel; but with a Scarf before his face,
as he had last.

D. God send us the brightness of his countenance when it shall please him.

Uriel...... True it is, that in respect of the terror and force of God his
wrath and indignation in [1] Judgment: Reconciliation is made: through that
power which is given unto the Lamb, Reconciliation of two sorts.
to whom all power is given in Heaven and Earth: But with the [2] congregation,
and the members of Christ his body, the number of the faithful, the Church of
God, you have not made reconciliation, Wherefore Uriel his face is yet covered.
1. 2.
And therefore, are not sinners worthy to behold the face of true light and
understanding: for there is a double Reconciliation: One (and the firs) between
the Conscience and the Judge: through the force of faith and repentance: that
is to say, Reconciliation against Judgment. Another, (the secon)
Reconciliation Vide supra September. 5. The eye was commanded to be reconciled to
the Spirit of Truth.
between the Spirit of Truth, (the Church of Go) and man's Conscience.

Behold I teach you a mystery.

1. Those that are at one with God, shall not be judged with the wicked in the
last Judgment: Justitia Dei.
Notwithstanding the Justice of God is pure, and undefiled: and suffers not
man's fault unpunished. 2. But he that is at one with the Spirit of God, is made
one with him, and without punishment.

For there are many things that God bears witness of, in the soul and secret
Chambers of man, D. Ab occultis meis munda me, etc.
that neither the blessed, already dignified, nor to be dignified, do, or can
know: which is the cause that the soul of man, (after his body sleepet) being
found polluted, is received, and snatched up, of such as are the Messagers of
punishment: and so, according to the multitude of their sins, are A temporal
punishment.
in horror, and punishment. Therefore not all, that are punished, shall be
damned; Neither is it evident unto the Angels, who shall be saved: I speak
generally:

Therefore when you offend, be also reconciled unto the Mother of the house:
that you may have Ecclesiae catholicae reconciliari debemus.
place before such as are reproved.

Herein you may understand the retaining of sin; For the [ Accipite Spiritum
Sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remit (...) eis: and quorum (...), (...)
sunt: Joannes 20. (...). Math. 16. C. 18. C. Si descendero in Infernum; tu
illic es.
] retaining of sin is a judgment: And therefore it is necessary that God
should hold a general day, that those that have trusted in him, and inwardly
have been sorry for their offenses, may also taste of his mercy. Else how could
it be verified, that the Prophet says? If in Hell, thou art also there.

But, here, there is a Caution; All sins that are forgiven by the Church, pass
not the fire: but Ignis purgationis. The perfect assurance by Christ and his
Church or Spirit.
he that is forgiven in his heart by God, in his Son Christ; and [2] reconciled
through the holy Spirit, to the body from whence he is fallen, is safe, as well
from the wrath of God to come, as the punishment due unto his offenses.

And therefore is the reconciling of brethren, of great force. Wherefore Math.
c. 5. D.
has Christ left his body with the Church? Wherefore is he called the bread of
Life?

I say unto you, my brethren, that the body of Christ dignified and glorified,
is true bread; is true comfort, which cleanses sinners that are penitent, and
wipeth away the punishment of adversity.

Happy are those, that eat of him, and that account not his body, as the shadow
of a candle. D. ^.


Behold, I teach you: Even as the Spirit of God fills the Congregation of the
faithful; so does the body of Christ now dignifie, fill and cleanse all that
receive with sorrow: sorrow I mean for their wickedness.

But lo: his body is become an offense unto the world. Many there are that say,
This is Christ: But behold I teach you. Even as all things were made by him,
spiritually: So are all, that are of his Elect, nourished through him, bodily.

Lo, he is become one power, one God; in that he is neither separated from his
body; nor separateth his body from his Church.

After a while I come again.

E. K. Now he is gone away.

D. We read over the premises to our great comfort, in the mean time, while
VRIEL disappeared.

E. K. Now he is here again.

Uriel...... O ye timorous birds, How long run you headlong into the
Wilderness? How long D. Now he answers to (...) request first propounded.
Rudolp.
will you be ignorant? How long will you tempt the Lord with the spirit of
foolishness and error? Behold thou have not judged well of me. Behold thou
have placed me in a low room, and have taken the Garland from my head, and trod
it under thy feet: For, what is Rodolph, that is not at leisure for the Lord,
the God of righteousness, the King of Heaven and Earth?

Are they troubled with things that are greater than I? True it is; for with me
there is no trouble: for where I enter, I set all things in quiet. Will the
Counselors of the Earth, sit in judgment to sift the Lord? O ye fools and
starvelings of the Earth: O you of little understanding. Think you, that you
are able to find light amongst the affairs of the World? true judgment in the
imagination of man? or verity amongst the hoords and corruption of
covetousness and falsehood? If.


If he be not at leisure to hear me: Have not I told thee, that I have another
in store? Lo, I see, all flesh is full of folly.

D. It is not yet done: and therefore we ask counsel of thee; and I thank thee
(O Lord) for rebuking of us, before farther error committed. Spiritus
Electionis quid sit vide pagina sequente. Rodulp. Spiritus (...).


Uriel...... Lo, I gave unto thee, the spirit of choice: and therefore I will
regard thy doing, and will wink at thy weakness. I will bless all that thou
take in hand, and will cover thee with a Robe of Purple; that thou may
understand that all is mine, and that I raise up whom I list. And I say unto
thee again.: Lo, Rodolph has heard thee, And I will pour my Spirit of truth
into thee, and thou shall be a light unto him.

But, now, If he live righteously, and follow me truly; I will hold up his
House with Pillars of If. D. From the East, Comfort and Triumph. Rodolphi
soboles in (...) generationem. If. Secrecy required.
Hiacinct, and his Chambers shall be full of Modesty and Comfort. I will bring
the East wind over him, as a Lady of Comfort: and she shall sit upon his
Castles with Triumph, and he shall sleep with joy.

Moreover I will bless his loins: and his House shall stand to the third
generation: and to the end; for, now, the World has hoary hairs, and begins
to be sick.

If he despise my commandment, I will put the sword against him; and in his
dwelling places shall his enemies banquet. (But those that deal with thee, let
them sow up their mouth: lest being cut with a Razor, they speak not.) For
those that neglect my Judgments I will despise them, and their seed shall
wither, as corn sown out of season: But he that loves me, I will multiply him,
And he that adds unto me, I will add unto him a thousand. Addere Deo quo
modo bonum est: (...) infra. Spiritus Electionis supra Sept. 5.


But lo, thou have the spirit of choice.

D. O Lord open my understanding of that saying.

Uriel...... Quos tu eligis, electi sunt: quo autem despicis, despiciuntur
etiam.

D. Dwell thou in me (O Lord) for I am frail, and (without thee) very blind.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D. Thy glorious name (O Lord) be magnified, praised, and extolled for ever.
Amen.

D. I perceive that I shall not deal with the Doctor Curtz now. Well, I can let
him understand D. I spoke this to E. K.
that I had rather deal with the Emperor himself, and so shift my self of him.

E. K. He is here again.

Uriel...... Yes, deal with him: and hide nothing from him.

D. With Doctor Curtz, O Lord? D. Curtz.


Uriel...... I -- And therefore I said, He that adds unto me, I will add
unto him a thousand: But he that plays with me; lo, I swear, I will blot his
name from life: D. Frankly as my term was in my first request, or question this
day made.


[D] Libereagas: Deus est enim liber.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D. Deo Omnipotenti, Invisibili and misericordi sit omnis honor, laus,
gratiarum actio, and Gloria: nunc and in perpetuum.

Amen.
Thursday, Septembris 13. Mane. Pragae.
Emericus did bring himself in sight of the Chamberlain, the Noble Octavius
Spinola: as I willed him: And he called Emericus to him, and told him, that
this day Doctor Curtz should understand the Emperor his pleasure, to confer
with me, etc.

Emericus about 10 of the clock before Noon being in the Ritters Stove (or
Guard-Chamber) saw Doctor Curtz come out from the Emperor.

Friday, September. 14. Mane, circa 10.
I sent Emericus to Doctor Curtz his house in parva part: with my
commendations; and to say that before, I understood of Doctor Hageck Mr. Doctor
Curtz his desire to be acquainted with me: whereof I was very glad and
desirous: and now I trust that the Emperor his majesty, by his Authority has
taken order with him whereby to begin our acquaintance, and (God willing) our
perpetual friendship. The Doctor was at home, and to Emericus (saying the
effect of my message before noted) the Doctor declared that Captaverat antea
varias occasiones mecum contrahendae amicitiae, etc. and that now he is very
joyful of the occasion offered by the Emperors Majesty: and that this day
sundry affairs did hinder the opportunity of our meeting, but to morrow at any
hour (at my choice) he would be ready to welcome me to his house: and so with
the usual phrase of offering all his services to my pleasure, he sent Emericus
to me with his said Answer.

Quos Deus conjungit, Homo ne separet. Amen.
Quos autem Deus and Caesar copulat, copulatissimi maneant.
Amen.
Saturday, Septembris, 15. A Meridie hora (fere) prima. Pragae.
I came to the foresaid (called Doctor) Curtz: about one of the clock after
Noon, who had all the day been ready to have heard me, if I would so have had
it: but I sent him word in the morning by Emericus, that after Noon, (as now at
this hour) I would come to him. Being come, he entertained me courteously: and
two chairs being at the Tables end, he gave me the preeminence (by a friendly
kind of earnestness) Then he told me, that long since in Germany, he had heard
of my fame, and had seen of my writings: and that he was very glad of the
opportunity now of my coming to this (ity; and that otherwise he was desirous
of my acquaintance, but chiefly seeing the Emperor his Majesty Ore tenus (for
that was his phrase) by word of his own mouth, had willed him to hear what I
had to say to his Majesty. I began and declared my long course of study for 40
years, always, by degrees going forward, and desirous of the best, and pure
truths in all manner of studies, wherein I had passed, and that I had passed as
many as were commonly known, and more than are commonly heard of. But that at
length I perceived only God (and by his good Angels) could satisfy my desire:
which was to understand the natures of all his creatures, and the best manner
how to use D. Studiorum meorum scopus.
them to his divine honor and glory, and the comfort of the elect, and also to
the reproof and confusion of the adversaries of his name and honor. And herein
I had dealed sundry ways: And at length had found the mercies of God such as
to send me the instruction of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Vriel, and diverse
other his good and faithful Messagers, such as I had here now brought books
(about 18) to show him the manner of their proceeding: And that I thought it
good to begin at the last book, which also concerned most this present Emperor
Rodolph. And so I did; and so by degrees from book to book lightly, I gave him
a Rodolph.
taste or sight of the most part, and also let him see the Stone brought me by
Angelical ministry, etc.

All things being seen and heard, that in six hours I could show him: at length
he required of me what conclusion, or summary report he should make to the
Emperor. I answered, as he had occasion of the things seen and heard; but if
he would follow my counsel (somewhat expert in these Divine and Angelical
doings.) That his Majesty was to thank God for his My counsel to Doctor Curtz.
great mercies and graces offered: and that by me one, who most sincerely and
faithfully gave his Majesty to understand the will of God herein, and that his
Majesty was to do, as Mary (the blessed Virgin) did, to lay up all these my
informations in his heart, and to say Ecce servus Domini, fiat voluntas tua,
and so to attend the manner of the Lord his proceeding, while he framed his
life, as it became every Christian to do.

He said, that he would write (for his own memories help) some short note of
his observations of my speeches, and things seen and marked: and that he would
to morrow (being Sunday) or on Monday, if he conveniently could, make a report
to the Emperor, and so with all speed give me to understand further of the
Emperor his Majesty's will and pleasure. Hereupon courteously he brought me
down to the street door of his house; and I came home after seven of the Clock,
and an half, in the evening.

The mercies of God be on me, and his name be magnified and extolled in this
world, and for ever. Amen.

Note. In the mean space while I was thus occupied with the foresaid Mr. Curtz.
E. K. was visited at our Lodging with a wicked Tempter, who denied any Christ
to be: and that as the He also said that in the former my Records that I had
noted many a ly, and untruth.
heart received comfort of all the Members of the body: So that he, who is God,
of all things received comfort by Angels, and other the Members of the world:
and that I was now with one, who would use me like a Serpent, with head and
tail compassing my confusion, etc. he earnestly reviled E. K. in diverse
manners: he said, that E. K. should be damned, and said: moreover, that of our
practices should never come any fruitful end, etc.

D. The eternal and Almighty God confound the Adversaries of his truth and
glory, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Redeemer, and the Triumphant Conqueror
against, Hell, fin, and the Devil.

Amen.
PRAGAE.
On Monday and Tuesday the 17th. and 18th. of September, I sent Emericus up to
the Castle, to listen after answer of that Doctor Curtz his report to the
Emperor, of that he had perceived by me. (But on Monday Octavius Spinola had
sent into the Town for Emericus, Note, the Emperor inclined to (...), etc.
and told him that the Emperor had care and desire to understand my doing with
the Doctor: And therefore asked Emericus if I had been with the Doctor, and he
affirmed that I had. Hereof (said he) the Emperor will be glad: And yet (as I
began to note) Emericus coming on Tuesday in the face of the Doctor in the
Ritters stove; had not one word spoken to I suspect the Doctor does not deal
sincerely.
him, that either he had spoken to the Emperor, or he had not. And therefore I
suspect that the Doctor deals not honestly, faithfully, or wisely in this so
weighty a case. And forasmuch as he told me, that the Emperor his Majesty was
persuaded, that he was pious, etc. perhaps he would be loath; now, to prefer me
to the speech of the Emperor, seeing both he himself, and the rest of his
counsel stood persuaded to the contrary of this King. Hereupon this great
delay, upon sinister report made to the Emperor might follow, etc.

Note. Friday, September. 21. Circa horam 10. Fere, Mane. Pragae.
D. As I and E. K. were together in my Study, earnestly discoursing of
Auricular confession, public confession, and confessing to God alone, and of
the Authority of the Church, and the manner of the same Authority using to
release, or retain fins, E. K. saw one walk on the Table between him and me:
Thereupon I framed me to write, and note what should be showed, or said, E. K.
willed me to set down the shew-stone: So I did, and he looked.

E. K. I see him here with the Scarf over his head and face, until his waste,
but I see his hair yellow behind on his head, etc.

Mitte lucem tuam, O Deus and varitatem tuam ut ipsae nos ducant ex hac valle
miseriae ad montem Sanctum Sion, and ad coelestia tua Tabernacula. Amen.

Uriel...... I am Uriel the servant of the most wise, mighty, and everlasting
God: which visit you for two causes.

The first, that I may open unto you true, and perfect light: such as darkness
comprehends not, infallible, and true meat, the power and spirit of the
everlasting God.

The second, that I may counsel you against the world, and teach you to triumph
against her frowardness. For, who has trusted in the Lord, and has been cast
down? or what is he that has cried aloud, and is not heard? Therefore, I say
unto you; Hear my voice: For I am of truth, and Trinitatis Lux and mysteria per
Vrielem revelantur. Mendacium Obstinatum (...).
put against darkness, and in me are published the light, and mysteries of the
Trinity from time to time, and in all ages unto those that fear, and obey God.

Two things there are which are the seals and marks of Satan: which bring
eternal death and damnation to all such as are noted, or burned with them, that
is to say, lying, and froward silence.

Behold the words of Christ, unto the subtle (your father is a liar from the
beginning, and the Devil.)

Hearken unto my voice: He that [1] teaches false Doctrine, opens [2] his
mouth against truth, or defiraudeth [3] his brother is a liar, and shall not be
forgiven.

1. For first, he sins against his Creator, which created all things in
truth.

2. Secondly, he offends against the truth, and his Redeemer, which is the
son of God, very Christ.

3. Thirdly, he offends against the spirit of God, (of the Father, and the
Son) the holy Ghost: which shall not be forgiven; And therefore does he incur
the rigor of Gods justice, his eternal damnation.

But, I say, give ear unto my words: For, I will sift the dust, and find out
the Pearl, that of a long time has lain trodden under the feet.

I will come again.

E. K. He is gone.

D. We read over the premises, and so expected the rest.

E. K. He is again here.

Uriel...... Now let us join these things together.

All flesh offends, and is a liar. Who, therefore shall be saved, or escape
eternal damnation? Objectio. Solutio.


He it is (I sa) that when he has lied, and spoken against the truth does not
frowardly drowned, and keep down his sin in silence.

For, lying meriteth the vengeance of the Trinity. But he that is wilfully
froward, seals up Mendacium. Ecclesiae Dignitas and Authoritas.
his own damnation: For this cause (my brethren) and to the intent that the
mercies of God might always be ready for sinners; has he provided the light,
and comfort of his spirit, left as a continual workman in the Church and spouse
of Christ.

I teach you briefly: that, he whosoever, opening his mouth against the spirit
of truth; and with Reconciliation to the Church.
wilful frowardness continues in his lying, without reconciliation to the
Church sins against the holy Ghost, and shall be damned eternally.

I come again.

E. K. He is gone.

E. K. He is here again.

Uriel...... Be now therefore admonished (I say) be warned: And considering you
be sinners, acknowledge your offenses, least in the end your sin be against the
holy Ghost, and so not to be forgiven. But herein they err with you that
expound the Scriptures, saying, that man sins, and cannot be forgiven,
because he sins against the holy Ghost.

I teach you, my brethren: that there is no sin against God, but it is against
the holy Ghost:

If so be, in the end, it be shut up with wilful silence. Wilful silence. D.
Finalis inpoenitentia. Testes Angelici. Froward silence.


Whenever, (therefore) you have offended acknowledge, I say, your sins,
before God and his Angels: That God may forgive you, and the Angels bear
witness of your forgiveness, and shut not up your sins in froward silence.

If thou commit adultry, if thou blaspheme the name of God, if thou be a liar;
yea, if thou speak against the truth: yea, if thou say there is no God (as the
Psalm.
foolish do) Despair not; saying, I have sinned against the holy Ghost, because
I am a sinner, and a blasphemer of the name of God, because I have spoken, and
opened my mouth against the spirit of truth: But go unto the Church, which is
Ito ad Ecclesiam.
governed by the spirit of God, and there with hearty, and open confession
disclose, and make plain thy offenses, that the holy Ghost may bear witness in
the spouse, and Church of Christ; That thou have not sinned against him to
eternal death: Because D. Voluntary (...) is contrary to froward lence. Aures
Dei, Manus (...) Vide de Lazaro, Joh. c. 1
thou art not drowned in froward silence.

For, although God bear witness of repentance. Although he hear, and open his
ears, yet consider also he has hands, and must untye those bonds wherewith you
are bound. What are the hands of God, but his spirit, wherewith he makes and
created all things. Therefore when thou have cried out and art sorry, endeavor
thy self also to be lifted up by the hands of God.

Learn a similitude in Christ, which (signifying the power of his Church,)
commanded the offender to go and wash himself: and so he was whole. I speak
this, for thy [E.K.] instruction: I say also unto thee, [E.K.] Go and wash thy
self: For thou art a liar, thou art a drunkard: And therefore thou art a
sinner. And if thou persevere, and shadow thy sins with wilful silence
frowardly, then sealest thou thy self with the second brand, and can not be
forgiven, because thou sinnest against the Ghost.

Act. 3.
Ananias fell down at the feet of Peter, not only for that he lied: but
because after his offense he was wilfully silent.

Here thou may consider the greatness of God his mysteries, and secrets of
his will and of favor, Supra.
that he stretches out unto thee in mercy, for thou art a Child, and must
ascend, and must become a man. The rest after you are refreshed.

D. We went to Dinner to our Host his house.

D. Thanks, honor, glory, and praise be unto the Almighty Trinity, now and
ever. Amen.

D. After we had been at Dinner, they read over the premises, and considered
them quietly.

E. K. Here he is.

D. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the highest, to whom be all honor
and glory. Amen.

Uriel...... Lo, Lo, Lo, (I sa) which of you has an eye, that sees not, (no)
the world: the vanity, and folly of worldlings: and such as are choked with the
mildew of vanity and worldly promotion?

For thus says the Lord; wherein could I show my self more, either unto this
age, or unto this Emperor, then with rebuking him for his sins from Heaven?

Who is able to promise more, or to perform More assuredly.
assureder then I, which lighten, and make all things? Yet they believe not,

(...), they rejoice in their own folly, and despise me: yea, because they
despise thee, whom I have sent with my word unto them.

D. Is despised of Rud, and Curtz.

E. K.

Well, thus says the Lord, they have despised their own Garlands, and have
trodden their food under feet: They have rent their Robes in pieces, and have
cast them into the waves. They are become masterlisse Dogs, for I have forsaken
them. And lo, Rodolph, I will scatter thy bones, and Contra Rud.
thy head shall be divided in many pieces. I will bring in thy enemies over all
thy Kingdoms, and for thy sake shall many thousands perish. He also that
thinks himself wise, if he dye a natural Contra Curtz.
death; then say, I am not, neither that I live with my people.

But because thou have done that which I commanded thee, and have not forgot my
name. Lo, D Fecit quod illi injunctum (...). Pactum misericordiae divinae cum D.
I will plant thee my self, and thou shall grow, and out of thee shall spring a
mighty and a terrible sword: whose Hilts shall be as the Carbuncle, and edge
like unto the sting of a Dragon, and I will not suffer thee to fall: neither
shall thine enemies ride upon thee. Truly, truly, thou shall know I am with
thee.

But be patient: for Satan hunteth hard after thee. Thou shall Sathanas. * Ne
magnitudo revevelationum extellat me, datus est mi hi stimulus carnis (...),
etc. Paulus ad Corinthios secunda, cap. 12.
have always a * prick even unto thy last grave. But therein shall thy faith
be exalted, and thy reward great.

..... I come again.

E. K. He is gone.

E. K. Here he is again.

Uriel...... Lo, for thy labor I will reward thee: And so it shall be. Behold,
I had determined England pardoned for D. his sake.
to have rooted out the English people, to have made a wilderness, and desert
of it; to have filled it with many strange people, and to have tied the sword
to it perpetually.

D. This is no contradiction, for thus this wilderness and filling is to be
understood.

But

D. The filling of it with strangers should have been for the conquest, and in
a manner razing, or defacing of all Cities, Towns, and Castles, and so to have
brought it to a wilderness and desert.

But Lo, I will give thee that land; (only for thy sake) God will give me
England, that is to say, spare it from destruction for my sake, etc. England.
D. Our good return into England D. Perhaps, spiders flying in the air, are
carried by strings of their own spinning, or making, or else I know not how.
Rud. I remained for the most part in Bohemia, and in the Empire, till 1589.
it shall not be consumed.

And after certain months, I will bring thee home; yea, thou shall live till
thou be able to pass the waves without a ship, and to ascend the Hills, as the
Spiders do. Notwithstanding, I will take the Crown from the house, it is in,
and I will place it, as I have Prophesied unto thee. Notwithstanding, for a
time, thou shall live with Caesar.

..... I come again.

E. K. He is gone.

D. O Lord, what shall become of my good friend the Lord Laskie.

E. K. Here he is again.

Uriel...... Of Lasky thus it is said: Thou [D.] have groaned for him, and have
placed him in A.L. A. L. Came to us to Trebon, in Bohemia, An. 1588. post
captum Maximilianum a Polonis, etc. Rud. Number. 11. Psalm. 77.
thy [D.] heart: From henceforth will I reconcile him unto me, and I will cease
my anger upon him, and he shall come hither * shortly. But he is a wanton, and
very prone to sin.

But hear what I say unto thee.

[ E. K. He seems to have talk with one afar off]

Caesar thought thou had had the Philosophers stone, and (as yet) he thinks
so.

Even as I choked the gluttenous Israelites with quayles, so will I choke him
with that secret.

Behold, thou shall write unto him, saying, that he regards not heaven: A
Letter to be written unto Casar. Lapis Philosophorum. A special gift in healing
by the show in this stone.
And say unto him, that thou can make the Philosophers stone, I will perform
it unto thee: Thou shall do it: And I will give unto thee a special virtue in
healing: That whenever thou come hither: Thou shall understand the truth.
And this I do, because they shall not despise thee.

D. O Lord, for me to be despised in doing thy commandment, is honor and
comfort to me: But as concerning thy honor and glory; Thou in thy wisdom
know what is best to be done. R. Peribit. Benedictio Dei sit super nos.
Supra. (...) fac.


Uriel...... Notwithstanding, thou shall see him perish before thy face. Lo,
from this time, I will bless thee marvellously, and I will help thee in all
thy works.

Do thou always:

And make me thy Buckler.

D. What shall I do with Doctor Curtz, as concerning his answer?

Uriel...... Handle him like a man, for he will deceive thee.

E. K. I request you but one thing for all my labor and travel; that is, that
this Doctor might this night be bereft of his life, to the terror of other,
etc.

Uriel...... Have patience, God turns all to his glory, and your commodity.
To morrow I have something else to say.

Deus Noster in coelo, omnia quaecunque volrit fecit: Ille solus est
Omnipotens, aeternus, sapiens, Bonus, Justus and Misericors: Illi debetur omis
Laus, gratiarum actio, honor and gloria.

Amen.
Saturday, 22. September. Mane, Circiter horam 9.
Precibus ad Deum finitis, and variis ad ipsum Ejaculationibus pro (...) and
veritate Dei, etc. and quibusdam de Rudolphi and Curtzii corruptis Judiciis
(qui Dei Misericordias, juxta carnis sensum judicare ausi sunt) [apparuit Vriel
facie velata ut ante.]

Uriel...... ( For this cause say I unto thee) write unto Rudolph, saying, I
can make the Philosophers A Letter to Rudolph the Emperor.
stone: Because I would place thee with them, according to their hope and
imagination: That whilst they think little of me, and of the sweetness of my
message and testimony, I might burst out amongst them; as the mighty waters do
out of Hills, when the earth moves: For I have said unto thee, I will place
thee here; If I sow thee here, what Raven can pluck thee up by the roots. No, I
will hide thee, as the Hen does her Chickens: And I will make thee spring to
their destruction. For why, thou shall overcome that mystery for thy own sake.
Eruptiones (...) ex Terrae motibus. Lapis Philosorum.


D. For the glory of God: his honor and triumph, all good come unto me.

Uriel...... Behold, since they will not tie thee unto them from heaven: Thou
shall tie them unto Caesar futurus.
thee from earth: That thou may rejoice when thou see their destruction,
and be ready clothed for him that is to come.

It was said unto thee, my mother says she will choose an Emperor in It is a
saying of Madimi, Junii 26. 1584. Cracoviae. Ernestus Frater Rudolphi. D.
Blessings offered are promises with conditions. Gold, ex lapide Philosophorum.
(...) crudelis, terribilis, inaudita.
ernest: But it is Ernest that shall sit upon his seat. Behold, 'there shall be
no seed left in him for his wickedness. Yea, the blessings that I have offered
him shall return again; and I will leave his house naked. But when he sees and
has Gold (which is the thing he desires, and those that counsel him, do most
desire him, for) Then shall he perish with a most cruel, terrible, and unheard
of mischief.

But lo, I have written his name within my hand, because I would not forget to
punish him. Behold, Note.
I could send the winds to devour him, and could open the Caves of the earth
to swallow him; which would turn to my honor: But I have a care over you.

Now I am unto you in mercy and wisdom. But I will be with you in terror God in
mercy, wisdom, terror, miracles. Vox Domini ut hominis futura nobis audibilis.
and miracles. And I will deal with you in a higher degree: And you shall hear
my voice, as men do their brethren.

D. What thou will (O Lord) for thy honor and glory: That be.

Uriel...... But those that are his counselors have commanded him, rather then
counseled him, Consiliarii Casaris. R. Possessus Belzagal Cacodamon Turcarum.
to have no dealing with thee at all.

And he is possessed with a great, and a mighty Devil. And behold Belzagal
(which is the fury and Prince of the Turks) does assist him in his wickedness,
for he knows it may come to pass that Turkish, or Rudolphus Raether. My
books from Poland. A. L.
his Kingdom shall be short. But give ear unto me. Fawn thou upon Caesar as a
worldling, that thou may draw him with the world, to see the glory of God:
but to his destruction. For lo, how much more a man's felicity is in this world,
the more shall be the burden of his destruction.

There be that gape after thy books, and speak vainly of things that are not.
Therefore I counsel that they dwell not long with Poland.

Behold, when Lasky comes, he shall not hastily return into Poland: till I
whisper in his ears, He is dead that sought thy life. I have more to say, but
they are not (yet) necessary.

D. I beseech you to tell me when I shall prepare my self to go for my books,
etc.

Uriel...... I speak not, that I know not; but choose thy own time. Now will I
become a Courtier. ^


E. K. He is gone.

Fiat voluntas Dei, ad ejus laudem, honorem and gloriam.
Amen.
Monday, Septembris, 24. Mane hora 8. Pragae.
D. At the first looking E. K. saw Vriel, but covered with his Scarf, etc.
Notwithstanding I said some prayers to God on my knees, and came and said here.
Mitte lucem tuam and veritatem (...) O (...): ut ipsae nos ducart ad montem
Sion, etc.

It is to be remembered that for two causes we repaired to the Shew-stone: the
one by reason of the letter which I had written to the Emperor: and was minded
to go to show it to the Spanish Ambassador before I sent it to the Emperor,
to have his opinion of it, and also to bear it. Secondly, by reason of foul
slanderous words which were spoken of me here at this Ambassador Table: That I
was a Conjurer, and a bank rupt alkimist, and came here to get somewhat of the
Emperor: and that I had sold my goods, and given to the Lord Laskie the money,
and that he had deceived me. To these untruths the Ambassador did reply in my
behalf: for which I meant to thank him, etc.

Uriel...... Even as the accursed, and cast down, most wilfully abhors,
hates, and dishonors, the God of (...), because of his mightiness and power
over him: So do all those that suck and hang upon his dugs, that are coveteous
and desirous of worldly promotion: that gape and thirst after the glory of this
world, abhor, hate, and continually vex and dishonor, such as love Justice, or
dwell under the wings of the God of power and Triumph. Herein may you rejoice,
that you are partakers and innocents ((...) at, and despised with the worl) in
the fellowship of God, and of his Son Christ. Herein may you be glad, that you
are sealed, and dwell with the Fathers, and that you play also upon the Harp
of David: for verily as they are, so shall you be: and as they are made
righteous ^
by reason of their election, and crowned toward eternal Joy; So shall your
Election establish your righteousness, and give you Garlands of eternal
comfort. Those that are on the Seas, are fearful of the winds: And why?
because of the motion of the place, and of the power of nature: But it is not
so, with you: for you dwell in Castles made of marble, wrought out of the
midst of a sure rock, a most stable foundation. For why? I am sure that God
dwells in you, and you in him. Deus habitat in (...) and nos in (...). Image
Christi Paulus ad Cor. cap. 15. F.
Therefore lift up your heads, and rejoice when you are afflicted, and keep the
image of God sincere and perfect in you, that you may always be ^.
merciful in the Image of his Son Christ. But when the Lord opens his mouth,
and calls you together, saying, ^.
Venite and audite: Then lay away all mercy; for the God of (...).
Justice dwells amongst you. Who dwells in a house till it be perfectly
finished? or what is he that puts on a garment before it be made? Be you
assured, that where the (...).
house is finished, and your (...).
garments made, you shall both enter, and be clothed with comfort: Comfort of ^.
wisdom and power. I am mindful of you, and will be mindful of my (...).
promise toward you. And If you remain and dwell [forte together deest] and be
constant in me, you shall pass the ^.
Thunders that are to come; you shall be witnesses of my power: and shall enter
into the ^.
Land of Promise with those that shall be comforted: where these days shall
have an end. O my brethren, this world exceeds in wickedness, and is a
terror to the good Angels: Because of the souls that she devoureth. But when
lightness is rewarded, and Justice sits in place, Then shall she bear no
weight, but be made all one with the bottomless pit. Despise her, despise her;
for she is an (...).

Behold I have entered in amongst you; and it is my Spirit that A Spiritu Dei
sumus ducti ut Domino (...) Domino Gulielmo de Sancto Clemente, (...) Regis
legath heae aperiremus cui mercedem dabit Deus.
leads to the Ambassador from Spain. I will reward him.

Therefore as thou have opened me unto the D. Jacobo Curtzio Consiliario (...).
wicked, so let also the good bear witness of me.

The Lord is become a firebrand in fury, and has armed himself: and has taken
unto him his great Target, and the Spear of his indignation: Accursed are they
that have offended him.

Tum vero aeterni Genii Immortalis (...) and * (...). URIEL, Saniel, Azaelque,
D. Quantum memini in Sibyllae oraculis Graecis and Latinis facilis per (...),
(...) Vrielis (...) ill (...) sunt (...) ad (...). Vide and (...) ascribe.


Quae mala quisque hominum patraverit ante Scientes

E tetris animas tenebris caliginis omnes.

Judicio sistent ad formidabile patris

Magni, Immortalis solium, etc. Orat. Sibyl. page 79.

Ubi sequuntur plura de VRIELE.

And when I separate them in the day of wrath to come, (as one of the fingers
and gatherers in of the (...) of God) Then they shall know that I am URIEL,
which will not forget the wickedness of their hands, nor their blasphemous
mouth, in that day of revenge.

After a certain time comes Michael unto you, and shall show unto you his
bloody Sword; and Prophesia de MICHAELE.
you shall stand under his Banner. He shall hold up his hands, and shall fight
against the Hills for you: and your enemies shall not be. Unto which time,
receive you Light and Comfort: and be contented with adversity in the Lord.

My brethren, it is better to be poor, with those that are Math. cap. 5. (...)
ipsorum est regnum coelorum, etc. D. Erit cum Caesare. I understand not this,
how it is, or shall be verified, or with which Caesar.
poor in spirit: then to be rich with those that are gluttons, and with the
Princes of the Earth

Thou shall be with Caesar, in despite of the Devil.

I have said.

D. Gloria patri and filio and Spiritui Sancto: Sicut erat in Principio and
nunc and semper, and in secula seculorum. Amen.

Note: As I had finished this Action, and was come to my Study door; Emericus
was returned again from the Spanish Ambassador, to whom I had sent him
desirous to know his leisure for me: who had now sent me word by Emericus to
come to diner, and so he would have leisure, etc. Whereof I was right glad; and
went thither to diner: who into his inermost Study (where he himself was
writing of letters) caused me to be brought. And after I had complained of
injury and violence done unto me, by foul slanders, and that, at his Honors
Table: (to which his Honor, in my behalf had replied: and therefore most
humbly, and sincerely I did thank him) I said that the Emperous Majesty himself
could bear me witness, that I used this phrase unto him, that I came not for
his riches as, Non veni ad vos O Serenissime Caesar propter divitias vestras,
ut inde ego dives fierem, sed a Deo missus, non audeo aliter facere quam ejus
ad ve tram Caesaream Majestatem voluntatem declarare, etc. And therefore, How
falsely they slandered me, it was evident: and because I perceive that Doctor
Curtz has not dealt neither with due entertainment of me as of a stranger, or
a Sudent, or a Mathematitian, or of one whom (to my face) he gave great praise
unto, as of one long since of great fame in Germany, and so in his good
estimation, etc. And least of all, as of one, who offered so great courtesies to
the Emperors Majesty as he was made witness of: I thought good to send unto
the Emperors Majesty this letter following, and so read it unto him after
diner, when I showed him Librum Pragensem sive Caesareum; and moreover Librum
decimum, (whose former title was Libri Sexti Mystici Tertiarius) and there
showed him diverse Actions in Latin already translated, because now to
translate so to him of the English, did seem to me both tedious, and to him not
so readily pleasant. All things on his (...) considered, his summary final
conclusion was, as well of the last offer in this my letter, as of the great
actions and divine purposes. For the first he declared that he was lineally
descended out of the consanguinity, of one a Gentleman, but unlettred at the
first, who left his wife, children, and family in Domini Legati Regis (...)
Responsum.
Maiorca, and ascended an Hill there, and in place solitary remained an (...)
year, and at the years end, he came down, but so learned and wise, that all who
knew him before, wondered at it. And that the same man was called Raymondo
Lullio: and that he made that which is called the Philosophers Stone, as in
England (said he) I understand is good record of it: Therefore I see, quoth he,
that it is a truth and possible: and as he has granted the knowledge of it to
one man, so he may grant it to another, etc. And as for the other higher
matters, I perceive that God intends some great matter in this world. But I
am not able to judge or determine of it: But I am of this mind, wherein I can
any way further the service of God, I will be ready and obedient, etc. And as
for the Emperors person himself, I find him of a good nature, courteous, and
most zealously Catholic: yea ready to shed his blood in the cause, if
opportunity required. He understands the Latin well, and speaks
sufficiently well: That is true (quoth I) for he spoke well in Latin to me
diverse things. Moreover (said he) as concerning you, I saw him very well
affectionated, making great account of your book, etc. Therefore you are not to
regard these Dutch men's ill tongues, who hardly can brook any stranger, etc.

Upon farther matter that I had to show him, I offered my ready repair unto him
at all times of his good leisure being called or warned. And he desirous to see
the Stone brought to me by an Angel, willed me to come to morrow also, to
Diner: I promised him, and so with thanks yielded to his honor, I departed
toward my Lodging at Bethelem in old Prage.

The Copy of the foresaid Letter to the Emperor.
MUltis (O Serenissime Caesar) and permagnis (fere omnium) Creaturarum Dei,
immo (...) Dei, and coelestibus haud paucis mysteriis, arcanisque, vestrae
Caesareae Majestatis jussu per me (jam, ante quatuordecim dies) fideliter,
sincere, and diligenter (quantum sex horarum fieri poterat spacio) declaratis,
ac manifestatis: eidem, cui, eadem penes me videnda, audienda, intelligendaque
esse voluistis: Inde, nunc, quae sit vestrae Caesareae Majestari, simplex
(tanquam ab aequo rerum AEstimatore) facta relatio: vel, quod cum relatione
adjunctum Judicium: vel, qualis totius processus excogitata censura: vel,
qualis mecum procedendi, vobis persuasa cautio; vel, quale pro Caesarei vestri
responsi forma, initum captumque consilium, Non sum tam immodeste curiosus, ut
expiscar, Neque aliter, vel alia ratione de sacrae vestrae Majestatis Caesareae
prudenti and gratiosa (in praemissis) Resolutione, sum sollicitus, quam, me
(fidelem, sincerum, and devotum) Dei Omnipotentis, and (in Deo, propterque
Deum) vestrae sacrae Caesareae Majestatis servitorem deceat. Video tamen me
(dum nullum adhuc ad praemissa receperim responsum) per tam alci silentii
(quasi) stimulum, aliquantulum impelli, ut secundo vestram Caesaream Majestatem
admoneam, Ne divinam hane, and divinitus oblatam Misericordiam, tam
inexpectatam, tam magnam, tam inauditam, tam admirandam, tam multiplicem, tam
statui Imperatorio, Christianaeque Reipublicae necessariam, tam certam, tam
paratam, eamque (per Dei Omnipotentis, Caesareaeque Majestatis vestrae, fidelem
servitorem) re ipsa, vobis confirmandam, and administrandam: (si sacra vestra
Caesarea Majestas voluisset) parvi momenti negotium, vel inventum aliquod
humanum, aut fraudem Diabolicam, esse, fuisse, vel fore, ullo modo suspicemini,
vel Credatis. Tali enim and tam gravi vestrae Caesareae Majestatis errore,
Omnipotentis Dei incendi posse furorem vehementer vereor: and ne hanc Dei
misericordiam respuentes, ejusdem indignantem provocetis vindictam, valde
metuo. Quapropter, cum videam Caelum ipsum, and caelestia talia mysteria, non
tali tantaeque curae, vestrae sacrae Majestati Caesareae adhuc esse, quali,
quantaeque optassem equidem: Ego potius quam, ut, vel Deus hujus suae (prius
inauditae) Misericordiae ultroque vestrae Caesareae Majestati oblatae, prorsus
nullum (penes homines) haberet conspicuum judicium, argumentum, Testimonium vel
experimentum: Et potius quam mea (saepe nominata) fidelitas, sinceritas, and
Devotio (sive votum) erga Deum and vestram Caesaream Majestatem, omni (apud
posteros nostros) careret fide, and veritatis manifestae robore: In Dei Nomine,
and ad ejus laudem, honorem, and gloriam: and ut vestrae serenissimae Caesareae
Majestatis satisfaciam desiderio Heroico, De lapide illo Benedicto:
(Philosophorum vocato lapide) infallibiliter videndo, possidendo and utendo:
Assero vestrae sacrae Caesareae Majestati, lapidem eundem me (auxilio favoreque
Divino) conficere posse. Et propterea; Si vestra Caesarea Majestas, me velit
interim, sibi intime charum habere: Et, si, pro dignitate tanti mysterii, and
Beneficii (sibi a me liberalissime and humillime exhibendi) gratiose me
tractare dignabitur (Non tamen alio quidem vel altiori me insigniens Titulo
quam qui vestrae Caesareae Majestatis Philosopho and Mathematico conveniat,)
Hiis literis ore and cord polliceor, sancteque coram Deo Omnipotenti voveo:
Opus illud philosophicum, Omuibus suis numeris perfectum, in manus vestras
Caesareas, (and sine sumptibus vestris ad illud opus perficiendum requirendis)
ac brevissimo, quo fieri poterit, tempore (Nutu Dei) me daturum. De aliis
praeterea Arcanis, adhuc mihi silendum esse video. Nunc autem sacrae Caesareae
Majestaris vestrae gratiosam, liberam, constantemque voluntatem, in praemissis,
non aliter, nisi ex vestro proprio gratioso ore vel ex vestris Caesareis
literis propriis, intelligere Cupio. Nullum enim jam nosco, dignum and aptum,
qui in istis, alissque Naturae and Artis secretis, meus (penes vestram
Caesaream Majestatem) fieri deberet Mercurius.

Tuesday, Septembris 25. Pragae.
Note: I went to Diner to the Spanish Ambassador: and carried with me the
Stone brought me by an Angel; and the fourth Book, wherein the manner of the
bringing of it is expressed. And also I carried with me Librum Sextum Sanctum
Mysticum.

After Diner, when I had showed him these things: his final answer was, that
verily he took the doing to be by good Angel: marry, the matters to be too
great: Therefore (said I) they are for the service of God, and not only man.
He said he was a sinner, and not worthy to be privy, much less to be a doer in
them: Notwithstanding whatsoever he can do therein acceptable to God, he would
be most obedient thereto. He desired a Copy of the A Copy of the letters
desired.
Emperor his foresaid letters, that he might consider circumspectly of the
Contents before he should deliver them; whereunto I consented. Renderiug his
honor thanks I departed.

After my return home, I found E. K. resolved to go from hence to morrow, for
his wife, E K (...) to go in o England as he pretended.
and so straightway into England: which was to me a grief: But what can I do,
but refer all to the mercies of God, whom I have called upon for wisdom to
serve him withal? I have (...) my trust in the Lord, I have not murmured at any
such pangs and tentations hitherto.

The mercies of the Highest be upon me, as I have put my trust in him.

Amen.

Now were we (all) brought to great penury: not able without the Lord Laskies,
or some Poverty.
heavenly help, to sustain our state any longer.

Besides this, I understood of the Queens displeasure for my departure, and of
the Bishop of London his intent to have begun to have accused me of
Conjuration, and so to have had the secret assistance of you know whom.

Tu es Deus fortitudo mea, refugium meum Susceptor meus, and liberator meus.

Amen.
Wedensday, Septembris 26. Ante Meridiem. Pragae.
About 10 and a half of the clock, Dr. Curtz sent with Mr. Simon Hageck his
servant to D. Curtz.
know my lodging: He had passed not far off in a lane on horseback his self
going into the Town, and so met Mr. Simon Hageck at the lanes end, etc.

Thursday, Septembris 27. Pragae.
(...): About 7. of the clock came Dr. Curtz his servant from his Master to
tell me, that his Master would come unto me at 9 of the clock. D. Curtz.


At 9 of the clock came Dr. Curtz on horseback to me, to my lodging (at Doctor
Hageck his house by Bethleem) my wife he saluted, and little Katharine, my
daughter. Mr. Kelly had gotten him into his chamber, not willing to be seen.

After he was come up into my little Study, and there set, in Mr. Kelly his
usual place, and I in mine; I began to complain of the great injury done unto
me here; for I came as a sincere and faithful servitour of the Emperor his
Majesty, intending all goodness and honor unto him: no hindrance, loss or
hurt; neither came I propter divitias Caesaris mihi (...), as I said expressly
unto his Majesty. I was, before I came hither, of good name and fame, both in
this Court, and all Europe over, As you your self Mr. Doctor (quoth I) can bear
me witness: and other in this Court diverse: And that here my name and fame
should suffer shipwreck, where I thought I had been in, a sure Haven of my
principal Patron: My thinks that great in jury is done unto me: I know no
means how to help it, but to give you warning of the envious malicious back
biters that also are about this Court, that as you find occasion, you might
encounter with this evil, and foul monster, in so mighty a Princes Cause
intruding it self.

The Doctor seemed not to know what I meant. I told him, that at a Noble-mans
Table, There was, of great account, who said, that there was an English man,
come to the Emperors, A bankrupt (...), a Conjurer, and Necromantist: who had
sold his own goods, and given the Lord Laskie the money: and that he had
beguiled him: and that now he would fain get some of the Emperor his money
from him, etc. The Doctor seemed greatly to mislike these slanderous words, and
said, that he never heard of any such; with some few words more, of the wicked
manner of back biters.

After this, as (...) the report making to the Emperor, of that I had showed
unto him, at his house, (as before is noted) he said that he had made a plain
and sincere report. Whereunto the Emperors Majesty, had (as yet) given no
answer. And to be plain with you (said he) his Majesty thinks them almost
either incredible, or impossible: and would have some leisure to (...) of them:
and is desirous to have the sight of those Latin Actions you showed me, or a
Copy of them, and especially, of that, which contains a paraphrasis of the
Apostolical Creed. I answered, that my Books I would not deliver out of my
hands: And as for a Copy of them, I would (at leisure) write it, that his
Majesty might have it. And then I told him farther, that because it was so long
before I heard any word of him, I had letters ready to send to the Emperors
Majesty, to have farther declared my mind unto him, and I declared unto him the
tenor of them: and he told me that about three of the clock after noon, his man
should go to the Court, and if then I would send them, his man should carry
them. I answered that I would expect a day or two for the Emperors return
hither. After this we talked of some Mathematical matters: And I showed him the
little Book de superficierum divisionibus, set forth by me and Commandinus,
printed at Pezaro in Italy. He said that he never saw it before: I bad him then
take it with him to peruse: and that if I had another Copy, I would give it
him; but I had none other but that. I showed him also the Propaedeamata
Aphoristica de praestantioribus quibusdam Naturae virtutibus, which he had
never seen before. After this, with mutual courtesies offered on both parts
(after the manner of the world) he took his horse, and returned homeward.

Friday, Septembris, 28. Pragae.
Intending to send the Emperors letter (here before written) to his Majesty,
by my good friend, the Spanish Ambassador, I wrote this letter to send to the
Ambassador in that behalf, and as concerning the credit of these Actions.

Illustrissimo Domino, Domino Don Gulielmo de Sancto Clemente, serenissimi
atque Catholici Hispaniarum Regis apud sacram Caesaream Majestatem, etc.
Legato, Domino suo observandissimo.
Illustris and Magnifice Heroes: Multis hoc probari potest testimoniis and
exemplis, quod illa, quae (preter vulgarium artium and scientiarum decreta)
Nova, and supra vulgariter Studiosorum expectationem, hominibus (licet piis and
candidis quidem) Divinitus revelantur mysteria, cum summa difficultate vel
intelliguntur a paucissimis, vel vix sine suspitione admittuntur, aut creduntur
a (...): Ast qualis, in nostris, (si rectae pieque informatae rostris
adhibeatur judicium) esse potest suspitio? Nam a Deo Omnipotente, per multos
jam annos, fideliter, ardenter, and constanter per preces requisita sapientia:
Una (scilicet quae penes nos quidem) videtur esse radix and occasio tanti
istius Doni obtinendi. Ast in coelesti suo Palatio, ante conditum mundum,
determinata, and assignata erga nos Misericordia and gratia Omnipotentis Dei,
praecipuum, solidum, immobileque hujus tanti mysterii est censendum
fundamentum: In quo mysterio, talis relucet, per potentes fidelesque Angelos
Isagogica Informatio, De Arcanis Dei consiliis, tam in mundi creatione
Creaturarumque naturis, and vero usu, quam in mundi praesentis moxque (...)
statu: Et preterea, de unius Catholicae Ecclesiae (charissimae Jesu Christi
(...), nostraeque piae matris) sanctitate, dignitate, and Authoritate (veluti
in qua etiam est Sanctorum Communio, and Peccatorum remissio) and de multis
nondum per nos revelandis Dei Arcanis Magnalibus and Determinationibus: Quod
tantum abest, ut aliquis (sanae mentis) Christianus, Actiones Nostras Mysticas,
Diabolicas esse frauds, contendere, immo ne suspicari quidem conetur aut
possit: ut potius, tale Arcanum Dei propositum, incredibiliter admirari,
rationem humanam, in eisdem examinandis, subjugare, and Dei erga Electos suos
admirandam misericordiam in istis esse manifestam, humillime, and cum summo
tremore fateri velit: Ego quidem, hactenus, in istis, aliud (fere) nihil, me
esse invenio, nisi Calamum scribae, velociter per me scribentis. Nam visa
auditaque (in mea praesentia) fidelissime, de litera interdum ad literam,
interdum, verbatim, interdum pluribus simul receptis verbis (ipso eodem
temporis momento, quo traduntur) annotare sum solitus. Ast jam in quam multa
excrevit Noster talis labor volumina? Ex quibus omnibns illum fructum,
successumque expectamus, qualem praefixit ille, cujus nutui cuncta obediunt.
Istas autem ad suam sacrem Caesaream Majestatem literas meas: Cum vestra
magnificentia opportunitatem inveniet primam, si meo nomine: humillime eidem
exhibere dignabitur, Tum magno mihi (Divinitus) injuncto, levatus ero onere:
Tum magno, a vestra magnificentia affectus beneficio: Interim vero, Dum suae
sacrae Majestatis Caesareae ad istas responsum dabitur, (nimirum si ad 14. vel
16. dies prius expectandum esset) vel, statim post acceptum responsum (si tam
expedite illud recipere possum, quam quod recepi ultimo) ad iter me accingere
debeo, propter familiam, libros, and aliquam meam suppellectilem, huc (ante
hyemis asperitatem) transferendam. Ubi, cum Caesareae Majestatis gratioso
favore, and sub ipsius Protectione Imperatoria, voluntatem Omnipotentis Dei
implere, pro viribus, and suae sacrae Caesareae Majestati inservire (tanquam
ejusdem Philosophus and Mathematicus) fidelissime, de tempore in tempus,
paratus esse potero.

Illustri vestrae Magnificentiae Addictissimus

Joannes Dee.

I annexed hereunto a Postscript, which follows:
Post-scriptum.
MEarum esse partium, and consultum esse duxi vestrae Magnificentiae
paucissimis verbis significare, quod heri, mane, hora nona, vir egregius, and
suae Majestis Caesareae fidus Confiliarius D. Doctor Curtzius, me humanissime
invisebat in meo ergastulo, and hypocaustato, juxta Bethlehem, ubi videre
poterat Bibliothecam presentem meam, nullam (fere) aliam esse, praeter Sancta
Dei Evangelia and Biblia sacra ipsosque nostrorum mysteriorum libros: Ego autem
quodam humili modo (inter caeteras querelas meas) de tam longa interposita mora
conquerebar, inter ejusdem (de meis rebus) factam relationem, and Caesareum de
eisdem recipiendum responsum. Ille vero se simplicissime Caesareae Majesti visa
auditaque (penes me) retulisse asseruit, nullo suo, de eisdem, adhibito
judicio. Verum, Caesari (dixit) quasi impossibilia vel incredibilia fuisse
visa. Et de responso mihi (in hac part) dando, secum, adhuc, suam deliberare
velle Majestatem Caesaream. Unde ego de literis meis istis, suae Majesti
mittendis, mentionem feci and summatim earundem tenorem, eidem enarravi. Ille
easdem statim habere voluit, ipsi Caesareae Majestati a Meridie mittendas: Ego
quidem Caesaris me velle ad pauculos dies expectare ad ventum dixi. Deinde de
rebus Mathematicis brevissime inter nos habito sermon, illique (ad
pervidendum) dato libello quodam Geometrico (per me and Federicum Commandinum
Vrbinatem) in lucem olim dato, and mutuis, post, utrinque promissis officiis
humanitatis and benevolentiae, abiit.

1584. Sept. 28.

Saturday, September. 29. Die Sancti Michaelis.
The foresaid Letter to the Emperors Majesty, with this Letter to the
Ambassador, and this Postscript: And moreover, (according to the Ambassador
his request) the Copy of the Emperors Letter, all in one uttermore paper
closed (Letter like) sealed, and with superscription to the foresaid
Ambassador; I sent to his honor on Michaelmas day at dinner time, by Emericus
Sontag: Who delivered the same to the Secretary of the Ambassador, and he to
the Lord Ambassador, as he sat at dinner.

Deus been vertat, ad laudem nominis sui.

Amen.
September 29.
Remember that this day (afternoon) I sent Hugh on foot with my Letters to
Cracovia to Edmond, that my folk should not be out of quiet, or afeard to see
Mistress Kelly, sent for, and no Letters to come from me, etc. I writ to the
Lord (...) of our want of money, etc.

Monday, Octobris 1. a Meridie circa 3. horam. Pragae. Oratione dominica
finita, etc. Valde cito est facta apparitio.
E. K. Here be two, one his face is covered, and the other is not: Vriel.
Gabriel.
And he, whose face is uncovered seems to be Gabriel.

D. Sit benedictus Deus Pater, Deus filius, and Deus Spiritus Sanctus nunc and
Semper. Amen.

D. Our chief cause (at this instant) why we resort to this shew-stone, is for
to understand (according to the grounds of God his promise) the state of my
wife her grievous disease, (...) mea (...) periculosus.
and means to cure her, wherein if it please the Lord to be merciful unto her
and me, it shall be the occasion whereby she will all her life time praise the
name of God for his mercies, and be of a quietter mind, and not so testy and
fretting as she is.

..... Who are you, or from whence come you, that you'require science; which
seek to be more Gabriel:
wise and expert, then such as are the Children and Doctors of this World?
whose judgments are rash, and understanding naked: and in whose lips dwells
no truth. Who (I say) are you, that you should deserve the majestral benefit of
so great and sanctified grace? as to understand the determination of God, the
power of his Angels, or the brightness, or obscurity of man's Soul, and
understanding: You desperate sinners, and partakers with the wicked, how can
you seek bread at your fathers hands: when you seek to steal into his barnes?
Yea, into his house, and dining Tables: and more then that; yea, even into his
privy Chambers: not to spoil him of his household stuff, The robbing God of his
honor.
of his Gold, or precious stones, but of the diadem, and Crown of his
everlasting Majesty and honor: you are thieves and robbers; and through the
Dignity of your spirit you shall think to exalt your selves, and to live in
Majesty with the world.

True it is, you may live so: But you live with an Harlot, and shall possess
the reward of Fornicators and (...).

Therefore seek not to feed of such food, as the holy, and blessed messengers,
and Ministers of the (...) Argeli (...).
God of Hosts and glory do taste of: and are comforted; for they are the
spirits of truth and understanding: such as cleave unto their God, and fight
against the abominations, and horrible blasphemies of the world and her
adherents: which (because you set your selves against the) shall keep, ^.
and close up the brightness, and obscurity of each Soul from you, that (...)
ignorance may be greater; and your darkness (...), and that you may return
without light: to the Barathrum of ignorance, ^.
where pride, self-love, and the Children of vanity have their hubitation.

Then (peradventure) will you say within your selves: There be other doors,
there be other woods; yea, there be other ways, let us therefore seek out them.

But behold, I will shut up from you all Elemental Vigor: So that the Fountains
of coagulation Vigor (...).
shall be dried when you seek them, and the natural nourishment and food of
parts that dwell in one (...). Pabula.
proportion shall hide themselves, and be asleep when you seck them; yea, in
the lowest I will place a threefold door-bar, stronger then a Rock of yearn,
which shall stand between your eyes and knowledge, and you shall not see: for
peradventure you may say in your selves.

Behold, there is a science known; yea, there is a conjunction of [D] equal
qualities, opening unto D. ^. If.
us the (...) of comfort in infirmities, that is not so. O you foolish: for
neither here, nor there, shall you find the Lord, if you follow the steps, and
defiled ways that the world teaches you.

For I said of you: Lo, I will place you against the world, that Nos mundi
Inimici esse debemus, and mundus nos odio prosequitur propter Deum.
my name may be magnified, and the world shall hate you for my sake.

D. O Lord, be merciful unto us: Deal, O Lord, with us, as I have put my trust
in thee: Turn away thy wrath (O God) and visit us in mercy: O God, O Lord, what
grievous sayings are these?

Gabriel...... Trouble [D] thou not thy heart, but hear the voice of me,
Gabriel, the man of God. I am the true medecin of such as put their trust in
the God of Hosts, and in his son Christ; which is the Lamb of life, and the
comfort of his father, which give unto those that thirst, the true medecin
Gabriel. (...) super D.
of comfort and consolation; neither shall God forsake thee, neither shall thy
Soul be deceived.

But it behooves these things to be spoken, that sin might be corrected, and
Nota causam acerbae increpationis istius.
the name of him that sent us, magnified.

D. In nomine Dei loquitur, Here placing.
qui per omnes Angelos loquitur: licet enim Vriel dixerit vel alius, tamen Deus
semper loquitur. (...) Misericordiae capax.


Gabriel. Hear my voice: as I said unto thee, so will I place thee here. And
from hence thou shall have science and understanding, and thou shall be
favorable in the eyes of him, that I favor not: that my glory might be
exalted in him, and against his childishness. Yet, I will be merciful to him;
yet if he hear me. E. L.

..... Unto thee [E. K.] I say, (O thou that art a worldling) A voice from an
uncertain place. There were some wicked (...) vexing E. K. from (...) quietly.
E. K.
I will stir up friends amongst you, and I will fill thy hands with that thou
desire: But that thou receivest in the one, I will pluck back in the other,
that when thou would be wise, thou shall not, and when thou would see,
thou shall not.

D. E. K. Was very much offended at these sharp words, etc. and would have left
off, etc.

Uriel...... Inobediens es, and castigatione dignus.

Gabr...... As for the virtue of the holy spirit Sept. 21. in fine.
(spoken of) the gift of medecin, and healing (which you call Physic) Alas,
you know not.

Insani sunt omnes, and fatui: For, Physic is in very deed, the true, and
perfect science of the natural combination, and proportion of known parts,
answering in graduation real, to one principal and defined; is therefore above
the capacity of such as are worldlings, and do hunt after money more then the
truth of Gods spirit.

Definitie Medicina, Medicina est vera and perfect a scientia naturalis
combinati (...), and proportionis partium (...) debito (...) respendentium in
graduatione reali ad (...) principale, and desiaitum esse.

Uriel as a witness standing by.

But lo, light stands by me, and my words are medicine: and whatsoever I
speak, light bears witness of me: Therefore are my words true.

..... Have patience awhile.

D. He disappeared.

D. We examined the definition of Physic to be a very apt answering, both to
the Anatomical natures of man, or any patient, and also of the Herb, or simple,
that is medicinal, etc.

D. He came again and proceeded.

Gab..... Which consists of two parts, the knowledge of celestial radiation
(the cause of [1] combining) Radiatio (...), vigor elementalis.
and of Elemental vigor, the stay, and cause of [2] proportion.

The first, and celestial is threefold, that is to say, from God, from the
Angels, from man's Soul.

The second (that is to say Elementa) is the knowledge of the star [1]
coagulating; of the [2] pabula of the parts nourished, of the [3] conjunction
of like qualities.

(Here is the true Art of Physic)

This second is threefold.

After a while I come again.

D. He is come again, and proceeded.

Gab...... Go to.

D. In the name of Jesus.

Gab...... Then you are diseased, you are sick: you must have a Physician: why
then, your Physician must be such as has this Science, to judge your disease,

Whether (for sin) it come from God: and so by prayer to be cured: Deus 1.


Or from the Angels, as the Ministers of Gods Justice (generally) for desert or
for reproof: Angelus 2.


Or from the soul of man, as from the chief life of the body, whose infection
radically, and by the Anima hominis, 3. Infectio anima. Impretas.
influence of proportions immediate, (hidden from man, but known unto us,). is
called (with us) Mazah: with you, Impietas.

These are the first three, and Magical Causes: The other three are
Elementall. Tres magicae causae.


1. Either by the star, that is cause of coagulation and imbibing of man's sperm
in the femine Stella. 1.
blood, without the which it could not.

2. The other (that is the second) through infection of meats which are
diverse, wherewith the Cibus. 2.
thing is, [and] continues, which in their kinds are many.

3. The last, by conjunction or mixture: which is the secret property that
draws infection from Mixtio. 3.
man to man.

These if you know (for he is no Physician if he know them not) how they are
and live, and are Attractio (...) contagiosorum.
joined together in their proportions, and also when they exceed, or are
diminished, in that they are you shall be able to bring them to their proper
being, wherein they are ratified and rejoice.

[D. He was away a quarter of an hour.]

Gab...... Lo, these are seeds and foundations: and here I have (according to
my property) touched the least of my strings for you.

If now you intend to excel the Physicians of the Earth, and to help those
that are diseased, Medicina vera.
sincerely, truly, and through the power and mercy of God;

Then must you attend upon me, and my expositions, for forty days, wherein I
will open unto 40. Days.
you, many and unknown secrets; and will comfort you with this one herb or
branch of my Garden, True Gabriel: verus Gabriel.
to the intent you may perceive I am true Gabriel.

But as in you that are hearers, due obedience ought to be, so must I keep the
Authority and Abstinnentes and purgati a (...).
gravity of a Schoolmaster, suffering none to hear my Doctrine, but such as are
abstinent and cleansed from their sins.

Consider therefore, what the mercies of God are, the fruit, and value of this
Doctrine, and the nakedness and necessity of the world that requires it, and
then answer me. Responsum votum.


For your answer is a vow unto the Lord, of whose help and comfort I bear
witness. Auxilium and (...) Dei. Janae (...) meae (...) perticulosus.


But as touching thy wife, her disease is in the first Elemental, and very
dangerous, and threatens her child, yea and her self death.

D. Lord, therefore I resort unto thee, who art the Curer of all dieases.

Gab...... But to morrow (if thou resort here,)

I will tell thee, what it is, and will define of it.

Lord, I trust, it shall be cured: What is unpossible unto our God?

Gab...... I cease.

D. Incessant praise and honor, be unto the Almighty, most bountiful, and wise
God, the Lord of Hosts, our God and King.

Amen.

Remember I sent letters to Cracow by the Messager of Prage:

Tuesday, Octobris 2. Mane hora 9. Pragae.
D. Orationibus finitis, ad Deum, etc. Deus in adjutorium nostrum intend, etc.

E. K. Here they be.

D. Gratia Dei, patris, and filii, and Spiritus Sancti, sit super nos nunc and
semper and in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

D. They paused, before they spoke, very long.

D. Perhaps they expect our answer, as concerning our cleansing and abstaining
from sins: Herein I crave at Gods hands his grace and mercy, and intend and
desire both to be purged, and also to abstain not only 40 days, but all my
life, to the best of my ability, etc.

Gab...... Puris habemus omnia, Immundis nihil.

D. I beseech you for God his sake, and per viscera misericordiae Altissimi,
that you would declare uuto us a certain remedy of my wife her disease, etc.

Gabr...... When thy wife was a milkie substance, growing by the perfection of
the place, and influence radical, (which only, is the gift of the Sun) then,
was not the Matrix, or bag of Virtus.
Nature (wherein she increased) perfect, or of sufficient retention: By reason
of a fever going before the conception: So that, the Angelical administration,
generally containing, the vessel of life, Febri laborabat Matter uxoris ante
conceptienem.
for the proportion of the world, For, so, the soul is sent in, to D. Of Jane
my wife.
entered by force of their Order immediately, before the [D]inward parts, were
established in their nutriment and proportion.

Which is the cause, that the second Forsan, vasa seminaria.
vessel, and lowest of nature (for, your terms I must use) is so thin, and tied
short, that it is not able to keep in, or retain, the simile and quidditie of
her own substantial being and seed.

Wherefore, when the rest of her digestions (according to her age and natural
strength) fulfill their offices, by degree to be received into that receptacle;
then, does the force of nature quail: and by the subtilty of the principle, or
matter ejected, (which seeks to take up on every center a dwelling place,)
the guts and passages, are offended and scalded with an intemperate heat: the
most subtle and sharpest part, being of a most penetrating virtue: (and
therefore seeking passag) mixeth her self with the excrements, where resting,
she turns unto her first form, which She he it.
is blood: Whose Quintessence works, in her own property and beginning, and
forces the [1] excrement stercoral many times to become bloody, the other part
being more heavy, notwithstanding unapt to descend, (Quia natura quaerit omne
suum) becomes corrupted; and so by virtue of Excrementa bina.
nature, is cast out as an [2] excrement, being blood and matter.

But I tell thee, that so long as Nature was in the lowest degree, and the
sperm kept more near together, by reason of the spiritual heat in youth, it was
not faulty in her:

But in her sixteenth year, when they were more heavy and sought issue and
descension, then began Spiritus caloris. The breathing or vapouring heat.
Nature to feel the effect, in the places, and vessel, which is the ground of
her retention, the chief basis and mother of her dwelling.

Behold now, being faetive, and the force of heat drawn to the nutriment of the
Creature; Moreover Vxor jam pragnans est. Imagination.
the other part Active compelled into a nearer place, by the impediment of
imagination, brings great danger now, by reason that Nature is become very
weak, and not able to make excremental expulsion.

But do (...) thou think that there is a remedy to this disease?

D. Yea verily, through the wisdom and mercies of the Highest.

Gabr...... I have taught the disease; I will go and see if there be a remedy.

D. The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, be merciful to my wife and me, and
send her remedy and cure of her grief.

E. K. Here he is.

Gab...... Come again after Diner.

D. We had been sent for to diner, twice or thrice before. So we went.

D. Misericordiae Dei sint super nos.

Amen.
After Diner, circa horam 1.
D. We resorted to the Mystery: and shortly, they appeared both.

E. K. Here they be both.

D.

Gab...... Take pure wheat, a pint: one Pheasant-Cock alive, an eleven ounces
of Masculine Amber (which is the white Ambe) an ounce and a quarter of
Turpentine. The physical remedy.


D. Of washed Turpentine?

Gab...... Turpentine that is washed loses his virtue.

Break the Cock in pieces with a pestel, (his feathers plucked off) pound the
Amber small.

Put all this into a gallon of red wine.

D. May we take the red wine of this Country?

Gab...... I. Distill them, with a fire of the second heat.

[D. I beseech you, how long shall they stand in steep?

Gab...... As thou will.]

Still it again the second time, (the feces being cast awa) And add something
more to the fire, so that it be a quarter toward the third.

Let her fast forty hours from meat: And let her divide the Medicine into three
parts.

The first part, let her drink (being milk-warm) by little and little.

The second part, let her make a sauce of, for five or six meals.

The last part, let her use in Absconditis: And she shall have health.

D. I beseech you, in how many days compass would you have this to be done?

Gab...... It is no question: the necessity of the thing teacbeth.

D. As concerning the Infant, what state is it in?

Gab...... Shut thy mouth: Seek not.

D. I am contented.

D. As concerning a Pheasant-Cock, I know not how or where to get it.

Gab...... All the creatures of the world, else, help not. I have taught, take
thou care.

D. The thanks, honor, and praise, be to the Highest, and I thank you for your
charity and good will, to impart these things unto me.

Gab...... You shall have no more, at me, until you be repentant, and
reconciled: and are (...), Reconciliatio.
made apt for my School.

E. K. You might give this Table virtue to cure her, or cure her with some one
thing, or simple, if you be good Angels.

Gab...... Unto us, the virtue of Gods Creatures are known: which we may open
unto you: and E. K. His malicious tongue against God his good Angels.
the power of giving virtue is in God: Therefore cease thy malicious tongue.

I have no more.

E. K. They are gone.

D. Deo Omnipotenti, Optimo and Maximo sit omnis laus honor and gloria: nunc
and semper.

Amen.
Thursday, Octobris 4. Mane, hora 10. circiter. Pragae.
Orationibus variis ad Deum, and pro pane quotidiano jam in tempore
necessitatis, finitis, etc. apparitio facta est.

E. K. Here is he, that is covered with the Scarf.

D. It was a parcel of my prayers to God

D. Misericordias Domini in aternum cantabo, qui me sub alia suis illaesum
servavit, servat, and servabit.

Uriel...... Hear, O thou, [D] that say, (if I have put my trust in the)
hear me, If that thou had tarried at home, and wanted my admonishment, thy
children had been scattered, thy wife had ended her days with sorrow: and lo,
the birds of the air had rested on thy carkase. If thou wast held by the hand,
and attended on, by heavenly Pilots, when the Seas would have swallowed thee,
and Satan (...) power over thee; If poison had prevailed, wherewith thy meat
was often times sawced. If the continual rage of Satan and the world had
overthrown thee. Then had not I been thy God, neither had done well unto thee.
But out of all these I have led thee, as a father does his child from danger,
And from many more scourges and adversities unknown to thee, but ready to
afflict thee. (...) to, thou say unto me, If: What have thou done for me, or
added unto my If.
name? What have thou lost that I have not given thee? or what can thou have,
that I pluck hack? Hear my voice. He that loves the world, loves not me; for
what I do I do: and what I am, I am: And I made nothing without a cause. Thou
have not yet begged for my name, neither have been imprisoned for my sake; But
I have turned the prison from thee, and have opened unto thee my mysteries. I
say unto thee, I am the beginning, and an undefiled Spirit, and there is no
riches that is without me. If I should not suffer thee to be proved, Then were
thou not for me; (...). (...) are long in (...). Fell (...), (...) vinum. (...).
For, those that are mine, taste tribulation: But when Satan has spent his
whip; If thou be found faithful, I will place my covenant with thee and thy
children, And I will be revealed unto them, unto the end of the world. Silver
and Gold I give not; But my blessing, is above the substance of the Earth.
Days there be, that thou must drink of gall, and a time comes, when thou
shall drink wine. In the mean season, those that give unto thee, I will
mnltiply all they have with blessing a thousand fold; for those that give unto
thee, I will give unto them; And those that pluck back from thee, I will also
pluck back from them. Those that are of me, have no spot; for I am all beauty.

E. K. But will you give us meat, drink, and clothing?

(...) ad Cor. Epist. 1. cap. 15. versu 51. and 52 Ecce mysterium vobis (...):
Non (...) quidem obdormiemus: sed omnes (...): ^, etc.

The Commission, and manner of prophesying against the incredulous.

O Kelly, Kelly,
There shall come a time, (if you dwell together and love me) that in the twink
of an eye, you shall breath your last, and live again: and I will kick under my
feet all the proud Nations of the Earth:: for my day is at hand. But I am a
jealous God: Be therefore faithful. If I send thee forth, and they hear thee
not: or measure thee, as a shadow, at noon days, Go unto the mountains and
take up stones and break them in pieces with a mighty pestel, cast them against
the winds, and into the four parts of the Earth. And say, Thus and thus be it
unto them: Thus and thus let the Lord work for me: and thy prophecy shall be
true, and it shall come to pass that thou say. Confirmation of the
Prophecy. The manner of blessing Prophetical.


So likewise if they hear thee, do unto them, that my blessing may also be
known.

D. Lord, what shall I do, if they hear me?

Uriel...... Do unto them the signs of good; as it shall come into thy mind.

I come again.

E. K. He is gone.

D. I thank thee O God, for this great comfort: my heart is greatly refreshed
therewith: Thou art my God.

D. We read over the premises.

E. K. He is here again.

Why do thou [E. K.] seek to flee from me, and secretly put into thy
heart, etc. E. K. Intending to depart, and I not knowing.


D. He spoke diverse things to E. K. which chiefly concerned himself: and he
would not utter them as now: But he told me, That he was determined to have
sold his cloths, and with as much speed as he could, with his wife, to have
gone to Hamburgh, and so to England, etc. If his wife would not go, that he
would.

Uriel...... Hear me, There is not any one, more strong, more rich, or more
friendly, than I, etc.

D. He spoke much again to E. K. of himself, which he expressed not.

E. K. It is true, I will follow God; but I doubt that you are not of God.

Uriel...... I will show you the water: do what you list. I say unto thee [D]
Take not thy My wife not to go now to Cracow.
wife Jane with thee, least thou have a new sorrow.

Three of you shall go, The fourth, [T. K.] (which is [E. K.] his brothe) shall
be a servant to his house.

I can well keep it. Vriel our Housekeeper. A. L. Against Laskie his enemies
as in the former practice was taught.


But when thou come into Poland, be not known. Lead out Lasky by the hand,
and bring him hither, and prophecy against his enemies, that I may break them
in pieces: and may be mindful of my Covenant.

He has much need of Counsel.

I am with you.

E. K. He is disappeared.

D. Deo nostro, Domino nostro and Sanctificatori nostro Omnipotenti, aeterno,
and misericordi sit omnis laus, gratiarum actio, honor and gloria nunc and
semper.

Amen.
Friday, Octobris 5.
At afternoon came one of Doctor Curtz his servants from his Master to tell
me, that his Master would come to me to morrow in the morning about seven,
eight, or nine of the Clock, as I would, etc.

Saturday, Octobris 6. Mane.
Before seven of the Clock I thought good rather my self to go to Doctor
Curtz, then to suffer him to come to me so far, and that for diverse causes: So
I went to him, and came before he was ready. At his being ready he came forth,
but nothing with so cheerful a countenance to welcome me as he did at the
first: I conjectured that he suspected that I would take his words in evil
part, which he had to say to me from the Emperor, which (after I had somewhat
spoken of the book that I lent him, and some other, that had written somewhat
of such matter of division of superficies, and he had told me that this my book
was the most excellent in that Argument, and so made a pause, he began in this
sort in two parts to divide his speech, and said that Caesarea sua Majestas
quantum ad sua peccata (per me reprehensa) solet Confessionarium adhibere
tempore and loco opportunis, neque diffidere illum de Misericordia divina;
Quantum autem ad me attinebat, paratam esse suam Caesaream Majestatem mihi
gratificari and benefacere in quacumque re quae illius subjiceret Authoritati:
I hereupon answered, and said: Doteo verba mea in alio sensu intellecta vel
concepta fuisse a sua. Caesarea Majestate quam intelligi vel concipi debebant.
Non enim me ejus fieri Consessionarium cupiebam, sed peccata ejus ex coelo
reprehensa fuisse, hoc illi significare jubebar, ut feci: unde ille
consolationis plus haurire poterat, quam ex consilio alicujus sui amici vel
(...) sui, peccata ejus redarguentis, Domini enim Dei eximium declarabat
favorem, etc. (...) vero ad illam quam mihi offerebat sua Majestas Caesarea
gratiam, humillime acceptabam. (...) vero quod desiderem titulo Philosophi and
Mathematici Caesarei insigniri causa est multiplex; tum respectu secreti mei
servitii erga Caesarem, sub eo praetextu caelandi quam majoris authoritatis and
(...) Caesarianos and Anglos meos, ne vel illis hic nugas agere videar, and
nullius esse (...), vel istis (...) viderer aptus, contra quem suam invidiam
and maledicentissimam, ut incepere, exercerent linguam impune, etc. (...)
igitur D. Curtzium ut Caesaream suam Majestam admoneret de indebitae
interpretatione illorum verborum quibus vitia ejus redarguebantur, etc. Then he
spoke of the second Letters to the Emperor, the effect whereof he had heard at
my hands, and had sent on Michaelmas even to the Emperors Majesty, a note and
advise of them, as he now said. And did wish that they had been delivered
before the Emperor had resolved on the former answer: Those Letters (said I)
are in the Ambassadors of (...) hands; and if he will not deliver them to day,
I will fetch them for you: If you do (said he) I will deliver them (...) way,
for at eighth of the Clock (...) shall have me in the Ritter stove, or hear of
(...) there. Then (said I) I will straight way go to the Ambassador.

I went unto the Ambassador of Spain, and reported all that had passed between
me and D. Curtz. He said, that by reason of his diverse affairs he had not good
opportunity, never since the receipt of my Letters to go to the Emperors
Majesty: But that this day he determined to deliver my Letters with his own
hand unto his Majesty: so with thanks given to his honor I departed: I went to
the Ritter stove (or Chamber of presence) where I found none of the Guard, but
very many sitting without. In the stove were three, or four, of which one went
straight way into the privy Chamber, and by and by D. Curtz came out from the
Emperor unto me, I asked him if he had told the Emperor of my grief conceived
of his misunderstanding my words: he said, I, and that the Emperor (...) it
not in evil part, and so of diverse other things we had talk walking up and down
together about a quarter of an hour: Among other things I told him that the
Lord Ambassador would deliver my Letters himself to the Emperors Majesty, so
I departed, and he returned back to the Emperor into the privy Chamber.

Sunday, Octobris 7. Mane hora 7.
I sent to the Lord Ambassador his house, and there I learned that the
Ambassador had yesterday delivered my Letter to his Majesty: And that answer
was to be expected by D. Curtz.

After Dinner I went to Doctor Curtz home to his lodging, and he had nothing as
yet to say of the Letter delivered by the Lord Ambassador: But we fell to
other talk, and I told him plainly, that I had not hitherto lived obscurely,
neither without care of my good fame and name, maintaining, and increasing;
therefore if here for my sincere dealing (...) should seem to be despised, or
not regarded, or to be but a trifler, my thought I should have great injury:
And sure I was that the Emperors Majesty was much ruled by him, and as he did
frame his judgment, so did his Majesty very often resolve in such matters as
mine; wherefore if I were not used in my causes as was reasonable, and for the
Emperors honor it should not be laid to any other man's charge but to his,
etc. He promised that he would deliver all in the best words he could, in
friendly sort, etc. After this he showed diverse his labors and inventions,
Mathematical, and chiefly Arithmetical Tables, both for his invention by
squares to have the minute and second of observations Astronomical, and so for
the mending of Nonnius his invention of the Quadrant dividing in 90. 91. 92.
93. etc. I then opened to him my secret of my glass, for battering in a dark
night, etc. He said that conclusion would be very acceptable to his Majesty, I
told him that the glass was at Cracovia, and his Majesty should see it by Gods
leave.

After this I told him that I would full fain have a Pasport, or safe conduct
to pass quietly and safely in any of the Emperors Dominions. He thought his
Majesty would willingly grant that, and willed me to write three, or four lines
as I would have it, and he informed me thus:

Caesaream suam Majestatem humillime or at Joannes Dee Anglus, serenissimae
suae Majestatis Devotissimus servitor, ut pro sua majori in Itineribus per
amplissimum suae Caesareae Majestatis Imperium conficientis securitate, literas
salvi passus fibi concedere dignaretur.

Joannes Dee.

At my coming home, I bethought me that I would gladly, the said Pasport, safe
Conduct, or Letters of passage, more ample and beneficial; as for my wife,
children, family, servants, and goods whatsoever, and for one whole year to
dure from the date of these presents thus.

Wednesday, On Monday morning 8. Octobris.
Sacram suam Caesaream Majestatem humillime orat, serenissimae suae Majestatis
Devotissimus servitor Joannes Dee Anglus, ut eidem Joanni pro seipso, uxore
sua, liberis suis, familia sua, servitoribus, Ancillis suis and suppellectili
sua quacunque sua sacra Caesarea Majestas favorabiles and gratiosas suas liter
as salvi quieti and liberi transitus per omnes and quascumque amplissimi
Majestatis suae Caesareae Imperii parts viasque, and pro integri anni (proxime
post datam praesentium sequenti) tempore quocumque, clementer concedere
dignaretur.

Anno 1584. Oct. 8.

Joannes Dee.

Monday, Octobris 8.
I went to Mr. Doctor Curtz, with these last Letters fair written, and I found
him to be at the Hoff rate Camer in Counsel: and so awaiting till they rose
(half an hour after 8. of the Clock) he came out with my Letters in his hand,
which I left yesternight with him. I showed him these last written: And he said
they use to limit no time, but to make them indefinite. So he took the last,
and I had the former Letters back again. He went with them into the privy
Chamber, he said, I should not need to send for the Letters, but he would send
them home by his man, and I went from him toward the Ambassador Don Gulielmo
de Sancto Clemente, whom I found coming with the Ambassador of Spain (who came
three, or four days before, to give the golden Fleese to the Emperor) and the
Marshall of the Court to go to the Emperor presently to have audience: And as
I stood in the Court of the Ambassadors lodging, and they three on hors-back
coming, the Ambassador my friend did put off his Cap, so did the new
Ambassador and Marshal twice very (...) to me. I saw it was no time to offer
speech to the Ambassador; now of my giving thanks, taking leave, and requiring
his pleasure toward the Lord Laskie: so following them to the Court, I passed
for ward home toward my Lodging.

Mysteriorum PRAGENSIUM Confirmatio, Anno, 1585. Januarii 14. PRAGAE Iterum
veni Pragam ultimo Decembris, ANNO, 1585.
NOTE. Anno 1584.
ANNO, 1584, Decembris 20, ( Stylo Gregoriano) we did set forth, I, Master
Kelly, (...) my Infant, with his Nurse, and John Crokar, (in a Coach with
Horse, which I had bought of Master Frizer) from Cracovia toward Prage.

PRAGE.

Decembris 30. We came to Prage in the afternoon.

December 31. I wrote to Don Gulielmo de Sancto Clement, the Spanish
Ambassador, as follows.

ILlustrissime and magnifice Heroes, Licet mea nondum privata curaverim negocia:
pro quibus ordmandis, multos interim dum hinc abfuetim, and labores pertulerim,
and sumptus fecerim: Tamen nolui literas ad vestram magnificentiam, a
Nobilissimo illo Domino Palatino Syradiensi missas in multas horas a reditu meo
retinere penes me: Ne aliqua ex part, officio viderer deesse meo, tam erga
vestram magnificentiam; quam ipsum Dominum Palatinum. Quantum vero ad
Mysteriorum incredibilium progressum, habeo and quae dicam, and sunt quae
audiam multa ad veritatis causam (invitissimis ejusdem adversariis
quibuscunque) elucidandum. De quibus quando opportunum erit, paratissimus ero,
cum (...), tum audiri: eo quidem modo, quo sinceritati and (...) meae erga
(...) saum Majestatem erit convenientissimum. Interim aliquot dierum
intervallum liberum requiro, ut tam aedes mihi meisque conducam ((...) fieri
possit) accommodas, quam ut alia, ad rem familia rem spectantia disponam, Deus
Optim. Max. Magnificentiam vestram ornare beareque dignetur.

Pragae ultima Decembris 1584.

Illustrissimae Magnificentiae Vestrae Obsequentissimus, Joannes Dee.

Anno 1585, PRAGAE.
FRIDAY,

JAnuary 4. I hired the House in the Salt street, of the two Sisters: But Mr.
Christopher Christian, who had long time been Chancellor, or Register of old
Pragae, did make the Covenant or Bargain with me: he had Anne the one Sister,
to Wife, and the other Sister named Dorothe, had to her husband. This Dorothea
dwest in the House, and was to remove to an other House of her own hard by: and
to deliver unto me and mine the whole House, with all the appurtenances of
rooms and easements, and I to pay for the year 70 Dollers: and that quarterly,
(every 3 Months expired) to pay the quarters rent thereof.

JAnuary 6. I wrote to D. Jacob Curtius: One of the Empereurs Privy Counsel,
of whom the former Records of Prage Actions do make abundant mention: And a
letter of his written to me the 8th. day of October Anno 1584, is beginning of
the Book next written before this. The Copy of the letter which I wrote now, is
this.

Illustri and Magnifico viro Do Jacobo Curtio sacrae Cesareae Majestatis ab
arcanis Consiliis, Domino meo plurimumcolendo.
ILlustris and magnifice vir. Majorine gaudio affici debeam ex bona vestra
valetudine, and salvo meo ad Pragam reditu: an ex contumeliis hic interim dum
abfuerim, contra me confictis, and variis ejaculatis reprehensionibus and quasi
nimis, dolor torqueri, pene incertum videri possit. Ego quod statui, hactenus
seci: suppellectilem scilicet ex Cracovia meam cum tota familia mea, huc jam
adduci curavi; cum magnis quidem laboribus meis; and sumptibus haud modicis.
AEdes (ex quo jam veni) tales quales, etiam cum aliqua difficultate, conduxi.
Et hac presenti septimana, omnia hic nostra ad easdem citissime transferri,
remque familiarem, and Oeconomicam, quodam crasso modo disponi, negociorum
meorum requirit ratio. Interim vestram magnificentiam enixe (...) habere velim,
ne ullo modo aegre ferat, quod eandem nondum inviserim, officioque meo, in hac
part, accurate satisfecerim spero, quod una mecum sentire velitis, jure merito
in proverbium hoc (...) dictum.

Satis cito, modo satis been.

Non solum literae ad me vestrae, in abitu meo, mihi magno interim fuere
solatio o: Sed and absente me, saepe testificata bona vestra de me concepta
opinio magno me delinivit gaudio: de contumeliis igitur, and literis vestris,
and veram de me opinione, sive judicio, cum opportunum fuero nactus ocyum
(predictis negociis meis confectis) vestrae magnificentiae adero, ut aliquid
dicam: and paratissimus futurus, ut omnia quae poterofaciam, quo vobis and
posteritati constet, fideliter and sincere (prout statueram) ad sacrae suae
Cesareae Majestatis, aegregia servitia, animnm me applicasse meum.

Pragae Januarii 6. Anno 1585.

Praga Anno 1585.
January 12.

Saturday Afternoon I removed clean from Doctor Hagek, his House by Bedlem, and
came with all my Household to the House which I had hired of the two Sisters
(married) not far from the Marketplace in old Pragae.

Pragae Actio prima, post reditum.
January 14.

Monday Circa 9 horam a media nocte: Precibus ad Deum de more fusis, and
invocato lumine auxilioque Dei, ad ejusdem veritatem intelligendam, and cum
virtute tractandam, etc.

E. K. Here is LEVANAEL as may appear Febru. 5. post; ultima part. E. K Note,
The House is round without and square within.
one with a Vail before his face, as it were, a Hair Cloth of Ashcolour: I know
him not yet: I see a Garden full of fruit, of diverse sorts. In the midst of it
is a place higher then the rest. On that place stands a round House, it has
four corners, [withi^] and 4 Windows: and every Window is round, and has 4
round partitions, round also. It has 4 Doors, and at the East Door is one
step, at the South 2 steps, and at the North 3, and at the West Door, 4 steps:
The first Door is white, like Crystal, transparent: The South Door is red of
an high color, transparent. The North Door is bright black, not to be thorough
seen, as the rest. The West is green, like an Emerauld Stone: So is the South
Door like a Ruby. The Doors be all plain. The House within (as it may be
judged by the transparent Doors) seems to be white, and empty.

E. K. He that has his face covered, opens the Eaft Door; and all the House
1 Fire.
seems to be on fire, like a furnace. The fire within does weve, and move
about the House, and by the roof. Now he opens the West Door, and there
appears, as 2 Water.
if all the House were a fountain full of water. And there run diverse streams,
in the same one water, whereof, one does go and come, as if it ebbed and
flowed; which stream does go about all the rest, by the sides of the House,
that is, as if it were the Ocean sea compassing t^^ World. The next stream,
within that, moves from the 4 sides ward, and make (in manner) 4 Triangles, or
rather Cones, of water, whose vertices rest cut off (as it were) by the middle
stream of water which occupies the middle or Center of the House, and is in
circular form environed.

An other manner of stream there is, which comes from the 4 corners of an
innermost square: and so run diametraliter or contradictorie wise, toward that
circular middle stream.

The middle stream seems to issue out at the very Center of the place, and to
mount up, and making an arch of his course, does seem to fall circulariter in
one, circumference.

E. K. The fire also had diversity in it.

D I would you had noted the diversity of the fires also.

..... Those that learn truly, learn by parts.

E. K. The color of the water in the Center, is most pure white.

The waters of that Saint Andrews Cross, are like a water somewhat Saffronish
colored. The waters of the Triangles, are somewhat like a watrish blew, which
appears most, in the top of the arches of their flowing:

For all spring otherwise.

The uttermost water, is of Quicksilver show, as if it were somewhat mortified.

D In the figure following, you may gather a better and more easy
understanding of this Description of the water streams. Here is a blank, or
void space in the Original Copy: but no figure.


E. K Now he opens the Fire Door again: And the fire appears in a square
place. And there appear 4 fires filling the whole place, leaving nothing
vaccuum.

One of these fires seems to rise from the Center of the place; and to go in
low arches to the 4 corners of the House.

The House seems to have 14 foot long in every side.

The arches of these fires seem to come from a trunk of fire, which rises from
about the Center: and seems to be 4 foot over in the Diameter.

This Trunk seems to be high three quarters of the height of the place; The
place seems to be as high as it is broad.

On the top of this fiery trunk, seems the fire to be in form of a fiery
Globe, having 6 foot, his Diameter, which fire reverberateth and rolleth in it
self.

From the sides of the Trunk (between the said Globe and foresaid Arches,)
goes up fire Triangularly, filling all; saving that which remains filled, by
the flames of fire, which arises from the Here is a blank, or void (...) in
the (...): but no figure.
Globe to the 4 corners of the House, filling all the place above the Globe: as
by the figure annexed, more plainly may appear.

E. K. Note The color of the fire of the 4 arches, is very red; The rest are
very pure, Aerial, candent, etc.

The Motion of the trunk fire is swiftest.

The Original Center of all these fires, seems to be very little.

E. K. Now he opens the red Door.

The House seems darkish, of color of the

smoke of a Wax Candle being put out. 3 Air.


..... By it self, it is not, but by the Sun, it is clear.

E. K. It has 4 motions in it also: every one moving more swiftly then the
other: All from the middle of the House. Three of them move arch-wise to the
sides.

The first and second arise to half the height of the place.

The third occupies the other half.

The fourth goes upright to the top of the House.

The second his space (that he strikes against on the Wall) is double to the
space of the Wall, against which the first smites. Here is a blank, or void
space in the Original Copy: but no figure.


E. K. Now he opens the black bright Door; And the House there seems full 4
Earth.
of black dust, like Gunpowder color, or somewhat of Leadish color.

E. K. Now he seems to go down, fair and softly from the House, down the
little Hill, and from thence goes by a water side, to a Rockish Mountain.

E. K He speaks.

..... Ascend. I am now ready for you: Bring out your Mattocks, Spades, and
Shovels. Enig e very eri.

E. K. Now come out of that Rock, seven lean men, with Spades, and Shovels, and
Mattocks, etc.

..... Follow me.

E. K. Now they be come up to the foresaid Hill.

..... Come on, Dig till you find.

E. K. Every one stands distinctly one from another, and they dig on the
foresaid Hill, which before seemed covered with Earth and Grass: But now it
appears to be a Rock, and they dig that the Fire flies out again of their
strokes, and some have broken their Mattocks, some their Spades, all except
two, one with a Shovel, an other with a Pickax.

The Workmen. O Lord we labor in vain.

..... So you are sure to do, unless you have better Tools.

The Workmen. Alas we labor in vain.

One of them. This is long of you.

..... I bad you provide Instruments to labor with, but you asked not me,
wherein you should labor. Therefore have you dug away that which you saw,
and have repulse with that you know not.

A dark man thou art, and hidden from men, and so are thy doings. One of them
said to the man covered with Hair-Cloth of Ash color.


E. K. They stood gazing one on another.

..... Have you not better Instruments? Go, provide your selves, and return.

E. K. They run a great pace to the foresaid Rocky Cave from whence they came
out first. Now they come again with great Beetles of Iron, and Wedges. They
knock their Wedges (as we use in Wood) and so break off great Slakes of Stone,
like Slate, and throw it down the Hill.

One of them. What a thing is this, that this Wedg is broken?

Another We are in worse case then ever we were.

E. K. Their Wedges are broken, the most part, and the Fire flies out of the
Stone in great abundance.

..... The nature of this Stone is not to cleave: Therefore if you have no other
Instruments you must cease.

E. K. They are in great disquietness among themselves.

..... Those that go a Journey, provide them Clothes against all weathers: He
that is worthy of the Name of a Conqueror, carries with him all Engines: Where
the Bridges be broken down, he stays not, because he is prepared: Behold, he
has victuals for time to come, and his Study is as well the event, as is the
mean. So should true Laborers do: considering what they work in. For the Earth
is a Monster with many faces: and the receptacle of all variety. Go home, stand
not idle. Provide by Arts for the hardness of Nature, for the one Sister
weepeth without the other.

E. K. They go away speedily.

..... They have their Tools to harden, and their Steeles to temper. It will be
more then au hour space before they return. Therefore may you spend the time in
your necessity, and use the time of day as you are acquainted or wonted. I also
must over-see them, or else their labor will be without fruit.

E. K. Now he is gone.

D. Gloria (...). and F. and SS. sicut erat, etc. Amen.

Monday,

The same day, after dinner we returned to our former purpose for God his
Service, to his Honor and Glory.

E. K. He is here. Now the Laborers be coming out; They have Wedges made long
and sharp: and Pickaxes with three pikes very short.

They say. Our trust is, that these tools will serve.

E. K. They fall to work. They make like square holes, and put in their wedges,
and break up the rock or blackish stone (like yron-mine, or Magnes stone) in
roundish lumps as big as a two-peny loaf, about two or three inches thick. They
pick or dig round about the hole first, and so after use their wedges. The
Pickaxes have three heads, every pick thereof bigger then the other. The first
as big as one finger: the second as two: the third as broad as four fingers.
And so after the first digging they fetch three or four cakes or pieces out of
one hole, and then they go to another. Now one of them is fallen into the ground,
up to the armpits. Now another is fallen in, to the knees. Now the house
standing thereon begins to shake, and waver from one side to the other. Now
the men be gotten out of the holes they stuck in.

..... Make an end of your labor.

One of the workmen to the Guide. It behooves you to find a remedy, or to let
us understand what remedy we shall (...), that you may descend thence: for lo,
the peril you stand in, is great: for this Rock was nothing else but a shell,
whose kernel is a bottomless lake, and a mire quickened with some shut up
water.

..... You come hither as Laborers, therefore make an end of your work, and
stand not idle. If the house fall, and I sink, then is your labor at an end.
For the end of your labor is the fulfilling of my will, and the promise which
you have made me.

One of them. We are ready to do our promise; but we are more ready to provide
that you may be amongst us; so you may be free from danger.

..... O you of little wit; are you not ashamed? which of you have dwelt within
the secrets of this Hill? yea, which of you intends to fulfill his promise?
Judge not a thing whereof you have no skill, neither be slack in that you have
to do: for the one has his (...) of idleness, and the other is condemned of
rashness: For why? It springs on (...) mother ignorance.

They say. If we work, it is against reason. Neither (...) our tools (...) to
this labor. Therefore we had rather be idle, then to labor about nothing: for
to labor in vain, is to do nothing.

If we were determined to work, how should we (...) our (...), since the
Instruments of working want?

..... Gather up the pieces of your spades, that is wood, and may be joined
together: The older and the baser they are, the fitter they are to turn up such
soil.

E. K. There comes a Smith by with a budget full of nails.

One of them to the Smith. What have thou there?

Smith. Nails.

E K. They be like Horshooe-nails.

..... Thou came in good time, leave thy nails behind thee, and at thy return
I will pay thee for them. See, God is not unmindful of us, for nails are the
fittest things to further your work. Join therefore your spades and shovels
together, and labor.

E. K. Now they are mending their spades and shovels, the iron of them being
all off and broken.

Now they work, and throw away the earth like durty sand, and the skurf of the
(...) sticks to their spades and shovels.

E. K. One goes behind, and makes a trench to let the water out from the
sand.

One of them. How now! Have we found harvest in the midst of winter?

..... Why: what have you there?

One of them. Marry either Alablaster or Salt.

E. K. Now one of them knocks a piece off with his shovel-end, and reaches
it up to his Guide.

..... Did I not tell you, that the Earth has many faces?

E. K. They work now easily, and cut up like Salt or Alablaster.

Now they have dug all the hill away, even to the house. Now the house
seems (...) upon that white stuff.

One of them. If we dig any further, we shall undermine the house.

..... Go to your business.

E. K. They work.

..... Soft, soft. Now labor with your hands as softly as may be. Stand aside.

E K. Now he takes one of the irons of their spades, and seems himself to
pare the sides of the Foundation under the house, and it seems to be a vessel
of transparent glass, and having fire within it.

..... The fear of the Lord is a burning fire, consumes not, but (...) the
body; the old dross Timor Domini
it wipeth away, and the daily influxion of the flesh and sin it separateth
from the soul.

Behold (I say) he lives not, but unto whom life is given: neither is their
any joy, but it is ascending; for the end of joy is glory; but glory is the
consummation of desire, and the beginning of felicity. No man enters into joy,
but by life: neither is there any life, but in the fear of God.

Whosoever therefore has the fear of God, let him draw (...), and (...)
hither. Number exceeds Ascension
not, but by unities. Neither is there any multiplication but by order. For the
root of number is one. And things that ascend are dignified by order. Out of
this vessel go four vents ascending into that Rock, which is the Root, which is
this building. Separation


It is said, Behold: let my spirit enter in, let there be Separation mad within
the house of the North, that the earth may be divided into her members. Cursed
be that body, that is not divided, according to proportion, answering to the
Division. For she has yet not cast off the shape of darkness.

E. K. There runs up fire into the house, from out of the round glass
vessel under the foundation of the house. And that fire makes a great (...)
(through the black bright or marble door to be hard only.) Now that North door
is (...) thrown open, and there appear in the house like kernels of apples, and
slime appears, and water thinner then slime, and there appears pure water,
else. Now there comes together stuff like yellow earth, which the fire
wrought out of the black earth: And the pure water runs into that yellow
stuff.

.....Of that take a part.

E. K. The fire returns back again among the stuff in that house, and there
appear of all Creatures some.

Here is Creation, and it is the first. (...)


E. K. Now he takes a lump of the earth lying by, which was thrown up, and he
breaks it into six pieces like round Balls.

E. K. He (...) thing like a vessel of iron, and puts into it that mixture
of yellow earth and (...).. And it looks now like grass mingled with water.

..... Thou art strong, and wilt beget a strong Child.

E. K. Now he (...) out the earth which he put in, and it is a lump of gold. He
gives it him tha stands by.

.....so are the seeds of the earth.

E. K. Now he takes the second, and puts it in.

.....Corruption is a thief, for he has robbed thee of thy best Ornaments, for
thou art weaker in the second.

E. K. He takes it out, and it is as if it were pure silver.

.....Where there is double theft, poverty insueth. (...), notwithstanding, Thou
art true; for thou give unto every thing as much as he (...): Thus openest
the greatest hability and strength of thy power, not such as it has been, but
such as it is.

E. K. Now he puts in the third Ball.

.....Thou must tarry, for thou art of an harder digestion, since thou art the
third, Content thy self, for thou art not an Inheretor.

E. K. He takes it out, and gives unto one of them that stands by, that is
a red metal like copper.

E. K. Now he takes up another of the Balls, and holds it in his hand.

.....Behold, thy mother, Heat is gone, and the enemy of life enters; for he
that passes his middle age, decays, and draws to an end.

Behold, thou shall find a Stepmother, for thou came out of time.

E. K. Now he puts it into the vessel.

..... Let cold cover thy face, let the North truly beget thee, for thou art an
enemy to thy predecessors. But thou art of great virtue, for of thy excrement
shall virtue receive dignity. And thy virtue shall be a garland to Nature; for
thou shall be visible when the other are silent: the Seat shall not hinder thy
ver^tue, notwithstanding, thy virtue shall differ with the Seas: For as they
differ, so shall thou.

E. K. Now he takes it our. It is a ragged thing like Smiths cynder of iron,
and it has holes in it, as if it were spongy.

E. K. Now he takes up another Ball of the earth: he puts it in.

..... Thou art tractable and like unto an obedient daughter: But thou shall be
the fifth in the second and an Instrument to the first.

E. K. Now he takes it out, it is like unto a white whet stone, as he shaped
it at the putting in, it is like Tynne.

E. K. Now he takes up another Ball, and puts it in.

..... Thou art the last that has in himself and by himself his being: Behold
thy face is like unto wax, but thy inward bowels are like unto the anger of a
Serpent: Many shall have thee, but shall not know thee.

One of them by said. Will you give me nothing?.

E. K. A great cloud covers them all, the stone and all.

D It dured so a quarter of an hour.

E. K. Now appears another, none of them before appearing. He seems afar
off coming, and higher placed then the other, it seems to be URIEL, he has
his face covered with a Skarf of black hanging down to his breast.

URIEL..... Blessed are such as are not offended in the little ones.

[ E. K. He speaks now a language which I understand not.]

URIEL..... For the Angels of the God of Righteousness, are his little ones:
and such as know not sin of Concupiscence by consent (I speak this for your
understanding) Take heed (therefore) that you offend not your selves: for you
must become little ones: and the power of the highest must abound in you.

He that offends his brother, offends God: but he that offends his own
innocence, is abhorred of the Lord. Lo you are The children of Promise, and in
you is the mystery of a great, and mighty Seal. Therefore study to humble your
selves, for Humility is the Root of Innocence. But (my brethren) Innocents by
nature you cannot be, neither can you serve God in the imagination of
cleanness of your own flesh. Now (therefore) since you are fleshly, will you
become innocent? Or how can you seek that which Nature has lost?

The Scriptures teach you; That in Christ you were born anew: And by him you
may become In Christ we may become Innocents, and be born anew.
Innocents, when in him you are cleansed. Therefore, if in him the state of
your Innocence remain, if in him you are renewed, and made clean, (being rotten
and defiled) why seek you not him, as you should do?

No man that seeks the brightness of the Sun, goes under the Earth:
Neither creeps he into unknown Caves. The Tygres seek not their prey upon
Earth, where the waters are not. Neither the Eagles upon waters.

No more ought you to grudg that the Lord tempts you, nor to be offended when
the World offends Temptation.
you.

Is it not said unto you, that you shall fight a great fight: What fight is it
my brethren: But a Battle against the Worldlings and the Devil?

I say unto you that Kings shall be often ^^ied in you. Kings.


The Sun cease not, yet he shall cease, yea he shall not be.

The Lights of Heaven keep their course; but they shall suddenly stagger, and
forget their long worn way. Much more shall the wickedness of those that rise
up against you, have an end, for in them is no course but error, and the
firebrarnds of Satan, prepared in their own hands, for their own destruction.

Behold, they shall contend against you and shall despise Victoria nostra e^^.
thee: But lo I have blessed thee above them: for thou shall fight against
them, and shall overthrow them: that my Name may be magnified in thy mouth
amongst the multitude of the sinful.

Behold, they are opposite unto thee, because they are opposite unto me: for I
have gathered thee from amongst them, and they are become thy Enemies. Since
therefore they are thine Enemies (because thou must fight against them:) Be not
grieved therefore when their wickedness does offend thee: But put on the
armor of patience, and Become innocent.

Do thou think that from the Heavens can come the dew and life of all things?
Even so think Ministri veritatis.
also, that from us comes no untruth.

Be therefore innocent, and be not deceived by the flesh; Cast reason aside,
covered with her Cloud: And lift up thy self in him, unto him (I say) that has
lifted thee from the Doors of Death: taken thee out of the hands of Butchers,
and continued thee for a member of his Glory.

Behold, I say unto thee, The brightness of Truth over-shadoweth thee. If
therefore, thou dwell in O magna misericoardia tua, Domine.
truth, why should thou be afraid? Considering that she conquereth and
resists all her Enemies.

Behold, the World despises you, you also shall despise the World.

When the Angel of the Lord pours his wrath and vial upon the Earth, and the
enemies of the Son of God, ^ in among the sheep. When the self-same Plague
that was in the land of Pharaoh raineth in the Houses of all that dwells upon
the Earth, such as the Lord abhors. When the Lord with his hand shall gather
up the fruits of the Earth from them, Where then shall be their honors? What
then shall be done with money; with that harlot and strumpet of the Earth? Of
what value shall their love be then, or who shall regard their friendship?

In these a years that are to come, shall all these things come to pass.
Prophetia 1589 1590 1591 1592 The Harbor we are in.


And this great joy shall be turned into tears of Brimstone.

Why? you of little faith, you know not how often I have been amongst you:
neither the Harbor that I have thrust you into. Notwithstanding you murmur
amongst your selves. But stick fast unto him that leads you: For he is a sure
Guide.

And be not afraid, though the Earth open her jaws against you, for why? I will
bless all things you take in hand, (says the Lord,) and my spirit shall dwell
amongst you.

D May I speak?

E. K. He turn^ him to you.

D How shall our new proceedings join to our old beginnings? O God, our guide,
light, staff, shield, and comfort, etc.

URIEL. Behold, I teach you, before I correct: But the Doctrine I teach is
Humility, Patience [he seems to speak to one above,] and the fear of wrath to
come

After which manner, I have taught them, by thee D.

Therefore, if thou teach Obedience through the spirit of God, appearing unto
thee; Be thou also To Rodoldh, and Curts. Note
Patient and Obedient: And Humble thy self unto them, for my sake. Not with the
opening of any seal, nether with the Counsels, that I shall deliver thee:
But with a ready mind, Obediently, * I promised the stone.
desiring to perform that which thou have promised in me.

I am sufficient strength, and will be thy buckler, and if they intend evil, it
shall rest upon them; yea when they imagine it, it shall frize within them. And
thy goings in and out shall be sat amongst A way of (...).
them. But behold, I teach unto thee a way, which thou followest not. When thou
mindest to do any thing, in the name of God, to his honor, to the help of thy
neighbor, or thine owncomfort: Go about it whatsoever it be: and begin a
Labor; Do that thing thou intendest. And see that you join with one consent
toward God and the (...) you are occupied in.

Then cry out to God for comfort, for light, and true understanding. And it it
shall be given unto thee abundantly. For Lo, I say unto thee [E. K. I
understand him not now.] I will open my hand unto thee, and be merciful unto
thee: And whenever you heap up the Wood together, Together.
I will descend and give fire.

Behold, I keep back the rest of my message for an other time. Which shall be
ready for you when I find you ready to receive it.

D I requested to know (...) I should deal with the Ambassador of Spain, or the
Emperor, or Curtius; Secondly, your RULE here given, I understand it not. For I
dare not begin any labor (...) divine: Man's imagination is so weak, etc.

URIEL Thon have those that are sent unto thee here for thy instruction, which
shall by degrees lead thee into the (...) of that thou art to do. By degrees.


But it is one thing to receive Corn, and abundance of grain, by the blessing
of God, in the return of an year: and an other thing to do the works of the
Apostles.

For the spirit of God is twofold: working by information, and influence
Celestial through the grant of God his good will, in the ministry of his
Angels to the information of such as are his faithful and chosen: An other
thing to be inspired from God himself, in his holy spirit, imediately
comforting and knitting Wisdom together with you, beyond the power that is
given unto his Angels.

I have spoken unto you a sound and true doctrine, and have given you not
fleshly but Celestial counsel: Apply your self unto it, as the Spirit of God
leads you. As for those wicked men (that Ambassador except) our
understanding has no name of them: We remember them not, neither limit any
thing for them. But if thou in thy simplicity and innocence can not deal with
them, the fault rests in thy own faith. Simplicity. Innocence.


I am gone.

D Deo nostro Omnipotenti Immortali and Regi Gloriae, sit omnis laus, honor,
gratiarum actio and Jubilatio.

Amen.
Pragae.
January 16.

Wednesday, Mane hora 9 fere

D Precibus ad Deum fusis, ut nobiscum procederet in sua misericordia and
lumine veritatis, non in parabolis solum and manifesta, sed clara and manifesta
veritate, modo qui illi maxim placet, etc.

E. K. I see the man again and the house: the man seems to be covered on his
face, and so over with a vail of hair-cloth to his middle.

D When it shall please God, all vailes and AEnigmata shall cease.

..... Whatsoever I teach you has a Mystery. And I am a Mystery in my self.
Even so all Mysteries.
things that you learn of me, you must be content to receive as mystical
instructions comprehending perfect truth, and to be known to such as are true.
Some there be that have, and have nothing: yea though they have all, for All,
is contained: But the mysteries of God are infinite, and his grace is not to be
determined.

D That saying is dark.

That which is All, is contained. Believe you, that we give holy things unto
Swine? Or open the finger and workmanship of God unto Sinners? God forbid.
Moses saw God but his hinder parts. The Prophets were acquainted with God, but
mystically. The Apostles with the Son of God in shadows, and their own
impotency. Yea, I say unto you, that she that lies in the lap of her Mother,
knows not but by degrees, for it is the manner of Gods Wisdom, both
immediately and by us, to keep back his Wisdom from Hell and corruption.

Therefore murmur not at that which you receive, for it is not your own.
Behold, if you have better, you need it not: for it is vanity to seek for that
you have. Well, since it is given you, Consider what it is, that is given you.
Consider also how it is given you, and by whom.

D We know by whom, as our consciences and faith teach us.

..... O you of little understanding: Who is he that can and has to give, but
God, Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, unto whom all things are given
in Heaven, and in Earth, if therefore, All be his, then he gives. And if you
receive it hardly; Consider how hardly you ought to deliver it again.

And if it be a fire reviving the form of all worldly things: Then cast it not
to Swine: neither Ignis vivificans. (...) P. (...) as.
yet worship it. Behold, you are men, But in having it you must cease to be
men, for by it you enter upon, and into all immortality: And by it you sacend
into the true knowledge of our forefathers, and state of Innocence.

But I hear a voice; I will depart, and come again.

E. K. Now all is vanished away.

D We read over the premises to our comfort and instruction, we beseech God to
continue his graces and mercies, on us, and in us, to his honor and glory,
here and for ever.

E. K. Now he is here again.

..... The will of God is upon me, and snatcheth me unto other things.

To morrow in the morning, with empty Bellies, I will tell you what it is you
(...)

D Fiat voluntas Dei, ad ejus budem, honorem and gloriam, (...) and semper.

Amen.
Pragae.
Anno 1585. January 17.

Thursday. (...), circa horam 8..

Oratione (...) finita, and aha brevi ejaculatione, pro lumine and veritate Dei
obtinendis, etc.

Post quartam horae partem, venit.

E. K. Here he is now.

D (...), laus, and honor sit Deo nostro Omnipotenti. Amen.

..... Honor and thanksgiving with loud voices, be unto our Lord Jesus.

D Amen. E. K. Amen. D Note this VISION. Earth of a tawny color.


E. K. He has a great heap of earth, or little hill natural by him of orange
or tawny color, drawing somewhat to a Lion tawny.

E. K. A Woman comes, and with a spade diggeth about it. Now comes a child
(a man-child) out of a dark place, with a fire shovel in his hand.

The Woman has taken away all the earth, and there appears water, where the
earth Water.
was. The boy casts out that Water with the fire shovel. The Woman laugheth
at that. The Woman is in green clothes, and the boy in red. Green. Red.


Now comes a Woman with child, or with a great belly, in white clothes, she
puts her hand down to the ground, and pulls out a little Glass full of
red oil.

Now comes an old man with a Crab-tree staff on his back, his clothes of
motly color. This old man takes the Glass from the Woman by force, with his
fist he breaks the Glasle, and all the oil runs about his arm, and out of
that oil did seem a Book to come, a very little Book.

..... Plainer, truer, or better can nothing be.

E. K. He said this, looking on the Book.

..... These four found, but none HAD FRUIT, but the last. Hear and write the
mysteries 1 (...) Woman. 2 A Child. 3 A Woman with child. 4 An old man.
of God, with humble hearts, not sitting, but kneeling, before Sanctum
Sanctorum.

D I kneeled, and so prepared my self to the writing. In the Name of Jesus our
Redeemer, and the Wisdom (...) of God Almighty.

E. K. He kneeleth himself.

E. K. Now goes fire out of his mouth streamingly, he turns himself to the 4
parts of the World, spouting out, or breathing fire vehemently.

E. K. Now comes one like an angel, hovering over him in the air: and
bids An (...).
him Hold up his hand.

..... Thou (...) swear by heaven and earth, and by him that sits on the
Throne, that thou An Oath.
shall open thy mouth, and speak no more then is contained in this Book.

E. K. He delivers him a Book out of his Bosom.

..... I have sworn.

E. K. The Angel is gone. Now truly, the place is holy.

E. K. He holds the Book in his hand which the Angel gave him. The Book is as
if it were of Ivory bone. The Book is open, he looks on it. The letters seem
to be bluish.

..... There is silence in us, and in the heavens.

E. K. Now all is full of smoke.

D (...) paululum tacitus.

E. K. Now it is clear again...... He seems to read of the Book.

..... Take of your Dlasod.

E. K. The book seems to be written in the holy Characters.

..... Dlasod dignified.

E. K. -- E. K. thought this is ignotum (...) ignotius.


..... My brother, leave off thy childishness; murmur not, thou hindrest me.

E. K. He is again in a Cloud. E. K. Now he is clear again.

..... And Luminus or from due degrees.

..... Read it.

D I read it...... Take off your Dlasod dignified, and Luminus, or from due
degrees.

E. K. He seems to labor much about the reading of it.

..... Gather or take fierce degree.

..... [I feel no power, therefore have patience.]

'..... Notwithstanding, work it diverse days multiplying four digestions.

E. K. Now he is in a Cloud again.

..... Pray, that it may be given unto me of God.

..... And double then Dlasod, and thy Rod Inr. [It is a word which cannot be
sounded] D Corrected thus afterward


..... Mend it Rlo.

D Must it be Rlodnr?

..... Look about you, for Satan would hinder you of Gods benefits.

..... Rlodnr.

..... Diligently.

..... Pray, that you may understand.

D We prayed.

..... For, until thou watch so continuing.

E. K. A Cloud stands by him, and now comes before him as other times
before: and then goes away from before him again.

..... it, a holy hour descends.

..... Note this, very well, for here you may be cast over shoes.

E. K

..... This Cloud is in thee. D We had talk of the foresaid Cloud.

..... Of every work there ascends one Audcal, and so every Law Rlodnr.

E. K. Now he is covered in his vail or cloud again.

E. K. Prayed a short fervent prayer, whereat I rejoiced much.

E. K. Now there comes a beam from above into his head as big as my little
finger.

..... And purpose Dlasod, take a swift Image, and have the proportion of a most
glorious E. K. He speaks, and casts (...) arms abroad swiftly. [ (...)] D
This was added and corrected afterward.
mixture Audcal and also Lulo. Continue and by office seek Rnodnr backward by
the red digestion. But he by the common or red Darr does gather most ripest
work, purge the last fortene well fixed. Then the four through your [Rlodnr]

[I said] Roxtan finished more together at the lower body by one degree (...)
be by you for him hold it, for him in one of them.

E. K. Now helyeth down prostrate.

..... Until of the last thing.

E. K. -- He speaks swift.


..... In him become his red and highest degree of his resurrection through
coition.

E. K. Now there comes a great thing like a fire, and covers him.

Now sit up.

D We did rise up from kneeling.

..... After a while I come again.

..... There is the whole work.

E. K. Here is again.

..... Bring forth the book of Enoch.

..... Read your lesson..... D I read the former, Take off your, etc. Liber Enoch
Gather your six words, 4 words consist of 6 letters, and two of 4. Six words.
Rlodnr read that, in the upper angle descending in the first square. It is a
great thing to know which is the first table there in Nature. Deliver the Book
here.

D I gave the Book to E.K.

..... Look where thou E. K. see the letter clear.

E. K. looked, and saw a spark of light upon R, then on L, etc.

D He was led by light appearing on the letters to read the six words,

Dlasod, Roxtan, Rlodnr, Audcal, Darr, Lulo. Six words.


..... Here is Quaternarius in Circumferentia, and Quaternarius in Centro.

There be the 4 mediating ways to the Center.

All that may be spoken in that you call Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral
workmanship of Nature Animal, Vegetable, Mineral. Omne verum vero (...)
is here, as in a part of the four. This far now, more as you desire it. But
that you may see, I am a Companion with the rest.

E. K. He is gone.

D Benedicamus Domino Deo nostro Omnipotenti, Patri Filio and Spiritui sancto,

Amen.
Pragae.
Januarii 18.

Friday Mane horam circiter 8

Orationibus fusis ad Deum, ut Mysteria nobis exhibita (hesterno die)
explicentur; and ut detracta literae cortice succus and spiritus veritatis
manifestus fiat, etc. tandem apparuit ille cum velo cinereo.

E. K. Here he is, upon a green endless plain field, and as I see abroad in
the field, so the Heaven appears, and all circumstances of the air abroad:
but my thinks, that I am from the earth aloft, and see all under me, as if it
were in a valley.

..... Now what have you learned out of that Lesson?

D We perceive the grace and favor of God, to deliver us Mysteries in outward
terms determined, but in the fruitful inward verity, as yet unknown to us.

..... Behold I have delivered you (through the Will of God) the true perfect
and most plain Science The use and (...) of the former Lessons.
or understanding of all the lower Creatures of God: their natures, fellowship
together, and perfect knitting together, which is fourfold.

The first, the knitting together of celestial influence, and the Creatures
below. The second, the center of every body Essential. The third, the
combination of many parts or bodies concurrent to one principle. The last, the
true use and knowledge of every substance to be conjoined and distributed. Take
a pause --

[ E. K. He speaks a language which I cannot sound after him.]

D We read the premises, and discoursed of them.

E. K. Now he is here again.

..... In the Lesson which I have taught you is this knowledge, with the rest
contained.

Therefore seek, and turn the earth upfide down. Labor, that you may receive
fruit, for unto Note
him that works, and has strength, strength shall be given, and the reward
of a workman. Many years, the daughter of long time, are not necessary to the
opening of this Mystery. Many months have nothing to do here: For lo, it is a
labor of one day, for in one day you may understand to tear this Lesson in
pieces, and to understand what every word signifies.

But here is to be considered, in the learning of this Lesson, three things:
the place that every Note The place of words and letters.
word occupies; the place that every letter occupies, and the number and
place that every word and letter is referred unto. For here place and number
are apart, and bear an Image of the work that they entreat of.

But number and place must be joined together, and thereby shall you taste of
that which follows, The number of words and letters.
true wisdom.

Be therefore diligent, and pray for the grace of God, that you may learn and
understand. The The joining of number and place.
manner of man's teaching look not for, in me; for I have nothing to do with
man. See, how you can digest this:

E. K. He is stepped aside.

E. K. He is here again.

D I discoursed.

..... Now hear of what I shall say unto you. I will open unto you a Mystery,
the key and foundation into the entrance and knowledge of the divine wisdom,
delivered unto you in a Science palpable, contained in letters and words
unorderly placed, as a Chaos: and therefore not to be understood but by order
to be reduced and drawn into their places, and thereby to be understood.

For you have not a letter, nor the form of a letter, nor the place of a
letter, but they are all counted Cabalistically
with us, as the stars are counted with God. The letters and words working into
all reason, as the stars do into the lower creatures: Therefore humbly receive
that which I have to say unto you, or shall open unto you as obedient Scholars,
kneeling.

First, a little with me praise God -- E. K. He is on his knees.

E. K. prayed the 142 Psalm, Domine exaudi orationem meam, and I with heart
consented, and greatly rejoiced in the aptness of the prayer: as E.K. his case
chiefly required, and mine also.

.... I come again.

E.K. He is gone.

D We conferred and considered many things to the praise of God, and the
contempt of the worldly wisdom, etc.

E. K: Now he is come again.

E. K. Now there comes a white curtain before him.

..... Now hear my voice, for thou can not see me.

120

One, Seventy three, 67, 29. 20 Read -- D I read...... it must be 120...... 33.

E. K. I hear a voice, as if baskets, and earthen pots were thrown from place
to place, from one side to another.

105

..... 78. (...) 95. 100. 60. 91. *

K. K. I hear as it were a whistling very basely or lowly, whu, whu, whu, etc.

..... Say what you have. D I read all the 12 numbers --.

..... Make a note there. D I made *as you see before.

..... 39. E. K. Had a very heavy thing on his head: and in his cap it seemed as
if it would have crept into his head.

..... 51. 52. 83. 6. 7. 12. 20. 88. *

..... Note that. D So did I, as before, with * as a full point, Notable.

..... Take thou E. K. also pen, ink, and paper, and note the numbers also, that
you may agree.

E. K. Took pen, ink, and paper.

..... Write thou E. K. also the numbers that he has written.

E. K. Wrote out all the former numbers.

5

5..... 11. 13. (...) 62. 63 141. 9. 81. 18. 26. 54. 123. 105. 14. 27. 115.
135. 137. 10. 64. 46. 59.

D I became here almost in a found, I was forced to rise from kneeling. Our
guide and Schoolmaster bad me go away, and E. K. should write out the rest: But
it was not our friend that so bad. D These E. K. very quickly had received;
after my going, by show of bright light representing the numbers upon his
paper. But it was a Sophistical show, (...) may appear after.


139. 22. 3. 45. 128. 86. 72. 68. 58. 142. 121. 143. 24. 63. 69. 55. 19. 15 25.
37. 31. 17. 76. 57. 75. 40. 42. 79. 119. 8. 96. 113. 93. 84. 70. 49. 32 17.
122. 136 71. 2. 138. 43. 109. 106. 126. 116 131. 77. 4. 103. 16. 124. 30. 102.
110. 50, 48. 89. 44. 97 101. 82. 129. 130. 90. 34. 98. 99. 65. 28. 112. 114.
47. 144. 107. 132. 61. 133. 134. 66 80. 53. 73. 35. 92 111. 21. 127. 108. 56.
118. 125. 104. 87. 42. 94. 38. 85. 74.

Thou E. K. have all done.

After Dinner we repaired to our business, and by and by apparitioa was made.

..... And luminous, all one word.

..... Now set your numbers, as they follow in order, so orderly over every word.

D To gether is to be taken for one word.

..... It is so.

D There seem to be just 144 accounted words.

..... Now bring every word consequently in order by number directing you. When
you have finished and considered, after 2 hours I will help you again.

5..... Must be in the place of 23, and must answer And luminous.

2..... The number over Comoron, must be 2: and not 138. Set all together, I
will help your errors.

D I cannot do it well this night.

..... As thou will, and when thou will, I am ready.

D Omne quod vivit resonet lauds altissimi.

Amen.
Pragae.
Saturday.

Januarii 19 Mane hora 9. Inspecto Lapide statim apparuit, qui ante heri. Post
preces ad Deum.

..... Hear what I shall say unto you. The Word and Testament of Jesus Christ,
the bread of life, left to the comfort and instruction of the faithful, is such
as informs according to the dignity and pureness of Spirit in him, which
seeks to be informed. For why, the Holy Ghost helps not such as are Lepers,
neither heals such as are sick, unless they come seeking him truly for (...).

Many read the Scriptures after the same manner, (my brethren) but they are
confounded, because they seek their own glory, and not the glory of him,
whereof they (...). Herein death Satan rejoice that the Word of God is become an
instrument unto him, to spoil the life, (and state to come) of man.

Herein death he rejoice, that with the same meat that God feeds, even with
the self same he confounds.

After the same manner has he done unto you.

For yesterday, when he saw thee (D) labor and struggle with infirmities of
the flesh, he thought D I was very sick suddenly, and was constrained to leave
off.
a fit time to thrust in himself, and of the same bread that I have given you
(in the power of Chris) to make himself an instrument by turning of himself
into our brightness, to lead you into error. But not unworthy are you of this
mist or darkness: Read you not in the Seriptures, that he perished that moved
himself to stay the Ark unbidden?

The Hand does not the part of the body, neither can he that is a Seer, and the
member of another, D (...); proprium solum officium faciat.
fulfill the office of him of whom he is a member.

I say unto thee [E.K.]

Because thou yesterday would offer up sacrifice, would put thy hand to
that which is not thy office, and that in the absence of him, which is thy
body: therefore has Satan deceived thee, Officio unusquisque fungatur proprio.
and as the father of liers has in a lesson of truth led you so far into
error, that you will never find the way out, if you should follow those
instructions.

For why they are false, and of the Devil.

When thou were commanded, saying, Write; then write: But when thou have no
authority given thee, usurp not. But notwithstanding, Humble your selves before
the Lord, and kneeling before Mercy and Grace.
him, Receive you Lessons together, you are but one body.

D Thanks be unto our God, which has delivered us from the snare of the wicked
hunter, and is ready to lead us into the path of truth.

.....: Now write both together, as you shall hear.

D In the Name of Jesus.

..... The Place is holy.

1. 10. 67. 29. 120. E. K. Now I hear as the falling of a block. 33. 78. 140.
95. 52. 60. 91. 39. 51. 65. 83. 6. 7. 12. 20. 88. 11. 13. 5. 62. 121. 63. 125.
141. 9. 81. 18. 26. 54. 123. 128. 14. 27. 115. 66. 135. 137. 10 64. 59. 139.
22. 3. 23. 105. 86. 72. 68. 45. 142. 121 29. 143. 24. 36. 58. 55. 15. 25. 37.
31. 117. 76. 57. 69. 40. 41. 79. 75. 8. 96. 113. 93. 84. 70. 35. 32. 17. 122.
136. 49. 138 2. (...). 43. 109. 106. 126. 116. 131. 77. 4. 103. 92. 19. 124.
30. 102. 110. 50. 48. 89. 44. 97. 101. 82. 129. 130. 90. 34. 132. 98: 134. 87.
28. 112. 114. 47. 144. 187. 132. 61. 21. 99. 87
[46] 71. 42. 80. 53. 66. 77. 16. 111. 133 127. 108. 56. 118. 119. 104. 100.
73. 94. 38 85. 74.

A holy must be all one word, and so else where, A most.

D I find here 8 numbers double, and 9 numbers between 1 and 144, not served
with words, and Note.
one to want of 144.

..... What is it to me, if Satan confound you.

D As I put my trust in the Almighty power of Christ our Redeemer, so I most
humbly, heartily and constantly beseech him, and verily believe, that he will
confound and utterly extermine all Satanical temptations in these actions, else
are we nothing.

..... Beseech God to forgive you your sins. I will visit you at the fourth hour
after dinner.

Deo Gratias.

Saturday,

After dinner, circa horam 4.

D Comfort us, O God, with thy truth, as we intend truly to be thy faithful and
(...) Servants. Mitte limam.

E. K. Here he is.

1..... You have 29 twice, the last 29 must clean be put out.

2 You have two Dlasod, you must put the latter out.

E. K. He is gone.

E. K. He is here again.

3..... Have you-not this word double?

Put two words next to that, Dlasod and

..... Look out the number of 63

Put next to it 125...... D The wicked enemy prompted falls.

4..... You have two 10

Make the last 66.

5 The last 77 must be 71.

The rest will prove it self.

Now set the numbers and gather.

..... Think not that I can err; if there be a fault, it is yours.

Saturday,

After drinking at night, hora 7.

..... Your words and numbers must be all one, or else you labor in vain.

..... 1. 2. 3.

D Which be the words answering to those numbers?

..... Take Common Rlodnr I will teach you no further.

D God be thanked.

..... Take Common

..... I spoke to thee in the beginning of Darr and And, over the which there
must be 121 and 125

I so instructed thee in the beginning.

But it must be for a new Revolution, but not for this. Note. For a new
Revolution The beginning of another.


Put out these numbers, let them fall elsewhere.

Note that, in the Margent, for the beginning of another.

1 Take 2 Common 3 Audcal 4 Purge 5 and 6 Work 7 It.
..... Dlasod and then together.

..... 121 over Dlasod, and 125 over then.

..... Now doubt not.

Pragae.
Januarii 20.

Sunday after Dinner, about 3 of the clock. As we sat together in the Mystical
study, and the Shew-stone being before E. K. our Schoolmaster appeared therein.

..... Behold I open unto thee this key, which is not worthy for the unworthy;
neither are the unworthy worthy of it. - Yea such it is, as never entered into
man before; but the body it is, with the image whereof they have brought forth
many things, to the praise of God, in the Number of his Works.

Take Common, etc. Take hold.

Write it in a paper by it self.

Now you have that you sought for (you may apply it, and find your own errors)
which you are unworthy to receive any such thing.

D Gloria laus and jubilatio sit Deo nostro altissimo Domino Dominantium and
Regi Regum immortali.

Amen.
Pragae.
Januarii 21.

Monday.

Mane hora 9.

D Oratione Dominica and aliis precibus ad Deum fusis, pro ejus gratia and
auxilio, per fideles fous Ministros, and nostros conatus promovendos, etc.

E. K. Here he is.

D Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini, cujus nomen sanctificetur and
exaltetur, (...) and in aevum per omnes gentes.

.... Remember that you are flesh, and by your works deserve nothing at Gods
hands.

Now then if you be man, then are you of earth, earthy. But according to your
similitude, grafted in the image of God in his Son Jesus you are heavenly.

But behold, God is opposite unto you, and his spirit (...) not unto you, in
that you are flesh, in that you are earth, in that you are filthy: in that you
are the children of Satan, and that therefore, take part with him against
Christ anointed of the Lord.

E. K. He is out of sight now.

Now if you be opposite, or more contrary to the image of him which dwells in
you, if you dwell in him what do ye here: why presume you to enter within the
Doors of him to whom you are an adversary?

Herein you show your ignorance; and the lumpishnesse of your fragility, in
that you seek of him, unto whom you are odious, or crave the bread which is due
and necessary for his children and servants. But hear my voice, Petentibus dat,
sed petentibus (...), and (...), sed non alienis. (...)


Notwithstanding, of his mercy, and for that, he knew before the beginning of
all worlds, the (...) of your vessels, and remembering that you have been of his
household, mercifully he has hitherto (...) at you, and at your presumption,
and fed you with that bread, which is not the bread of (...).

(...) now considering that you continue in your wickedness, continue in your
rebellion against his Majesty, and fight (...) under his banner which is
accursed, he takes his bread from you, shuts ^.
up his Doors against you, warns his servants against you, and is become a
firebrand of wrath against you.

But here you will say: were not we of those number unto whom he made a
promise, you were so. But upon condition: That if you would bridle your tongues
from (...) evil, and become wholly his. But you are neither his, nor bridle
your tongues: but speak (...) before the Lord, and the Messengers of his light
and covenant. Therefore are you not inheritors of his promise. Behold, while
the grapes grew, and the corn ripeneth, God did expect your return, for no hour
is unacceptable unto him.

But now the harvest comes that the corn must be cut down and the grapes
pressed, you are not as you said you would be, nor as you promised.

Therefore are you excluded, for in the vineyard there comes no strangers,
nor in this harvest comes any hirelings, for it is not the harvest of man.

D

Now either fulfill your promise and return from the multitude of your sins:
or murmur not, though you be shut out of Doors.

The earth of it self brings forth nothing, for it is the lump and excrement
of darkness, whose bowels are a (...) lake. Hell.


But where the heavens yield, and the Sun pours down his force, she opens
her self, and becomes spongy, receiving mixture to generation, and so is
exalted above her self, and brings forth to the use of man: Even so the Body
when it lies in the puddle and hotchpotch of his earthly filthiness, and
darkness making himself equal with beasts: whose dignity is not, but in their
use.

E. K. Now he is here again.

..... Two things you have to be instructedin, in Rlodnr, and in the Law of
Coition and Mixture.

The first, is the instrument working, and drawing things together of one
nature. The second is the bonnds and terms, wherein every mixture consists,
and beyond the which it cannot go.

The first of 4 parts, every part containing, contains his contained double.

The first is Tepens, this teaches the rest.

These two things can I open unto you in two revolutions, which is but one
days work.

But now I cease to open any more unto you till I see the favor of God more
open unto you.

After 7 days I will come again, until then, I neither am, nor speak.

D The mercies of God be upon us, now, and ever,

Amen.
Pragae. Jesus Mercy.
Monday.

Januarii 28. Mane, hora 10 fere.

Oratione Dominica and aliis pro misericordia divina, fusis precibus
extemporandis.

After diverse pitiful complaints of our frailty, and calling for favor,
grace, and mercy, he appeared.

..... Let the heavens prepare themselves to hear, the earth scatter her self
before my voice: for I am the Trumpet of the Highest, and the piercing Spirit,
dispersed into all creatures, which are from the beginning in God, and made to
his glory, and the use of mankind, that in man he might be glorified.

Give ear therefore, gird up your garments, and seatter your hair abroad before
the Lord, which is glorified in me, and through whom I speak; and these are my
words.

Harden not your hearts against the Lord, neither exalt your selves above him
that has created you. But humble your selves, and consider you are flesh,
mortal, transitory, and full of sin.

My brethren, my brethren, sin and flesh appear not before the Lord, neither
such as are sinners, and fleshly vessels apt or fit for the Lord to dwell in.

Understand what the Lord is, and how great he is: a Judge to the wicked, great
and terrible: a father to the holy and sincere, just, full of mercy, and loving
kindness.

If you now therefore be holy, and put on the garments of Innocence, and walk
before him in If
righteousness; Then look to have the reward of Children; Then look for his
fatherly mercies, and loving kindness; Then, then rejoice at the garments of
glory prepared for you.

But if you seek him in judgment, and stir him up to wrath and anger: if you
cause him to call the But if
terrible thunders (provided for the wicke) about him, in the most furious
flames of his indignation, to gather you together like whirl Winds: if you draw
his holy Angel from you, and spoil you of your arms: if he sit down upon the
mouth of vengeance, and arm himself with righteousness against your
wickedness.

Then look for the horrible and unspeakable reward of the wicked, and the
consuming fire of Justice, sharper then the two-edged sword.

Who has stood before the Lord in Justice? or who dare quarrel with the
highest? What flesh has seen the Lord in his Majesty? or can appear before
him, as righteous?

Tear your selves therefore in pieces, and fall down before the Lord, worship
him as a father, and become his children: for his Judgments (my brethren) are
terrible, and his wrath is without measure. Many ways you are bound and tied
unto God; As by discipline you learn.

But three special ways you have been advanced by him more then your brothers
or sisters have bin:

The first in the visitation, (...) he has comforted you, and exalted you
above the worldlings, of his good, pure, and just Ministers of eternity and
light.

Secondly, in that with his own hand, yea, with the beck of his own eye, beyond
the ministry of Angels, he has diverse ways protected you: defended you, yea,
and snatched you from imminent and violent envy, and prepared destruction of
Satan, at home, abroad, and diverse other ways, secret and not to be opened.

Lastly, that by their means and ministry, which are his good Angels, and
minister unto him, he has guarded you from the wickedness of your own
Country, and has brought you, ready to place you into the lap of a Virgin,
with whom, if you take part, you shall ascend into that Jerusalem, which shall
descend, and there live for ever.

Therefore ought you, above all men, to lift up the horn of the Lord, and to
blow his praises abroad.

Therefore ought you when others are full of idleness, the dalliances of
sin, to humble your self upon the earth before the Lord, and to praise his
Name.

Therefore ought you, though all flesh forsook the Lord, and cried out against
his anointed, to stand stiffly against the malice of the hills, and to be
without fear.

O my brethren, therefore ought you (in very dee) to shake off your
wickedness, and to cleave (before the Lor) unto the innocence of Angels,
delighting in the one as an eternal food, despising the other as a firebrand
for Hellfire and the wicked.

D O Lord, Velle adest nobis, ast absque tuo singulari favore, and auxilio non
possumus perficere, quod ita debemus praestare. Igitur Deus.

Lo, behold, your humility is not, you are sealed to the World, and according
to the World measure World.
the Lord; Therefore with the World shall you be judged. Therefore shall the
Lord sit in judgment against you.

D O Lord, what prevails us that we are are born? or what prevails us that
we have heard of the mysteries and promises most merciful of the highest, as
concerning our Election, if the Lord will not help us in our great frailty and
misery where shall we become on the face of the earth? etc.

..... Hear me. Fret not in Spirit, for it is not in thee. D

E. K. Now a flame of fire flasheth in my face.

..... O ye of little faith! O ye of little faith! O ye of little faith! I
have gathered you together as Prophets. But you fly from me. If I had known or
foreseen, that to sit on the seat of Kings, had been meet for you, to have had
habitation or dwelling with the crafty Counselors of the Earth would have made
you fit for me. If I had seen that pride of the loathsome heaps of money ill
gathered together, could have sanctified you before me; Then could I have
lifted you up, placed D (...), the lowth.
you amongst the worldly wise, or opened unto you the lowth of the Earth. But I
provided you against Kings, against Counselors, against the Governors of the
World, to open my judgments, and to bear witness of my power. But since you
are so full of rebellion, and will rise up against the Lord D Our office
appointed.
that made you, disdain to take part with his holy Spirit, that you may be
rectified and (...) to the performance of his holy will; Hear [D] thou my voice.

Take whomsoever thou will, in whose face the Lord shall seem to dwell, and
place him with this De (...) asciscendo vidente and (...) Domini (...).
Seer, and let him stand seven times by him: I will take the spirit from him,
and will give it unto another, unto the same that stands by, and shall have
power to see: and he shall fulfill my word, that I have begun. But if thou do
so, take heed that upon his head there come no rasor; But keep him for me.

I come again.

D O Lord God, thou have coupled us two together, in thy election, and what the
Lord has joined, no fleshly fancy of mine shall willingly separate. But Lord,
if it be thy will, seeing he is so hard to give credit to thy holy messages,
without some proof in work first passed; as for example, this doctrine of the
Philosophers stone; that so he may come to be allowed, though he imitate Thomas
Dydimus in his hard and flow belief, or credit given to thy Ministers in this
Action. Lord, proceed herein, that he may perceive thy power and mercies, etc.
And Lord, because he is to receive the pledge of thy (...), and mystery of the
heavenly food, we would gladly hear of that holy Sacrament some discourse for
our better instruction, and his better encouragement to the mystery receiving.

D After a good while, in which mean time we had discoursed of the Sacrament
receiving, and of the Philosophers stone making, he appeared.

E. K. Here he is now.

.....Note well what I say unto you.

E. K. He opens his face, he puts on a white garment, he takes up the
four corners of his garment, and puts them under a broad girdle he has: on
his head is nothing, but hair reddish wavering.

.....God, in the beginning, of Nothing, by himself, made, created, and gathered
together all Creatures; of Nothing, because in himself he is.

E. K. He holds up his hands, and looks up to heaven, and seems to pray
extentis manibus.

..... If he Be, then does it follow, that nothing is, but that which is God.
But God made not all things (made and create) of himself, neither out of
himself: therefore of nothing.

Understand therefore, that God from beginning, and beyond the beginning in
himself, in himself as God, contained I am and is, proper to himself, and for
himself: But also by the knowledge of himself, he contained also that Nothing,
of the which in his secret and determined purpose separated from himself, he
intended to make all things. It follows necessarily (therefore) that that
which was not, had no power of it self, must remain after the Image of IS,
brought or knit together by the Wisome of God, substantially in himself,
whereby Jesus Christ appeared in his Godhead.

But behold, when God the Father and the Son, through one spiritual substance
and illumination, from one center, had gathered together (Ictu Divino) that
Nihil separable.

E. K. He seems to be consumed to ashes in a fire, and so lies as it were in
ashes prostrate.

E. K. Now he is up again I know not how.

E. K. He seems now to be very clear, and in manner transparent.

..... Say that last.

D I read, But behold, when God, etc. as in the 8th. line above.

E. K. He looks about him diligently.

..... Then did he separate that Nothing from himself, and as it marvelously lay
hid in him: so marvelously he wrought upon it: Not at one instant, for then it
had been like unto himself.

But in time, which he first made out of nothing: which being consumed, Nothing
shall return into (...).
the place from whence it came. And that which has offended in nothing shall
be a second, opposite from God, and out of God; which shall have continuance,
world without end: And it shall be always vexed, the Spirit of God mediating:
not of the substance or pureness of God, or of his Spirit, but with the
self-same Nothing; out of which God created all things. Seeing therefore, that
the Will of God, which is his Image, separating Nothing from eternity, in time
made all things (being the work of six days.) [But I teach you a Mystery.]

All things that through God are moved to the Center by the Spirit of God,
(which is the center of the Godhead) are not after the world, after the
consummation of the world, as Angels and the Angels Men's souls.
blessed souls, are not to be reckoned with [that] Nothing: But are of God,
because they dwell in him, of whom it is said, There they shall not need the
Sun nor the Moon, the Lamb himself shall be their light, and a shining lamp for
ever. Note here that the Trinity, first, second, and third, totally not moved,
but by himself, in himself, time bringing forth all things according to his
Word, made all things except Man. For why? when all things had pleased him, not
because they were, but because by the Word (the Image of himself, and wherein
he is delighte) they were made, he made man, as the Scripture teaches you, how
by the Spirit of God in Moses, that he should enjoy and use the benefit of all
this something proceeding from nothing in the Creatures of God in their kind:
that in him God might be glorified; not only in this world, which is your
earth and vail of misery; but also and chiefly that the memory of his exceeding
and great mercy and omnipotency might remain before him in heaven, in the image
of man, and the most excellent Creatures, world without end.

E. K. Now he is fallen into ashes again, as before.

E. K. Now he stands up again, as before.

..... Here is the making of man to be considered: for of the most excellentest
dignified, and (...) part of Nothing distributed, as it were approaching near
unto God: God made the Soul of man, as a thing knit or tied in the unequal of
his own Sphere, not taking part with Nothing materially, Creation of man.
but with Nothing Immortal.

The Soul was made spiritual and increasing, wherein the Philosophers, the wise
men of this world Anima hominis Esdras book. Note (...) the souls spiritual
increasing. A (...) Mystery.
are deceived, and has been a secret shut up in the Book of Esdras, not fit
for the world.

For even as flesh by conjunction and commixtion of likelihoods proper in their
own nature to bring forth the (...) of himself; so does the most execllentest
part of man, taking part with the vicinity of God, (and so (...) moving) bring
forth, after the manner of eternity, every living soul: the Spirit of God
(conjoined with the (...)) working with him in his infinity.

(...) in the beginning God has not numbered (...) all souls that shall enter
into those vessels, D So that it may be said, that Deus quasi creando, and home
quasi generando, (...) humanam (...).
or other part. But the matter material in himself, he knows and has
limited, beyond the which, ^, there cannot be. Therefore it is contained in
Number: Not, that it is (...) in Number to be numbered, but within the
proportion of number contained in the knowledge of (...) Christ, taking (...)
with man, and so to be numbered.

Adam fell; (...) God his Commandment, and therefore was his soul darkened,
bare and naked, because he wanted the beauty and excellency of Gods Spirit,
wherein he dignified him, and made him like unto himself, being a living soul.
He was cast out, and now casts off misery, wanting the knowledge of those
things, for the which he was created. Now God, the image of his Father, grieved
at the fall of man, and moved with pity, vouchsafed, because of the excellency
of man, to enter into man being before (...), into this part of nothing, into
man. Not that he would beautify himself with any thing that man had: But that,
Become man, begotten of the Holy Ghost, he might, as you know by the
Scriptures, make man acceptable again with God his The Trinity distinct.
Father, God himself, with God in unity, for (...) and Terror is God the
Father, Mercy and love is God the Son Wisdom and knowledge is God the Holy
ghost.

He, since (...) became man, put not on the flesh of man to become a liar, but
that the flesh of man might be full of the spirit of truth and understanding.

E. K. Now he is fallen again into ashes.

E. K. Now he is up again.

And so receive forgiveness of sins, and be at one with God, which is to say,
in his favor, taking hold in God, not as created, and from Creation sinful by
fall. But by ransonse and redemption as bought and made free in Jesus Christ,
which offered up the Sacrifice of frankincense, gold, and myrrh, of true
propitiation, for the quick and the dead.

Now, my brethren, give good ear what I say unto you.

The wisdom of the Father, in love, created and made man, dignifying him, and
exalting him, as the Lord and Master over all Creatures mortal. But how? by
Plasmation. For it is written, Let us make man.

Here thou see also the Scripture says, that God took of the Earth. Mark
this word, and consider Earth.
it when I shall apply it.

Now if this power, if this Plasmating, if this Taking, which was the Word,
become man, perfect man; then follows it, that man was and is, God creating
and created. If therefore this conjunction or knitting together of God and man,
bear the image of him, in excellency and power, which created all things, and
by whom this Nothing was spread abroad, and had form in his parts: then
follows it, that the self-same God and Man being truth, speaking of himself
unto his Disciples saying, This is my body.

E. K. Now he is fallen again in ashes.

E. K. Now he is up again.

..... Read.

D I read, Now my brethren give good ear, etc.

E. K. Now he holds up his hands.

.....did in breaking of bread, which signifies the earth, in taking it
signified, the power of making, and his own Office, and breaking it before his
Disciples, according to the secret sense of man's soul, then being yet alive,
give himself in the bread, and in breaking unto his Disciples, as the sense of
his word spoken.

E K. He speaks that I understand not.

.....did import and truly signify himself, his (...) body, to suffer, and
suffered in that, in him, in his Godhead and wisdom before the worlds it was
so: his very true body and very true blood. But notwithstanding (...). Consider
of this.

E. K. He is gone.

D Blessed be.

E. K. Now he is here again.

..... Mark here for whom, and unto whom Christ took, and brake bread: also took
the Chalice, and called it his blood of the New Testament, which shall be given.

Here you see, that in faith, and Sacramentally it was given unto his Disciples
there, which was Note. In faith and (...).
also to be given upon the Cross for the redemption of man kind; for else, why
should he have said, which shall be given?

But here my Brethren, in that it was to be given, it was to seal the perpetual
and everlasting memory thereof unto the destruction of Satan, and the comfort
of his chosen. But in spirit, before, he had pacified the wrath of his Father:
Therefore it was given and to be given.

But unto whom? to his Disciples, and not unto strangers; not unto the Scribes
and Pharisees, but unto such as did apprehend him by faith.

Here thou see, that to apprehend by faith, is to be comprehended in the love
of God.

But in that Christ said that shall be shed, it signified unto the worlds end:
for his blood is always shed before his father, as a satisfaction for the
obstinacy and sin of man.

But the remembrance thereof is the power of doing, that he gave to his
Disciples, which consists The remembrance.
in Act, which must be done in the Church of God, yea even unto the end. For as
God (Jesus Chris) is said to be a Savior and anointed, so is he an eternal
King, and a continual Savior of such as fly unto him, containing in man (being
dignified through his Godhead) the eternal power of Christus potest esse ubique.
presence and Being, in all places wheresoever.

Consider (my brethren) unto what use should the body of Christ be, if the Body
it self were not a Sacrament, and the holy sign of the peace between God and
man.

Behold it is said, unless thou eat of the flesh and drink of the blood, thou
can not, etc.

If the Disciples did eat the body of Christ, Christ ministering himself, and
standing by, not yet crucified, why therefore should not thou eat the body
of the same Christ, which dwells in thee, and in whom thou have to dwell.

But here is to be considered the manner of eating.

E. K. Now he falls in ashes again.

E. K. Now he is up again.

..... But at whom shall we learn this manner of cating? My brethren, of his
Disciples. For although Christ himself alive, visibly and substantially stood
beside them, and ministered unto them: Notwithstanding took bread, brake it, and
gave it unto them, saying, This is my body: They simply did believe it,
considering and acknowledging his Omnipotency (which Peter had grounded in
saying, (...) the Son of the living God)

If therefore he be acknowledged of us (I speak for yo) to be the Son of the
living God. Then must we truly confess, that all things are possible unto him,
and that by faith, we ought to believe the mysteries, works and wonders of God,
Sacramentally opened and to be used for the cure of our own sores.

[He speaks I know not what, nor to whom.]

..... Read.

D I read: But at whom? etc.

And not as the wicked use to do; Tie the power and majesty of God and his
Omnipotency to the tail or end of reason, to be halled as she will.

If his Apostles have left us examples of belief, have taught us how to
believe, and upon what rock and foundation to fasten our belief; Then simply
and nakedly follow the steps of true Faith, and laying reason aside, believe.

But here note, that this Sacrament is to be ministered amongst the Apostles,
amongst the Ministers and true Servants of God, in his Church, and not in the
temple of the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, and Deceivers, which (...)
they tear Christ Jesus and his body after the frowardness of their own sense,
do eat (as Judas did) and so perish eternally.

But I say unto you, and teach you, that wheresoever in the true Church of God
remembrance is made, and the use of this Sacrament is celebrated of the true
body and blood of Jesus Christ crucified, there is also the true body of
Christ, God and man substantial, and bread of eternal comfort and food, to such
as humbly, nakedly, and penitently receive it, propitiatory for the quick and
the dead; not unto such as are dead in sin, and in hell, and out of this life,
but unto such as are here Sinners, and so dead, and to be revived. For he that
dwells in Christ is quick, because he dwells in life and light. But he that
goes out of Christ through sin, and in whom Christ dwells not, he is dead.
For this, I have said.

D Lord, what shall we say to the Priests, when they would have us to
acknowledge Transubstantiation, etc.

..... The bread that was ministered by Christ unto his Disciples, was not a
figure of his body, but D The words of Consecration pronounced. Sub forma panis.
his true body. So the Minister using the office and person of Christ in
office, pronouncing the [D] words, does also give unto the people not Bread,
but the true body.

But hear me, Thou must consider it as a Sacrament, and must believe as the
Disciples did, that it is the true Body of Christ, that thou eatest in the form
of Bread.

D As concerning under both kinds recieving, what is your doctrine?

..... Caro and sanguis faciunt corpus and cosstituunt.

D Then it is no offense to God, to receive under one kind only.

D As concerning the worshipping of it, being lifted up by the Priest.

..... That, by faith, (in that it is believed to be the true body) is also by
faith to be worshipped: Not in that it has the shape of bread, but that it is
the body of Christ. true God and man.

D As concerning also the reserving of it, being consecrated, what are we to
understand?

..... Reason has no place here: To them that receive it, it is a Sacrament.
But receiving ceasing, the Sacrament cease also.

Celebrandi, and accipientibus, Sacramentum and Sacrificium est: (...)
celebratione, and nullis accipientibus, cessat Sacramentum and Sacrificium. Nam
Sacramentum (...) ab institutione and modo.

The mean consists in them both.

..... To morrow you shall hear more of me, in the mean season consider you, How
merciful God is unto you through me, and open this doctrine also unto your
wives, that they may also know God truly.

D Gloria in (...) Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.

Pragae.
1585.

Januarii 29. Tuesday. Mane hora 10.

Orationibus finitis, post hesternae actionis lectionem, apparuit, facie
velata, ut prius.

..... I demonstrated to you, yesterday, how the visible (...) or matter
appearing was united and knit unto the visible, significated: wherein and
whereunto I answered in my own form and person, for whosoever talks of God
and Christ expounding the Scriptures, ought to talk plainly, truly, and openly,
that that which they speak may be under stood. This is the Office of a
Preacher. Even so I talking of God, and illuminated to this Office, for the
time, was bare, because I spoke not of my self. But the doctrine I taughtyou
was true: and is worthy to be graved in golden Tables, and monumentally to be
placed upon the altar, wherein man may see, as in a glass, How God through his
Sacraments and holy institutions, sanctifies, regenerateth and purifieth man
unto himself.

Now to the work intended, which is called in the Holy Art Gebofal, which is
not (as the Philosophers Ars Sancta. GE BOFAL. Prima Porta libri sancti. 48
Portae Sapientiae.
have written) The first step supernatural, but it is the first supernatural
step naturally limited unto the 48 Gates of Wisdom; where your holy Book
begins. The last is the speaking with God, as Moses did, which is infinite:
All the rest have proper limits, wherein they are contained.

But understand that hoc opus unum receives Multiplication and dignification,
by ascension (...) Deo, summa Sapientiae Porta.
through all the rest that are limited according to their proper qualities.

Of this knowledge I have laid a sure foundation, have taught what it is, and
the instrument wherewithal, and whereby it is. The manner of proceeding, and
her Basis. So that there wants Multiplication.
nothing but the simple and easy unknitting of those things that are wrapped,
not with the bands of it self, but with the obscurity and caliginous Cloud of
your own ignorance. Dignification. What has been taughs. What yet lacks.


But if the Cloud be in you, then by your own help and consent it must be
removed.

D By the favor and help of the Highest we trust the Cloud shall be removed.

..... Take heed therefore you lift not up your selves in mind, presuming
against reason, (whereby you are knit together) and the will of God: whereby
you are taught obedience.

For pride is hateful before God: and to be in love with your selves is the
greatest ignorance. Pride. Self-love.


Shall a dark selter brag or boast of her beauty? because she receives light
and cleernesse, by a Candle brought into, or shining into her.

No more can thou, [E. K.] for the ripennesse of thy wit and understanding is
through the presence of us, and our illumination.

But if we depart, thou shall become a dark seller, and shall think too well of
thy self in vain.

Matter wants amongst you, the fire cannot continue, but when you bring more
Wood, you shall have more fire I will not visit you again, until the seventh
day.

D Deo nostro Omnipotenti, Sempiterno vero and vivo, sit omnis Laus, Decor,
Gloria and gratiarum actio, nunc and semper.

Amen.
Pragae.
February 5. Tuesday. Mane, horam circiter 10.

D Orationibus finitis, and specialiter pro misericordia divina super nos tres,
[ A L.] E. K.] D] ad ejus honorem, laudem, and gloriam.

E. K. He is here now.

D Gloria patri, etc.

Woe be unto the World, for the has appeared before the Lord unpure.

Woe be unto the Sons of men, for they are the dwelling places of the beast.

Woe be untothe seed of the earth, and unto the seed within her, for she is
touched with fire from (...).
on high, and is trod under the feet of the Highest.

Who is he that girdeth his (...) unto him: or what is he that is ready for the
battle? such as have (...) the Lord and are run astray: and has placed himself
with the scornful.

Great sorrow is at hand unto all flesh: the (...) shall be (...) down, and the
streets shall bear (...) or them. ^.


For there (...) proclaimed in Heaven, and the God of Hosts has put on his
armor, and is become a fire of warth

Now comes the time, that such as so, (...) God, shall fall down Headlong,
and such as have been lifted up, run astray and down wilfully.

Happy (...) that endures and (...) a Labourer before the Lord, for he shall
enter into his holy (...) and had be crowned with the Victory.

Such as God covered, they (...) from him: yea, such as serve at his Tables,
become his enemies.

What therefore hall I say? I make (...), but I reap it not: I build, but I
enjoy not.

D (...) to us, O God, and help our (...), purge (...), and create a clean
heart (...), etc.

..... (...) an his heard: but he that is (...) enters, For into the Sanctuary
of the Lord, no unclean thing comes, for being cleansed, they enter.

He that is a (...), or an Apostle, or a (...) called, by the mouth of the
Lord, and so separated from the rest, let (...) do his duty; First, that he
make himself clean before the Lord; And D Make clean (...).
then may he hear, and sit in judgment, against the impure and unjust, and may
see the works and wonders of the Lord in his holy place.

^.

E. K. He is gone.

D After (...) we had (...) together, I fell to this Prayer.

D O (...) heard our conferences, discourses and resolutions: O God, be our
(...), and (...) the (...) gnances of purposes, so as it may appear that thou
art the merciful Father, the almighty and living God, the (...) of all things
being and that thy promises made in mercy and favor, shall not with (...) be
overthrown, or hindered. Manifest thy power and glory to us herein, that thy
Prphectes may come to light, to the end and purpose thy Wisdom and power may
work thy own honor and glory. So be it.

E. K. Now sir, where are you?

..... Here I am, the servant of God.

(...) vestrum, (...) est hujus negotii minister.

Alter, Puer.

(...) ad unpleat minister ministerium: Puer autem humili and se ministerio.

Understand that. ^ 13.


D (...) or the old (...) told us of a man naked, who clothed himself with
leaves, and of a child, and a (...), etc. Anno 1584. Aprilis 21. Cracoviae.

Hear my counsel, and follow it.

Wonderful, and great are the secrets and judgments of Gods determinations to
come: which are all ready leased and (...) into your bosom. (...).


They are great and true: and are like unto the Rainbow which the Sun makes
by the aptness A (...) of the (...) very (...).
of the matter and place (that shows it self suddenly and many behold it: So
shall the harvest of this Doctrine, when the Vial is run, and the World
receives disposition, show himself wonderful and terrible to all Nations.

But if the matter agree not with the weakness of your understanding, and
palpable blindness; Repine not, neither murmur. But pray, that you may have
the spirit of God, to understand, and that your eyes may be opened.

The Prophet [D] saw, but his boy did not. D ^.


But the Prophet praying, the boys eyes were opened.

These mysteries are delivered and taught to a Minister apt for them through
the Grace and foreknowledg of God, wherein ho has blessed thee, Dee. (...).


Unto thee is (...) the dignity of this man's vessel, which ministers unto
thee, as a servant.

He therefore is not part of the labor, but part of thy knowledge.

Kelley. True it is, that this rain falls out at thy request. But lo, thou
art let into the garden, (...).
and art preferred before all others, as a gatherer, that the wonders of the
Lord may be finished in his House. (...). (...) own judgment is to be laid
aside.


Therefore seeing thou art let in as a servant, not as a JVDG, lay Judgment
aside, and do thy duty.

So shall it come to pass that the minister, through thee, shall be satisfied,
(as through the labor D Through E. K. to be satisfied.
of a necessary) and thou through thee satisfied, shall be satisfied also.

In the mean season gather thy self together, fear God truly, and humbly go
home unto thy Mother. D Ad (...) omnium fidelium, (...).


Endeavor thy self to know things necessary for man's understanding, whereby
thou shall be apter to judge, and to take part with the * Spirit of God.

I promise thee, if thou do so, that the Spirit of understanding in all humane
knowledge and divine, sufficiently for thy Profession, Calling, and Creation
shall multiply upon thee. D In Ecclesia (...). A promise to E. K. of great
importance. A. L.


D I presume not to interrupt your discourse of matter, but as we are knit with
the Lord A. L. in (...) of friendship, for the Service of God, so does charity,
and the order of our affairs require that somewhat we should understand of his
present estate, etc.]

..... Cast pride away and be humble: for he that has an humble spirit knows
much.

Et cum puer Prophet, es, ab illo quaere, (...) te informab it.

Video and (...), (...) non video, Lasky.

D Oh Lord, what is this, what is this! Oh Lord! A. L. Non (...) in (...).


..... Sedem posuit Satanus in cor (...), and neglexit mandata Dei.

Si quae dixi feceritis, been fiet vobis: Sin minus, fiat vobis, sed (...) mihi.

D Give me leave to speak I pray you.

..... Fio, loquendo, macer.

D If Lasky (...), (upon whom so much of our worldly doings is grounded, as the
Housekeeping, still in Cracovia, in hire for an year, etc.) How shall we
supply the wants? etc.

..... Si ceciderit, statu.

Unicum habet [A. L.] a coelo secum relictum.

But iniquity and negligence causes him avolare also, of 21, this is the last.
A. L. (...) bonum Angelum jam (...) habet (...): Habuit 21. Ultimum consilium.


D O Lord, Lord, Lord, have mercy upon us.

..... Consider this last (...) for I can counsel you no mora. As your sight is,
so shall you see me.

D I beseech you let me know your name, if it shall not offend you to ask.

..... Sum sanetissimi figilli foederis centrum.

D Are you the same that is about the Cross in the Center? (...).


..... I. [^] D Then are you Levanael. D Lib. 2. In (...).


Leva. Relinquo, sed non desero. E. K. He is gone.

D Gloria, Laus, Honor Deo nostro Omnipotenti.

Amen.
Pragae.
Februaris 18.

Monday Mane horam circiter 9.

D Orationibus ad Deum fusis, and aliquantulum de E. K. quantum ad mysteriorum
participationem presentem: ut misericorditer nobiscum agat, and illius [ E. K.]
intentionem, and fidem Catholicam respicit, and ut sua divina bonitas nobiscum
procederet in mysterio perficiendo; viz. de lapide Philosophorum, propter
honorem and gloriam sui nominis, etc.

E. K. I see an endless thing like a red Sea. A head cut off from a body does
appear: Shortly after.
the Hair has bin pulled off it: that Head appears to come out up of that
bloody Sea, tumbling sometime one part, and sometime another upward, and
sometime under the water clean.

E. K. Now I see a Tree upon an old Hill full of moss in a desolate place,
besides the former water.

The Tree is sprung of a graft, which has been grafted in The Tree has a few
green leaves on, and many old leaves: The state of the Tree is as if it were
Autumn. There lies by it the top of a Tree cut off, and dead withered.

The Tree has a eleven Shots or branches issuing out of it.

There tumbleth down from heaven a white thing, and out of it issues an arm
with a broad axe in his hand, such as they hew pamnel board with, it seems to
be about a yard long

That hand with his nail makes a race down along the body of the Tree, and
then spreads the bark open from that place of the race made.

Quod erit, and futurum est, est and non est. A voice.


E. K. That voice seems to come out of the top of the Show Stone.

E. K. On the place of the Tree where it was made bare appeared two figures of
8, one in manner under another. Now the bark is put together again, and the
Tree seems whole, and as it were not cut.

Quod erit and futurum est, jam est. A voice out of the white. 10 branches cut
off of the grafted tree.


E. K. At this word he struck off ten of the Tree branches, and the stem or
branch that stands, seems to be now between me and the Sun risen about an
hour high; And that stem or branch has five lesser branches out of it.

Every.

E. K. Now there stands one like Michael,, with a tanckard in his hand of
silver and stooped, he says;

Mich...... Iterum Lavabo te.

E. K. He washes with water, and his hands the old branch cut off. Now he
takes that old branch up in his hand, and holds it up. The ax is turned from
the tree.

..... Plantavi te, and neglexisti mandata and statuta legis meae, and in
superbia tua defalcavi te: A voice from the top of the stone.
Sedjam memor sum verborum and (...) mei apud patres, and occupabis locum
solitum, and ipse rorabo te (...) coeli. Jam ponam timorem in cor tuum, and
visitabo te legibus meis, and introducam pedes reductos in Sanctuarium: Neque
cades, sicut patres tui ceciderunt; Induxi (...) malam and (...), and benedixi
ei, (sed proh dolor) taedet me. Igitur dejeci, and praecipitavi illos a me: Ne
forte triumphantes posuissent nullum Deum.

Michael..... Magnus es tu Ben Elohim, magna est gloria tua, magnitudo tua
superat coelos, and jam (...) in (...). Regnum Dei (...) terris (...) stat.


E. K. Now Michael puts on the dead bough on the former tree: Now he with
the ax with his thumb, closes the barks together.

Now out of heaven comes drops of a rain, and that stem which was so put to,
had 12 branches; and both that and the rest springs together very freshly.

Michael...... Qui habet occulos videat, and cui sunt aures audiat.

Deo

E. K. Now appears one like D under the tree. (...) Kelly


E. K. or Safeguard.

And also I see my self (said E. K.) coming there, and my Gown is all white,
but (...): and D seems to have a white Gown, or rather like a woman's
safeguard full of pleats, and full of men's eyes.

There appear seven more, six men and one boy. One is a Blackmore. Seven more.


They have all white garments also.

The tree at the first seemed to bring forth and show horns, and after that
there appeared men issuing out or growing plentifully on that tree, and those
men to have those horns.

Then he with the Ax pulled one of those men off, and pulled one of his horns,
skull and all, and thereof gave to eat to D, E. K. and the other seven; and
they did eat: and so all the Vision did vanish away, nothing appearing in the
stone.

..... Ista ad rem; Vos autem post modicum admonebo. A voice.


-- D After half an hour, wherein we talked de Conversione Judaeorum.

E. K. Here is now Levanael, as before time.

Levan...... O thou which art of the seed of the earth, attend my voice, and
open thy heart, that thy bowels may be filled with gladness, and that within
thy head may wisdom enter, since God has not only called thee, but also has
made a choice in thee, If thou hear his voice, and obey it. If


Be not stiff-necked, neither suffer sensual imaginations to obscure or defile
thy inward understanding. The first nourishes thee to the (...) of thy flesh,
that thy flesh perishing may also carry thy soul with it. The second teaches
thee to understand thy self, and thereby to acknowledge the Creator: that
thereby thy soul purified may also purify thy body: that thereby in the end
(...) may rise a purified and perfect Creature.

Behold, there are which rise; and have lost their bodies: and there are also
which rise, and they rise in body.

Qui appetit se propter se, not intelligit Deum, sed qui intelligit Deum,
appetit seipsum; sed appetitus ejus non est a se, sed ab alio.

Since therefore, to seek God [not] for your own sakes, is to glorify God,
lift up your selves, and behold the heavens, and look into the earth, and muse
at her wonders: And let not the lesser part carry away thegreater.

E. K. I pray you speak higher, I can scarce hear you.

Those that have their Sanctification through promise, and fulfilling of the
Will of God, have always forsaken themselves: But yet, for themselves,
followed his Commandments; Therefore I say for sake your selves, and do the
will of God, that for the comforts of your selves, and your eternal salvation,
you may seek God.

But he that seeks God, seeks him through patience, through afflictions,
through temptations. Patience. Afflictions. (...). (...).


Therefore despise this Monster that tempts you, and neglect her in the
midst of her pride, for she is poor, miserable, and prepared as a firebrand
for destruction; if you seek riches of her, she has none, if you seek wisdom
at her, she knows it not, if you desire (...), and the joys of rest, she
cries out against you, Watch, Watch, and (...) up your selves.

And if you seek eternal life, or study to please God, and to glorify him,
whereunto you are created, separate your selves from the Harlot.

Swear your selves her enemy, and hate all those that take part with her; For,
behold, she is become A mundo and ^.
an enemy of him that created you, a Blasphemer of him whom you seek to
glorify, the daughter of him, which set himself against the Highest.

Therefore for your Creations sake, ought you to despise her.

For your Redemptions sake to neglect her, and for the Glory that you seek to
attain unto, utterly to despise or contemn her.

But here, peradventure, you will say unto me, as he said unto Christ the Son
of the living God.

E. K. He makes cursy, and kisseth the ground.

What shall I do to enherit everlasting life?

I say unto you follow the Commandments.

Behold, it is written, I give you a new Commandemnt; Love one another. Love.


How love you one another without Charity?

But what is Charity? is it not the gift of the Holy Ghost? you know it is so,
you know also, that the Holy Ghost is called a Comforter.

But consider with your selves, why he is called a Comforter; Not because he
comfort himself, for he is all comfort; But because he is the comfort of
such as he has spoken to, saying, I have given you a new Commandment, Love
one another; But, who are they? Even they that eat the flesh, and drink the
(...) of the Son of man Jesus Christ, the Son of God, true God and man,
which unless you do, you are not of that Company unto whom Christ said I give
you a new Commandment.

For in so doing you are (...) in Christ, are subject to the Commandment, tied
unto Charity, wherein you are refreshed by the Holy Ghost the Continual
Comforter, and giver of wisdom to such as dwell in Christ.

See therefore that none is of Christ, that has not Charity, neither has any
Charity, that is not of the Company of such as feed of the flesh and blood of
Jesus Christ, without the which there is no Salvation, therefore art thou E. K.
a liar when thou say I fear God, I love God, I intend to live well and in
obedience, for thou followest not his Commandments, thou fliest from him;
Therefore thou art not with him.

But I hear D E. K. did confess that he thought so at this instant. Penance.
The Church. Ad Ecclesiam Catholicam confugiendam.
thee saying, I confess my self to Christ before the Throne of God.

But thou have not offered thy selfunto the Priest, neither have laid down thy
Sacrifice.

I say unto thee, Thou confessest not thy self, neither thy sins, before God,
because thou come not where he is.

Not that God sees thee not, but that he is said not to hear sinners, unless
they be penitent, but penance is limited by the Church, and sorrowfulness is
not judged by thy self, it (...) thee therefore, if thou will fly unto Christ,
to enter into the Company of such as profess him, where he is, and with whom
he dwells.

There, at what time thou repentest thee of thy sins, and shall confess them
with sorrowfulness, before him which is in office at the mystery; there also
by the mystery (which is Chris) shall thou receive forgiveness of thy sins.

For if he that ministers, is heard in the power of his Administration, and
Sacramental vow, much more has he power to forgive Sins; For lo, that he
does, is not of himself, but his dignity is of that, whereof he is called a
Priest.

Now therefore I say unto thee E. K. until thou make thy self clean, thou shall
continue filthy, and immundis and impuris, non revelat Deus Sacramenta.

But even as thou, not clean, see, and yet see nothing: so being cleansed,
not seeing thou shall see, and see all things.

I have done.

D Gloria Patri and Filio and Spiritus sancto, sicut erat in principio, and
nunc and semper, and in secula seculorum.

Amen.
Pragae.
1585.

Februarii 23.

Saturday A meridie horam circiter 2.

Orationibus ad Deum fusis, pro luce and veritate divina, etc.

D The occasion of this coming to the Shew-Stone, was that as we sat together
in the Stove, there was a pat or stroke or two (not natural) given on the Bench
and Wall: and withal I felt on my head a heavy moving thing, and also after
that E. K. felt on his back, as if one had written letters distinctly:
whereupon we went to understand the will of God, as being thereto half warned
and stirred by these tokens.

E. K. Madimi is here.

D Benedicti sunt pedes evangelizantium pacem and favorem altissimi.

Madimi..... What should I speak unto you, since you have no faith?

Why should I teach you that despise my documents? (...)


I knock in vain, for you hear me not.

Vnus unam alius aliam quaerit: dispares est is.

D Deus potest (...) and (...) satisfacere, bona semper petentibus.

Madimi..... Shall I speak, or no?

D Speak in the Name of God, who would not hear the words of the wise and of
the mighty, of the good and true?

Madimi..... Shall I close my mouth, because of your wickedness? or shall I
open my mouth, because Matter.
my Mother has commanded me? Madimi.


I will go back, and will desire that my mouth may be sewed up with a double
thread: for assure your self I will not come again willingly: But if she say
again, Go, I will come.

Hui, wherefore does God give bread to Dogs: or suffers his son to shine to
the bottomless Caves? I know a cause, but yet I am torn in spirit.

O Mother, Mother, if thou should speak unto this people, out of and from
above the Clouds, they would melt before thee, yea, they would fall.

But lo thou speak unto them by thy daughter that they may stand and hear,
but they hear not: But I swear unto thee, they despise thee.

What shall therefore become of them? I go, I will see if I can absent my self
from them.

D She went away as if she had been angry, in the mean space we argued after
our former manner; E. K. as he was wont, and I still in my constant hope of
Gods mercies.

E. K. Now she is here again. After half an hour.


E. K. She puts off her peticoat, and puts on an other Garment full of
pleats of a golden color, and after that an other Garment, upon that Garment
with many Crowns bordered on it, with hands out of every of them, and a great
part of the Arm, they are right hands, the first Garment (which she put off)
and flingeth it into a fire.

Madimi..... I speak unto you, though I say nothing.

Madimi..... The counsels from above, are perfect, because they descend.

But the wrappings of man's wit, are unperfect knots, hard to put together, and
harder to unlose: Consilia Dei.
Therefore they are not.

But these are of God, and they are true. Envious minds, and false hearts, do
hunt after thee, and Imprisonment conspired against me. D
they have said and have conspired; But I have said unto them, be it unto them,
as they have measured unto others: And that which they have nonrished in
corners, let it be fire, and consume their dwelling (...); Let it seek out
their brothers: Let their throats be burst in pieces: Let it range (...) their
Kingdoms, and let it burn down the gate of their borders, that the way may be
wide: for a narrow way serves not where I bring in mischief, I will bring her
to the borders, and will place her in the Gates, and will say unto her.

Accipe tibi vim.

And I will give her a two edged sword, but I will not enter in with her:
because I will not hear their Lamentations, neither be moved with their
groanings.

These are the hard and heavy knots, that the evil spirit and man's wit has
wrought togther; But because they are humane, they shall perish.

Truly it seems good to my Mother and me: and our consent thinks good also,
(and the rather The way is prepared by A. L.
because she has prepared the way by her own wisdom, which part of the North
you must always (look unto,) and be directed by.

For why, that Constellation is true, and does teach those that err; Those
also that are right, it comfort them.

But I will go unto my Mother, and ask her once more, whether I may hide these
things from Sapientia divina nostra (...) esse stella (...) in hec mari magno.
you.

E. K. She is gone.

D We read over the premises, and gathered, that some treachery was devised
against me: And therefore, I beseech God, to give us his counsels, and advises,
to be my guide and protector, my light and comfort.

E. K. Here she is again.

Madimi..... That you both, or (if you will be distracte) one of you, go
secretly hence, and speedily (...) from Prage. The words of the Conspirators.
unto Lasky: So shall it come to pass, that he whom they intended to imprison,
(saying, we will compel him to perform his word, least he peradventure triumph
elsewhere against us;) [and] may at last, open the Prison Doors for them, and
salute a strange King, even in the self same place, where they shall eat to
morrows Dinner. But when they perceive that you are gone; Then will they
understand that you knew, and that the spirit of God was amongst you.

I come again. Spiritus (...) nobiscum.


E. K. She is here again.

Madimi..... If these words be true, bear witness of the truth: if you think
them to be false, you need not follow them.

D How soon would you advise me to be going hence? you see how bare I am of
money.

Madimi..... Do so as in an eminent danger. I have spoke the last word. Sed
adhuc tria; Omnia (...) voto.

D Deo nostro Omnipotenti, sapienti, and misericordi, sit omnis gratiarum
actio, Laus, Honor, and Gloria, nunc and semper, Amen.

Monday

Februarii 25. a meridie, circiter 1.

E. K. Fell on his back as one had written as he sat at the Table; Hereupon we
resorted to the Shew-Stone, etc.

Precibus ad Deum finitis, cito apparuit Angelus Dei.

E. K. Here is Madimi.

Madimi..... You have vowed to your selves, and to the Lord, perform your
vows. That which God commands, that do.

Excuse your selves with men, and gird up your Garments to the travail; Not in
Wagon, but on Horseback.

E. K. I pray you to give us some instructions of my Lord Lasky his being.

Travail hence directly, and unto Wratislania, and there I will meet you.

E. K. I pray you to deal openly with us, according to our frail state, and to
declare unto us of my Lord Lasky his estate. A. L:


Madimi..... You depend not upon Lasky, but Lasky depends upon you; if he do
evil, his punishment is ready: if he do well, he does it for himself.

I am greater then you, and my eye stretches farther then yours; yea, though
you went to morrow, you have (...) some days. Days.


D I must carry my Books with me, we must be at the least three horse. Books to
be hidden.


Madimi..... Not so, but thou shall hide them.

D Am I to (...) hither again, before my wife come from hence?

Madimi..... I am not flesh, neither do I move, or am moved with flesh; But if
you fulfill the first, the rest follows.

D Secretly and speedily.

Do this, as though you committed theft, for if the (...) be diminished, the
purpose shall also want success. Hours.


Ductus es, sequere si vis.

The hand is open, and ready to take hold on you, what therefore shall I say
more to you?

D What hand I pray you?

Madimi..... Manus amplectens non rapiens.

D Lord I understand not that neither.

E. K. She is gone.

D In manus, tuas Domine, Commendamus nostra corpora, animas nostras and
spiritus nostros.

Amen.

Wednesday.

February 27. D I and E. K. and Thomas Kelly as servant, rode to Limburg,
(otherwise named Nimburge,) six miles from Prage, in the way toward Bressel:
otherwise, named (...).

(...) 28. Mane circa 6 horam. At Limberg.

Thursday. Note, I had caused from 4 of the clock in the morning the Horses to
be looked unto, so as, by five, or as soon as it was break of day, we might be
riding.

In the mean space while E. K. yet lay in his bed awake, and I was in the next
Chamber by, in ordering my things of my male. E K. heard a voice (like mine)
say D.

Whereat he asked me, what say you? I answered, that I spoke nothing. Then he
doubted what creature did use that voice. Afterward he rose: and when he had
been ready a while, and sat in the Chamber where my male lay, he said, that he
felt somewhat crawling, or as one writing on his back, and at length to ascend
into his head. And so I left him, and went out into another place, and kneeled
to pray, and prayed, and upon the coming in of Thomas Kelly into that room
where I kneeled (in the Door of a little open Gallery over the street) I rose
up, and went in again to E. K. and he told me that he slumbred by reason of the
heaviness of his head, and that he seemed to see me praying, and Michael to
stand by me. I answered, that truth it was I had been somewhat bent to prayer,
but that I could not pray as I would, etc. Hereupon, Immediately he saw Michael
over my A Vision.
Head with a pen in his hand: Thereupon I was resolved that I was to write
somewhat of importance: And I made speed to take pen, ink and paper, and to
settle my self to writing, because we made have to (...), as intending to ride
8 or 9 miles that day, and company tarrying for us: one of them being a Jew,
whose sister is wife to Doctor Solomon of Prague the Jew, etc. And going about
to attend for something to write, a voice said, as follows.

Cur non includis te ad audiendum vocem meam? A Voice.


D Hereupon, I did shut all the Doors, and uttermost Doors.

A voice..... In receptaculo, ut magis approbetur veritas. Note the reason why
a (...) is (...) more credit.


D Hereupon speedily I took out the Shew-stone, and (...) it on the Table
before E. K.

E. K. Here appears a white Circle round about the border of the Stone, and a
ball or Globe of flaming fire in the midst; The white Circle has great
brightness of light in it. Madimi.


E. K. Now here is Madimi, she stands in the white Circle: and looks into
the fire, she kneeleth.

On the outside of her, stands Michael with a sword.

E. K. Madimi is gone away, and Michael is come to the lower part of the Circle.

A voice..... Speak, for who controlleth me?

E. K. Michael boweth himself toward his feet, as though he kissed the place
where he stood: as if it were the Circle that he kissed.

Michael..... These are the words of the Lord, and of me his Angel, and
Minister of truth: and they follow.

Behold, I have led you forth diverse times: and you have obeyed me. Therefore
I say unto you, Be now Stewards of more.

D O merciful God.

E. K. He spreads his Arms abroad, and stoopeth down.

Michael..... He that commits his Treasure unto man, finds favor, and at
his return has his own. But he that commits himself unto me, and he areth
my voice, I will write his Name in the Book of Life. Behold, Behold, Behold, I
swear and it is.

That in thee, Dee, I delight. And lo, because thou have obeyed me, and not of
force of (...) Dee.
persuasions, I show unto thee what is to come, and what I would have thee to
do: and wherefore thou come hither.

D Fiat voluntas Dei.

E. K.

Michael..... Cover me for a while, lest peradventure thou see I am beyond the
ability of thy capacity, and so return not easily.

E. K. He becomes very bright.

D I understood not well this saying, neither E. K.

Michael I say unto thee cover the receptacle.

D We covered the stone a while, and read the premises.

E. K. He is brighter then he was, the Circle of light shines still.

D We uncovered the Stone, and then he spoke again.

Michael..... Before twelve months of your account be finished, with the
Sun: I will keep my promise with thee, as concerning the destruction of
Rodulph: lest peradventure, he triumph, as he often does. For, thy lines are
many times perused by him; Saying, This man doted, Red.
where is become his God, or his good Angels? The destruction of Rodulph.


And behold, I will sweep him off the face of the earth: And he shall perish
miserably: that he may understand, that thou dealt not for thy self, but did
fulfill the work of thy master.

Moreover I will bring in, even in the second month, (the twelve ended)
Steven. St. D All conditionally to be understood.


And for a truth, (as I am) will place him in the seat Imperial; He shall
possess an Empire most great: and shall show what it is to govern, when God
places.

In his time will I fulfill many things that I have promised thee, and I will
be merciful unto thee; because thou have not broken my Covenant.

My mind abhors from Lasky, for he is neither faithful to me, nor to thee:
neither he cares A. L.
for his own soul.

D Chamo and fraeno maxillas illius constringe (o Deus) ut approximet ad te.

Michael..... The speedy return of Curtius was to deliberate with Rodolph how
they might, (under the color of Justic) entangle thee.

And lo, whom thou fostredst and fedst at thy Table, is he, that has wet his
hand in the dish with thee, and has delivered thee. Emericus. Sontag. us.


Moreover, he has betrayed his Master: And the cause of his adversity, has
had chief root in him. From the third year he has done unjustly: and has made
naked his Lords secrets.

But he shall have his reward: and shall perish with his own hand. Before thou
(...) out of thy own Doors, to take thy Journey, Rodolph knew of thy going.

And for a truth, his letters are before thee.

Therefore, it behooves me, to give thee warning, and to teach and instruct
thee, as one exercised in my business.

Cover me, I am become cleerer.

D We covered the Receptacle.

After a while we uncovered it.

Michael..... This therefore shall thou do.

The same way thou came, the same way thou shall also return: Not to fly
from their malice or tyranny: But to stand in the face of them as my servant.

Hereby, indirectly, shall the Traitor understand you know him. The (...).


And Rodolphus hard heart, I will stir up with indignation against him. For he
shall (...) construed a Liar.

And they shall begin to fear thee, and also to love thee: and thou shall be in
favor amongst them. Note. Annuate their doings.


Annuate their doings, and hear their sayings. And those things they shall
offer thee, refuse not. I will sendone out to pay them their wages.

Moreover, I command thee Kelly, (But in my own person, I counsel and advertise
the) that thou take part with the Lord Jesus: And go forward with the business
thou have in hand. D Belike he was studying in Dunstons book and Tables whereof
he made me not privy. Yet if. Donum Dei. Together.


For why? They shall be shortly made open and plain; lest thy (D) word (to the
Emperor he meanet) receive foil in the hearts of men.

But I bind it not to that place. For, the fruit that springs of it, shall do
my service with Steven; And yet, if he will, with that unjust Lasky. And it
shall be a Garden for you: wherein you shall not borrow of the World, but of
the Gift of God.

And hitherto I will deal with thee, that the least thing which thou have
bestowed in obedience toward me, shall not be forgotten.

Live you together, as brethren: and wonder together, at my works, and in me,
for there shall not a hair of your head perish; So that you listen, and be
obedient unto my voice. If. Infans baptizandus. Mich.


When therefore thou come home, hide not thy self; But see, that the Infant
be regenerated. D As concerning the Godfathers: shall I request and use such as
I intended?

Michael..... Do, that thou have done.

But put all these things up amongst (...) secrets of your hearts, as though
not seeing, yet seeing all things.

Let these for this time suffice.

E. K. The fire is gone, he and all.

D Creatori nostro Omnipotenti, Protectori nostro misericordissimo and
consolatori nostro abundantissimo in tempore necessitatis nostrae sit perennis
Laus, Honor, Gloria, and gratiarum (...).

Amen.

D Hereupon we had great comfor, and so brake our fast, and returned to Prague
again, before 4 of the clok in the afternoon.

Note.
While I was thus out, and had left a letter for the Curtese Balthazar
Federicus Dominus ab Ossa, etc. to deal with the Spanish Ambassador, the Lord
Romfe, and mine Her Kinsky, to crave pardon of my sudden departure, and the
Child not yet christened, etc. and had given my wife charge not to deliver the
Letter before Friday night, etc. It came to pass, that this Mr. Balthazar had
sent word of his coming to (...) with the Lord Kinsky, (whom on the Friday
before I had met riding out of Town: and he told me that he was to be out three
or 4 days, etc.) and that he was desirous to speak with me.

Upon which occasion my wife thought it best to send the letter to him, and so
did, not long before my coming home. Which thing when I understood, I was half
sorry for it, and sent presently word to Master Balthazar of my coming home,
and to certify him that my wife had erred to send that letter unto his worship
before Friday night, when she might perceive that indeed I did ride forth to
Bressel.

He thereupon was desirous to speak with me, and of him I received my Letter
which he had perused, and offered himself most ready to satisfy the content
thereof, etc.

Now to the chief purpose, At my return home from Master Balthazar Federick ab
Ossa, I found Emericus Sontagius, in my wives stove with Master Kelly, who at
the sight of me was sore amazed, and half not able, or not willing to speak,
but said, vos estis veteres equites. Then Mr. Kelly told me, that Emericus had
told him, that the Emperor had been all day yesterday very melancholic, and
would speak with no body. And that he knew of my journey in a moment when it
was, and that by the Jews, and specially by the Doctor his son, that had gone
about to get me the four horses, and labored very much with himself (unasked)
to persuade me that the Emperor his first and chief understanding of it was by
the Jews, etc. Hereupon (being now night) he went home.

Pragae.
Martii 14.

Thursday. A meridie, hora 2. Baptizatus erat Michael Dee filius meus in arcis
Pragensis majori Templo. Baptismum exercente, Caesareae Majestatis Capellano.

Susceptoribus vero, Illustrissimis Dominis, Domino don Gulielmo de sancto
Clemente, Hispaniarum Regis, apud Caesarem Legato, and Domino Magnifico, Domino
Romff, summo Caesareae majestatis cubiculario, and a consiliis arcanis intimo
and primario, etc.

Susceptrice autem, Nobilissima foemina, Domina de Dittrechstain, Domini de
Dittrechstain, uxore charissima, qui major Domo Caesareae majestatis est.
Infanti vero nomen erat inditum Michael ad petitionem meam, ob gratam beati
Michaelis memoriam, qui ( ex misericordia Dei) tam fuit Michael.
est and erit nobis beneficus, auxiliaris and tutelaris, etc.

Pragae.
Martii 18.

Monday. mane, horam circiter 7.

D Precibus (ex more) ad Deum fusis, primum; deinde (aliqua interposita mora)
aliis etiam ejaculationibusque factis pro misericordia, luce and auxilio Dei,
etc. post horas 2. tandem nulla facta apparitione, cessavimus. Ego vero de Dei
ira timidus, causam subesse magnam dubitavi, etc.

D (...) nostri Deus, and ne nobiscum agas, juxta omnes iniquitates nostras,
Amen.

Martii 20.

Wednesday, mane. D Note -- E. K. yesterday had a show of a little thing as big
as a pease of fire as it were in the stone going about by the brinks. And
because it was not in shape humane, he of purpose would not declare it so to
me, and so I have noted (as appears) of no show. This he told me on Tuesday
night (that was yesternight) upon occasion of a great stir and moving in his
brains, very sensible and distinct, as of a creature of humane shape and
lineaments going up and down to and fro in his brains, and within his skull:
sometimes seeming to sit down, sometime to put his head out at his ear.

And this began from the same night following.

Pragae.
Martii 20.

Wednesday, mane circiter 6.

D Precibus ad Deum fusis aliquanto prolixioribus quam ex more, etc. statim
facta est apparitio.

E. K. Here is the same show of a little parcel of fire somewhat less then a
pease, going about the border of the stone.

E. K. Here is one, but he has a covered face, I know him not, his covering is
of a compound color, between black, red and white, he is covered down to his
middle, the ground of it is white: There be spots of black and red on it, some
big, some little, as if they had been sprinkled on with a pen, or dashed on
with a pencil.

.....Against divine necessity is no prayer nor resistance.

E. K. I feel nothing, in my head now, and till now I did, as is moved before.

..... Come, o you Prophets, and render your accounts. Come, O you that have
sucked of the breasts, wherein the judgments and secret will of the Lord is hid,
and of Necessity to come, Gather your selves together, render some account why
the King of eternity descending from the heavens has so often visited you? And
why he has rather visited you, in the Desert, upon mighty and high Mountains,
unranged of men. Tell, I say, what the cause is, that he has come down into
the Fens, and amongst your flock: Could not this God have lifted you up, and
have brought you into his secret chambers? Could he not have ravished you unto
himself, and so have carried you about with him that you might see his great
wisdom unknown to man, and the abundance of Glory, wherein he has his
habitation. There is none of you that dare presume to say, that you deserved
the Lord his presence.

There is none of you that dare open his mouth, saying, God has need of us.

Tell therefore what is the cause that God has visited you.

D The (...) judgments and determinations of the highest, etc.

..... Be silent, thou answerest before thou art called.

.... What is there none of you that answers me? No, where art thou?

Job, where art thou?

Moses, where art thou?

Zyrom, where art thou?

Syracasba, where art thou?

Daniel, where art thou?

Jonas, where art thou?

Ezechiel, where art thou?

Holy, holy Esdras, where art thou?

You lesser Prophets, where are you?

You number without number, (whom the Lord has talked witha) wherefore show
you not your selves?

All these were full of the Holy Ghost.

All these mortified their flesh for the love of God. Yet, what, are you not
able to render account or to show the true cause why God has visited you?

Goa visited you so long, and so often, so mercifully and so abundantly, and are
you silent and ignorant? Why?

Mandata tua justa sunt Domine.

What, was this the cause that God visited you for, that you should fulfill his
Commandments, and teach his people the way of salvation?

True it is, it was the cause that moved you to obedience. But the very cause
why God appeared unto you, you know not.

Behold, the Commandments of God are just and true, whose sons you are: if
therefore you follow not the Commandments of your father, you are disobedient.
But why, your Father has commanded you: Lo, I teach you.

When God of very God, the true light, beauty and honor of his Father,
contained or was full of the image of an heaven and earth, and by the
omnipotent, conjoined, and equal power and strength of them both, joined in
one, was brought forth, and had his real beginning, he determined also, in the
self-same Image and Idea, the due and proper order, just law and determination,
of all things that were comprehended, which law and things together have their
course co-essential both in heaven and earth, distinguishing all things into
their real beginnings, limitation of time, and determination between their
extremes. This order or law, begun in the bosom of the Word of God, keeps so
his proper course, and order, and law of his own establishment, That those
things that before were wrought in God, might also receive working and being
substantial to the end of God his progression.

This is the self-same that we spoke of before, in the name of divine
Necessity, against the which no prayer prevails, nor resistance can be made.

This Necessity was the cause, O you Prophets and Children of God, that God
dwelt amongst you.

This Necessity was the instrument that brought you to the stage of your
election.

This Necessity was the cause that God chose you.

This Necessity makes of wax, honey; of tar, milk; of long ranging, return, of
Infidels, Christians; of disobedient, holy ones.

Finally, of the unperfect and evil, rage and roming astray of mankind, the
true number of such as return from wickedness, and are chosen to eternal joy
from the beginning.

But this may seem unto you a strange and stumbling Doctrine.

I have (...) the Basis.

D We read the premises, which seemed to us very pithy, and ponderous, and
full of mysteries.

D I noted two Prophets names, not before.

..... This Necessity is twofold, one (that is to say, the firs) contemplative
and fix.

The other, working and leading to an end.

In the first do dwell two great and mighty Judges, Justice and Mercy.

In the second dwells the son and image of Justice, leading on by order for
the course of things, that are led on by the later, have not true Justice, but
the image of Justice.

This is the cause that the elect and chosen may err and go astray, and lose
the benefit both of the end of his Election and first determination.

For why: All things come on, and keep their course, even as they are led, by
the image of Justice, Man only excepted: which by reason of his free will
draws out of order, (...) from the mark, refuses that which is good, and
through the burden of his flesh, inclines unto evil.

[ E. K. He teaches himself.]

In the which evil, whilst he dwells and continues, lo the course of
necessity takes hold upon him, and draws him unto the scope or end whereunto
he inclines himself.

For, behold, Although he be before sanctified unto the Lord, and made a chosen
vessel, wherein if he continue, necessarily he shall enjoy the reward and glory
of the sanctified. Yet if he lose that If he continue.
Necessity, and fly from his own law and condition, taking part with the
filthiness and iniquity of his enemy, through Satan or his flesh, of Necessity
he must perish.

For as those that are good, tied unto the law of goodness, are glorified, if
they continue: so likewise If
are the evil tied unto the law of wickedness, the Necessity whereof is
damnable.

This is the cause that the Prophets are visited.

Because God found them punishing their flesh, despising the vanities of the
world, and resisting Satan.

For lo, the Lord looked down unto the earth: And he saw them despising
wickedness, fearing him, and grounded in the faith of redemption.

Therefore he thrust himself in amongst them, and through the first part of
necessity (in merc) he visited them.

Take heed (o yo) that the Lord of necessity visits in Justice, for your
burden shall be great and intolerable.

E. K. He is gone.

D We read and discoursed a pretty while.

E. K. Here he is again.

..... Now unto the rest.

What is (therefore) that necessity divine against the which there is no prayer
nor resistance? For why it is evident, That sinners may return, and those that
err, may be brought into the right way, and that by Prayer.

Behold, no man is penitent, but he uses Prayer. Prayer.


No man satisfies, but he uses Prayer.

No man takes part with the Church, but in Prayer, for Prayer is the Key,
sanctified by the

Holy Ghost, which opens the way unto God.

Necessity had determined the destruction of Ninevee, necessity also saved it.

For lo, when they should necessarily have received reward for their
wickedness, they prayed, and resisted necessity.

It appears, therefore, not yet, what necessity that is, that Prayer
prevails not against.

Note here, The later necessity is necessity, leading malum ad malum, and bonum
ad bonum; which necessity is that, which is tied unto every thing leading it
unto the end that it desires.

Even as God, seeing the Prophets for sake the loathsomeness of their flesh,
and framing themselves to the necessity which leads unto good, of his mere
mercy, in the first, thrust himself amongst them, fixing their later and
desired necessity, with a necessity of his Omnipotent and unspeakable mercy
wherein there dwells two things;

Joy, and Perseverance.

These therefore (as the Prophet) which are visited with God in mercy, are fed,
nourished and fostered as the Prophets were, with these two dishes,

Whereof the greatest is Perseverance.

Herein I teach you, that he that is first elected and applies himself to the
necessity of his Election, doing the works that are righteous before the Lord,
and receives comfort by the visitation of Gods mercy, is sealed to the end of
his Election, in gladness, and through the value and strength of Perseverance,
and cannot fall so far, that he shall be bruised, or run so far astray, that he
shall not be able to remember himself.

Happy are those that are elected.

But happy, happier are those that persevere in their Election.

These are those unto whom God imputes not their sins.

These are those that sin and Satan are a weary of, for they are not able to
prevail.

These are those which are numbered in the Book of God, and whose (...) as yet
for their coming. But the altar shall be opened, and they shall rise.

But is there a mercy fixed, and does this mercy also fix Justice; Or as I have
called it the Image of Justice.

It is evidont; So also is there a Justice that is fixed, a Justice triumphing,
a Justice mighty' a Justice unable to be resisted, a Justice that Prayer
prevails not against, yea, a Justice that Hell and the Devil are condemned in.

This is that Justice, this is that two edged sword, this is, that Iron Mall,
wherewith those that refuse their Election, or are not elected, following the
necessity of wickedness, are and shall be cut in pieces with, beaten into
small powder, and be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone.

This is he that seals up the second Hell, with the second death.

This is that you, o you starvelings, you vagabonds, you stiff-necked and
stinking sinners ought to dread and fear!

Has God elected you, and do you disdain it?

Has he provided a Seat for you, an Honor for you, a Crown for you, a Wedding
Garment for you, his eternal glory for you. And will you force him to cast it
into the fire.

Shall the finger of God write you, and shall the vengeance of God root you out.

Repent I say, and fly from your iniquity.

Return into the way of the Lord, least God seeing your wickedness, your
un-natural and inhumane rebellion, your disobedience against your father,
thrust himself upon your necessity with his justice and vengeance.

Which thing if you do, Prayer prevails not^ much less is their resistance.

Are you not afraid to lose the sight of God, and to be deprived of the glory
of his Majesty?

Are you not afraid of the unspeakable flames and firebrarnds of Hell, which
are prepared for the wicked?

What shall I say unto you?

Shall I take pity upon you?

Why care you not for your selves?

Shall I pray unto God for you?

You pray not for your selves.

Shall I bestow goodness upon you?

Hui, you despise it.

Shall I bring three Sheep from the Mountains, and shall I lose two of them
before I come Three sheep.
home.

O you mortal men, be merciful unto your selves, Take pity on your selves. Fall
into the true judgment of light and darkness, of good and evil, of eternal
Glory and Damnation.

For, behold, I tell you, that God is ready to thrust himself, yea, to throw
himself as a might stone upon you.

Against the which there is no time of prayer, nor nothing that can prevail.

I have here taught you, and exhorted you.

Exhorted you to forsake your wickedness, and to cleave unto the Lord.

Taught you that those that are elected may lose their election, and may be
established in their Election. Also that those that are not elected run by the
rule of necessity unto the end of their wickedness, which is rewarded with
eternal fire.

From the which God of his mercy, and in his Son Jesus Christ, who has
redeemed you, is yet ready, if you will, to deliver you.

Hal rowgh ha.

D We long discoursed of sundry things, and each reproved other of
haughtiness, or pride of mind, how justly we did it God knows.

E. K. He is here still.

D O Lord order these matters with us, and between us, to thy Honor and Glory.

E. K. --

..... Thou E. K. and we, receive at one fountain, we are created and made by
one God, to the Note E K. had said, let them give me somewhat, or some thing
beneficial to my mind or body; and then I will like the better of them.
end we should glorify him, as our Creator, you, as your Redeemer and Creator

But lo, we are of Heaven heavenly, comforted and nourished with the glory of
God, wherein (since the (D) division made amongst u) we err not: you to the
intent you may be proved, are covered with mortality and corruption, to the
intent that the judgment of God may allow you, for those places you are apt to
inherit. If therefore we be both refreshed of God, have our beginning from God
as from our Creator, let us both acknowledge his goodness, and glorify him in
the works of our hands: we, in our angelical forms, you, in the Skirmish
wherein you fight, by fighting manfully, and overcomming. The fall of Angels.


Yet of us thou have, as those have that are rewarded in the labor of him that
is sent in message from the giver.

If the King send his Messenger unto thee, he ought for three causes. First,
for the person from whence he comes. Secondly, for the authority of his
message, or goodness of reward. Thirdly, that by him you receive the benefit,
whereby you are gratified. A King his messenger to be (...) for 3 causes. The
Angels good will toward E. K.


Even so deal with us for us he may say, you fare the better by him, in respect
of his labor, and the authority that he uses: so may we say, you fare the
better by us.

But let the heaven and earth bear witness (besides the benefits of Go) of our
good will toward you. But answer me.

E. K. What say you to me? wherein.

..... As touching your receiving, as touching thy taking part with Christ
Jesus, very (...) D E. K. said he would not allow of their doings and coun
sels, unless they were allowed of and confirmed by the Priest, to whom he
would confess himself. The authority of good Angels is greater then the autho
rity of the Pope. Note of the Jews. (...) Churches Triumphant and Militant.
(...) quid?
man: the Son of the living God, whose precious blood cries out continually
before his Father for the sins of the people.

Whether is greater, the authority of truth, by the Church Militant, or
Triumphant?

Answer you [E. K.] to that.

E. K. By the Church Triumphant.

..... Even such is our authority. Therefore it is greater then the authority of
him that is a fleshly Priest.

If the Angels that have appeared unto you, had appeared also unto the Jews,
saying, Crucify not the Son of God, they would not have done it.

For though they believed not man, yet would they have believed an Angel.

Therefore did God the Father acknowledge his Son Christ, by both Churches: as
you may read by the Angels that appeared to the Shepherds, acknowledging from
heaven the truth, that Jesus was the Son of God.

E. K. What is the Church? I did not think that the Angels were of any Church.

The Church is the number of those which are governed by the Holy Ghost, and
that continually sing Holy, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Zebaoth: But that we
sing so, the Scriptures bear witness. Therefore we are of the Church, and our
testimonies are true.

I counsel you therefore to put on humility, and to make your selves subject
before the truth.

Love one another, not because you are men, but because you are partakers of
the heavenly testimony.

In respect of thy body and mind, I answer thee, that thy body is which now had
not been, and what thy mind sees, comes through the light that we leave
with it. D E. K. had said, let them give me somewhat (...) to my body, or some
wisdom to my minds be hoof. A Prophecy.


But if we forsake thee, thy body is not, much (...) shall thy understanding
be. Stay and I come again.

D We read, and E. K. marvelled at the aptness and soundness of their answer.

E. K. Here he is again.

E. K. I cannot tell F or P.

..... When P has ended, and P has ended,

I come again.

E. K. He is here. D Forte P L. significat Philosophorum (...). This we had not
yet.


When P has ended, and L has ended (which is at han) then comes the son of
perdition, and enters.

Of these two Letters I will say more, in your next action.

The Light of heaven be amongst you.

D Amen.

Misericordia Dei ineffabilis sit super nos, nunc and semper, Amen.

Sequitur Liber 24, qui, hac die etiam (...) est a Meridie, hor am circiter 3
per (...) Levanael.

Mysteriorum PRAGENSIUM Confirmatorum Liber. PRAGAE, Anno 1585, Martii 20.
Mysteriorum CRACOVIENSIUM Stephanicorum, Initia Aprilis 12. 1585. Mysteria
Stephanica.
TAke common Audcal, purge and work it by Rlodnr of four diverse digestions,
continuing the last digestion for fourteen days, in one and a swift
proportion, until it be Dlasod fixed a most red and luminous body, the Image
of Resurrection.

Take also Lulo of red Roxtan, and work him through the four fiery degrees,
until thou have his Audcal, and there gather him.

Then double every degree of your Rlodnr, and by the law of Coition and mixture
work and continue them diligently together. Notwithstanding backward, through
every degree, multiplying the lower and last Rlodnr his due office finished by
one degree more then the highest.

So does it become Darr, the thing you seek for: a holy, most glorious, red,
and dignified Dlasod.

But watch well, and gather him, so, at the highest: For in one hour, he
descends, or ascends from the purpose.

Take hold.

Vide hujus Diei action praecedente. De Necessitate divina and electione, etc.
Pragae.
Anno 1585.

Martii 20.

Wednesday, a meridie circa 3. D As we sat together in my Study, and talked of
our affairs, and of the Philosophers stone, E. K. felt a thing heavy upon his
head, and heard a voice, saying, I will teach thee. Hereupon I set the stone in
place.

E. K. Here is Levanael, covered as he was wont.

Levan...... Why are you not pure, that you may learn?

E. K. So we will receive at Easter, as the time of the year does require.

D Lord, thou have said, we should at length be of one mind, through thy
mercies, Lord help us herein.

E. K. He seems to have had his lips sewed: for the vail is so thin, that it
permits his face in manner to be perfectly discerned.

Levan...... See that you take the season, and gather while it is time; if you
let this Harvest pass, you shall be desirous to gather, and you cannot. NOTE.
Thrice.


Thrice I must come unto you, if I find you not.

Lo, I have done, for I come no more.

E. K. I pray you to deal with another: here is John, a boy in the house, you
may use him.

Levan...... Thy talk is humane folly: But before I go, I will not be hidden
from you.

Read your Lesson, it is now a stale lesson.

D I read, Take Common Audcal, etc. Take hold.

Levan...... You are best to do so.

E. K. Now he has heaved up his vail, his face is bare, it was not his lips
that had those stitches as it were, but it was in his vail, his face is a very
fair beautiful face.

D We beseech you for God his sake, his glory and honor, to give light, and to
make plain this Lesson or Conclusion.

Levan...... This Conclusion wherein man is exalted being the last and the
first, is as necessary for you, and for the avoiding of temptations that are to
come, as your garments are to cover your nakedness, or the houses to keep off
the storms.

D Give us therefore this help, this hand, this staff, this counsel, O Lord.

Levan...... How much the more you neglect it, and the time wherein it is to be
gathered, so much the more shall you be tedious unto your selves and the
business which you must fulfill in the will of God, if you have this; it will
first cause you to forsake; secondly, it will plant you there, The fruit of the
Philosoophers stone.
where without it your seet cannot enter, and from whence when you are planted,
you shall not easily be moved.

I speak not this, for that you should murmur, saying, Cannot God plant us
without this? But to make it evident unto you: That God uses his Creatures
visible to introduce or lead in (yea, supernatural) force and wisdom.

These things will demonstrate the will and power of God grafted in you, that
it is found perfect, and from above. The diverse commodities of the Philosophers
stone known. Table-talk of poverty objected to us.


For if you say, lo these things has God taught me, and these things has God
opened unto me: Whilst they wonder at the one, they shall be forced to believe
the other.

Moreover, they shall leave their Table-talks, which object poverty unto you,
and they shall be forced to say, (even in despite of their teet) what need had
he of us? he sought us not of the world, for lo, he leads her as his slave.

These things, if you consider not, I put you in remembrance, that you may know
you lose time, yea, that you lose a benefit, desired of many, and so forth.

Lo, I come again.

D I read over the premises.

E. K. Here he is again.

Levan...... Read.

D I read.

Levan...... What is Audcal?

D God knows, I know not.

Levan...... It is Gold.

D Purge and work it. How your purging is, I know not.

Levan...... Read and go forward.

Levan...... Dlasod is Sulphur.

Go on let me teach you generally.

D Take also Lulo of red Roxtan.

Levan...... Roxtan, is pure and simple Wine in her self.

Lulo is her mother.

D There may be in these words great abiguitie.

Levan...... Lulo is Tartar, simply of red wine.

(...) is his Mercury. D He said before it was Gold:


Darr, (in the angelical tongue) is the true Name of the Stone.

I come again.

E. K. Here he is again.

I have no more to say to you, this is the first time. The first time of three
before spoken of.


E. K. He is gone.

D We know that Lapis Philosophicus sit ex metallis, cum metallis, and super
metalla, etc.

E. K. Here he is again. -- All is there.

Levan...... How many letters are in Audcal. -- D -- Six.

So many ways is this a working.

E. K. He is gone.

D Divina nobis semper adsit gratia, and nobiscum co-operatur, ad Dei Honorem
and Gloriam.

Amen.
Pragae.
Martii. 21.

Thursday, a meridie circa 5 horam.

Note, my wife being in great perplexity for want of money, requested E. K.
and me that the effect of the unnexed petition might be propounded to God and
his good Angels, to give answer or counsel in the cause? Hereupon I prayed a
little to the same purpose, and read the petition, etc.

We desire God of his great and infinite mercies, to grant us the help of these
heavenly mysteries, that we may by them be directed how or by whom to be aided
and relieved, in this necessity that we are in, of sufficient and needful
provision, for meat and drink for us and our Family, wherewith we stand at this
instant much oppressed: and the rather because that might be hurtful to us, and
the credit of the actions wherein we are vowed and linked unto his heavenly
Majesty, (by the ministry and comfort of his holy Angels) to lay such things
as are the ornaments of our House, and the coverings of our bodies, in pawn
either unto such as are Rebels against his divine Majesty, the Jews, or the
people of this City, which are malicious and full of wicked slanders: I Jane
Dee humbly request this thing of God, acknowledging my self his servant and
handmaiden, to whom I commit my body and soul.

E. K. Here is one with a leather coat and a spade, with a white Coronet on his
head round, has a bag on one side of him, and on the other side a bottle, it
seems like an husbandman, but a young fair man he is.

Jane Dee.

Give ear unto me thou Woman, is it not written, that Women come not into the
(...), The title out actions.
much less ought they to come before the testimony of the will of God to be
fulfilled mightily, and to come against the World and against the pomp for
money and iniquity, but because thou have humbled thy self, and have refused to
tarry (...), as it becomes thee: I will answer to thy infirmities, and will
talk with thee.

He that has his House inhemmed with a Ditch, which is deep and swelled with
water must needs make a Bridge over, that he may be at liberty, else is he a
Prisoner unto the waters, but if he want Wood, and have no shift to enter into
the fields, is it not Wisdom to break his Dining Tables, and to set himself
free; why cryest thou unto me; Bebold, let thy House yield, and the covering of
thy body give place to the necessity of hunger, Behold, God suffers his Elect
and chosen vessels oftentimes to be without Mansion or apparel: But, lo, he
feeds the Sparrows, but I will not reprehend thee, because thy soul is frail,
but be faithful and obedient, and that truly, as thou art yoked: Behold, A
promise to Jane her children.
I have blessed thy Children, and of thy seed and bones will I build a new, and
they shall have Houses, and shall be served of such as the people salute,
saying, hail Master. Be thou patient and full of repentance, and do that thou
have to do, and not that thou have done, For, lo, mercy is with thee, and well
shall come unto thee.

Behold, the Scourge is with you, and of necessity you must be tempted, that
your Faith may worthily Of Necessiry.
be glorified, and that you may be praised in me.

Behold thou seek Counsel of me, I will counsel thee, Behold, I would dig
for thee, but I should do contrary to my self, because I have given power, and
he that possesses the earth is against me; But such as I have, I will give
thee, and it shall be sufficient, more then thy vessels can hold, or thy days
can thank me for.

Consider that to morrow comes not before he be brought in: Neither can
thou have until thy power come; But cast up thy eyes, and hope for better
things; Lo, since I cannot give thee that thou desire, really, yet I bow my
head, and so I counsel thee, let thy husband arise and gird himself together,
and let him take his eyes with him, and let him have out of this place: For my
thinks they dissemble; Lo, let him stand before Steven, and let him visit
Lasky, peradventure he find him not living: But if he live he is dead, there
shall you see that I will relieve thee and do good unto him, and will bind up
the Jaws of the persecutor, that he may go on.

Thou art a Woman, and thy infirmities follow thee, I counsel not without a
cause, neither did I Note, One storm is yet to come.
stir thee up to speak: But for thy faith I will reward thee: But one storm
is to come, take it patiently, thou shall be the more whiter, and more nearer:
Behold, I go before and he that follows D Huic sexui scilicet muliebri.
me does well unto himself, for I do well unto those that follow me; Cast away
your murmurring, and sweep your Houses, take heed of Spiders, and of the whore
Rats This is the first time that I have answered to this kind in the latter
(...) Lo, I go

D Lord, it was said unto us as a Watchword, when Stevens Messengers should
come for us, that then we should go. Now his Messengers are not yet come, etc.

..... If the Bridegroom invite thee himself, what need thou his servant.

D Now is the difficulty for money greater, for if we had tarried together,
less money would have served then now it will do, etc.

..... Thou have asked counsel, I have counseled thee, if it please thee hear
me, it shall be well Numerata divina. Nescimus quis nobiscum loquitur.
with thee if thou tarry, but much better if thou go; I have numbered thee, but
be not proud, but because I have numbered, diminish not thy self, least when I
find not the number, I find not thee also, if thou will any thing else, there
are, and they can say unto thee, but who speaks with thee thou know not.

E. K. He is gone.

D Seeing here is matter unlooked for, we are stirred to ask questions not
thought of before: Therefore, O Lord, send whom it please thee to us.

A voice..... Sunt aliae horae.

Deo nostro Omnipotenti sit omnis Laus, Honor, Gloria, and Jubilatio.

Amen.
Pragae.
Wednesday.

27 Martii Mane circa horam 9.

E. K. came to me and asked me the Circle or Copy thereof which was showed to
him at Oxford, and he had written out, or described by the light that was
showed to him by the spiritual Creature, he intended as he said to show it to a
Jesuit, and to ask his counsel of it, etc. having a great misliking of our
spiritual friends, saying, that they were the great Devils; and so the lesser
that he dealt withal before, gave place unto them, etc. Hereupon I told him I
would ask our friends counsel, before I delivered any thing of theirs to their
enemy, etc. He would presently have it, and with great threats most terrible
and dangerous to me, he willed me to deliver it strait ways I being occupied
with writing a letter to the Queens Majesty, said as soon as I had leisure I
would give it him, he said he would tarry my leisure: I told him that would
scarce be this seven night, I had so many letters to write, he thereupon grew
in such a rage that he said I should not pass one foot beyond him before I did
deliver it him at (...) he rose to shut the Door of the study upon me, I arose
and went after him and took him by the shoulders to keep him from the Door, and
withal called aloud to my folks; Come here (how) here is violence offered unto
me, whereupon they came in all, and my wife, and so afterward by degrees his
fury assuaged, and my folks, my Wife and his went away: and after he had sitten
two or three hours with me, he saw on my head as I sat writing Michael stand
with a sword, and willed him to speak, which he did forbear to do, above a
quarter of an hour, as E. K. said: At length he spoke as follows --

E. K. Here appears Michael on your head, and has bid me diverse times to
speak to you.

D I disposed my (...) to write, and Michael (...) bring the Stone.

E. K. Here appear 12 with him, 4 behind him, and 4 on each sides of him 4, and
all with swords of fire, and he the hindermost of them had a Barrel of Glass
on his back full of fire, the 12 were all in red Coats.

Michael..... The Prophet.

Nunc ergo Notum faecimus Domine Rex quoniam si civitas haec aedificata fuerit,
and ipsius mutilati 3 (...) cap. (...). c.
fuerint, descensus tibi non erit (...), neque in Phoenicem.

E. K. Now they all kneel down about him.

They look pitifully with their faces upward, as though they were praying, they
be all in blood red Garments, and Michael his sword is as the sword I once did
see him have; whose edge did open.

E. K. Now answer me to the purpose: whether I shall have the Circle of Letters
which I did desire?

Michael...... Is there any like unto thee, O Jehovah in Heaven and in Earth,
or can thy enemies rise up [saying] against thee, and shall they stand, O thou
whose look is more terrible unto thy Angels, then all the fires which thou have
created, either in the bottomless pit or in the life of all Elemental
Creatures, or above in the heavens if they were gathered together in one can be
terrible to man.

Have thou not made Heaven and Earth, and have put thy head no where, and thy
feet somewhere; because without thee there is not, and without thee there
cannot be?

O thou that have numbered the Stars, and art Dominus Dominantium above those
that govern them, and more in knowledge then their Government. Thou, Thou, Will thou suffer thy Name to be trodden under foot? Thou, Thou, Will thou correct
the Heavens, and the whole seed of man? Will thou drown the World with waters,
and root the wicked from the face of the Earth? Will thou cast down the
loathsome and wicked Cities, that they may grow in the terror of thy judgment?
Will thou send so many Plagues into Egypt?

Will thou suffer all these things to be done and many more memorable, which
are all in thee: And One man: E. K. Veritas.
thou permit one Man, one Soul to be thus carried away with Satan to the
dishonouring and treading under foot of thee, and thy light of thee, and thy
truth.

If the King exalted him which magnified Truth before the strength and Policy
of Women: extolled him before his Princes, and caused for his sake the building
of this Temple to go forward: 1 Esd. chapter 4. 33, etc.
Will thou not punish him that despises truth, that prefers the wantonness
and (...) of the World (that errant strumpe) before thy word, and before the
strength of a heavenly Authority: Art thou so become a little one, that thou
art less then a King? have thou turned thy face so far aside that thou (...)
not this Rebellion? Can one man be dearer unto thee then the whole World was?
or shall the Heavens be thrown headlong down, and shall he go uncorrected?
Have thou Mountains and Stones untrodden on, out of the which thou caust show
thy Praise and Honor? An apt Skrier is sanctified.
Are there not yet Infants which may be sanctified to speak with the Heavens,
that thou so hidest thy self away from Justice; What, What, if those that
often cry for grace receive it not, yet do thou give it unto him that comes
from it. Nota.


Sane stupor Coelis, and stupor terris.

What, are not so many Fires as wait upon me sufficient to arm Satan with
vengeance against this Notethe manner of Justice.
D wicked one? O thou Beast, O thou roaring Lion, O thou Monster, O thou
Whirlpool, O thou terrible Murderer.

E. K.

Have thou placed headlong many thousands into Hell, and do thou linger to
rage upon this imp, whom thou have so long sought for?

Is it not written, least peradventure he find them sleeping, and so overcome
them.

But, behold, whom thou find sleeping, is ready for thee, willing to go with
thee, what sparest thou? art thou so bold, to give authority unto thy Ministers
to confound, nay, to so blind that thou can not see so great an Hill?

Behold, thy Ministers cry out unto thee, and send thee word, calling thee
Master, King.

Take heed the City be not built, take heed the walls of it be not lifted up,
and as they that were the Messengers of the King made evident before his face
that it was against his commodity, to have the Temple of the Lord built up, to
have the City new shapen, to have the Walls made strong, because it should
hinder his (...) into Coelosyria, and the rest. (...) (...) 2.24.


E. K. Now the 12 (he excepted) fall down.

Mich...... And thy Ministers have they not said unto thee, if this work of the
Lord go forward, if the City sent down from the Heavens may receive a place to
set her self in, if the Walls and Rampters of this that was built above shall
be placed on any place of the World on earth, Behold, Behold, will it not
hinder thy cause, will it not subvert thy Kingdom, will it not turn thee out
of Doors: will it not bring thee to aterrible day before the Lord?

Is it not written, that that day shall be terrible to Satan, and his Angels?

And will thou suffer a Door to be opened, wherein it may enter, it behooves
thee Satan here to bend thy bow, it behooves thee now to draw up thy arrows.

And if thou intend to plant on earth, that it may grow, time is, yet, now to
weed out this Message from above.

`Do thy Messengers give thee warning of these things, do thou hold back thy
force: when the Porters will betray the City, would deliver it into thy hands,
would break down the walls before thee, what I say art thou like to enter, thou
that loses no opportunity, art thou so negligent: Behold, the Doors stand open
before thee, why entrest thou not.

Do thou want fire, lo, he that (...) it has fire for thee, (...), rumor.

Behold, he offers himself a companion, what would thou more, unto these
things thou hear the sayings of thy servants, which say unto thee O Satan,
if this City be built, and the walls erected; Thou can not go into the Holy
Land: And lo, hear thou not them, neither do regard this opportunity,
whence art thou so forgetful, O God? great is thy mercies, and far art thou
above the sins of man: O thou not only shuttest up the eyes of the wicked,
that they cannot see truth before their face, but the profound [the] malice and
sight of Satan, that where he should most enter he misseth that place, and when
time serves him, that he lets it pass.

But so, so, God, thou give to whom, and where thou will, and even as thou
art terrible in (...) misericordia.
Justice, so likewise art thou wonderful in mercy; Therefore of thee is no end,
neither can be added any end.

This thy great mercy is the cause that this blasphemous Rebellion is yet
unpunished; This is the Blasphemous rebellion.
cause that Satan misseth his mark, and is become weak.

If any man make a (...), an earthen vessel, works he not, tempereth he not,
to the end to make a pot? But lo, when he has made it, and applies it to his
intent, if even he again destroy it, is he not vain? Do not those that stand
by him wonder at him? More mervail is it, that when Satan shouteth and hitteth
the mark, that he should be blind, yea, so blind, that he knows not where to
gather up his arrow?

But lo, the Temple was built, and the City stood, although the work was left
off for a while, 3 (...) cap.
and he that (...) truth went with glad tidings, neither desiring rich apparel,
neither to sit next the King, but that the City of the Lord might be built, and
that the Name of God might be magnified, so shall it be of this City which the
Lord has sent down with his finger, his unsearchable and wonderful truth: the
Revelation and Law of (...) to come, it shall be built, it shall flourish, it
Actionum.
shall stand, it shall endure, it shall be magnified, it shall be spoken of
through all the World, and it shall not cease.

Behold, the King of Kings has allowed it and the love of truth, is great with
him, what has he to do with Kings? or wherein needs he the beauty of the
Earth? Dominiest terra, and plenitudo ejus.

Whosoever therefore sticks unto truth, shall be exalted with God, which is
the King of Kings shall be magnified before his Counselors, not Counselors
fore-warning, but Counselors pertaking of holy Will: not called Counselors,
in respect of counselling him, but in that they are made privy of the Counsel
of God: Before these also shall he be magnified.

E. K. For what end says he all this.

O ye Infidels, and of little faith, which taste of the meat that was hidden
from the Prophets, which are over-shadowed with the light of heaven, which have
always associated with the holy Ministers of God, wherefore are you so
stiff-necked, pleasant is the yoke wherein you are linked, and honorable is
the earth that you draw the plow upon, for the Lord follows, and his Angels
drive, and the seed that is sown shall be the beginning of glory.

O ye stiff-necked people, why for sake you your visitation, or run astray
from your faith that you are driven in, do you make much of the Lords of the
earth? Do you delight in her dross that harlot money? Do you give reverence to
the King, and stand you in fear to break his Laws? have you a greater Lord
then the Lord of Heaven and Earth, have you any money or jewels to be compared
to his Grace? have you any honor on Earth, that can stand up against the Crown
of Heaven? where (...) God crowns those that are Victors? Have you any Law
sweeter then the (...) illuminations, and sweet dew like comforts, the voices
and presence of the holy angels?

Be mindful, be mindful, and lift up your selves, and be not blind, but
consider the time of your visitation, and that which you do, is the work of a
King, a King which is able in power, strength, and majesty to exalt you, to
strengthen you, and to make you honorable, but in the end of the Visitation,
and in the reward of your faithfulness, work not to day, and be sorry to
morrow; But lay sorrow a fide, and continue your labor, least peradventure God
unhood-wink, and make open the sight of Satan, and so deliver you.

Woe, woe, be unto them that are delivered, for believe me their tribulation is
great.

There is horror and gnashing of teeth, there is misery and vengeance for
ever, there is horror and the worm of conscience.

But two things are to be considered, here, whether the temptation be greater
then the resistance, or the resistance, more dignified then the rigor of
temptation.

Behold, the work is great, the labor is also equal unto it; And to fight
against the Princes of darkness in a set battle, requires great force.

The temptations therefore that follow you, must needs be great, I see
therefore the temptations surmounteth your strength, and your dignity is not
such as (...) resist against it; For why, Satan striveth not with you, simply
for the sin of Adultery, for the dregs of Fornication, for the covetous
desire of money, for the want of charity, or because you are proud; But he
striveth, rises up against you and tempts you against the Lord, and against
the strength of his truth, whereunto you are elected: Therefore, I give
sentence.

Lo, because that temptations has entered into you above your power, and not so
much for the subverting Signum quo (...) esse possimus quod Deus Satana franum
injiciet. Nota.
as of the work of the Lord intended, and of necessity to be done.

Therefore, I proceed not against you, but against Satan, and God shall deliver
you from your temptations; And this shall be a sign and token, that I will
hamper and bridle the jaws of theenemy, that is to say, so long as thou
(Kelly) art in this flesh, never shall there appear, or visibly show himself
unto thee any wicked or evil spirit, neither shall thou be haled in pieces, as
thou have been, whosoever therefore appears hereafter is of God; For thy eyes
shall be shut up from the wicked object. Et intellectu tuo Non introibit umbra
mortis. Caviat E. K. (...).


But now take heed, thou either perverse or froward, stiff-necked or
disobedient; The sin is of thy self, and shall fall upon thee, and thou shall
not be spared as thou have been; Now watch and Veritas.
gird up your selves, and do the will of the Highest, prefer and worship
truth, that you may be also worshipped. Lift up your selves, as the servants of
God, and help to bring stones unto the building of this great City, that you
may be openers of the Gates, and that the white Equus albus. Apoc. cap. 19. B:
Nostra vocatie magna. Dee sup.
horse may enter, and that he that enters may reward you with honor.

Greater then you are in the dignity of truth, are not amongst mortal men,
neither shall there be any amongst mortal men that shall more despise the World
then you, therefore has God framed one of you as a stiff made ass, to bind
up the countenance of his work, and to be free from yielding unto Satan, which
well understands that Satan endeavors, and that his Ministers cry out
against this glorious habitation, which being built, the wicked come not to
Coelosyria, neither shall they see the beauty of the Phoenices.

When you have read these things I come again, and ponder them well.

D We read them, and the places of Esdras, one in the second Chapter of the
third Book of Esdras, and the other in the third and fourth Chapter of the same
Book.

E. K. Now he is here himself alone. Parabola de nobis duobus:


Michael..... A Wood grew up and the Trees were young, and lo, there arose a
great Tempest from the North, and the Seas threw out the air that had subtly
stolen himself into them, and the winds were great, and behold, there was one
Tree which was older then the rest, and had grown longer then that which shot
up by him; This Tree could not be moved with the wind, but the Tree that was
young, was moved to and fro with the Wind, and strock himself oftentimes, upon
the stiff set Tree: The Forester came and beheld, and said within himself, the
force of this wind is great, see this young Tree beats himself in pieces
against the greater, I will go home, and will bring my ground instruments, and
will er adicate him, and I will place him further off: Then if the winds come,
be shall have room to move: But when he came home, the Lord of the Wood seeing
him in a readiness, with his Mattock and his spade, asked him of his going,
which told the thing in order to his Master; But lo, his Master rebuked him,
and he said thus, when the winds are not they increase, they are not hurtful
one to the other, suffer them therefore, when the young Tree takes roots, and
shall look up unto some years, his roots shall link themselves with and uuder
the roots of the greater; Then though the winds come, they shall not be hurtful
one to another, but shall stand so much the more fast, by how much the more
they are wrapped together, yea, when the old tree withers, he shall be a
strength unto him, and shall add unto his age as much as he has added unto
his youth. And he ceased to dig.

Be not therefore haled in sunder, neither be you offended one at another,
peradventure Reason would set you aside: But God will not Behold, if you break
the yoke that you are in, and run astray, he that erreth shall perish: even
so shall he that stands also be desolate: For why the driver angry,
continues not with one: But he shall return home, and shall not see the end of
the Harvest Love therefore one another, and comfort one another; for he that
comfort his brother, comfort himself: and when one is a weary, let the
other draw; For, why you are men and not yet Primitiae and Decimae.
crowned; the first is paid: so is also the tenth; Even so the tree that is
grafted bears fruit sooner then that which grows of the seed.
Notwithstanding, both have their place in the Orchard, the night let that yield
unto day, and Winter bear rule over Summer: Let youth yield unto ripe for
years; Solomon says, it is good for that young man that obeys the counsel of
his elder; In the Council House the things that they handle are for their
Commonwealth; Notwithstanding has his order and degree. Cast your eye upon
all things and you shall have examples; Peter in (...)
his vocation preached the same Gospel that the rest of the Apostles did, but
he was greater then the rest, not in respect of his Apostleship, nor in respect
of feeding, but that God might keep his Peter. (...). Vota nostra. Actor.
Videus. One body.
order, as the chief amongst them, which preferred Peter first, Therefore be
not stubborn. But I command you in the Name of him that sent me, and because
you have vowed that the one of you did nothing without the others coursel,
notwithstanding shall you not be two counselors.

Therefore, in things that are to be done, let the Door occupy the
superiority; The Seer let him see, and look after the doings of him that he
sees; For you are but one body in this work.

E. K. He is gone out of sight.

D As concerning my Letters and business into England, I thought good to ask
counsel what I were best to do with the Letters to the Queen and others.

Michael..... Gather out of the book of Enoch, the Seal and the Angel of thy
Country, deal with (...).
him.

D I found a Door, in the name due to Britannia. Anno 15.

Michael..... Thou shall easily find the truth by their appearing, for the one
answers not unto It is ascribed to my negligence, that I have not the
practice of (...) his Book. Sigillum (...). Liber Enoch. Note this Role.
the others function.

Hereby must thou do in all.

Kingdoms and Estates, both how, and what thou will, that thou have not is thy
own error.

Note...... Understand me well here.

When thou will have any thing to do in the World, in humane affairs, seek
nothing in Sigillo AEmeth, Enoch his Book is a worldly Book.

Veritas in Coelo.
Imago veritatis, in terra.
homini
Imago imagini respondet.
Coelestia autem petnntur a Coelo.
D I beseech you.

Michael..... Darkness yields unto light: Falsum quod est, veritati malum
bono.

But note in the Book of Enoch there are those that are good, there are there
also those that are Liber Enoch.
evil, the Prince of darkness is evil.

And those that are evil there, do stand on his side: but as his Ministers give
place to those that are good, so do they also.

Note...... But as concerning the manner how to practice that Book, I would
gladly hear somewhat.

Michael...... Sua sunt, sua dicunt.

D I understand this to be required at his hands that gave us that Book.

Michael..... Polonia te expectat, and qui EST praecessit.

D As concerning my health helping, may I stay here yet 8 days, and then make
speed to be Polonia.
going toward Poland, as was prescribed to me.

Michael..... Possum tibi concidere dies, Septem --

If thou did know that which I see, thou would not go, but thou would
run: He that is before Hortulanus noster Christus (...) spero.
is a Gardener, and he knows the virtue of Herbs: But the eighth day I will
be there also.

..... Where, and which eighth day.

Michael..... The eighth day hence I will be in Cracovia: I have told thee
plainly.

D May I then stay well 7 days, before I set forth on my journey.

Michael..... Potes, and non potes.

Thou have thy own judgment granted thee, thereby thou may do it: But in
respect of the necessity that requires thee there, thou can not.

D I beseech you not to be offended, if I ask the cause of the Lord Lasky,
silence -- D -- He stayed long.

E. K. Why did you not speak now.

Michael..... Behold, he has said with him self, (and those that are wicked,
have whispered unto him) surely it seems that they despise me, and
obstinately (because he (...) not received letters from you) he uses this
silence.

Moreover, he has not done, as God commanded him: But I will give him thee,
use thou him (...) and pax Dci sit Super (...).
as thou will.

D I render unto thee O most merciful, mighty and loving God) thanks and
honor, and will (during my being) praise thy holy Name.

E. K. He is gone, and went away mounting upward, etc.

Quis, sicut Deus noster, qui humiliter resplicet, and peccatores sua ditat
(...).

Illi soli sit omnis laus, honor, and gloria, nunc and semper.

Amen.
Pragae.
Monday

Aprilis 1. Mane, circa 8.

D A remembrance for me. England Letters.

A. L. His Letters opened, and some yet kept.

Emerick his traitorous dealing to be deciphered; Counsel for the manner of our
going, and what things shall be needful to take with us.

D Praecesfeci, and visitatas, and alias (ex tempore) ejaculationes, pro
auxilio Dei omnipotenti necessario in omnibus nostris (Dei prescripti)
tractandis negotiis, etc.

E. K. Here is a tall man with white clothes, with wide sleeves, and his
garment very much pleated, and a thing like a Cypress scarf before his face
black, which had been many times doubled, and with a knot behind him, Two
others there are by him on his left hand, one of them is apparelled in a green
thing like a Cassock coming down to his middle leg, and a pair of shoes on
his feet, and a hat on his head.

The other in a marble Jerkin like a leather Jerkin with panos, and a pair of
Hose, with round Breeches of the same stuff, his neither stocks like common
black, and usual shoes, and on his head an hat as the other has of the
English fashion: The first has a little beard short, aburn (...), The other
has a young beard whitish.

..... Why do you provoke me to indignation?

E. K. He seems to The white man.
speak to them two looking on them.

Why accuse you me of doing wrong?

Have I not lead you out by the hand from the Serpents?

Carried you against nature through the waters?

Have I not held you up from falling?

Have I not brought you hither unto the Hill?

E. K. There appears a very great Hill up to the Heavens by him.

This is the entrance.

The way is open for you ascend.

And are you not yet ashamed to urgeme?

If I have done you wrong, wrong be unto me.

If I have done more then I ought to do, why do you vex me?

D He seems to mean us.

E. K. He speaks to them two.

I have said unto you eat, and you have not.

I have told you it is time to eat; but you have your own time.

I have said unto you Go before; Follow me.

But in this case I will not be (...) against you.

These (...) that record my sayings shall (...) judgment against you.

Therefore now unto you. E. K. He turns toward you, D]

Here you see the Hill, here you see the way open:

Here you see no hinder ance.

Yet, (...) these men accuse me, trouble me.

Determine you against them.

Call not at these Doors any more, until you be called unto them.

Ye have said if, before the Lord, if you had not, it had been better for you.
If


E. K. He treads them two under his feet all to pieces, and takes his hands,
and flingeth the blood of them about, and it sticks to the sides.

A voice...... What is it to me if man had never been.

E. K. He wrappeth up the place of their lying as if it were a Cloth, and
puts or tumbleth them out of fight.

E. K. Now he is gone like a Whirlwind away.

LORD,

D I am heartily sorry for any thing I have said or done, which has provoked
thy indignation, thy mercy be upon us, and not the rigor of thy most just
Judgment. Amen. Thy Name be always praised. Amen.

O Lord, I find my own weakness and frailty continually, and therefore I call
unto thee for thy gift of Wisdom, that I might wisely and discreetly serve
thee all the days of my life. O Lord, the escapes of my lips and the folly of
my heart pardon, I most heartily beseech thee: And if thy helping hand forsook
us, and much more, if thy indignation work against us, we are in most miserable
and pitiful case, have pity, have mercy, have compassion on us, Lord, Lord,
Lord, forgive this our offense whatsoever; Suffer us not to be confounded
through our little faith, O God, help our faith, help, help, or else we perish.

K. K. Here he is again. Note my great offense.


..... When the Lord bad thee go, if thou had so done, and had not taken
thine own time, more had been given unto him, and more had been added unto thee.

But now Letters came, that have passed through the hands of Sodomites and
Murderers, (through D Lasky his letters came on Friday last.
whose hands they are accursed) you rejoice, you receive comfort, you determine
to go.

But if you had left those letters behind you, had come when I bad you go. Then
had my Name been untouched. D Pardon, pardon, pardon, o God, thy judgments are
just.


Therefere is the Lord angry, and forgets not this offense.

For he that deals with me, deals not as with a man, for I have nothing in
me tied to time, much less has he that sent me.

D O God, what a wretched miserable man am I, thus to fall, and to offend my
God, O Lord, that thou judge is very just; for man would have taken
indignation against his servant that should not go where he bids, or that
would seek or use better credit to encourage him to his duty, then his Masters,
etc.

Many times have thou been wearied.

Have mercy, O God. Et dele omnes (...) meas, cor mundum crea in me, and averto
iram tuam a nobis, Is thy fury implacable, or shall thy anguish last for ever,
what is slesh and dust before thee?

..... There shall remain the sting of this offense, in both your generations,
until the fifth.

And I swear unto you by heaven. A sentence of punishment yet (...) be (...).


D Spare this Sentence of indignation (O God) against us. Thou have said in
what hour soever a sinner is sorry for his sins, and turns unto the Lord,
etc. And Lord, I am heartily sorry, I bewail with tears this great offense,
thou see my contrite heart, O God, O God, O God, etc.

..... This has added much, even has bound up the rod, which I spoke before
unto thee.. Pardon.


D Thy mercies be recorded, likewise, O Lord, and praised from Generation to
Generation.

After this we sat and considered, and perceived, and confessed the greatness
of our offense, how it concerned much the Honor and Glory of God, if we had
gone without receiving the advertisement of those Letters; So should they hear
(the) and the King St. have perceived that we had the direction of God, and of
his good Angels, and not to have depended upon man's letters, or persuasions,
etc. we both a like confessed this great misdoing, and so framed our selves to
make all speed away that possible we could, the mercies of God be upon us now
and ever.

E. K. He is here, and said, Be thou shut for twenty days, D (...) days the
(...) is to be (...).
and withal pulled a thing-like a Curtain about the Stone, and the Stone seemed
to be full of the same substance, being like the froth of the Sea, yet hanging
or joining together like Curds of a posset.

Misericordias Dominum in aeternum cantabo, quis sicut Deus meus, qui cum
iratus fuerit, misericordiam praestavit contrito cord invocantibus: Soli
igitur Deo meo, sit omnis (...), honor, gloria and jubilatio, nunc and semper,

Amen.
A Pragae.
Aprilis 5.

Friday, I took my Journey from Pragae toward Cracovia, God be our good speed,
E. K. I, Thomas Kelly, and Hugh Brycket my servants.

Cracoviae, 1585.
Friday.

Aprilis 12. A meridie we came to Cracovia, and as we were within an English
mile of the City, being a fair and calm day, there passed about half a mile
before us, crossing from the right hand to the left Whirlwinds, diverse one
after another, wreathing up the dust with great vehemence on high, and shooting
forward still, and then mounting into the air, and so went Southerly from us,
and likewise some began on the right hand, and came furiously, raising up and
wreathing the dust up into the air Southerly also, and did not cross the way.

When we came to our house, we found that a stranger was set into it, by the
Landlords (Mr. John Long, the Judge, and Martin Plutner) and having by me the
keys of the Storehouse, and of the Street-door, I caused my stuff brought with
me to be set in, and that night we made hard shift for lodging. But the new and
forced in tenants gave me leave to have one of my Bedsteads, which was in one
stove, and emptied the same to us, with much ado.

Saturday and Sunday we were sore out-faced or rather threatened, that we should
have no house there, and also one Bonar his arms were set upon the door, as if
the house had been allowed to him ex officio. Monday I made the Rector privy of
the Injuries I endured, and he courteously sent two Masters of Art with me to
the Proconsul to have Citation for the Landlords to appear on Tuesday by 7 of
the clock, to answer to our complaint.

This Monday-night came the Lord Lasky from Lasko, upon a Letter he had
received from me from Niso, of my coming.

Tuesday ( Aprilis 16) the Lord Lasky came to the house, and in the morning
would have presently cast all their stuff out of doors, but by entreaty he
permitted them to empty all into the lower stove.

In the mean space I appeared with my Lawyer or Attorney Mr. Tetaldo, (an
Italian) an ancient Practitioner in the Polish and Cracovian Causes: And to
conclude, I had a Decree against my Landlords, that I was to have at least an
half years warning; whereupon John Laugh gave me warning to avoid at
Michaelmas, and so we came from the Court or Townhouse, called Praetorium in
Latin. This same Tuesday afternoon, my Lord Lasky went to the King of Poland
up into the Castle, and told him of my coming, and how evilly I was used: and
he said, why did he not cast them out of doors? so have I now, quoth the Lord
Lasky; and the King granted the House to be holden ex officio: And the next day
the King was desirous to speak with me.

Aprilis 17. Wednesday, I went with the Lord Lasky to the King, to whom I said,
to this intent, Consolatio, pax, and misericordia Dei sit tibi, o serenissime
Rex: Coram quo, Divinitus recipi admonitionem, ut me sustinem, quod nunc
humillime facio: paratissimus cum omni fidelitate and sinceritate ea cum Regia
vestra Majestate tractare, quae mihi divinitus injungantur, Quorum mysteriorum
historias de ordine in ordinem refer, prout occasio dabitur, non recusabo
aliaque omnia peragere, quae Deo and vestrae Majestati (...) gratia fore
intelligero, etc.

The King answered, Vt de vestra persona (...) bona audivi absente, ita jam
mihi gratus valde est adventus vester, and si quod sit in quo vobis meagratia
and favor, possit esse commodo non deero me vestrum favorem, and protectorem
existere: Atque de (...) and aliis majoribus rebus aliquid magis opportuni
loquendi tempus post festos istos dies: quo tempore vos ad me accersori curabo,
etc.

Hereupon I made Coursy, as was appertaining, and stepped back somewhat from
the King, and so the Vice-Chancelor and other Officers, the chief Secretary
brought Bills to be read, and subscribed, or assigned with the Kings own hand,
which he did: and after the Lord Lasky had watched a fit time to tell the King
of his desire to speak a few words to his Majesty of some of his own astairs,
and was bidden to resort straightway after dinner to his Majesty, we took our
leave with reverence doing, and so went out of the privy Chamber, or rather
withdrawing Chamber through his privy Chamber, where he had said Mass when
wecame, and so into the Guard-chamber, and down, etc.

Friday, I took Ghostly counsel of Doctor Hannibal, the great Divine, that had
now set out some of his Commentaries upon Pymander, Hermitis Trismigisti.

Saturday ( Aprilis 20) I received the Communion at the Pernardines, where that
Doctor is a Professor.

This day E. K. the Ghostly counsel and comfort, as his case required.

On Easter Monday, very devoutly in Saint Stephens Church E. K. received the
Communion, to my unspeakable (...) and content, being a thing so long and
earnestly required, and urged of him, by ourspiritual good friends, as may
appear by sundry former actions.

Cracoviae.
Tuesday in Easter week,

Aprilis 23. Mane (...) horam 8. Praecibus fusis; mediocriter longis.

E. K. Here appears many thousands of spiritual Creatures, all in white: Now
there seems one like Michael, (all in red) to stand (...) them, they all
standing in an half Moon compass behind him.

Michael..... Adhuc semel (sed Stephano assidente) Loquor. Michael. D Forte de
(...). L. (...).


Sed si aurem, and animam suam, loquetae meae praebuerit stabilietur seeds illi

E. K. Now they seem all to mourn or hum, all in one tune.

He speaks still, but I understand not his speech.

Sin minus loquitor pro me pestis: ulcere enim percutiam terram Zeli plenus
sum, and Justitiae

E. K. All are vanished away.

D Ne observes iniquitates meas (Domine (...) Christi) qui speramns in
misericordia tua, qui redempti sumus (...) sanguine tuo, Amen.

Emitte Domine verbum tuum Evangelicum, ut liquefacias and emolias obdurata
corda mea frigore (...), ut mea peccata purgentur, and efficiantur, quasi in
Christo, ut nebula ignorantiae expellatur e cordibus meis, and spiritus Sancto
gratia affluant aquae (...) in poenitentia Salutari,

Amen.
1585. Cracoviae.
Aprilis 24. in Easter-week.

Wednesday morning, (...) horam 8.

Orationibus factis ad Deum, tam oratione Dominica, quamaliis particularitur
respectu Ministerii (...), qui regnis president obtinendi, ut nobis
praescriptum (...), and dum conarer particulariter nominare aliquem, statim
incipit E.K. and (...) --

E. K. There appears afar off a woman coming, and she is A woman.
here now, she is all covered in green, as with a cloud: I may through it
discern her fair face, and her hairs dispersed abroad.

The place about her seems to be concave, replenished with light of the
Sun: she stands as in a hollow shell, or Oval figure Nostrum (...)
Stephanum Regem. (...) 30. Qui (...) gubernant and (...) (...) Tribuum. Vide
Anno 1584. Maii 21 1584 Juni 20. de (...) Aerum. D In (...) (...) (...)
tractant (...), at in 30 (...) non sunt tales (...) cum nobis (...) est. (...)
21 (...), 1584. Ed sent into (...).
concave.

..... Stephen, lift up thy head amongst the stars of Heaven; for the Spirit of
God is with thee, and thou art become the Darling of the Highest, but the Lord
will reprehend thee for thy sins.

Behold, thou shall stand, and thy sword shall be made holy: See therefore that
you honor him, labor for him and obey him, as the anointed and (...) of the
Lord.

For why, his spirit shall be plentiful amongst (...), and he shall put the
pillow of rest under your heads.

E. K. The more she speaks, the more the place is bright.

..... The Prince of Darkness shall lie as a stumbling block in his way, but he
shall stride over him without offense.

The earthly Creatures have not to do in this receptacle:

Therefore take heed thou defile it not.

If thou follow the rules of calling them, thou shall see that the air is their
habitation.

Other ways irregularly they appear in such vessels: But such as are prepared
for them.

Take heed (therefore) thou defile not the place of the Justified, with the
presence of those that are accursed.

But as they are of two sorts; so let their appearing places be diverse.

Thy servant is conducted, and shall not stumble, but shall return, that the
name of God may be blessed.

Now cease thy voice for our presence, until the Lord has rebuked Stephen, in
the consideration whereof consists the seal of his Election.

Verbum shall be the first word wherein the Lord shall show himself unto him.

Behold, I am full of the light of heaven, and I shut up and go.

E. K. She is gone

D Note, all those things I intended or desired to be satisfied in, are
answered me without my asking.

Misericordia, Pax, and Lux Dei nobis semper adsint omnis autem laus, honor,
and gloria sit Deo nostro,

Amen.
Notae (...).
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.

May 6, and 7, 8. E. K. was very unquiet in mind, and so expressed to me in
words: for that A. L. had not paid him his money, long since due: and chiefly
for that he doubted very much of A. L. his turning to the Lord with (...) his
heart, and constantly. So much did A. L. his former life and ungodly living and
dealing offend him, and so void was he of any hope, that he became in a great
(...) of mind to find us coupled with so (...) a man. I showed A. L. his last
Letters, how * D What should I then think or both them.
he was in a (...) of his own, belonging to the (...) Rithwyan, (which he had
now by a stratagem won from the unjust delaying of his adversary) and what
penance and contrition he was in, what meditations, and what godly purposes,
etc. But E. K. would not hope of conversion, and thereupon utterly and (...)
intended with all speed to be gone from hence toward Prage, and willed me (if I
would) to prepare my Letters He became very blasphemous against God to my great
grief and terror: what the issue thereof would be, so great was the (...) and
(...) against God and his holy purposes in us, that almost greater could not be
uttered. I used as quiet words as I could, assuring him of Gods mercies always
ready, and his helping hand for all such as put their trust in him, and call
upon him in their (...) and times of need, and so did betake him to God for
that Tuesday night, being past 9 of the clock.

Wednesday morning, as I was at my prayers in my study over his Chamber, and
had made declaration of this cause, and of the perplexity most grievous that I
was in to see my friend and partner ( E. K.) thus carried away with so grievous
a temptation, so manifold and (...).

E. K. yet lying in his bed, did call his brother Thomas to him, and willed him
to callme to him: Thomas came (when I had in manner ended my devotions and
prayers) for me, I went to him, yet lying in his bed: And after I had wished a
good morrow, and sat by him on the Bench at his beds head, he began and said
such matter as follows,

E. K. A Spirit appeared to me this morning by my Bedside, and bid me be quiet.

Bad me will you to go to morrow with both your servants to my Lord, as
secretly as you could.

Bad you comfort him.

Bad you bring him with you.

Bad you to go to the King as you came homeward.

Bad me to board in the mean space with the Italian Gregorius, Jordanus,
Venitus.
Doctor at Perins house.

Bad me lie here every night.

Hereupon I was most glad and joyful, and praised God for his mavelous
mercies, loving kindness and goodness toward us, and declared my self assured
that God had put out his term, and settled the degree: For the performance of
his purposes and promises made to us, for his own honor and glory: And so with
joy and thanks given E. K. for his courteous imparting these good news to me, I
went about my business intended, which was to go to the Table of the Lord: as
I was prepared for it, and so went to the Barnardines Church.

Soli Deo nostro sit omnis laus, honor, gloria, and gratiarum actio, nunc and
semper, Amen.

Note, I had in my prayers alleged to God, that albeit I was in great
perplexity and agony of mind, yet since I was willed to cease my voice for
having at any angelical presence, I said he of his divine clemency and care
over us, in these great desires might counsel us and direct us, though we did
not urge our request as we were wont. The conclusion and shame which many ways
would follow, if this intended purpose of E. K. should go forward and take
place) was so great, that we might seem to the world, to have been led to that
evil end, by a manifold digression, rather then otherwise led in mercy and
verity, wherein I requested God to regard his own honor and glory, etc.

Cracovia,
Maij 20.

Monday a meridie horam circiter 6. in mansio meo.

NOTE D.

D

E. K. sitting with me in my study, told me, that after my going to Rithian to
the Lord Lasky, he had very many apparitions, and diverse matters declared unto
him, of the state of Christendom, etc.

He said (moreover) fault was found with my manner of standing before Stephen,
I should have made some more ample declaration of my Calling and knowledge in
these our actions. Secondly, that I did mistake the phrase spoken unto me at
Prage of the rod binding up 1585. Aprilis. Our actions to be cut off for our
(...).
: For he said, that Michael Dee should die, that I should thereby be afflicted,
and diverse such things he told me, and among other that he was willed to be
ready to leave me, when he should be called: for, he said, our actions shall be
cut off, for some of our unworthiness, etc. All which things were so grievous
unto me, as I was (in manner) ready to sound; and my distress was the greater,
because (after a sort) I was barred from requiring the presence of any of our
spiritual friends, till Stephen had been rebuked by the Lord, and I had vowed
to obey their commandments and instructions, whereby I was driven to beseech
God to consider my cause and grief, who unfainedly desired to be his true
Servant: And being desirous to obey them, staying of my voice for the presence
of his good Ministers, I was contented to offer up my obedience herein for a
sacrifice; and ready to receive this distress and affliction, as a punishment
for my (...), awaiting his will and pleasure.

E. K. said, It shall not be amiss to bring forth the Shew-stone, and assay
what the good will of God would be herein.

D I fetched the Shew-stone, and after it had been set about a quarter of an
hour. E. K. Espied in it a little naked boy, with a white cloth scarf, from
under (...):
his Navel hanging down unto his knees; The hair of his head is short as of an
young child: [and about that time came the Lord A. L. unto us, who sat down by
us:] He had a little Circle of air in his hand: There is a light in the stone
as if there were the shining of the Sun in it.

Puer..... Creavit Deus omnia Spirituoris sui qui etiam Spiritus, defendit and
defendet suos, and in nomine (...) sperantes.

E. K. He throws up his Circlet, and catches it again, three times; He
stands still, and says nothing more yet.

Puer..... Perforatus a Domino, loquor.

E. K. Now he is turned into a water which goes round about, and in the midst
of it is blood.

Now he is returned to his former shape again.

Puer..... The end of all flesh is at hand.

And the sickle of the Highest shall reap down the Mountains; The Valleys
shall be without Prepheta.
fruit: And the seed of man shall be accursed.

E. K. Now he turns his face to you [D.]

Puer..... Who is he that the Lord rejoices in, or on whom the Heavens look
with merry countenance, whose feet are not a burden to the earth, and in whom
is the force of the soul comforted? Who is he that shall rejoice in the Lord?
Even he it is that goes out of himself, and beholds himself, saying, O thou
Carcass thou art a Sepulcher for me; Neither am I placed in thee, for thine own
beauty, but that the Lord may be magnified, and his Creatures dignified; He it
is that shakes off himself, and puts on the Armor of Affliction, praising
and extolling the Garland of the God of Hosts, before that great Whore, and in
despite of her Congregation; He it is that forsakes his own will, to do the
will of him that created him; Whosoever (therefore) does his own will, is the
servant of Perdition; But he that expects the will of God is (...).

Behold, therefore, because you do so, and have beheld your selves, not in your
selves, have acknowledged the power of God, and the truth of his Message, your
Honor shall be great: Therefore Domina acceplatio nostrerum (...).
fear not, For, lo, This Garland is prepared for you: and rest is sealed unto
you, of the Highest, unto you, your wives, children and servants.

D Blessed be thy Name for ever, O eternal, almighty, and most merciful, our
God and King of Glory.

Puer..... If the Sun shine not in vain, if the Stars move not, but by
variation and discourse, moving things, alternatim, to an end, if the Earth
stand still, because she is so created: Much less ought man to despair in the
mercies and promises of God, which are not without a cause, neither any time
spoken without effect.

I remember thee (Lasky) says the Lord; And I will chasten thee for thy
sins, and behold, I A. L.
swear unto thee, as I have done; But humble thy self. This body of thine shall
turn into dust. Take beed therefore that it defile not the greater part; For
unto him that dies a sinner, vengeance is judgment. But if thou live according
unto my Laws, and graft thy self within my will, if thou forsake the World for
my sake, and do the works of righteousness; Because I have called thee before
me, I will add unto thy years, and will not blot out thy Name out of my
remembrance.

Be not therefore a Man, but the sealed servant of the Highest. Rejoice in him
that created thee, and when I command thee to strike, follow me, for I will
make the way very broad for thee.

Behold, I am mindful of my Covenant made unto thee, the seventh day of
September, in the Anno 1583. 7 (...). (...) 10. If
year four score and three.

I will establish unto thee, that fortitude, both in true Wisdom and Victory:
And I will make thee mighty as a Corner Stone (...) Angle of my Temple: if thou
turn, if thou do the will of him that speaks unto thee: if thou become a
marble stone, speaking Justice and Verity; The mysteries of thy Cross light
upon thee, and let thy sons be blessed in thee.

I greatly thirst after Steven, for the course of things are at hand,

Behold, I will bless him, that he may leave blessing unto thee.

Behold, I will place thee unto him, as his right leg, and he shall stand.

But his wicked Garments I will cut in sunder, yea I will send in the fire of
wrath and dissension: And I will take away the buttons from his breast.

I have given unto him three wicked Nations, that they may grind under him as
slavish Captives. Tres impiae Nationes data, St.


When I come in one Week, Behold, I strike, and those that are proud, become
poor and desolace.

The outward face of things shall be changed; And the whole World shall say, Lo
here, is the finger Digitus (...).
of the highest.

Rise Therefore, and with speed go before Steven; But the League Table thou
shall leave behind Mensa (...). In meo (...) Lapide (...). [O]
thee. I will reveal my self in thy proper Show (...).

Dixi: quaerite victoriam.

D Deo nostro Omnipotenti, Patri totus consolationis and misericordiarum
plenissimo, sit omnis Honor. Laus, Benedictio, Gloria and Imperium, nunc and
semper Amen, Amen, Amen.

D I did communicate, and this was the third time, within Easter receiving.
Note. Maii 21. Tuesday.
Primo cum Humbate, and bis cum Raphaeli confessus, etc. That all manner of
ways I might have a clean and a quiet Conscience.


Maii 22.

Wednesday, Nyepolonicze, in Aula Regia, circa horam 1 a meridie.

Note, after dinner as we sat together, A. L. E. K. and I discoursing of some
of our matters; There appeared over A. L. his head (to the sight of E. K.) a
little Child half, the upper part holding over the head of A.L. a white Crown,
and a finger out of it pointing toward D, and withal he said,

Puer..... Audivi te victores estis.

D Hereupon we sat out the Shew-stone, as being ready and desirous to be
instructed, according as the cause chiefly required.

As I began to pray and study, Domino non sumus digni ut nos exaudias, suddenly
E. K. said he saw as follows.

E. K. I see a great Hill of fire, a very great Mountain, and it is as if it
did hang in the air: for I see the air under it, and I see the Sun shine on
it the Mountain fire flameth not.

Now the little boy that appeared last day, stands on the top of this
Mountain.

Puer..... God has spoken unto you, and has gathered you together, and lo,
you are become a strong sword, with the which the Nations shall be cut down,
and the God of Hosts shall stretch forth his hands; And behold, you are come,
and now is the time you Satan shall reap But Satan (...) sore against you;
Behold, Lasky thou art become rich; But have faith: For it overcomes riches,
and shall beautify and strengthen thee, that thou shall be able to receive
reward for thy labor: For it is not a small labor to contend against sin, I
have brought thee unto Steven, And I will give him thee into thy hands: And
because thou shall see that God is not barren, I am of power; Hear me therefore
says the Lord, will thou that before thy face I shall destroy Steven for his
wickedness? will thou that I shall strike him with a perpetual Leprosy, or
will thou that I shall correct him and leave him to do good unto thee? Now thou
shall see that I am not (...) data, Anno (...), de Stephani (...).
weak; Neither that my words are barren or without fruit: Ask therefore of the
Lord, and before thou move it shall be given thee For thou dealest with him
that is a flame of fire, and a two edged sword to the wicked, out of the
Dunghill I chose him, out of nothing I can stir thee up, and exalt thee, but
thou must first be poor before thou be exalted, read the Scriptures and judge
Now speak. E. K. He is gone.

Infinitae and incomprehensibiles sunt misericordiae tuae, O Deus, and Judicia
tua sunt inperscrutabilia, (...).

A. L. Domine Deus misericors, quanta est tua misericordia, quod me summum
peccatorem tanta gratia prosequeris? (...) sum Domine ante faciem tuam: Itaque
Domine, quaeso, ne illum propter me deleas neque Lepra percutias: sed potius
inspires in illum, ut mihi propterte, and a te, per illum been fiat. Non quaero
Domine divitias, sed gloriam tuam. Non nobis Domine, non nobis sed nomini tuo
da gloriam. Et fiatmihi secundum voluntatem tuam Domine. Tu scis Domine, an
hypocritice ago.

(...) mei (...), miserere mei, sitque misericordia tua supra me and fiat
voluntas tua, sicut in (...), sic (...) and in (...), Atque nomen tuum sit
benedictum in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

E. K. He is here again.

Puer..... Saptens es tu, [A. L.] and plenus spiritu Dei: Non quaerens sanguine
fratris tui igitur ben dictum, sis inter potentes hujus saeculi, and ab hac die
spiritus meus nunquam a te discedet; and haec quia te humiliasti nam non (...)
sine causa

Puer..... And lo, I will correct him sharply: Ask therefore in what Language
thou will have me correct him (for he is scarce worthy to hear that he may
understand.)

E. K. He is gone.

A. L. Hungarice peto, ut ipse audiat ea quae illi sunt dicenda sic ita Divinae
tuae placcuerit Majestati.

Puer..... Hungary is hateful unto me; For it is full of iniquity; Neither
will I speak unto him my self that he shall (yet) hear me. I will open my mouth
in Latin for thy sake: and if he become obedient, I will also appear unto him
my self and unto you all, in the spirit and presence of my Angel: But to
overcome him by Miracles it needs not, for by him the people are not edified,
But by my words he shall understand, that I touch him, although Satan stand by
him: unless it were for thy sake I would not withdraw my word and curse from
him, for why, I am sufficiently advised, And I do but keep back the fire from
him.

But go thou [A. L.] unto him, and speak unto him liberally, when he has heard
me, if he receive me, my blessing is upon him of necessity.

If he hear me not, I can easily unlock for I have the Key ready.

God the Father, God the Son, (unto whom all power is given in Heaven and
Earth) with the fire of eternal comfort, which is the privy science and
knowledge of the faithful; The Holy Ghost, be upon thee, and with thee for this
day, thy [A. L) sins are blotted out of Gods remembrance. Hodle (...) A. L.
(...), (...) and litera.


I have no more to say.

Omnipotenti, tromendo and Solis Adorando Deo, and Domino nostro sit omnis
gratiarum actio, Laus and Jubilatio, nunc and in omne aevium.

Amen.
Nyepolonicze in Aula Regis Polonie.
Anno 1585.

Maii. 23. A meridie hora Circiter 6.

The King sent for the Lord Lasky and me, by his Vice-Chamberlaine, whom we
came unto in a Chamber, within the Chamber or room where he uses to give
audience, or to eat with his Palatines and other: He sat by the Window which is
toward the South, and by which his Prospect is into his new Garden, which is in
making: He began thus, (the Lord Albert Lasky being by, and thereto willed by
the King,) and said unto me very near as those words import.

St. Egit mecum Dominus Palatinus, ut vos audirem de rebus istis magnis and
raris loquente: Quod libentur feci: and tamen hoc considerari debet, quod
Prophetae omnes and revelationes jam diu and in tempore Christi cessaverunt.
Tamen si (...) in istis, contra Dei sit honorem, eo lubentius sunt audienda: Et
ego quidem haud dubito quin Deus nunc possit multis modis secreta quaedam
hominibus deligere, ad hac usque tempora, mandatis and inusitatis.

Hereupon I answered to this sense, although I cannot express the same words.

D Considero in ordine vestrae regia tria quasi capitala, in quibus totus
ordinis vestrae est medulla. Primum de Prophetiaris, and revelationem
cessatione, secundum; an aliquid in nostris actionibus, vel exercitiis insit
contra Dei honorem: and tertium (quod animo meo est valde gratium) quod, Deo
non praescribatis certos aliquos modos vel tempora quibus sua hominibus velit
aut debeat secreta detegere. De primo, hoc possimus vestrae Majestati Reginae
asserere, quod ille Scripturae locus haud recte a plurimis intelligeter: and ab
(...) pessime, qui velint omni modae. Dei potentiae and misericordiae and
sapientiae praescribere certos modos, and tempora certa: asserendo nullorum
hiis temporibus esse Prophetiam, vel post Christum fore: quia omnes in Christo
cessavere: hoc est, quia omnes de illo quae erant Prophetiae felicet. De Dei
filio in carne venturo and Messia vero, and redemptore generis humani futuro,
(and de tota illa quam nos agnovimus and confitemur Christiani, completum and
consummatum esse Christi historia) jam cessavere: adeo quod illa neque jam
futura sunt ut putant Judaei, neque repetenda sunt, cum jam sunt consummata and
peracta que madmodum Prophetae praenuntiabant nam ob hac causa cum Christus
Jesus in cruce pendens scinisset, quod omnia de co Prophetia completa fuissent,
and praecepimus scilicet omnium Prophetiarum (ante Christiano) scopus jam esset
Collinatus, and Juxta praesentiam and propositum Dei redemptoris humane
conscientiam esset mysterium ipse dixit consummatum est: Nam and Paulus dixit
ad Judaeos, (namque (...) omnia quae de co scripta erant, deponentes eum, de
Ligno posuerunt eum in monumento. Et Joan. 19. E: Acts 13. E.
post Resurrectionem suam ipsammet Christus suis discipulis (pergentibus versus
Castellum Emaus, and de illius morte and resurrectione disserentibus and (...))
dixit, O stulti and tardi cord ad (...) in omnibus quae (...) sunt Prophetae:
Nonne haec oportuit pati Christus, and ita intrare in gloriam suam, and
incipiente a Moyse and omnibus Luke 24.
Prophetis interpraetabitur illis in omnibus scripturis, quae (...) ipsoerant,
etc. and paulo post iterum ad eosdem vobiscum: Quoriam necesse impleriomnia
quae scripta sunt in lege Moysi and Prophetis, and Psalmis de me.

Sed quantum ad alium sensum quod post Christum mill essent Prophetae vel
relationes ipsam Scripturae planissime contrarium docent. Nam quod descendum
erit de revelatione fine notabile illa Beati Joanni Apocalypsi quae post
Christum (...)? quae and ab eodem Joanne Propheta vocatur, dicendo Cap. 1. Apoc,
Beatus qui legit and audit verba (...). hujus and servat ea qui in ea scripta
sunt, and in ultimo Capite ejusdem Apocalypseos sine revelationes, ter, (...)
vocat Prophetiae librum. Quare manitestum est post Christum esse Revelationes
and Prophetas. Praeteria que erat illa Paulo facta revelatio in ejus Vocatione
and Conversione per ipsum Jesum Christum, ut in Apostolicorum apparet Actum
libro, Cap. 9. quid de illa decennes Acts 10.
Cornelio Centuriano?

Quid de illa Petro de animalibus mundis and immundis. Et Paulus ipsam dicet si
D Acts 11. D 2 Ad Cor. c. 12.
gloriari oportet (non expedit quidem) veniam ante ad visiones and revelationes
Domini, etc. and paulo post: and de Magnitudo revelationem extollit me, datus
est mihi stimulis carnis meae, Angelus Satanae qui me colophizet es, notum mihi
factum est sacramentum, sicut supra scripsi: prout potestis legentes
intelligere prudentiam meam in mysterio Christi, quod aliis generationibus non
est agnitum filiis homini, sicut nunc revelatum est sanctis Apostolis ejus and
Prophetis in spiritu, etc, ubi etia^ Prophetas post Christu^ esse apparet: and
cap. 4. Et ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos (...) autem Prophetas, alios
vero Evaugelistis, alios autem Pastores and Doctores ad consnmmationem (...),
in opus ministerii, in aedificatione^ Corporis Christi, Donec occurramus omnes
in unitate fidei in mensuram aetate plenitudinis Christi, etc. ubi tam diu
Prophetas fore in Ecclesia Christi post Christu^ apparet. Donec occurramus
omnes in unitate fidei, etc. quod nondum post Christum factum fuisse been simus
and jam haec aetate nostra maxim sumus circa negotium fidei discordes maxim
videntur esse necessariae non Prophetae solum sed etiam Revelationes valde
express de Mysteriis Divinus. Et de locotione Angelica Acts cap. 8. Philippi
cor a loco in locum per Spiritum Dei.
ad Philippum, and ejus de loco in locum invisibile quasi translatione per
Spirirituum Domini, quod putendum est. Et de Prophetis post Christum tempora
testificatur Actum undecimum caput, ubi legimus quod eodem (...) quo primum
discipuli Christi Antiochiae cognominarentur Christiani, (...) ab Jerisolymis
Prophetae Antiochiam, and surgens unus ex eis nomine Agabus, sign si abat per
spiritum, famem magnam futuram universo (...) terrarum, quae (...) (...), ad
secundum autem vestrae Majestatis Regiae Capitulum, sic (...) coram Deo and
beatis ejus Angelis, assere quod conscientia mea nihil ^, Notivit, vel
dijudicare potuit, neque possit in omnibus nostris actionibus, vel illarum
aliqua, quod sit contra Dei, honorem, vel gloriam, Immo, quod ad (...) and
gloriam valde spectent, possimus.

Denique tertio in loco quod cum magna and verae pia Regiaque and discretione
existitis, me Deum Omnipotentem iis temporibus posse modis suis variis, (...)
quibusdam sua (...) mysteria and secreta. Valde letor: and eo magis, quod tam
ex nostris praeteritis id constare potuerit multis Actionibus; quam ex futuris:
quibus inter esse and adesse praesens (si ita illi visum fuerit) vestra possit
Majestus Regia. Et praeteritarum nostrorum Actionum libros 24, paratus sum
((...) vestrae serenissimae Majestati placuerit tempore,) videndos exhibere;
quorum quaedam Latina lingua, Graeca aliae, aliae Anglica lingua, sed ex maxim
(...) Anglica sunt Conscriprae ipsae actiones Angelorum, viz. (...) bonotum
Instructiones, admonitiones, exhottationes, (...), (...), and (...) ealio sunt.
(...) nobis factae Revelationes, reales vel verbales, and per spatium jam trium
fere annorum a nobis receptae and (...), etc.

Nyepolonizae in Aula Regia praesente ipso (...) Rege, and A. L, etc.
(...) Lunae

May 27. Mane, horam 7. circiter. In camera privata Regis.

Omnipotens, (...), Verae, and uni Deus, (...) misericors Pater mi, qui me de
Patriae (...) funesta contra (...) concepta malicia, per Angelos (...)
admonisti, and per cosdem, inde, In lapide qui ^
me cum Vx re, Liberts, and Familia mea istisque A. L. E. K.
duobus, egredi jussisti: e egredientes nos, (...) maris, quasi (...): Et qui
ex homicidiarum and Hereticorum manibus and (...) nos (...): Et qui multis nos
modis (partim nobis cognitis, partim (...)) a (...) and (...), ab eo tempore,
quod ad tua secreta Judicia and negotia testific (...), (...) and (...) nos
(...): Ideo propter hanc tuam tantam and tuam (...) misericordiam; immortalis
(...) a nobis deberi lauds and gratias humillime agnoscamus. O (...) Pater
noster (...) qui D and E. K.
nos duos; vinculo tuo Divino arctissime copulasti: and quasi unum ex (...)
esse (...). O tu fortissime (...) meus qui hanc tuum Lasky, quasi Athletam meum
(...), animosum, and meum (...), nobis adjunxisti: virum Cathelicae tuae and
(...) Religionis (...) and Anti-christianismi omnis acerrimum hostem; (...) o
(...), (...) and (...) Deus, and Pater meus, qui tuis mox incipiendis Regiis,
magnis mirific: (...), quem (...) Regem, (...) iuvenisti Stephanum, tuum
futurum Bellatorem: quis tuo mutui, and jussit ex animis, totis suis veribus,
and maximo zelo obedire velit: and cut nos honorem and (...) and (...), in
mandatis dedisti: and propter quem labores ((...) not a) ut subiremus and
sustenueremus statuisti: and ad quem, post laboriosas peregrinationes nostr:
multiplices quidem, praeter 7 (...) factas, directas aliquas, alias ante,
(humano judici) quasi retrogradas, tuam maximam gratiam, favore: and auxilio
incolumnies and salvos nos perduxisti: Nos quasi hic tuos, tuo Nomine and una
mente convenientes, tua digneris Paterna misericordia, a totius vitae meae
omnibus purgare spurcilits: Et Charissimi tus (...) Domini and Redemptoris
Nomini Jesu Christi intercedentibus meritis, nobis Condona quicquid contra
Leges tuas Sanct as and Justas, volentes, vel nescii, vel negligentes, verbo,
facto vel (...) ad hanc usque horam (...) omnes and singuli, ut tibi jam (...)
massa pura and (...) offerri: una Divina and (...) fermitanda gratia; and tuae
charitatis igne in cordibus nostris per te accenso, quasi quidem proportionis
and sacri in Templo tuo efficiamur panes. Et sit nobis interim Filius tuus
Dominus nostris Jesus Christus Panis vitae: quem gust ando suavissimum, and
sides veribus transgladiendo (...) Manna eundem habeamus nobiscum in perpetuum,
mitte igitur nunc Luce and Veritatem tuam o Deus Omnipotens sempiternae, Vivae,
and Verae, and tuo Stephano (noster autem Serenissimo Gratiosissimoque Reg)
appareat, Te Deum nostrum verum vivam, Omnipotentem (...) nostrum in iis
actionibus and Mysteriis esse me ante (licet peccatis obnoxiu) voto and
Conatumagno, fidele tuam and sincerium esse servatum: omniaque tua jussa mihi
maxim esse Curae: nosque singulos singularibus in te autem mundi exordium
praeordinatos esse muneribus, in tuo Sancto servitio tractandis, etc.

E. K. Nihil post primas praeces apparebat.

D Breves secundas feci, and adhuc nihil apparebat

Tertias adjeci, etiam breves.

Post tertias ex lapide quidem Calor in faciem ipsius.

E. K. Exire videbatur.

Circa lapidis oram and fimbriam rubicundus viridis circulus apparebat.

E. K. Jam video hominem albis indutum vestibus, and succinctis facie longa
sparsis crinibus, and a deus notu quasi undantibus, and dexter pes stans super
magnum lapidem rotundam, and sinister super aquam, and post dorsum ejus magna
lux est: Nunc video terram sub pedibus ejus, sed quasi in aere videtur esse tam
lapis ipse quam aqua illa.

D Sit benedictus Deus noster, and fiat voluntas ejus.

Aquae cursus (qui versus Occidentem est) pedem ejus videtur sccundum se prius
defer.

Videtur iste longo a me esse cum intueor faciem ejus interdum una apparet esse
interdum tres facies and ita confuso quodam modo.

E. K. Audio magnam vocem Dicentem, Veni and Vidi.

E. K. Descendit jam alter ad illum quasi Globus Ignius cum facie eminenti, and
ab ejus corpore quasi verga arundinea videtur emanare.

..... Inspexi, and examinavi, and ecce, Nulla est Justicia. Anglice omnia dict
a erant usque ad verbum ab, etc.


Vox..... Interet aqua in mare, and siat falsa, quia ecce tertia viola est
plena.

E. K. Jam venit ignis, and illum totum circundat, aliquo minimo: Circa illud
relecto intervallo sibi proximo.

Vox..... Mensura.

(...) and sigillum est (52) quin quaginta duo.

Ast (...) sum plenus Justitiae and Misericordiae.

Visigitur tu, quod aperies os meum?

Ast quare inquit Dominus visitarem Stephanum humiliet Semetyrum.

E. K. -- Inclinat caput suum] quia ecce habeo quod dicam, and ecce habeo, and
labia mihi confuta sunt.

Magnificat igitur (...) Coeli and terrae Deum Creatorem, Regem and
illuminatorem quod possit (...) peccatoribus (...) esse and vultum ejus
misericordiam super vos convertere.

E. K. Jam conversus est totus in Globium igneum.

D Miscrere (...), secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, etc.

E. K. Jam magnus quidam fumus per plicas quasdam (insta nubis) lapidem operet.

E. K. Jam videtur illa nubes convoluta esse, and seorsim ad unum D Latin baec
sunt (...) dicta.
latus lapidis seposita.

..... Verbum, ab altissimo missus facio;
Quamobrem erige te and diligenter
Attend Stephane, quis te a Cunabulis
Enutrivit? quis viarum tuarum labores. D Nota quod haec Stephani Regis
reprehensio incipiebat Latin, ab haec dictione verbum quemadmodum praedixit,
Maii Cracoviae

Aut juventutis tua temeritate mensuravit? ab impetu judicii and temporis: quis
te legit? aut unde munitus es Coelestidecore? Hanc tibi animans viventem,
sagacem, and sale plenum, quis induxit? Nonne Rex ille gloriae, in cujus
gratiam omnis subjecta est, in coelo and in terra potestas? qui te potenti
elevans brachio a milite ad majorem, a majore, ad maximum evocavit septrium;
Nonne idem ille, quite and (...) and visitat: and de semetipso, ante saecula
dixit, Ego sum? Quareigitur, Nebulam tam tenebrosam, tanta ecce caligine tanta
dico ingratudine suffultam, inter Deum tuum, and animam tuam induxisti? An,
quod non accepisti habes? [he shaked his hand at the King, after the Polonian
manner] Aur unde (Di) Diadema Capitis? Ecce quia in fragili cordis tui
prudentia, Deum a sinistris, immo a tergo, posuisti, sequitur te spiritus
malignus: Nam erasti: Igitur multiplicata and numerata sunt peccata tua in
Coelis, Judicium tuum in te canes ipsi cum pseuda Propheta ferant inquinata
sunt Regia tua scelere turpissimo, Cubicula tua olent malum, igitur surrexit
Deus turgidus and terribilis factus est and iratus tibi. Verum sic dicit
Dominus; quia patres tui, ad Altar meum sanctiores stetere, neque perversi a
voce and via mei recessere; te autem, quia virum a vulgo distinctum seperando
seperavi, and seperatum: eligendo, dilexi: Non visitabo iniquitates tuas in
verga mea: Neque Dejiciam te quemadmodum decrevi: Sed in Solio titubanti sedeas
permittam. Verum si brachium meum Zelo cognoveris potens: si impietatem tuam
derelinques: si te munditiae ornaveris, si fetidam a sinu tuo lepram and
alnnica tineam, (non ad vomitum rediens) abster seris Ego quoque iram avertam
meam, and dies tua relinquae stabilientur fortitudine: Reges malidicti and
potentes hujus nudi intoxicati calice, Meretricis (mea quia neglexere statut)
fulmine ire meo in manu, and ante pedes tuos cadent ferrorique erit gladius
tuus nationibus, tutela te Coeli circumducent dum in robore dexterae tuae
peribunt inimici.

Cor populi tui, a te alienatum, post modicum repurgabitur: qui autem in
sanctum conspiramere turpissimo, cadent ulcere. Adhuc si latere meo cum
firmiter, tam fideliter adhaescas abumbrabit te spiritus meus and evades
sapiens: teque res Foecundabit de Coelo. Haec est veritas and Lex Domini, quam
proposit tibi Forte Vriel.
Lux Dei hodie Stephano: Igitur sum tibi gladium femori, estringe, eleva pro
Domino and veritate, pugna, vince, Regna Noli (sicut homo) timori cedere, neque
de mundo queritate: quia Deus tuus tecum est; Ignis terribilis and magnus
Dominus exercituum: Igitur si os tuum just a solio operies: si impium
condemnaveris impietatis impleto te spiritu meo, and anima tua repleatur igni
potenti, dum manus tuae vindicant coelos, [inclinat caput.]

Impiam illam generationem, (de qua Domino loquuntur est, and in servitutem
tibi tradidit,) cum Bohemia.
videris tempus, cum filiis suis, and a populo suo, a parvo usque ad majore,
percute gladio ut pro impietate peccati, sit plagarum numerus; quia erit
inflictus Bohemia (non minus odiosa Coelis: quam terrae gravis, and tediosa)
signata tibi; est; and maledicta in jubare solis, Collige and Orna.

Fuge pedem in Aquilone, and digitis tange mare, and noti spernere coronam
altissimi ostendam tibi nomen meum, and ponam lauds tuas inter aquas. Cinge te
etiam sicut forti, amplectere montes meridionales; and aedifica mihi altar:
Eripiam enim vincula ab illis. Ab Occidente, manus violentas in viscera tua
extendunt: Sed ferro praescindam illas ungues. Denique si a peccatis
cessaveris, si studio flagrabis coelestium, and ambuland^s coram me Domino Deo
tuo in justitia, and veritate, and nuncquid in nomine meo seperit benedicatur
and in me splendorem suscipit; Sin autem, verba, quae ^gomet ulter existamt
vide Junii 24.
locutus est Dominus, audire notueris, Egomet ulter existam hodie exaltavi te
in Domino, and posui caput tuum inter stellas: Esto igitur obediens: Paratus
est terror impiis, and maledictus est mundus: Beatus autem qui fideliter
observant Verba, and illa custodiet quae Dominus hodie fecit Gratia Dei patris,
Jesu Christi filii, ejus [inclinat caput] and Spiritus Sancti visitet vos
semper [extendit manus su^^ valde.]

D Amen.

Adduc familiam tuam cum celeritate.

D Sit benedictus nomen altissimi qui in servandis promissis est
constantissimus, and in misericoardiis Anglice hoc dixit.
abundantissimus. Illi Gloria, Laus, Honor, decus, jubilatio, and gratiarum
actio nunc and semper.

Amen.


Maii 28.

Tuesday mane circa 6. in Nyepolonize.

D Oratione finita and aliquibus verbis factis, de nostra cum Stephano Action
praeterita haeri.

E. K. Here is he that was yesterday in our Action with the King.

Hei mihi (says the Lord) [He stoopeth by little downward] why do I hold my
hand from the Earth? What have all the Princes of the World built a Tower
against me? These in denying me and my Majesty: The other wallowing in extreme
drunkenness amongst the pleasures and blindness of the flesh, neglecting
(without fear) my Commandments, have I thrown out the Children from the
Vineyard, and called in the Dung-carriers? have I visited my servants, (whom I
chose) in wrath and indignation with the Sword of Justice? have I thus
scattered them upon the face of the World, without a Shepherd, to entertain
blasphemous Murderers, Liars, and the Runnagates of the Earth, the seed of
Cain, and of the cursed! O you Caterpillars, O you that fill the Earth with
poison! O you abusers of my Name, and Dishonorors of my Temple! What is the
cause that you are so barren, or that the Lord has not mightily showed himself
amongst you, as unto his Children? Why are not the Miracles and Wonders a
Testimony of the God of Truth amongst you, as they were unto the Israelites?
Why, has not the Sea divided her self? Why, has not the Lord delivered you
from bondage? Unto the Israelites he gave a fruitful land (the possession of
the wicke) abounding with Milk and Honey: unto you, he has delivered your
possession unto the Dogs: and your children to become Captives, why does not
the God of Hosts stretch forth his hand saying: Deliver my people from bondage?
are not the times of those latter days D As the (...) and (...) knew not the
time of their visitation and so are these days shadowed in the Israclues acts,
etc.
and of the Harvest of the Disciples Exodus c. 19. be
shadowed amongt the doings and graces of the Israelites, you are become blind,
you have eyes but you see not, for you * know not the time of your visitation.
O thou stif-necked Generation this is the cause, that the finger of God comes
not amongst you: This, this is the cause, because you have not Faith: Neither
is the Spirit of godliness and obedience amongst you, can he that is all Truth
defile himself with lying: or can the flesh of man diminish the authority of
the Godhead: is Christ Jesus, (very God of very Go) of less power or strength
unto you, then he was before, unto the seed of Abraham: because he has taken
your flesh upon him. O you ignorant, o you blind strangers, o you that were
faithful in the sight of the Lord, is not the God of Heaven and Earth heir
unto you, by reason of his Manhood have you not now access your selves unto
the Throne of the Highest, which your Fathers had not? the Israelites ran unto
the Prophets and high Priests: yea, they durst not run before the Lord: For it
was said of them

* Let them stand before the hill. They brought their offerings to the Priest,
which offered up their prayers and humility: But unto you (o you of little
fait) the Gates are set open: yea, even unto the Throne of God: why therefore,
do you not ascend unto your Christ, Which is anointed before the Father. Has
he anointed him for himself, or for you? for both: If you have no miracle, you
have no faith, if you have (says the Son of Go) faith, to be compared with a
Mustard Seed, etc. (...) Fides.
But you do none of these things, neither is the name of God magnified amongst
you, Is it not a shame, that the faith of man grows not to be equal with a
Mustard Seed, is it not a sign of your slavish nature, from the which you were
called, that there is no faith amongst you?

True it is: For why the blood of Christ is shed upon you: and you are washed
without deserts, Behold now (says the Lord) when I have stirred up a Moses
there are no Israelites that will follow A Moses.
him: the seed of Abraham is destroyed with the Winter of self-love and
dis-obedience.

The Lord groaneth, saying: Whether shall I turn me? unto whom shall I show my
face? if I say unto them go out, set your (...) against the wicked: Behold, I
will be amongst you, and fight for you: who is it that hears me? where is
your faith become? who is he that believes me, O you wicked Generation shall
the Lord call you and seek your deliverance, and will you know of the Lord
with what means he will work amongst you, is the God of Heaven and Earth
become amongst Haec (...) verba Stephani Regis cum quo (...).
you an Ingineer or a Merchant, a Hoorder up of worldly treasure; or one that
rides on horseback to battle? you stinking Carrion, you hateful wretches
before Heaven and Earth, you blind hirelings. Who divided the Seas who threw
down Jericho, who overthrew the wicked Kings? who destroyed (...)
the Cities of the wicked? who fought against the reprobate Giants and the
flesh of mankind? who opened the windows of Heaven and consumed you all except
as you read Genes. 7. (...)
eight persons, yea, if out of the windows I can consume you, what shall
become of you if I open my doors, if I send out my servants against you, and my
innumerable army. Is it not said, whatsoever I put into your (...)
months, that speak. Why do you so, but for the truths sake: If therefore I
bid you do, is not my truth all one? I am full of sorrow: for no man opens
his doors unto me, no man believes me: no man remembers that I made Heaven
and Earth:

Stay a while that I may weep with my self.

E. K. All the stone is become black and full of fiery specks.

D After we had read the premises

E. K. Here is another now come in green a man with nothing Ilimese. (...)
infra.
on his head but only his yellow hair.

He has like a pair of black boots under his garments close to his legs: like
buskins etc.

D Note Ilemese appeared in July, Anno 1548, and did make an end of Nalvage his
work, etc.

He appears their like a little child with yellow hair, etc.

D

Iteach you [he paused after a pretty while

Thus says the Lord thou must answer Steven according to the hardness of his
heart: Answer Responsum primo Stephano Rege.
him thus, for the Mean: Lo, King, the God of Heaven and Earth has placed me
before thee, and has showed unto thee his will, has nourished up me his
servant from my youth unto this day, in the fear of him and the fervent desire
of true wisdom, whereby I have attained (through his hell) unto the knowledge
and secrets of the things in Nature: which knowledge behold in the name of God
and for his sake: and because he has chosen thee, lo, I offer up unto thee,
and willingly made thee partaker of; This done be not afraid to open thy mouth
unto him, as thou did unto Rodolph, in (...) the Emperor.
writing, Behold (o Kin) I can make the Philosophers Stone, for so they call
it, Bear thou therefore the Charge, and give me a name within thy Court that I
may have access unto thee: and yearly maintenance of thee for us both; Command
him also, or strike a band of secrecy between him; thy self, and Lasky. Take
heed thou want not faith: for I will help thee: And he shall have a great For
us both E. K. and D Fides.
Treasure, I will see them, if he will labor for me. But it may be Lasky will
hold him by the heel.

D What mean you by that phrase?

..... As Jacob did Esau. Genes. 23. D


Unto this apply thy self, and give thy whole endeavor from time, to time also
I will open my mind unto Stephen through thee, or in the presence of himself.

But let Lasky open this unto him: The Camp is known unto me.

D I understand not this point.

..... Let him understand, thou art minded so to do.

For this seven days, ask no more answer. (...) a responsis petendis.


D How, and if the King be desirous of any action?

..... I respect not the King.

D I beseech you be not offended that I ask your name?

..... Ilemese.

E. K. He is gone.

D The other will come again.

A voice. Non venit.

Therefore shut up the window.

Deus Coeli and Teriae da nobis Fidem.

Nyepolonicze in Aula Regis St.
Junii,

Tuesday a me idie circa horam tertiam: The King send for me to hear what I had
to say to him as I had, send him word that I had to say somewhat to him in God
his behalf. When I was come into his privy Chamber, and all others excluded
but only the Lord Lasky who came with me, and stayed by the King his
commandment. I said thus verbatim as follows.

D Ecce (o Rex) Deus Coeli and (...), me ante oculos Vestros posuit: and vobis
suam declaravit voluntatem: me autem servum suum a juventute mea ad praesentem
diem enutrivit in timore illius, and desiderio ferventi verae sapientiae qua
ratione (and ejus auxilio) (...) sum cognitionem and secreta (...) naturalium
quam cognitione (ecce) in nomine Dei.

Cracovia.
Junii 6

Mane horam circiter 8

Orationibus finitis, pro luce and veritate Divina, quae nos ducerent and
perducerent ad montem sanctum Sion etc.

I have (o Lord) according to my simple ability, endeavored my self to
declare to Steven those things I was willed; accept, o Lord, my intent, and
give me thy graces and increase my faith that I may in my doings and sayings,
please thee or not offend thy divine Majesty, and now o Lord, we await thy
further direction: not presuming to propound (as now) matter, such as our (...)
state might move us unto: but therein we crave this aid, thy light and
wisdom, etc.

K. E. Here is a great head with wings like a Cherubim: all of fire, the eyes
are very big, as big as your hat, and his head as big as this Table.

..... He that is a sleep let him sleep on, he that is in the high way let him
not return home. He that eats let him not rise, but eat still, and he that
weepeth let him weep still, he that rejoices let him rejoice for ever. He that
goes awry let him not return into the way. He that planteth his Vineyard let
him not see it, he that gathers the grapes let him not drink of them, he that
blasphemeth the name of God, let him blaspheme, for he returns not. But he
that looks up unto Heaven, let him not cast his eyes upon the Earth.

Behold, the Lord has forgotten the Earth, and it is a burden to me that I am
here, therefore I go.

Unto those that do well, the Steward is ready with the reward, woe be unto the
Monster of the Earth, for he is accursed.

E. K. He is gone: and flies in a strange order: upward in a special line in
manner?

A voice. Put all things to silence that the Lord had touched, (...)

The receptacle and the Books, see you open them not, nor touch them until you
hear more from me. But be of right heart, and walk the ways that you are
returned into.

Take this one lesson: you are in (...) with me, and for the rest care not.

D Thy mercies be sealed upon us for ever and ever, o Lord, of Hosts.

E. K. Now is a red thing, like a Cloud come all over the stone.

Ignem tui amoris and praepotentis fidei in cordibus nostris, accende, o Deus
Omnipotens nunc and semper.

Amen.
Anno 1585. Augusti 6. Unica Actio; quae Pucciana vocetur. Que durabat ab hora
5. mane, ad horam 11. PRAGAE.
Actio Pucciana.
Pragae. Actionis Puccianae, prior pars.
Augusti 6.

Tuesday, Mane, circa ortum Solis, and nobis heri injungebatur.

Fusis de moere praecibus, etc. praesentibus nobis D, E. K. and Fr. Pucci, ut
praescriptum erat.

Disposita erat Mensa foederis: Candelaque cerea accensa.

E. K. Here is one, covered in white to the breast, all white apparalled, he
has a long glass in his left hand, full of filthy loathsome stuff, like
matter or like blood and milk, or curds mingled together, and a staff about an
ell long in his right hand, he sets the end on the ground, he points with
his staff toward the

D I had set S. K. at the usual Table, in our secret study, and had (...) my
usual Shew-stone before him.
Table of Covenant.

Accede Dominum.

D He [ E. K.] came to the Table of Covenant, and looked into the Holy-stone,
and saw the same vision, but his face is (here) bare, and he seems to be
Vriel.

D Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini: o beata Dei Lux, URIEL......
Gloriatibi Domine, Rex coeli, and terrae, quies, and venturus es.

E. K. Now I see the foundation of an old thing, as though it were of a Church.

A voice..... Measure.

Measure from the East to the North, and from the North to the West part, for
behold, the rest is judged already.

URIEL..... I have measured, (Lord) 25, and the half of twenty five. 37.

The voice..... Divide into three parts. [D The third part of 37] is 12.

URIEL..... It is done.

The voice..... Unto the Kings of the East give the first.

Unto the Kings of West give the second.

The remnant measure unto the days of the North: that the fire of my
indignation, may be a bridle amongst them, and that the whole World (except the
except) may drink of the sorrow of the Prophetia; seventh part of the half
time, yet to come.

URIEL..... Thy mouth (O Lor) is a two-edged sword, thy judgments are perpetual
and everlasting, thy words are the spirit of truth and understanding, thy
Garments most pure and smelling incense; Thy Seat without end, and triumphing,
who is like unto thee amongst the Heavens, or who has known thy beauty? Great
art thou in thy holy ones, and mighty in thy word amongst the Sons of men:
Thy Testament is holy, and undefiled, The glory of thy Seat, and the health of
thy Sons: Thy anointed is sacrificed, and has brought health unto the
faithful, and unto the Sons of Abraham. Thy spirit is everlasting and the oil
of comfort: The Heavens (therefore) gather themselves together, with Hallelujah
to bear witness of thy great indignation and fury prepared for the Earth,
which has risen up with the Kings of the Earth, and has put on the Wedding
Garments: saying with her self I am a Queen: I am the daughter of felicity.
Remember all ye, that are drunken with my pleasure the Character I have given
you, and prepare your selves to contend with the Highest, set your selves
against him, as against the anointed, for you are become the Children of a
strong Champion: whose Son shall garnish you with the Name of a Kingdom, and
shall pour wonders amongst you, from the stars, which shall put the Sun
the steward of his Wagon, and the Moon the handmaid of his servants. But, O
God, she is a Liar, and the fire brandof destruction. For, behold, thou art
mighty, and shall triumph, and shall be a Conqueror for ever.

E. K. Now the Stone is full of white smoke.

D A Pause.

E. K. The smoke is gone, and here stands one over him in the air with a
Book, whose nether parts are in a cloud of fire, with his A Vision.
hair sparsed, his arms naked, the Book is in his right hand, a four square
Book, with a red fiery cover, and the leaves be white on the edge, it has 7
seals upon it, as if the claspes were sealed with 7 Liber cum 7 sigillis.
golden Seals. And there are letters upon the Seals, the first E. M. Emet tau.
E. T. T. A. V.

..... Take this Book, ut veritas Luce magis clarescat, Et Lux, veritate fiat
valida. Data The angel with the Book.
est enim tibi potestas, dandi and aperiendi hunc librum mundo and mundis.

URIEL..... Gloria tibi. Rex coeli and terrae qui fuisti es, and venturus, es
hinc enim, judiciu^ meretricis.

E. K. Now Vriel takes the Book, kneeling upon both his knees.

URIEL..... Rejoice O you sons of men, lift up your hearts unto heaven for
the secrets of God are opened: and his word let out of Prison. Rejoice, O you
sons of God, for the spirit of truth and understanding is amongst you.
Rejoice O you that are of the Sanctuary, for you shall be full of wisdom and
understanding. Rejoice O thou the House of Jacob, for thy visitation is at an
end, and D Visitatio Justitiae (...). Judaeorum. (...).
thy visitation is beginning: The four winds shall gather thee together, and
thou shall build up the trodden wall: The bridegroom shall dwell with thee. And
lo, behold, the Lord has sworn, and wickedness shall not enter into thee,
neither shall the Spirit of the Highest go from thee, but thy fathers bones
shall have rest; And thou shall live eternally.

The blood of the Innocents shall be washed away from thee, and thou shall do
penance for many days. Then shall the Lamb stand in the midst of thy streets
O Jerusalem: and shall give Statutes unto thy people and inhabitants: All
Nations shall come unto the House of David: The Mothers shall teach their
infants, saying, Truth has prevailed, and the Name of the Lord shall be the
Veritas prevalebar.
Watchman of thee, O City.

E. K. Now all is full of a white clond.

URIEL..... Silence unto me, and rest unto you for a season.

E. K. All is disappeared, and the stone seems clear.

Actionis Puccianae posterior pars.
D Legi praemissa Latin ipsi Fr. Pucci, and pauca locutus sum de regibus and
aliis qui haec putant esse nostras imposturas, and a nobis aec mala ratione
tractari, etc.

E. K. He is here again.

E. K. He sits in a chair of Crystal, with his Book in his lap, and the
measuring rod in his right hand, and the glass vial in his left hand.

URIEL..... Seeing that power is given unto me, and that truth is added unto my
Ministry, and I am become full of light and truth, I will open your eyes, and
I will speak unto you the truth that you may shake off the lumpishnesse of your
darkness, and profound ignorance: and walk in truth with your fathers.

Give ear (therefore) diligently unto my voice: and imbibe my sayings, within
the liquor of your hearts, that the sap of your understanding may receive
strength, and that you mayflourish with acceptable Truth, as the chosen
servants and Ministers of the Highest.

Totus mundus in maligno positus est, and is become the open shop of Satan, to
deceive Malitia, Mundama, Pompa, and (...).
the Merchants of the Earth with all abomination. But what, are you the
Pedlers of such wares? or the Carriers abroad of lies and false doctrine. Do
you think it is a small matter to tie the sense of Gods Scriptures and
mysteries unto the sense and snatching of your Imaginations? Do you count it
nothing to sit in judgment against the Spirit of God: leaving him no place, but
at your limitation. Is it lawful before the Son of God, to spend the whole
days, yea, many years, with the Sons of Satan, the lying imps, and
deceivers of the World? Are you so far entered into the shop of abomination,
that you point unto the Son of God the time of his coming, the descending of
his Prophets, and the time wherein he shall visit the Earth? Moses durst not
speak, but from the Lords mouth: The Prophets expounded not the Law, but the
voice of the Lord. The Son of God spoke not his own words, in that he was
flesh, but the words of his Father; His Disciples taught not, but through the
holy Ghost; Dare you (therefore) presume to teach, and open the secret Chamber
of the Highest, being not called?

Tell me, have you left your Merchandise, and the counting of your money
deceitfully gotten, to beome Teachers of the Word of God? Are you not ashamed
to teach before you understand? yea, are you not ashamed to lead away, where
you cannot bring home? Hypocrites you are, and void of the Holy Ghost, liars
you are become, and the enemies of Christ, and his holy Spirit.

Peradventure you will say, in reading the Scriptures we understand But tell
me, by what spirit you understand them: what Angel has appeared unto you? or
of which of the Heavens have you been instructed?

It may be you will say of the Holy Ghost, O thou fool, and of little
understanding! Do thou not understand that the Holy Ghost, is the
Schoolmaster of the Church, of the whole Flock and Congregation of Christ? If
he be the Schoolmaster (therefore) over a multitude, it follows then, that
one doctrine taught by the Holy Ghost, is a lesson or an understanding of a
multitude: But what multitude are of thine understanding or of what
Congregation art thou? Will thou say, thou art scattered. Thou speak fasly,
thou art a runnagate. But, behold, I teach thee, and thy error is beforethy
face.

Whosoever does understand the Scriptures must seek to understand them by
Ordinance and spiritual tradition. But of what spiritual tradition
understandest thou? or by what Ordinance are the Scriptures opened unto thee?
Thou will say thou art informed by the Holy Fathers, and by the same Spirit
that they taught, by the same Spirit thou understandest. Thou say so, but
thou do not so. Which of thy Forefathers has tied reason to the Word of
God? or the understanding of the Scriptures to the Discipline of the Heathen?
I, say unto thee, that thy Forefathers were dear unto Christ, were pertakers
of the heavenly visions and celestial comforts, which visions and celestial
comforts, did not teach unto them, a new exposition of the Scriptures, but did
confirm and give light unto the mysteries of the Holy Ghost spoken by the
Apostles, the ground-layers and founders of the Church. Whatsoever, therefore,
thou learnest of thy Forefathers, thou learnest of the Apostles, and
whatsoever thou learnest of the Apostles thou have by the Holy Ghost. But if
thou expound the Fathers after thy sense, and not after the sense of the
Apostles, thou have not the Holy Ghost, but the spirit of lying. Therefore
humble thy self and fall down before the Lord. Lay reason aside, and Reason.
Ecclesia (...).
cleave unto him. Seek to understand his word according to his holy Spirit.
Which holy Spirit thou must needs find, and shall find in a visible Church,
even unto the end.

I will plainly say unto thee (That, Truth may appear mightily in light:)
Whosoever is contrary unto the will of God, which is delivered unto his Church,
taught by his Apostles, nourished by the Holy Ghost, delivered unto the World,
and by Peter brought to Rome, by him, there taught by his Successors, held, and
maintained, is contrary to God and to his Truth. Lather. Casvin: Wilfully,
Obstinately erring.


Luther has his reward.

Calvin his reward.

The rest, all that have erred, and wilfully run astray, separating
themselves from the Church The definition of an Here tique.
and Congregation of Christ obstinately, and through the instigation of their
father the Devil, have their reward. Against whom the Son of God shall
pronounce judgment, saying, Go you deceivers into Hell fire, provided for your
Father and his Children from the beginning.

You rise up amongst your selves, saying, The Pope is Antichrist; For by this
name you call The Pope is not Antichrist. Antichrist.
him, an evil man he may be, and fall from his vocation: But he can never be
Antichrist: For Antichrist is he, the son of the Devil, a man flesh and
blood, born of a wicked and deceitful Harlot, that shall seduce the people,
swell with the strength of his father, and resist God in Earth amongst men, as
his father did in Heaven among the Angels, utterly denying his Omnipotency, and
setting himself against him.

O you fools, and of little understanding: When unto the Apostles, the Keys of
Heaven were Claves Coeli (...) datae.
given, that is to say, the same authority and power of Christ Jesus the Son
of the Living God, to forgive sins, and to exclude sinners from the Kingdom
of Heaven; (An) when unto the same Apostles; it was said also Come behind me
Satan: you have not under standing to see into the mysteries of the Highest; if
the Son of God did commend and reprehend his Disciples, why may not
(therefore) a Bishop, be counted good and evil; if it follow (therefore) that
good aend evil may be a Remember (...) amending of this place. (...) belong eth.
Bishop it follows also, that neither good nor evil adds unto the Authority
of a Bishop, but unto his own life; if he be good he reapeth the benefit of his
goodness, but if he be evil, he is a Liar, because his Doctrine is against
himself, if therefore for the sin of man, God has suffered many in the
spirit of Acts 23. A.
Ananias to sit in the holy place, it is for your finnes sake; and for your
rebellious nature to be punished: And not for the obscuring or darkning of his
Church.

Open your eyes therefore, and understand, and cleave to the Church for the
Church sake, and not for the love of man. Despise not the Church, because of
the transgressions of man: But submit your neck under that holy yoke and
ordinance, which shall lead you to the Congregation governed by the Spirit of
God, wherein you shall under stand the secrets of God his Book, to be
interpreted Nullus ^.
according to the sense of your fathers: whose understanding was the finger of
the Holy Ghost, you cannot authorize your selves, and without authority you can
do nothing; Therefore if your authority be not, why take you upon you the
doings of the Church, which it is one thing to seek to understand the
Scriptures, and an other thing to teach the Scriptures according to his
understanding, for he that teaches, teaches, by Authority, but if he have no
Authority, he is an Usurper. An usurper.


My brethren remember your selves, and consider you are Children: you are not,
vestri juris, but alieni. Therefore, do nothing that is of your selves: But
follow, (as good children) the steps of ^.
your Mother: which Mother is a pure Virgin, and is always instructed with the
wisdom of the Comforter; What meat she shall give unto you her Children: and
how she shall bring you up and instruct you: Simplicity is much worth, and
obedience is a Garland before the Lord. But Curiosity is the Devil; Have you
not read; That the bread of the holy ones is not to be cast unto `Dogs? Look
unto your selves whether you be Dogs or no. See if your life be holy: your
doings straight and just, your patience manisold: your affliction great for the
Lord: if you find not your selves so, you are not Children; If you be not
Children, you are not Sons, if you be not Sons you have no Mother, if you
have no Mother you are Dogs, you are devourers of the bread of Children,
currish, senseless, and against God.

Enter therefore into judgment with your selves.

Consider you are created by God.

Consider you are redecmed by God.

Consider also you are also left to the spiritual tuition and comfort of God:
which God has made of you a Congregation: a holy and sanctified fellowship,
feeding always as brethren together, under his wings, and at his Lable: which
feeds you with the bread of life and understanding, with the body and blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of the Living God.

With understanding that you may know the will of your Father which is in
Heaven, and knowing him, be obedient: which is the conclusion of your vocation.
Shake not off therefore the yoke of Obedience, least you put away also the Cup
of understanding, and so know not the will of your ^.
Father.

But my thinks, you are starved, your guts are shrunk up: your bones and
sinews are withered. What is the cause thereof? When received you the bread of
the Lord? When received you nourishment? O you of little faith: and less
understanding you err, and run astray: you are blind, you follow not the
will of your Father: Return, Return, and say within your selves,

O eternal God and loving Father, great is thy care and mercy ^.
over us, which being led astray (with Satan and the spirit of darkness) have
brought us home: which being blind have set open before our eyes: (our eyes
also opened) the true path and line of understanding: Happy are we whom thou
love so deerly: and unto whom the care of our health is so dear: We will
therefore praise thy Name, and return from our errors: we will acknowledge our
sins, and follow thy Commandments: for thou, O Lord, art only just and
true, and thy mercy is everlasting: Thy Laws are sweet, and thy love and
kindness mighty amongst us, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Zebaoth, all honor
praise and glory be nnto thee for ever.

D Amen.

..... After a while I return again.

E. K. He is gone.

D Note, I read the premises to Fr. Pucci, in Latin, which seemed to us to be
wonderfully pithy, and to the purpose, etc.

E. K. He is here again.

URIEL..... Francis Pucci, give ear unto my word. Stay a while.

D Hereupon Fr. Pucci did kneel on both his knees. Pranciscus Pucci.


URIEL..... True it is, that, as thy spirit moved thee, so God has called thee
to the partaking and understanding of his will to be fulfilled in punishment
and wrath against the falsehood and deceit of the earth. And therefore has God
in his great love and exceeding mercy called thee away from the Sons of the
accursed, and from the way of unrighteousness: wherein if thou follow him in
simplicity of Conscience, and righteousness ( the works of faith) thou shall
be confirmed: for I say unto thee, I will power my vengeance upon the whole
Earth, and I will chasten her in her iniquity, and in the midst of her pride,
I will throw her down headlong, and she shall triumph no more And because thou
have humbled thy self, my spirit shall be with thee, Judicium incipiet a domo
Dei. Filius, Servus.
and thou shall understand. And this wicked Monster, that sits in the Holy
Temple, and sins against the Highest, shall be thrown down headlong with
his pride: And he shall be chastised and corrected with the mouth of you two;
For at the house of the Lord Judgment must begin. And the rebelling son must
be scourged before the wicked servant be punished. Fear not, I will put (...)
your words, strength and power: And if he hear you not, but stretch forth his
hands against you, I will rain fire and brimstone from Heaven: and his dwelling
places shall sink. And the Lake that shall remain, shall bear witness against
him for evermore: Lift up thy heart therefore, and despise the World; Fight
with her manfully, and be not overcome. Moreover, acknowledge thy sins, and
fly unto the Lord. Seek out his House, and eat of his bread: for thou have much
need of it.

The seeds that thou has sown abroad, gather up again, least thou be punished
for the sins of thy Brethren.

Thy Soul stands dear before the Lord, which is the cause that he has
mercy upon thee, which says unto thee, If thou be obedient before the Lord,
follow the instructions and discipline of the holy Ghost: and do the works of
righteousness and Charity, my Spirit shall rest upon thee. I have said.

K. E. He is gone.

D I read over the last parcel in Latin to Francis Pucci: after he had in very
penitent sort thanked God, confessed himself an offender, as he was here noted,
etc.

E. K. He is here again.

URIEL...... Your Penance and Devotion premised, The blessing of God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in his everlasting truth and light,
comfort you, bless you, and be merciful unto you.

D Amen.

URIEL...... Extingue lumen: Nam decedo.

D Deo nostro Omnipotenti, aeterno Lucis and Veritatis Authori sit omnis laus,
gratia actio, honor and gloria, nunc and sine fine.

Amen.
Anno 1585 Augusti 6 PRAGAE.
Actionis Puccianae posterior pars.
Videns, ( E. K.) nubem jam recessisse conspexit: ut supra URIELIS caput (quasi
in (...)) Videntes olim, qui Prophetae postea dicti.
alium vidit Angelum: cujus pars inferior, nube ignea continebatur. Capitis
very capilli, circa hameros sparsi, and orachia nuda apparebant. Dextra autem
Librum tenebat, quadrata figura, tegmine, (quasi ignito, (...) color,)
velatim: Foliorum vero exterior margo, albicans erat. Septem retinaculis, quasi
totidem seris, clausus esse, liber videbatur. Atque super retinaculorum ora,
sigilla quasi aurea, impressa comparebant. Et super singulis sigillis, litterae
inscriptae singulares. Super primo E, sup. 2 M, sup. 3 E, sup. 4 T, sup. 5 T,
sup. 6 A, sup. 7 V.

..... Accipe librum hunc, and verit as luce magis clarescat: Et lux, veritate,
siat valida. Dataeft tibi potest as dandi, and aperiendi hunc Librum, Mundo,
and Mundis.

URIEL...... Gratia tibi, Rex Coeli, and tenae, qui fuisti, cs, and venturus
es, hinc enim Judicium (...).

E. K. Jam accipit librum URIEL, utrisque flexis genibus.

URIEL...... Gaudete, o vos filii homini, (...) corda vestra Coelum versus.
Secreta enim (...): and (...) ejus ex (...) emissum (...). Gaudete, o vos Filii
Dei, quia Spiritus veritatis and intelligentiae inter vos existit: Gaudete, o
vos, qui de sanctuario estis, quia sapientia and intelligentia replebimini.
Gaudete, o tu domus Jacob, quia jam tua finita est visitatio, atque (...).
Quatuor venti (...) una colligent: and conculcatum redificabis mirum. Tibi
(...). Et, ecce, juravit Dominus, and non te invadent impietates; neque
Spiritus (...) a te recedet. (...), Petrum tuorum ossa quietem nauciscentur:
and tu ipse aeterna frueris (...). Sanguis innocentum, a te abluetur: and ad
dies multos poenitentia te affliges. Tunc quidem Agnus, in (...), (...), o
Hicrusalem: Edictaque promulgabit populo tuo, civibusque tuis.

Omnis Nationes ad domum Davidis confluent matres, suos informabunt infantis,
iis verbis: Praevaluit (...): atque Dei nomen, (...) vigil, o Civitas.

E. K. Jam, omnia, nube alba, oppleta sunt.

URIEL...... Mihi silentium, vobis vero, ad temporis exiguum intervallum, quies
esto.

E. K. Ex oculis meis prorsus evanuer prorsus.

D Nota. Interea ab ipso Angelico sermon, praescripta in Latinum recitavi
conversa, legendo expedite, ipsi Domino Francisco Puccio, praeterea abiter
pauca locutus sum, de Calumniis, contra nostras actiones tales oraculatis, etc.

E. K. Iterum hic mihi apparet Uriel, atque in Cathedra sedet Chrystallina cum
Libro illo, in suo gremio: dextra autem, illam tenet virgam Geometricam: and
sinistra, illam Philosophiam vitream, ut prius.

URIEL...... Cum mihi sit concessa potestas, and cum meo ministerio sit
adjuncta veritas; (unde lucis and veritatis sum factus plenus) vestras ego
aperiam oculos, atque vobis ipsam eloquar veritatem; ut inertem illam molem
tenebrarum vestrarum, et profundae ignorantiae, excutere positis, et in luce
cum patribus vestris ambulaie. Voci igitur meae diligenter praebere aurem, and
intracordium vestrorum liquorem, dicta imbibatis mea. Ut vestrae intelligentiae
succus, vigorem recipere possit: and vos ipsi florere positis cum acceptabili
veritate, veluti servi electi, et Ministri ALTISSIMI.

Totus mundus in maligno positus est, aperta Satane factus est officina, ad
terrae mercatores omni abominandae impietatis genere decipiendum. Ast, quid
vosne facti estis talium mercium sub mercatores garuli? vel mendaciorum et
doctrir ae falsae, in publicum vectarii: AEstimatisne vos, levis momenti
negotium esse Scripturarum Divinarum and Mysteriorum sensum, judicium et
temeritati alligare vestrarum imaginationum? nihili rem esse statutis, in
judicio sedere contra spiritum Dei, nullum illi concedendo locum, nisi vestro
ex praescripto?

Vobisne licet, (...) Filio Dei, integros dies, immo injustos consumere annos,
cum filiis Satane mendaci sobole, and mundi deceptoribus? Adeone penitus in
abominationis officinam vosmet contulistis ut Dei filio, futuri adventus sui
tempus praescribere velitis, Prophetarumque suorum descensus: temporisque
terminum, in quo ipse terram erit visitaturus?

Moses nihil loqui ausus erat, nisi ab ore Dei.

Prophetae Legem non explicabaut, sed Dei vox.

Filius Dei propria sua non est locutus verba, quatenus Caro crat, sed verba
patris sui.

Discipuii ejus, nihil, nisi ex (...) sancto docuerunt.

Audetisne (igitur) vos, vobis docendi assumere munus, aditaque secreta
Altissimi pandere, minime ad id admissi, vocative?

Dieite mihi, Mercaturamne deseruistis, vestrarumque pecuniaium (fraud
partarum) supputationes, ut verbi Dei essetis Doctores?

An non pudet vos, ante docere, quam ipsi intelligatis?

Immo an non vos pudet seducere, prius, quam domum reducere noveritis?

Hypocritae estis, and Spiritu sancto vacui.

Mendaces esse devenistis, and ipsius Christi ininuci, and sui sancti Spiritus.

Fortassis dicitis, ex Scripturarum Lectione, intelligentiam comparamus
earundem.

Ast mihi respondeatis; cujus spiritus auxilio, hane vobis comparatis
intelligentiam?

Quis vobis apparuit Angelus? vel ex quo Coelo, vestram recepistis
instructionem?

Fieri potest, quod, ex Spiritu sancto dicetis.

O stulte tu modicaeque intelligentiae! non intelligis tu, quod Spiritus
sanctus Ecclesiae Paedagogus est, integri gregis, and congregationis Christi?

(...) si (...) Paedagogus est, sequitur, quod Doctrina aliqua, quam Spiritus
sanctus decet, (...), documentum, sive intelligentia sit multitudinis.

Atqui, quae hominum multitudo, tuae est intelligentiae?

Vel cujus es tu Congregationis?

Aliter dispersionis. Dicisne, dispersus alicujus te unum esse: Falsum narras,
fugitivus es.

Verum, ecce, te doceo: Errorque tuus ante tuam constat faciem.

Quicunque ad Scripturam intelligentiam perveniet, conari debet ad illarum
intelligentiam praevenire, (...) Ordinationem, and Traditionem spiritualem.

Ast ex qua spirituali traditione, nactus es tu intelligentiam?

Vel juxta quam Ordinationem, tibi est apertus Scripturarum sensus?

Dices (forsan) ex sanctis Patribus, informatum esse te, and per eundem
spiritum per quem docebent illi, tuam te esse consecutum intelligentiam.

Dicere sic quidem potes, verum non te sic facere certum est.

Quis enim antiquorum Patrum, rationem copulavit verbo Dei, vel Scripturam
intelligentiam, Ethnicorum astrinxit disciplinae?

Tibi dico, quo antiqui Patres, Christo chari erant, and coelestium visionum,
consolationumque Coelestium participes: quae visiones (...) esque consolationes
non illos docebant novam Scripturarum expositionem, sed confirmabant, luceque
illustrabant mysteria Spiritus sancti, per Apostolos declarata, qui Ecclesiae
ipsi sua posuere fundamenta; quicquid igitur ab antiquis Patribus discere
possis, ab Apostolis discis, and quicquid ab Apostolis intelligis, habes id
quidem, a Spiritu sancto, sed si ipsos Patres exponas tuo sensu modoque, and
non juxta sensum Apostolorum, certe Spiritum sanctum non habes, sed spiritum
mendacii.

Humilem, igitur, temet praebeto, and coram Domino procidas, rationem semoveas,
Dominoque adhaereas, laboresque verbum ejusdem intelligere, ex Spiritu suo
sancto: quem Spiritum sanctum, omni ex necessicate invenire debes, atque
invenies invisibili Ecclesia usque ad mundi finem.

Perspicue tibi dicam, (ut veritas potenter in luce appareat) quicunque Dei
contrarius est voluntati, quae suae est tradita Ecclesiae per Apostolos quidem
publicata, per Spiritum sanctum enutrita, and mundo impertita, and per Petrum
ad Romam tradicta, and per eundem ibidem expressa, ab ejusdem successoribus
retenta atque sustentata est: Hic idem Deo and veritati suae contrarius est.

Lutherus suorum recepit mercedem.

Calvinus suam.

Reliqui omnes (...) erraverunt, and sponte in devia concurrerunt, separando
seipsos ab Ecclesia and Congregatione Christi, obstinate and Diaboli (patris
sui) instinctu, mercedem suam receperunt.

Contra quos filius Dei judicium pronunciabit, dicendo:

Ite Deceptores in gehennae ignem, Patri vestro and filiis illius, ab exordio
praeparatum.

Inter vos ipsos insurgitis asserendo, Papam Antichristum esse (hoc enim nomine
illum insignitis) homo (...) malus esse possit, atque a sua excidere vocatione,
verumtamen Antichristus esse nunquam potest.

Antichristus enim ille est, qui filius est Diaboli, homo quidem ex carne and
sanguine natus ex impia and (...) meretrice, qui populos seducet tumidusque sui
patris potentia, Deo resistet in Terra inter homines, quemadmodum pater ejus in
Coelo fecerat inter Angelos: prorsus denegando Dei Ominpotentiam seque illi
opponendo.

O vos stulti and exiguae intelligentiae, quum Apostolis Coeli concredabantur
claves: (quasi diceres) eadem Christi (...) filii Dei viventis, authoritas and
potestas ad hominem condonanda peccata, and ad peccatores Coelo excludendos,
and quum Matt. cap. 16. C. D
eisdem Apostolis, vade post me Satana, etiam diceoatur, non tanta estis
intelligentia ut in Altissimi haec introspicere valeatis mysteria.

Si Dei filius tum commendabat tum etiam (...) Discipulos suos, cur non possit
igitur Episcopus, and bonus and malus censeri? Si hinc consequatur, bonum
malumque Episcopo inesse posse, pari ratione inferri posfit authoritatis
Episcopalis rationem, a bono malove illo non pendere, sed ipsius ad Episcopi
vitam hoc bonum malumve spectare si bonus sit, suae bonitatis metet beneficium;
sin malus sit, mendax est; sua enim illi contraria est doctrina. Proinde, si,
propter hominum peccata Deus permiserit, multos in spiritu Act. 23. A
Ananiae sedere in loco sancto, id quidem propter peccata vestra est, and
rebellem naturam, ut supplicium recipiatis: and non obscura vel tenebrosa ejus
fieret Ecclesia.

Aperite itaque oculos vestros and intelligite, and Ecclesiae adhaeritatis,
amore ipsius Ecclesiae, and non hominum. Neque Ecclesiam contemnatis, propter
hominum iniquitatis.

Verum colla illi submutatis sancto jugo and ordinationi, quae vos ducet ad
illam Congregationem quae gubernator per Spiritum Dei, in qua intelligetis
secreta Libri Dei, explicata esse juxta sensum antiquorum vestrorum Patrum:
quorum intelligentia erat dignitus Spiritus Sancti.

Non potestis a vobis ipsis authoritatem recipere, and hinc authoritas nihil
facere potestis.

Idcirco cum vestra authoritas nulla sit, cur Ecclesia opera Actave intra
vestras arripitis manus? Malae fidei possessor.


Una quidem res est, Scripturarum aliquem quaerere intelligentiam: atque alia
est Scripturas docere, secundum intelligentiam suam. Qui enim docet, ex
authoritate docet: sed authoritatem si non habeat usurpator five intiusor est.

Fratres mei, Considerate vosmet ipsos been, and considerate vos pueros esse,
and quod vestri juris non sitis sed alieni. Nihil igitur faciatis quasi ex
vobis ipsis: sed insistatis (ut pueri boni) vestigiis Matris vestrae, quae
Matter pura Virgo est, and semper a Paracleti sapientia informatur, quem vobis
(pueris ejus) exhibere cibum debet; and quo vos modo educare atque instruere.

Simplicitas multum valet and obedientia, certum est, coram Domino; Ast
curiositas Diabolus est. Matt. 7. a 15. C Mar. 7. C


An non legistis quid sanctorum panis, non sit ante cancs projiciendus?

Penitius vosmet examinetis, utrum canes sitis, ncc ne.

Videte utrum vita vestra sancta sit, opera vestra recta and justa; patientia
vestra multiplex; afflictio vestra, magna propter Dominum.

Si vosmet ipsos, in hoc statu esse, minime deprehendatis, pueri non estis; si
pueri haud sitis, non estis filii; si filii haud sitis matrem non habetis; sin
vero matrem non habet, devoratores estis illius panis qui filiis debetur,
canini, insensati, and contra Deum estis.

In (...) judicium status vos ipsi descendatis.

Pater Considerate, per Deum Creati estis Vox haec (...) multum (...).
Filius Considerate, per Deum Redempti estis. Spiritus S. Considerate etiam,
relicti estis Spirituali Tutelae and consolationi Dei.
Qui Deus ex vobis congregationem ordinavit, sanctam and sanctificatam
societatem, pascentem semper simul tanquam fratres, sub alis suis and insua
mensa; qui vos pascit vitae and intelligentiae panae; corpore ((...)) and
sanguine Jesu Christi filii Dei viventis.

Intelligentiae autem pane vos pascit, ut patris vestii voluntatem
intelligatis, qui in Coelis est; Obedientia ut illi quum noveritis, obedientes
factis; quae obedientia vestrae vocationis finis est.

Nullo igitur modo obedientiae jugum excutiatis, de simul etiam Calicem
intelligentiae a vobis repellatis; atque ea ratione Patris vestri vos lateat
voluntas.

Sed judicio meo famelici estis, vestra contracta sunt intestina, ossa nervique
mariescunt.

Quae hujus rei causa est? quando illum Domini (...) recepistis? quando
nutrimentum accepistis? o vos modicae fidei and intelligentiae minoris erratis,
and devii curritis. Coeci estis, patris veftri, non obtemperatis voluntati;
redite, redite and intra vosmet ipsos talia dicatis.

O sempiterne Deus, and benign Pater, magna certe est cura misericordiaque tua
erga nos, quos in devia actos per Satanam, and spiritum tenebrarum reduxisti
domum; and nobis coecis praeposuisti (visu etiam nobis restituto) veram semitam
lineamque rectam intelligentiae. O nos soelices, quos tibi tam charos habes;
and quorum salus tantae tibi curae est. Nomen proinde tuum, laudibus
celebrabunus; and a nostris revertemur crroribus. Peccata confitebimur nostra,
and praecepta observabimus tua. Quoniam tu solus, o Domine, justus and verus
es, and misericordia tua aeterna est. Leges tuae suaves sunt, et per amans tua
benignitas inter nos valida est. Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Zebaoth. Honor
omnis laus et gloria tibi detur in perpetuum.

D Amen.

URIEL...... Modico transacto temporis spatio revertam.

E. K. Abiit.

D Nota.

D Interim Francisco Pucci haec (quae Anglice dictata recepimus) Latin
recitabam. Nobisque nervosa valde, (...) accommoda institut is videbantur.

E. K. Iterum illum adesse video.

URIEL...... Francisce attentis auribus, verba excipias mea.

SISTATIS PAULULUM.
D Hinc statim, Franciscus Puccius a sede sua genibus utrisque (quasi Deo
supplex) terram petebat.

URIEL...... Verum quidem est (ut tuus te alias commune fecit spiritus) quod
Deus te (...) ut particeps and intelligens esses voluntatis suae explendae, in
vindicta and ira sua exercenda, contra terrae falsitatem and fraudem.

Atque hanc ob causam, ex magno suo amore, and immensa misericordia sua
avocavit te Deus a filiis hominum, Deo invisorum, and ab injustitiae tramite.

In qua tua vocatione, si illum imiteris, in tuae conscientiae simplicitate,
and justitia (quae fidei sunt opera) confirmaberis. Tibi enim dico, vindictam
meam effundam super universam terram atque illam castigabo in iniquitate sua,
and in suae superbie summo gradu illam praecipitem posternam; neque ultra
triumphabit.

Et quia te demissum humilemque exhibuisti spiritus meus tecum erit, and
intelligentiam tu consequeris.

Et monstrum hoc impium, quod in Templo sancto sedet, and contra Altissimum
peccat, (...) (...). 9. C 1 Petri 4. D
cum superbia sua, Atque ex ore utriusque vestri castigabitur and corrigetur.
Judicium enim a Domo Dei inchoari debet, E filius rebellis prius flagellis
caedi debet, quam impius puniri servus.

No timeatis, Vestris enim verbis, vires and potentiam adjungam.

Et vestra si contemnat verba manusque suas contra vos (...): de Coelo ignis
atque sulphuris demittam imbrem, and Palatia ejusdem in terram descendent:
lacusque ibidem remanens contra illum testimonium dabit perpetuum.

Erigas igitur cor tuum mundumque despicias, and contra cjusdem veriliter
pugna, neque ab eodem vincans.

Tua (...) confitearis peccata: and ad Dominum confugias, illius perquirito
domum, and de illius pane comedas: eo enim multum tibi opus est.

Et semina quae sparsim (...), recolligas: ne forte tu poenas tuas, ob fratrum
tuorum peccata.

Anima tua Deo chara est, atque ideirco misericordia erga te movetur, tibique
dicit, si coram Domino (...) appareas: atque sequaris instructiones and
disciplinam Spiritus sancti faciasque opera Justiciae and Charitatis, spiritus
meus super te requiescet.

Dixi.
E. K. Abiit.

D Ex Anglicis dictatis istis ultimis Latin eundem expressi sensum, Domino Fr.
Puccio, valde devoto humili, and praemissa agnoscenti and acceptanti, etc.

E. K. Iterum mihi conspicuus est.

URIEL...... Praemissa vestra tam poenitentia quam devotione, Benedictio Dei
Patris Filii, and Spiritu sancti, in sua sempiterna veritate luceque vos
consoletur, vobisque benedicat, and vobis misericordiam impertiat copiosam.

D Amen.
Ex Action, quae erat die Veneris, September 6. 1585. Pragae.
Eat Puccius, ut promissis per ficiendis provide at.

At cor habeat sincerum rectumque. Angelica vox.


Immo saepe proprios detergat caliceos.

Inter eu ndem autem alloquatur mortua arbusta, de Domino venturo.

Ambulet cum montibus ut illi ejus audire possit.

Tunc revertatur ut quod reliquum est ad implere possit.

Atqui dico proprios tergat caliceos.

D Vos oro ut illam nobis explicare phrasem velitis obscuram.

Qui flagellatur ipse sentit. Augelica vox.


Angelica vox...... Reliqui (iejunii vestr) dies, non hic complebuntur, sed in
illis viginti diebus, in quibus Romae operari Decretum est mihi.

LIBER RESURRECTIONIS. Pragae, Aprilis 30.
Pactum, seu Foedus Sabbatismi. 1586.
Threbone October. 14.

Venimus e September. 14.

1586.
In Maio 29 (...) Decretum contra nos exiit a Caesare Rod. In Augusto 8,
Reversionis permissio D. Rosenbergio, obtinente ut ad sua veniamus.
Miraculum, and factum memorandum in perpetuum.
AS E.K. stood at the end of the Galery by his Chamber, looking over into the
Vineyard he seemed to fee the little man the Gardener, in all manner of
behavior and apparel, who is the chief workman or over-seer of Mr. Carpio his
workmen in the same Vineyard. He seemed very handsomely to prune some of the
Trees: at length he approached under the wall by E. K. and holding his face
away-ward he said unto him, Quaeso dicas Domino Doctori quod veniat ad me. And
so went away as it were cutting here and there the Trees very handsomely, and at
length over the Cherry-trees by the house on the Rock in the Garden he seemed
to mount up in a great pillar of fire.

E. K. bade his Wife to go, and she who was in the Garden. She came up, and
brought him word, No body.

E. K. then came to me and said, I think there is some wicked spirit that would
allude me, and he told and said to me, as is before noted. Then said I, I will
go into the Garden, and bade E. K. come with me. We went down that way which
this Creature did go: but nothing we saw, went to the Banqueting House in the
Vineyard, but that place pleased us not: so, we went along in the way by the
cliff side, and sat down on the bank by the great pyle of Vine-stakes lying in
the very South end of the Vineyard. And we had not sat there half a quarter of
an hour, but I espied under the Almondtree, and on the South Side of it, being
the Westerly Almond-tree, that is it which is standing on the Westerly side of
the straight path which leads from the North toward the South in the
Vineyard. I espied ( I say) like a sheet of fair white paper lying tossed to
and fro in the wind. I rose and went to it, and (to the praise of God his truth
and power,) there I found three of my Books lying, which were so diligently
burnt the tenth day of April last.

1 The three Books were, Enoch his Book.

2 The 48 Claves Angelicae.

3 And the third was the Book of my gathering of the thirty Aires, and entitled
Liber Scientia terrestris auxilii and victoriae.

Thereupon E. K. coming to me, I fell on my knees with great thanks yiedling
to the God Almighty, and so did E. K. whose mind and body were mervailously
affected at the sight of the said Books, having no show or sign that ever they
had been in the fire, neither by color or savor, or any thing wanting.

And after we had set half an hour under the foresaid Almond-trees praising
God and wondering at the Miracle. Suddenly appeared by us the self-same Gardener
like person, but with his face somewhat turned away, and nothing thereof to be
adjudged as of Ave the custom is. He said, Kelly, follow me, E. K. went, and I
sat still, awaiting his return.

This Gardener went before E. K. and his feet seemed not to touch the ground by
a foot height. And as he went before E. K. so the doors did seem to open
before him, he (...) him up the great stairs on the left hand by the Vineyard
door, and so in at his own Chamber door where E. K. has his new Study, and
then the door going out of that to the stairs opened of it self, and he went up
those stairs, and at length brought him to the Furnace mouth where all the
Books and papers had been (...) the 10 day of this April. And coming thither,
there the spiritual Creature did seem to set one of his feet on the post on the
right hard without the Furnace mouth, and with the other to step to the Furnace
mouth, and so to reach into the Furnace (the bricks being now plucked away
which stopped the mouth of the Furnace, all saving one brick thick) and as he
had reached into the furnace there appeared a great light, as if there had been
a window in the back of the Furnace, and also to E. K. the hole which was (...)
greater then the thickness of a brick unstopped, did seem now more then three
or four brick thickness wide, and so over his shoulder backward he did reach to
E. K. all the rest of the standing Books, excepting the Book out of which the
last Action was cut, and Fr. Pucci his Recantation, also to E. K. appeared in
the Furnace all the rest of the papers which were not as then delivered out.

That being done, he bade E. K. go, and said he should have the rest afterward.
He went before in a little fiery cloud, and E. K. followed with the Books under
his arm all along the Gallery, and came down the stairs by Fr. Pucci his
Chamber door, and then his guide left E. K. and he brought me the Books unto my
place under the Almond-tree.

Pragae.
1586 Aprilis 30 May-even.

Mane circa 8.

D Precibus quibusdam fusis ad Deum, and (...) pro miraculo Hesterno actis,
petebamus jam a Deo consilium suum quid de isto miraculo nobis esset faciendum
ulterius, etc.

Et quid faciemus cum Domino Rosenbergio, an illum debeamus admittere ad
amicitiam nostram and soedus sanctum? quid de ejus oblatis aedibus, etc.

E. K. A voice comes down right before me saying.

E. K. Who is this William? (...) a Rosenberg.


Vox...... Thou William. D A pause D I suspect it to be the Lord Rosenberg.
Thou William. D A pause Thou William of Rosenberg. D A greater pause

This day in the Blood of the Lamb, do I pronounce forgiveness of sins, upon
thee: and for a sign and token: Thy lines shall be opened, and thy seed shall
be multiplied upon Earth Therefore take unto thee a Sheep, that is yet a Lamb,
and spoil not the flock of thy poor neighbor.

And, behold, if thou turn thy self from the North, and ascend unto the Holy
Mountain, [and] I will hereafter make a Covenant with thee. But take heed, thou
despise me not.

Blessed are those that are comforted of me, for their strength is from above.
For whosoever is rebuked of the spirit of truth, shall with time perish as a
shadow.

Is it not said, if thy eye offend thee, cast him out? I say unto thee also,
yea, though thy head (...), (...) him also away. The unstable Whisperings and
wordly Policies of such as are the Princes of the World, are they not known
unto me?

O you Hypocrites! O you little of understanding, and of less faith, how far
are you in love with the World, and her pomp, with the flesh and her lightness
or wantonness, with the Devil and Consilium.
his damnable subtilty! Purge your houses, and purge your Kingdoms, if you
wiil stir up the Lord to strengthen you. Cursed is that Nation, that defiled
her self with the society of such as are Bastards. But woe, we, be unto him that
Rules not according to the length of his bridle.

The chaff of this Empire and Kingdom, behold it remains, the father swept it
not out, neither De Imperio To. and Regio Bohemiae.
does the Son lift up his hand for the name of the Highest.

O you Hypocrites, you are faithless, for you fulfill not your charge!

Thou have, yet time to awake, thou may yet be acceptable. Time yet.


Thy doings let them be a Judge between thee and me.

D Magna pausa.

Vox..... Behold, I have given thee unto Rosenberg, him also have I given unto
thee The voice so expounded it after at my request. Anno 88. (...) D. (...).
Whosoever therefore considers not the giver shall be called to account and
that sharply.

In the year 88, I will send out my visitation that the ends of the world may
be known, and that Justice may appear in the garments of her unmeasurable
honor.

In the mean season, I will bless you abundantly with all the gists and seeds
of nature. See therefore, that you work, and labor that your hands may bring
forth fruit, the increase of the Lord.

Six Actions you shall have: the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lords, and from
this day (being a part of the tim) beginning from From good Friday. Our
Heavenly Calendar of six months Action. The rest red Books to be most closely
kept until the sixth Action. Domini miraculum (...) est temendum. (...) a
(...). (...) est (...) ^. E. K. and D together. Adam of (...) (...) Chancellor.
Friday last celebrated, as the memorial of him through ^. Vox 7. D I asked
which Friday.
whom I speak unto you, which suffered upon the Cross for your Redemption,
until the day come of the sixth Month, you shall not presume to ask any
visitation of him that speaks with you. And so the sixth Month (the last day
ensuin) shall always be your day of Action.

Pucci is defiled, and shall not be partaker of these six visitations to come:
but shall depart from you, and be ready as the Lord shall find him, and as he
shall be warned of you. Notwithstanding my spirit shall not depart from him,
and I will open his understanding that he may convert many. For the World must
be satisfied with testimony as well of his life, as the recantation and
professed Doctrine.

D We lack (o Lord) his recantation written by his own hand, I cannot find it
in the Books restored.

Those Books let them be kept of thee, as committed unto thy custody by me. And
see that they be never opened until the sixth Action to come.

See also, that you disclose not my hand amongst you, least I then rise up
against you.

For, behold, you are yet in the Wilderness. Therefore, be silent.

Unto William, notwithstanding (hereafter) all things may be known, and made
manifest.

If any man seek you, else, you know him not.

For you live within the silence of the Highest.

The rest that wants, shall be restored unto you: even unto the least and
last letter.

Live, therefore, together as in the hands of your Protector.

And doubt not, but that I will be merciful unto him that is sick through his
infirmity: yea, and unto his generation as I have promised. And the sin which
remains in his Fathers house, and in his house for many generations, I will
mercifully blot out.

Doubt not, my peace (which am peace, the beginning and the endin) shall
always be amongst you.

D We read all and had long discourse of all, and at last, I asked thus.

D What shall I say unto Rosenberg of your present merciful dealing and intent
toward him.

Vox..... That, which is said of him, that, say thou D unto him.

Move no more questions.

D (...) Domino omnia opera ejus, laudate illum omnes Creaturae ejus: laudent
illum (...), laudent illum Sancti ejus: ille solus est Omnipotens, ille solus
est Sanctus, ille Protector nostri, Illuminator and Consolator noster est.
Cinguli omnis honor and gloria.

Amen.
MEMORANDUM.
1586. May 1.

On May day after dinner I went over the water (being brought to the water side
in the Lord Rosenberg his coach, and Jacobus Menschick with me) unto the Lord
Rosenberg his Gardens, and lodging by the waterside, whether he came to me by
appointment. To whom when I had read in Latin ( ex tempore) the things that
concerned him, I asked him what he had done, since the time of my being with
him, that I may the better understand these words spoken to him and of him.

He told, that he had often prayed, since unto God for the forgiveness of his
sins, and to open his eyes how he might serve him; and to make it to be evident
unto him whether he is to marry or no, and where, or in what stock or kindred.
And if it were his divine will, that he might receive comfort and instruction
by me, and that these and such matters, and somewhat earnestly he had prayed
also for his Mr. the Emperor, that he might bend himself to enjoy God his
favor, yea, for his own marriage and amending of his loose life, while he yet
sat at dinner this day at the Archbishops table, his heart and thought did come
very much upon it, etc.

At these his words I rejoiced much to perceive the doing of the Highest, in
the hearing of his prayer (...) prayed and that the answer which I read unto
him was so filty applied unto his prayer as he also himself, did perceive with
great comfort and spiritual joy. He entreated much that I would pray to God
that the Emperor might be restored to the favor of God, as he was when I
declared my message unto him from the Highest, I answered, that whatsoever the
God of Heaven and Earth should appoint me to say or do unto his Majesty, I most
willingly rejoice in the faithful doing of it: and that it was my duty (as a
Christian) to pray for his Majesty: but I should not make my promise of my
prayer to be heard, but would highly rejoice if his Imperial Majesty would so
use himself in God his judgment, as might be meritorious in the sight of our
Redeemer.

Such words and matters as this passed between us. And he said that he would in
all points, fulfill the advice and warning of God, in this Action expressed, and
would marry a Maiden as he was willed. Votum and promissum Wilhelmi (...),
Vice-regis Bohemiae.
And this day did acknowledge, and account himself a happy man. And as
concerning our mutual bond by the means of each being given to the other by
God of Heaven and Earth, he vowed and promised that he would regard it in all
points to the best of his skill and power, etc.

These and other such good seeds for the service of God being sown between us;
he went toward his Palace in the Court, and I to the waterside, and so over
to the Coach awaiting for me, and so came home. God be praised.

MEMORANDUM.
The Lord Rosenberg sent Mr. Jacob Menschik with this Letter unto me.

Magnifico Domino Joanni Dee ad manus proprias.

Magnifice Domine, Pater Observandae and Charissimae.

LEtatus sum in his quae mihi dixistis. Cognovi enim quoniam exaudivit
deprecationem meam pius pater and misericors Dominus. Itaque maximo pere
desideravi ut quam sepissime ea mihi legere, perlegere and semper ab oculos
habere possim: per amorem Dei oro. ut saltem eorum, quae mihi perlecta and ad
me pertinent verborum mihi transmittas descriptionem: Non tantum mihi (...)
gratificabitur, sed and consolabor (...).

Obsecro praeterea Dominum vestram, assidue pro me orare velit, ut confirmet
hoc Deus quod operatus est in nobis: and dirigat omnia consilia, opera,
actiones, imwo and cogitationes nostras ad laudom and gloriam sanctissimi
nostris sui, commodum multorum, and animae nostrae salutem. Neque desinat, pro
amore suo paterno, quo me (uti spero) Dominatio vestra prosequitur me, semper
in omnibus qua pro honor Dei and commodo vestro a me fieri and debent and
possunt, admonere and significare. Rem summopere mihi gratum and expectationi
meae dignam and consentaneam faciet. Et cum his, me commendo suis praecibus and
orationibus, nec non paterno suo amori and cordi. Optime valeat Magnifica
Dominatio vestra Dominica, Cantate, Anno 1586.

Filius and Amicus vester ex animo Wilhelmus R. Manu propria.

Rogo ut melius intelligat `Dominatio vestra eaque scripta sunt, and consideret
plus mentem meam quam verba. Quia mihi in usu non fuit a multis annis Lingua
Latina, and nemini in hac re confidere volo.

NOTE.
I had translated this Sunday morning, the same parcel of the former Action
into Latin for the Lord Rosenberg, which he then sent for, jump at the time,
when I had finished it: And so I sent it him enclosed in a Letter.

May 6. Being Tuesday, I entered my Journey toward Valkenaw Glasse-house, and
Leipsig Mart.

There are diverse Valkenaws, one by Egre, or Elbogen, not far from Carls Bath,
westward from Prage about 18 Bemish miles, an other in Behem, about 11 or 12
miles from Prage, northerly, a mile from Krebitz, and two miles from Liep, and
a mile from Kamnitz.

NOTE.
May 11 I came to Leipsig, on Sunday the 11 of May, and was at Peter Hans
Swartz his House lodged. I found Laurence Overton, (with much ado) an English
Merchant: to whom my wife (the last year) had showed no little friendship to
himself, and Thomas his partners servant, in the time of his lying sick in our
House, etc. at Prage; He came from England at Mid-lent, he confessed that
Edmond my servant had been oftentimes with him, at his House, and that he did
think that he would come with the next Ships after his coming from England,
then to come within 16 days.

I perceived by his diverse express sayings, that he was but a hollow friend
unto me, and seemed half afraid to deal either with me, or my man.

There, also I found a courteous Gentleman called Mr. Francis Evers, the Lord
Evers his Son of the North. And of all other matters omitting the rehearsal
in these Records, (those matters I mean which at Leipsich and in this Journey
happened notably unto me, or I did my self) one Letter which I wrote to the
Queen of England her Secretary, the Right Honorable Sir Francis (...), as
follows.

Right Honorable SIR,
ALbeit I have (almost) in vain come a hundred miles (from Prage to this
Leipsich Mart) hoping either to meet my Servant there, with answer to my former
Letters, sent in November last to her Majesty (when also I wrote unto your
Honor, and diverse other). And so with speed from this Leipsich to have sent
again, most speedily as occasion should have served. And now, I find, neither
servant, neither Letter from him, neither word of mouth: yet all this
notwithstanding: and whatsoever the hindrance or delay hereof be (whether the
keeping back of my Letters from her Majesty, or the manifold and importune,
most weighty affairs public hindering or delaying her Majesty's most gracious,
discreet and wise resolution herein: or what other occasion else has and does
cause this long and wonderful delay of answer receiving. All this
notwithstanding, I thought good, before I set up to my Coach, to visit, and
most humbly to salute your Honor very faithfully, dutifully and sincerely,
with great and the same good will, that my Letter some years since written to
your Honor, (butt hen, a sinmbling block unto your Honor and other, for the
strangeness of the Phrases therein) does pretend, so it is, right Honorable,
that the merciful providence of the Highest, declared in his great and abundant
graces upon me, and mine, is so wonderful and mighty, that very few, unless
they be present witnesses, can believe the same. Therefore how hard they are to
be believed, there where all my life and doings were construed to a contrary
sense: and (...) of death contrived and decreed against the Innocent, who can
not easily judge.

I am forced to be brief. That which England suspected, was also here, for
these two years, almost (secretly) in doubt, in question, in consultation
Imperial and Royal, by Honorable Espies, fawning about me, and by other,
discoursed upon, pryed and peered into. And at length, both the chief Romish
power, and Imperial dignity, are brought to that point, resolutely, that,
partly they are sorry, of their so late reclaiming their erroneous judgment
against us and of us, and seek means to deal with us, so as we might favor
both the one and the other: And partly to Rome is sent for as great Authority
and Power as can be devised, and likewise here, all other means and ways
contrived, How, by force, or for fear, they may make us glad to follow their
humors. But all in vain, for force humane we fear not: as plainly, and often,
I have to the Princes declared: And otherwise then in pure verity, and
godliness, we will not favor any (my words may seem very mavelous in your
Honors ears: But mark the end, we have had (and shall have to deal with no
babes) I have full often and upon many of their requests and questions, referred
my self to her Majesty's answer, thus, in vain, expected. Nuncius Apostolicus,
(Germanicus Mala Spina) after his years suit unto me to be acquainted with me,
at length had such his answer, that he is gone to Rome with a flea in his ear,
that (...) him, and terrifieth the whole State Romish and Jesuitical: secretly
they threaten us violent death, and openly they fawn upon us. We know, the
sting of Envy, and the fury of the Fear in Tyrannical minds, what desperate
attempts they have and do often undertake. But the God of Heaven and Earth is
our Light, Leader, and Defender. To the Worlds end, his mercies upon us, will
bread his Praises, Honor and Glory. Thus much very rhapsodically, (yet
faithfully) tanquam dictum sapienti, I thought good to commit to the safe and
speedy conveyance of a young Merchant here called Lawrence Overton: which if it
come to your Honors hands before my Servant have his dispatch, I shall or may
by your Honor be advertized. Your Honor is sufficient from her Majesty to
deal and proceed with me, if it be thought good. But if you make a
Council Table Case of it, Quot homines, tot sententiae. And my Commission from
above is not so large: Qui potest capere, capiat.

Sir, I trust, I shall have Justice for my House, Library, Goods, and Revenues,
etc. Do not you disdain, neither fear to bear favor unto your poor Innocent
Neighbor. If you send unto me Master Thomas Diggs, in her Majesty's behalf,
his faithfulness to her Majesty, and my well liking of the man, shall bring
forth some piece of good service. But her Majesty had been better, to have
spent or given away in Alms, a Million of Gold, then to have lost some
opportunities past. No humane reason can limit or determine God his mavelous
means of proceeding with us. He has made of Saul (E K.) a Paul: but yet, now
and then, visited with a pang of humane frailty. The Almighty bless her
Majesty both in this World, and eternally: and inspire your heart with some
conceiving of his merciful purposes, yet, yet, not utterly cut off from her
Majesty, to enjoy

To the right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, her most Excellent
Majesty's Principal Secretary, my singular good Friend and Patron, with speed

From Leipsich this 14 of May 1586, at Peter Hans Swarts House. Your Honors
faithful wel-willer to use and command for the honor of God and her Majesty's
best service, JOHN DEE.


Illustriss. and Magnif. D. mei Colendissimi.
BEnedictio Dei Patris and mera gratia and misericordia per unicum meritum Jesu
Christi, illuminatio Spiritus Sancti, (...) nos cum omnibus Christianis, qui
magno cum zelo, propter gloriam ejus, crucem, tribulationem, and praesentionem
a rancido atque putido scorto Babylonico, in turbulentissimo hujus mundi Oceano
patimur, ut exemplo Jesu Christi qui est in Patre, virtute and auxilio Spiritu
S. haec omnia perferre patienter valeamus ad nominis sui gloriam and animarum
nostrarum salutem. Amen.

(...) fortastis videbitur Dominat V. quod ignotus ad ignotos scribo (...)
bonam hujus culpae partem justissimo dolori, quem ex rumore sparso, and ad me
delato propter D. V. concepi: mirari enim non satis possum pertinax studium
bestiae istius Babilonice, quae nihil intentatum relinquit, nullum non movendo
lapidem, quo hominibus vestrae nationis praecipue piis and amantibus Dei non
solummodo nocere sed and funditus perdere studet. Elapso enim undecima die
hujus mensis Legatus Pontificius Libellum supplicationum ut vocant) Caes.
Majestati obtulit quo D. V. Nicromanciae and aliis artibus, prohibitis
insimulat, aliisque calumniis graviter accusat copias hujus libelli habere
potuissem, sed nimis sero hac de resum certior factus, nec tutum and absque
suspitione est qui illum ex Italico in Latinum sermonem transtulit petere.
Quare cum haec omnia vana a D. V. ut hominibus Christianis and Philosophis
certo sciam Epistolam hanc cum tenendi tum admonendi causa exarare libuit ut
promptiores and paratiores D. V. ad respondendum offendant. Peto itaque ut eo
animo suscipiatis quo scripta est scilicet Christiano integro and candido.
Valete meque precibus vestris Christo commendate.

POSCRIPT.

Ante aliquot dies transmisissem D. V. Litteras sed D. V. peregrae prosectas
esse mihi significatum fuit postquam autem a servitore generoso D. a Bikerstein
cognovissem (Ferdinando Harnik) D. V. hanc nostram remiss patriam,
intermittere non potui quin illud quod Julius Ascanius septima a Verdeman.
vestrum interessit scire litteris istis significarem.

Illustriss. and Magnif. D. Joanni Dee and Edwardo V, etc. Dominis and amicis
meis colendiss.

Rceived of Mr. Kelly on Friday before Whitsunday, after my return from
Valkenaw. 1586. Mr. Kelly received this on Thursday before Whitsontide, 22 May
1586.

Illustrissimo Principi and Domino Domino Wilielmo Ursino hereditario Domino
Inclite Domus a Rosenberg, Domino in Crommaw Equiti aurei velleris Caesareae
Majestatis intimi consilii Consiliario, and in Regno Bohemiae supremo
Burgravio, etc. Domino and Patrono meo Colendissimo.
ILlustrissime Princeps, nihil mihi gratias a Magnifico Domino, Schonbergio
narrari poterat, quam vestram Celsitudinem prospera interim frui valetudine,
Dum ego vario, diverso, and intricato quodam fueram jactatus itinere, per
montes, per valles, per sylvas densissimas, per apertos campos, and per nivem
profundam, and nobis fere inperviam: Et (semper tamen nos protegente altissimo)
tandem sani, salvique illesis tam equis quam curru Celsitudinis vestrae,
reversi sumus. Pro quo prospero successu, summas Altissimo agimus gratias, and
Vestrae Celsitudini infinitas a nobis deberi fatemur. Dum absum contra nos
nescio quid falsi incipit iste Apostolicus Nuncius vel leviter nimis credere,
and temere conqueri, vel a seipso excogitare perversae. Verae si ita pergant
(habito jam nostri, per biennium experimento satis accurato) illi quidem, qui
pietate and sapientia, (saltem vulgares) deberent superare homines omnes,
omnium hominum semet declarare maxim invidos, malitiosos, perversos, sanguinis
humani appetentes, superbos, innocentum carnifices, and piorum in Christo
Calumniatores exitiosos, etc. Vere (dico) cogemur pulverem ex calceis nostris
excutere, and alias in mundi parts nos confer. Et nisi vestrae Celsitudinis
haberemus eam quam debemns considerationem: Et nisi nos ipsos vestrae
Celsitudinis praesidio quocunqne armato (quasi) minntos existimaremns (praeter
illud invincibile, Dei Opt. Max. agmen invisibile) statim abire ex hoc regno
conaremur. Curare etiam debet sua Caesarea Majestas, ut aliquo modo, and
citissime, perspectum toti huic Regno esse possit, nos duos non solum verae
Catholicos esse, sed etiam verae pietatis and pacis Christianae, esse
amantissimos. Per literas istas non est opus ut plura effundam, spiritus mei
fervore quodam. Sed diligentissime and circumspectissime respiciamus nos
utrique, inestimabile Dei, quod nobis utrisque contulit Donum. Sumus enim quafi
tres. Sed in uno Deo, unus quasi vir esse debemus. Mysterium hoc notate I. D.
E. K. W. R. Nam qui me habet, habet and E. K. and quem ego meum habeo, ille
etiam ipsius mei E. K. censendus est esse. Omnipotens ille Deus qui cuncta
creavit, vestram Illustrissimam Celsitudinem, suae divinae Justitiae, and
Gloriae Comimnistrum and co-operatorem nobis conjungat and diutissime conservet.

Pragae, Maii 26, Anno 1586. Illustrissime Celsitudinis vestrae fidelissimus in
Christo Servitor. Joannes Dee.


Invictissimae Potentissimeque sacrae suae Caesareae Majestati Hungariae,
Bohemiae, etc. Regi, etc. etc.
PEr aliquot jam hebdomadas, Invictissime and Gratiosissime Caesar, aures
nostras circumsonabant rumores varii, quasdam contra me, and socium meum,
praeparari accusationes graves and exitiosas: Vestraeque Sacrae Caesareae
Majestati offerendas fore vel jam oblatas esse: Et praeterea Sacram Vestram
Caesaream Majestatem, quorundam persuasionibus, poene eo perductam esse, ut
aliquam malam, and nobis periculosam, de nobis conciperet opinionem. Vestrae
igitur Sacrae Caesareae Majestati humillime supplicamus ut (Authoritate sua
Caesarea, interposita (illius, cujuscunque contra nos exhibiti libelli, copiam,
accurate and verbatim exscribi, nobisque tradi, mandare, gratiose dignaretur,
Sic enim nostris responsis ad accusationis contra nos confictae collatis
articulos, citissime and clarissime intelliget sua Sacra Majestas Caesarea,
quid in praemissis, cum Justitia, ad Dei honorem and Reipublicae Christianae
utilitatem, arbitrari, vel statuere possit aut debeat. Et de hoc certissimi nos
sumus, favente Deo, (quod adhuc, et nimis diu, aliquorum negligentia, et contra
nostram voluntatem, Vestram Sacram Caesarem latet Majestatem.) Nos cum Vestrae
Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis personae, tum Reipublicae Christianae, per vos
long utiliores, gratioresque esse posse, quam omnes, et quotcunque hic nostri
praesentes adversarii: veluti ipsa docebit veritas si poenes Vestrae Caesareae
Majestatis aures proprias, eum possit habere favorem, ut gratiose audiri queat
Deus Opt. Max. Sacram Vestram Caesaream Majestatem sua Divina abundantissime
illustret gratia abrachioque suo extento, contra, Christi atrocissimos hosts
Imperatorem reddat triumuphantissimum

Amen.

Maii 28, 1586 Sacrae Vestrae Majestatis Caesareae Humilis and fidelis
Servitor, ad Dei promovendam gloriam Joannes Dee.


Invictissimae potentissimeque Sacrae suae Caesareae Majestate Hungariae,
Bohemiae, etc. Regi, etc. etc. Domino meo Clementissimo and Patrono
incomparabili ad manus proprias expeditissime
EDlor gostronger lirbor bortrauter fraundt, Disestumdoist mir dasz brusflain
Ju komon, Darauszichunt sondon frondron Got (...) behorzt ganuottvornoman, In
summa crasz David fraibt is it waar, Mirabilis Deus in sanctis suis Deus Israel,
ipse dabit virtutem and fortitudinem plebi suae, Benedictus Deus.

Diso Varfolgung wirds Inon, (obgottcoill) In Iror wolfart gorrichon und don
Lonidon In Irom spot.

Dentibus suis frement, and contabescent desiderium peccatorum peribit.

Dom gutton Jungon Gorrn Civillor got soinrm horrn vndsicssolbst orkonam.) kan
afu soelvnd Crib goholffonwordon. Dasz Vborig crollen coir cunuadtlich brld
Vorrichton, Interim, So brotts Ich, sic bon moiu and angon, Jum
fernundtlichston Jubo gruosson, vadarim trouots graucott Ina, Juosforiron,
Darbinbegott shimt vnsz Von Nanasa In arigkail.

Datum in Eyle Raudmitz don 28 Maii, Anno 1586. Des sorru trruoer fraundt
Wilsclm Moimaigne handtz
Horrn Laspar von Schonburg auff Voplitz Moinom Vartranotra gutton froundo In
solbsthandog. Cito Cito Cito Cito Cito

SOwder Rumeschenn Kayserlichen auch Ju Hungern unds Behom Koninhchon Mapt
vnsors allor guadigston horrn cropen Doctori Joanni de Dee Engellandorn,
ansormoldon, Dasz Iro Mapt jausz jondorn vrgeblichen, bodencklichon vndt
billichen vrsachonjont schlosson some snovndt dio somigon In Joror Mapt, tumg
Ruch Bohem so woll als andorn dorosolbron Pomp Ranchon, burstant gumbombon vndt
Landon longer nicht Induldon nach julugivn Hiorauff so sun nun Jorar Mapt
Endlichor orille vndt truster beurhlich Dasz chrsichsambt soinom Worbe tindorn,
vmdallon don soyinpen, so woll als soinem Consorten vndt Jugethanen boy
vormedanp Iron Mapt trusten vnnachlvszlichenn straffland and vnguad, Innerhali
dru Negt nachoniandor volpomdon sechs Zagen, alhie or heve, vnd sichalszbalet
daranff vrn hinnon, aussorhalbgedachtor Jorar Mapt Koningraich Behannb vms
andoror Joror Mapt Koningraich, Curstanthumbay vndt Cainder begebo diseilben
Durchausz Jun Kunfftigmedr Nuchsus sorror Darumen, weyternicht besunden nach
betresten less Damit ausz den lasll lassalba un Imo odar den seympen auch
doupy Jme Jupethaury, vngrhorsamblicsay vborganpen crourdo Irr Mapt Inn truston
einschon vndt Straff, sosie lirber vormitton schonvrolton nicet Vernrsacht
wordoun, Wolton In Mapt, I Am Juondtlicher Nachrichtung, nicht porgen. Esz
boszfese auch Hieran Iror Mapt sorustor Willey vndt mainug. Decretum in
Consilio Imperatoriae Majestatis secretiori.

Prage xxix Maii, Anno Lxxxvi. E. Waldtnons Sayleldt.
Mynssnik. Decret Doctor Johann de Dee Iror Mapt Koniglich Bohomb so woll als
andors Iror Mapt Lander sureamboy. Doctori Joanni Dee offerendum
I received this the 30 day of May, Anno 1586, Mane hora nona, By one of the
Chancery Clerks.

The Copy of the Emperor his Decree, of our Banishment out of his Kingdoms,
Dukedoms, etc. with only six days warning.

Anno 1586 18 Junii in Erphurdia Thuringiae, quo, Illustrissimus Dominus
Rosenbergius, miserat Joannem Carpionem ad nos, cum literis suis, and maxim ut
de uxore futura, Dei intelligeret voluntatem, and de aliis rebus, etc. Ego vero
jam Cassellae eram in Hessia, and Erphurdiae erat D. Eduardo Keleus. Qui super
(...) and petitionibus Illustrissimi jussus erat divinitus Chartam mundam super
Altar, ante Sacerdotem Missam celebrantem ponere, quod and fecit, anne and die
supra scriptis, mane in Monasterio Minoris Ordinis S. Francisci, inter horam D
Admonitio.
6 and 7 Monacho Seniore Missam Celebrante. Et finita Missa, haec quae sequitur
in Charta inveniebantur pulchre scripta. Sed die sequente, postquam exscripta
erant pro Illustrissimo Principe (...) nostri.
statim evanuere omnes lineae and literae, nihilque in illa Charta, post
visible perneansit, etc.

Nations teriae omnes vocatae in Judicium, coram Tribunal stabunt. Populus enim
rebellis, nimiumque hujus mundi deditus voluptati, mei jamdudum ira furoris
irrititus tabescit: Ita quod, neque ad sinistram neque ad dextram sed ad
voluntatem meam perinplendam, declinandum est. Beatus ille qui mihi mandatisque
patris mei obediens est and perseverantia decoratus.

Maledictus autem, qui mendax operibus, perdicas verbum meum: quia scandalo
multis erit, and ignominiae pacis Evangelii mei.

Egote Gulielme (quia manus adjunxisti mihi) Davidem ad Goliatha jugulandum
constitui and constituendo invexi.

Mundo igitur ad gloriam meam utere, and corpus tuum erige in me, ad justitiam
meam in sede debita collocandam, and superbiam iniquissimam turpissimamque
(illorum qui posuerunt sedem meam, in scabellum pedem blasphemiae and
abominationis) ad penitus tum conculcandum, tum eradicandam.

Beatus enim eris in fortitudine manus and spiritus mei, quia audite preces
tuas. Noli igitur tempus visitationis tuae negligere: sed freme zelo and
indignatione acerima, and conjunctam tuis parietibus, virginem in uxorem
accipe, paratam lumbis and senectuti tuae illamque amando (...), and diligendo
fove, ut mea in te and in illa benedictio pollicita manifesta fiat.

Cave porro, ne quos tibi in auxilium paravi, servos (...), vel negligentia vel
timiditate tua, aliorum sic patiaris ex manibus tuis vel tanquam oves ab ovili
tuo, malis artibus and iniquitate, eripi. Quis enim istud surripiet quod datum
est a me?

Cogita igitur and vigilando cura, quod hactenus lesum est.

Fringam namque fraenum Satanae and inimicis vestris.

Benedictio Patris and Spiritus mei, and consolatio a me (cui subjecta est
omnis potestas) sit tecum and supra te.

A peccatis denique monitus cessa ut cum mecum loqueris, vita tua sit lumine
and gratia mea suffulta.

MEMORANDUM.
Be remembered that Mr. Francis Pucci Florentine, whom at my going to Leipsich I
left in our Mr. (...) Pucci. Anno 1586. Maii 6.
house at Prage, in the mean space had been at Frankford upon Mean, and went
from Prage about the same day that the Bishop of Placenza Nuncius Apostolicus
did exhibit to the Emperor a libel against us of most horrible untruths, etc.
At his going from Prage he had that Nuncius blessing, etc. In the mean space,
and after his return to Prage again it happened so, that the 30 of May last, I
received the Emperors commandment, I, my Companion, and all mine to depart
within six days out of Prage and consequently out of all his Kingdoms,
Dukedomes and Lands. Which we did, and were come to Erphurd in Thuringa, and
sometimes to Cassel whether we had removed our goods and family by reason the
Senators of Erphurd would give as no leave to hire any house there as both by
the Lord Schonberg in the name of the Lord Rosenberg, I was assayed, with
repulse received, and also again by me and E. K. proved, July 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. And on Tuesday (the 15th day of Jun) Doctor Curtz brought upward
from the Senate that they would not grant our Request, yet notwithstanding, if
the Lord Rosenberg would again send unto them in the matter, they would think
better upon the matter, etc.

Now remember that Francis Pucci came to Erphurd on Thursday after our supper,
July 10 (stilo novo) on horseback on a horse which he had bought at
Mawnberg-faire, etc.

July the 11th he discoursed with E. K. and me, that he thought we might obtain
favor to return to Prage again if we would.

That he had found this Nuncius Apostolicus more courteous then Malaspina, of
whom he reported also, that is was credibly informed that he was sore offended
that we gave him no more honorable title in our speeches to him, then
Reverendissima Vestra Paternitas.

This Pucci framed the discourse of his talk to persuade us to think well of
this Episcopus Placentius that he was charitable toward us, and sorrow that we
were so uucourteously used, that he meant nothing else in his suit to the
Emperor against us, but that we might be examined, and thou being found
faulty, we should be sent to Rome, but after that he had begun to move against
us, that he found the Emperor more eagerly bent against us, than he himself
was.

NOTE.
The Lord Rosenberg told us that when he did (in our behalf) advise the
Emperor of his error committed in our extermination, that the Emperor
answered that this Nuncius from his first Audience did urge so vchemently
against us, and also the Pope had (...) commandment by Letter to him to deliver
us and send us to Rome, that he was forced in manner to do as he did. But if
the commandment or his Decree were to be made again, that it should not pass,
or if this Nuncius (...) had not sent this Decree away to Rome, that he should
not send it, etc. This I note in respect of the contrariety in the Nuncius
assertion, and the Emperors, of our so hard usage.

The foresaid eleventh day of July, the foresaid Fr. Pucci to prove this his
intended persuasion of the Nuncius good meaning toward us, and to make us
believe that great benefit would ensue our going to Rome, did bring forth unto
us a writing of his own hand which he read unto us, and at the hearing of it we
mused much for many causes I asked him then why the Nuncius had not subscribed
this writing. It is all one said he for that; Has he heard this read (quoth
I,) yea, that he has heard me read this three several times, arise unto him
(said he;) And if you like of it says he, wherein his power serves him not to
perform as much as is specified in the writing, he will make and use means to
have it from his Holiness; well, said I, take a copy hereof Mr. Kelly, for I
was riding toward Salfeild about a house getting; Thereupon said he, contented,
but I think it meeter to save and keep the original it self said E. K. Well,
said Pucci, and so the original was delivered to E. K.

NOTE.
After 10 of the clock the same Friday, being the eleventh day of this month,
after breakfast I rid toward Salfeild about the house of the Earl Albert of
Swartzenberg, etc.

But after I was out of Erffurd until my return again, I was so sore vexed in
mind to think of Pucci his return to our company, as well for his unquiet
nature in disputations, as for his blabbing of our secrets without our leave,
or well liking, or any good doing thereby; either in God his service, A bait.
or our credit, but rather the contrary, ensuing albeit not of his intent, but
by either his undiscreet handling of it, or of his undue hearers of him, etc.
And also for his Household behavior, not A spy.
acceptable to our wives and family, and also because we were warned that he
should be cut off from our company, etc. And chiefly, now to consider that he
had laid such a bait for us with our mortal enemy, to entrap us by fair fawning
words, which by no means the Emperor would consent to do before by his
authority, but rather to put us out of his Kingdoms, etc. And imagining that
he was a mighty Explorator upon us, for this Nuncius Apostolicus, and his
adherents, that now he might perceive what we had done hitherto, what we were
doing, and what we intended to do, and considering that he urged at our hands
in answer to the former writing, wherein also lay a trap for either in not
answering it, or refusing to grant some points of it, or in our consenting to
the whole, this Nuneius would put matter against us to our great disadvantage.
Thus being tormented in mind in my absence, how we might be rid of this Fr.
Pucci, by quiet and honest means, I devised to write to this Nuncius to know
if this writing were of his contriving only, or of Pucci his contriving only,
or jointly, or if at the least the writing were according to his will, and
offer unto us, and so to send him away; wherein he could make no refusal, I
intending not to make him privy of the content of my Letter; And in the mean
space of his absence I hoped that some good way and better means would appear
or fall out, whereunto we might trust, etc. Thus I note my imaginations and
discourses in the time of mv absence.

I returned to Erphurd July 13. hora 5. a meridie.

I found Fr. Pucci desirous to have answer to the foresaid writing, and very
much persuading this Roman voyage, using arguments out of our actions, as that
God said we should go to Rome, in a certain months space; That we ought to
obey the Roman Bishop, and to love him, etc. I replied and said, that he was
not to urge God upon any his sayings to us, but to refer all to his most free
disposition, his will was to be done and not ours, God was not bound to us,
etc. He answered very vehemently, and often, that Deus est nobis
obligatissimus, and Deus dixit nos itur os Romam, and (...) credi and credam,
and aliter non credam nisi mihi Deus dixerit non nobis, etc. Well, (quod we)
God has del vered unto us his meaning in that phrase, which we also devise you
of, that it is not meant ((...) the (...)) that we shall corporally go to
Rome, and so I brake off that his reasoning; And told him that we (...) that he
should (...) this Roman Voyage so violently and eagerly more then we; It
appertained unto us as much as to him, etc. The same day I told him that he had
(...) offended God with his (...) in our affairs otherwise then appertained
unto his calling, and he may well remember his repentance therein, and his
forgiveness obtained. But that now he had offended much more in curiosity, and
half in conspiracy against us with our mortal enemy this Nuncius Apostolicus,
upon whom he did fawn, in whose favor he is, who joyneth, counsaileth with him
in our affairs, who dare prescribe us what we have to do in so weighty
affairs as our Journey to Rome, who has framed a bill, accusing us coufusedly
of Heresy, and wicked Magic, both falsely in one part, and dangerous to life,
and infamous at the least in the other, and hereto requires, urges, and in
manner in God his name argues by our actions past, obedience. And therefore he
has separated himself from us, and has set himself against us, etc.

With great vehemence he said, He intended nothing, but well to us, and was
Explorator with this Nuncius for our behalf; We require none (said I) neither
we need any, for God sees all, and does all, for our benefit, if we will
constantly love and serve him; so be brief, he would seem to be worthy to be
thought well of for his zealous good will and fidelity to us ward, in all his
doings and sayings; The truth whereof God knows, to whom we commit the cause
between him and us.

The Copy of the writing before specified.
SI D. Johannes Dee, D. Eduardus Kelleus, and Fr. Puccius, volent irae Romam,
ut conferant cum tanquam Pontifice de suis Revelationibus, venerantes eum
tanquam Sancti Petri Successorem and Christi in terris Vicarium Illust and
Reverend. Episcopus Placentinus Apostolicus Nuncins apnd Caesaream Majestatem,
dabit illis Literas commendationis, ut per totum iter, and Romae, humanissime
summaque charitate tractentur, and in suis necessitatibus juventur: Ac
praeterea authoritate Apostolica absolvet eos and liberaebit ab omni culpa and
poena, quam meriti essent in vita ante acta, ob arts Magicas exercitatas,
(...), falsasque opiniones ab eis sparsas, ant fictas, verbis aut scriptis, aut
aliis rationibus; ob libros prohibitos lectos aut scriptos, sive ob aliua
quodvis crimen, cujus accusari aut argui possent in foro sancto Inquisitionis,
aut in foro quod Contentiosum vocant; aut in quovis alio foro Pontificiae
ditionis: Ne quis ob ullum peccatum aut scelus quantumvis atrox, quod illi
admiserint ante hoc iter susceptum, eis unquam facessere negotium, aut molestus
esse possit, aut ullo modo inquirere, aut ipsos accusare presumat.

For the better ground of any manner of answer making hereunto I asked the same
Fr. Pucci, after supper, on Tuesday the 15 of July, (forasmuch as I had framed
a Letter for answer to the pith of the Letter or writing here recorded) whether
this Letter were written and sent to us by the consent of this Nuncius
Apostolicus, to know our answer in, or no. He seemed to be unwilling now
directly to affirm the Nuncius consent. We replied that he had already told us
that he had read it thrice over to the said Nuncius, and that he liked well of
it, and did mervail that now he would make strange to affirm the same again,
seeing I had now, (according to his purpose) written a plain and perfect humble
answer to the same Letter, and much more matter, true and needful for this
Nuncius to know. Well, said he, Eatenus ex ejus consensu est, si velitis ire
Romam, ea praestare conabitur, quae in eisdem literis continentur, etc. Well,
said I, (in Latin always you must understand my talk with him in the same
sense here in English recorded, if he mean well unto us, and in charity
unfeigned; he will not be offended with my answer; The Copy whereof does ensue.

Illustissimo Reverendissimoque Domino, Domino Episcopo Placentino The
superscription of the Letter without.
apud Potentissimum and Invictissimum Romanorum Imperatorem Rodulphum, ejus
nominis secundum, Apostolico Nuncio, Domino mihi (in Christo) Colendissimo.
Illustrissime and Reverendissime Domine, mihi Colendissime.
IN Nomine, Sanctae Beatae and Individuae Trinitatis, vestram Illustratissimam
Remember Fr. Pueci his own hand writing hereof is kept in a lether bag by it
self, to be the more safe and ready to be showed without showing of this Book.
Reverendissimamque Dominationem, ea qua virum Christianum decet animi
affectione and humilitate saluto, non presumptione aliqua, vestris manibns
oculisve istas meas obtrudens literas, sed ex istius Nuncii vestri verbis
admonitus, non gratas solum, sed ((...)) expectatat fore: hasce aliquot, haud
invitus, exaravi lineolas. Quibus cum non potero, 40 annorum continuum and
ardentissimum vitae me cursum in limatioris quam vulgaris veritatis
Philosophicae in dagatione transactum, describere; (vel adumbrare (...)) satis
presenti nostro esse (...) instituto, si praesenti rerum metamorphosi, and
admirandae negotiorum nostrorum actioni, itidumque circuitioni multiplici,
aliquid exprimam quod maxim quadret.

Divinitus ante aliquot annos Ab Anno 1581.
informati, and deinde ex Anglia Anno, 1583.
evocati, non solum fortissima Dei Omnipotentis manu, and miraculose, ex multis
magnisque evasimus maris periculis: sed etiam ex vatiis hominum fraudulentis
and truculentis contra nos, and vitam nostram consiliis and conatibus, liberati
hactenus, eidem Deo nostro gratias laudesque canimus merre grata, mente laeta,
mente profecto Christianae, Catholicae, Apostoliceque Religionis amantissima,
and (Dei nos confirmante gratia) tenacissima futura. Ast ecce, tamen, qui
ejusdem nostrae pie matris (Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae) legitimi etiam
censentur esse filii, nos, fratres suos, in omni modestia, quiet, pace, and
civili Justitia, inter illos, and coram illis, Pragae conversantes, subito, in
exilium quoddam, sive exterminium, Caesareo emitti mandato procurabant nulla,
(...), nulla proisus, neque privatim, neque public declarata tam violenti
mandati, causa sed vulgari solum, and aulica relatione nobis facta intelliximus
ex libello quodam, per vos, sacrae Caesareae Majestati exhibito, conflatam
contra nos fuisse maximam Caesaris indignationem, and quasi excandescentiam:
unde ex Cancellaria Bohemica, acerbissimum ad nos (sacrae suae Caesareae
Majestatis nomine) missum sit Anno, 1586. 30 (...).
mandatum (nulla in eodem expressa, ejusdem mandati causa, vel ratione
legitima) ut infra tunc sex proximos sequentes dies, Ego, consors meus, uxores
nostrae, liberi mei omnes, immo and ipse infans noster Michael ( Pragensis
natus, and baptizatus) atque ad matris adhuc pendens mamillas, famuli etiam
mei, and ancillae, mei denique omnes, and domestici, ex ipsa Praga, atque ita
consequenter, ex universo regno Bohemiae, and aliis quibuscunque sacrae
Caesareae Majestatis Regnis; Ducatibus, and terris, migraremus, nunquam easdem
reversuri, sub terribilis infligendae poenae periculo. Nos autem, nulla
interposita mora, huc mandato Caesareo fideliter and humiliter obedire nosmet
accinximus: Bonaque nostra mobilia, a peregrinationis nostrae suppellectilem,
tam librariam quam domesticam, in duos magnos currus conici curavimus:
Reliquorum nostrorum bonorum, partem unam, amicis dedimus, and pauperibus
dispersimus and distribuimus: Partem autem, de facie terrae, (propter causas
Deo non ingratas) pridie, ante exitum istum nostrum, per nos deletam esse
sciatis: Ast optimum partem, * Anno, 1586. 10 Anno.
Divino jussu, decima die Aprilis (quando etiam, de tota hac afflictione, and
persecutione nostra, and aliis adhuc futuris eramus divinitus praemoniti.)
Ignis luculentissimis flammis commisimus: quanao illa, ejusdem optimae partis,
quae nullus unquam naturalis vulgarisque ignis poterat laedere vel consumere,
visibili angelici ministerio, ex ipsis summis flammis in Divinam, Angelicamve
invisibilem recipiebantur Custodiam. Ast librorum Divinorum Thesaurus maximus,
tunc, and ibidem (duorum adhuc viventium testium diligenti opera,) ab ipsis
flammis in cineres favillamque conversus est totus: renovationem,
restaurationem, and quasi regenerationem vel resurrectionem quandam, per
Divinam manum, opportuno recepturus tempore Sacellum; Denique cum altari quod
omnipotenti Trinitati consecrandum fore cupiebamus, (media ex part absolutum)
intactum relinquimus. Ego vero, cum consorte meo, uxoribus nostris, liberis
meis, and reliquis exulibus, sive exterminatis nostris Rhedis, tribus avecti,
transmigrationem hanc, nobis injunctam, die praefinita ingressi sumus. Atque
nondum ex Imperii Romani finibus egressi, ita gressus nostros disponimus,
(...), 1586. (...). 4.
and, de caetero (Deo favente and gubernante) disponemus: ut toti orbi
Christiano claro apparere poterit, patienter nos haec (qualiacunque) tolerare
posse, aut saltem velle: and paratissimos esse nos, Reddere Deo quae Dei sunt,
and Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris. Obedientissimos etiam nos esse, and humillimos
sacro sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae filios, and summi Pontificis Romani, and
aliorum Ecclesiasticorum Praesulum Catholicorum; in Christo and propter
Christum tam esse observantes and fore, quam ipse qui Judex futurus est vivorum
and mortuorum, varriis nos esse modis haud raro admonuit. Vestrae vero
Illustrissime, Reverendissimeque Dominationi, hoc a Deo optamus bonum, ut per
secundas vestras (de tota causa nostra) meditationes, nostrae Innocentiae,
sinceritatis, and fidelis (coram Deo and hominibus) in illa Republica Bohemica
conversationis nostrae, justa habeatur ratio: Meaeque honestae famae,
existimationisque (sine qua, ne vivere quidem cupio) ea fiat in integrum
restitutio: ut talis posthac esse indicetur indubitate, qualis (ante vestrum
Caesareae Majestati exhibitum contra nos libellum,) per 30 annos, (and plures)
in omnibus (poene) Christiani orbis tam Academiis, quam Regnis and Provinciis
(ex Dei immensa Bonitate, gratia abundantissima and singulari providentia)
extitisse, haud obscuris confirmari possit testimoniis. Ex hiis igitur paucis,
Historiae ipsius veritatis seintillis, Vestrae Illustrissimae Reverendissimeque
Dominationis prudentia, magnum sibi lumen alicere sive accendere potuit: ad
nos, nostrorum animorum affectiones, nostrorum ita mirabilium and adhuc
incredibilium negotiorum progressum and statum dijudicandum, and denique de
ipso futuro horum omnium exitu, haud leves sibi contexendas conjecturas: Cum
nos, ex solo Deo Omnipotente, and vero and vivo, in omnibus nostris pendeamus,
and ab ipso dirigamur and protegamur. Cui soli, nosipsos, nostraque omnia,
Animae, corporis and Fortunae nuncupata Bona, tanquam Holocaustum, quotidianis
nostris humillimis and spontaneis offerimus precibus. Cui denique soli sit
omnis laus, honor, gloria, and gratiarum Actio, nunc and semper. Amen.

Datae Erphurdiae, Anno 1586, die 16 Julii. Fidelis (in Christo, and propter
Christum) servulus. Joannes Dee.


This Letter being written, and read unto E. K. and of him well liked for the
quiet and modest course therein kept, otherwise (as he said to Fr. Pucci) then
he could have used: or had used in a Letter which now he had also written: but
now would not send, thinking that my foresaid Letter might suffice for our
case, he talked with Fr. Pucci of this Letter, which Fr, Pucci said he would
gladly see and read, which E. K. told him that I was minded not to let him read
it: Then said he, that he would not carry it: Hereupon in talk with Fr. Pucci,
speaking of this Letter, I told him that I had written a Letter with sufficient
answer in general to the Nuncius request and offer by him in writing brought to
us, and in sum told him the chief contents of the Letter. Then said he,
whereas you write of the Books burnt, why write you not unto him of the
recovery of them, as I now perceive by you both, that they are restored? And it
shall be a disgrace to you if the Nuncius shall understand more by other, then
by your self. Thereof have I no care, Quod scripsi, scripsi, and I know the
truth of my writing: And they are not all restored that I know of: And
whatsoever he has at my hands he may be assured is true: whatsoever he shall
otherwise hear, the Record thereof cannot be so good, unless, our Record
consent thereto; Then said he, why write you of those Books burning, being done
before your coming away: It is as if you wrote backward. Have you no care Mr.
Pucci, for the method of my Letters said I, and I said farther, it is told me
that unless you see my Letters you will not carry them, you shall pardon me
for seeing of them, the content I have sufficiently told you: and if you will
not deliver them, I can get them delivered diverse ways, or I may omit the
sending of them, and write such a Letter to the Nuncius that I had written
answer to his requests, and offer sent by Fr. Pucci; But he would not bring the
said my Letter, (...) he might have a sight of it himself. At the length by
farther discourse with E. K. he became resolved to go with the letter, and (by
E. K. his order) he was to receive 50 Dollors of John Carpio, that he should
not be destitute of money at Prage. Fifty (...).


NOTE.
This day, Francis Pucci said to us both, how can you doubt of my fidelity
toward you (whom I love as my own life,) and against this Monster of Rome, whom
my chief desire is, and long Pucci infidelitct manifestissima facta:
has been, that he may be overthrown, etc. Again, consider, what fidelity,
obedience, and reverence he has promised to the Pope, and this Nuncius, as the
writing brought by him, and so sore and many ways urged by him, for us to
accept of, can specify.

Therefore Fr. is false to the Pope, or us, or both, or rash, foolish, blind,
etc. And (as our spiritual Schoolmaster, diverse times terms him) leprous:
Therefore I commit this his doings to the judgment of God: But also it is
greatly to be remembered and noted that he now also discoursed again with E. K.
as concerning the Birth of Christ, that it could not be proved by the
Scriptures, that Christ came of the line of David, unless he were begotten of
the actual copulation of Joseph, with Mary, and said that, because it was the
gift of the Holy Ghost, that at Joseph his first and only carnal copulation
with Mary, Christ was conecived; Therefore she was accounted (in manner) a
Virgin according to the Jews doctrine: which his heresy when I heard, I
trembled for the horror Videlicet, that is miraculous that Virgo in primo cum
viro congressu conciperet.
of so manifest an heresy against evident Scripture, virgo concipiet and virgo
pariet, etc. and against many other most plain and sufficient Authorities both
of Scriptures, and also Histories of our Lady her examination made by Women,
and that she was found a Virgin, etc. And at her conception her answer to the
Angel; Quia virum non cognovi, etc. and antequam convenirent, juventa est in
utero habens de spiritu sancto, etc.

NOTE.
It is evident hereby that this Pucci is very leprous, both in this Heresy
(what other he is infected with, God he knows) and also the former infidelity
proved.

On Thursday 17 July Fr. Pucci entered his Voyage toward Prage with my Letter to
the Nuncius Apostolicus, and with Letters to John Caerpio from E. K, and with
my Letters enclosed to the Lord Rosenberg. And we entered our journey toward
Cassel, but that night we rode only three miles, to Gotha, our horses were so
ill that we hired, and therefore sending them back again the next day, we hired
a Coach, etc.

POSCRIPTUM.
Remember that Fr. Pucci, the morning before his going required of me our
Letters Testimonial to our friends, of his fidelity toward us. What needs
that (said I) for as much as your deeds were as well known to them as to us,
your own conscience to your self may serve abundantly. But our friends diverse,
who have warned us of you, and have marvelled why we would suffer you any
longer in our house and company, would neither credit our Letters as yet in
this case. And would also condemn us of light judgment, or great blindness to
judge the cause between you and us.

But truly I observed in him, now, a more proud presuming over us then
hitherto, before, when he was sore rebuked, for over-crowing us, so as he began
to do.

1 Now he said, he had as great authority as we to publish any of our Secrets,
at his discretion. Praesumptio.


2 That he ought to eat bread with us.

3 That he understood our Books of Actions better then we.

4 That he needed not our consent or counsel to deal with the Pope his
Nuncius: he did it by his duty general, of Charity, etc.

5 He offered to order the Nuncius, and the Emperor to the reclaiming of the
Decree made against us, etc.

NOTE.
Consider what this may import, that the Decree touching him, being one of my
household company, and of them that then did appertain to me, and whose name he
is not afraid one way and another way not abashed to Vide scriptum illius de
nostro (...) Romano, etc.
thrust himself into the whole body of our Revelations, as a principal fellow
or Receiver of them. By the first he ought to be afraid of the danger of the
Decree which banished us, unless he is assured of their good will who have
showed themselves our mortal enemies, or else some other cause emboldned him to
some other purpose, etc. by the second he might be afraid of so great
presumption, being but a Probationer, not yet allowed of, and to us known to be
cut off.

All these points I cannot decipher and judge, but refer them to the profound
wisdom and high I. D.
providence of God, wherefore and how far he has admitted him to be privy of
our Actions, and so a witness to some purposes sufficient. All things be to the
honor and glory of God. Amen.

Magnifice Domine,

LEctis tuis literis fui miratus quod intelligerem te illius esse opinionis and
sententiae, me apud Caesarem tibi ac consortituo officiis meis non parum
obfuisse, quod sciam ita me and religione and natura comparatum, ut omnibus
quam maxim cupiam prodesse, nemini aut obesse. Quod autem praestiterim quod
mei erat officii, mihi vitio verti non debet. Caeterum cum inter summum
Pontificem, and Caesarem, merus sim interpres, non video quid in hoc vestro
negotio praestare possim: Consulo autem, ut vestram innocentiam, de fide
Catholica sensum, and de Angelorum conversatione and assistentia, quam
visibilem habere dicitis, juxta Concilii Lateranensis in uudecima Sessione
decretum, coram Summo Pontifice and Sede Apostolica deducatis, and ita
exponatis ut non possit cuiquam esse dubium quid sentiatis, quin sede
Apostolica approbante, fides tuto ab omnibus Angelicis assertionibus vestris,
praestari possit, and tum demum and obtrectatoribus, si qui sunt, ora
obcludentur. Nec ut arbitror grave vobis videbitur consilium meum, si enim ea
vobis est in fide Catholica puritas atque constantia, ea in praesenti Angelorum
communione sinceritas, vitae integritas, and innocentia, ut asseritis: Me
etiant tacente occasionem quaeritis declarandae vestrae fidei and bonitatis,
and hac una ratione honori vestro (cujus vos rationem habendam dicitis, and cui
tantum abest quod per me aliquid sit detractum, ut illum etiam pro viribus
quantum officii mei and injuncti muneris ratio patietur, fovere sim paratus, ut
Domino Puccio pluribus dixi) and omnibus vitae commodis vel maxim consuletis.
Deus gratia sua vos ita regat, ut Angelorum conversationem in Coelis aliquando
habere possitis. Vale Pragae, die 28 Julii 1586.

Magnific. D. V.

Ex Cord in Christo frater Philip. Episcopus Placentinus (...).

Magnific. Domino Joanni Dee, Anglo, etc.

D Oraculum Divinum.
MVlta sunt flagella praecepta mea negligentium: Multiplexque furor hominibus
propriis confidentibus viribus. Hi enim contemptores sanguinis and Regni mei
fortitudinis, Gigantes facti sunt, ad omnem abominationem multiplicandam. Sed
ego Sum qui sum, qui posui in Patre Solium verbumque ad faciendum in terris
Judicium: qui in ultima Tuba percutiam illos, ut coacti recognoscant vias meas,
and ad ovile proprium redeant. Peribit Ecclesiae and populi Iniquitas, and
judicabitur in gladio. Tu vero Gulielme, manum in tempore extend opportuno,
prout a me informaberis, and Regnum, (tacto and moriente nequissimo) adjunctum
induc: Inunxi enim te in fortissima dextra mea, ad falsum illum Prophetam, and
Goliath [forte Mahometanos and Turcas] extirpandum ut intelligat Terra judicium
a Nazareno Crucifixo me. Sunt qui cribarent te: sed maledicti sunt machinantes
in te malum. F ac bonum, and utere creaturis meis ad gloriam meam Docui
Kelleum, inquiete, hac nocte, de caeteris, quae ab illo disces. Spiritus meus
habitet in vobis.

Trebonae, Anno 1589. Mensis Augusti fine.
When Mr. Kelly was gone from me at Salfeild toward Bohemia, and in the mean
space the Emperor had granted to the Lord Rosenberg license for us to return
into Bohemia, to any of his Lordships, Towns, Cities, Castles, etc. This was
delivered written by spiritual and divine means, and the writing yet remains
in my Lord his hands, out of which I copyed this for the order of our History
somewhat making plain.

Franciscus Puccius praestantissimis ac Deo dilectis viris D D. Joanni Dee and
Eduardo Kelleo generosis Anglis, majoribus in Christo fratribus, and ipsis
tanquam patribus colendis, precatur gratiam and pacem a Deo patre nostro, and a
Domino Jesu Christo, Amen.
EX quo a vobis discessi, toto illo itinere, quod octo diebus confeci, vendito
Lipsiae equo, haud parum vexatus fuit meus spiritus, dum animum mecum volverim,
quot modis Satanas divinum opus retardare and nostram conjunctionem dirimere,
adhibitis exterioribus and interioribus machinis and armis, tentaverit, and
adhuc tentare non cesset. Neque enim possum, nisi ab eo, agnoscere afflatus
illos diffidentie, rumores ab invidis hominibus, sparsos, suspitiones nobis
injectas, absque certis indiciis, adversus fidem non levibus argumentis
probatam, atque hujusmodi impedimenta and offendicula, quibus cursum nostrum
impedire ac sanctam amicitiam, divinis auspiciis, inter nos coeptam, convellere
ac labefactare, malignus ille spiritus aggressus est. Itaque, in illa lucta, ne
ullo modo manus illi darem, aut fatiscerem, decrevi me, magis ac magis, munire
certa fide in Deum, ac spe promissionum ejus, quas illum servaturum non dubito,
tum precibus frequentioribus magis instare, apud summum patrem, ut nos quam
primum donare velit illo spiritu, quo nostri humeri montibus ferendis, ut ille
inquit, pares evadent; ad haec austeriorem vitam instituere nec mensas lautas
amicorum adire, sed panem doloris solus comedere decrevi, ne sim meliore
condition quam vos, qui tantopere affligimini, ut benignissimus Dominus
quamprimum, vos in integrum restituat, atque ad solita colloquia piaque
exercitia nos una revocet, and eventu consentaneo suis sanctissimis dictis,
singulos nostrum exhilaret. Hanc viam sequenti Dominus mihi spem facit fore, ut
vobis and aliis facilius meam fidem probem, and multas tentationes vitem quae
apud hujus mundi homines facile nos invadunt. Ideo, nisi necessitate urgente,
aut communibus negotiis, familiaritatem omnem and convictum cum aulicis fugio,
and me hoc modo minus ineptem precibus gentio, meamque vitam and mores in dies
emendare conor, ne videar omnino indignus ea schola, in qua Dominus me erudire
dignatus est, nec interim cum Publicano, illo, precari obliviscor, ut Deus
propitius sit mihi peccatori. Vos non dubito me vestris votis and
supplicationibus juvabitis, ut vocatione meae respondeam, and in opere Domini
vobis adjumento and consolationi esse possim: and benignissimus ille pater
propediem hoc adverso vento ignem suum magis excitari curabit, ac nos majori,
quam unquam antea, jucunditate recreabit. Ac de his hactenus. Quod vero ad
nostra negotia attinet; perveni huc die 24 Julii, sub vesperam, ac statim adivi
Illustrissimum Dominum Nuncium, cui vestras tradidi, quas laeto vultu accipere
visus est: sed colloquendi non fuit otium, cum, parata coena, jam discumbere
vellet. In posteriorem Diem igitur rejectus, ad Dominum Carpionem me
conferebam, cum didici eum ad vos Missum, quatriduo ante, hinc discessisse.
Dolui admodum eum non esse mihi obviam factum, tum ratione vestrarum, tum
mearum literarum, quoniam fasciculum quendam ad me quoque ferebat. Sed quod
maxim me torquebat erat cura de litteris Illustrissimi Domini Rosenbergii,
quas sciebam inclusas Domini Carpionis literis, nec eas aperire, aut alii
tradere audebam, cum diserte esset, scriptum illud ad manus proprias. Dum
itaque occasionem quero and expecto, ea sese obtulit, quam mox audietis.
Reversus sequenti die, ad Illustrissimum Dominum Nuncium, invenio apud illum
Jesuitam Italum, qui mihi fuit a confessionibus: blande (...) ambobus accipior,
sedere jubeor, a Jesuita nomine candoris and ingenuitatis, non parum laudor.
Tum lupide moneor ab Illustrissimo Domino Nuncio ut ipsi adsim, in convertendo
Jesuita ille (is enim erat qui cum ipso expostulaverat, quod nimis facile mihi
dedisset: testimonia triumphantis Ecclesiae non subjici judicio militantis.)
Respondeo me fecisse quod in me erat ut docerem eum praeferre Coelum terrae, ac
tribunal superius inferiori; sed cum id mihi minime successet, ejus esse, sua
doctrina and autoritate, hominem de sententia illa dejicere Illustrissimus
Dominus Nuncius haud gravate, nostram sententiam, hac in part, probat, and
exemplis confirmat, atque ita concludit, ut statuat certitudinem videntis and
audientis Dominum, aut ejus angelum, non pendere a probatione Ecclesiastica,
neque ab illo esse rationem repetendam suae revelationis, dum nihil publici
muneris exercere audet: sed si incipiat palam profiteri, se a Deo doctum and
missum, ita ut non (...) solum, sed aliorum quoque intersit, scire quo spiritu
agatur, tunc Ecclesiasticorum munus esse, illius spiritum examinare and
probare, neque ipsum jure posse examen hoc detrectare, licet suas revelationes
eis subjicere minime teneatur. Nam si ordinaria autoritas eum admiserat, been
habebit, nihilque turbarum excitabitur: sin per injuriam aut inscitiam ali
quam, aut per aliam hujusmodi causam, rejicietur, suum erit appellare
Superiorem Dominum, qui ipsum misit, quo suum servum and Legatum defendat, aut
ordinario Judice commonefacto, aut alia ratione: quod probabat decreto
Lateranense Concilii, cujus mentionem facit in suis literis; ac praeterea
historia S. Francisci, qui primum expulsus ab Innocentio Pontifice, mox
revocatus fuit, cum per quietem apparuisse Pontifici pannosus ille, qui
Lateranense templum suis humeris fulciret. Addebat praeterea viros Dei non esse
solitos deterreri una aut altera repulsa, and hoc repellendi modo, dicebat
Praesules aliquando usos esse, ut probarent spiritum and constantiam eorum qui
res novas magnasque Proponerent. Ego vero inquam, ut haec ita se habeant, Vos
hactenus publicum munus exercere non tentasse, and intra privatos parietes,
summa modestia vos continuisse. Tum ille, longiori ambitu verborum, sic de
vobis disserint, ut ex vestris verbis Serenissimum Poloniae Regem, ad
invictssimun Caesarem, and ad Illustrissimum Legatum Hispanicum, jam constare
diceret, vos aliquid amplius quam privatum moliri: Ac Summo Pontifici, sedenti
in specula super totam Christianam Rempublicam potuisse merito suspectas esse
vestras personas, hoc modo Principum animos, and interiores aularum recessus
scrutantes: Idque ratione vestrae Regnae, infensissimae Apostolicae, sedi, and
cum ipso Turca conspirantis, necnon spiritus familiares habentis ac praeterea
ratione vestrae summae peritiae, in artibus and scientiis reconditis, quibus
facile plebi and imperitis imponi potest. Cum enim sitis magni Astrologi,
dicebat ille, and facile vobis sit habere geneses principum, necnon Magicas
arts calleatis, haud difficulter possetior bonorum Angelorum nomine, ea
proponere, quae a spiritu Ecclesiae host manarent. Ideo Summum Pontificem,
(cui duo, illi Principes sunt maxim observandi, utpote qui inter Haereticos
vivant and regnent) prudenter fecisse, qui jusserit, ut in vestros mores and
doctrinam inquireretur. Accidisse autem praeter ejus postulatam and voluntatem,
ut, indicta causa, expelleremini. Se vero vicem nostram dolere, and paratum
esse ad curandum, ut vos justificare possitis, idque sibi esse in votis, non
semel asserint Quapropter hortatus est me, ut ad Illustrissimum Dominum
Rosenbergium contenderem, at que ipsius bonam propensionem, erga vos, ei
significarem; Nam ille a Summo Pontifice facile impetrabit, ut causa vestra hic
cognoscatur, and si ille vobis faverit, ut hactenus fecit, se quoque adfuturum
vobis omnibus officiis, ac primum fore, qui se vestris genibus obvolvat si
tales eritis, quales vos nonnulli praedicant. Ego igitur recta ad Illustris. D.
Rosenbergium. Sed quater redeundum mihi fuit, antequam admitterer. Die 27
tandem (...), exposui meum studium, erga vos resque vestras, ac quomodo Illust.
D. Nuncius affectus ergavos esset, ac tandem oravi utnon desereret patrocinium
and defensionem illam, quam suscepisset peregrinorum (...), qui a Caesare minus
been informato ad Caesarem melius informatum, provocarent, ac suam innocentiam,
Dei and hominibus, probatam cuperent. Ille humaniter respondit: Vos non admodum
sibi notos esse: se bis cum seniore; semel tantum cum juniore collocutum,
judicasse vos doctos and pios, and praeclaris donis instructos: existimare
vobis hoc accidisse mala aliqua relatione cui incommodo a res principum sunt
obnoxiae: vestrum esse id aequo animo far: non se poenitere quod vobis
faverit, and si scirit quid potissimum, a se, peteretis, daturum operam, ut
vestris votis responderetur. Tune mihi visum est nonnulla dicere de optima spe,
quam de ipso concepissetis, and quomodo me non dimiseratis sine literis ad
illum: Sed erant inclusae fasciculo D. Joan. Carpionis, quem statim protuli,
atque eo instante ac respondente D. Carpionem non aegre laturum si ipsi
dedissem, tradidi fasciculum ei, qui dixit se per otium lecturum, ac, sequenti
die, mihi responsurum. Discedo igitur ab illo ad Illust. D. Nuncium, atque
otium nactus, tum per me, tum per Illust. Legatum Florentinum, pluribus cum eo
agere instituo, de insigni injuria vobis facta: expono quantopore
laboraveritis, ut considere possetis, apud Catholica Templa, and quam
inhumaniter, in hospitiis and civitatibus ratione hujus praejudicii Caesarei,
tractaremini, doceo quam sordido and angusto loco vestras familias
reliqueritas, ita ut vestram supellectilem, and libros explicare nequi veritis;
Moneo, ut Domini Dee jam grandis natu, aut potius senis, and nihil tale
hactenus passi vicem doleat; ejus erumnas non tanquam simplicis hominis
considerandas esse, cum vir sexagenarius, quatuor tenel lis suavissimisque
liberis (quorum major septimum annum vix excesserit) ac dilectissimae conjugi
adjunctis, long gravius affligatur, ratione uxoris suae lectissimae foeminae,
and pignorum charissimorum, quam sui ipsius; ostendo quanto offendiculo hoc
futurum sit Catholicis Anglis, ac caeteris, and quanta ansa praebeatur
haereticis, invehendi in Ecclesiasticum ordinem: declaro periculum imminens
ordini illi, si forte Deus facultatibus vestris ad eos plectendos eorum
inimicos armari permitteret: Demonstro Deum alias, per Isaelitas haereticos
Catholicos Judaeos punire consuevisse: ac denique declaro, quam absurdum sit
vos indicta caussa condemnari, si id meriti sitis: quanto absurdius, si non
meriti sitis quicqnam tale: absurdissimum vero, cum a Catholica Ecclesia honor
potius vobis deberetur: Ac cum non petatis nisi ut vobis vos purgare liceat,
nihil magis consentaneum rationi excogitari, nullo alio modo errorem admissum
emendari, atque hoc negotium been dirigi and redintegrari posse. Ille mihi
legit vestras literas, id est D. Dee, sed de rebus, ambobus vobis, aliquo modo,
communibus: dicit se non credere ea, quae de divinis monitis and miraculis, in
illis, continentur, petit ut ipse declarem obscuriorem locum de libris
combustis: audit a me testimonium oculatum de illis concrematis, and quomodo
vobis audiverim eos esse coelitus restitutos, ac denique concludit in illis
literis esse multa laudabilia, multa admirabilia, multa itidem incredibilia;
sed cum non sint Deo impossibilia, se sustinere assensum, nec velle quicquam
certi, re non penitus explorata, pronunciare: vobis tamen responsurum
humaniter, ac daturum mihi literas, quod fecit postea die 28, quas literas ad
vos, cum hisce, mitto. Et quia legendi eas mihi (...) copiam, satis jejunias
and frigidas mihi esse visus, haud (...) Tamen quia mentionem aliquam mei
facit, tanquam hominis (...) quo fusius de suo animo, erga vos, egerit, visum
est mihi accurate and particulatim exponere, quid inter nos actum dictumve sit,
ut verba cum factis confer possitis, and pro vestra prudentia and pietate,
consilium capere, and si operae precium videbitur rescribere. Quantum enim ex
ejus sermonibus colligo, videtur ipsi necessarium novum mandatum, a summo
Pontifice, antequam quicquam vobiscum agat; nec se scripturum dicit de vobis
Romam, nisi prius petatis quod ab ejus sanctitate capitis: utpote qui, in hac
causa, fuerit merus interpres, inter Pontificem and Caesarem; nec possit, nisi
verbis sui Domini quicquam promittere and statuere. Idcirco, quantum videre
possum, res diutius protrahetur quam vellemus, nisi Dominus noster and Pontifex
coelestis, alio modo, nobis providerit. Die 28 and 29 inveni Illust. D.
Rosenbergium tam occupatum, ut admitti non potuerim, sed per cubicularium
significavit, se valde cupere ut colloqueremur, itaque redirem die 30. Interim
fui rursus cum Illustrissimo D. Nuncio, mox discessuro ad Sancti Caroli
Monasterium, ubi commorabitur quamdiu hi estus saevient. Et cum commodo
cecidisset, in colloquendo, visum est, mihi interrogare hominem, an probaret
meam sententiam de discernendo ex certis notis and terminis verum verbum Dei a
ficto and fucato, cum possit angelus malus transformare se in angelum lucis and
Apostata falsi, non raro, se transfigurent in Apostolos Christi. Dicebam enim
duo mihi videri necessaria, ut hoc judicium rite fiat, primum quidem, in homine
audiente, bona propensio and animus been affectus ad Creatorem, totusque ex ei
ita pendens, ut nihil antiquius habeat quam ei placere, and qui de ejus
benignitate atque veritate non dubitet erga eos, qui ad ipsum confugiunt, ut
bonum spiritum hauriant. Deinde in sermon, nomine Dei proposito, requiri eas
proprietates, quae tantum authorem deceant; quas graphice describit Paulus, cum
dicit, Vivus est enim sermo Dei and efficax, and penetrabilior omni gladio
ancipiti, and perlingens (...). 4. 12, 13.
usque ad divisionem animae ac spiritus, compagum quoque ac medullarum, and
discretor cogitationum and intentionum cordis, and non est ulla creatura
invisibilis in conspectu ejus. Cui adstipulatus Deus, qui apud Jeremiam dicit;
Propheta qui somnium habet, somnium narret, (...). 23, 28, 29.
et qui verba mea habet, verba mea narret. Quid paleis cum tritico? dicit
Dominus. Nunquid non verba mea sunt quasi ignis? dicit Dominus, quasi malleus
conterens petram? Concludebam igitur, hominem Deo fidentem, ex efficacitate and
ardore illo, quo affici se percipit, deprehendere sermonis Dei veritatem. Nam
vox lupi and alieni pastoris non potest permovere veram ovem, ut ipsum diu
sequatur, and hanc esse regulam, qua judicarem divinas sententias a non
divinis, distingui posse: Ille probabit meam sententiam, atque addidit, sine
bono studio auditorum, non apparere efficacitatem divinorum sermonum, ut
constat ex Christi historia. Dum enim simplices Israelite, dicebant; Nunquid
sic loquutus est homo, and similia de Christi doctrina, Pharisaei and perversi
Sacerdotes eum deridebant and contemnebant. Tnnc ego, si contingeret igitur, ut
cum congrediemur, fieret ad te verbum Domini, number hujuscemodi regula utereris.
Hic ille inquit, cum posset accidere, ut mihi de hac re judicandum esset, nolo
hoc tempore, meam sententiam declarare, sed hujuscemodi ratio non mihi mala
videtur. Ex quibus verbis nescio quid mihi visus sum adorari minus candidum,
quam in re tanta, opus esset. Sed Dei esto judicium de ejus interiori sensu.
Ego, bona fide, colloquia nostra exposui, ut vobis usui esse possint, ratus hoc
vobis gratum, sicut foret mihi si vestro loco essem. Reversus die 30, ad
Illust. D. Resenbergium vidi eum tandem exeuntem, ex cubiculo, ad quosdam
nobiles, et dixit se tantopere districtum esse, ut mecum colloqui non posset.
Sicut cuperet. Ego vero, inquam me S. Celsitudinis monitu, toties reversum
expectare ejus responsum, et an vobis rescribere vellet. Tunc ille inquit prius
tecum colloquendum est mihi, itaque, (ut ejus verbis utar) habeas patientiam,
aliquot dies donec ego pro te mittam, et sic me dimisit. Docui igitur
Venceslaum cubicularium nostras aedes, qui dixit se optime callere locum, ac,
suo tempore, memorem fore mei, cum Dominus me accerset. Expectans igitur aut
responsum Illustrissimi D. Rosenbergii, aut aliquid aliud dignum vestris
auribus, non visum est mihi id vos expressum nuncium mittere: Monente
praesertim Domino Sevembergio, vobis esse paratis nescio quas aedes in oppido
Naitu, in Comitatu Suarreburgensi, and ut expectarem reditum Domini Carpionis,
quem propediem reversurum sperabat, ne sine magna causa atque incertus de loco
vestrae sedis, ad vos literas dirigerem. Igitur non parum solicitus de vobis
and de reditu D. Carponis, semel ad minimum in die, ejus aedes adeo, atque
interrogo si quid de illo significetur, nec quicquam, per multos dies audio.
Tandem de die 12 Augusti scisitor D. Millerum an aliquid mihi de amico, dicere
possit. Respondet se quoque expectare hominem, atque admodum mirari tam
diuturnam moram, praesertim cum D. Gregorius, qui in ipso Carpione ad vos
venerat, sit triduo ante reversus. Ego igitur, qui nihil prius de D. Gregorii
aut itinere aut reditu noveram, ad illum recta contendo. Gallus ejus
contubernalis humaniter me admittit, jubet expectare D. Doctorem, et ad illum
accersendum currit. Sed cum diutius moraretur, ego jam discessurus, video D.
Gregorium seorsum cum ipso colloquentem, et me torvo vultu intuentum. Saluto
illum and gratulor reditum, ac demum de vobis incorrogo. Ille respondet se
nihil quicquam de vobis aut rebus vestris scire, nec vobiscum fuisse. Tunc ego
aliquantulum haereo, ac tandem dico, si nolit quicquam dicere me aequo animo
laturum, sed jam mihi constare eum vobiscum fuisse: Ille stomachatur vestrum
nomen, ac totius mundi fallacias and imposturas: dicit sua sibi esse curae, non
vestra vos multa quidem promittere, sed parum praestare, nescire se quare
conqueramini: se per sesqui annum, vana spe lactatum, vobis ad haesisse, ut
aliquod e minoribus vestris arcanis disceret, nec quicquam a licujus momenti
percepisse. Hic ego: an parvum tibi videtur arcanum illud contra luem veneream?
Ille vero, subridens, a D. Sconto, inquit, long praestantiorem habeo. Denique,
his omissis, librum meum Postellae repeto: ille negat se habuisse interrogata
quo audiverim; ac me laudante D. Dee, ille rursus negat se vidisse; nisi forte,
inquit, ex manibus D. Sevenbergii, vis dicere librum nescio quem sine titulo:
ac denique de restituendo nullam spem facit. Ego qui cum illo verba commutare
nollem, abeo: ac puerum vestrum Stanislaum, in atrio offendo, and ab illo
intelligo, vos Erfordiam usque cum D. Gregorio and D. Carpione venisse, ante
octiduum. D. Carpionem illinc Bambergam ad exigendas nescio quas pecunias,
profectum; se cum D. Gregorio, hoc venisse. Interrogo an literas aut aliquod
verbulum, a vobis, ad me, ferret; respondet, nihil prorsus, quia forte
putabant, inquit, te hic non esse: se post triduum aut quatriduum ad vos
reversurum. Laudo ejus consilium, and constantiam in serviendis Dominis, ac
doceo meas aedes, ne sine meis literis ad vos veniat: promittit se non
discessurum, me insalutato D. Gregorius interim percipit, me cum eo colloqui,
atque iratus (quantum ex voce clamantis judicare possum) puerum revocat. Ego,
cogitabundus, discedo. Die quinto decimo hujus mensis, tandem (...) servulum
vestrum Stanislaum, in loco libero, eum accuratius de vestris rebus ac statu
examino, atque non sine magna animi mei voluptate, audio vobis concessas esse
ampliores aedes. Illust. D. Langravium praestantissimo D. Dee multum tribuere
ut favere, and summo Deo pro tanto munere magnas gratias ago, atque puerum ad
meum cubiculum duco ostendoque illi literas ad vos paratas, ne sine ipsis ad
vos revertatur. Sed paulo postea pater Carpionis me monet, se velle ante
noctem, ad vos unicum expressum mittere and ut scribam si velim: nam se a D.
Kelleo monitum hoc mihi significare: ingentes gratias ago D. Kelleo qui mei non
sit omnino oblitus, and haec, per hunc quem vobis spero fidem nuncium,
significare statuo, scripturus rursus per Stanislaum, si operae pretium
videbitur.

Oro vos atque obtestor per Deum illum vivum, qui Author est nostrae amicitiae,
and qui diserte praecepit ut nos invicem ac mutuo amemus, ne obliviscamini mei
cum datur vobis occasio invigendi me per literas aut per inter nuncios, and
reddendi me certiorem de statu vestrarum nostiorumque rerum; nam ego certe
vestri non obliviscar, and officia mea id testibuntur, non solum coram Deo, sed
etiam coram omnibus hominibus. Si vester reditus aliquandiu differetur, invisam
vos proximo mense Septembri, long enim a vobis vix vivere possum, immo si
proprie loquendum sit, me vitae taedet: Ac praesens agam de nonnullis rebus
quas scribere minime decet.

Jam elapsi sunt 18 dies ex quo Illustrissimum Nuncium Apostolicum non vidi,
and cum satis superque satisfecerim obedientiae, non adibo illum, ne verba
nobis dare sibi tam facile fore persuadeat. Ostendit literas D. Dee Legato
Veneto and Florentino and uterque mihi summopere eas laudavit, dixitque sibi
visus disertas graves, and plusquam vulgaris spiritus, and optissint exemplum
illarum, sed ego offerre non poteram, and dubito ne Illustristimus Nuncius eas
supprimat; nam haud obscure, innuit se timere vestrum (...) praesertim aequum
and rationale, and id quaerere videtur, ut vobiscum agere possit more Hisp.
etc. D. Joan. Carpio, nondum revertitur, and D. Rosenbergius cras dicitur
discessurus and nescio an recuperare potero literas ad eundem Carpionem, in
quibus de pecuniolis (...) agebatur, si dubitatis ne ille diutius quam par sit,
solutionem differat quaeso curetis, ut aliquo alio modo mihi prospiciatur. D.
ab Ossa, per 20 dies, non vidi, ac Jesuitis palam dixi and dico quandocunque
occasio se offert, vobis factum ab ipsis insignem injuriam, eos plus pendere ab
aulis terrestribus quam a coelesti: timere collationem aquam cum vobis, ac suae
causae annum haud obscure dissidere, itaque jam sum eis minus gratus.

Saluto uxorem D. Dee lectissimam foeminam, ac mihi non minus quam matrem
venerandam; necnon conjugem D. Kellei rarum exemplum juvenilis sanctitatis,
castitatis, atque omnium virtutum. Saluto omnes, alios vestros domesticos
sanctos vosque inprimis D. D. Joan. and Ed. desiderabilia mihi nomina foelices
ac beatos in Domino cupio ac precor. Quantum tribuam and tribuere debeam
vestris precibus nostis, eis oro atque obsecro me apud D. Deum juvetis ut
vocationi meae respondeam, and cursum meum hilari animo ac firmo corpore
perficiam. Sanctissimus ille pater, qui nobis jam suscitavit pastorem illum
magnum D. Jesum filium suum mox reversurum ad subigendos omnes innimicos ejus
sub pedibus suis, atque extremam manum impositurum renovationi rerum, nos omnes
suo spiritu foveat ac recreet, ut Lati adventum ejus praestolari, atque
nuptialibus vostibus, lampadibusque accensis ornati, ipsi occurrere possimus.
Praga xv Kal. October. M. D. Lxxxv.

Idem Dominationibus vestris addictissius Atque ex animo frater

PUCCIUS

Praestantissimis ac Deo dilectis viris D. D. Joannes Dee. and Eduardo Kelleo
Generosis Anglis, ac Majoribus in Christo fratribus, mihi, tanquam Patribus
colendis, etc.

Mgnifice (...); and utipater amantissime and observande non minori etiam
desiderio teneor videndi and de multis colloquendi cum Magnifica dominature
vestra de cujus erga me and fide, and amore nunquam dubitavi nec dubitare
possum post prandium hora commoda ego illam accedam. Deus sua, gratia semper
nobis adsit.

Vester ex animo, Guilielmus propria manu.

Febr. 10. 1587, stilo novo. Trebone.

Postride reditus (...) a Vienna ad Trebonam.

A
Sir, My hearty commendations unto you desiring your health as my own, my Lord
was exceeding glad of your Letters, and said now I see he loves me, and truly
as far as I perceive he loves us heartily. This Sunday in the Name of the
Blessed Trinity I begin my Journey, wherein I commend me unto your prayers,
desiring the Almighty to send his fortitude with me. I commend me unto Mrs. Dee
a thousand times, and unto your little babes: wishing my self rather amongst
you, then elsewhere, I will by Gods grace about twenty days hence return, in
the (...) season all comfort and joy be amongst you;

D
Prage. 1587. 25 Januarii. Thomas Kelly. went with him. Francis Garland. went
with him. Ferdinando Hernyk. went with him.
Your assured and immovable friend. E. Kelly.


To the Right Worshipful, and his assured friend Mr. John Dee Esquire, give
these.

Magnifico Domino, Domino Dee.

Received of Lodovick in the Highway by Platz, in the middle way between
New-house and Trebon, as I was coming from New-house, whither I went to have
met my Lord as he came from (...): But Archduke Ernest was occasion (as was
thought) that they should go to Prage by (...), being the more even, although
not the next way: I received them on Friday the 6 of February, and they were
delivered him at Prage on Sunday was a seven-night before, being the 25 of
January, novo stilo.

Swethart I (...) me unto you, hoping in God that you are in good health, as I
and my children, with all my Household am here, I praise God for it; I have none
other matter to write unto you at this time.

I being at New-house from Trebone, (to go to understand which way my Lord
Rosenberg would go from (...) to Prage and when,) and this Letter being in the
same day brought from Prage, my (...) sent Lodovick with it, toward me, and so
without Platz Town in the Highway he gave it me.

Trebone in Bohemia. Visitationis Secundae, Actio instituta.
D Preces ad Diem fudi, and declared that we here and now presented our selves,
as in obedience, Anno 1586. Die 19 Septembris. Die Veneris sexti mensis fine a
die Veneris ante Pascha a meridie hora 3.
according to the time prescribed of six Months end, since the last good
Friday: I craved pardon of all our errors and misdeeds, since the last time of
his visiting us, and now requested his aid and direction hence-forward to walk
prosperously, according to the well pleasing of his divine Majesty: and that
he would grant unto William Rosenberg, E. K. and me his graces, so abundantly,
that in us his honor might be increased, and glory advanced mightily and
triumphantly, etc.

E. K. Here is a round fire like a Sun.

Vox..... Frigida praeparatio.

Frigida oration.

Frigidam hoc exigunt responsuns.

(...) tamen Gulielmo, mediatorem and agnum, respondere paratum, consulite.

E. K. He is gone now.

D Tu justus es Domine, and nos impii: tu sanctus es Domine, and viae tuae
immaculatae: nos nec orare, neque nos praeparare sine tuo auxilio and gratia
unquam possimus: Tuam igitur (...) concedas gratiam, and de tanto errore nostro
dignam agere poenitentam, ut agnum, and mediatorem nostrum omni tempore nobis
inveniamus propitium ex tua clementia, illius meritis, and lpiritus tui Sancti
afflatu consolatorio: Amen.

Cui, Trino and uni, Deo vero, and Omnipotenti, sit sempiternus honor, laus
perennis, and gloria perpetua.

Amen.
Trebone, Actio Secunda ex septem.
Anno 1586.

October. 14. Tuesday. Mane post solis ortum.

Circa 7. Precibus fusis, gratiisque actis pro misericordiis Dei infinitis erga
nos tam in pradst inatione quam in executione, in patria, in (...), and in hac
peregrinatione, and pro liberatione nostra ex manibus hostium in Pragensi
exilio, and pro sua continua tutela, and pro redactione nostra cum honor and
gloria in illo, ad quietem and securitatem cum Willielmo Rosenbergio, jam
lebamus quid ipse potissimum nobis proponere velit ex suis mvsteriis, and quid
de (...) esset statuendum, quid de and operibus Philosophicis juxta (...)
propositum, and quid de errore in practica nuper facta sit statuendum, and quid
praetere a nobis jam and praecipue sit faciendum, and ad (...) vocandum
paratos, nos esse juxta Dei beneplacitum, etc.

D I had set up Mensam foederis, with the appurtenances, and had set the
Angelical Stone in the frame of Gold on the (...), only E. K. and I being in
the goodly little Chapel next my Chamber, appointed to our uses.

A voice..... Let him come, that is to come.

D I went for the Lord Rosenberg, whom I found in his Oratory of the Church
hearing of Mass: And he came with me and sat in his (...).

E. K. I see a great plain like unto a field, as though it were a (...).
Mile over, in the end of it there is a great high rotten Tree, all the grass
is as though it were withered and burned, there comes a beam as of fire from
Heaven, and lights upon the Tree, now there comes water out of the root of
the Tree, as though it were a Sea, and spreads all the plain over: And the
Tree opens and there comes a Man out of it, his hair hangs down unto his
girdle stead, his garment covers him down from his shoulders, and hangs
behind him down upon the water.

The earth has now drunk up all the water, and the Man stands upon the dry
ground.

All the place is full of green grass about a cubit high.

Now the Man is out of sight.

It seemed to be as beyond and without the Stone.

The Vision is clean dis-appeared.

D I expounded this Vision in Latin to the Lord Rosenberg.

E. K. In the midst of the Stone seems to stand a little round thing like a
spark of fire, and it increases, and seems to be as big as a Globe of 20
inches Diameter, or thereabout.

Vox..... Woe be unto the World, woe be unto the World, and Worldlings: Woe be
unto you Sons of men, for you are withered, and (...) the field of the Lord
brings you not forth: you are defiled, and being defiled, you defile also the
beauty of your Seat: And behold, behold, behold, (I say) you that are the King
and Princes of the Earth tied and knit together upon one stem, you are all
rotten and barren, behold, you bring forth no fruit: but even as the grass
that withers, he is a dis-glory to the place, even so, are you that is
grass, of your situation and dwelling, for behold, you have no leaves, much
less fruit: Woe, woe, woe, unto such a generation, which lacks moisture, and
the fire of comfort: The (...) that carries you is the Seat and holy place,
which also is contaminated. And lo, behold, (as it were) withered; if holiness
be hidden whereupon Locus sanctus contaminatus:
you stand, how wicked are those that are governed by you, how wicked are you,
and how abominable: how full of corruption are you that stand without all
beauty, moisture, or comfort: The time shall come that the power and might of
God which here speaks amongst you, in the fire and spirit or his holy truth
shall come down from above, from Heaven, from the Seat of comfort, from the
everlasting Throne, and shall fall down, not into you, nor amongst you (for you
shall be rooted out) but into the stem and into the root which is the holy
place, and the house of comfort: And behold, the power of God, (of him that
speaket) shall be mighty, strong, and of infinite power: So that like a Woman
with Child, she shall bring forth in the Church of God, a man, clothed with a
white garment: which is JUSTICE unspotted, which may walk with infinite power
(and in the (...) of (...) and beauty) upon the abundance of graces, and the
waters of comfort, which shall slow out of the holy Seat.

And behold, o you Sons of men, you shall be full of understanding, and of
the spirit of Wisdom, and the grace of God, (of him that speaks with yo)
shall be plentiful and strong amongst you: So that you shall spring, and
beautify the Earth and the House of Christ: And behold, the higher boughs,
and mighty branches shall lose their virtue, and be cast down, because they
have placed themselves upon the outward rotten Stock, to the dishonor of him
that has called them: and there shall no more strength or virtue be amongst
you: but you shall be subject to verity, and be (...) with an iron rod, by him
that came out, and walked on the waters: Then shall be peace ^.
and rest: (...) shall (...) descend.

E. K. Now is all dis-appeared away out of sight.

D I read the former (...) in Laune to the Lord Rosenberg.

A Pause.

D Tu justus es Domine, and Judicia tua vera, tu omnipotens o Deus noster, and
brachio tuo nullus ^ nos (...) and Justitia.

E. K. Now he is returned again in the form he went away in. A red cross
comes over it, pure red, so yellowish.

A Pause.

So that (...) Name of the God of Righteousness, and of his Son Christ shall
be magnified in ^
(...): And (...), behold, by my self, I swear that after a few Months the
time expired; I will (...), and (...) he holy place, so that there shall be no
abomination in it.

And behold, the ends of the World shall be opened, and all people shall
rejoice in the Cross and Name of the Lamb.

But first (...) terror to all Nations. Woe, woe, therefore be unto you, o you
Kings and Princes of the Earth! he that has ears let him hear.

..... And lo, behold, this day I am descended, and my promise is upon him that
hears (...) you.

Let him (...) therefore the fragility of humane reason, and give me a dwelling
place by (...): for I will (...) make a Covenant with him, so that my Name and
Spirit shall not depart ^
from his House.

And what I have promised him I am, and I will bring to pass: what is he, or
who is he that ^
(...) to (...), that (if he repent no) receives not (...) reward?

And moreover, I will appear to him hereafter, and he shall be partaker of the
celestial mystery, if my Name be exalted in him.

And be (...), he shall often fall, but he shall rise again, and shall
persevere unto the end.

E. K. It is dis-appeared.

D Legi (...) hanc (...) Latin ipsi Principi Rosenbergio.

A Pause.

E. K. In lapide stetit scriptum. After an hour.

D We removed not, out fat still and discoursed partly upon the premises, and
partly of Englands (...) to come.

K. K. There appears a little white cloud, like the end of (...) cloud, with
a dark image of a face of three in one: sometimes appearing three, sometimes
one.

The end of the white cloud does wave up and down before the face.

(...) ex latere lapidis..... These four Months, let William ( for as much as
in him lies) abstain ^
from Prage, for he shall deceive those that are deceivers.

Two winds shall arise from the Earth within these next years in this Kingdom:
In the first let him sit still: In the second let him arm himself; and resist
with Victory.

E. K. There appears a Wood, a great Wood on the left hand by a River: There
be two like Hawks, whereof one is white, and the other is black: The one is on
a bough in the water, that is the black, the other on a withered bough on the
land.

A great Bear comes out of the Wood. (...).


Now he runs toward them, he catches the black one in the water, and
swalloweth him, and stands up upon his hinder legs. Now he goes to the
other, and shakes him in his mouth, and stands up on his hinder legs: and
has pulled off both his Wings, he returns into the Wood again, the body of
the white lies on the ground. Now he turns his feet up.

Now he stands on his legs again.

He follows the Bear the same way he went, he would lift up himself as if he
would fly, but he cannot.

All this Wood, Bear, and two Fowls are vanished.

E. K. Below stands a great Castle, at the foot of the Hill on which that
Wood did stand, down in a valley from the Hill goes a great high Bridge of
Stone long (in sight) about ten English miles long.

Beside the entrance, on the right hand of that Castle, is like a Dial, with
motions celestial in it, of Sun and Moon.

Now comes a Bear, (black as the other) a very great monstrous (...) secundus.
Bear. The Bridge quaketh under him as he passes it toward the Castle he
roareth, lookingtoward the Castle. He steppeth up to the Dial, and takes the
Moon out of it, and teareth it all in pieces with his teeth. The Castle
falls, and the bridge where he stands is broken. The Castle is all in ruin.

The Bear stands upon the edge of the bridge, and beholds the ruin of the
Castle down into a pit as it were.

Now he goes back and the bridge falls down after him.

Now the Wood appears again, and he goes into the Wood.

Now that Vision is all vanished away.

Vox..... You (...) shortly see, against what stone Pucci has spurned.

My Peace and blessing be upon you.

E. K. Now all is gone away.

D Gloria, (...), honor, Benedictio and Jubilatio sit Deo Patri, Deo filio, and
Deo Spititui sancto: sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and in sempiterna
saeculorum saecula. Amen.

Spiritu (...) confirma nos Deus, Deus noster confirmet nos Deus, Omnipotens,
Sempiterne vive and vere. Amen, Amen,

Amen.
MEMORANDUM.
Anno 1586. Octobris Die 17, a meridie, post novas cum Fr. Puccio turbas and
rixas, propter pecunias quas cupiebat a nobis habere, ex liberalitate, and in
nomine Dei, and tanquam a servis Dei, and non ab Edwardo Kelleo tanquam ab
Edwardo Kelleo, nos [D and E. K] conclusimus (ad scandala multa evitanda (...)
contra nos sparserat and excogitaverat, propter pecunias ejus 800 Florenorum,
Deo oblat as and reddit as per illum, and prius recusatas quando nos illi
solvere parati eramus, and 630 Ducatos illi exhibuimus coram Deo, ut inde
acciperet quod suum esse judicabat) Conclusimus inquam, (came bonae spe, quod
non offenderemus Deum) ante illum, coram testibus, exponere numerum 800
Florenorum: and si sibi deberi assereret, quod recipere posset, si vellet; sin
vero negaret 800 Florenorum, aut aliquam sibi a nobis deberi pecuniam, Tunc and
id etiam coram testibus pronuntiatum volebamus, testimonio, and chirographo
conscripto notum facere temporibus and locis opportunis.

Ex Arco Ivimus igitur ad Primatis Domum, and convocatis aliquot Civibus
primariis, Sacerdote sediere, and aliquot scribis Illustris summi Principis
(Domini Rosenbergii) duos magnos saccos pecuniarum expostuimus, and ex (ubi duo
millia ducatorum, and preaterca plures quam 400 Doleri numerabantur supra
mensam, 800 Floreni: Et Dilemmate illi proposito ( quod superius annotavi)
(...) accipere contentus erat, sed ille voluit subscribere, se accepisse in
nomine Dei, and a nobis tanquam a servis Dei. Nos vero protestabamur nos nullo
modo recipere in nos, ut a Deo hoc nobis esset (...) diceremus, ut illi illas
proponeremus pecunias, vel accipiendas, vel recusandas ab illo: Sed tantum ad
evitanda magna and multa scandala contra nos, ill illius ibidem libero
committere arbitrio, ut ill and dicat, quod illi videretur melius, and illi
esset gr Accepit ergo pecunias, numeravit, and inde est conscriptum
Chirogrpahum manu scribe summi Principis (Pauli Wolfg, praesentis cum diversis
testibus, qui sua nomina (...), ut in (...) appare potest.

Deo gratias agamus. Speramus enim, meliori nos jam (...): and magis Franciscus
Puccius.
fore liberos ab ejus lingua venenata and inquieta Deus illum (...): and illi
sit propitius, at que dixit nobis se velle nu nc ministrum faciat, (...)
divinae (...) in

Trebone. Anno 1587.
(...) Januarii 21. mane hor. 9.

D Tempus (...), est tempus opportunum.

Necessitas non habet Legem.

D In nomine pat is and F and SS, etc. Pater noster, etc. Omnipotens (...) vere
and une Deus in adjutorium W. C. E. K. and (...) Joannes (...), intend, etc.

D Not by or upon presumption (O Lord) (...) with fear and love toward thee we
are ready to hear thy will, as concerning the Show and Commandment, now at
Prage in this months beginning made to E. K. We (...) and hope it is of thee,
and that thou (...) not tempt us, or suffer us to be (...) in so (...) a (...),
And (...) not (...) informed in those two ounces of powder. E. K. (...) not how
to do, seeing at his return (...) he misseth an half ounce thereof ^ make up
that (...) or (...)? we will or dare propound to make any complete action: but
therein refer all to our Parliament days, or principal ordinary actions
assigned.

Mora interposita, part hora.

E. K. Here appear Letters if I could read them, thus they are.

D.

..... ^.

E. K. They seem white Letters -- of greenish yellow colored figures, in every
figure one of the four words, in all being 12 letters.

E. K. Now they be gone.

D I understand that the first part of that my Proposition is touched in answer
of mihi, that is, to God, the service required is to be done: and ita and a
(...), so is the message or commandment from the same our God.

D Mora (...) horae part.

E K. Now is here other writing, thus, Claudite, clausae sunt.

D I understand not this well, if it mean no more to be taken out of the
Powder, or what else.

Now appear over the former words, other words, as thus, Cessate

E. K. Over Claudite, is Cessate, the other words I cannot read yet.

E. K. Over clausa sunt appears divinum propositum sibi ad (...) non constat.

D Quae igitur (...) sunt, and a te, (...) sunt acceptissima.: and perte, and
propter te, ut nobis injuncta faciamus tuum, o Deus, nobis (...) praebeas
auxilium!

Tibi Creaton Redemptori, and Sanctificatori nostro, sit omnis Laus; Honor, and
Gloria, nunc and semper, Amen.

Ad Omnipotentis Trinitatis Laudem, Honorem, and Gloriam.

Mysteriorum Divinorum memorabilia cni dies quartus Aprilis, Anno 1587, dicata
suit.

1587. ACTIO TERTIA.
Trebonae Generalis.
D. POst preces ad Deum, and recitatum Catalogum illum, petitionum nostrarum ad
eundem, Aprilis 4. Mane circa 8.
quievimus divina expectantes consilia, monita, and oracula.

Magna pausa.
D...... Tandem accepi literas Illas cum 12 (...) and illas priores ad (...).
(...).
utrasque illustrissimi Domini Rosenbergii, and recitavi coram Deo, ut ejus
obedientia, humilitas, and desiderium, coram Deo and Angelis ejusdem contestata
essent. Alia adhuc pausa, sive Mora facta, sed non longa.

E. K. There seems a black Curtain of Velvet, to be drawn from one side of
the Stone to the other. The Curtain is full of plights.

There seemed also one to have descended from above, (a good way behind the
Curtain) and so to go behind the same Curtain.

Alia pausa.
Vox...... Happy is he, whose mind thirsts after the knowledge of such
things as are spiritual, and celestial, of such things as are in the
everlasting place and glory of him that is, and was, and shall be for ever: for
unto him belongs rest in the harvest of the Highest, and comfort in the midst
of many worldly sorrows. For unto him, thus says the Lord, the Lord of Rest,
Thou have rendered my blood again, with comfort unto me, and have made a blood
of eternal rest unto thy self for ever. Ascend therefore and dwell with me, and
receive eternal comfort: for unto such bell ngeth the Kingdom of my Father; for
I am Requies cessatio sabbatum, etc. Sabbath.
Zebaoth unto all such as trust in me. But behold, the earth brings not forth
my mighty praise, because of the wickedness that abounds in all mankind:
Neither have I many such children amongst the sons of men as I have spoken of
before; for why? The Giants of this world are a stumbling block unto the poor
people, and unto their subjects: for lo, behold, behold! (I say) vile and base
things (for that they are misused) are become gods within their houses: so
that, Gold and Silver, precious Stones, and soft Apparel, which were wont to be
brought out of their houses to garnish mine withal, are become their gods, and
the Idols of their destruction: for, who is he that exalts not himself in his
riches, and despises me that was the Author of them? Where is he that loves
not his wife and children, pomp and (...) ldly glory, more than the setting in
order of my little flock, or the preferment of my glory? Who (I say) is he,
that makes not more of himself than of me? Woe be unto you that so do: and woe
be unto the generations that shall follow you.

D. Be merciful unto us, O God of Mercies.

..... O wretched and miserable mankind, look, look in and upon thy self. Have
thou made thy self? or when thou art afflicted, can thou remove thine own
affliction? Have thou any thing of thy own, which my Father has not given
thee, through me, in one provident and eternal will? Can thou hide thy self
where I cannot see thee? or can thou do that which lies hid from me? Look
again upon thy self, and consider what parents, and root thou had thy
beginning in Nature: behold, they and their fathers are become the dust of the
earth; even so shall thou do. And even as of them is a straight account of life
required, even so shall it be of thee: for, I that made thee, and gave thee
breath, made thee partaker and user of my creatures, led thee in and out, gave
thee the Sun to shine upon thee, and the Moon as the mother of your radical
moisture. I that lifted thee up, either to the honor of a King, or Magistrate,
and made thee a governor over thy brethren, will at last take a straight
account of thee, how thou have used thy self toward me, and where thou have
advanced my Name in such things as I have lent thee: And be right sure, that
thou shall pay, even the uttermost farthing. Woe be unto thee, if thou make not
a just account; miserable shall thou be for ever, if thy deserts condemn thee.
Therefore while thou have time and space, look, look up unto me; for I am the
Well of comfort, and the God of peace; the true reward of righteousness to all
such as faithfully love and trust me.

Pausa.
D. I read this over..... Oh how comfortable are these lessons! Give us and
confirm unto us thy graces and blessings, O God, to do thy blessed will herein,
and in all our duty toward thee whatsoever.

E. K. Now the voice seems to come from him who stands behind the Curtain.

Magna Pausa.
William the son of Vrsine, the Lord talks with thee this day, saying, Will thou that I buy a Kingdom for thee with gold or silver? Will thou that the
Kings and Princes of the earth shall laugh the Almighty God of the heaven and
earth to scorn?

Have I at any time preferred (such as trust in me) to the government of my
people, by giving them the excrements of the earth?

Look down upon my servant Abraham.

Look down upon his children.

Call to remembrance my servant David.

Set Solomon before thy eyes.

The Kings and Princes of Judah and of Jerusalem.

Consider with thy self the Calling of the twelve: The government and state of
such as have been Princes amongst the flock Christian.

Have they been hired or promoted? Have they been lifted up by me with gold or
silver, or such like trumpery, the Monsters of the earth? In necessity, to pay
Tribute the fish ministered, wherewithal Tribute might be paid according to
custom.

In the calling of Abraham, multiplication of seed was promised; which was to
be a multitude in people, mighty and great upon the face of the earth.

David was (...) in (the least of his brethren) even to be King of Israel, not
by the (...) of precious stones, gold or silver. A Sling he had, a Satchel with
a few stones.

Solomon was commanded to build me a Temple, without any sum or stint. The
(...) went from place to place, intending to teach; neither carried they gold
or silver, but only a scrip or bag prepared for their common victuals and
nourishment.

Many Princes and Kings have published my Name, without any promise made unto
them from heaven.

Notwithstanding, unto Abraham I have plenty, as his necessities required: and
unto his children, as I had limited.

Unto David, being King, riches followed his State: and unto his son Solomon,
plenty both at home and abroad, to build my Temple.

Unto the Apostles I gave (in the time of the calling of my people) the spirit
of understanding, whereby they understood and had power to teach: And unto such
as stretched out their hands for my name, I have abundantly given; and it has
been faithfully, and for the love of me taken in hand.

Believe therefore with Abraham, and with his children.

Bring thy fling and bag before the people of the Lord against Goliath.

Endeavor thy self with Solomon, to build a Commonwealth, wherein I will be
exalced, as the servant of the Son of God, and as his follower.

Go forward, as thy own power and ability shall serve thee: For thus says the
Lord of Hosts:

Thou have nothing but what thou have received of me: neither thou, neither thy
father.

Provide therefore, of that thou have, which is mine: that is to say, of that
which thy power can extend unto, in thine own faculty and riches, to show thy
good will and ready endeavors in such things to be brought to pass, as thou
have learned of me: That is to say, Neglect not the time of this thy
visitation, neither despise this Kingdom wherein thou shall reign, for in so
doing I dwell with thee for ever, and with thy posterity which shall be (in me)
mighty. When thou art entered into it, whatsoever Treasure there is in my house,
or amongst you, Take it, use it.

Make thee a (...) of it with two edges, that with the one thou may cut off
the bastards The use of the Powder.
head, and with the other build up the Monuments and the houses of cleanliness,
godliness, and understanding: That the East again may flourish, and that I may
make (...). The ounce and the half which W. R. has is to be multiplied. Caesar:
reddenda quae sunt Caesaris. The L. Sobcovitz the Land-Hostmaster.
one Floc, from the Sunrising to his going down.

In the mean season, shall the Powder which thou have to be multiplied, be
extended, and multiplied with them that are here present, that it may be apt
for thy uses, and the strengthening of thy faith.

The one half of it thou shall keep, as the perpetual remembrance of me, even
thou and thy posterity.

Unto him that is thy head, do thy true obedience: although his heart be
bardued against thee, and thirsts after thy destruction.

For behold, thy enemy that seeks to devour thy Soul, cease not to lay
(...) for thee, that thou may become odious to common people. But the time
shall shortly come, when thou shall have justice against him. See therefore
that thou smite; see, I say again, that thou Justice against Pople. (...). The
Lord Czotek Schonberg. D He alludeth to the spies of the holy land for the
children of Israel To the question of (...) sending to. R. spondet Articulo
literarum suarum, an Caesari ex pulvere aliqua sit danda portio.
smite him, for Justice is the hand of the Highest punishing such as offend,
either against him or his Innocent.

These that now come unto thee, have brought thee a great Cluster of grapes,
even as big as they can both carry: amongst the which, notwithstanding there
are many rotten. But behold, the foolishness from above shall appear wisdom
before them, when their wisdom shall become foolishness before me, and before
themselves.

Round about thee thou shall receive assistance, and many hearts shall be made
glad in thee.

As for my Treasures to be opened, To him that defiles my Seat, and the Sword
of Justice.

To him that harbors abomination in his own houses, and listneth unto wicked
counsel.

Unto him which has despised me, which is accursed of me, shall none of my
Treasures be opened.

I have judged him, and it shall appear shortly.

That which is Caesar's give unto Caesar; and that which is mine, unto the House
of my Honor.

Be obedient (as the servant of God) unto thy Superiors: and whilst thou
may, diligently do Justice. Thy Country shall receive such remembrance of
thee, as shall never be rased from the face of the earth: until the fire come
down from heaven consuming all things.

Be full of humility, and abandon pride.

Bow down thine ears nnto the poor.

Be often sorry for thy days misspent.

Be strong for ever in me.

Pausa.
D

Thy wife is even at the door of sickness: But behold, I am even he, the Lord
of Jane my wife.
health.

E. K.

As unto thee, Barrenness dwells with thee, because thou did neglect me,
and take Ed. K. uxor sterilis illi erat.
a wife unto thy self * contrary unto my commandment: for neither young nor
old, rich nor poor, are respected with me; but what I will have done, is just,
and whosoever does it not, is privily (if he be not openly) punished for his
offense. Therefore thou shall At Mortlake, 1583.
have the womb which thou have barren, and fruitless unto thee, because thou
have transgressed that which I commanded thee.

Be it unto thy brother, as his service, trust, and confidence has been in me,
and toward De Thoma Keleoaegroto
me.

Lay your hands to work, and your bodies unto labor, and participate one with
another, Our mutual participating one with another.
as is commanded you.

That the blessing which I have promised you may go forward in you; and that
your labor may bring forth good fruit.

The fourteenth day hence shall this Action end: In which day you shall once
again assemble 18 Aprilis futura die Saturni. E. K. told me that he had all the
Lent praid once a day at the least, that he might no more have dealing to skry.
your selves here together. And now behold I say unto thee, unto thee, that
have thy eyes opened, and thy ears made perfect, which have been exalted by the
sight of the heavens, why do thou call upon me, desiring to be made free.

Is it a burden unto thee to be comforted from above? O foolish man! by how
much the heavens excel the earth, by so much does the gift that is given thee
from above, excel all earthly treasure. Notwithstanding, because that Manna is
loathsome unto thee, behold what is said unto thee this day.

Thou art made free: neither shall thou any time hereafter be constrained to
see the judgment of the highest, or to hear the voices of the heavens.

But thou art a stumbling block unto many.

Notwithstanding, my Spirit shall dwell with thee; and in the works of thy
hands thou shall receive comfort.

And the power which is given thee of seeing, shall be diminished in thee, and
shall Arthur Dee pragus ann. 1585.


dwell upon the first-begotten Son of him that sits by thee, as I have *
before said.

In the mean season shall he be exercised here before me, until the time come,
that his eyes shall be opened, and his ears receive passage toward the highest.

And these fourteen days shall it be a time unto thee of choosing or refusing.

For I will not cast thee away, neither out of my house, unless it be long of
thy own ignorance, Unleast, etc.
and wilful despising of my great benefit.

If thou therefore be weary of it, the fourteenth day hence, bring hither, and
lay before me the Powder which thou have, for thou have offended me, as a false
steward, in taking The Powder
out of that which is not thine own. I will no longer dally with you, but will
give unto you according unto your works.

D. O God be merciful unto us, and deal not with us according to the
wickedness, frowardness, and blindness of our hearts.

Amen.
NOTE.
D. UPon this former part of the Third Action General, where my first begotten
Son (namely Arthur) was assigned to the Ministry of seeing and hearing, in
place and stead of E. K. if he would utterly refuse the same office (hitherto
by him executed, and by him to be executed, until the seven actions general
finished) And that the same Child and Son, in the mean space (that is to say,
between the day of the part of Action received, and the end of the same:
determined to be fourteen days after) should be exercised before God. I
thereupon thinking that E. K. would, should, or best could instruct and direct
the Child in that exercise, did always await, that E. K. would of himself
call the Boy to that Exercise with him; and so much the rather, because he
said, that he was very glad now that he should have a Witness of the things
showed and declared by spiritual Creatures: And that he would be more willing
to do what should be so enjoined to him to do, then if only he himself did
see, and that for diverse causes. But when E. K. said to me, that I should
exercise the Child and not he, and that he would not, I thereupon appointed
with my self to bring the Child to the place, and to offer him, and present
him to the service of Seeing and Skrying from God, and by Gods assignment, and
of the time of fourteen days yet remaining, being the 15, 16, 17 days of
April, and next before the 18 day, (the day assigned to end the Action in) to
have the Child exercised in them. And thereupon contrived for the Child this
order of Prayer ensuing.

Die Mercurii summo mane die Aprilis 15. anno 1587. Trebonae.
In the Name of God the Father, of God the Son, and of God the Holy Oration pro
Arthuro qua in exercitiis suis uti debet mysticis.
Ghost. Amen.

Glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

O Almighty and Everlasting, the true and living God, have metcy, pity and
compassion on my father John Dee, and on me Arthur Dee; who being now called
hither by thy assignment, am now here present and ready in all humility,
obedience and faithfulness, to serve thy Divine Majesty, with all the gifts and
graces which thou have hither to endued me with; and with all other which of
thy most bountiful and fatherly mercy, thou will henceforward bestow upon me.
Lighten (therefore) O Almighty God, mine eyes, and open thou mine ears;
Quicken, Instruct and Confirm in me, and unto me, my discretion, judgment,
understanding, memory, and utterance, that I may be a true and perfect Seer,
Hearer, Declarer and Witness of such things which either immediately of thy
Divine Majesty, or mediately by the ministry of thy holy, mighty, and faithful
Angels shall be manifested, declared or showed unto me, now, and at all times
and occasions, for the advancing of thy Praise, Honor and Glory. Amen.

Hereupon, Wednesday morning, (the 15 of this April) I brought the Child to
the holy Table, being in order of the furniture thereto belonging, and set
before him the Stone in the frame, (my first sanctified Stone) and caused him
on his knees, to say the foresaid Prayer. And I also praid to the Child's
hearing, other Prayers to God for the purpose in hand: and at his coming to
look and see in the Stone,

There appeared to him (as he judged) diverse little square figures, with
pricks, and diverse other figures and lines, which I caused him with his own
hand to imitate upon a paper with pen and ink.

The lines were white, and some of the pricks also, but other of the pricks
were black, as of ink.

Arth. Two old men with black beards, and with golden Crowns upon their heads,
do appear. One is now gone: this holds his hands before him like a Maid.

Arth. Now in the place of those square marks, I see two Lions, the one very
exactly, and gaping. About the upper brim of the Stone they appear: and the
Lions feet be waxen greater and greater.

I see another man from the breast upward. I can see no hair on his head.

I see a great company of feet, and their garments skirts somewhat above their
ankles: and they are like women's kirtles with gards about them.

I see another man without a doublet, in his shirt, and with a white Cloak
about him, hanging his hands down by his sides.

D. Nothing else esteemed or judged to be shown in the Stone, by the Child, we
ceased that Exercise, and committed all to Gods mercies.

D. On Thursday and Friday, I determined each of them two days that the Child
Aprilis 16.
shall thrice in the day be put to the Exercise, and each time repeat the
Prayer prescribed thrice.

D. In the forenoon I brought the Child to the Exercise, and he said as
follows. I.


I see two men with Crowns of gold upon their heads: their apparel is black and
white. I cannot see their feet. Their faces are white, their eyes are black
like spots of ink.

There appear now two other, without Crowns: of the which one stands whole
before, and of the other I see nothing but the head, which stands behind the
first.

I see not any with Crowns now. The apparel of him is white that I see.

I see no hands of him. I see nothing now.

The squares and pricks appear again as yesterday.

And I doubted it was something of the Glass it self: as there were in it
certain white spots.

An hour we were at the practice.

D. The second Exercise before Dinner. After the Prayer thrice said, etc. II.


Arth. I see the first square lines and pricks, white and black: the pricks for
the most part be all white, but some are black, and the lines all white.

I saw, even now, some of those squares made Lions: but now there appear none.

The squares are now turned also into other shapes, which I cannot well declare.

Now the Letters be gone, and the squares do appear again.

The squares are gone, and a word is there.

The letters are clearer then they were: for all the lines and letters do
appear white.

There appears a B, with a square, with four black pricks in it. It is gone.

Now some of the squares are come amongst the letters B D O.

Under the B appears a little `thus' backward.

The letters as if one had cut them in the glass B D O

Here appears a Castle with little pinacles like a Church.

Now it is gone.

B a this appeared and suddenly is gone.

Now there appears a young man with a white doublet, and his arms by his
side, and a B before him against his doublet. He has a black beard and a white
face. I see no hair on his head: his beard is a little --

He is now changed: he has on his doublet breast, on each side three black
lines.

He is gone, and another is come in his place, with a white leather (...) and a
gray cloak like Hans of Gloats his cloak. He is gone.

The first young man is come again, and has now on the one side of his doublet
on the other side, thus:

Now I see only two strokes overthwart all the doublet, but he has no head
that I see.

(...) his head is come again, or else another man, that has two lines and two
(...) as he had.

The light of the candle did seem to shine suddenly on his face, and go away
again. It did not shine on his doublet, but only on his face and his head.

There is now another man come in, who holds up both his hands: the upper
part of his sleeves are white, and the half toward his hands black.

The first man is here still. Now he has no arms but a B before his doublet,
but no lines, but only on each side two pricks in stead of the lines, thus::

These men came amongst the squares suddenly before I was aware.

Here appear not so many as were here.

Here are now but six squares, and one man. I see no farther of the man but to
the waste of his doublet.

The man appears not so brim to my sight as he did, his head is no bigger
than the mark in the margent.

The third Exercise after Dinner. III.


Arth. Whereas I said before there was some of the square figures wanting: Now
I find that they are all here again, as many as they were at my first feeing.

In lifting up the Stone, and bringing it down again, the squares do all seem
like B B of the Roman letters.

D. Magna mora.

Arth. I see now B A. It is now vanished away, after three Pater noster times
saying. R a appears, but I cannot see clearly the foot of the R. Now it is
gone

(...) I see a thing all white in this form, and a little o before it. It would
seem to be as an X and an o. It is vanished away.

e B An English little e, and a Roman great B.

It is gone before I can be aware.

S B now appears. B by himself: it appears following S B thus S B B.

N appears by the last B, in order following, thus S B B N.

I can see no more now but the S B the B and N.

s B appear. e B is here now. B by himself, with two great white pricks before
it, appear. The pricks wax dim.

The man stands amongst the squares and letters in the midst of them. (...)
This now appears. The 4 little pricks be gone.

There appears like a B and a d joining to it.

A circle appeared with a black prick in it, and two white pricks after. An n,
two strikes, and two white pricks after. The n is white and the prick within
the n black. ua appeared, and quickly went away. Two long strikes by
themselves, white. The two pricks black, and the crooked line white. Four white
pricks by themselves. Two black. Two long white strikes and a prick. A round
circle white, and a black prick in it. A white prick by it self. A little prick
as it were blotted, and a stroke by it all white. The crooked lines white, and
the pricks black. Two white pricks by themselves. Two long white strokes. lo
These both white.

Here appears the thing like the Castle, all white.

The pricks black, the lines white. A little English o by it self. Four white
strokes. The man is here in the midst of the things, as before I told. Four
white pricks.

Note: All the shows are within the uppermost quarter of the stone, as where A
with the prick.

Like a figure of 2 all white. Two little black pricks, and the stroke white.
They are now gone. Do appears all white. Xo appears all white. B e
appears white. Two o's joined like a figure of 8 all white. A great Roman
white S by it self. B Bu These appear white. A white prick by it self. An
English little t white. Two lines white.

Mora magna.

So we ended.

D. God enrich us with his Truths.

The end of Thursdays third Exeroise.

Friday Morning. 1.
The Prayers on both parts being said.

Arth. I see not the squares, lines, pricks, and those other things which I was
wont to see first.

Mora horae unius.

After I had tarried an hour, and had had no evident show: as I asked the boy
diligently again, he said that he had from the beginning seen thus (...)

Also there appeared X o all white. D o the o joyneth to the D.

Fiat voluntas Dei in sua-luce and veritate, ad ejus nominis laudem, honorem,
gloriam.

Amen.
Friday. II.
Preces --

Mora horae unius spatio.

Nulla ostensio toto illo tempore.

D. (...), misericordia and Pax, Dei, and Domini nostri Jesu Christi, sit super
nos, and nobiscum: nunc and in sempiterna saeculorum saecula.

Amen.
Friday 3. a meridie.
Mora Magna.

Multae factae preces erant, and invitati illi fideles Dei servi quia etiam
auxilia sua (...) cessitati quocumque tempore. Etsi mora magna and admiranda:
and apparitio nulla facta est puero ipsi.

D. Tandem mirabili fortuna, sive fato divino accessit ad nos Dominus E. K. and
quae sequebantur Thursday a (...) circa 3.
notavi.

D. He sat down by us: and Arthur yet standing before me at the Table, being
covered after the best manner, but only the Stone being set thereon; He asked
if any thing appeared: We answered No, albeit I have called oftentimes, and
have prayed earnestly that some of our former accounted friends might show
themselves to the boy, as Madimi, Il, (...), and chiefly Vriel, because as he
was first which appeared to the joining of E. K. and me together: so he might
be also the Director in the translating of E. K. his office to Arthur. (...).
Then said he, I marvel if you had no apparition here: for I somewhat thinking
of Arthur and his proceeding in the (...) of skrying, came here into the
gallery, and I heard you pray: and opening the window, I looked out, and I saw
a great number going in and out of this Chapel at the little hole in the glass
window. I saw Madimi, Il, and many other that had dealed with us heretofore,
but showed themselves in very filthy order; and Vriel appeared, and (...) all
to be of God, and good: And therefore I wonder if here you have no show:
perhaps there is somewhat, but Arthur sees it not.

D. True it is: and how should I help him herein, seeing I cannot yet see or
skry?

E. K. I will come and see if there be any thing.

D. I pray you do. [Note: and so E. K. looked toward the stone, and he by and
by said, Here appears somewhat, and pointed to Arthur, where: and asked him
if he saw any thing, and he said No. Then said

E. K. I see like a white Marble square table or book lying on a wooden desk.

D. I pray you Sir take the pains to look and discern what is here showed.

E. K. I see written upon that book, Beata, quae per peccatum mihi, domum
corruentem and hominibus integram reddit.

E. K. Now a leaf of that book is turned open, and there is written on it, but
I cannot read it yet. Now I see it.

Ego sum qui dedi and daturus sum vobis legem: ex qua mortalibus perpetua
requies and felicitas sit ventura.

E. K. Now another leaf is turned over, and appears written,

Estote ergo tales, quales me meosque decet, and rati coram me ambulate.

E. K. Now turns over the leaf of it self.

Ne populus esuriens and suiens, negligentia and obstinatia vestra vel ruat vel
saltem.

E. K. Now the leaf turns.

Pro tempore, alimento careat.

E. K. Now the desk and book or table is gone.

D. Note: By and by after, while E. K. did look into the stone, he said,

E. K. I see a hand appear, a very great one, white, with the fingers spread
abroad. E. K. The hand is gone, but there remains writing.

Videbitis and audietis brevi omnes. Si interim.

E. K. It is as if it were upon the side of a white Globe afar off. Sight and
hearing promised.
The Globe turns so swiftly that I cannot well read it.

Animi ad meliora compoti.

E. K. The Globe turns so swiftly that I cannot read it till it stand still.

Sese mihi and meis.

E. K. Now again the Globe is turned most swiftly.

(Filiorum more) subjicient. Si vero (per meipsum loquor and jure) alieni and
vagabundi alias vobismet ipsis disimperitis non oculo, sed corpori, immo
omnibus membris, casus and ruina paratur. Quales enim in futuro eritis, vobis
ut scivetis nullo modo licet: Majora enim a superis mortalibus, prae foribus
sunt, quotidieque instant quam vel primo, vel secundo etatis modulo fuerunt.
Qui aures, erigat: Cui intellectus, sapiat. Omnia peccata apud me postponuntur
huic. insaniens propter me, sapiat: Immo adulterizans propter me, in
sempiternum benedicetur, and premio afficietur celesti.

E. K. Now the Globe is gone.

D. Gloria Patri and Filio and Spiritui sancto, erat in principio and nunc, and
semper and in secula seculorum. Amen.

So we left off.

Trebonae.
Actionis Tertiae altera pars. 1587. Saturday Aprilis 18.

Preces ad Deum Omnipotentem, pro sua veritate nobis impartienda, ad nominis
suo laudem, honorem and gloriam.

D. Note Arthur was set to the stone, but nothing appeared; E. K. had brought
the powder with him as he was bidden to do. Then I desired him to apply himself
to see as he was wont. And so he did.

E. K. Here appear all in the stone that appeared yesterday unto me in the air
in that most disorderly and filthy manner. They are in the like apparel as
yesterday.

D. O God confirm us in thy truth sor thine own honor and glory, and suffer us
not to be overcome with any temptation, but deliver us from all evil now and
ever.

E. K. There appeared Madimi, Il. and the rest: And so they are here; but now
all the rest are gone, and only Madimi remains.

Madimi opens all her apparel, and her self all naked; and shows her shame
also.

E. K. Fie on thee, Devil avoid hence with this filthiness, etc.

Mad. In the Name of God, why find you fault with me?

D. Because your yesterdayes doings, and words are provocations to fin, and
unmeet for any godly creature to use.

Mad. What is sin?

D. To break the Commandment of God.

Mad. Set that down, so.

Mad. If the self-same God give you a new Commandment taking away the former
form of sin which he limited by the Law; What remains then?

D. If by the self-same God that gave the Law to Moses, and gave his New
Covenant by Christ, who sealed it by his blood; and had his witnesses very
many, and his Apostles instructed by his holy Spirit, who admonished us of all
cleanness in words and works, yea and in thoughts, if by the same God, hose
former Laws and Doctrines be abrogated, and that sufficient proof and testimony
may be had that it is the same God: Then must the same God (...) testimony to
be had herein.
be obeyed: For only God is the Lord of Lords, King of Kings, and Governor of
all things.

E K She kneeleth, and holds up her hands.

Mad. The Laws of God, and of his Son Christ, stablished by the testimony of
his Disciples and Congregation, and by the force and power of his holy Spirit,
are not in any particular vocation D. A (...) granted does not a brogate a Law,
(...) does (...) the force of the law in it self otherwise.
abrogated, but rather confirmed.

For (...) it falls out, that God being offended at the wickedness of any
man, or of some man private, sends down his Spirit of Death, infecting and
tempting another man's mind; so that he (...) void of Reason, and rises up
against him, whom God is offended with, and strikes him, so that he dies.
This, before man, is accounted sin before God it shall be imputed unto him for
righteousness. Even so whatsoever the Spirit of God teaches us from him,
though it appear sin before man, is righteousness before him.

Therefore assure your selves, that whatsoever is seen and heard amongst you,
is from above, and is a sign and (...) even this day before you; for I that
touched thy Son, Arthur was (...) and E K. law one in a long white garment
(...) as though he would (...) him. He was very sick for the time. (...). S.
Paul (...). Good Angels. The wisdom of God, of us (...) comprehensible.
might also have taken away his breath.

But O, you are of little understanding: But behold I teach you.

That unto those that are accounted righteous (through the good will of God)
sin is justly punished, but not as unto the wicked. For whatsoever you have
done unto other men, even the self-same shall light upon you, but happy is he
that receives not justice through the (...) of (...), but through the grace
and mercy of God.

The Apostle Paul abounded in carnal lust: he was also offensive unto his
brethren so that he despaired, and was ready to have left his vocation, until
the Lord did say unto him, My mercy and grace (...) thee.

Believe me, that we are from above.

Which considered: Consider also, That as you cannot comprehend the heavens, so
likewise can you not comprehend the wisdom of God, which says, I will be
merciful unto whom I list; and unto whom I will not, I have none in store:
Foolish is he that asks why?

And (...) I say unto you, Stumble not against God. Who he is that made you?
Who is he that has given you power to look up toward heaven? You are fools,
and of little understanding: This day says G d unt you,

B hold you are become free: Do that which most pleases you: For behold, your
own reason rises up against my wisdom.

Not content you are to be heirs, but you would be Lords, yea Gods, yea the
Judgers of the heavens: Wherefore do even as y u list, but if you forake the
way taught you from ab ve, behold evil shall enter into your senses, and
abomination shall dwell before your eyes, as a recompense, unto such as you have
done wrong unto: And your wives and children, shall be carried away before your
face.

D. The Almighty God of heaven and earth be my comfort, as I desire comfort in
his service; and give me wisdom as I desire it for his honor and glory, Amen.

E. K. I see a white pillar; and upon the pillar, I see four heads. The (...)
pillar


She tieth the pillar round about with a list.

The four heads are like on two heads, and on two Wolves heads.

Now there comes a thing like a white Crown of Crystal, and stands upon all
our four heads. The heads seem to be enclosed by the necks within the pillar.

Now she takes the pillar and goes up with it.

Now she brings an half Moon down, and written in it as follows.

Injustum nihil quod justum est Deo.

Now she goes round about upon a thing like a Carpet; she goes now beyond
where is an Orchard; she cutteth branches of two trees, and she seems to
insert them, or graff them into another.

Now she goes into a black place behind the wood, and brings a thing with
her in a chain: An ugly thing like a Devil.

Mad...... Behold, see thou this: wherewithal thou thoughtest to overthrow,
and most infect, thou art utterly overthrown, and shall never return again.

E. K. Now he leapeth, and the ground opens, and he sinketh in: and there
seems a stink of brimstone to come to my Nose from the pit.

Now the grafts are all grown in the tree, as if they were all of one tree.

Now she comes out of that orchard. Now she goes round about the orchard, and
leaves a darkness like a cloud round about the orchard.

Mad...... Visible to God, but invisible to man.

E. K. Now she comes again upon her Carpet.

Behold, if you resist not God, but shut out Satan (through unity amongst you)
thus it is said Unity. An offer of every 7th day to be taught the secrets of
the books received. The holy books delivered. Our works to go on. The Lord
Rosenberg. The powder here. If Omniareponenda. Caesar and Papa brevi nos
infestabunt denno. If
unto you, Assemble your selves together every seventh day, that your eyes may
be opened, and that you may understand by him that shall teach you, what the
secrets of the holy books (delivered you) are: That you may become full of
understanding, and in knowledge above common men.

And in your works go forward, and detract no time, that you may also have
fruit.

Unto William I will be merciful for ever, according to my promise. But I will
buy him no Kingdom, after the manner of man, with money. But what I have
determined unto him, shall happen unto him: And he shall become mighty in me.

And this Powder which thou have brought here, is appointed for a time by God,
and cannot be used until then, without offense. Happy is he that hears my
words this day: and happy is he that understands them.

But if you deny the Wisdom of the Highest, and account us his Messengers,
Creatures of darkness. This day you are made free.

And look that you lay up all things that is spoken of from above; and
whatsoever has been taught you, (as well the books as instruments.)

You shall shortly have to do again with the cruelty of the Emperor, and the
accursed Bishop.

Whereunto, if you go forward with God, you shall be taught to answer. If you
leave off, as soon as you hear of it be going into Germany, lest you perish
before then.

I have no more to say unto you, but my swiftness is from above.

E. K. Now she makes her self ready, etc.

Mad...... If my friendship like you not, I beseech God send you as good will,
as I (in powe) bear toward you.

I have not one word more given me to speak.

E. K. Now she is gone.

D. I was glad that an offer was made of being every seventh day to be taught
the secrets of the books already delivered unto us: Thinking that it was easy
for us to perform that unity which was required to be amongst us four;
understanding all after the Christian and godly sense. But E. K. who had
yesterday seen and heard another meaning of this unity required, utterly
abhorred to have any dealing with them farther, and did intend to accept at
their hands the liberty of leaving off to deal with them any more: which his
understanding, as it was strange and unpleasant unto me, so I earnestly
requested to be resolved therein in manner as follows.

At the same time and in the same place this ensued.

NOTE.
D. Upon Mr. Kelly his great doubt bred unto me of Madimi her words yesterday,
spoken to him, that we two had our two wives in such sort, as we might use them
in common, it was agreed by us, to move the question, whether the sense were of
Carnal use (contrary to the law of the Commandment) or of Spiritual love, and
charitable care and unity of minds, for advancing the service of God.

E. K. Upon a Scroll, like the edge of a Carpet, is written, De utroque loquor.

D. The one is expressly against the Commandment of God: neither can I by any
means consent to like of that Doctrine. And for my help in that verity, I do
call down the power of Almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and all
the good Angels, (his faithful Ministers) to assist me in the defense of my
faithful obedience to the law of the Gospel, and of his Church.

Assist me, O Christ.

Assist me, O Jesu.

Assist me, O holy Spirit.

E. K. It appears written upon a white Crucifix, as follows, Mea gratia,
major est (...). Gratia enim (...) mea est, ut hominibus insanis (...)
beatitudo: Et que ita dicta sunt, Vel sint, vel hodie libertas vobis
restituitur. Amen dico vobis, quia si dicerem (...) Eas, and fatrem Jugula, and
non faceret, filius est peccati and mortis. Omnia, enim, possibilia and licita
sunt superis. Neque magis (...) sunt pudenda illis, quam mortalium quorumcumque
vultus.

Ita enim fiet, spurius cum (...) (quod magis absurdum est) copulabitur. Et
oriens cum occidente, Meridies quoque cum septentrione coadunabuntur.

E. K. Now it is vanished.

D. Hereupon we were in great amazement and grief of mind, that so hard, and
(as it, yet seemed unto me) so unpure a Doctrine, was popounded and enjoined
unto us of them, whom I always (from the beginning hitherto) did judge and
esteem, undoubtedly, to be good Angels: And had unto E K. offered my soul as a
pawn, to discharge E. K. his crediting of them, as the good and faithful
Ministers of Almighty God. But now, my heart was sore afflicted upon many
causes: And E. K. had (as he thought) now, a just and sufficient cause, to
forsake dealing with them any more. As his prayer to God of a long time has
been (as in the former part of this Action may appear.)

After our going out of the Chapel, and at our being at dinner, when we four
(whose heads so were united, in a pillar showed, as is before set down, I found
means to make some little declaration of our great grief (mine chiefly) now
occasioned, either to try us, or really to be executed, in the common and
indifferent using of Matrimonial Acts amongst any couple of us four: Which
thing was strange to the women: And they hoped of some more comfortable issue
of the cause. And so we left off.

After Dinner, as E. K. was alone, there appeared unto him little creatures of
a cubit high: and they came to the Still where he had the spirit of Wine
distilling over out of a Retorto: And one of them (whose name they expressed
Ben) said that it was in vain so to hope for the best spirit of the Wine: And
showed him how to distill it, and separate it better. And moreover how to get
oil of the spirit of Wine, as it burned in the lamps: And began to ask E. K.
what Countryman he was? And when he had answered an Englishman, he asked
then, how he came hither? he answered by Sea: Then said he, And who helped you
to pass the mavelous great dangers of the Sea. And so took occasion to speak
of the benefits which God had hitherto done for us, very many. And this Ben,
said than among very many other things (as Mr. E. K. told me on Saturday night
after Supper holding on his talk almost till two of the clock after midnight)
That he it was that delivered (...) was the deliverer of the powder to E. K. at
the digging in England. Note, unleast conditionally. Q. El. K. Phi.
him, or gave unto his hands the powder. And also he said either than or the
next day at the furthest, that unleast he would be conformable to the will of
God in this last Action declared, That he would take the virtue and force of
the powder from it: That it should be unprofitable: And that he should become a
beggar.

And of me also he said that I did evil to require proof, or testimony now,
that this last Doctrine was from God Almighty, and said that I should be led
prisoner to Rome, etc.

He told of England, and said, That about July or November her Majesty should
from heaven be destroyed; and that about the same time the King of Spain should
dye. And that this present Pope at his Mass should be deprived of life before
two years to an end. And that another should be Pope, who should be Decimus
quintus of his name; And that he would begin to reform things, but that shortly
he should of the Cardinals be stoned to death. And that after that there should
be no Pope for some years.

Of England he said, That after the death of our dear Queen, One of the house
of Austria England.
made mighty by the King of Spain his death, should invade and conquer the
land, etc. He said, One (now abroad) should at Milford-haven enter, and by the
help of the Britans subdue the said Conqueror: And that one Morgan a Britan
should be made King of the Britans, and next him, one Rowland, etc.

He said also, That this Francis Garland was an espy upon us from the Lord
Treasurer of Fr. Garland Edw. Garland.
England: And that Edward Garland is not his brother: And that so the matter is
agreed between them, etc.

That my Lord Rosenberg should be in danger of poisoning for these certain
months to come.

That my Tables of Enoch, were in some places falsely written. Enochs Tables.
Antichrist. Ely, Enoch. Johannes (...)


Of Antichrist he spoke, and of his appearing:

Of Ely and Enoch coming out of Paradise: And of Saint John Evangelist, that he
dyed not, but in Pathmos had his invisible being: And that he it was, who did
give (...) Apostata his deaths wound.

He said also that he has at diverse times preached visibly since the time of
his invisible state entered.

He confirmed the words of the great Famine and Bloodshed that should come
shortly.

He said that on every side of us, people should be slain, but that we should
(by the Divine God our Protector. (...). Garland into (...). Refuse (...) home.
^ my old (...). Ben.
protection) escape.

He said that shortly this Francis Garland should go into England: And that we
should be sent for. But that it were best to refuse their calling us home.

He said that there were four other, who were made also privy of God his
mysteries as we were, with whom we should meet at Rome.

He said that Mary and one more in England, should see the wonderful days to
come.

Madimi appeared to him there also.

The same Ben went once away mounting up in a flame of fire: and afterward upon
occasion of asking him somewhat, he came down so again.

And of the manner how to draw the oil of the Spirit of wine being burnt, he
brought thither the instruments of two silver dishes, whelmed one upon another
with an hole passing through the middle of them both, and with sponge between
them: in which the oil would remain, etc.

After all these, and many other things told me by the same Mr. E.K. we
departed each About 2 of the clock after midnight (...).
to his bed, where I found my wife awake, attending to hear some new matter of
me from Mr. Kelly his reports of the apparitions, continued with him above four
hours, being else alone, I then told her, and said, June, I see that there is
no other remedy, but as has been said of our cross-matching, so it must needs
be done.

Thereupon she fell a weeping and trembling for a quarter of an hour: And I
pacified her as well as I could; and so, in the fear of God, and in believing
of his Admonishment, did persuade her that she showed her self prettily
resolved to be content for God his sake and his secret Purposes, to obey the
Admonishment.

D. Note, Because I have found so much halting and untruth in E. K. his reports
to me made, of the spiritual Creatures, where I have not been present at an
Action: and April 20.
because his memory may fail him, and because he was subject to ill tempters, I
believe so much hereof as shall by better trial be found true, or conformable
to truth.

D. Note..... E.K. had this day diverse apparitions unto him in his own Chamber,
and instructions in diverse matters which he regarded not, but remained still in
his purpose of utterly discrediting those Creatures, and not to have any more
to do with them. But among diverse apparitions he noted this of one that said
unto him.

..... Join Enoch his Tables.

..... Give every place his running number.

E.K. What mean you by places?

..... The squares. Which done, refer every letter in the Table to his number,
and so read what I will, for this is the last time I will admonish you.

E.K. A man stands in the Air in a fiery Globe of my height; accompanied
with some hundred of Puppets: on the one side of him stands a woman, and
about her are four Clouds all white.

The man upon a white Triangle D showed these Numbers with spaces, as you see
following.

D 49 466 495 46 395 152 228 218 597 63 607 254 418 409 410 502 -- -- 566 82
505 550 306 228 423 -- -- 119 473 179 -- 320 603 264 517 141 214 491 149 312
363 22 261 390 173 24 247 403 59 414 197 338 271 370 494 366 -- 367 -- -- --
174 -- 175 411 177 -- 89 97 517 239 272 -- 273 603 65 243 116 -- 416 604 -- 80
103 182 -- 150 11 552 -- 460 225 -- 226 414 46 -- 405 -- 441 -- 267 295 170 163
250 -- 251 395 228 46 -- 175 -- 25 171 586 467 331 163 606 73 83 519 97 418 466
-- -- -- 131 -- 132 53 269 311 490 418 -- -- 620 214 59 244 222 -- 251 -- 253
68 400 150 53 4 277 -- 23 253 32 98 39 418 -- 303 -- 304 444 75 395 196 96 --
355 178 538 224 188 401 496 497 586 156 512 331 592 20 545 46 20 136 90 116 18
55 338 -- D. I perceive that commonly one is to be abated of the number.
287 43 7 290 355 -- -- -- -- 335 618 604 25 123 244 408 20 610 17 433 72 452
501 480 -- 151 340 424 597 182 165 197 195 97 -- 98 93 -- 314 401 52 285 495 --
511 335 284 175 621 170 544 -- 352 295 --

D. Note: When E. K. had showed me this Note, I by and by brought forth my book
of Enoch his Tables, and found the four letters r T b d to be the four first
letters of the four principal squares standing about the black Cross: and that
here they were to be placed otherwise than as I had set them. And in the first
placing of them together, I remember that I had doubt how to join them; for
they were given apart each by themselves.

Secondly, I found out the 4 Characters; saving they were inversed somewhat,
and one of them closed: whereof I found none like, but very near. These
Characters were of every square one.

Thirdly, I did take these numbers contained between the lines (some more and
some fewer) to be words to be gathered out of the Table of letters: so many
words as were distinct companies of numbers; it is to wit, 41.

Hereupon we began to number the squares wherein the letters stood in Enochs
Tables as I had them, but we could not exactly find the words, but somewhat
near. Hereupon being tired, and desirous to know the sense of that Cipher, we
left off till after supper, and then we assayed again: but we could not bolt it
out, though we knew very near what was to be done by the instruction of a
spiritual Voice, now and then helping us toward the practice.

At length E. K. was willed to go down into his Chamber, and I did remain still
at our Dineing Table till his return, which was within an hour or somewhat
more. And at his return this he brought in writing.

My applying of Numbers for more easy reckoning.
r D. r z I l a f a y t l p a t a o a d v p t d n I m 24 a r d z a I d p a l a
m a a b c o o r o m e b b 48 c o o n s a r e y a v b t o g c o n x m a l g m 72
t o I t t z o p a c o c n h o d d I a l c a o o 96 s I g a s o m r b z n b p a
t a x I o v s p s n 120 f m o n d a t d I a r I s a a I x a a r v r o I 144 o r
o I b a h a o z p I m p h a r s l g a I o l 168 t n a b r v I x g a s d m a m g
l o I n l I r x 192 o I I I t T p a l o a I o l a a d n g a t a p a 216 a b a m
o o o a c v c a p a l c o I d x p a c n 240 n a o c o t T n p r n t n d a z n z
I v a a s a 264 o c a n m a g o t r r I I I d p o n s d a s p I 288 s h I a l r
a p m z o x x r I n h t a r n d I (...) b o a z a r o p h a r a d o n p a t d a
n o a a 336 v n n a x o p s o n d n o l o a g e o o b a v a 360 a I g r u n o o
m a g g o p a m n o v g m d n m 384 o r p m n I n g b e a l a p l s t e d e c a
o p 408 r s o n I z I r l e m v s c m I o o n a m l o x 432 I z I n r c z I a m
h l v a v s g d l v r I a p 456 m o r d I a l h c t g a o I p t e a a p d o c e
480 o c a n c h I a s o m t x s v a c N r z I r z a 504 a r b I Z m I I l p I z
s I o d a o I n r z f m 528 o p a n a l a m s m a p d a l t t d n a d I r e 552
d o l o p I n I a n b a d I x o m o n s I o s p 576 r x p a o c S I z I x p o o
d x z I a p a n l I 600 a x t I r v a s t r I m r g o a n n q a c r a r 624

..... The black Cross is right, and needs no mending. But thus much I do, to
let thee understand, that thou may consider thy self to be a man: And
beneath this understanding, unless thou submit all into the hands of God, for
his sake; who else leaving you, all naked, provideth in his creatures to his
own glory.

..... Cara tibi uxor, carior tibi sapientia, charissimis tibi ego sum. Electus
tremis, and hesitando peccas: Noli igitur ad genium, and carmen sapere; sed
obtempera mihi: ductor enim tuus sum and author spiritus omnium. Hec omnia a me
sunt, and licita vobis.

..... I admonish you as the children of God, to consider your vocation, and the
love of God toward you; and not to prefer your reason before the wisdom of
the highest, whose mercy is so great toward you, That you are chosen from the
number of men to walk with him, and to understand his mysteries, and with all
to execute his justice and praise throughout the Nations and people of the
earth. Consider that if he find you obstinate, the plagues of heinous sinners,
and contemners of the gifts of God shall fall upon you, to your great
overthrow: This is the last time of your trial. Therefore show your selves
lovers of him that has led you, and covered you with a mighty shield: Or
shortly look for the reward of such, as have contemned the Wisdom and Majesty
of the Highest.

I Raphael, counsel you to make a Covenant with the Highest, and to esteem his
wings more then your own lives.

D. When E. K. had brought me these things, I greatly rejoiced in spirit, and
was utterly resolved to obey this new Doctrine to us, peculiarly, of all people
of the world enjoined. And after some little discourse and conference hereof,
we went to bed, this 20. 20. day of April, at night.

Aprilis 21.
D. Thus, am I resolved, O Almighty God, as concerning the case, so hard to
flesh and blood, to be resolved in, thus: And thus I desire, that we all four,
might with one mind and consent, offer and present unto thee, this writing as
a Vow, Promise, and Covenant, if it so please thy divine majesty to accept it.

WE four (whose heads appeared under one Chrystalline Crown, in one pillar
united, and enclosed) do most humbly and heartily thank thee, O Almighty God
(our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier) for all thy mercies and benefits
hitherto received, in our persons, and in them that appertain unto us: And at
this present, do faithfully and sincerely confess, and acknowledge, that thy
profound wisdom in this most new and strange doctrine (among Christians)
propounded, commended, and enjoined unto us four only, is above our humane
reason, and Christian profession to like of: For that in outward show of words,
it seems to us expressly to be contrary to the purity and chastity, which of
us, and all Christians, thy followers, is exactly required. Notwithstanding, we
will, herein, captivate, and tread under-foot all our humane timorous doubting
of any inconvenience, which shall, or may fall upon us, or follow us in this
world, or in the world to come, in respect or by reason of our embracing of
this Doctrine, listened unto, of us, as delivered from our true and living God,
the Creator of heaven and earth; who only has the true original power and
Authority of sins releasing and discharging: And whose pardoning, and not
imputing of fin unto us, through our lively faith in the most worthy merit, and
precious blood of the Lamb Immaculate, shed for us, is and shall be our
justification and salvation. We, therefore (according to blessed Raphael his
counsel last given) most humbly and sincerely require thy Divine Majesty, to
accept this our Covenant with thee (for that, thy merciful promises made unto
us, may be to us performed; and thy divine purposes in us and by us, may be
furthered, and advanced and fulfilled.) That, as we acknowledge thy divine
wisdom and grace offered unto us in this thy last mystical Admonishment: And
do most earnestly will us to accept the same, as lawful and just with thee;
Which Admonishment stands upon two parts: That is to wit, upon our true
Christian charity spiritual between us four, and also upon the Matrimonial
license and liberty, indifferently among us four to be used: So we the same
four (which hereunto will subscribe) covenant with thy Divine Majesty, upon the
two principal respects before rehearsed, truly and unfainedly to accept and
perform henceforward amongst us four, in word, thought and deed, Christian
charity, and perfect friendship, and all that belongs thereto: And as for the
Matrimonial-like license, and liberty, we accept and allow of it, and promise
unto thee (O our God) to fulfill the same, in such sort, as the godly are
permitted to fulfill, and have been by diverse testimonies commended for, and by
Divine doctrine willed to fulfill, in Matrimonial conversation, whenever thy
motions and allurements (Matrimonial-like) shall draw and persuade any couple
of us. Beseeching thee, as thou art the only true Almighty and Everlasting
God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, Thou will, in thy infinite mercies, not
impute it unto us for sin, blindness, rashness, or presumption, being not
accepted, done, or performed upon carnal lust, or wanton concupiscence; But by
the way of Abraham-like faith and obedience, unto thee, our God, our Leader,
Teacher, Protector and Justifier, now and for ever. And hereunto we call the
holy Heavens to be witnesses, for thy honor and glory (O Almighty God) and our
discharge, now and for ever. Amen.

I Edward Kelly by good and provident (according to the Laws and ordinances of
God) determination and consideration in these former Actions, that is to say,
appearings, shows made, and voices uttered, by the within named in this Book,
and the rest whatsoever Spirits have from the beginning thereof (which at large
by the Records appears) not only doubted and disliked their insinuations and
doctrine uttered, but also diverse and sundry times (as coveting to eschew and
avoid the danger and inconvenience that might either by them, their selves, or
the drift of their doctrine ensue, or to my indamagement diverse ways, happen)
sought to depart from the exercises thereof: and withal boldly (as the servant
of the Son of God) inveighed against them: urging them to depart, or render
better reason of their unknown and uncredible words and speeches delivered; and
withal often and sundry times friendly exhorted the Right Worshipful Master
JOHN DEE (the chief follower thereof) as also in the Records appears, to
regard his souls health, the good proceeding of his wordly credit (which
through Europe is great) the better maintenance to come of his wife and
children, to beware of them, and withal to give them over: wherein although I
friendly and brotherly labored, my labor seemed to be lost and counsel of him
despised, and withal was urged with replies to the contrary by him made, and
promises, in that case, of the loss of his souls health, if they were not of
God: Whereunto upon as it were some farther taste of them, or opinion grounded
upon the frailty of zeal, he ceased not also to pawn unto me his soul, etc.
which his persuasions were the chief and only cause of my this so long
proceeding with them: And now also at this instant, and before a few days
having manifest occasion to think they were the servants of Satan, and the
children of darkness; because they manifestly urged and commanded in the name
of God a Doctrine Damnable, and contrary to the Laws of God, his Commandments,
and Gospel by our Savior Christ as a Touchstone to us left and delivered, did
openly unto them dislike their proceeding, and brotherly admonished the said
Worshipful, and my good friend Mr. JOHN DEE to beware of them: And now having
just occasion to determine what they were, to consider all these things before
mentioned by me, and wisely to leave them; and the rather because of
themselves, they (as that by their own words appears) upon our not following
that Doctrine delivered, gave unto us a Quietus est, or pasport of freedom:
But the Books being brought forth April 22. at night.
, after some discourse therein, after a day or two had, and their words perused
spoken heretofore, did as it were (because of the possible verity thereof, Deo
enim omnia sunt possibilia) gave us cause of further deliberation: so that
thereby, I did partly of my self, and partly by the true meaning of the said
Mr. DEE in the receiving of them, as from God; and after a sort by the zeal I
saw him bear unto the true worship and glory of God to be (as that was by them,
promised) by us promoted, descend from my self, and condescend unto his opinion
and determination, giving over all reason, or whatsoever for the love of God:
But the women disliked utterly this last Doctrine, The women.
and consulting amongst themselves gave us this answer, the former actions did
nothing offend them but much comforted them: and therefore this last, not
agreeing with the rest (which they think to be according to the good will and
wholesome Law of God) makes them to fear, because it expressly is contrary to
the Commandment of God: And thereupon desiring God not to be offended with
their ignorance, required another action for better information herein; in the
mean, vowing, fasting, and praying, Mrs. DEE has covenanted with God to
abstain from the eating of fish and flesh until An actiou required by the
women.
his Divine Majesty satisfy their minds according to his Laws established,
and throughout all Christendom received. To this their request of having an
action, I absolutely answer, that my simplicity before the Highest is such as I
trust will excuse me: And because the sum of this Doctrine, given in his
name, does require obedience which I have (as is before written) offered, I
think my self discharged: And therefore have no farther cause to hazard my
self any more in any action. Wherefore I answer that if it be lawful for them
to call this Doctrine in question, it is more lawful for me to doubt of greater
perril; considering that to come where we are absolutely answered were folly,
and might redound unto my great inconvenience. Therefore beseeching God to have
mercy upon me, and to satisfy their Petitions, doubts and vows, I finally
answer, that I will from this day forward meddle no more herein. 22. of April,
1587.

By me EDWARD KELLY.


Aprilis 24. Trebonae. Aprilis 24. Friday.

D. PRayers to God made in respect of this strange and new doctrine, requiring
his Divine Majesty to be merciful unto us, and to give us wisdom and faith that
we may herein please him; and that we cannot find how we may do the thing
required, being contrary to the Laws of Moses, Christ, his Church, and of all
Nations. Therefore seeing God is not contrary to himself, we desired that we
might not be contrary to him or his Laws, etc.

D. Not long, lo, there appeared a great flame of fire in the principal Stone,
(both standing on the Table before E. K.) which thing though he told me, I made
no end of my Prayer to God. And behold, suddenly one seemed to come in at the
south window of the Chapel, right against E. K. (But before that, the stone
was heaved up an handful high, and set down again well, which thing E. K.
thought did signify some strange matter toward.) Then after, the man that came
in at the window seemed to have his nether parts in a cloud, and with
spred-abroad arms to come toward E. K. At which sight he shrinked back
somewhat, and then that Creature took up between both his hands the stone and
frame of gold, and mounted up away as he came.. E. K. catched at it, but he
could not touch it. At which thing being so taken away, and at the sight
thereof E. K. was in a great fear and trembling, and had tremorem cordis for a
while. But I was very glad and well pleased.

Here appears a fire in this other stone also, and a man in the fire, with
flaxen hair hanging down upon him, and is naked unto his Paps; and seems to
have spots of blood upon him. He spoke, and said as follows.

If I had intended to have overthrown you, or brought you to confusion, or
suffered you to be (...).
led into temptation beyond your strength and power, then had the Seas long ago
swallowed you. Yea, there had not a soul lived amongst you.

But the law and tidings (to mankind) of gladness, are both grounded in me, I
am the Beginning The Law and the Gospel.
and the Ending: And behold, happy is he that delights in me, for in me is
truth and understanding. Whatsoever you have received, you have received of me;
and without me you have received nothing. Behold, I my self was even the figure
of misery and death for your sins. Why (therefore) disdain you to be figured
after me? I will gather the four quarters of the earth together, and they shall
become one.

And as I have made you the figure of two people to come, and amongst them, the
D. and E. K. a figure of (...) people to come.
executors of my Justice: So likewise have I sanctified you in an holy
Ordinance, giving you the first fruits of the time to come. Happy is he that is
a Serpent in the wilderness hanged up upon the Cross, being the will and figure
of my determination, and Kingdom to come: I am even in the doors; and I will
overthrow all flesh. I will no more delight in the sons of men.

* Contrary to my self, I teach you nothing. D. * He answers to a phrase of
my prayer or discourse. This doctrine is not to be published to any man. Note.
Un us pastor and unum (...). Conatus (...). Moses.


For this Doctrine is not to be published to mortal men: but is given unto you,
to manifest your faith, and to make you worthy in the sight of the heavens, for
believing in me of your vocation to come.

Therefore I say unto you, Rejoice, and be not careful for to morrow: for I,
even I, have provided for you: Sin no more.

Behold! None of the Orders, either of Heaven or Earth, are armed to open their
mouths in my Name, teaching or opening this Doctrine, unless it were of me,
for I am the First and the Last. And I will be Shepherd over all, that the
Kingdom of my Father may come, and that my Spirit may be upon all flesh, where
there shall be no law, nor need of light: I my self am their lanthorn for ever.

And behold, I will be as a Rock between you and the teeth of Leviathan, which
seeks to set you asunder, and to bring you to confusion.

And I am, and am holy, and holiness it self: Out of me comes no unclean thing.

For even as the time of Moses was wonderful to all the Gentiles, even so shall
those days to come be unto the Nations and Kings of the earth. I am a law for
ever. And behold, power is given unto me from above: And I have visited the
earth, and have thrown my curse Sterilit as Terrae.
upon her: And lo, she shall become barren.

He that fasteth and prays does but that which is commanded: He that also
fulfilleth (...) will, is justified before me: for who is he that raises up,
or who is he that casts down? Yea, even I it is that have taken you four
Trees out of the forest of the world, and have covered The show of 4 trees,
what it means. Pectorale cum (...) and Thummim. Number.
you hitherto with my wings. And behold, this that is taken away shall be
restored again to you with more power. And Might shall be in it, and a
brestplate unto you, of Judgment and Knowledge.

And if there be any of you that seeks a Miracle at my hands, and believes
in my words, let him or her present themselves here the next Monday, with the
rest, and he shall perceive that I was the Judge of Abiram, and the God of
Abraham: Walk before me as the sous of my Father, in all righteousness. And
follow you that which you call unrighteousness even with gladness: for I can
make you whiter then snow.

Your unity and knitting together is the end and consummation of the beginning
of Our unity of what importance it is: est finis (...) futurae. The ancient
token and watchword foreshewed us: Arise, come and see my judgments.
my harvest. I will not dally with you, but I will be mighty in deed amongst
you. And lo, I will shortly open your eyes, and you shall see: And I will say,
ARISE, and you shall go out. What I am, I am.

E. K. The flame and all is disappeared.

D. Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, sicut erat in principio, and
nunc, and in sempiterna saeculorum saecula. Amen.

E. K.

..... said after, that his body had in it like a fiery heat, even from his
breast down unto all his parts, his privities and thighs.

Deo Omnipotenti, Misericordi and Regi seculorum sit omnis laus, honor and
gloria nunc and semper.

Amen.
J. D. E. K. J. D. J. K.
WE four (whose heads appeared under one Chrystalline Crown, and in one pillar
Aprilis 18. ann. 1587.
united and enclosed) do most (...) and heartily thank thee (O Almigh y God,
our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier) for all thy mercies and benefits (...)
received in our own persons, and in them that appertain unto us: And at this
present do faithfully and sincerely confess and acknowledge, that thy profound
wisdom in this most new and strange Doctrine (among Christians) propounded,
commended and enjoined unto us four only, is above our humane Reason, and our
Catholic Christian Profession to like of: for that, in outward show of words,
it seems to us expressly to be contrary to the purity and (...) which of us
and all Christians (thy followers) is exactly required. No withstanding, we
will for thy sake herein captivate and tread under foot all our humane timorous
doubting of any inconvenience which shall or may fall upon us, or follow us (in
this world, or in the world to come) in respect, or by reason of our embracing
of this Doctrine, listened unto of us, as delivered from thee, our true and
living God, the Creator of heaven and earth, who only have the true original
power and authority of sins releasing and discharging; and whose pardoning, or
not imputing of sin (...) us, through our lively faith in the most worthy Merit
and precious Blood of thy Lamb immaculate, shed for us, is and shall be our
Justification and Salvation. We therefore, (according to blessed Raphael his
counsel lately given) most humbly and sincerely require Aprilis 20. no (...)
profunda
thy divine Majesty to accept this our Covenant with thee (to the intent that
all thy merciful and gracious promises made unto us four, and any of us, may be
to us performed: and also that thy divine purposes in us, and by us, may be
furthered, advanced and fulfilled) That as we acknowledge thy divine wisdom and
grace opened unto us in this thy last mystical Admonishment of universal unity
to be between us: And do most instantly and earnestly will us to accept and
use the same, as both mystically most needful, and also lawful and just with
thee: (which Admonishment stands upon two parts; that is to wit, upon true
and consummate Christian Charity between us four unviolably to be kept. And
also upon the New Matrimonial-like license and liberty indifferently amongst us
four to be used:) So we the same four abovenamed (which hereunto will also
subscribe our Names) do this day Covenant with thy Divine Majesty (besides all
other respects, chiefly upon the two principal intents and respects Before at
this mark.
before here rehearsed) truly and unfeignedly to accept and perform henceforward
amongst us four (in word, thought and deed, to the uttermost and best of our
power) a perfect unity, and with incomparable true love and good Christian
Charity, friendship, imparting and communicating each unto other, all and
whatsoever we have or shall have hereafter during our lives. And as for the
Matrimonial-like license, we accept and allow of it: And promise unto thee (O
our God, the Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth) to fulfill the same in such
(...) the go (...) are permitted to fulfill, and have been (by diverse
testimonies) commended for, and by divine Doctrine willed to fulfill in
Matrimonial-like conversation, whenever thy (...) and allurements
Matrimonial-like shall draw and persuade any couple of us thereunto: Beseeching
thee, as thou art the only, true Almighty and everlasting God, Creator of
heaven and earth, Thou will in thy infinite mercies not impute it unto us for
sin, blindness, rashness or presumption; being not accepted, done or performed
of us upon carnal lust, or wanton concupiscence, but by the way of Abraham-like
faith and obedience unto thee our God, our Leader, Teacher, Protector and
Justifier, now and for ever. And hereunto we most humbly and faithfully require
thy Divine Majesty to be our witness: And moreover we call thy holy Angels, and
to bear record for thy honor and glory, and for our discharge, now and for
ever. And for a further consummation of this New Covenant on our behalf, (by
thy will and permission) made with thee (the God of heaven and earth) we the
same four first notified, and particularly and vulgarly named John Dee, Edward
Kelley, Jane Dee, and Jone Kelley, have faithfully, obediently, willingly and
wittingly subscribed our Names with our own hands day of May, Anno 1587. In
Trebon Castle.

And finally, as thou have warned us (O God) that this doctrine and doings
should unto no mortal man else be disclosed, but among us only the abovenamed
four to be kept most secret: and have said, that whosoever of us should by any
means disclose the same, and he also or she to whom the same should be
disclosed, should presently and immediately be stricken dead by thy Divine
power: So we all and every of us four do request thee most earnestly, and
Covenant with thee as our God, that so all this doctrine and doing may be kept
most hid and secret; and also that the sudden and immediate bodily death may
light and fall on the discloser, and on him or her to whom the same doctrine or
doing any manner of way shall be disclosed or known. Amen, Amen, Amen.

JOHN DEE.

Note and remember, That on Sunday the third of May, Ann. 1587. (by the new
account) I John Dee, Edward Kelley, and our two wives, covenanted with God, and
subscribed the same, for indissoluble and inviolable unities, charity and
friendship keeping between us four, and all things between us to be common, as
God by sundry means willed us to do. Ad Dei honorem, laudem and gloriam in fide
and obedientia Factum esto.

Amen.
1587. Trebonae, in the fine Chapel. May 6. Wednesday, a Meridie.

D. THe foresaid Covenant being framed by me John Dee, as near as I could
according to the intent and faith of us required, to be notified and declared
by the works of unity both spiritual and corporal. Now it was by the women as
by our selves thought necessary to understand the will of God and his good
pleasure, Whether this Covenant and form of words performed, is and will be
acceptable, and according to the well liking of his Divine Majesty: And that
hereupon, the act of corporal knowledge being performed on both our parts, It
will please his Divine Majesty to seal and warrant unto us most certainly and
speedily all his Divine, Merciful and bountiful Promises and Blessings; and
also promises us wisdom, knowledge, ability and power to execute his justice,
and declare and demonstrate his infallible verity amongst men, to his honor
and glory.

Hereupon E.K. and I went to the Chapel to the South Table. D. To this intent
I prayed to the Almighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, fatherly, favorably
and mercifully to regard the singleness and straits of my heart, desiring him
to increase the faith, and to open the eyes of my heart, that I may see Opera
digitorum and mirabilia ejus, nobis sicuti necessaria, for his service and
glory, and for the confusion and overthrow of his enemies. Amen.

I read over the Covenant ( verbatim) before the Divine Majesty, and his holy
Angels.

Pausa horae.
E. K. Here appears Madimi.

As a thing like a head with three eyes comes upon her head, and one of the
eyes seem to come one into another.

Mad...... Pepigistis.

D. Pepigimus.

Ratum est: perumpite sunt vobis omnia communia.

Dei, non hominis estote: Promissa quae sunt, possidete: Vobis destinata, vera
sunt: AEternus sum.

E. K. She is gone.

E.K. My thought an infinite number of spiritual Creatures stood afar off
behind her like as in an half Moon.

D. Illi qui AEternus est Omnipotens, Sapiens, Bonus, Verus, Misericors, and
rerum omnium Creator, Redemptor noster and Illuminator omnium (lumine vero
Collustratoru) Sit omnis gratiarum actio, laus, benedictio, honor and gloria:
Nunc and in sempiterna saeculorum saecula.

Amen.
1587. Trebonae.
PReces ad Dominum Creatorem Cali and terrae, etc. Then as concerning the
Covenant Wednesday morning (...) 20.
which was made subscribed and delivered in, but the next day required again of
Mr. E.K. and in his wifes name to put out his name, etc. But when he had it, he
cut it into equal parts; keeping that half wherein his subscription and his
wifes were, and delivered unto me, the other half but after a few days desired
to have the sight and reading of both together; and then he kept the other part
from me also: But afterward Madimi did with her finger draw on the two papers
make them whole again, etc. and then she gave the print of my Characters, and
said a red Circle should always appear in the Stone to all men's sight, etc.

E. K. There is here a great Globe of fire hanging in the top of (...) Christus.
the Stone; and in the Globe a man standing with a purple Robe like Christ, I
cannot well perceive his face.

..... Who sits upon the Cherubins, and is carried abroad with their wings:
Who is he that is lifted up in thunders, and in the voice of many waters
exalted and magnified through the power of a Seraphin (which is the power of
him that made him?) Who is he that stretches out his arms and imbraceth all
things? Who is he that is not, and is? Who is he that numbreth the Stars as the
letters of a V lumne? or enters down into the waves? In the multitude of his
wonders who is he that makes his Whelps there, where the Sea glideth, and
keeps them in Chains, till the day of his stretch-forth power come? Who is he
that makes his habitation in the Sun, or fills the Moon with a perpetual
River? Who is he that has made Winter and Summer, times and seasons? Who is he
that is the Lord of all beasts and fowls? Who is he that has made you of
nothing? even he it is that has led you out, even he it is that has carried
you to the Seas even he it is, that has kept you sleeping, and preserved you
waking: Even he it is that has (...) his thunders underneath your and has
harnished you.

With the (...) of (...) against the people of Ethan, yea even he it is (I say)
that is, and lives for ever, and has provided you as the chiefest reapers,
yea and overseers of his harvest, which has made you a promise: That the
Kings of the earth shall be enriched by you, and has made you free from all
men, against the day when you shall see me. But O you of little faith and
understanding, O, I say, you of little faith and understanding, how long will
you be your own masters, nay your own servants, how long do you contemn, the
profound and unspeakable floods of my wisdom, and foreknowledge in you.

How long (I say) will you run after your own imaginations and contemn the
present counsels which I give you, hindering the power that is ready to fall
upon you, O (...) of little faith and understanding.

Behold I have prepared a banquet for you, and have brought you even unto the
doors; but because you smell not the feast you disdain to enter, happy is he
that enters in through me: For I am the very gate to all felicity and joy, and
without me is nothing: Are you more discreet then I am wise? or more honest
than I am holy? Righteousness, and righteousness is that, which is rewarded
with honor. Behold I made all things, Is it not contrary to Nature, that the
lights of (...).
heaven should stand: Why therefore at the prayer of the Carpter call you upon
the Sun in my name; Calling (I say) upon my name did the Sun stand still.
Rebuke him therefore if he has done amiss; or teach him, why he so abused
Nature, O you wretches, I say unto you, you are the last of the beginning of
the times to come, so figured by my determination and eternal purpose: And
Figuration
behold the Son and Moon shall stand still, even at your voices, and the
Mountains shall bring themselves together before the face of man, at your
commandment, that the people and Kings of the earth may say, Lo this is the
finger of him that has created all things.

Be therefore obedient and full of faith.

And see that all things be one amongst you, and cleave not asunder, lest I
take vengeance All things one.
upon you, for behold Satan has power to cast you asunder, but a little he
shouldbe faithful therefore, and provident, be watchful, and take heed for you
have made a Covenant; and behold it is written before my face in heaven, even
as whatsoever I have spoken unto you, is laid up in my treasures. Take heed
that you run neither to the right hand, neither to the left; A Covenant
but that you cast away your selves for me: As I humbled my self to death,
wherein the unity between my Congregation and me, was before my Father
perpetually sealed, whereby I am always present with such as put their trust
in me. Even so as the East and the West, the North, and the South, Esau and
Jacob, shall be gathered together through the power I will give you, and united
Potentia magna ex deo futura.
for ever in the Kingdom of my Father which is to come, in one holy and
eternal fellowship, so be you contented also to be the figures of the things
that are to come by you, that it may be a perpetual testimony before the
heavens, and before men, of your perfect and sound faith: Figures.
And thou, even thou that have tore in pieces even this morning again this
Covenant which thou have made with me, Behold the time shall come that thou
shall be torn in pieces thy self, and I will turn even my face away from thee
for a time: And even as thou have obstinately and ignorantly, blasphemed the
company of my holy messagers, even so shall the people of the earth obstinately
and ignorantly throw thee out from Town to Town: And even as thou have done
unto me, even so shall men do unto thee. But because thy mind was inwardly
never to forsake me, even so shall thou never be forsaken of me, but I will
return again unto thee. And now behold, thou have made a bargain, and behold
thou think to take thee up a new dwelling place, and thou shall not do so:
But who so receives thee into his house shall as truly as I am, both he and
his family fink down into the very lake of hell. But before thou enter in, I
will by dreams and visions warn him; therefore run not abroad: Take heed of the
Tempter, Thou made a Covenant with me, which thou can not in breaking of the
papers put out; for my register is eternal: And those that bear witness before
me are the compass of my wings.

And lo behold Carpio has for his former intent of separating you, cut off the
day of his Father, and is become fatherless: Behold even shortly shall his
mother perish also.

And, if hereafter, he attempt any farther, I will throw the vengeance of
Justice upon him, that he shall be a laughing stock to the people amongst which
he was born: Woe be unto them that rises up against me.

..... After a while I come again.

E. K: I thought we should have nothing else, but

D. I read this over to E.K.

E. K. He is here again.

He that pawneth This was said because I had pawned my soul, upon my avouching
the spiritual creatures which have dealt with us, to be of God and good: which
my bargain E. K. had by word and writing, disdainfully charged, and of late
threatened mewithall. The secret servants for God. Sapientia and potentia in Deo.
his soul for me, loses it not, and he that dies for me, dies to eternal
life. Behold you shall both as Lambs be brought forth before men in your latter
days, and shall be overthrown and slain, and your bodies tossed to and fro:
But I will revive you again, and will be full of power: And you shall be
comforted with the joys of your brethren, for I have many that secretly serve
me, and when you have showed your obedience, the second day after, come here
again before me; for I will lead you into the way of Knowledge and
Understanding: And Judgment and Wisdom shall be upon you, and shall be
restored unto you: And you shall grow every day, wise and mighty in me.

E. K. He is gone: and in going he made a Cross (toward us) of blessing.

Rerum omni Creatori Omnipotenti, Misericordi and Justo, Domino nostro and Deo
nostro, sit omnis laus, honor, gloria, gratiarum actio and Jubilatio: Nunc and
in sempiterna saeculorum saecula. Amen.

I can, and by our two Consents, and at the request of Jane D... unto the
women. And Mr. E.K. hereupon said to his wife, That his boots were now put off,
and changed his purpose of going away with Carpio now. God confirm his mind in
all good purposes according Carpio.
to the well-pleasing of the Highest. Amen.

..... D..... As I, and E.K. walked out at the new stairs, into the new
Orchardward Friday afternoon about four of the clock.
along the little River to view the small fish, and returning to the fore
stairs again, E.K. saw twain as high as my son Arthur fighting by the River
side with swords; and the one said to the other, thou have beguiled me: Then I
at length, said unto them, Can I take up the matter between you? one said yea
that you can: in what is it quoth I? Then said he, I sent a thing to thy wife
by my man, and this fellow has taken it from him. They fought fore, and at
length, he that had it was wounded in the thigh, and it seemed to bleed.
Afterward he that was wounded, did bring a yellow square thing out of his
bosom; then I guessed it to be my Stone that was taken away. The other said
unto him, let it be carried, suddenly he seemed to have been out of sight, and
to be come again; he threatened Lapi dis sancti restitutio.
the other that had wounded him, and said he would be even with him. The other
said, Have thou laid it under the right pillow of the bed where his wife lay
yesternight.

At length they both went (one after another) into a little Willow tree body on
the right hand next the new stairs into the garden; the tree seemed to cleave,
or open, and they to go in.

Hereupon we went away: And I coming to my Chamber, found my wife lying upon
her bed (where I lay yesternight) and there I lifted up the right pillow, upon
which she lay resting herself (being not well at ease) And in manner under her
shoulders there I found my precious Stone, that was taken away by Madimi:
Whereat E. K. greatly wondered, doubting the verity of the show. But I and my
wife rejoiced, tkanking God.

Saturday May 23. Mane circa 9.
PReces ad Deum fundebantur, etc. And then we requested that the act of
obedience performed (according to our faith conceived of our vocation, from the
Almighty and Eternal God of heaven and earth) might be accepted: And that
henceforward we might be instructed in the understanding and practice of
wisdom, both such as already we have received some introductions Mystical, and
also of all other what the Almighty God shall deem meet for us to know, and
execute for his honor and glory, etc.

D E. K. Took Pen and Ink, and wrote the request here adjoined; and he read it
to me, and he requested me to read it to the Divine Majesty; and so I did, and
hereupon we waited both to the first my prayer and to this Petition, the Divine
answer.

D. Omnipotens sempiterne, vere and vive Deus mittas lucem tuam and veritatem
tuam ut ipsae nos ducant and perducant admontem, sanctum Syon, ex hac valle
miseriae and ad Celestem tuam Jerusalem. Amen.

E. K. From the beginning of this our coming, there appeared a purple Circle as
big as a star in the Circumference of the holy Stone, which yesterday was
brought again: And that it should so be, Madimi had forewarned E. K. when she
showed it unto him, when also she gave the prints of the letters of the
backside of the bottom of the gold frame of it.

..... E. K. There appears here a great man all in bright Equus albus
harness sitting upon a white horse: he has a spear all fiery in his left
hand, he now puts into his right hand: he has a long sword by his side: he
has also a target hanging on his back, it seems to be of steel: It hangs
from his neck by a blue lace; it comes up behind him as high as the top of his
head. The horse is milk white, all studded with white: a very comely horse it
is. The man is in complete harness, the top of his helmet has a sharp form.

Upon his Target, are many Cherubins, as it were painted in Circles: there is
one in the middle: About it as a Circle with six in it, and then a Circle with
eight, and then a great Circle with ten in it, and in the greatest are twenty;
and about the Circle of twenty Sum.
are seven parts: at each of which points is a Cherubin; Their faces be like
burning gold, their wings be more brighter and as it were their wings coming
over their heads do Cherubin.
not touch together. His horse is also harnished before and behind. The horse
legs behind are harnished as with boots marveilously contrived, for defense as
it were of his hind legs.

E. K. He is ridden away, he seems to ride through a great field.

E. K. Here is now come Madimi.

E. K. She is gone into the field, that way which he rode.

E. K. Here is another, like a woman all in green.

E. K. Here comes another woman: All her attire is like beaten gold; she has
on her forehead a Cross crystal, her neck and breast are bare unto under her
dugs: She has a girdle of beaten gold slackly buckled unto her with a pendant
of gold down to the ground.

I am the Daughter of Fortitude, and ravished every hour, from my youth. For
behold, I am Understanding, and Science dwells in me; and the heavens oppress
me, they covet and desire me with infinite appetite: few or none that are
earthly have embraced me, for I am shadowed with the Circle of the Stone, and
covered with the morning Clouds. My feet are swifter than the winds, and my
hands are sweeter than the morning dew. My garments are from the beginning, and
my dwelling place is in my self. The Lion knows not where I walk, neither do
the beasts of the field understand me. I am defloured, and yet a virgin: I
sanctify, and am not sanctified. Happy is he that imbraceth me: for in the
night season I am sweet, and in the day full of pleasure. My company is a
harmony of many Cymbals, and my lips sweeter than health it self. I am a harlot
for such as ravish me, and a virgin with such as know me not: For lo, I am
loved of many, and I am a lover to many; and as many as come unto me as they
should do, have entertainment. Purge your streets, O ye sons of men, and wash
your houses clean; make your selves holy, and put on righteousness. Cast out
your old strumpets, and burn their clothes; abstain from the company of other
women that are defiled, that are sluttish, and not so handsome and beautiful as
I, and then will I come and dwell amongst you: and behold, I will bring forth
children (...) you, and they shall be the Sons of Comfort. I will open my
garments, and stand naked before you, that your love may be more enflamed
toward me.

As yet, I walk in the Clouds; as yet, I am carrried with the Winds, and cannot
descend unto you for the multitude of your abominations, and the filthy
loathsomness of your dwelling (...). Behold these four, who is he that shall
say, They have sinned? or unto whom shall they The four. D. E. K. I. K. and I.
D. A blessing for obedience according to faith.
make account? Not unto you, O you sons of men, nor unto your children: for
unto the Lord belongs the judgment of his servants.

Now therefore, let the earth give forth her fruit unto you, and let the
Mountains forsake their barrenness (...) your footsteps shall remain. Happy is
he that saluteth you, and cursed is he that holds up his hands against you.
And power shall be given unto you from henceforth to resist your enemies: and
the Lord shall always hear you in the time of your troubles. And I am sent
unto you to play the harlot with you, and am to enrich you with the (...) of
other Preparare nos met debemus. Salutatio prima.
men. Prepare for me, for I come shortly. Provide your Chambers for me, that
they may be sweet and cleanly; for I will make a dewlling place amongst you:
and I will be common with the father and the son, yea and with all them that
truly favors you: for my youth is in her flowers, and my strength is not to
be extinguished with man. Strong am I above and be low, therefore provide for
me: for behold, I now salute you, and let peace be amongst you; for I am the
Daughter of Comfort. Disclose not my secrets unto women, neither let them
understand Secrecy from women.
how sweet I am, for all things belongs not to every one. I come unto you
again.

E. K. She is gone along that green field also.

D. I read it over to our great comfort.

D. We most humbly and heartily thank thee, O God Almighty, the only fountain
of Wisdom, Power, and all goodness: Help us now and ever to be faithful and
fruitful servants to thee, for thy honor and glory. Amen.

E. K. The field appears a very level ground, covered with pretty grass even
to the brinks of the..... It is bright if the Sun light, but I see not the Sun,
but the clear sky over it.

D. Pausa semihora unius.

E. K. Now comes the horseman, and rides by into the field, and so does
Madimi. Now comes the third, and so goes away into the field.

Now comes she that was left here: she stands still: she has A book 3
inches.
a book in her hand covered (as it were) with Moss three inches at the head,
and four inches long, and a finger thick: it has no Clasps; it is plain.

Pausa.

The fourth hour after dinner, repair hither again: And whatsoever you shall
read out of Secrecy required.
this book, receive it kneeling upon your knees; and see that you suffer no
Creature female to enter within this place: Neither shall the things that be
opened unto you, be revealed unto your wives, or unto any Creature as yet: for
I will lie with you a while, and you shall perceive that I am sweet and full of
comfort, and that the Lord is at hand, and that he will shortly visit the
earth, and all his whole Provinces.

E. K. She turns her self into a thousand shapes of all Creatures: (...)
prope est.
and now she is come to her own form again.

She hangs the Book in the air.

Give God thanks, and so depart.

D. All laud, thanks, honor and glory be to our God, our King and Savior, now
and ever.

Amen.
1587. Saturday the same day.
AFter Dinner, about four hours, or somewhat less we resorted to the place.

A voice to E. K. Kneel toward the East; so he kneeled at the table of
Covenant, with his face toward the East; and I at my table opposite to him.

D..... In the Name of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

Recte sapere and intellegere doceto nos (O Dominus) nam sapientia tua, totum
est quod quaerimus

Da verbum tuum in ore nostro and sapientum tuam in cordibus nostris fige.

E. K. The Book remains hanging in the air.

A voice..... Kelly, I know it is troublesome for thee to kneel: Sit. Pausa
magna.

D..... So E. K. rose from kneeling, and did sit.

..... E. K. Now she is here, that last advertised us.

She takes the book and divides it into two parts: and it seems to be two
books: the half cover adjoining to one, and the The book divided.
other half cover belonging to the other, the sides with the covers are toward
me.

..... Wisdom, is a pearceing beam which is the center of the spiritual being
of the holy Spirit, touching from all parts from whence the Divinity sends it
out: and is proper to the soul, or unto substances, that have (...), (...); so
that, whatsoever shall have end, can never attain unto that which is called
Wisdom: Neither can things that are subject to the second death, receive any
such influence, because they are already noted, and marked with the seat of
destruction. Happy is he whom God has made a vessel of salvation; for unto him
belongs joy, and a crown of reward: Adam (your forefather and first paren) in
respect of his Ad (...) Dei factus erat.
creation, that is to say, in respect of his imaginative composition received
no strength, but by the Holy Ghost; for the soul of man is free from all
passions and affections, until it enter into the hody unto the which it is
limited: so that, being neither good nor bad (but apt unto both) he is left, by
Divine providence and permission joined together to the end of the one, or the
other: But wheresoever wisdom dwells, it dwells not with the soul, as any
property thereof, but according to the good will of God, whose mercy concurreth
on every side into him, and takes up a mansion therein to utter out, and
manifest his great goodness: And even as the heavens are glorified continually
with the Spirit of God: So is the s ul of man glorified, that receives
sanctification thereby; for no man is illuminated, that is not sanctified:
neither is there any man perfectly sanctified, that is not illuminated. I speak
this (my brethren) for that you shall understand, That no man did, or can ever
attain to wisdom (that perfect wisdom which I speak of) without he become a
Center in his soul unto the mercies, and good will of God comprehending him,
and dwelling in him, therefore lift up your eyes and see, Call your wits
together, and The conceiving the exposition of our former books. The good will
of God. Adam his knowledge.
mark my words, To teach you, or expound unto you the mysteries of the Books
that you have already received, is not in my power, but in the good will of
God, after whose Image I am: Which good will of God, is the descending of his
holy Spirit abundantly upon you, and into you, opening all your senses, and
making you perfect men: for Adam understood by that grace, and his eyes were
opened so that he saw and know all things that were to his understanding: So
have all those more and less, that have been counted wise, received the gifts
of the Holy Ghost, which sets the soul on man, so on fire that he pierces
into all things, and judges mightily. The Apostles which knew even the
thoughts of men, understood all things, because the holy Spiritamade a dwelling
place in them: even so The Apostles. We.
shall it happen unto you: For you are the chosen of this last days, an such
as shall be full of the blessings of God, and his Spirit shall rest with you
abundantly. Mark therefore what I have to say unto you.

A hundred days are limited unto you during the which time, you shall every
seventh, present your selves in this place, and you shall laud and praise God.
And behold I will be An hundred (...) limited every 7th day. Personal
apparition. The understanding of such things as have before time been delivered
us mystically. Silence until. Power to be given us. (...) an. 1583 mensis die,
of his diverse spotted (...). Note and remember. Entrance inthe 4th. and 5th.
heaven. D O Lord I thank thee that thou have accepted my patience. (...) 30.
The books of Dunstan and the powder.
present amongst you.

And before these days pass, when power is given me so to do, I will enter out
of this Stone unto you and you shall eat up these two books, both the one and
the other: and wisdom shall be divided between you, sufficient to each man.

Then shall your eyes be opened to see and understand all such things as have
been written unto you, and taught you from above. But beware ye take heed, that
you dwell within your selves, and keep the secrets of God, until the time come
that you shall be bid SPEAK: For then shall the Spirit of God be mighty upon
you; so that it shall be said of you, LO were not these, the Sorcerers, and
such as were accounted Vagabonds: Other some shall say, Behold let us take
heed, and let us humble our selves before them: For the Lord of Hoasts is with
them.

And you shall have power in the Heavens, and in the lower bodies: And it shall
be taught you at all times inwardly, even what belongs to the hearts of men:
Then shall thou E. K. have a new coat put on thee, and it shall be all of one
color. Then shall thou D. also have power to open that book, which God has
committed unto thee; but use your selves as men, yea even then remember such as
may receive the mercies and grace of God: And let all peace and unity be
amongst you: For even as the Sun looks into all things from above, so shall
you into all the creatures that live upon the earthy; yea the one of you shall
have his lifted, and shall enter into the fourth or fifth heaven, for unto him
that is worldly knowledge be given; and unto him that has been patient, shall
greater things descend. Notwithstanding both sufficiently satisfied: In the
mean season, The seventh day hence, shall thou bring in such things, as the Lord
has given thee: And in this place they shall be disposed according to the
knowledge that is given me: And herein thou have pleased the Lord; For that
thou have dealed straight, and according to brotherly meaning.

D. Now comes the time that the Whore shall be called before the Highest, and
the tenth Month hence, shall the Turk and the Moscovite make a perpetual league
together, and in the thirteenth month, shall Poland be assaulted, with the
Tartarians, and shall be spoiled: yea even unto the very ribs, so that in the
sixteenth month they shall fall all together from Christ: And the hand of God
shall run in vengeance, vengeance, even through this Kingdom, and through
Germany, and into Italy; and in the 23. Month Rome shall be destroyed, so that
one stone shall not be left standing upon another, and vengeance shall be on
all the earth, and fear upon all people, for the Lord is gone out against them:
They eat and drink, and say, Let us be merry: Woe be unto them, for the know not
the time of their visitation. For lo Justice shall visit them and tread them
under foot: And ^ for a while; that is to say, D. Mense 10. forte mense pro
ann. erit. A Prophecy Mense 13. Poland. Mense 16. Bohemia. Germania. Italia.
An. 1589. Bohemia. Antichristus Until. Revenge.
This wicked triumph. And behold in the North shall rise that Monster, and
shall pass forth with many Miracles, but you seeing all these things shall be
at quietness until such times as it shall be said unto them, Revenge. Happy is
he that is not partaker of the love of such as shall be vexed these latter
days.

E. K. She is gone.

D. I read these over to E. K. To his great comfort.

..... Make an end, I have no more to say

D. Deo nostro Omnipotenti, Patri, Filio, and Spiritui sancto sit omnis laus
gratiarum actio, bonor gloria and Imperium nunc and in sempiterna saeculorum
secula. Amen.

MAgnifici viri fratres and amici Chariss. Hodie hora 9. ante meridiem istae
mihi allatae sunt literae a Domino Schombergio, quae datae sunt 5 Marcii, and
debebat jam devenisse in manus meas antea. Ex quibus intelligo ipsum cum Domino
Holek expect are responsum Munsterbergii. Quandoquidem Omnipotens ille omnium
rerum moderator, and rector vos delegaverit ad hoc ministerium and opus
perficiendum. Ego nihil scio quid agendum, nec ullum meum Consilium eo accedere
potest, ut disponere aliquid possim, sciam aut velim; nisi quod sapientissimo
illi moderatori visum fuerit. Proinde omnia vobis transmitto, Orate sedulo, and
quod placuerit Altissimo and Potntissimo Domino hoc fiat, and me etiam in
omnibus informate and in tantis libenter obedire cupio and volo: Et ita nolim
neque diem istam praetermittere quin statim rursus ad vos transmittam. Interim
vos and meipsum Dei omnipotentis bonitati immensaeque misericordiae commendans.
Dat. Cromoviae, 16 Marcii, Anno 1587.

Vester amicus and frater,

Guilielmus manu propria.

Magnificis viris Domino Joanni Dee and Domino Edvardo Kelleo and ad manus
proprias.

1587. Recepimus tandem Trebonae Aprilis 2. Nos enim a Reichstenio (...) and
rediveramus antequam ad Reichstenium nuncius venit.

(...) Domini Charissimi amici and fratres, ad literas vestras nihil (...)
potui, quandoquidem per suas mihi literas D. Schomberg. de suo and (...) a....
tu significaveras, volui primum quae mihi.... (...). (...) si (...) nova (...)
vel non audita, dominationem vestrain (...) denuo certiorem redderc. Haeri
noctu solus ad me venit D. a (...). relicto socio in monasterio meo. Coroniensi
dimidium ab hinc (...) and de negotiis mihi multa exposuit, de quibus uti
intellexi, ex ipso and (...) Mag. significaverit, Uti potui intelligere, satis
circumspecte and (...) negotia sunt tractata usque huc, and spero etiam
fideliter: Ad (...) respondi, prout sepissime a me intellexistis, and nuper
etiam literis (...) dicenda putabam Dom. vestrae scripsi. Tota res videtur
consistere in adjuvandis aliquibus personis pecuniarum aliquo auxilio, and
prout and scriptum sive.... memoriale mihi tradidit, quod transmitto Dom.
vestris perlegendum and considerandum, and post, mihi remittatur oro.
Charissimi Domini scitis quae sit voluntas Domini, proxima actio and aliae,
(mihi videtur) annuunt ipsos adjutandos, fiat secundum ipsius cujus omnia sunt
voluntate and misericordissima dispositione and expediantur eo celerius, prout
cum Domino Edvardo locuti sumus. Ipsi respondeant Domino altissimo and
potentissimo de fide quam ipsi praestabunt, sin vero aliter visum fuerit
Omnipotenti Domino fiat ita. Rogo Dom. vestras Magn. quam amantissime piis suis
ad Deum orationibus and mediis a Domino vobis traditis and concessis promovete,
and adjuvetis Domini Dei nostri opus and voluntatem excqui.

Socius remansit in monasterio, ut supra dictum, and conclusi cum Domino
Schombergio, ut neque videam neque tractem cum illo, certis de causis, quas
vobis significabit, and a me etiam intelligetis; tamen ut eo sit melius
contentus de duobus vel tribus millibus tallerorum ipsi procurabitur ad quaedam
sibi necessaria comparanda in lucio sperat ipsum been fore contentum pro
tempore modo caetera quae majora sunt propter reliqua ut supra scripsi
procurentur.

Ego non sum ab Imperatore vocatus, sed meam de aliquibus expetivit sua
Majestas sententiam de quibus rescripsi ut decuit.

De action intellexi Dom. vestras paratas ad praescriptum diem esse velle,
been est. Semper nos paratos esse decet and convenit; Ipse benignissime quae in
nobis desunt, sua misericordia and clementia inenarrabili perficiat: Placet
mihi sententia Dom. vestrarum and quae initio and in prooemio actionis
proponere velletis, de quo me informabitis, ad hoc me componam and expectabo
humiliter responsum.

Quae proponenda putabam nulla sunt alia nisi illa.

1. Si Imperator de rebus Polonicis a me quicquid sciscitari vellet, aut
suspicione aliqua de me concepta aut fingendo sibi aliquid quomodo me gerere
debeam.

2. Si Imperator de successione Regni hujus pro fratre aliquid tractare vellet
quomodo me gerere debeam.

3. Si electio Polonica successura sit, quid de bonis meis paternis disponat
Dominus, and mihi quid faciendum.

4. Debeo-ne de negotio Polonico aliqua cum Electore Brandenburgico aut aliquo
Principe Imperii confidenter confer, vel non. Cum quibus, quando and qua
ratione.

5. Si miles aliquis conducendus and quando.

6. Si Pontifex aut Imperator de personis Dom. vestrarum vellet aliquid
attentare, vel eas iterum relegare, vel quovis modo perturbare, quid agendum
and ipsis respondendum.

7. Si de Thesauro nobis concredito aliquid Caesari sit (...) quando, quantum,
and quomodo.

8. Si Imperator mea opera uti vellet pro agendis Comitiis in Moravia and
Silesia, si hoc suscipere munus debeam.

De caeteri humiliter supplicent ut me ita disponere dignetur altissimus ut
sibi soli placeam and serviam fideliter and (...) sui nominis (...) gloriam and
Reipublicae Christianae salutem.

Si Dom. vestrae putant aliqua omittenda, aut quae offendere possent per amorem
Dei oro, been considerent: omittant aut emendant pro sua pietate and prudentia.

Unum est quod omisi de propositionibus; Quod constitueram in animo de Thesauro
Domini mihi benign concesso aliquas fundationes, hic in patria ista
constituere. Deus scit mentem meam quem nihil latet. Si placet hoc meum
misericordissimo Domino propositum vel non.

Et praesertim si mihi alio (divina ita disponente gratia) sit commigrandum,
vellem patria mea cognoscat, and tota posteritas quod amaverim illam, and
optime de salute ipsorum and posteritatis senserim.

Dat. Cromoviae faeria 5. post Pascha, Anno 1587.

Vester ex animo, and frater and amicus sincerus

Guilielmus manu propria.

In nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.
Gloria Patri, and Filii, and Spiritui Sancto: sicut erat in principio and nunc
and semper and in secula seculo rum. Amen.
In Action Tertia, proponenda.
1. DEo Omnipotenti, Patri, Filio and Spiritui Sancto, offerimus nos humilime,
paratos ad Divina Oracula, monita, instructiones, informationes, and alia
quaecunque in hac generali Action, suscipienda, intelligenda, and exequenda,
quae sua Divina Majestas, pro sua gloria and nostra consolatione maxima fore,
praeviderit and decreverit.

2. Humiliter requirimus, an hic plenaria haec transigetur Actio: vel an nobis
ad Cromoviam, cum necessariis nostris rebus, (and quibus illis quidem)
properandum suerit.

3. Has nostri Domini Rosenbergii Quaestiones 12 generales, and alia (...); in
eisdem particulariter continentur, humiliter offerimus, tam ejus quam nostro
nomine, illa and talia expectantes responsa quae and qualia a sede Majestatis
Divinae, in suorum servorum consultationibus procedere, and olim and semper
solent.

4. Et quia in eisdem Quaestionibus, nulla facta est mentio de usu pulveris
quem sibi divinitus concessum habet, and aliquoties prius dictum fuerit, quod
in hac Action, informaretur de illius pulveris usu, nos, jam humiliter illam
desideramus informationem.

5. Et quia extraordinarius iste vehemens favor Moschovitici Principis erga me
incognitum jam est mihi and multis aliis contestatus, and manifestus, (ago Deo
Optimo Maximo gratias quantas possum maximas) and quia incertus sum ad quem
finem Deus illum eius favorem erga me, dirigere velit: humiliter peto and mihi
a te (Omnipotens Deus) informatio (...) de isto fine, and voluntate tua in hac
part, and quo modo ejusdem Nunciis respondere debeam, si qui jam (...) de
caetero.

6. An non debeamus nosmet disponere, (ut alias, aliquoties praemonitum est) ut
(...), lapidem Philosophorum ex methodo Dunstani conficiamus: quae methodus,
quia mihi non constat, saepe me hactenus fecit videri quasi in hoc labor
tardum, (...), vel ignavum: Vbi, contra, quam est paratus animus meus and manus
and pedes and omnes vires tam animi quam corporis mei, Tu nosti, Tuque (O Deus)
testis esto meus.

7. Illa Praxis, cum poculo ferreo, canali vitrea, calce etc. nondum nobis
succedit; (...), ad illius quoque Conclusionis veritatem practicam obtinendam,
libenter sciremus, quid est quod nos hactenus impedivit, vel quid nobis deest,
ad veram intelligendam, and perficiendam praxim ill am.

8. Thomae Kellei decumbentis valetudinem and sanitatem, tibi (O Deus)
commendamus, and supplicamus, ut illi, nobisque propitius esse velis: illumque
sanum and salvum nobis reddere and confirmare digneris ad nominis tui laudem,
honorem and gloriam, ex fideli ejusdem posthac servitio, and officio: erga
divinam tuam Majestatem. Amen.

9. Joanna, uxor Ed: Kellei nostri, Omnipotenti Divina (...) tuae supplicat per
me, and ego humilime (ejusdem Joannae (...)) (...) (O Deus) supplico, ut illi
velis esse misericors, clemens and benignus; and ut (...) multiplices ad te
preces pro faecunditate cum hoc ejus marito (...) respicias charitate: and ut
illi hoc contribuere velis (...), and (...) servitii (erga hunc suum mariium)
praemium, ut (...) and cum (...) gaudere possit beata: respice quaesumus hanc
(...), ut a multis olim piis faeminis and viris candem accepisti, and (...)
concessisti (...) Misericordissime Pater, per Filium tuum, Dominum nostrum
Jesum Christum. Amen.

10. Pro mea Jana (O Deu) humilime gratias ago, quod hactenus tam clementer and
pie illam liberaveris a suae radicalis infirmitatis contagione: contra quam and
medicinam facere, me docuisti: and me ut facerem adjuvisti, factaeque eam
virtutem concessisti, ut illa remedii optati nobis praeberet signa, qualia
nostra imperitia magis sperat esse bona and certa, quam recta ratiene
dijudicare potest, hoc igitur symptona egestionis sanguinolentae quid sit
nescimus, an morbi alterius indicium, an dictae Medicinae adhuc in sua virtute
and efficacia procedentis, operatio. Tuum (O Deu) ne dedigneris impartire mihi
consilium: and de fluxu illo frequenti, ex ejusdem Janae auribus, libenter
audire vellemus remedium aliquod.

De Angliae and Reginae ejusdem statu, si aliquid scire nobis expedit, libenter
audiemus.

London, At Mrs. Goodman her house. Martii 20 a meride hora 4 JESUS Omnipotens
sempiterne and une Deus.
MIttas lucem tuam and veritatem tuam, ut ipsa me ducat and perducat ad montem
sanctum tuum and Tabernacula. Amen.

..... I am blessed Raphael, a blessed messenger of the Almighty, I am sent of
God, who is blessed for evermore. Amen.

John Dee, I am sent of God for thy comfort first to certify thee thou shall
overcome this thy infirmity, and when thou art strong in body, as God in his
goodness will make thee, THEN thou shall have all made known unto thee of such
things being not come to pass as have been before spoken of, because that thou
should take comfort in God, that thou art not left from the comfort of Gods
blessed creatures. Now God has sent me at this time whereby thou shall be
satisfied, THAT when thy body is able to abide the time of my service from God
to be delivered unto thee by me Raphael: Thy friend John Pontoys yet lives,
but his time is likely to be short.

Ask at your will.

D..... O God, I am beaten into a great attempt, to make the counsel privy, of
my beggary, and to offer the Earl of Salisbury, such my duties as I may
perfect to his content. How stands this with your good liking?

D. Spiritual,

Thou shall have friends, in thy suit, and thou shall have foes, but through
Gods D. Spiritual, mercies, thy friends, shall overcome thy foes and thou shall
see how that God in his goodness will work mightily in his power for thee.

Proceed in thy suit so shortly as thou can find thy health in body able:
And for thy health use thy own skill, that God has, and shall guide thee
withal to thy good and perfect receiving of thy perfect health.

D..... Of the blood, not coming out of my Fundament, but at a little, as it
were a pin hole of the skin.

Raph. That the which thou had no knowledge to help thy weakness, God in his
mercies did send thee therein present help, the which but only for that issue
thou could not have lived. And for the cure and thy help, the same God will
work with thee in thy heart and mind so, that it shall be known unto no man,
but by Gods merciful goodness delivered unto thee, such ways and means as
shall be thy help, and restore thee to health again. This God of his mercy has
sent me to deliver this short message, because of thy weakness, Thou art not
strong to endure them, therefore such is Gods goodness to let you to understand
that after the tenth day of April, I will then [10]
appear again, and thou shall understand much more what Gods will and his
pleasure is to be done in Gods services, and for your good, and so for this
little short message, I have declared unto you the will of Jesus Christ: And so
for this time, In the Name of the most highest Creator and maker of Heaven and
Earth, I do now return at his will and commandment, and I am ready at all
times when he shall command me to appear to thy comfort. His Name be praised
evermore. Amen, Amen. D. Amen.

Friday 24 Martii hora 9
DEus in adjutorium nostrum intend as D. D. R. R.... Zebaith..... The
Omnipotent God be praised for evermore, his holy Name be glorified. Now John
Dee, I Raphael am n w come at Gods pleasure, and at his commandment to speak
with thee, and make known unto thee as far forth as in my power lies to speak
God has sent me to declare unto thee: the cause of thy desire now at this
time, John Dee, as thou art an earthly man., if thou do desire to have help
from God of such things as earthly men cannot he without while they have time
here in this mortal life, thou desire to have knowledge as concerning things
hid, the which I Raphael have no delight, neither pleasure in speaking of any
such earthly matter, or earthly cases. But my delight is in the Almighty, and
in his wisdom. But notwithstanding at this request, and thy inward desire in
God to be certified of this treasure, the which these two men whom thou know
do speak of, they ever had a time appointed of God for it, and it was not used
accordingly as they should have done. Now this second time, because you have a
desire to have help and knowledge at the hands of the Almighty, I Raphael do
command thee and those men whom thou know, that they shall not intermeddle,
or to take it in hand before the tenth day of January be past, f r if they do,
they shall not prevail, for that is a time that God has best appointed for the
said purpose, and for the quiet enjoying of it; so when that day is past, then
let them in the name of God enter into that (...). And if they will be such men
as they ought for to be, and as Gods will is that they should be, to deal
faithfully and truly one with the other in deed and in word, God will then
bless their good purpose, and bring it to their head when they shall take in
hand to open the earth, God will presently at that instant then suffer their
good purpose to take effect, and the matter to be effected and had, so that
they shall not be put off, if they shall hear or see any thing that they shall
dislike, but safely to stand in the hope, and craving at Gods hand to have that
good help to be a warrant between them, and all hurt and danger whatsoever may
behappen, and so overcome. I say, If they will faithfully pray unto God with
their whole trust in God, God will bless their good success, if they be
otherwise, then as good never stir, and their good success will be against
them. So I Raphael have made kuown unto thee Gods purpose in this thy request.

For this I have said.

John Dee, I Raphael, did make known unto this desire of that secret, and that
great gift that gave unto thee in such order and manner as thou know where
thou hidst it, and that never as yet had the knowledge and the wisdom that
God will give thee as concerning that, and many mo such unto thee: So this rare
gift being taken away from thee by them thou know, by taking thy key, and so
taking of it from thy keeping, it was the will and purpose of God, that I
Raphael should give such... that thou should have knowledge... of the same.
Thou shall take such course.... thou may obtain it again, and when thou have
it, thou shall put it into the same chest again, and commit it into the custody
and keeping of thy very friend John Pontoys, and he shall, and will deal
faithfully and friendly with thee in keeping the same until such time as by
that... the which thou know is promised unto thee, that thou shall receive
the perfect understanding of the hid knowledge and secrecy of God that is not
as yet made known unto thee, and..... as has been said, so shall thou have
such wisdom delivered unto thee by me Raphael that shall come in such... and
order as has been late made known unto thee for thy good in such short and
speedy time to be performed, and so thus much I have made known unto thee, as
God has in store for thee to be performed. Thus much I have now said, and
given thee cunning to keep it in such manner as I have spoken, or else thou will
be disappointed of that, and... it will hide such purpose as God will have come
to pass, so in his mighty power command me to come. I have for this matter
finished; If thou have any thing speedily, ask in... for I am to depart.

John Dee, If thou will have all thy cause then.... as thou must show unto thy
liking and hers what thou have drawn, and crave for good assistance it... of...
desiring his help, and... unto her the disease.... to go to such men that
shoald give thee further instruction thy best as I have said to show unto her
that thou have done..... and he will... in thy case unto..... and Canterbury,
and so the faith shall triumph in short time, and if this be.....

Julii 9. hora 4. a meridie.
D. After my Prayers for a quarter of an hour, a Voice said, Westminster Three
Kings in Kingsstreet.


I am Raphael whose voice thou do hear: To morrow morning at nine of the
clock God will send me to thy sight.

D. So with thanks to God I ended.

D. Mittas lucem tuam and veritatem tuam, quae nos (...) and perducant ad
montem sanctum (...) the 10 (...), (...) 9.
tuum and coelestia tua tabernacula. Amen.

Barth. As for you, the Creator of God does appear.

D. Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini Halleluia.

...... Blessed be God the Father, and God the Son, and God the holy Ghost. All
honor and power be ascribed unto the living God for evermore. Amen. D. Amen.

John Dee, I am Raphael, one of the blessed and elect Angels of the Almighty;
and at his will and his good pleasure, he has commanded me to appear here at
this time, to set forth the will and pleasure of the Almighty God.

John Dee, my message that I have at this time to deliver unto thee, is of
great force, in that God would have thee to do. And whereas it was said at my
last appearing at this beholder, that I would appear again, and now it has
pleased God to send me to perform and make known according to that which was
then said, that all things before promised should be made plainly known what
Gods will is to be done in all that has been before said.

Now I do make known unto you the plain meaning and understanding thereof.

First th u have been promised the secret knowledge and understanding of the
Philosophers Stone, of the Book of St. Dunstans, to have the knowledge of them.

It is since a long time, as thou know to man's reason, and to the mind of
man, a few years is with man thought to be big; and now God has been thy
keeper, and most chiefly created thee, and has suffered thee to have time to
live unto this age: and furthermore, thou do like unto thy Nativity, and
considering thy great age that the course of Nature for age, is likely, by thy
reason, to take place. BUT John Dee, thou (...) well remember unto whom, in the
holy Scriptures, that God in his mercies did add and put to fifteen years
longer than the time was set him: So think not but God in his mercies will be
as great unto thee. And now to come to the matter whereby to lot thee to
understand why thou had not thus these rare gifts and promises performed unto
thee, it was the will f God to keep them away, and to suffer the heart of thy
supreme head and governor, under God, to be hardened against thee, that thou
art no better account made of unto him, but to be such an one that does deal
with Devils and by Sorcery, as you commonly term them Witchcraft: and who does,
and who has informed him, to be thus evil and hardly informed against thee,
but only the Devil, and by the hatred of thy secret enemy whom thou know
(Salisbury I mea) and all malice and enemies that he can by his Devils,
Maserien, Hermeloe, the four wicked ones, the which are accounted the four
Rulers of the Air, whose names be Ories, Egym, Paynim, and Mayrary: They be the
Devils that he does deal withal, that he through their enticing and his, he
thinks to be pleasant and good wisdom that he receives at their hands; That
he and his Devils do seek thy overthrow in all good things, and does and shall,
so far forth as God will suffer them, seek all the malice and hindrance in all
good causes to be done to thy good. Therefore now John Dee I am to let thee to
understand plainly what Gods will and his great purpose is to have thee to do,
although it may seem hard to thy good liking, considering as thou do think,
the weakness of thy body, and course of age: yet notwithstanding, that same God
that has been thy protector and keeper until this present time of years, that
same merciful God shall keep thee, and make thee able to perform things that
shall be made known unto thee; for God will not bestow such rare gifts as I
have before said, amongst those which be unworthy of such great blessings from
the Almighty. For God will not bestow Pearls amongst those that will not
believe nor understand that God has any such blessings to bestow upon men: for
I say unto thee, John Dee, that if God should or would bestow those blessings
upon thee, even at this present, or at any time to be shortly performed and
delivered unto thee: Then, except that thou should make all things plainly
known of Gods secrets delivered unto thee, unto thy supreme head under God here
upon earth, and likewise thy enemy to be partaker in these secrets and great
gifts of God, if thou would not perform as much unto them, as God should give
wisdom unto thee, therein, thy life would and should, by the envy and malice of
those wicked ones, and by thy great enemy thou should speedily be cut off
from this life, but God will not have it so. So if thou will do as God shall
command thee by this message, thou shall have all these messages, promises and
wisdom, both for the Philosophers Stone, the book of S. Dunstans, the secret
wisdom of that Jewel that was delivered, as thou know, in what manner it is
plainly known unto thee.

So now it is the will of God to suffer thy supreme Head his heart to be
hardened against thee; and likewise for thy great enemy for his wicked
instructions against thee, God does suffer it so to be, even as Pharaoh his
heart was hardened against the children of God, so stands the matter against
thee with them. It is the will of God so to suffer it to their great account
that they shall have to make, when it shall please the Almighty that that time
shall be, that they must render unto God their accounts. Now John Dee it is the
will of the Almighty to send me Raphael to deliver unto thee this Message, the
which will seem unto thee to be very hard: yet as thou art the servant of God,
and one whom God does favor and love (although the world by wicked enemies
does hate thee) willingly and obediently follow that course the which God in
his mercies at this time shall make known unto thee.

Thou (...) (if thou will obey the commandment of God, by me made known unto
thee) take a long journey in hand, and go where thou shall have all these great
mercies of God performed unto thee, and God will show thee as great favor in
the sight of God, as ever he did show unto Joseph, who was sold into bondage,
as thou know, and in all his (...) and troubles (...) was with him, and
delivered him: So, if thou will follow this commandment from (...) delivered
unto thee by me Raphael, that thou shall not doubt, nor waver in thy mind, but
God will be merciful unto thee, both in this life and in the life to come: and
think God will not command thee to take such a journey in hand, but that he does
know that is best for thee, and he will preserve thee, and keep thee in thy
journey. And thou shall find in thy journey, that God shall and will deal (...)
with thee in finding ease of the infirmity of the stone, that the Angels of God
shall direct thee in thy heart and mind, how thou shall use thy body, to the
health and comfort of thy strength. And when thou art at thy journies end
amongst such friends beyond the seas as thou know, God shall and will raise
thee as faithful friends ( as now I have said before) as Joseph had, so shall
thou be favored with God and man; for it is the will and purpose of God to
have thee to be obedient unto this the which I do make known unto thee, because
thou should not remain here, to be beholding unto those that are thy mortal
enemies, and had rather to hear of thy end, than otherwise to hear of thy
well-doing, or any good to be done unto thee by any man; it is a grief and a
spite in head and mind unto them, that thou should come to any help, or
things necessary for man's use here upon earth, the which man cannot be without.
And John Dee, I am to command thee, that so shortly as thou can by all means
possible, set thy things in order, for thy Wardenship, and in all other causes
of worldly affairs. And for maintenance to further thy journey, God will most
graciously raise thee up some good friends to be helping unto thee, that thou
(...) have maintenance in thy journey. And thy very friend John Pontoys shall by
Gods favor John (...).
come home, and he shall and will be a great aid unto thee, t perform this
course the which God by me has commanded thee to undertake: That where thou
do (...) now in want, and to be (...) unto those, who do not love thee,
neither in heart do wish thee well; so God would have thee to be where thou
shall do him service, and God will give thee long days in so doing, and (...)
this his Long life.
commandment and will by me Raphael, the which message I am at Gods will and
his pleasure plainly to make known unto thee, that it is his will to have thee
to follow this course, in which God will have thee to enter into, Not fearing
nor mistrusting the weakness of thy body, but that God will preserve thee for
that time, as shall be his good will and pleasure, that thou shall have life
here in this world, to be as merciful a God to deliver thee from all hurts and
dangers, and from all infirmities, even with as much health as thou have had in
this time as thou have lived thus many years; so God will have thee to follow
his will in this direction, and then thou shall have all things aforesaid
performed unto thee, and thou shall then have such favor, that thou shall
behold his blessed Creatures with these thy mortal eyes: and if thou will
perform to the uttermost of thy power this message from God by me delivered;
Then G d will in his mercies perform all that is promised unto thee. And except
thou will be willing and dutiful so much as in thee lies to make good this,
the which I have through God, means declared what course thou must take; and if
thou do it not, then God will not no more send unto thee, to the beholding of
any man's earthly eyes, any of his blessed Creatures. Therefore I command thee
from God, as I am his faithful Minister and blessed Angel of God, that thou
should not doubt to take this journey in hand, for God will be with thee and
for thee, and his D Si Deus (...) quis contra nos.
blessed Angels shall be thy comfort, even as the Angel of God was the comfort
unto young Tobias in his journey, so God will deal with thee in thine. And so I
have delivered unto thee what God will have thee (...).

It is the will and favor of God to give the as much understanding of Gods
mercies toward thee yet for to come, as ever mortal man had delivered unto him
by any spiritual Creature from God. So now I have fully ended my message.
Therefore, see that thou John Dee be as ready to perform it to the greatest of
thy power, as lovingly in giving God thanks for this message delivered, because
I would have thee to be such an one as shall not end his days in reproach, and
rejoicing of thy enemies, but thou shall have time and days to live, that when
thou die, and shall depart this world, thou shall die with fame and memory to
the end, that such an one was upon the earth, Miracula.
that God by him had wrought great and wonderful Miracles in his service. And
thus to Gods honor and his glory, I have ended my message, yielding unto God
all honor, and praise, and thanks for all his blessings, and his great
benefits bestowed upon his Creatures, both now and for evermore. Amen. Blessed
be God in all his gifts, and holy in all his works. Praised be God. Amen, Amen.

D. Amen.

D. Now, O God, as I have willingly yielded unto thy will and commandment of
undertaking a Journey: so I beseech thee that it may stand with thy good
pleasure to notify unto me the Country, Region or City unto which thou would
have me direct my course from hence-forward.

D. Nothing appeared.

A Voice..... A Voice..... In the Name of God, to morrow at ten of the clock.

D. So be it.

D. All thanks, praise and glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost, now and for ever.

Amen.
A Note to be considered.
Mr. Ecclestone.
In the house at the breaking up of the place were these: James
Bolton, Lettice Gostwich a Maiden, Cook and Dairy-maid.

TO know the house and place therein where it is; or if it be in many places
divided, which they are.

Or if any other be privy of it, who may give any evidence.

And whatsoever may make this a perfect work, to Mr. Ecclestones reasonable
contentment, most humbly and heartily I beseech God to make known now unto us,
and so the praise and thanks due to God for his mercies, to the best of our
power to be yielded unto him.

Saturday, Julii 11. hora 10. ante meridiem.
Note, In the Original two Schedules are pinned across this page.

The first Schedule. To enquire,

1. THe Name of the place whether I am to direct my total Journey.

2. Whom shall I have in my company besides John Pontoys.

3. What of Patrick Sanders.

4. What of my daughter Katherine.

5. What of my standing Books and other appurtenances. What of Mr. Bardolf to
go with me? Or, Of Mr. Dortnall his Companion?

6. What shall my Son Arthur do, to his help and comfort in his intended travel?

7. Shall not I at any time return hither into England again? Shall I make
account to keep some title of enjoying my house at my return?

Mr. Ecclestone his Case.
Junii 27. 1607. The second Schedule.

THe Name of my House is Eccleston of Eccleston, the man's Name whom I suspect
is Thomas Webster Carpenter, of the age under forty, not more, within the
County of Lancaster.

The place was in a false Roof adjoining to a Chimney called New Chamber
Chimney.

Edward Ecclestone.

Thomas Webster the Thief.

Note: There being a Figure in a single leaf of paper, and the same having no
direction where it should be placed, I thought best to place it here, the page
immediately aforegoing making mention of one Webster a Thief; and here being
words which (if I mistake not) relate to such a business, an unquam recuper
abitur, whether that was stolen shall ever be recovered; and, In quo loco jam
est, In what place Webster the Thief is at present.

1. Significat Domina Ascendentis and octavae, recuperari posse.

2. Applicans per sed cum receptione, recuperari posse significat, sed cum
difficultate aliqua.

4. Nota locum, and signum est: and Ancilla vel foemina aliqua consideranda est.

4. Luminaria sese mutuo respicientia, non posterdum fore denotat 5. and maxim
cum Dominus medii (...) carpere 7. sexali radio respiciat sed interim 7. domum
comburat.

JESUS
A Domino factum est istud and est mirabile in oculis nostris. Ex stercore
erigit pauperem ut collocet eum cum principibus populi sui. Amen.

Mittas (O Deus) lucem tuam and veritatem tuam, ut ipsa nos ducant, mirabilem
in me fac misericordiam tuam, and sapientiam tuam in cord meo figas.

I Am Raphael that speak, if you will have me to appear, proceed in haste, for
God A Voice.
has appointed me great service to do.

D. In the Name of Jesus, we desire your answers and instructions to these
Articles here slightly noted.

1. Raph. In the Name of Jesus Christ, I Raphael am now sent unto you to
deliver unto you your question so far forth as God his will and pleasure is to
command me, and I must make a short continuance with you, for I have service of
God commanded me in haste to be done, in his blessed Name I am come to fulfill
his will in your desires, and therefore in his Name go on.

1. D. The name of the place.

Raph. John Dee, thou have been a Traveller, and God has ever yet at any time
provided for thee in all thy Journeys, so much Gods favor and his mercies is
such toward thee, that this thy request and desire to be known, What Country is
best for thy good: God has referred it to thy own will to make choice, in what
Country or City thou have thy best mind unto; and when thou have made thy
choice, if it be Gods liking, and to thy good, it shall be directed unto thee;
otherwise, if it shall be made known that some other place shall be better for
thee: Therefore take thy own choice and liking.

D.

Raph. John Dee, he that has commanded thee to take this Journey in hand, he
will provide for thee in Germany, or any other Country wheresoever thou go.
Therefore let thy good will and liking be in placing thy self, if thou will be
near unto England or far off.

D. Whether is best, I know not.

Raph. I have said, that wheresoever thou will, God does prize thy willing
desire, to fulfill that God does command: think but thou satisfy and rest in
taking thy own choice, God will provide for thee, whither and to what City thou
have a mind or will to enter into, and always Gods good Angel shall hold thee,
and ever give thee to understand, what and where shall be ever best for thy
good liking, when thou art there. Therefore take no care, he, that Almighty
will provide for thee, that thou shall be so governed with his goodness, that
all shall stand well with thee.

2. D. Whom shall I have in my company beside John Pontoys?

3, 4. Raph: John Dee, thou of thy self do best know that without thy
daughter; thou cannot not be without her: and likewise God has sent thee a very
honest and well-disposed young man to go with thee in thy Journey. And for John
Pontoys, he shall be one, as thy greatest comfort and special aid, next unto
the Almighty. And for any other else, it is at thy own good will and well-(...)
whom thou will choose to make fit thy purpose for necessary uses, for help,
about thee, Servants I mean.

5. D. What of my standing books, and other appurtenances?

Ralph. John Dee, thou have spoken already of a very good course to send them
away, not all at once, but some at one time, and some at another, and God shall
and will give thee good success rein: and let thy friend John Pontoys, let him
provide for all such purposes, and so (...).
shall thou do well.

D. As I have been heretofore hindered of many of good purposes fulfilling, so
perchance the King will not be willing now to grant me license to pass over sea.

Raph. He shall and will grant thee license.

6. D. For my Son Arthur, do to his help and comfort in his intended travel.

Raph. If thy Son do like his course to travel, he shall in the mean while do
well, for thy sak; being a father unto him, God will favor him. And when thou
art in place where God has commanded thee to (...), in short time after thy
being there, thou shall be able to do him good, in helping him for such things
as (...) now wants, and then thou shall tak him near unto thee, so that he
may have a comfort of thy fatherly help, and thou to have comfort of his
well-doing: and so for this I have certified thee.

7. (...). Shall (...) I at any time return hither into England again?

Raph. Thou shall be better able in health and strength of thy body to come
into England again, (...) thou will: but thou shall see and perceive thy self
so mercifully provided f r, that thou will have but little mind or
willingness, to come into England again, such shall Gods great mercies be
toward thee.

D. Then I perceive that I shall not make any great account of keeping my house
at (...) for any my return hither.

Mr. Eccleston his Case of his money taken away by one Thomas Webster, etc.

Raph. Thou do take an hard matter in hand. This man Thomas Webster had it,
and has it in his keeping as yet, but he will not yield that he has it. And
for Eccleston to deal by extremities with him, he shall prevail little, he
shall not thereby obtain his purpose. But by friendly dealing with the party,
and in proffering him to be a partaker with him, he may yield unto Eccleston.
But otherwise, the matter will grow hard. I would from God advise thee, John
Dee, to enter as few of these matters as may be, for this will not be
compassed, except that he shall proceed into the man's house according unto Law;
and then he shall (...) himself into trouble, and for the thing never the
better: but, as I have said, by friendly dealing he may yield, and so far forth
as it shall please God, I will work by Gods favor to make him yield. And thus
much I have said, and let it suffice.

It does remain as yet in a Coffer that is somewhat of a white color, but he
will, if he be stirred, he will then remove it, and hide it in the ground in a
little Parlour that he has. And so I have spoken and answered thee at this
time, as concerning

D. Money I had sent me from the Emperor by Hans Bik: I marvel that it is not
yet come hither.

Raph. For that, John Pontoys will make known unto thee, all to thy good. And
in whose Name, and in his whose Power I came, so now again I return to that
place, to the which in his mercies bring all his blessed Creatures, yielding
all honor and praise unto his holy Name, I end. Amen, Amen.

D. Amen.
14 day of July, hora 11.
D. AS I sat at Dinner with Bartholomew Hickman, my Daughter, Patrick and
Thomas Turner, about the end of the Dinner Bartholomew heard a Voice, saying,
To morrow half an hour after 9 of the clock, give your attendance to know the
Lords pleasure.

D. As near as I remember, so he said, or to that effect.

1607 Julii 15. hor. 9. ante meridiem. JESUS.
In nomine Dei Patris, and Filii and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Mittas lucem tuam and veritatem tuam, sapientiam and omnimodum auxilium tuum,
Domine Deus, ut tibi serviamus sancte, fideliter and constanter omnibus diebus
vitae nostrae. Amen.

Barth...... The Creature.

IN the Name of him that created me Raphael, and all the blessed Creatures, and
likewise in his power made all the world, and all things therein contained:
Jesus Christ of his great goodness Jesus Christ
has sent me now at his will, and so I am bound at his will to return, when
his pleasure is. All honor be given to him, being God Almighty for evermore.
Amen.

John Dee, I am Raphael that last appeared unto you, and I through Gods good
pleasure did set down and made known unto thee, what pretended course God would
have thee to enter into, and his will is such, that so far forth, and so
speedily as thou can, to proceed in it, because that God has great service
for thee to do, when thou shall be there placed.

And now I do let thee understand, that as concerning Eccleston his suit and
matter that I did Mr. Eccleston.
at my last being here speak of, so far forth as it pleased God to give me his
free will: and now God has sent me for favor that God does bear unto thee,
and not for no cause else, I Raphael do now tell thee, that this matter, and
all such like unto it, are not for me to enter into, neither for any such as be
of that high Society and Calling as I am of. Yet notwithstanding, I am ready by
Gods merciful goodness to command those whom God has and does appoint to
Raphael his inferiors.
serve under me: and such his blessed Creatures being those that do stand in
his presence, I Raphael will at Gods pleasure command those that shall deal in
Ecclestons suit, in constraining by such Creatures as I have made known unto
you, that they shall force and constrain these parties, as he which he had in
hand; he is one, James Bolton is another, and the Treasure was carried The
Treasure.
to the Carpenter his brothers house; and there, as I did show unto thee, a
Coffer of white color. Those parties are so troubled in mind, that they
cannot be quiet, how or where to place the Treasure, because they would keep it
close. But let this suffice and satisfy for the whole answer in this his suit:
I Raphael through Gods power will command such Creatures Raphael his
commandment.
that shall constrain those parties to bring the matter to true light, and
confess the said Treasure; and he, the party the owner to have his money again,
in so short time as may be pleasing and acceptable unto the Almighty. God will
have the whole matter made known in this order, without any further trouble
unto the parties: but it is his will that he shall examine them in friendly
manner, if they will not yield, then by the force of a Justice in examination;
How they will and shall yield.
but they will not yield till such time as I by these Creatures shall make them
to yield, through Gods help, to their sorrow; and so the party the owner shall
so come by his goods again. And now I have answered you in as ample manner as
God will have me; for (as I have sai) such matters are not for me, but that
course that I have now declared, by Gods help shall be performed. And so in the
Name of the Highest for this I do now end, giving praise to the Almighty. And
furthermore, John Dee, in few words, for thy sake, If this Window by his D. By
this The Window to be brought in, etc.
Creatures, should have meddled in the cause, they should have had a great
labor. But notwithstanding, that which I have spoken of, is sufficient,
praised be the Name of God: and so I end.

D. If it should not offend, then I would gladly know the sum of the Treasure.

Raph. Two thousand and a half, and odd money.

D. How, in gold and silver?

Raph. More then three parts thereof in gold.

D. Most humbly and heartily I thank the Almighty for.....

Raph. John Dee, if thou do doubt of any thing as concerning the entering into
the course of thy Journey; and likewise, if thou do doubt of any thing that
shall be against thy good success when thou art there, Now speak, and I shall
through Gods mercies make thee answer, as it may and shall please God to the
good direction of any thing that thou shall doubt of, for God will not command
thee to enter into that Journey, but that he will most mercifully and
graciously be thy keeper, and deliver thee from the hands of thy enemies in thy
Journey. And for the good health of thy body, God will so carry thee in good
health, that thou shall set forth such service when thou art there placed, that
shall be thy great comfort unto Gods honor, in making of his mavelous works
to be known. And thus much for thy comfort through Gods merciful goodness I
have made known unto thee: and so I end.

D......

John Dee, God does know all this that thou do speak of. In few words, to end
many words, (...) will so direct thy ways in ending such troubles, as shall be
to thy good and speedy finishing.

D.....

John Pontoys, before such time as thou shall have any great cause to use his
aid, and furtheremore, God will so work for thee in the heart of his Master
(whom he is Factor for) Stapers I mean, that Stapers shall with all the aid and
help that he can to further (...) good proceeding. And so God in all cases will
thus graciously deal with thee. And now is my full time to depart in Gods
peace, and to serve him from whom I came, his mighty Name.

D. I fearing his sudden departure, did earnestly urge at his hands, to know
the truth of Tobias his history: and so half unmannerly did interrupt his
speech with my question.

John Dee, I am Raphael that is appointed of God to be thy Guide in this thy
Journey; and I am that same Raphael that was the Guide unto young Tobias in his
long Journey, and delivered him from the power of the wicked Spirit Asmodeus,
who had, as thou know, how many he had destroyed: and I brought him through
Gods power home again, and delivered him in health unto his own parents. And
thus much I have made thee plainly to understand without any doubting to the
contrary. And so now once again I do depart. All honor and glory to the
everlasting God, both now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

D. Amen.

17 July.
AFter dinner ( horam circiter 4.) as Bartholomew and I talked of diverse of my
doings with Mr. Kelley, a Voice produced this to Bartholomews hearing,

A Voice...... I, John Dee, I have heard you all this while.

Thou shall be able to do, and to see, and to understand more than all this as
thou have spoken of, according as God has promised thee.

D. Blessed be his holy Name, and his mercies be magnified on me, to the honor
of his holy Name. Amen.

D. Note..... Upon occasion of further talk and speech of my Jewel that was
brought, I asked Bartholomew if ever he had seen it since it was set in gold;
and he thought that he had not seen it: Whereupon I went speedily to my Chest,
unlocked it, and took it out, and undid the Case, and set the Stone in his due
manner.

And by and by did Raphael appear in the Stone, and in voice said thus, as
follows:

Raph. In the Name of Jesus Christ, I am Raphael whose voice thou did hear
right now. And now, in Gods holy Name, for thy good, and for thy comfort, I
have, now, here, in this Pearl entered Possession, in (...) hereafter to be that
blessed Creature, to be obedient unto Gods Commandment, to serve thee at all
times, when thou art placed in thy Journey, which God has commanded thee. And
likewise thou shall have the book from whence this came. And that 1 2 3 (...)
domum. Vid. Arbatel.
Dust which thou have in keeping, (the which thou do make account of (...)
better but dust) Then it shall be turned to the right use, from whence it was:
and to that good purpose, that God has ordained for to do. And now it was the
will of God, that I should speak unto thee a few words of this good comfort to
be performed. Praise God, honor his holy Name, for his great blessings now and
for ever; That it did please the Almighty to send me to your presence, in token
of his love, for his great mercy. And so now, in his Name I go again into the
presence of the Almighty, whose Name be ever praised, with all his elect
Angels, and all the blessed Creatures of God, and all the blessed Creatures
upon earth, praise his Name for evermore. Amen, Amen.

D. Amen.

D. O Lord God, most humbly, heartily and sincerely I honor thee, praise thee,
and extol thy mercies, and most loving kindness, for these, and all other thy
graces and blessings on me. Accept, O God, my hearty thanks, and enable me so
to thank thee, as may be a most acceptable sacrifice unto thy Divine Majesty.
Amen, Amen,

Amen.
1607. Sept. 5. hora 9. Mortlak.
(...)
Mitte lucem tuam and veritatem tuam Domine, quae nos ducant and perducant ad
montem sanctum tuum and ad coelestia tua tabernacula. Amen.

Barth. He is in the Stone now.

Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini.

O Most merciful Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who is and was the Creator and
Redeemer of Mankind, and of all his blessed Creatures. In his power I Raphael
am now come at his will and commandment, and so likewise at his good pleasure I
must then return at such time as he has commanded me.

John Dee, in the Name of the Most Highest, I am come to deliver unto thee this
my Message, the which God in his goodness has commanded me.

First, I Raphael am sent of God at this time most chiefly to put thee in that
good remembrance of my last appearing to your presence, to let thee to
understand, that look what course God in his mercies did set then down, what
way thou should take to enter into this Journey, the which God in his
goodness is most willing that thou should enter into. For, John Dee, God has
declared, and made manifestly known unto thee at my last appearing, what
service God would use thee unto, and all such purposes that were the last time
spoken of, shall be by Gods favor and his merciful good gift performed unto
thee: and fear thou not, but God will safely help and preserve thy body in thy
Journey, to that end, that thou should be in that place wherein thou
might have time to enter into all such service as God has by me made known
unto thee. For, John Dee, such has Gods mercies been in suffering wicked men
to prevail against thee, and they have and do make a scorn of thee here in this
thy Native Country: So it is with thee as it was with Christ and his Apostles,
being most cruelly used in their own Native Countries; so John Dee, God has
suffered those wicked men to pluck thee down in worldly affairs, the which
should be maintenance for thee and for thine, and without such maintenance man
cannot be without, while be is here in this vale of Misery. Such wicked men
have most cruelly used thee, even as Job by Gods sufferance, who suffered the
Devil to prevail against him: yet Gods mercies be so great unto thee, that
although they (most wickedly) have robbed thee of thy possession, yet God would
not suffer those wicked ones by any of their malicious practices to prevail in
any wise to hurt thy body, as Jobs was: For if they ((...) their wicked
purposes) could have wrought such cruelty against thee, thou had not been a
man living here upon earth until this time. So John Dee, thou do know who is
thy mortal enemy, who, rules next unto your earthly King.

D.

Why thou may well know, for I have made it known before time unto thee, that
he is not thy friend, though thou have not offended him in any wise. Therefore,
because that this thy Native Country is not a place fit for Gods purposes in
his wisdom to be bestowed upon thee here, Therefore at my last Message, God
did send me to make known unto thee, whether he would have thee to go, that
there thou might be a man; and that man, whom God has appointed to make his
Wisdom known: for thou art that man whom God has chosen, that (accordingly as
it was said yesterday) that no mortal man in flesh, but only Enoch, had or
shall have the like wisdom made known, plainly to be understood by any man, or
thou thy self shall understand and receive at the hands of the Almighty.
Therefore it is his will and purpose of God, that he would have thee in that
Country, for this thy Native Country is not worthy of gifts that thou shall
receive at the hands of God, to come, and to be made known unto those which be
not worthy of such great gifts of Gods wisdom, to come amongst those that be
unworthy.

Therefore, John Dee, in all these matters the which in favor at this time
made known unto thee, the chief and greatest cause of this my coming unto thee,
is to make the matter plainly known, that God in his mercies would have thee
with all diligence that thou can possibly, to haste thee to that Country
where God does command thee, and at my last being here thou know what was my
Message, therefore do thy diligence to fulfill it as thou can, and God will
put his great helps unto thee, in strengthening of thy body, and otherwise,
which shall be to thy good. And thou being once in that place where God would
have thee to be, thou should well perceive and plainly understand, that God
will most mercifully work with thee for thy good in performing all such
promises, the which has (...) loath at the last time and at this time. made
known unto thee.

John Dee, I do put thee in remembrance, that whereas thou (...) say, that thou
had a portion of money (...) thee from the Emperor unto thee; I tell thee,
that the Devil in working in the heart of one of thy enemies (Cook I mean) did
seek some ways by his false important ill speeches, in most false manner, unto
one that did in somewhat let the Emperor to understand, what he had most
falsely, to thy discredit (as he thought) to hinder thee, that thou should
not come to any help or credit at the Emperors hand. But John Dee, be of good
comfort, The Emperor of all Emperors will be thy comfort, and aid thee, and
evermore put down thy enemies, that the Emperor (that thou should have
received that portion o) it shall be so with thee, that he shall have more need
of thee, in such wisdom as God shall deliver unto thee; for thou shall have no
need of him, but only to keep good will and friendship betwixt him and thee,
in showing thy self friendly unto him, as God shall hereafter give thee plainly
to understand.

Now, John Dee, I have made known unto thee what Gods will is in this my
message. This is the greatest and the most principal cause, why God has sent
me unto thee at this present time. And now I have through Gods mercies
delivered this his Commandment unto thee: and for this I have now said and
finished.

D. Blessed be the Almighty God, now and for ever.

Gladly I would have understood how much the portion was which the Emperor
would have sent me.

John Dee, let it go, and speak no farther of it: for thou may be joyful,
whereas it is said unto thee, that he should have need of thee, and not thou of
him. Therefore reason no more in that matter.

D. As concerning Mr. Eccleston.

John Dee, in few words I answer thee, He has dealt with the parties in those
affairs, but the chief party will not, as yet, yield any thing to be made
known, but does stubbornly and stoutly stand in his own defense: And Gods
Creatures have wrought with him, and nothing he will (as ye) yield unto, except
that those Creatures should deal so cruelly with him, as it were to pull him
apieces: this is his wicked stubbornness. But God will bring the matter to
light; but Eccleston has not dealt so in the matter as he might have done, he
is too too slack in his own cause. Therefore if the fault be in him, then do
not blame the Creatures of God. For God could (as you very well do know it)
command that said Treasure to be brought: but he will not have it so to be,
because it shall come by other means among men: So God has a great care and
purpose to do all for your good, to keep matters out of blame and slander of
the world, as it might come to pass, if it should come by any other ways, but
by this plot which is laid down to decline. And when it is the will of God that
it shall be delivered, God will so perform it, if man will do as he should do,
in all reverend manner toward Godward. And so now I let you to perceive, and
to know, that it is not as yet obtained.

D. Whether has the other party confessed any thing?

Raph. He has (...) as yet yielded openly: but he has in secret manner
persuaded his fellow, that the matter might be made known unto Eccleston, in
confessing of all the whole matter, but the other will not yet yield: but it
were better for him to yield at the first, then to tarry any longer, the less
would be his punishment from God therein. And so I let you to understand, that
you shall give God his time to work in that matter at his pleasure, and then
shall it be to the good of the owner, and of you likewise. And now I have said.

D. As concerning the bereaving me of my own goods, I would gladly understand
who has my silver double gilt bell-Salt, and other things here of late
conveyed from me.

Raph. John Dee, This is the will and purpose of God to command thee, although
thou do suffer wrong because thy goods be so taken away from thee, yet Gods
will is such, that he will have thee to be a peacemaker in this cause: for it
is past help to have it again: But as thou art a mortal father, so use that
matter as a father, for thy son had it, although he would not, neither will
confess it. And likewise for such things of late missing about this house, thou
shall hereafter as plainly know who had them, and how they were gone, as thou
do plainly understand for thy Salt, but thou shall stay and proceed no
further, till such time as I Raphael shall speak further of it, for God will
have all things to be done well, and to his best liking. So for that I have now
said.

D.

John Dee, it is in the hands of God and his power to send thee such helps as
thou do seek of the Treasure to be brought unto thee, but God will not have
it so to be, the while thou art in this place (England I mea) for God will not
have thee to come into any disdain, or slander might take some advantage
against them, but be content with that little that can be made of thy right in
the College matters. And furthermore, thou shall see that God will send thee
soon some such small helps by man, that thou shall have some feeling of help,
to help thee whither thou should go; and therefore I Raphael have now said.

D.... John Pontoys.

John Dee, be not too much inquisitive, but what shall be best to your liking
in any good cause whatsoever you or he shall think good to be done for your
good, God will put his assistance and help that you shall perceive Gods favor
therein. And thus much I have said: at Gods commandment I came, and so on his
merciful goodness, and his power, I must presently depart.

D... Bartholomews request of George Sherman his earnest often and dreaming of
Treasure to be under the foundation of the wall called De la pry wall, a Nunry
in times past within half a mile of Northampton, Sir William Tate his house is
within that wall in three parts.

That man may lawfully have it, if he take heed in the breaking of the the
three places, for 500.
it is for the greatest part under the bottom of the wall, and many roots of
thorns and trees that will let and hinder the working for it, if he do not work
much as slope as you can, to go under the roots, the which he may well and
lawfully do. So doing, he may well obtain his purpose; and 300.
now you have plainly understood the truth.

The one part of that Treasure was laid by an old Nun, that was of that house,
at that time, and one that was her brother, and the other was laid even at the
same time, that the same travel the which you took the last day saving one, to
know of that battle, it was hid at the same time by one of the Lords that was
there killed, and so it has remained ever since, the one place more easier to
come at then the other, but with the favor of God, and in his mercy, that good
fortune to be desired at parties hand, it may be had and compassed by the said
party. And so now I have made the matter known unto you. And now in the name of
the Almighty, and merciful God, at whose will and pleasure I came, so now I
depart in Gods peace. The mercies of God be upon you, both for this life, and
for that which is to come, his name be glorified for evermore Amen, Amen.

D. Amen.
1607. Monday 7. Sept. hora 7.
D. THis morning as Bartholomew had intended to be going homeward in the
morning, and I not intending to move an action now, but committed all to God,
Bartholomew was spoken unto by Raphael.

..... Command John Dee to come up into this place. A voice to Bartholomew.


D.... In the name of Jesus, and to the honor and glory of the most blessed
Trinity. Amen.

Mittas O omnipotens sempiterne and une Deus lucem tuam and veritatem tuam,
quae nos ducant and perducant ad montem sanctum tuum and (...) tua tabernacula.
Amen.

Barth..... He is here.

D.... Benedictus est, qui venit in nomine Domini. Amen.

The Almighty God be blessed and praised of all good creatures, give praise
unto his holy name, for evermore. Amen.

John Dee, I am the same blessed creature Raphael, that did appear the last day
but one in this place, I am at the commandment of the most highest to come unto
your presence at this time, because thou should very well know that I
Raphael am very ready at all times, to come, when God shall command me; but
John Dee, I have no long message, at this time, for thou have Gods full purpose
and his will, in what he would have thee to enter into, and because that thou
shall well know that even now at your departing, the one from the other, it
has pleased God to send me to let thee to understand that for this time no
more matters (as concerning what thou art taugh) shall not (at this tim) no
more be spoken of, until such time as God shall appoint, at your next meeting
and coming together, that then, if there be any thing, that is not done of you,
so far forth as it is in your power to fulfill it, if (...) default in you be,
I will then put you in remembrance of it, and help you in any thing which you
shall doubt of: and if you have any question or demand to ask of me, even now,
I am very ready in few words to answer you, and then in his name, who has sent
me (that is the Almight) I must return therefore, if you have to ask do it.

D.... As concerning Mr. John of the Isle of Man, his pitiful case has moved
my compassion.

Raph.... John Dee, assure thy self, that as thou do most heartily, with a
good faith in God, that thou might be that man wherein God will most
mercifully help his distressed case, therefore I answer thee, that God has,
and he will hear thee, to thy comfort therein, and to the great comfort of the
man whom that cause does belong unto. God will mercifully help the cause so
shortly, as his will and pleasure is to be done in it. So much I have said for
this.

D.... I thank God most heartily for his so great mercies.

D.... John Pontoys, my great friend, earnestly desires to know his good Angel.

Raph..... John Dee, for thy sake he shall know his good Angel, but let it not
be with him hereafter to have a pride in mind, that God has made known unto
him his good angel, for no man upon the face of the earth can have a better
then he has, for Uriel is his appointed Angel from his birth to this day, and
so shall continue with him to the appointed time, that God will take his life
away in separating his soul from his body, for Uriel has been under God his
deliverer forth of many dangers, and so he shall be his defense under God to
his life's end. And for this, I have made the matter plainly known unto you.
Proceed.

D.... Secondly, John Pontoys is desirous to know the end of the Polish
troubles.

Raph.... John Dee, in few words, for that matter, I answer thee. Those
troubles will somewhat end to his loss; but it shall be no great matter, so
that God will work the case that it shall end to his liking. And thus much for
this I have said.

D.... As concerning the man and the Treasure, I am desirous to know whether he
will be content to assign his title to Bartholomew, upon some portion thereof
delivered unto him; and what other he has made acquainted with the matter; and
whether it may not by Gods good liking be set up without digging.

Raph.... John Dee, in all this I hear thee, and I know thine intent herein.
That man may be reasonably ruled, but yet he will not put over his title
therein; but he has 4. that beknowing how the matter does stand with him, and
so much as he does know, he has made them to know as much as himself:
Therefore assure thy self that he shall be ruled, and that it shall not be as
he will. If he will not be ordered in such sort and good council as I Raphael
shall give unto this Bartholomew at that time, that then he shall have no part
of it, but I certify you that he will be ruled; but only the others, which I
have made known unto you, they will not come to so good course in the matter as
he will. Therefore let it rest, I will direct Bartholomew in the matter which
shall be to his good, or else it shall not come to his hand, the which you have
to know of. And for this, now I have said.

John Dee, it is the will and purpose of God, that it shall come by breaking of
the ground, because that God will have all things done well, that no discord
may break out betwixt the parties hereafter. And so now in Gods name I have
said.

D.... Most humbly I thank and praise Almighty God for his infinite mercies and
favor, beseeching him to assist me evermore. Amen.

D.... John Pontoys would shortly fall to work somewhat, to win some help for
money by distillations and Alchymicall conclusions, till we were otherwise
helped, and we are utterly unable to provide things necessary for lack of
sufficient provision of money.

Raph.... Trouble not thy self (as yet) with these causes.

D... If Captain Langham will lend me an hundred pounds or more, as he promised
me, for which my servant Patrick expects his performance at this hour.

Raph.... Not (in such tim) TO DO YOU GOOD.

John Dee, that is the plain meaning, wherein it is said, not to do thee good,
because it Note.
will be something too long (for thou art ready for it, if it were now,
therefore with all have, so much as is in Gods will to be done in it, it shall
be hastened forward to do thee good.

And now I have plainly spoken unto thee in this case, my time appointed of God
is at hand.

John Dee, thou have fulfilled two questions, as concerning John Pontoys, look
in thy Note. (...) Pontoys note.
John Pont. Oh that I might be fit to serve you in Bartholomews absence.

Raph.... John Dee, In the name of the most highest I answer thee, to this his
desire wherein he does crave at the hands of God, for to obtain the sight of
his blessed creatures; but hereafter it shall be made known unto thee what God
will do for him in that his desire. And now, all power and glory be given to
the Almighty who has made heaven and earth, his name be magnified, and praised
everlastingly. Amen, Amen.

D.... Amen.

D.... All praise, all thanks, all honor and glory be yielded unto God of all
his creatures, now and for evermore. Amen.

D.... John Pontoys note, which he wrote, and left on my study table, 7.
September. The (...). mane.

(...) it may stand with the will and leave of the Almighty, whose (...) be
blessed (...).

I would desire to know

1. My proper Angel. 2. The end of the Polish troubles. 3. O that I might be
fit to serve you in (...) absence.
Under John Pontoys Note the which is sowed over, is thus written.

The place of Basel in the Map of Europe.
To the left or next side 2 foot, and about 4 inches

Basel City

to the edge of the Map below 4 foot and a finger from Basel



1. ARney vah (...) gade hadney ox vals, nath gemseh ah orza vall gemmah, oh
gedvam on zembah nohhad vomfah oldru ampha nots admancha nonsah vamfas ornad,
alphol andax orzadah vos ausoh hansah voh adma wha notma goth vamsed adges
ouseple oudemax orzan, unfa onmah (...) gousah gols nabad Na.

2. Oxar Varmol pan sampas os al paus (...) audsu alsaph oncha, cosdam
onzagofes natmamatatp max, oluah von ganse pacath alnoh vor (...) adnay nonsah
oxansah Vals nodax vandqueth lan sandquat ox ardanh onzabel ormach donquin
(...) arpahels ontipodah omvah nosch als maut quts, ar mad notgals.

3. Vant ant quah ondreh als vrh quanchah orn sandvah loh, audah nol pan,
sedmah zvgeh als abmicadampaget (...), oxah gethol val axel authath gorsan vax
parsah vert (...) audamssah getheol, urchan nabadah oxembles armax lothar, vos
antath, orse vax, alnoth, other mals olnah gethom (...), allsa.

4. Orgeth or pasquah mzadah vorts, an enodah varsava onch aldumph, auget onsa
val galta oath arveth ax pa gesne ovad ax orney aldumbages, Voscomph alze ax,
orzad (...) astoh nadah Vortes, astmah notesima goth nathad omza, geth (...) ox
degath ouda voxa gemnache adnv davsa als alst arsah.

5. (...) ols (...) max (...) does novamq lath, advat Gotham, ardrivoh
astomagel arpaget (...) arde (...), ols (ya) gem va pala (...) orsat nahah
odmazen andulphel, ox (...) geth nor uamfah geno daqueth (...), oh (...), alsah
goth necor (...) neo alda (...).

6. Vanlah oha demageus ou (...), paphah (...), ozadcha lax ornah vor adme ox
Vastmah (...), gamnac o (...) ochado (...) dridah (...) sah, lugho iahat
nabscham nohads vandispa rossamod audroch alpoh (...) loh asnah gonfageph aldeh
lo dah vax orh asnis gad av dan se qua deo, dath vax nograh vox segbat (...).

7. Arni olbah galpa lohanaha gaupumagensah ollo var se darsah goho
albvmielamacapaloth who and veslah vors (...) imnony asqvam (...) als vasmah
genda loggahah astmv.

8. Arnah notah lax vart lvhoh (...) eapraminacah oxandahvah gemveloriphitonpha
attamplahnostapha ormaxadahahar orzemblizadmah panchefelogedoh aschah olmah
ledoh vaxma.

9. Cans na Cap lan seda ax nor vorza vo. Las pral onsa gem gemah noph gazo na
von saulfa nostradg ansel unsa pah (...) velsa or alda viax nor adroh semneh
(...) vandesqual olzah nolpax pahahloth r ax rv (...) glminaph gath ardot ardri
axa noh gaga leth arde maxa.

10. Carsal mabah nophch alps arford vord vanfax oriox nabat gemnepoh (...) not
vombalnams argeth alloah n phirt lauda (...) voxtaf ardno (...) labmageth (...)
almaglo ardet nalbar vanse darto vorts parsan ur unrah vor gadeth (...) orze
(...) vomreh gelpha, (...) or nembla ox ar vah su.

11. Zanchevmachaseph, olzaminoah Vals-buraah (...) orsapnago darsagnapha
nobsiblith armipyth arsepolimitantons Jembulsamar (...) ornaza oldaxardacoah.

12. Semno ah al ehi do a cha da Selpagmodah a da hu ba mi ca noh dam pha gli
as cha nor ox om pa mi na pho. lemp, na, gou, sa, pha ne co al pha as pa ge mo
call. na tu rage.

13. Sen gal se quar rus fa glau sur taste ormaca oxinodal ge brah nop tar na
gel vom na ches pal ma cax arsess as don sadg asc lan fau che dah nor vi car
max coh zum bla xanpha ad geh do ca ba ah.

14. Ar gem na ca pal fax, or nido hab cas pigan alpuh gagah loath zal sa bra
dan go sa pax vol san ques tan ondapha opicah or zy la pa a chra pa ma les ad
ma carpah oxalps on da pa, gem na de vor guse.

15. Lat gaus sa par sat lasteah lor adah nox ax ardephes nousou andoh gvmzi
vor sab liboh ad ni sa pa loh gaho lar va nox ax oho lan sempah noxa Vriah
sephah lusaz oldgalsax nottaph ax vernoc arpos (...) zem zubah, lothor gas
lvbah vom xa da phi ca no.

16. Assotaphe ondah Vor ban (...) pa loath agno jam nesroh am algors vrrabah
geuseh alde ox nah vors (...) amphicato nostrohh admadg or napsv asmo lon
gamphi arbel nof amphi on sembeloh aschi nar laffax las doxa pra gem a sestrox
amphi nax var sembleh.

17. Angesel orcapacad onz adq ochadah olzah vor nah orpogographel al sa gem na
ca pi coh. Ul da pa por sah naxor vonsa rous Erbauf lab dun zaph algadef loh
gem vorta oh amph a ho ha za vaxorza lepteh oxor neob ab va dv na ca. pi ca
lodox ard nah.

FINIS.

