THE SPEECH of the Honorable Henry Booth Esquire Spoken in CHESTER March 2. 1680/1.
At his being Elected one of the Knights of the Shire for that County, to serve
in the Parliament, Summoned to meet at Oxford the 21. of the said Month.
Gentlemen and Countrymen,
I Must acknowledge that God has been good unto me from my Cradle to this
moment, and of all his Providence to me there is none for which I have greater
reason to bless his holy name, than that he has enabled me to govern my self
and actions so, as to gain your good opinion and kindness, and I cannot but own
I have your favor accompanied with all the obliging Circumstances imaginable:
for the first time that you were pleased to command my Service was in the 18
Years Parliament, upon the death of Sir Foulk Lucy, who had served you
faithfully in that Parliament; and though I was raw and unacquainted with those
affairs, and without any Trial of my Integrity, you ventured all you had in my
hands at a time when England was in danger to be lost for want of a Vote: For
that Parliament chiefly consisted of such as sold their Country for private
advantage, and would have sold their King too, if they could have made a better
market; I served you some time in that Parliament, at last it was Dissolved,
and a new one called, and then as if you had approved of what I did, you
thought fit to employ me again in that Service, though you laid him aside who
had been my Colleague; that Parliament continued not long, but was Dissolved,
and a new one called; and then again a third time you thought me fit to
represent you in Parliament, though as you had done before you set him aside
whom you had sent along with me, and Chose a new one in his room; but why you
did me so Singular an honor as to continue me in your Service two Parliaments
together, and did not the like to the other Gentlemen, it is not for me to give
the reasons of it, those are best known to your selves. This is now the fourth
time that I have waited on you on the like occasion, and it is not a lessening
of your former kindness, that you have not changed my former Partner; but
rather a Confirmation of it, because that the first time you have continued him
is when he appears to be of my opinion; and that which still adds weight to
your kindness is, that notwithstanding all this stir, this bustle, this
unnecessary charge and expense, all the Stories by which I have been traduced,
you have not been prevailed upon to withdraw or diminish your favor.

Gentlemen, I humbly beg your Patience to speak a few words in answer to what
they say of me, lest by Silence I may seem to cry Amen to their reports and
Stories; the first thing they reported, was that I would not stand again, but
would decline your Service: but withal they give no reasons for it, only it is
so because they said it; but what reason there is to contradict them now who
said so the last time, and how true it was you well remember. So that this
being the Second time that they have told you the self same falsehoods, I hope
for the future that others will believe them as little as you have done. It was
reported that I was killed without giving any reasons or Circumstances, and
that to this also they expected an implicit belief, I wish they are not for an
implicit faith in all things; it was truly an excellent Artifice to threap you
out of your Votes; yet had I been killed, had it been for your Service, I
should have thought my self well bestowed, and rather meet than avoid the
occasion of my Death. They t^l you also that I am very obnoxious to the King,
but they do not tell you that I am restored to my former Station of my
Commission of the Peace, without seeking or desiring it, it cannot be imagined
that his Majesty would be so Gracious to a man of whom he has an ill opinion,
and it is a reflection to his Majesty to think he will do a thing of that
Nature out of any regard whatsoever, but when a thing carries its weight and
reasons with it; so that by this you may discern how all their reports are
grounded, being rather the effects of their desires than that the thing is
truly so.

It seems the Gentlemen are much displeased that this County have frequently
commanded those of my Family to serve them in Parliament, they call it an
entailing upon the Family, but they are not pleased to vouchsafe the reasons
why the Son may not be employed as well as the Father, in case he proves as fit
for it; but the truth is, they would govern you, and are angry that you will be
your own chusers; yet whether in this they design to serve you or their own
ends, I submit to your Judgment; but as to my own particular, they think the
County highly -- that I have served you in several Parliaments. Alas Gentlemen,
I know I am much inferior in Parts and Learning to a great many, but in
faithfulness to your Interest, I will submit to no man; but if you would
observe it, they would impose that upon you which they would not have done to
themselves. If they have a Servant who has served them faithfully, they would
not take a new one in his room; because they have entertained him several
years; but you must change your Members as often as you have new Parliaments,
though they serve you well, and you ought to hate them because they would have
it so: for they give no better reasons for it; but whether they seek your good
or their private regard I leave to you to determine.

A Reverend Gentleman at Northwich was pleased to tell you, that you must not
choose the same Members again, for if you did, the King and Parliament would not
agree. I wonder how long he has been one of the Kings Cabinet Council that he
can tell so well before; if we may believe the greatest Ministers, they say
otherwise, and that the King out of his gracious disposition to his people will
deny himself in that which is most dear, rather than break with his people, so
that either he or they are out; and I am not convinced that he is infallible,
and am apt to believe that he is in the wrong, since I have observed that they
are for the most part mistaken, who take upon them to judge of matters when
they are at so great a distance from White Hall, though it may be remembered
that this Gentleman has an affair at London, that requires his presence much
oftener than he is pleased to afford it; and but that great wits are unhappy in
short memories, that Gentleman could not have forgot that if the Parliament had
continued, one of his Cloth had been severely reproved for meddling with matters
not belonging to his Function, I mean Mr. Thomson of Bristol, and I hear there
is so great a number of the last House chosen, and like to be chosen, that his
fault will be remembered, which by the way, Gentlemen, is the Judgment of you
in your choice of me, you doing that which the rest of the Nation has done,
and where any change is, it is only to reject those that were Pensioners, or
else vehemently suspected to be Mercenaries. But I could wish it were not the
opinion of too many, that the way to recommend themselves as true Sons of the
Church is to Preach seldom, and meddle with State affairs more.

I hear some have taken offense, because at Northwich I did commend the last
House of Commons; truly Gentlemen I only gave it as my Opinion, and till the
contrary does appear I must believe that for Riches, Integrity, Learning,
Experience, and all things that are expedient for Members of that House,
England never had a better; and why the Parliament was Dissolved I know not,
for they who advised it, have neither dared to own it, nor the reasons for it.
There is one thing I could not but take notice of, in the opposition that has
been made against me; If you will observe, they are the persons that were most
inveterate one against another in the dispute between Sr. Philip Egerton and my
Cousin Chollomondley; but to oppose me they are united as one man. If their new
made Friendship be sincere, and they have this way to do it, I am very glad I
have been the occasion of their reconciliation; but if in this matter alone
they are cemented, then it does discover upon what principles they act, and
they are to be blamed, and not the Gentlemen who were set up to oppose me; for
I believe them both to be very worthy men, one of them is my Neighbor, and I
will do him what Service I can, and for the other he shall find me a Gentleman
if he has occasion to use me.

Gentlemen, I have as well as I can repeated the particular charges against me,
I had but a short time to recollect my self: there remains yet a general Charge
which I desire to speak to; and truly it is an heavy charge, a charge not to be
born if I were guilty of it. They say I am an evil man as to the King and
Church; I wish my accusers had either so much power or will to serve the King
or Church as I have; and because I do not know my self to be guilty as to
either of them, I hold my self obliged to say something in my Vindication.

I know not where I ever gave my Vote to impair the Kings Prerogative; for this
is my principle and ever has been my opinion, that the Kings Prerogative when
rightly used, is for the good and Benefit of the People; and the Liberties and
Properties of the People are for the support of the Crown and Kings
Prerogative, when they are not abused; but this blessed Harmony may sometimes
be disordered either by the influence of some ill Counsel about the King, who
to obtain their own ends, do not care to ruin their King and Master; or else
from the restless Spirits of some ambitious men of broken fortunes, who hope to
repair them out of other men's Estates. But it seems that I and the House of
Commons are much to blame, because by one of our Votes we forbid the People to
lend Money upon the Revenue by way of anticipation: I never knew it was a Crime
to pass a Vote the Law had justified, for the Law will maintain every part of
that Vote; and therefore I need say no more of it, and besides this is not a
place to argue it in. As for my part I Will do my best to preserve the Kings
Prerogative, and the way to do it is neither to add nor diminish; for to make a
King absolute is not to support but pull down his Prerogative, for the King
holds his Prerogative by the Law, and if that be destroyed, the Title is to be
disputed by the Sword, and he that has the sharpest will prove to have the
best right. As to the Church I am for it as it is now Established under
Episcopacy, but I would have them to be such as St. Paul to Tim. in his first
Book and 3 chap. describes, and when they live accordingly, I have as great a
reverence for them as any man, but when they live otherwise they prove to be --
and a ruin of the Church, and ought to be abhorred of all true Christians. And
for Ceremonies I take them not to be necessary to Salvation, but for decency
and order sake, and I conceive, this Ceremony is so much the more necessary, as
it tends to the more effectual uniting of Protestants, and to preserve Peace
and concord in the Church: I am of opinion the Church is in danger, and I Will do
my best to support it, and as the case stands we must either bring in
Protestants or Papists; I am for bringing in Protestants, and that is my Crime;
but you are pleased to judge me to be in the right. Now I will no longer doubt
of my opinion, I am sure he that is against bringing in Protestants is for
bringing in Papists; and whether it be more profitable to support the Church by
uniting of those who differ in Ceremonies, or those who differ in Fundamentals
I think is very plain. Is he a wise man who if his house be falling, by reason
of too much weight upon the roof, will lay more upon it, rather than prop it up
and take off some of the weight? So they who take the Church to consist of
Ceremonies, must pardon me that I am not of their opinion, since the word of
God warrants no such thing, and my reason tells me that they are too much
interested in the cause to be fit judges: for with them he is accounted a good
Son of the Church, who keeps a great stir about Ceremonies, though he live
never so ill a life, and perhaps is drunk when he performs his Devotion: but if
a man seem to be indifferent as to Ceremonies and make them no more than indeed
they be, yet in Practice Conforms more than he that makes a greater noise about
them, though he live never so godly a life, and as near as he can to the rule
of Gods word, yet he is a Fanatic and an enemy to the Church; but God Almighty
tells us he will have mercy and not Sacrifice.

Gentlemen, They who accuse me for an enemy to the King and Church have left
you out of the story; but I hope I shall not forget you, but remember on whose
errand I am sent; and as I have hitherto stuck to your interest, I hope nothing
will draw me aside from it, and if I know my own heart, I am persuaded that
neither rewards, threats, hopes nor fears will prevail upon me. I desire
nothing but to promote Gods glory and the interest of the King and people, and
if it shall please God to let me see the Protestant Religion and Government
established, I shall think I have lived long enough, and I shall be willing at
that instant to resign my breath. Gentlemen, I thought good to say this to you,
and I thank you for your patience, and hope I shall so behave my self in your
Service, that I shall make it appear I am sensible of the honor you have done
me.

I humbly thank you all.
To the Honorable HENRY BOOTH Esquire and Sir ROB. COTTON, Knight. and Bar.
Gentlemen,
WE the Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County Palatine of Chester, who have
by a Free and unanimous consent Re-elected you to be our Representatives in the
approaching Parliament, do thankfully acknowledge your joint integrity and
correspondence with the worthy and eminent members of the last Parliament, who
in so signal (and never to be forgotten) a manner asserted the Rights of
Petitioning, the Union, Supports and Growth of the true Protestant Religion
established by Law: And the only Expedient (we think), to Entail these things
to our Posterity, is to stick to what the Parliament concluded as to the Duke
of York, and all Popish Successors, and to provide for the Defense and Safety
of his Majesty's most Sacred Person, the vigorous and Sedulous Discovery of
that horrid Popish Plot, and to punish all Sham-plotters which we esteem the
worst of villains, without which his Imperial Majesty can neither be easy nor
secure.

These with those great and excellent things then under your Consideration,
make us confident of your sincerity and future proceedings, which that they may
be happy is our Prayer, and will be a support-to all those that wish a blessing
to his Most Sacred Majesty, and these distressed Kingdoms; we likewise desire
that your Votes may continue to be Printed, and till the effects we hope for
(on which the happiness of both Church and State depend) are accomplished, we
may thence read the current of your Consent and Union.

LONDON, Printed for John Minshall Bookseller in Chester, and are to be sold by
Langley Curtis in Goat Court without Ludgate. 1681.


