PEST and OFFEN or BUDA
A The City offen or Buda B Pest C. The Block house, or St. Gerrards Hill D.
The Castle E. The OverTown F. The Lower Subburbs. G. The Upper Subburbs H. The
Water Town, or Jews Town I. Turkish Burying Place K. Hot Baths L. Ruins of the
old Town M. The Danon N. The Bridge between Offen and Pest.



(...) and Description of the Famous City OFFEN, otherwise called BVDA.
Together with a particular account of this late famous Siege. As also an
Historical Relation of the several Sieges, and other accidents that has happened
to it, ever since it came into the Turkish possession.

Translated from the Original in High Dutch by Joseph Moxon.

AMong all the Cities in Hungary is Offen the pleasantest, best Situated and
Metropolis; having been the only Seat and residence of the Kings of Hungary.
Some derive its name from the many Ovens or Pits wherein formerly Lime has
been burnt. Solomon Schweiger derives its name from King Ovo, who reigned in
the time of the Emperor Henry the III.

By the Latins it was called Buda, from Buda King Attillas Brother, who
re-edified or enlarged it. Yet others say, Buda is corruptly so called from
Bada, Baths; and takes its name from the renowned Warm Baths in it. Of some it
was formerly called Etzel Burgh (viz. Ass-hill) or Attilias Burgh; Etzel
signifying in the German Language Ass.

This City being 32 German miles distant from Vienna, admits of six divisions.

1. The Castle marked D. 2. The Over Town at E. 3. The long Subburbs toward
the South, by which the Block-House in St. Gerrards Fields Stands marked F. 4.
The Water Town, or Jews Town, lying on the Danow, and its Walls butting and
joining to it, marked H. 5. The Subburbs adjoining to the Jews Town; and in
them a small four angled Palace. 6. Pest marked B. on the other side of the
Danow; and has a Bridge standing on 36 Ships between it and Offen. The Danow
is here about an English Mile broad.

The Walls and Bulwarks of this City are very strong; and the Buildings of the
whole City have formerly been very exquisite and Curious, as is yet to be seen
in the Castle.

From this City did the Turks the last year furnish their Leaguer before
Vienna, with all necessaries: It having excellent Grain brought thither from
Old Offen: It has many Hot Baths in it; and in them plenty of good Fish, which
presently die if they are put into cold Water.

Here are among the Turks and Jews, Christians allowed, as well Romanists as
Protestants, each having particularly a good School. The Church of our Lady
belongs to the Germans, and is for them a Burying place.

The Rascians (a false deceitful People) dwell here in great numbers, who
exercise all the Turkish Ceremonies of these parts (by perversion) under the
notion of Christianity.

Here are many ruins of fair Buildings, formerly erected by the Hungarian
Kings; particularly by Matthias Corvinus in whose Palace the Vizier keeps his
residence: As also of many curious Turkish Mosques, Caravan Serais, and eight
stately Baths, of which the Bath of Vili-bie is the fairest: Being much amended
by Soliman. Here are now Turkish Convents and Cloisters.

The most inhabitants are Soldiers, and Grants Turks, who live (though meanly)
in the fairest Houses.

Here King Mat. Corvinus did about 200 years ago furnish a curious Library,
which afterward the Turks demolisht; but yet a good part of it was collected
into the Imperial Library of Vienna, the rest destroyed by Fire.

Near this Metropolis; stands Old Offen, in a very unhealthy Soil which of the
Ancients was accounted Sicambria, where the Siambrian Soldiers in the time of
the Romans kept their Quarters, whose Monuments of Antiquity are yet found here.

For the better understanding the affairs of Offen, you must know that Sultan
Soliman, Anno 1526. came with a great Army personally before this City, and
Sept. 8. Mastered it; pardoned the Germans, but destroyed and captivated the
Hungarians, their Wives and Children. The Jews Town held out yet, so that the
Sultan lost 2500 Men before it; who at last gained it, and revenged their
obstinacy, so, as that of 3500 of them no more than 20 remained alive.

In the following year King Ferdinand regained the City Offen. But in Anno 1529
Soliman with a mighty Power came again before it; and having gained the Castle,
entered it with 1000 Turks (says our Author) against one Christian; Yet was he
in three Storms repulsed. So that (says our Author) the thought the Castle was
full of Devils. And now the besieged being tired out, and not reasonably hoping
for any relief, Capitulated, and agreed to march out in their full Arms: But
when they did the Turks fell upon them, contrary to their Parol, and
slaughtered them; so that not above 16 of them escaped alive. Only their former
Commander Thomas Radasti and his Soldiers had their liberties: Soliman
trusting to their Capitulations.

Anno 1541. came the Imperial General Willem van Roggendorff with 40000 men and
40 Cannon before the City, but Izabel, Widow of King Ferdinand, to whom the
Sultan deputed the Hungarian Crown after the defeat of King John of Zips,
called in the Turks to their assistance. So that the Christians were forced to
quit the Siege, with the loss of many Hungarians: And the Germans who were
possessed of Gerrards Berg were overcome by the Janisaries. Anno 1542. The
Emperor Charles the V. and his Brother King Ferdinand sent a great Army under
the Command of Joachim Elector of Brandenburg before this City, who made many
Stormings, with the loss of many Men: But the besieged defended themselves with
great resolution; and diseases happening in the Camp, the besiegers were forced
to draw off, and quit the Siege.

Anno 1599. The Here Van Schwartzenburg attempted to take the City by Surprise;
and with 10000 men came before it: But the attempt miscarried.

Anno 1602, October. 8. came the Christians again, with a strong Army before this
City, and with fire Engines burnt the long Bridge of Boats; by which many Turks
were destroyed, and the Fore and Water Towns gained by Storm. They gained Pest
also, and the Block-house on Gerrards-hill: So that this City was closely
blockt up on all sides. But the Besieged making strong and often Sallies, and
receiving Provisions by Water; the Christians were at last forced to raise the
Siege: Yet first, by a great Breach their Batteries had made, they made a very
vigorous Storm, October. 22. on the Over-Town, beginning at 3 a clock afternoon,
and continued it till midnight.

Anno 1635. The greatest part of this City was by Fire laid in Ashes, many
Cannons burnt on the Bulwarks, several thousands of Souls lost, and a great
deal of rich Merchandise consumed and spoiled in in these Flames.

Anno 1660. Another Fire happened, which did as much mischief as the former. This
happened by Lightning, and laid 2000 Houses in Ashes.

Since Anno 1529. Offen has remained 155 years in the Turkish Power. But this
present year 1684. the Duke of Lorrain, General for the Roman Emperor, having
first gained Vice-Grad, Vacchia and Pest, on July 4. (being the day in the
former year the Turks laid Siege to Vienna) came before the Metropolis of
Hungary, as being of so great concern, that on the gaining of it the whole
Conquest of Hungary depended. He having 40000 men, begirt it close on all sides
with well fortified Works, and raised several Batteries against it; making many
efforts for the regaining it. But many of his Soldiers being lost by the
desperate Sallies of the Turks; To his assistance came not only his Highness
the Elector Prince of Bavaria with 12000 men, but several Troops of the Suabian
Circle, about 4000 more.

On the other hand, The Turks had so well fortified the City, having 16000
resolute Janisaries in it, besides Citizens, and others, and all Provisions
necessary for its defense, endured the Siege very manfully, and made many
Courageous and desperate Sallies out of the City, upon the Christians, of whom
they have made great slaughter, though with the loss of many of themselves;
even till they were reduced from 16000 (as aforesaid) to 4000 Janisaries. And
besides the Serasquier Bassa with (at first) but 16000 men, came hovering about
the Siege, to devert the Christian Army from their more vigorous attempts upon
the City: And though the Bavarian Troops were lodged between the River Danow
and the City, yet did the Serasquier by Water frequently put Succors of Men and
Provisions into it, which so strengthened and encouraged the defendents, that
now the Winter coming on, and their Principal Mine discovered by a Renegado,
who got into the City, and other Mines filled by Springs and overflowings of
the River, and the Serasquiers numbers increased to 40000 men, The Christians
in a Council of War Oct. 29. resolved to put the Emperors Orders for raising
the Seige, in execution: And accordingly, having first sent all their sick and
wounded men away with the Baggage, the Canon was drawn off from the Batteries,
and planted for the defense of the Troops in their retreat to the Isle of St.
Andrews, where the whole Army consisting of about 30000 Men passed the Danube,
Nov. 1. on a Bridge of Boats: The Cavalry facing the Enemy while the Foot
marched off, without the loss of one man in their Retreat.

London; Printed for Joseph Moxon, at the Atlas in Ludgate Street. 1684.


