THE Englishman's Choice, AND TRUE INTEREST: In a Vigorous Prosecution of the
WAR against FRANCE; And Serving K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY, And Acknowledging Their
RIGHT.

-- Ego nec tumultum,
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente
Caesare Terras. Hor. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

THE Englishman's Choice, AND TRUE INTEREST.
WHEN I find those very Men, who in former Reigns, had Sacrificed our Religious
and Civil Rights, to the pleasures of their Princes, or Humors of a Governing
Party; now to set up for Patriots, in Opposing, or undervaluing, one of the
best Princes that ever sat on the English-Throne; Indignation, if not the Love
of my Country, were enough to make me Write.

Who, says the Wise Satyrist, could endure the Gracchi talking against
Sedition? And what true Englishman can with Patience hear them Declaim against
Taxes for carrying on the War against France, who were Eager to give what the
Court could ask, in a War against Protestants? Who encouraged and connived at
the Late King's Arbitrary Seizing the Customs; and would rather we should be at
the Mercy of France, to take all if it pleases, than to part with what bears no
Proportion to the vast Benefit which we have, in the security of our Religion,
Estats, and Lives, from the Barbarity of an Inhuman Enemy: Who may be very good
Companions for those Well-bred Gentlemen, which are so fond of them; but would
be ill Masters of England.

Shall those Men Complain, that English-Blood, or Treasure, is spent in so
necessary a War; who were Accessory to the solemn Murders in Form of Law of the
Best and Noblest of the English-Nation? Such as would gladly have dyed in that
cause, which our Degenerate Englishmen now start from.

Is not danger in the Field, much more desirable than to be at the mark of a
Bloody Ruling Party, which after their breaking in upon the City of London's
Liberty of Electing Sheriffs, could never miss of having any Man's Life in
their Power, nor ever spared where they thought it their Interest to destroy?

Shall those Men, who by Surrenders of Charters, and other Sordid Compliances,
Prostituted the Constitution of the English Monarchy to the Papists behind the
Court-Curtain; deny the Right of their Present Majesty's, and set themselves
against the passing any Law which may oblige Men to acknowledge their Right,
out of pretended Zeal for the Constitution?

Shall these Men hope to Convince the World, or do they themselves believe,
that the Constitution places all Authority unalterably in the first upon the
Royal Line, without any regard to Laws? If it be so, what make they of the
Constitution it self? How did any become Lawful Governors? And how came it to
pass, that the pretended Martyrs for a false Loyalty, Vid. the Paper which he
pressed the Bishops to Sign, to assure him and the Nation, that they were not
for the Prince of O.
refused to give the Late King any assurance, that they would adhere to him?
And that, upon our Present King's Advancing toward London, they invited him to
the Administration, before the Late King left England? Did they make no Scruple
to turn him out of the Government; and yet, after others are settled, are they
troubled with Qualms of Conscience about the former Right? Is it tolerable for
them to say, they would not have had his Present Majesty King, when they had
assisted so truly to Unking the other; and no real Medium was left, but King
William or a Commonwealth?

But can they pretend Conscience, who have none against Pensions and Places,
from a Government, the Right of which they disown? and they above all, who not
only declare against the Right of those Princes, to whom they have Sworn
Allegiance; but, after enriching themselves beyond measure, in Offices of the
greatest trust under them; have betrayed their Trust so manifestly, that there
is hardly any body, now, who does not see it? The Notorious and Public Marks
of which Treachery may be so Traced Step by Step, and set in so True a Light,
that no Body who is not a Party with them, or Judicially Blinded, should
question it.

I must needs say, if such there are in the World, who have Read Scripture, and
History, to that great Advantage, and so good Purpose, as to apply to His
Majesty, what is spoken of a forced Submission, saying, We submitted to him in
the day of his Power; Or what some Historians speak of H. 4th's scruple when he
had loss'd his Senses, about his Supposed Usurpation; such must be thought,
like Men of Honor, to have given fair warning of what were to be expected from
them.

But if His Majesty has run the hazard of loseing the Affections of his best
Subjects, by that only fault, of being too good to his Enemies; who can doubt,
but he who has ventured so much, and done such great things, for the good of
the Nation, will do this one thing only, yet to be desired, which is, to take
from his Enemies the Opportunities of betraying him.

At his first Landing the Serpents lay expiring under his feet, but his
Goodness, which like the Sun Communicated warmth to all, gave them new life,
and power to Sting. How happy a thing it is, that they have shown so much of
their Natures! Had they been less open, they might still have upholden that
Credit, which the pretense of zeal for The Church, and the Monarchy, had buoyed
up so long; and we might still be wasting in a lingering War with France; which
by Vigorous and Speedy Supplies, honestly Managed, may soon be ended to the
Glory both of Prince and People.

It was observed of the Old Romans, that they were the more formidable by their
losses to the Carthaginians: Which made them more United at home; more Active
against the Enemy; and Careful to find out Persons able to serve the
Commonwealth: Nor can we expect less, from the Wisdom and Resolution of the
English Nation: which will own the King's Title, and serve him; without respect
to a few Men, who have no Power in England but from the King. They pretend,
indeed, to be Pillars of the Church; while they are undermining its
Foundations: And would make the Church of an Inconsiderable Divided Party;
Dissenters from the True Church of England, the best of the Nobility, and
Gentry, and the whole body of the People: Who are entirely for His Majesty, as
he has Redeemed them from Popery: Against which the Church of England has long
been a known Bulwark.

They talk high for Monarchy; but are not for the English Monarchy or King* And
conjure up the Phantasm of a Commonwealth, to divert the apprehensions of the
Power of France: Nothing but the worst Ministry ever made a Commonwealth
tolerable in England: Nor has the Notion of it been raised of late for any
better purpose, than the discrediting them who are not for the Government of
the Late King, and* the French.

They who have labored under that imputation, are the Men who declared for
their Present Majesty's, when the others would have King William only a Regent;
a Protector of a Commonwealth; or Officer under King James, during his
pleasure; or rather under them, till their turn were served; without any sense
of Gratitude for the Deliverance wrought for 'em.

While our blind Zelots for Monarchy show, that King James, and the French
King, are the only Monarchs they would serve; interest, as well as Inclination,
and Duty, carry the supposed Commonwealths-Men, to do their utmost for a
Prince, who Revives to them the Memory of the best of those Kings, which have
Headed English Armies abroad.

When they consider, how much This King does in his own Person, beyond any
example of this Age, unless of the Great Gustavus, who raised and supported the
Protestant interest in Germany; how truly he makes good the Character of His
Illustrious Family, in being the Deliverer of oppressed Nations; how well he
performs his part, how much soever his Affairs the Clogged at Home; with what
Wisdom he Unites, and Keeps together, the Confederates against the Disturber of
the Peace of Christendom; what Life he gives to their Troops; and what real
Advantages he causes them to obtain, not suffering Flanders to be overrun by
so powerful an Army, of Soldiers long Trained up to War, under the same
Discipline, and Animated by the Examples of the Flower of their Nobility, and
Gentry; these supposed Commonwealths-Men, are ready with their Estates and
Persons to make War in good earnest, and put the French under a necessity of
waiting upon our Designs, and not we upon theirs; and of Disgorging their
Usurpations upon our Allies, if they will preserve what more truly belongs to
them.

I well know, some there are, who, as they desire we should fall by our selves,
Suggest that we may stand so; that our Navy may Guard our Coasts against
Invasions; or our Militia, and other Forces at home, may be enough to preserve
us if Enemies Land.

These Men cannot but own, that it is much better for England to be at Charges
in keeping the Enemy at a distance, than to be the Seat of War: And that if any
one of those Allies, which they undervalue, joined with France, it were such an
Accession to its power, as the French Party here would be very glad of: nor is
there any one of them, which would not in such Case, be as much Magnified by
that Party, as now they are Lessened.

But it is evident, that if the French should swallow Flanders (which they had
certainly done before now, if it had not been for the Confederacy) Holland,
which has lately set us so good an Example since the Battle of Landen, must
necessarly truckle, and their Navy be at the Command of France: And how could
we expect a Fleet able to secure us against both; when, hitherto, we and
Holland in Conjunction, have done so little against the Naval Force of France?
Excepting that Memorable time, when Admiral Russel (whose Victory was by some
Men held a crime) to his Eternal Honor and Glory, so well maintained the
Reputation of the English Nation.

If France had no Enemy but England, and were at liberty to employ against it
all their Armies in Flanders, upon the Rhine, in Piedmont, in Catalonia, and in
their Garrisons (which together amount to near 400000 Men) while so many here
show themselves ready to declare for them; what could England hope for, but to
be a Field of Blood? And how could we think that the French Swords would be
sheathed, while there were one Protestant remaining? Nay, when we consider, how
Barbarously they use the People whom they subdue, though of their own Religion,
without regard to Religious Houses, or Churches, or the Sepulchers of Princes;
we may believe, that the English Papists should find little better quarter than
others. They who have had such fatal proofs of the English Valor, and Enmity
to them, would take care never more to be in fear of their ancient Enemies: Nor
is it to be thought, that any thing less than our total Extirpation would
satisfy 'em.

When on the other side we consider, that, notwithstanding all the Treachery of
those among us, who by all manner of Ties have been obliged to do their utmost
against France; notwithstanding the Union and Fidelity in that King's Counsels;
and his greatest Efforts which he designed should be decicive this last year;
yet our King has stopped the progress of his Arms, and has given that Reputation
to the Confederates* that where he is in Person France will never Attack them
without double their number; what less can be expected, from the Gratitude and
Affection, of a brave People, to so Great a Prince; but that they will put him
into a Capacity to meet the French with equal numbers; which is to be assuredly
the Arbiter of a secure and honorable peace; and that the more Glorious, by how
many the greater Difficulties the Treachery of his pretended Friends has
obliged him to struggle with.

How impatiently did this Nation bear the private Caballing Designs, of former
King's, which have kept them in against France? What is it that they more
coveted for this last Age, than to have a Prince firm, beyond all possibility
of doubt, in the Nation's Quarrel; and who would be sure to endeavor to choose
such under him, as would Second, if not promote, the universal bent, and
desire, of his people.

King Iugurth, in ancient times, was known with presents to have corrupted the
greatest part of the Council of Rome, and to have kept them from assisting
their Friend and Ally, when a vigorous War had been for their honor and
interest: Nor did that bribing King ever think, in good earnest, of submitting
himself, till Metellus, a Man of known prudence, courage, and integrity, was at
the head of affairs.

Nor can we hope to bring France to reason by French Pensioners, if any such
there be: We may learn from their faithful Historian Philip de Comines, that
French money used to be very current in the Enlish Nation: It is not for me to
say it has had any influence of late: But I may say, there has been such a
chain of Treachery, somewhere, that every step looks as if the measures were
taken from France. Yet all the Corruption to be feared is not only from Money:
For ill habits, natures, or principles, do equally corrupt, and turn Men from
the service of this Government.

I must needs think it no undue Censure to say, that no Man, who understands
the Constitution of this Monarchy, can be against the present Government out of
principle: For whoever questions the right of it, either has not used due means
of informing himself, how fully the settlement is warranted by the
Constitution; or has that want of Judgment, which makes him a dependant upon
the Judgment of others: and the practice of them, who give Rules to the
unthinking Vulgar, has been so inconsistent with it self, as well as with their
professed Principles; that they must be ashamed of pretending to any thing but
obstinacy; and deserve the same credit with the French King, when, with his
Fleet upon our Coasts, he so Graciously declared for the Church of England.

As to them who come in to the Government, and yet deny its Right; or place it
upon such an uncertain bottom, as is a Virtual denial of it; whether Conquest,
or such a Providence as gives one's Purse to a Robber; it must be said, that we
find not this flying Party the same Men in one station that they are in another.

But what ever party they are of, through whose hand the Administration has
passed; they ought to remember that Old Saving, The Public Affairs will not be
ill Administered. In this Case bare indiscretion, or inadvertency, or want of
Intelligence, is a crime of an high Nature. And if any Man has arrived to that
height, to own himself the occasion of laying aside a Victorious Admiral,
because he has been against him in the House of Commons, this would be to
assume more than Regal Power; and such Insolence, if there were no more it it,
would deserve equal punishment with the most Notorious Treachery.

But if any in the Government have held out a Flag of Truce to its Enemies; If
being against the Right of their Majesty's, has with them been a Recommendation
to Preferment; and zeal for their Right a Cause of Disgrace; what in others
might pass only for Mismanagement, cannot but be judged Treachery in them.

Whatevever is given under the Management of Men of an other Allegiance, is but
providing Cannon to be turned upon our selves. But when Men are assured that
they who hold their present Majesty's to be our Lawful, and Rightful, King and
Queen (which is the True Test of Loyalty) shall be the only Persons entrusted
under them with the Administration; Who is he that Wishes well to England, that
will not Cheerful Contribute to his Power, for the maintaining the Right of a
Prince, without whom we cannot hope to be long a People?

They who have asserted his Right from the first Settlement of it, as they have
therein Renounced the Late King, we may be sure can have no Merit to plead upon
another change; Nor will they Act to their own Apparent Ruin, and hold the
Basin at the cutting of their own Throats.

Others, though they cannot long enjoy their Crimes, may Fancy, that what they
have done for a French Tyrany, and their fitness to be Instruments of it, may
continue to them the advantages they are now possessed of: or, at least, they
may be assured of the Ill-natured Satisfaction, of seeing those whom they have
long trampled on, destroyed before them,

And, indeed, were it not for the inhumane pleasure of Malice and Envy, it were
impossible that Protestants, and they men at ease in their Fortunes, should
engage in Plots against a Government, which is the only Security of their
Religion and Estates. And the good of England is so bound up in the Life of His
Majesty* that it can hardly be thought that numbers of any Party should engage
against him. The Papists themselves owe to him that Protection, and Security,
which King James could not have given them; besides the restitution of those
Fundamental Laws, in the defense of which their Forefathers had signalized
themselves: when they so truly distinguished between the Church of Rome, and
the Court of Rome; and thought themselves very good Catholics, when they
maintained their Liberties, by resisting the Usurpations of Popes, and of
Princes, as no part of Gods Ordinances. The High Church, and Passive-Obedience
Men, were perhaps the most sensible of the mischief of the late Reign; as they
found such advances toward turning them out of all Offices in Church and State
and their most celebrated Heads had, while under that Sense, in their Proposals
to King James; their refusal to sign an abhorrence of any design against him;
their closing with the Deliverance, if not inviting the Deliverer; and joining
to put him into possession of the Power of the Nation; acted so contrary to all
their former Proceedings; that one would have thought they had all of a sudden,
become Englishmen; and would have vindicated the Reformation from the Reproach
under which it has suffered, as if we lost in Civil Rights while we gained in
Spiritual; and that to be true Christians, we were to lay all our Worldly Goods
at the feet of our Princes, that they might distribute them among these
Successors of the Apostles.

The moderate true Church Party, could not but rejoice to find such a return of
their Endeavors, in the Settlement of the Government upon a Bottom, for which
they had ventured so far, and so long, to no purpose. But if any of them who
have suffered in the Public Cause, or sympathiz'd with them that did, now fall
off from a Settlement, called for by the Voice of the People, and the
Necessities of the Public, what do they but condemn themselves; or those their
Friends, who by their laudable Endeavors for the Bill of Exclusion, showed
that their Religion was more Sacred to them, than the supposed Divine Right of
Succession vested in a Popish Prince. But if such men desert this Government,
the Blood of the Lord Russel, Colonel Sydney, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Alderman
Cornish, and many other Sufferers for the Public, will in great measure lie at
their doors, as accessaries ex post facto to their Murders, and partakers of
the Crime: with whatever pomp they adorn their Sepulchers; what do they but pay
honor to the memories of Iefferies, and of those willing Iury-men, who helped
to dispatch so many Traitors to God and their King?

But certainly it would be very strange if any of them, who have so justly
exploded the Doctrine of the Bowstring, should become Proselites to it: and if
any one of their Spiritual Guides should now be for King James, or King Lewis;
I should think him worse than Father Peter's; who may be said to have acted with
uniformity to a Principle; when such men must be destitute of all color for
their Actions, and indeed of Common Sense: unless they can think to bring back
King James without French Forces; or to restrain those Insolences, which the
French Faction would give them the opportunity to commit. Should they think to
supplant this Government, and set up an other, without such selp, the vanity
and madness were past cure, or pity; nor, considering the power of France, and
how little virtue is left in those who should take cure for the Nation; can
Englishmen see any anchor for their hopes and expectations of Good to the
Public, but in King WILLIAM.

Is there any man who, though he set out well* is weary of the race of Glory; not
finding the Reward due to his Merit, or not enough to satisfy a boundless
ambition? let him consider how many, like the Philenian Brethren of old,
contentedly suffered themselves to be buried alive, to maintain the boundaries
of their Country: and that Perseverance in a Good Cause gives a Pleasure equal
to the greatest Rewards; and and is more honorable than the highest promotion.

Let him not envy those men whose rise has been a public calamity; but those
Volunteers in the Cause of God, their King, and Conntry, whom constancy, and
the general Voice, advance to the notice of their Prince. Can it be thought
that when he comes, to know what men have adhered to their Countries Cause in
the worst of Times, and what men served for the sake of that, with the hazard
of their Lives and Fortunes; that this great mind will leave it in the power of
some few to keep such men down, by their misrepresentations of when he knows,
that these might have been as great as their Expectations, or Desires, if they
would have joined with the Enemies to the English Liberties* who can believe,
that he who refused to invade the Liberties of Holland, when France and England
tempted him with a Crown, and a carte blanch; will not reward such virtue
where ever he finds it.

Courage is, if not the Source, at least the sign of all other virtues, in
Princes especially: nor can a Nation ever apprehend an Invasion of their
Liberties, but from pusillanimous Princes; whose fears make them grasp at false
securities, instead of what they might be certain of; in the prosperity and
affection of their Subjects: they who read the History of this Kingdom, and
mark the Characters of those Princes who have been encompassed with Armies of
Mercenaries at home, and them who have headed the English abroad; may be
satisfied, that Examples to warrant this Observation need not be fetched from
foreign Countries.

And as we have reason to believe, that our King can desire nothing more than
the good of his People; we ought, as we love our Country, every one according
to his Station and Capacity, to contribute our Endeavors, that England may not
be wanting to its self, or in gratitude to him: and, indeed, it must be said,
it has had so few good Princes, that it has always, till now, acted as in a
transport upon the very expectation of such an one; not need we go farther back
for an instance than to the beginning of the last Reign.

Certain it is, our King has no quarrel to revenge upon his People; and has
manifested that disposition to unite all Parties, and Interests, against the
Common Enemy; which if King James had in the least inclined to, all the Blood
and Treasure which has been spent in this necessary War, would have been
spared; and Christendom might have enjoyed that settled Peace, which can be
expected from nothing, under God, but King WILLIAM's Arms.

Let it never be said, that we have neglected an opportunity, for the use of
which late posterity will praise; as, otherwise, they will curse us, for
transmitting French Slavery to them.

Whoever will come into the Standard, perhaps the last that will be set up
against France, is to be embraced as a Friend to England* But many, it must be
confessed, ought to go through a state of trial, before they be received into
any place of Trust. The most gentle, the most safe (like the Military Sacrament
among the Romans) must needs be an Oath of Fidelity to Their present Majesty's:
not an Oath, which either can bear a doubtful Interpretation, or, at least, has
been interpreted into air, by Men who seem to think, that as long as they do
not in words acknowledge the Right of Their present Majesty's, there can be no
Perjury by Implication: But such an Oath as may rise in judgment, even in this
World, against every body who shall act any thing aginst the Right of Their
Majesty's: An Oath, which will leave no Loop-hole; and by which, as by the Word
to an Army, we may know who and who are together.

It will never be well, till the generality are engaged to be for the
Government in all events. Some, for certain, there are, who have made
themselves desperate in this Cause; and, as they never thought of making peace
with the other side, are incapable of pardon. They abhor a double Game, and
leave it to others, to be Heads of a Party which is against the Government, and
to support its Enemies, under color of getting into their Secrets, or bringing
them over from their Principle, or Faction. They give Men Characters according
as they find their affections to the Public, whatever their Carriage has been
toward them: nor have they Friend or Enemy; but as they are for, or against,
their Country: The love of which, as Cicero well says, is above all other Loves.

They who would be Trimmers in this Cause, make it evident, they are for having
the ship of State sink all at once: King William's, and our Countries side, can
never have too much weight against France and Rome. Nor, howmuch soever some
talk for the English Monarchy, can they reasonably expect to see it flourish,
but under King William; or till His Wisdom, and his Arms, have left it secured
to us?

I know it is difficult to make men wise, when the Wit and Money of France raise
so much Art to impose upon them: Yet this would be lost upon the generality of
Englishmen, if all disguises were thrown off; and they who are for France, or
King James, would speak out. That well meaning Men may no longer be cheated by
their false appearances; it may be convenient to pull off their Masks, and
borrowed Faces.

1. They are very copious upon the theme of Taxes, and the exporting Money to
our Armies abroad, or to assist any of the Confederates; but chiefly upon the
payment to the States of Holland, for their Charges in the late Expedition.
They would have it believed, that France would bring in a shorter Reckoning;
and would rather-have the Nation, like Constantinople, keep its Riches for a
Prey to the Enemy, than to give part to keep them out.

2. They to the prejudice of Their Majesty's, their Crown and Dignity, advance
Subjects to be Head of the Church of England. When a Man has once received that
Unction, his Person is become sacred, and to suggest that such an one is
treacherous is matter of excommunication. But who can, with patience hear it
said; in such a Man the Government loses or disobliges a whole Party? When, if
the Party be for the Government, they will esteem no man longer than he can be
thought true to it: If they be against it, kindness to any of them will but
embolden the rest, and give them opportunities for mischief. Who, when his
House is beset with Thieves, finding some of them lurking within, instead of
going to master them, will think to tempt them to his defense, against their
accomplices? They are too far engaged with one another, to dare to be honest
till their whole gang is; nor can they be reclaimed by gentle usage.

3. They have their known Cant and Shiboleth, to distinguish their Party from
all others: (the Church) and (the King) are the words given among them, to
unite Papist, and High-Church, Iacobite, and Loyalists.

And they have a certain Anagram, which joins Lewis and James; but always
preferring their old Master of France, witness the Health ( LIMP

And well knowing, that England, as the Great Duke of Rohan has rightly
observed, cannot be destroyed but by it self, and its own inbred Diseases; they
make and foment distempered Heats among us; while they divide Protestants into
different Clans and Interests; and while they make many Parties of them who
should be but one, or two at the most, they seem to wish us Ierusalem's Fate:
But when the Enemy has a party within our Gates; they who would be of no Party,
at least are not against the destruction of their Country.

4. They magnify the power of France, and the advantage of its way of
Government to make War, or command Peace; and mightily lessen, and reproach the
Confederates; and that chiefly under a popular Mask of Zeal against Leagues
with Popish Princes: which they, Good men! are so far from, that they are for
submitting to the worst of them without terms.

5. They insinuate, as if England bears the Charge of a needless War, to
maintain the Dominion of a foreign Prince, not considering that the Dutch alone
have in their pay 106540 Men, besides their allowing 25000 Gilders a Month
toward carrying on the War in Piedmont: and are so far from being discouraged
by the late Misfortunes, from a vigorous prosecution of the War, that they have
added 15000 to their former Land Forces; besides increasing their Navy.

And it is a known Maxim, that the preservation of Flanders is more for the
interest of England, than of Spain. If Flanders be an accession to France,
Holland must soon follow, and England next. They are like Nine-Pins the
throwing down one carries the rest

The importance of Flanders is sufficiently confessed by these Gentlemen, when
they would have others believe there is a necessity of our truckling to France
upon the taking a Town or two there; and yet they are for giving it all up: but
any man who has seen the noble Towns, and large Country yet remaining, would
think it very well worth the preserving. Antwerp it self, if it were in the
French Hands, would command the Trade of Christendom.

6. They are very invective against French Protestants among us, as promoting
Schism, eating the Bread out of our Mouths, and being Spies for France: as if
they wished them their persecution again.

7. The Dutch they would render more dangerous than either of the Turks;
because of the strength of their Shipping, and their Rivalship with us in
Trade; not considering, how they themselves have helped to raise France to be a
match for us and Holland; and, how likely it is, by the dividing either from
the other to swallow both: yet, by open ill usage, or a treacherous and fatal
friendship, they would drive the Dutch to take part against us.

8. They represent it dangerous to arm the Protestants in England, out of a
pretended fear of a Common wealth; and in Scotland and Ireland, for fear the
Church should be overrun with Protestants of all sorts; holding the French
Power and Popery, to be more remote dangers, or more tolerable evils.

9. They beyond measure magnify that Service the Dissenting Bishops did
themselves, in appearing for England in their own defense; and improve that
Surprise and Transport which the Nation was in, to see them once in their Lives
Protestants, and Englishmen, without marks of distinction; into an awing the
Government with an imaginary reputation; the very ground of which failed, as
soon as they fell off from the common Cause. Nor must they think it an easy
thing to dispose this Nation to turn out a Protestant King; because they
followed those Leaders, as they would any others, against Popery. God be
thanked, we have a Prince who will not quit His possession without bloody
Shirts.

They may have vanity enough to fancy, that they made this Revolution; when
they were no more than Flies upon the wheel, which the Sufferings of Lord
Russel, and others, first set a going. Their commitment to the Tower, was but
the last drop with which the Vessel ran over.

Yet if we reflect upon the Shares some of them had in laying or holding on,
that burden, which the Nation was eager to throw off; we may own, that they
contributed to the Revolution, as Storms and Tempests do to clearing the Sky
for fair Weather.

These, with a few hot headed Laymen, who have always used the Church for a
Sanctuary and Asylum; set up for a Church by themselves, divided from the Body
of the English Clergy, as well as Layty; and standing between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome.

Since there is no hopes of the Cassandrian way, for Rome to come to them; none
is left but the Laudaean, for them to advance toward Rome. And, indeed, it was
very visible, that they were doing drudgery for the Papists, in former Reigns;
while they were laboring to keep the Church of England upon a bottom, which
they neither designed for National, or a means of uniting with Protestants of
other Countries.

Can their Reputations weigh in England, against a Government founded in common
Protestantism? or against the Reputations of those their Successors, whose
Piety, Learning and Moderation, as they kept them from the highest Stations in
the Church, against the general Voice; at last promoted them with the Applause
of all, who wish well to England.

And though our Archbishop wants the advantage of an education at Rome (which
it seems the other has not had to no purpose) the greatest Bigots of the new
Sect cannot imagine him short of their Head, in any real Ornament, or
Qualification.

10. They, tho masters of no virtue, are so far from esteeming what the
greatest Enemies abroad admire in our King that they have the insolence to
speak unmannerly of his Person; when they owe it to His Clemency, that they are
not chastised for it by the Fury of the People.

11. They vilely insinuate, as if His Majesty were no Friend to the English
Nation: which no man can do, without greatly undervaluing both Prince, and
People. If indeed, the most were like themselves, or what they represent them;
he would be under an unwelcome necessity, of living as in a Country of Enemies,
who would not have him Reign over them. But, certainly none but they who are
obstinately resolved against loving him, can apprehend the hatred of a Prince,
whose goodness surprises his greatest Enemies: tho the Coals of Fire, which it
heaps upon their heads, do not melt them into any sense of gratitude, or shame.

What follows? but that all true Englishmen, standing upon their Guard against
these Wolves in Sheeps clothing; and against all, who may at least be
suspected of private ends; second the Intentions and Endeavors of a Prince,
who cannot possibly be thought to have any aim, or interest, but for the good
of this Nation, and Mankind in general.

Let us not fear the Power of France; like infectious Diseases, it will come
with a fear, which debilitates, and disables from resistance.

Hannibal at the Gates, as it was used to frighten the Children of Rome; to the
Men was a Call, and Incitement, to take care of the Public Safety. Not to have
despaired of the Commonwealth, when its Fortune seemed most desperate, was as
happy to them, as it was glorious.

And should the issue of opposing France be as dismal, as the most timorous, or
most designing, pretend to foretell; it were better, that the last day of our
being a free People, should overtake us doing our duty, and struggling against
our Chains, than helping to put them on. And in truth, hardly any thing in this
life can be a real affliction, till men begin to sink under the sense of having
brought it upon themselves.

Those Protestants, who hope to plead the merit of voluntary submissions and
services to France; would do well to consider, how it has been with those of
the Religion there, who enabled their King so to use them.

And those miserable Towns and Cities, which thought, by delivering up their
Keys to secure their Houses, Estates, and Liberties; stand as so many fired
Beacons, to stir up all Nations against them.

As the Power of France may be thought a punishment upon our accessions to it
formerly, and present divisions; when we repent of the past, and mend the
present cause of that Calamity; we may well think the Rod will be broken. Nor
will France longer be a scourge, than we deserve it.

It is, doubtless, in our Power to remove the moral, and judicial Cause, of our
Fears: nor can we think that all those Ravages, Persecutions, Perfidies, and
Contempts of God and Man; shall long go without some remarkable Punishment.
However, Humane Greatness has its Limits and Periods; and France seems to have
seen its best days.

If we use the means to humble it, by uniting, and exerting, our strength; when
once we come to grapple with it, and give it one powerful shock; like a great
Machine screwed up to the height* it will never leave turning, till it comes to
the bottom.

Inwhich happy day we shall no longer be troubled with the scruples of the
noisie few, that hold off from this Government; or the distinctions of the
many, who soon settled the point, of accepting Preferments; but are yet to seek
of Salvoes to the Reputation of a Party; which must change their Principles,
and cease to be a known Party, to come to those Grounds, upon which the Nation
received their present Majesty's for King and Queen; and that of Right.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's Arms next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street.
AN Historical and Ieographical Description of France. Extracted out of the
best Authors both Ancient and Modern. By I. De la. Cross.

The Reformed Gentleman: or, The Old English Morals rescued from the
Immoralities of the present Age; showing how inconsistent those pretended.
General Accomplishments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring and Sabbath breaking are
with the true Generosity of an Englishman. With an account of the Proceedings
of the Government for the Reformation of Manners. By A. M. of the Church of
England, Bound in 8. price 1 s. 6 d.

3. An Essay against Unequal Marriages, in Four Chapters, 1. The Introduction.
2. Against Old Persons Marrying with Young. 3. Against Persons Marrying without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying without their own
Consent. By S. Bufford, Gent. in 12. bound, price 1 s.

3. The Parsons Vade Mecum: or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations about
the accounts of the year, Moveable Feasts, Ember weeks, Ecclesiastical
Censures, the memorable Things in the three first Centuries, and some after
Ages, Archbishops and Bishoprics, their Election, Consecration, Installment,
etc. Patronage, Institution, Induction, Non-residence, Dispensations,
Pluralities, Deprivation, Dilapidation, Privileges of the Clergymen, Tithes
and Simony; very fit for all Clergymen and Gentlemen, in 12. bound, price 1 s.

4. The Measurers Guide: or, The whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and
easy, showing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of Regular
Solids, Artificers Work, viz. Carpenters, Joyners; Plaisterers, Painters,
Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, etc. with the Art of Gauging, of
singular Use to all Gentlemen Artificers and others, I. Barker in 12's bound,
Price 1s.

5. Taxilla, or Love preferred before Duty; a Novel. By D. W. Gent. 12's bound,
price 1s.

6. Eachards Gazetteers, or Newsman's Interpreters, being a Geographical Index
of all Cities, Towns, etc. in Europe, with their distances from each other, and
to what Prince they are now subject to; very necessary for the right
understanding of all Foreign and Domestic News, Letters and Gazetts. 12's
bound, price 2s.

7. A most complete Compendium of Geography, General and Special, describing
all the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according
to the latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12's
bound, price 1s. 6d.

8. -- Exact Description of Ireland, Surveying all its Provinces and Counties;
showing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal Things that are
necessary to be known; Illustrated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom,
the others of each particular Province, 12's bound, price 1s. 6d.

9. Flanders or the Spanish Netherlands, most accurately described, showing the
several Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength; with
an exact description of the Cities, and who they are at present subject to;
very necessary for the understanding of Wars in those Countries, 12's bound,
price 1s.

10. The Duke of Savoy 's Dominions most accurately described, with some
adjacent Parts, showing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for
the understanding of the present War in those Parts, price 3d. The five last
done by Laurance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.

11. N^^^ -- A Law-Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure Words
and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws,
with References to the several Statutes. Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the words are used, being the
very best extant. The Second Edition, by Tho. Blunt of the Inner Temple. Esquire in
Folio, price 10 s.

12. A Treatise of Civil Bonds and Contracts, and the Nature, Causes and
Effects of Suretiships, with Cautions against it. By R. A. Gent. 8. bound,
price 1 s. 6 d.

13. Tryon's New Art of Brewing, Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as
to render them more healthful to the body, and agreeable to Nature, with less
Trouble and Charge than generally practiced, with the Art of making Malt. The
third Edition, 12's bound, price 1s.

14. -- Wisdom Dictates, or Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health
of the Body, and the Peace of the Mind, fit to be regarded by all that would
enjoy the Blessings of this World: To which is added a Bill of Fare of 75 Noble
Dishes of excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh, 12's bound, price 1s.

15. -- Pythagoras's Mystic Philosophy revived* or the Mystery of Dreams and
Visions unfolded; wherein the Causes, Natures and Uses of Nocturnal
Representations, and the Communications of good and evil Angels are
Theosophically unfolded, 8. bound, price 1s, 6d.

16. A New Art of making above 20 Sorts of English Wines, Brandy and other
Spirits more pleasant and agreeble than those of France; Illustrated by the
Doctrine or Fermentation and Distillation, by Curious Examples on the Growth
and Product of this Island, 12's bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

17. Chymicus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chemical Art,
rationally stated, and demonstrated by various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts, Powers
and Oleosmus, in such a Method, as to retain the Specific Virtues of Concreets
in the greatest power and force, 8. bound, 2s.

18. Jacob Behmen's Theosophick Philosophy, unfolded in diverse Considerations
and Demonstrations; showing the Verity and Utility of the several Doctrines
contained in the Writings of that Author; with an Abridgment of his Works. By
E. Tailor; 4. bound, price 6s:

19. Arithmetical Rules Digested and Centracted, made plain and easy for the
help and benefit of the Memory* very necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradsmen,
as for Youth and Apprentices in Merchandise Affairs, 12's bound, price 1s.

20. The Safety of France to Monsieur the Dauphin, or the Secret History of the
French King, proving that there is no other way to secure France from
approaching Ruin, but by deposing his Father for a Tyrant* and destroyer of his
People. Done out of French, 12's bound, price 1s.

21. The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was accomplished, with a particular account of the
Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon* as likewise the Settlement
of both the Kingdoms under their most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary; with a List of the Couvention, 8. bound, price 5s.

22. Remarks on the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that
of Mallam the Dutchey of Lavaleer, late Mistress to the French King; wherein is
plainly showed the late Successes of King William in Ireland, as likewise his
Future Successes in France; with the miserable end of the French King,
Translated out of French, 4* price 6 d.

23 A Collection of the Famous Mr. George Wyther's Wonderful Prophesies,
relating to the English Nation and Government, many of which not yet fulfilled;
4. price 6d.

24. (...), A Poem, of a short account of the Rise, Progress, and Present State
of the New Reformation of Manners. By a late Gentleman of the Temple, 4. 6d.

25. Gilbert Rule's President of the Scots Assemblies, his Vindication of the
Church of Scotland from the Assertions and Calumnies of the Iacobites and
Grumbletonians, 4. 6d.

26. (...), viz. Remarks on the Death of King Charles, and the succession of
King James the Second, upon Faith upon Patience, upon Ambition, to the
University of Oxford: The Soul to a good Conscience, the Soul to a bad
Conscience 4. 6d.

27 Bragadocio, A Comedy, by a Person of Quality, ^^

28 The Vadois Declaration to all Christian Princes and States, of the Reasons
of their taking up Arms, and putting themselves under the Protection of King
William, 4. 2d*


