THE DECREES OF THE Parliament of Paris, Upon a Copy of the POPE'S BRIEF Of the
first of January, 1681.

And upon the ORDERS sent by the General of the Jesuits to the Provincials of
Toulouse and Paris.

Passed on the 18th and 20th of June, 1681. In reference to the present Contest
between the Pope and the King of France about the REGALE.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard* 16^^*

AN EXTRACT OF THE REGISTERS OF PARLIAMENT.
THis present day the King's Attorney General came into the Court of
Parliament, and alleged, that the Report being publicly spread up and down,
That the Pope had enjoined the General of the Jesuits, to direct to the
Provincials of Paris and Toulouse authentical Copies of the Brief issued out by
his Holiness, on the first day of this present year, together with a more
particular Injunction to him of Toulouse, to publish it, and to oblige those of
that Society, to affirm the Reality of the said Brief, contrary to the Opinion,
which we were desirous that men should still have had of it; As also that the
General of the Jesuits having written to those Provincials, pursuantly to that
Precept of the Pope, had sent to him of Toulouse an Authentical Expedition of
that Brief, with an Order that it might be communicated to that of Paris: This
new Method and Invention of publishing Bulls and Briefs in the Kingdom,
contrary to the Forms which had been observed to this present time; as well in
this as the neighboring Countries, seemed to be of so great consequence, that
he accounted it his duty to inform the Court of it, to the end, that if that
Report proved to be true, they might be pleased to obstruct the establishment
of an Innovation, the Consequences whereof might be so dangerous, and
particularly at such a time, when such extraordinary Briefs are seen to come
abroad. But representing withal, that the Prudence and Justice of the Court of
Parliament, not permitting him to act upon uncertain grounds, it was his humble
Request to them, that they would be pleased, considering the absence of the
Provincial, to summon in the Superior of the Professed House, the Rectors of
the College, and of the Noviciat of the Jesuits, and the Procurator of the
Province of Paris, to give an account to the said Court of Parliament, in the
presence of him the Attorney General, and his Colleagues, of what they know
concerning that Report, that the Court may proceed therein, upon the
Conclusions which they should take, after they have been more particularly
informed by that means.

The said Attorney General having withdrawn, and the Matter being taken into
Deliberation, it was resolved, that the Superior of the Professed House of the
Jesuits, the Rectors of the College, and the Noviciat, and the Procurator of
the Province of Paris should be summoned to appear in Court, on Friday at seven
in the Morning, that they might be heard in the presence of the King's Council,
and give an Account of what they knew of the said Brief of January 1. 1681. and
of the Orders which the Provincial received from the General upon that
occasion. And that done, that such Order be taken therein, upon the Conclusions
of his Majesty's Council, as shall be requisite.

Done in Parliament, June the 18th. 1681. Signed DONGOIS.

An Extract of the Registers of Parliament.
THis day the King's Council came into Court, and gave notice, that Father de
Verthamont, Superior of the Professed House of the Jesuits, of this City of
Paris, the Fathers Deschamps, and Dozaine, Rectors of the College, and of the
Noviciat, and Father Pallu, Procurator of the Province of France, were
attending in the Lobby, in order to their receiving the pleasure of the Court,
according to the Resolve of the 18th. of that Month: Whereupon the said Father-
Jesuit, being brought into the presence of the King's Council, Mensieur the
first President thus spoke to them:

This Court has summoned you to appear here, upon the Advertisement given to
us, that your General has not long since sent into France, by the Pope's
Order, to some of your Provincials, a pretended Brief, in order to the
publishing of it. This kind of procedure, quite opposite to the Orders of the
Kingdom, has always been disallowed with Reproach against its Authors, as often
as they have attempted to put it in practice. It is a strange thing that a
Prince, who has not ceased conquering, till such time as he was pleased to do
so, and who has given Peace to Europe cannot enjoy it himself, and that he is
not disturbed therein, but by the principal Ministers of Truth, while he
expends his Cares and Treasures for the Destruction of Heresy: But it is a
Happiness, that this Packet is fallen into Hands so reserved as yours: We do
not surprise your Wisdom, nor do we corrupt your Fidelity. The Court desires of
you, that you would make it a Relation of what has passed upon this occasion.

Father Verthamont acknowledged, that their Provincial had received a Letter
from their General of the 23d. of April last, with a Copy in the Italian
Language, of an Order of the Pope's, for the directing, to the Provincial of
Toulouse, a Copy, in an Authentical Form, of his Holinesse's Brief of the first
of January this present year, concerning the Grand-Vicars, established in the
Diocese of Pamiers, during the Vacancy of the Sea, and for enjoining the
Jesuits of Toulouse and Pamiers to declare, that the said Brief was real, and
to address a Copy of it, to the Provincial of Paris, that he might also be
assured of the Reality thereof. And by that Order, the General is charged to
give an Account, to the Assessor of the Inquisition, of the Answers which
should be made unto him. That in the same Packet, there was an unsigned Copy
of that Brief. That he himself knew, that, by by way of Answer to the General's
Letter, their Provincial had, among other things, written to him, that he did
not believe any one of his Society would would have been so unfortunate, as to
make any diminution of the respect they owe his Holiness, as he might also
assure the Court, on the behalf of all the Jesuits of the Kingdom, that they
should not ever be defective in point of Fidelity and Zeal for his Majesty.

Whereupon Monsieur Denis Talon, the King's Advocate, and one of his Council
spoke thus: Sirs, It is apparent by what has been just now said, by the
Superior of the Jesuits House of St. Lewis, in this City, That the General of
the Jesuits had received an Order from the Pope, for his sending to the
Provincials of the Jesuits of Paris and Toulouse, an authentical Copy of a
Brief, dated the first day of this present year, which is presupposed to be
directed to the Chapter of Pamiers, and to Friar Cerle, in the quality of the
Grand Vicar of Pamiers, during the Vacancy of the Sea, and that with a Design,
that the Jesuits of Toulouse and Pamiers, who, as it is pretended by some, had
publicly affirmed, that the said Brief was not real, should be obliged to
retract it, to confess the reality of the Brief, and to acknowledge withal the
fault they have committed by an affected Incredulity, and they would have it,
that the General should give an Account to the Assessor of the Inquisition of
the Answers which shall be made unto him. This Order, which does not appear to
have any Date, is accompanied with a Copy of the Brief, but not Signed, and by
a Letter of the General's, repeating the same thing contained in the Pope's
Order. It is easily discoverable by this simple Exposition of the matter of
Fact, that this manner of designing to publish, and in some sort to execute
Briefs in the Kingdom, is new, contrary to the Laws of the Country, and of a
dangerous Consequence. It is not only in France, that Briefs and other
important Expeditions of the Court of Rome cannot be either published or put in
Execution, without the King's permission. The same thing is practiced in Spain,
and in most of the other Countries, wherein the Authority of the Holy See is
acknowledged.

The Correspondence which ought to be between the two Powers, the Interest
which Sovereign Princes have to prevent the Introduction of any thing from
abroad, tending to the disturbance of the Tranquillity of their Governments, has
rendered this Custom legal and necessary: But that wise precaution, which many
times dispenses with our entering into more intricate Contestations, would be of
no Advantage, if the Contrivance which they have made use of at Rome, in order
to the publishing of the Brief of the first of January be authorized; in regard
that, as often as there shall be any Bulls, which they would have received in
the Kingdom, and yet such as whereof his Majesty will not think convenient to
permit either the Execution or Publication, they will make use of the
interposition of the Generals of Orders, who, for the most part have their
Residence at Rome. And the Pope by, their Channel, will pretend to get into
France all the Decrees of the Inquisition, and in a word, all the Encroachments
which the Court of Rome would make upon our Liberties.

It is therefore necessary to check the course of so dangerous an Innovation;
which yet may be done with so much the more ease, that, as to that concern,
there is not any necessity of establishing new Laws. It is only requisite that
we keep our selves from dispensing with the observation of the ancient
Ordinances, which do not allow of the publication of any Brief or Bull, from
Rome, without the King's permission. And this is done in some Provinces with so
much Rigor, that the very simple Signatures of Provisions of Benefices are not
exempted from that General Order, whether they come from Rome, or the Legation
of Avignon. What we do in this Juncture for the Public Interest, and his
Majesty's Service, proceeds not from our having Cause to complain of the
Jesuits; the Reproaches which they receive in the Direction, written in the
Pope's Name, and in their General's Letter, ought, amongst us, to stand them
instead of an Elogy, and are certain Proofs, that they have not deviated from
their Duty. And therefore since it may be some dissatisfaction to them, that
they cannot submit to the Orders of the Pope and their General, in case they
are not informed, how opposite that Order is to the Laws of the Kingdom, it is
but just that we relieve them, and rid them out of the perplexity, which they
might run into by the Authority of the Decree which will be passed. But if we
have not hitherto used endeavors to prevent the Publication of the Brief of
the first of January; if we have looked upon the Copies, which have been
scattered up and down of it in Paris, rather as Libels, than Copies of an
authentical Act, it has not been out of any Fear, but is to be attributed to
our moderation, as being inclineable to doubt of their reality. We shall not
want Remedies to oppose Enterprises of that Nature, when it shall not be
allowable in us to connive at them any longer. We shall use our utmost
endeavors to continue the good Correspondence which ought to be between His
Majesty and the Pope, between the Holy See, and the Gallicane Church; and
whatever may happen, we shall never, on our part, make a Breach of that Sacred
Union of the Sacerdotal Function, and the Royalty, so necessary to keep up the
Splendour of both the Powers, and to preserve and dilate Religion.

But on the other side, we shall not endure the Imposition of a Yoke, which our
Fathers have not undergone, nor the Abolition of our Liberties, of which they
were so jealous. We shall never approve of any Alteration in the Order of
Jurisdictions. When the Pope receives Appeals from Ecclesiastical Judgments, he
is obliged to nominate Judges in the Kingdom, for the termination of them, and
he cannot entertain affairs there at first breaking out, nor retain the
cognizance thereof at Rome, whether it be in reference to the validity of
Elections, or even of Appeals from Sentences given by Bishops, or other
Officials. As we are inclined to a Religious observation of the Concordate, and
do tolerate Resignations in favor, Preventions, Annates (that is annual
Tenths) though contrary to the ancient discipline of the Church; So ought the
Pope to execute it on his side also, in the things that are favorable to us,
which we do not look upon as Privileges granted us by Rome, but as the
exercise of common right, and as the Groundwork of our Immunities. And it is
thereby easily perceivable, that those persons, who are the Authors of the
Brief of the first of January, and of many others, which have appeared upon
this matter, engage the Pope in contests more likely to retrench his Authority,
than to augment it, and seem to have no other design, than that of disturbing
the Peace of the Church. In short, the Regale being one of the most eminent
rights of the Crown, how can they hope that the King will ever endure that that
Illustrious Prerogative should, during his Reign, admit of the least shock or
diminution? Your own Records acquaint you, that the Regale was always so
considered as a right of the Crown, unalienable and imprescriptible, that King
Francis the First, having left Madam Louise of Savoy, his Mother, Regent in the
Kingdom, and having, amongst other things, invested her with a power to confer
Benefices, vacant in the Regal donation, she was obliged to renounce that
Privilege, upon the Remonstrances of the Parliament, who represented to her,
that the right of conferring Benefices, in the Regal Donation, was so annexed
to the King's Person, that he could never part with it, or communicate it to
any other. The Judgment of particular, or general Controversies, arising in the
matters of the Regale, do belong, and ever have belonged to this Honorable
Assembly, privatively to all other Tribunals of the Kingdom. It was your
Honorable Body judged it above seventy years since, that the Regale extended
over all Bishoprics, without any distinction; and the Declarations of
MDCLXXIII, and MDCLXXV, do not make any new Establishment, and do but confirm
your Decree. So that we may confidently affirm, that how great soever the
King's Authority may be, yet he can no more renounce the Regale, either wholly,
or in part, than he can destroy the Salick Law, or abandon the Sovereignty of
some part of the Provinces, which make up and integrate the French Monarchy;
and what submission soever we may have for his Will and Pleasure, we shall
rather beseech him to disburthen us of the Exercise of our Charges, than
endure, that that Privilege should receive the least Diminution by our
Suffrages, or our Silence. There is not any necessity that a man should be much
versed in our Maxims, to discover, that it is not at Rome these Questions ought
to be discussed, and that whatever has been hitherto done, either on the
account of the Pope, or his Officers, is equally unmaintainable, as well in the
form, as the groundwork of it. It Is to no purpose that they menace with
Excommunication, not only the Ecclesiastics, but the very Prelates of the
Kingdom, when they do not implicitly submit to Briefs contrary to our manners,
and such as would absolutely abolish the Episcopal Jurisdiction, if the
Execution thereof were permitted. Appeals, in the case of abuses, introduced to
maintain the Policy of the Church, and to obstruct the usurpations of the
Officers of the Court of Rome upon the Temporal and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, are infallible expedients to secure all the King's Subjects from
those Censures, which our Ancestors have slighted, and declared abusive, when
there was no legal Ground for them.

Having thus protested, as we do, that we shall use all the means, which we
shall think convenient, to check the course of all these Innovations, and to
put a period to attempts so prejudicial to the King's Authority, and the
Immunities of the Gallicane Church; It is our request, that the Court will be
pleased to order the Copy of the Brief of the first of January, the Italian
Memoirs sent to the General of the Jesuits, and the Letter by him written to
the Provincial of the Province of Fance, to be registered amongst the Records of
the Court, to the end, that after Communication had of them what is fitting may
be required; That there be a prohibition issued out to the Provincial, and to
all the Superiors of the Houses of the Jesuits, against the publishing of the
said Brief, Letters, and Memoires, and doing any thing as to the Execution
thereof, directly or indirectly, under any pretense whatsoever, upon pain of an
extraordinary procedure against those who shall not obey, as disturbers of the
public tranquillity; as also upon pain, as to the Society, of the Forfeiture
of all the rights, privileges, and prerogatives, which are attributed thereto,
as well by its establishment, as otherwise. That the like Prohibitions be made
to all the Superiors, nay to all the individual persons of the Religious
Communities, against publishing, or executing any Bull or Brief, otherwise than
pursuantly to Letters Patent well and duly verified in Court, and that under
the same penalties: And that to that end, the Decree which is to pass upon the
present conclusions shall be read in all places, where it shall be thought
requisite.

Monsieur the First President pronounced his Opinion. The Court ordered, That
the Copies of the pretended Brief, the Memoire containing the Pope's Order, and
the Letter sent, shall be immediately registered, that they may be communicated
to his Majesty's Attorney General, and to the end, that, upon his Conclusions
in writing, such provision should be made therein as is requisite. And after
the Decree prononced, Monsieur the First President said to the Jesuits; The
present Assembly orders me to tell you, that they are satisfied with your
obedience. The said Pieces were registered, and afterward the King's Council
withdrew.

And afterward, upon the perusal of the said Pieces, and the Conclusions taken
in writing by the King's Attorney General, whereby he had required, That
prohibitions should be made to the said Provincial and others of the said
Society, as to the publishing the said Brief, and the orders received from the
Pope, by the General of their Society, and doing any thing directly or
indirectly executively thereto; And that Prohibitions should be in like manner
made to all Provincials, Superiors, and private persons of all the Religious
Orders, against their publishing and executing any Briefs, or Bulls of the
Pope, other than the Briefs and Bulls, relating to the interior and ordinary
discipline of their Orders, otherwise than consequentially to the King's
Letters Patents, registered in the Court of Parliament, upon pain of an
extraordinary procedure against all such as should be refractory, and, as to
the said Society and Religious Orders, upon the forfeiture of all the favors
and privileges which had been granted to them. The matter was taken into
Deliberation.

THE COURT proceeding juridically upon the Conclusisions of the King's
Attorney General, does make prohibitions to the said Provincial, and others of
the Society of the Jesuits, as to the publishing the said Brief, and Orders
received from the Pope, by the General of their Society, and doing any thing
directly or indirectly in the execution thereof. And it makes also most express
prohibitions to all Provincials, Superiors, and Religious Persons, of all
Orders, that they do not publish or execute any Briefs or Bulls of the Pope,
other than the Briefs and Bulls relating to the interior and ordinary
discipline of their Orders, otherwise than consequentially to the King's
Letters Patents registered in the Court of Parliament, upon pain of extraordinary
procedure against the refractory, and, in reference to the said Society and
Orders, of forfeiture of all the favors and privileges which have been
granted them by the King, and the Kings his Predecessors.

Done in Parliament, June 20th. MDCLXXXI. Signed DONGOIS.

FINIS.

