DELIGHTFUL NOVELS Exemplifyed in Eight CHOICE and ELEGANT HISTORIES Lately
Related by the most REFINED WITS; With INTERLUDES.

In which are Comprised The Gallant Adventures, Amorous Intrigues, and Famous
Enterprises of sev^ral ENGLISH GENTRY.

With the most Patheti^k Oratory and S^btil Stratagems used in LOVE-AFFAIRS.

The Fourth Impression, Enlarged with the Addition of Two New Novels.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Crayle, at the Lamb in Fle^^street, near
White-Friers-Ga^e. 1686.

Advertisement of some BOOKS Lately Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Crayle, at
the Lamb in Fleetstreet, next White-Friers-Gate.
1. THE Beauty of Holiness, written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man,
etc. To which is Added Holy Devotions on several Occasions, Fitted to the main
Uses of a Christian Life. The fourth Impression in Octavo.

2. The Christians Companion, or a Guide to the Holy Scriptures, discovering
the Hidden Treasures contained in the New Testament, and explaining the
difficult and intricate Texts throughout every Chapter. By a Reverend Divine of
the Church of England, in a small Vol. Octavo.

3. The Queens Closet Opened, Comprehending several Hundreds of Experienced
Receipts, and Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery, Preserving, Cookery,
etc. which were presented to the Queen by the most Eminent Doctors in Physic,
Surgeons, Oculists, and diverse Persons of Honor, whose Names are Fixed to
their several Receipts, The Last Edi^ion Corrected and Enlarged with many New
and Late Additions. 12^. price 2 s.

4. The Glory of God's Revenge against the Bloody and Detestable Sins of
Murder and Adultery, Expressed in Thirty Modern Tragical Histories. To which
are Annexed, the Triumphs of Friendship and Chastity, in some Illustrious
Examples. By Tho. Wrig^t. M. A. Octavo, price 2 s 6 d.

5. Cocker's Morals, or The Muses Spring-Garden, adorned with many Sententious
Disticks and Poems, in Alphabetical Order, for the Use of Writing-Schools, etc.
4 to. price 6 d.

6. Delightful Novels, Exemplifyed in Eight Choice and Elegant Hist^ries,
lately Related by the most Refined Wits, with Interludes, 12 o. price bound 1 s.

(...) The BOOKSELLER to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with a Novell Banquet, which in the pleasantness and
Variety of the Subject, and the several Comical and surprising Circumstances, I
am confident will be no less Grateful to Thee than I intend it. I must confess,
the Critical Palats of the Age have been too much Nauseated with lean and
Jejune Discourses of this Nature, especially when the Regalio has been prepared
by unskilful Hands; But this being both the Business and Diversion of a Person
eminent at Court for Wit and Parts; I dare Promise Thee the Polynant Relish,
which will not ^ but satisfy the most Curious or (...) severest Judge. These
ensuing Histories were writ by a Worthy and Learned Pen, at the Request of some
Gentlemen and Ladies, and now Published from his own Manuscript, that the more
Ingenious Part of the World may share in that Recreation, which was at first
designed for the private Entertainment of some Persons of Honor. The Stories
are here told under seigned Names, that we might preserve that Respect and
Reverence due to their Title and Grandeur.

But I shall no farther inhance thy Expectation of the following Treatise; An
Invitation is Civil and Modish, and so far I only offer it, though I do (...)
Question but every Guest will meet ^^^^h a Dish will give him some ob^^ging
Gusto.

B. ^.

THE INTRODUCTION
THe Noble Melintus, whose Arms abroad had been no less Successful than his
Amors at Court, the one Rendering his Name equally terrible to his Foes, as the
other did his Person, Lovely to those Beauteous Ladies his Generous Addresses
had Acquainted him with; On a sudden forsook the Court, and Sighed away his
bitter Hours in a Solitary R^tirement. When the News was Spread, the Noble
Melintus was withdrawn, it Raised a Wonder in all; His own Merits having Gained
him more then Ordinary favor from his Prince, and his Courtly presence, and
Obliging Mean Won a respect from all that knew him. The Count his Uncle more
particularly Enquired the Reason of his present discontent, from whom at length
with much difficulty, he Forced a discovery. I must, my Lord, (says Melintus)
Bless that Happy Minute when first I saw the Matchless Corinna, and Curse the
Severity of my Stars whose kinder Influence ought to have given Her more
constancy, or me less concern, for that Loss, I now but in vain Lament, She Is
gone! My Lord, She Is lost to Me for ever! My hated Rival now Surfeits with
delights in those Curling Arms I once thought mine; Every kiss he takes is a
Blessing stolen from Me, nor has He Honor enough to pity, but Scorns, laughs at
my Miseries, and with the Memory of my sufferings, whets his Cloyd Appetite to
fresh Enjoyments, Melintus would have proceeded, but the Count hav^ng now the
true Cause of his Melancholy, chose rather to divert his Passion then Encourage
it by a further discourse upon the same Unhappy Subject; And like a subtle
Rhetoritian with undiscerned Charms, led his heedless Auditor wide from his
present Theme of Sorrow, to a more Soft and Comical Entertainment: And when he
took leave promised to send Geronto, his old witty Companion, and some others
of his Friends, both Gentlemen and Ladies, the next Afternoon to Visit him;
Whose facetious Humors, and pleasant Conversation would divert his Melanchely,
and prove the most powerful Cordial to recover a dispairing Lover. Accordingly
the next day, Geronto, Lysander, Florimel and Aurelia, went over to Barn-Elms,
where Melintus had for some days past Concealed himself, that he might more
luxuriously Indulge his discontented thoughts free from the Trouble of
Ceremonious Visitants. No sooner had they saluted Melintus, whose Cloudy
Forehead spoke the present Anguish of his Soul; But in came Parmenio and
Philotas, each leading his Mistress, the fair Evadne and Beautiful Theodosia.
Melintus was not a little Surpised to see his Friends Crowd in so fast upon
him, when Geronto (their Mutual Civilities being past began to Rally Melintus
with such sharp Excursions as his great Wit had always priviledg'd him to at
Court, and his Intimate acquaintance might now more freely Challenge from his
Friend, the little bickerings with Repartees being over, in which the Ladies,
especially Florimel, lost no advantage, they fell upon more Composed
Discourses, and as nothing could be more agreeable to the Company, nor any
Subject more proper then that of Love, Geronto whose Talent was great that way,
first broke the Ice, and began with this Harangue,

NOVEL the First.
By GERONTO.
A Gentleman, younger Brother of a very good Family in the West of England,
having had the advantage of a Liberal Education at the University of Cambridge,
left those happy Walls, esteeming that sort of Colleg^ate Imprisonment too
narrow for his more aspiring and ambitious Thoughts, which now began to feel
the heats of Love, and Warmer desires of attaining that pitch of Honor and
Reputation his Ancestors had Arrived to. Having thus taken leave of his
Studies, he returned into the Country to receive the plentiful provision his
Father had by Will assigned him, which amounted to 4000 li. on which foundation
(though Inconsiderable to what his elder Brother enjoyed) he doubted not to raise
as Substantial a fortune by his Industrious Improvement as his Birthright had
denied him: With this Intention, knowing the Barren Soil of a Country Life,
was not so fit to accomplish his designs as the more fruitful emploiments that
attende^ a Court and City, he repaired to London: But bringing with him a
Temper too Generous to Flatter, and too Gentile to Cozen, he quickly found
without the first he must expect no preferment at Court, and wanting the Second
it was Impossible to advantage himself am^dst a Crowd, whose only patrimony was
their craft. In the midst of these Thoughts he had often resolved to return to
the more innocent diversions of the Country; But finding himself entangled in
his Affairs, and engaged in the acquaintance of the Town Gallants, who at first
had insensibly wrought him into their Society, by those Nets and Subtletys they
Spread to catch the heedless and Unwary; And being softened by the charms and
allurements of the fairer Sex, to whose Visits he was every day enticed, he
found it impossible to discharge himself of these Inconve^iences, though he had
before his Eyes the most dismal prospect of misery, and inevitable Ruin of his
Fortun^s which now beg^n to confume a pace, an^ in three years time the whole
Treasure was quite Exhausted. His Companions who had so often been relieved by
his Gen^rous kindness were so far from pitying or Assisting him in these
distresses, that like the Summer Birds, they left his Wintered Quarters to seek
a Spring in some warmer Climate, without the least Gratitude or kind
remembrance of those Lavish kindnesses with which they had been so often
refreshed? In thi^ Condition, Repentance, the usual Comerade of d^stress,
presented her wrinkled Face to the poor undone Youth, and brought into his
Thoughts his f^rm^r miscarriges, but with all left him destitut^ of any
obliging Clue to Extricate himself from the Labyrinth his follies and
Misfortunes had Ensnared him in. How ready he then was to curse the Influence
of those Stars that frowned at his Birth, and Raised in his own Breast an
Enemy against himself; To blame his past Improvidence, and all the Obliquityes
of his former Conduct; They can best Judge who have seen and known how few
Friends adversity affords, and how the pleasures of former prosperity are the
bitterest Ingredients of present Calamity.

In this deplorable Estate after that by renewed solicitations he had wearied
all his Friends, Poverty began to grow Shameful, his wonted Embroideryes were
now worn into Rags, the Treats and Regalios' with which he had tired out the
day, and Stole from the Hours of Rest to Solace himself with, now Tantaliz'd
his present Hunger; His Beds of Down and softer Companions of Nightly Amors,
were now no more, a Numerous concourse of Dunns with their Loud Alarms broke
his Rest, and like Hornets with their Stinging Demands, perpetually tormented
him, and he who but a little before was the Court and admiration of every
Flattering Sycophant, is now their Scorn and Laught^r. Instead of his Livery'd
Attendants, the Staff Officers w^tch his Steps, and nothing but the in^^my of a
Prison and the Gripes of penury, are the thoughts with which he Entertains
himself; So that being forced to the utmost Extremity, he resolved rather with
the Prodigal, to return to his Fathers House, than feed upon Husks amongst the
London Swine; To which End, having Raised as much Money as the remains of his
Movables would pledge for, he began his Journey for the West, hoping his
Friends would Commiserate his indigent Condition, however one Blessing he was
sure of, to be out of the Noise and Clamor of his Ravenous Creditours. His
Money being short he was forced to Travel on Foot, nor had he hopes it could
carry him to his Journey End, but resolving to trust his better fortune he set
forward; And having Traveled three days saw the last penny disposed of. The
Evening now drew on apace, and he found himself Extremely wearied, no prospect
of a Town to lodge at, or Money to pay for it, or other necessaries he had
occasion for, going heavily on under so great a load of trouble and discontent,
and pondering with himself, if it was altogether impossible for the wit of Man
to find out a Remedy for these present Evils, lifting up his eyes, at a
distance espied a Country Village half a Mile before him, which as soon as he
had overtaken, he fate down under a Hedge which belonged to a Neighboring
House, to consider what course to take to relieve his present want: Upon this
Hedge there were several pieces of Linen hung out to dry, and though it was now
late in the Evening, yet such was their Security and so great the Honesty of
those Country Hobs, that they feared no filching hand to Thieve them away; the
full Moon which with her Silver Beams supplied the Brightness of the Golden
day, discovered the Temptation to him, nor could he observe any Person near to
Guard the Hedge: But being never used to Steal, he was very loath to begin now,
nor was he less Averse to Beg; But urged by his extremities he was about to
bear away some of the Linen; when putting his Hand into his Pocket he found a
pair of Dice; Are you here still? Said he, here still? To torment, but not
assist Me! Oh base and bewitching Tools, the Wisemans scorn Charms to the fool,
and Panders to the Knave! here still; To refresh my Memory how you Ruined and
deceived Me! I have heard amongst your friends you have been Styled, the
substance of hope, the miserable Man's last relief, and is it possible to find
one sitter to receive your fa^ors then my self; Assist me then, and Umpire
between my necessity and Honesty, whilst I pursue my Intentions to play fairly
with this Hedge for the Linen it is Clothed with, and less needs then my
distressed S^oulders, which want a Covering. Yet am I resolved, if you cross my
hopes, I will yet be Just to my Losses and pay what you decree against me, and
i you strip me I shall then forswear your Assistance for the Future, and trust
my self Naked to the Charity of well disposed Christians, from whom I will hope
for that good fortune and Reasonable relief which you deny me,

Come then and lets try the Chances; Here Mr. Hedge, my Hat against that shirt:
7 is the Main, have at it; 12, Pox ont', out at the first Throw! There't goes
again, my Coat against those two Handkerchiefs and four Aprons, 6 is the Main,
now 12 good Dice, or I Am undone, ha! 5 to 6, I Have the worst on it, b^t away, now
Cater Ace, Tra Duce, what are you? Cater Duce, the Devils in the Dice, then I
must strip, Curse on ill Luck! But never be faint hearted; come, nay Breeches
you must go to, 9 is the main, have at it: what now, Duce Ace? The Devil take
all ill Luck, well, here is stockings and Shoes yet, what is there 8? Now good
sweet Honey. Dice be kind, Pox on it, (4) to 8, its two to one against me humph!
Sice Duce, Iv'e lost it, there is no hopes, Ruin is my portion, well I have
nothing left now but my Shirt, and so farewell all; Here the Dice began to
Repent, and the Spark won back his Clothes, and as much Linen from the Hedge
as was nec^ssary to supply his present Occasions, nor was he covetous of more,
which he Packed up into a Bundle and Trudged forward thanking his Stars for his
good Success. But not many paces was he gone before he was pursued by the
Owner, (who standing undiscovered behind a Tree was an Eye witness of this
strange Adventure,) and easily overtaken, by whom being questioned about the
Linen, he no ways E^deavour'd to Conceal, but Justified himself in the Fact,
telling him he came honestly by them, and would keep them, and make good his
Title before any M^gistrate in England. Enraged with this Answer, the
Countryman with Loud Outcries rai^'d the Neighborhood, who passed their
Censure and with words and blows both threatened and punished him: In so much
that he was fo^c'd to desire a Truce and entreat a hearing but had he s^oke
loud as the Northwind the Women would have Silenced him; O Rogue, says On^,
I Am glad we have found you, now I know how my Peu^trey went, which I charged on
the more innocent Fox, it is you Sirrah had them, and you shall pay for them.
W^ll said, Neighb^ur, says another, let us make ^n example of him, this is the
Rascal, I believe, ^ame a begging the other day, and whilst I was g^^h^ring
sticks Stole the Beef out of my P^t, and had like to have Ravished my D^ughter*
Ha^g him: Hang him, Thief: Scolds the Chorus. He endeavored to lay this Storm
by mild excuses, t^lling them he was a Gentleman and ought to Answer what he
had done before a Magistrate, all which did but the more incense the Rabble,
who had certainly torn him in pieces, had not a Farmers Daughter, taken with
his Shape and port, persuaded her Sweetheart Richard to use his Oratory for
the Gentleman's safety, which he not at all Curious in, did it to this ^ffect.

Fie, Neighbors, I think the Devil's in you, will not you hear a man speak, let Me
tell you, it does not become us to be Executioners to a Thief, that is the
Hangmans Work. If he has been a Rogue let the Jailer ^ave him, and the Rope
Throttle him, but why should our Hands save them a labor, our Landlord's a
Wise Man and a Justice, let us carry him thither, and I warrant you Mr. George
his Clerk will quickly take Care to send him where he best deserves.

Away with him, Away with him replied the rest, which was no Unwelcome News to
Honoriu^, (for so let us henc^forth call the Unfortunate Youth) hoping he
should find a Gentleman of those Generous Sentiments, who upon the Relation of
all Circumstances would Commiserate his Condition and assist his necessities,
they carried him to the House of a very Worthy Gentlem^n, to whom they
represented the Crime with all the complaints and aggravations their Country
Rhetorique could advance, entreating his Worship to make a public example of
so Notorious an Offender. To which Accusation, the Justice demanded of Honorius
what he had to say for himself; Who Replied,

I shall not Worthy Sir, go about to deny or Evade what I am Charged with, as
to the taking away the Goods my Accusers Claim, but as a Stranger and a
Gentleman (however I appear under this disguise of habit) I humbly Entreat your
Favor to hear me a few words in private, and I do not doubt but your Worship
will then think me not so hainously Guilty as my Accusers would persuade you
to.

The Port and demeanor of Honorius, together with the gracefulness of his
Elocution, so far wrought upon the Justice as to dismiss the Crowd, Restoring
to the party his Goods, and giving them his promises that he would take care o^
the Criminal.

No sooner were they departed, but Honorius proceeded to acquaint the Justice
with his condit^on in every point, and how, u^g'd to what he did by the force
of irresistible Necessity, which he hoped his goodness and Charity would rather
pity, then punish with the Severity of Law. The Justice extremely taken with
the pleasantness of the Relation, told Honorius he was fallen into such Hands as
would not Injure him, rather Contribute to his Relief: But since, pursues he,
you are Charged with a Crime of this Nature, think not but I will Inflict a
punishment on you, and as your Crime is Venial, your punish-shall not exceed it.

All that I require of you is that you lie in my House this Night, and take
that Accommodations the same can afford you, as to my Table and Cellar, or what
else you please to Command; Yet your Lodging must be in a Chamber which has
been haunted for these three years past with the Apparition of a Ch^ st, and so
frighted those who have seen it, that no Person yet was ever so hardy to speak
to it. If on these Condit^ons you like to be my Guest, you shall find a hearty
Welcome and a supply to carry you to the place you determine. Hono^ius with a
grateful acknowledg^ment received the offer, and humbly thanked the Gentleman
for his great favor to him, Telling him he was now doubly Obliged to his
Misfortunes, as well that he had the Honor of knowing so Worthy a Person, as
by this Adventure he might possibly make an Improvement in the Experimental
part of Spectrism, which in his younger years he had only Read at the
University; These and other Complyments much ple^s'd the Justice, who led him
into the ^arlour, where wa^ his Wife and Daughter, a Person ^f ^ncomparable
Beauty and richly Furnished with all the Ornaments of Body and Mind, to whom
after he had recounted how the Gentleman had promised him to ^ye in the Haunted
Room, and speak to the G^ost if it did appear; He ordered his Servants to
prepare Supper, and in the Interim called for Wine to entertain the stranger
who thought himself extremely happy; The time passed away in a very agreeable
Conversation, and the Justice was not a little pleased with the Modest
behavior of Honorius, nor did the young Lad^ his Daughter less admire his
person, ^h^ vivacity of his Wit and the quaintness of his d^scourse, which though
she end^avor'^ to hide, plainly appeared in her kind and Obliging Glances,
which Honorius soon perceived, and had taken further Encouragement had not the
meaness of his present appearance dampt his aspiring T^ought^. But to shorten
the Relation, Supper was ended, and the Ladies withdrew to their Chambers, at
such time as the old Gentleman conducted Honorius to an exc^llent Room well
Furnished with all things convenient and Ornamental, telling him Jocosely. That
must be his Prison for this Night, and as many more as he Thought fit. And
w^shing him good Night, Withdrew. The Complyment was returned by Honorius who
was well provided with Fire and Candle, and Bottles of Wine, that the Devil
might have the less power over him. Being now alone he had leisure to consider
his present Circumstances, when reflecting on the Beauty of the young Lady, and
the kind looks she bestowed on him, he began to hope they might be the presages
of his better fortune, which now seemed once again to Smile upon him. With
these Thoughts he went to Bed not much Concerned with the apprehensions of what
had been told him, yet not altogether slighting the danger he might be in, kept
his Candle burning; and being re^dy to take the Sweets of Rest the Clock struck
one, at which time the whole House was very quiet, and not the least Noise to
disturb him.

Musing with himself about his present fortune, he thought he heard something
Trip alo^g the Gallery before his Chamber, whilst more regardfully attending he
saw his Chamber door open, and in a Night dress he perceived a Person as he
thought enter and take two or three Rounds about the Room, and at length open a
Closet door. This Apparition though it seemed not so dismally frightful, yet
struck him with a present horror, which whilst he was more seriously
considering, came out of the Closet and took a Second walk in the Chamber, and
by degrees came nearer and nearer to his Bedside, which he diligently
observing, his apprehensions of the danger grew stronger upon him, but taking
courage was resolv^d to speak to it. With this intent looking steadfastly upon
it, he thought he beheld the same face of the Young Lady he ha^ se^n but ^ome
few hours before, this abated his fears and Encouraged his Resolution. Rising
out of his Bed he approached it, which se^m'd no h ng Shy of his advance, and
drawing nearer took it by the hand, which h^ found Soft and warm, an^ as tru^
Flesh and Blood as his own, and more curio^sly viewing the Face saw it to be
the real Person of the Young Lady, whose Body wak't whi^st all her Senses were
fast locked up in the profoundest Sleep. His thoughts were now again at the same
puzzle between his own desir^s and the Ladies Honor, as before they had been
between his necessity and Hon^sty, but the Temptation proved too strong for the
tender Virtue of Vigorous Youth to withstand. Leading her to his Bedside he
Softly laid her down and placed himself by her. But here should I recount the
bold Trespass of his Hands, which found nothing of a Ghost about her, or the
more daring attempts of his succeeding pleasures, my own Cheeks would blush at
the Confidence of my Tongue; Nor is it possible to speak the Transports
Honorius felt, I hope your kinder Imagination will supply the defects of my
Expression. It is enough, that whilst Honorius was Revelling in the midst of
that Garden of pleas^re and stealing the forbidden fruit, the Lady Awaked. She
had now be^n sensible of those delights from the o^l ging Embraces of her New
Be^f^ll^w, and t^ose kind Car^ss^s her waking fan y had pres^nted her with,
which she had never found from the Cold Arms of her confident Sylvia; Whil^t
she lay thus considering what this strange Dream should be, or if a truth, what
it meant; Her Senses being now more perfectly her own, she discovered her self
in another Bed, when hearing her Lovers excuses and the many pardons he begged,
She was ready to Swoon away at so strange a Surpr^zal, Oh He^vens! Says She,
what have thou done? Oh Ravisher base and Unworthy Guest; Are t^ese thy
acknowledgements of my Fathers kindness: With Charms and Philtres to bewitch my
Innocence, had thou no more regard to my spotless honor then thus betray me
to perpetual Shame and Ignominy^; Dearest Madam, replied Honorius, if the
Arraign^d have leave to offer ought to arrest their Sentence, by the powers of
Love, by all that is Sacred to you, Fly not from me before you hear my Defense.
Think not, sweet Lady, that to Satisfy the rage of my burning lust or to Grasp
such infinite happiness I would us^ unworthy means; It Was fortune gave you to m^
Arms, and as well might the Sun disclose his Summer Beams, and the Earth refuse
his Bounty, as I Shut my eyes against those glorious Beautyes, whose Charms
fired my heart, and ravished all my Senses; I saw you, Madam, walking in your
Sleep, I saw your Naked Beautyes, whose powers even Age it self though proud of
its beasted abstinence could not resist; and may not youth be pardon^d? If not,
Let loose your anger, wrinkle your brow into a Frown, and assure your self it
shall be as mortal as the most venomed or pointed weapon death it self makes
use of to destroy the guilty; or if this punishment be too flow for your fleet
Revenge, plunge a Dagger in my Breast, which I had rather feel then once hear
the dismal sound of that single word, Farewell; Yours Madam, let me Live for
ever, or fall this minute a welcome Sacrifice to your injured Fame, it is I,
Madam, I confess it, that Violated your unspotted Innocence, pure as the
Mountai^s Snow, and Chaste as the Winters Ice, whom if your Mercy cannot pardon,
let your Severest Justice Carve a Satisfaction from this offending Breast. With
these and many other the like expressions did the Amorous Youth sooth the
disconsolate Lady, till at last, overcome with his Importunities, with Tears of
Joy She embraced the gladded Lover, and consented he Should live^ Live then,
says She, and let the same bright wi^nesser of your Trespass and my dishonor;
hear our Marriage Vows, and see this Sacred Tie by which I am ever yours. --
Honorius his best Expressions were now too poor to speak the Raptures of his
Soul, nor certainly was ever Bridal Night passed over with greater pleasure and
delight then this betwe^n the two Enamorists, in so much that the Shrill
Messenger of the Morn had given Noti^e o^ its approach e're their thought^
strayed from their Enj^yments: But being apprehensive of a discovery, which was
not yet ripe for the Fathers Ear with aparting kiss they took leave of each
other, she Engaging Honorius to make some excuse to prolong his stay, promised
to return the next night to his Bed; which he received with all the Gratitude
he could express for so great a favor. The Lady was now gone to her own
Chamber, and Honorius was at leisure to consider the present state of his
affairs, how his Shattered fortunes were now repaired, by an Extraordinary
providence, beyond all hope or Expectation. This Lady was the only Child of her
Parents, and Heiress to a very considerable Estate, and as Valuable for her
Virtue, Beauty and all other accomplishments that might Complete the Happiness
of a Lover, as any of her Sex. Whilst his thought^ were employed in these
ravishing Contemplations, his Senses began to t^re, and he fell asleep at the
same time when the Justice and his Lady came into his Chamber, to Enquire how
he had passed the Nig^t, hearing the door open he Awakened, and after he had
feigned himself discomposed, he acquainted them it was a real truth the Room
was haunted, and that he had seen a Spirit, but he supposed t e same so far
from Evil, that if ever Angels left their Heavenly abodes to come upon Earth,
such was this and no worse; for though he had seen and Conversed with it, yet was
he not in the least affrighted, nor did its discourse import any thing of harm
to himself or the family, but what it had said he had been by Sacred Vow
obliged not to discover, till such time as he had seen it again, for the too
early Cock had Summoned it back to its unknown Mansions e're it had finished
the Secret it came to discover. The gladded Justice embraced his Welcome Guest,
and with the kindest words he could express himself, entreated his stay the
following N^ght, and that he would make him happy in his farther Acquaintance;
Less powerful Oratory would have persuaded Honorius to accept of that he so
much coveted; however thankfully returning the Justices Complements he soon
after Rose, and Spent the day in the Conversation of his New Friends. Nor was
the Lady ever from his thoughts, or her blushes from her Cheeks, whenever sho
Surpised his Strolling Eyes, catching Glances from hers at a distance. In
short, the Second Night came, and the long expected hour of Meeting brought our
Lovers to each others Arms; the Happy Minutes fled fast in their Mutual
Embraces, whilst the Lazy Intervalls were Spent in contrivance how they should
Gain her Parents consent to finish their Vowed Espousals. This the Lady
undertook: It was now day break when Aemilia retired to Her Chamber, and taking
a convenient opportunity that Morning in private, discovered to her Mother the
w^ole Intrigue of her fortunes, and told her, it being usual with Her to repair
to that Chamber in the day time to dress her self, and having often Spent her
Hours in Reading in the Closet, being more particularly deligh^ed with the
prospect, she believed it had been Customary with Her for several years to walk
this there in her Sleep, though it was never known till this Lucky Stranger h^d
made the discovery. Nor did she Conceal the Important truth with all the Naked
Circumstances, then praising the Generous Education and Endearing Carriage of
Honorius begged her Mother with all the Pathetical Expressions of Love and
tenderness, to intercede with her Father on his behalf; which sheat last
promised. The old Gentleman was much Surpised at the Relation and severely
blamed her unlawful Loves, but at the same time considering the Violence of his
Daughters affection, and the Honor of his Family, consented to Her Wishes, and
went with them to Honorius his Chamber, whom he Saluted his Son in Law, and
soon after Ordered the Consummation of their Nuptials, which were Celebrated
with all Imaginable Joy and Splendor. About a Month after, Honorius and his
Lady in a Coach and six Horses went down to Visit his Relations, who all
Congratulated his Happy fortunes, which were soon after increased to a very
great Estate by the unexpected Death of hss Elder Brother.

Geronto having thus Finished his Relation the whole Company, especially
Florimel, seemed extremely pleased with it; For indeed it was hardly possible
for him to speak to any Subject, though never so mean and Trivial, but what his
great Wit would always Beautify with those Charming Graces which won the
constant Applause of his Auditors, an Excellence peculiar to himself in which
few could ever Tollerably Imitate him.

Melintus Thanked him for his pleasant Fancy as he called it, and told him a
discourse of so much Mirth and Humor might have been better bestowed for his
part, Melancholy had of late so prevailed upon him that all Comedy was as Harsh
to his Ears, as the Clicking of a Death Watch to a Hoording Miser.

But Madam says he to Aurelia, if you please to Circulate the discourse as of
Right it belongs to you, I remember a Story I have formerly had the Honor to
hear you tell which if I mistake not was Tragically Unhappy, but as it then
pleased with the Sadness of it, I am sure it would much more now, since my
Vitiated Palate Relishes nothing but what is Compounded of the bitterest
Ingredients.

Sir says Aurelia, I presume you meant the Story of Amasius and Ortelia, but I
am afraid I shall unpardonably Transgress the Commands of my Lord your Uncle,
and the passion of the Relation will affect you too ^e^r^y; Though who knows but
Melancholy, which is only a more Natural poison, may be easiest Expelled by an
Application of its own Temperament, however, Sir, your Commands will Apologize
for me, which I thus Obey.

NOVEL the Second.
By AURELIA.
A Young Gentleman whose Name was Amasi^^s, the only Son of an Opulent and well
known Merchant of the City of London, after he had been furnished with a
Competent Sharr of Learning, to Qualify him for the study of the Law, was
placed at the Inns of Court, where the Advantages of his Fortunes and his own
Modest b^haviour gave him a Welcome reception amongst all his fellow Students.
However after he had Spent two years there, his mind inclined to Travel, and
Communicating his design to his Father, easily obtained his consent. After he
had seen France and Italy he came to Brussels, and Spent about four Months in
Flanders, and then removed to Amsterdam, where Lived a Gentleman who was his
Fathers correspondent, and an Eminent Merchant, at whose House he was invited
to Lodge during his Residence there. This Gentleman who was of considerable
Estate and quality, had great Resort of Company to his House, with whom Amasius
soon acquainted himself, his Generous conversation and affable Temper rendered
him Courted and beloved by all: He was likewise the Happy Father of three
Daughters of so Incomparable Beauty that the whole Country could not produce
their equals, nor were they less praised for a prudent Conduct, and Virtuous
Education. With the youngest of these called Ortelia, it was the fortune of
Amasius to fall in Love, and as if the same Loadstone had Attracted both their
Hearts, the same passionate desires, warmed Ortelia's Breast, and t^o' both of
them were Shy of discovering their affections to one another, ^et no
opportunity was missed in which by all the little Arts of Obligation an^
kindness they strove to advance themselves in each others favor, his Courtship
was most particularly to her, and her regards and Eye always upon him. If
Amasius happened to sigh, Ortelia would turn her Face to hide her reply in the
same Note; In this Condition for some Months did they live, wh^lst by degrees
all the diversions of the Country, the Visits of Friends, Balls and
Entertainm^nts grew Nauseous to the Lover, and a settled Melancholy seized his
Spirits. This was Observed by all his Acquaintance, but particularly by the
compassionate Eyes of tender Ortelia, who seemed very much concerned least the
same (probably) might be for some more Happy Mistress he had l^ft in England,
Under this anxiety and disquietude she had suffered some Weeks, which perhaps
had wrought more effectual to her disadvantage, had not Amasius one day took an
opportunity when she was alone in her Chamber, employed upon a piece of curious
Needlework, wherein she had drawn the little God smiling at a disconsolate Lady
whose Heart he had, newly struck with one of his Feathered Weapon^, prostrate
at his Feet, as if she seemed by her t^ars and piteous looks to beg his Mercy.
Taking notice of the fancy.

Is it possible my dearest Ortelia, says he, you should be such an Artist in
your Draughts of this God of love, and never feel a Dart from his quiver? How
know you Sir, replied the Fair One, but what you have seen may have a nearer
Relation to Me then you are pleased to Imagine, and that this wounded Lady may
be a proper device to represent my Unfortunate self; That Madam is Impossible
(pursues Amasius) for then should I view you in another posture, I should see
you Seated on a Throne with Crowns and Scepters at your Feet, an Imperial
Canopy above your Head, supported by admiring Angels, disposing of bleeding
hearts and my own amongst the Fatal Number. Oh Fie! replied she, you Complement
me Amasius, as if I were that Object of your happiest desires the Seas now part
you from, and I cannot but believe at the same time you address your
Commendations to Ortelia, you intend them to one more Lovely in your Esteem. I
did not think Madam, replies Amasius, you was so much a Stranger to your own
perfections, to believe these Eyes could be so much deceived, as to place my
respects on any other Object; Oh no assure your self that if Amasius must not
be admitted to admire his Ortelia to steal a kiss, and Imprint his Lips on
those fair Hands, to Languish at your Feet, and beg your Compassion, the grave
shall have my Courtship, and for ever will I bid Adieu to all the empty
pleasures on this side the Dust.

With these and such like Courtly Expressions as opportunity would give leave,
did our Enamored Pair pass away the Hours, and give each other the assurance of
as strong and lasting an Affection as Love it self could implant in the minds
of the most passionate; Nor was the same so secretly cautioned, but that the
Parents of Ortelia took Notice of its Growth, which as they saw no reason to
discourage, so neither would they give License to the c^ntinuance of it, till
such ^ime as Anasius his Father was acquainted with it and they had obtained
his consent. To which purpose the Dutch Merchant discoursed Amasius, te^ling
him, that he was on his part ready to give Ortelia a proportionable fortune to
what his Father should settle on him, and was no ways averse to his Marriage
with his Daughter. Amasius with tears of Joy returned his acknowledgements; and
Entreated him by all the Endearments Imaginable, (...) the next Packet to
acquaint his Father with it, and beg his leave that it might be forthwith
Consummated, this he promised, and accordingly did; This Letter Amasius,
Seconded with one of his own, wherein he described the Virtues and agreeable
sweetness of Ortelia's temper, begging pardon that without his leave his
thoughts had been fixed upon her, which he believed were directed by the Hand of
providence, and designed by Heaven for the Establishment of his future
happiness. The Father was well pleased with the proposals made by his
Correspondent, and in a short time after returned his consent. This was
certainly welcomed with no inconsiderable Joy by the Lovers, who had Spent the
last month in fear that some cross accident might Obviate their expectations,
or at least procrast^nate their Nuptials, which they so earnestly wished for,
But having now the Consent of their Parents Concurrent with their own desires,
the day o^ Marriage was agreed upon to be within a fortnight, and all necessary
p^eparations taken care of, to render it as Splendid as public. The pulses of
our Lovers be at nothing but desire, (...) the Minutes seemed to Travel on
Crutches and the Hours with a snails pace followed after. Ten days were now
past and the Eleventh had showed his Face, when early in the Morning a Letter
came by a particular Hand to Amasius from his Father, the Contents were in
these words.

My Dear Amasius,
If ever thou intendest to see thy Living Father, and as thou tenderest my
Blessing upon Sight of this, without any delay make all possible have to

Thy Loving and Dying Father. R. A.


Never did the young Swain with greater Horror s^e the Enl^ghtned thy Da t out
a growing Thunderbolt amidst his harmles^ flock, then did Amasius receive this
killing Message which struck his Enlivened Joy into Mortal apprehensions. A
Command so peremptory admited no excuse nor can I relate with how great a
discontent, he was forced to obey the Mandate, or in the least proportion
express the sad Farewell, he was constra^n'd to take of his weeping Ort^^lia.
The tears they Shed or ^he Sighs that broke prison from their Breasts, were as
innumerab^e as the tears of Autumn, or the drops that f^ l ^he Ocean; yet
obedience was indisputable, and his dolatory and unwilling departure Criminal;
in short, he Sighed and vowed Eternal Love, promised his return, and almost
dying on her Lips in his last salute, took leave and repaired to his Ship which
waited for him. The willing winds wafted him unwillingly from the Joy of his
Soul, and in a few Hours he lost fight of shore, where he had continual^y fixed
his Eyes, and left his dearest treasure; In every blast he thought he heard
Ortelias lamentation, and grew angry with the Churlish winds that they would
not do him the some kind Office and return his Sighs to Her. His Voyage was but
too prosperous in Conveying him thence, though in some measure he was pleased
therewith in that it gave him hopes he should be the less while from the
Mistress of his affections, with whom he had left his heart the pledg^ of his
resolved return. In a few days he arrived at London where he found his Father
upon recovery from a dangerous sickness in which hi^ Physicians had dispaired
of his Life. The old Gen^l^man w^lcom'd his beloved Am^sius with the hearty
affections of an Indulgen^ Father, whilst he Congratulated his e^cape from the
Grave with all the Transports of a dutiful Son; After a little time he
recovered a good state of hea^t^, and received the Visits of his Friends and
Neighbors. The General Accomplishments of Am^sius his affable discourse and
Courteous behavior were observed by all, who Commended him for the most
complete Gen^leman they had ever seen, amongst others an Ancient Gentleman,
Master of a great Estate and Father of one only Daughter to inherit it;
proposed her to Amasius his Father as a co^venient Match for his Son, at such
time as he had procured his leave to depart and Consummate his Bliss with the
Beauteous Ortelio. This o^d Fox knowing that her fortune would treble what was
offe^'d with Ortelia, greedily devoured the bait, and Commanded Am^sius to
forget his first, and apply his Addresses to this Second Mystress, which though
he refused with all the prayers and Gentle Arguments Love could Muster on his
behalf, by the recital of those many and Sacred Vows he had p^ss'd, and the
m^seryes he must certainly meet in the Violation of that Troth wh^c Heaven it
self had been witness to, yet the passionate Father, wholly devoted to his
Interest, would by no means be prevailed upon, but enjoined him by his Paternal
Authority and as h^ hoped to Heyr his Favor and fortune^, to obey his Command
wretchedly miserable was the Condition of Amasius, but complaints were in Vain,
the old Men were agreed and he must submit or incurr his Fathers utmost
disp^easure. However not all their Art or Industry could over alienate his
thoughts from his dear Ortelia. She was constantly in his Eye and the Subject
of every Melancholy So^^^oquy that he rep ated to the careless winds and
unanswering Groves, where he Sighed away his tedious Hours. In Memory of her
the tender Trees were wounded to Carve her Name, and every kind Turf that used
to be his Couch was Nourished by the dew that fell from his Eyes; The Bir^s
forgot their Notes, and learned to Sympathize with him, and Echo it self
repeated nothing but Ortelia's Name. Every one Compassionated the unhappy
Youth; but the Cruel Father, who see^ng all things in the Mirror of his own
Sordid Interest forced Amasius to Visit h^s designed Wise; but how Cold and
unlike a Lover his Addresses were, the young Lady quickly took Notice of, and
acquainted her Parents with it, which was not long before it came to his
Fathers ears, who the more he found him Averse to his Humor, the more did he
press the same, and charged him as un^utifull and Rebellious to his Commands,
which by all that was Sacred he Vowed he should perform. To this end he
forthwith enjoined a Second Visit which disconsolate Am^sius obeyed and having
the opportunity of private discourse with the young Lady, who was a Person o^
^qual discretion and Beauty he resolved to deal generously wi^h her, and lay
his present Condition naked b fore her. To this end after some short discourse
leading to his purpose he told her he was infinitely troubl^d that he had not a
heart* that he could ^ntirely devote to her Service, but that the same was
possessed by another whose Charms not long before had made an absolute Conquest
over him, and to whom by all the Vows and promis^s that Lovers make, he was in
the strictest sort obliged; So that should he go about to deceive her by
Counterfeiting a passion that could never be real, he should play the Traitor
with a Lady, who had for^er Virtues and Incomparable deserts so much of his
esteem, that he could never pardon himself so great a crime. The young Lady was
extremely pleased with his Ingeniou^ C^nfes^^on, and promised she would on her
part never go about to make him guilty of the br^a^h of those Vow, she looked
upon above all o^h^rs, to have some thing more awful and Religious in them and
exacted the most sincere observance: But on the contrary she would endeavor
what lay in her power to divert her Father from his design. Ah Madam! replied
the gladded A^asius, and can you be so kind, so forgetful of my faults, and
give me your pardon, then may I hope once more to be happy.

You have it Sir, says the Lady, and an Esteem with it Suitable to your
Merits, for surely there is none who knows your Circumstances but must Commend
you, and to Evince to the World, I am one of that Number, the blame shall be
mine; and if you please, in Obedience to your Fathers Commands, to pursue your
Courtship, the Breach shall appear on my part.

Its Heaven! Heaven Madam! Replied the overjoyed Am^sius, that must repay this
favor, which all my Stock of Gratitude is too poor to Answer in the least
degree. These and such like discourses were the Ente^tainment of the Second
Meeting wherein it was resolved Amasius should carry on his seeming Addresses,
and the refusal to be on the Ladies side, this he so lively personated, that in
the eye of the World, he was loo^'d upon as absolutely Enamored of her
excellencyes as if the same had been real, upon which his Father received him
with a double return of his respect and kindness to him. The old Gentleman
having settled the whole affair between themselves, agreed the time and place to
finish the Espousa^s, under which apprehension, let us change the Scene ^o
Holland, where during the time of Amasius absence, the disconsolate Ortelia
like the Mourning Turtle on her Melancholy perch, Sighed out her Sorrows in the
longing expectation of her D^ar Amasius his return, but having by the
miscarriage of his Letter for two Months heard nothing from him, began to think
him unkind and forgetful of his Vows; when it happened an English Gentleman
Traveling into those parts, and invited to her Fathers House with other
Friends one day to Dinner, amongst the variety of their discourse of England,
and of their several acquaintance there, it was asked if he ^new Amasius his
Father, how he did, and if perfectly recovered from his late Sickness, which he
told them he was, and that his Son, the young Gentleman, was to be suddenly
Married with a Lady to whom he had been some time Engaged. This unexpected News
Surpised the whole Family, but especially Ortelia, who trembled and changed
Color at it; the question was renewed by Ortelias Father, Sir, says he, I have
some knowledge of the young Gentleman, and should be very glad to hear of his
prosperity, and I entreat you, Sir, if you can to tell me more particularly the
Person to whom, and the Grounds of your assurance that he is so soon to Change
his Condition. In answer to which, the Gentleman told him her Name, described
her Person and fortune, and withal gave her a very advantageous Character, as
to her Virtues, her Beauty and excellent Temper* add^ng that before he left
England the day had been appointed; which he supposed wo^ld happ^n two days
following, that he was with Amasi^s, and his Father when the Wedding Cloth^s
were bo^ght, and other provisions made for the Solemnity. And is, p^rsues one
of Orteli^^ Sister^, Amasius as accomplished a Lover a^ he seems a Gentleman;
Doubtless Madam, sa^es the stranger, he wants no^h^ng to Commend him to the
World in all respects, and I have observed, (for I live near him) his Visits to
be v^ry assiduous, his mean and address Vig^rous and Courtly; The day I came
for Holl^nd he waited upon her in a New Chariot Richly guilt, in which they
both went to a play together. Perfi^ious Wretch! says O^telia to her self am I
so soon forgotten! -- Oh Am^si^s! and blushed and could scarce refrain her Eyes
from expressing the Violenc^ of her p^ssion, which her Friends taking Notice
of, d^verted the discourse and Dinner being ended; She slipped from the Company
to her Chamber, where after she had given her passion its full rage against the
false Amasius, she fla^g her self down upon the Bed, where she lay till her
Sisters came up to comfort her. But alas! too late, for the Torrent of her
Griefs had already put a f^tal period to her life, and her Soul was fled to
those Mansions of Bliss wh ch she missed of here, so st^ange were their
Surprise at so sudden a Disaster, that they could sca^ce believe their eyes,
their loud shrieks and cries called up the House, and so excessive was the
general Lamentation that it is b^yond the power of my expression to d^scribe
it. I will now l^ave this House of Mou^n^ng and return to Amasi^s, who all this
t^me h^^ lived upon the Rack, and was against his will obliged to Act a part so
directly contrary to his Inclinations and the ingenuity of his Temper; But this
being at the Ladies request and known to her, it did the less concern him: On
the other Hand ^he young Lady had u^ed all her endeavors with her Father to
put off the Match, alleging in her self a present indisposition o^ health, and
unwillingness so hastily to change her Condition, nor could she d scover,
(whatever the world might see,) those Graces in Amasius his Person, or that
agreeable humor in his conservation, that should tempt her to Marry him, and
Haz^rd her future ^appiness in the Choice of a Husband she could never entirely
Love. But all her arguments were in Vain, her perverse Father would permit no
dispu^es, but sharply reproved her, Saying, not her Eyes should be the guide of
her Choice, that should dep^nd on his pleasure, that he was very well satis^ied
in Amasius, an^ did expect nothing from her but a due Compliance to his Will.
In this state their affairs stood ^ll the very Night was come which preceeded
the Morning of their Nuptials, on which a^ they were d^scoursing together,
Amasi^s on his knees begged her pardon that he must unwillingly take some other
course to avoid that, which to any other man in the World would be the greatest
Bles^ing his Soul could wish to enj^y on this side Heaven; But what the same
should be he was not yet determined, but impossible it was, that he could be
ever forced to betray his vows to Ortelia. The good Lady pityed his Condition,
and begged him by no desperate Act to urge his Fate, telling him she would be
ready to share his misfortunes, and equally suffer with him. The Evening grew
on apace and Amasius with a Thousand thanks to the Generous Lady took leave, no
ways resolved what to do, his wandering thoughts fell upon several Stratagems
to defer the Wedding, but none of them pleased him, the Obstinacy of his Father
was not to be remo^ed by all his prayers an^ Entreaties. At last he resigned
himself to his Pillow, and recommended the success of this great affair to the
care and Conduct of his better Genius; however this point he fixed, that rather
then break his Vows he would Venture the d^spleasure of his Father, and if no
Mediation would reconcile him, he resolved for H^lland to l^ve and dye with his
Dear Ortelia. Often did he endeavor to Compose himself to rest, but the
Troubles of his mind kept his Eyes open, nor had he slept a wink when the clock
struck two, the Moon shone full upon the Window, and his Melancholy fancy was
shaping the several Shadows into various representations and figures, when he
t^ought he heard his door open, and turning his Eye he saw the Appearance of a
Woman with a Mournful and pale look, enter his Chambers, startled at the
Phantasm as he at first supposed it to be, after a little time he recovered
himself and observing the figure more nearly, he thought he beheld the very
Person of Ortelia, Clad all in white with her Hair disshrevell'd, and at the
End of every Lock a drop of Blood, which hung round her Shoulders like a Chain
of Rubyes, On her head she seemed to have a Crown of Gold set round with
diamonds, Emeralds, Saphires, and other precious Stones of different Colou^s
whose Dazzling rays his weaker eyes could no more behold then the Sun in his
Meridian Glory, thi^ surprising Vision struck a sacred horror through every
part, though the strangeness of the Apparition did not so much ass^ight as the
Majest^ck Port and radiant Grac^s pleased his admiting fancy: It moved in a
gentle pace toward the Bed, and drawing the Curtains in a pleasing but hollow
voice* spoke to him.

Fear not, Amasius, for I am now too late satisfied of thy Fidelity to the
Mistak^n Ortelia, nor do I come from the Shades of Death, to reproach thy
unconstant Love, it has been the Misfortune of my Credulity, not thy
Disloyalty, too late I knew it, to Remedy the dissolution I suffered; but the
powers amongst whom I am, have since revealed the truth and though I can never be
thine.

Not mine, replied the tremb^ing Amasias, not mine, Ortelia? Think not those
Shades shall ever hide thee, no Ortelia; if really thou art my Ortelia, surely
thou could not think so hardly of me, but even amidst those dark Shadess
below Amasius would seek thee out; and since our D^stinyes have forbid us to
abide on Earth, is there no Society ben^ath it? thither I will follow thee, and
Trac^ every step of thine till I have wearied thy Fleeting Man^s and forced
thee to repose, w^ere I will rest in thy ^osom and e^joy the happiness of being
ever with thee,

Alas Amasius! Replied the Mournful Shade, little art thou learnt in what we
know, nor dare I tell thee what we are Subject to, who Travel in that great
Abyss. Live therefore, Amasius, it is Heaven enjoins it, Heaven (to which in a
short time my andring spirit must take its everlasting flight) bids thee not
shake the Sands of life which in a short time will of themselves run out, much
les^ break the precious Christ all that contains them; long it will not he e're
we shall meet again and be for ever joined by Ties more Sacred then Flesh and
Blood can admit of here. Oh Amasius, we shall be infinitely happy, but we must
wait the leisure of Heaven to make us so.

May that time quickly come, cries the passionate Amasius, move faster, O ye
Sluggish Hours and huddle into days, ye days into years to accomplish that
Happy period.

'Twill not be long first, said Ortelia, but in the mean time observe my
Request, and do no Violence to your self, nor ever consent to Marry the Person
designed nor any other, and if you can possibly prevent it, never reveal one
Syllable of this discours^, nor let the World know I have now appeared to you,
for if you do, my restless Ghost will ever haunt you.

I dare promise any thing thy Blessed Shade desires me, Replied Amasius, but to
live is a pun^shm^nt too intolerable for f^ail Mo^ta^ity to bear, I Will cast off
my h^ted Life w th all the Gild^d vanities that attend it, to be Blessed amongst
the N^mber of the dead, with the Sight of my Ortelia

We must not, said She, Carve out our own desires, if we should, our unskilful
Hand would often mistake the Poison for the Antidote, but as thou Tenderest the
Prayers and Entreatyes of dead Ortelia, patiently attend thy Fate.

At which word the Shrill Harbinger of the Morn gave Notice of the approach of
day, and Summoned all wandering Ghosts to their dark abode; when Ortelia
contracting her scattered Rays into one Glorious Beam of Light, cried
Farewell! Farewell! My Dear Amasius, and vanished in a Minute. Amasius, seeing
that Ortelia was now gone beyond recall, fell into these passionate Complaints,
Oh kind Death, if ever thou had pity for the Miserable, suffer thy self this
once to be entreated, discharge me from this Clog of earth which still sinks my
aspiring Soul; See here a Resistless breast which begs but one single Shaft,
and have thou none at leisure? Insulting Tyrant to keep the wretched in Chains,
and like the Conquered B^jazet make me the Gazing Stock of Fools, whilst I am
imprisoned in this Cage of Flesh, but Oh! that like him, I could dash out life,
against those Bars that hold me! Oh sad parting, Oh Dear O^telia! and art thou
gone so soon from me, who per^aps may never see thee more? Come death and ease
me, Oh cruel fate obey! No! no! I am condemned to Linger out a miserable life
in pains, more Exquisite then the sharpest Martyrdoms, but thou dear Soul have
told me it shall not be long. Oh remember but thy last promise, and I will ask
no more to complete me happy; with these and other dolorous Expression^ did the
Unhappy Amasius Vent his sorrows, whilst excess of passion had thrown him into
a Violent Fever. In the Morn^ng early, his Friends came Crowding to his
Chamber to bid good Morrow to the Bridegroom, and finding him in Bed yet, one
of them began to Rally his Sluggishness, who on a Wedding Day when all the
preparations for the Nuptials waited for him, and his Friends were Met to
welcome the Happy Hour, was the greatest Loyterer himself: To whom Amasius only
answered with a deep Sigh, which wa followed by Showers of Tears, the most
pathetick Oratory of a troubled Mind: what weeping, Amasius? says another, sye
for shame, let the old and impotent who have worn out Youth, and are now cursed
with the miseries of Age bewail the loss of those pl^asures they once did Revel
in; but thou art now in full possession of those riper Joys, and thy happier
fortune speaks nothing but Mirth and Jollity. Pray forbear Sir, your unwelcom
Jests and spare your Railery, at this time said Amasius, the Grave mu be my
Marriage Bed, and Oh that I were now to dress my self, and be th^re undrest at
N ght, with what cheerfulness should you then see m^ c nsummate those wished
for Espou^als. But G ntl m^n, as you are my Friends let me beg of you to give
me no farther disturbance, my th^u^hts are otherways disposed of then you
imagine, and the greatest kindness you can do me is to leave me to my own
Meditations. In so disconsolate a tone did Amas^us deliver himself, that he
strangely Surpised the hearers with pity for his Condition, the reason of
which they could not pos^ibly imagine. His Father was immediately a^qu^inted
with it, who coming to his Bedside found him extremely ill, and fitter for the
Advice of the Physicians then the Entertainment of his Frien^s, or the intended
Solemnity. The Doctors were sent for to consult of his present Distemper, who
all agreed he was in a High Fever, but that the cause thereof was not
External, but from some ex^raordinary grief which oppressed his Spirits, and was
not to be removed by al^ their Learned prescriptions, nor could they advise a
more proper Cure then what they endeavou^'d to prevent his Death. For some
week^ in this miserable Condition, did he linger out the tedious Hours, to the
great trouble and discomfort of his Relations, who daily Visited him, and as
often pressed to know the cause of his present affl^ction, which he the more
carefully strove to hide, nor could they Guess at any probable cause, but as
they observed his deep Sighs, and then of a sudden his pa^sionate and abrupt
expressions of O dear O^telia, happy Ort^lia, but lost, but gone for ever O
miserable wretch, miserable Amasius, I come, I come, my ^oy, my Dear Saint, I
com, from whence they all concluded nothing but the Hand of Heaven could work a
Cure on his Distempered mind, whilst his Body only S^mpathiz'd with the anguish
of his Soul; in the mean time, his Father heard from his Dutch correspondent,
how fatal his unkindness had been to his Family, who now began to see his own
E^rour, and blame himself as the only cause of those Misfortunes in which they
had both so great a Share; and that by crossing the Established Loves of
Amasius and Ortelia (which received their Life an^ vigor from his
encouragement) he had occasioned the death of Beautiful Ortelia, and reduced
his Son into those miseries and discontents from which he had but small hopes
to recover him. However after six weeks Languishing under his illness, he began
to grow into a better State of health, but his Melancholy increased upon him;
Though his Father endeavored by all imag^neable diversions to drive it from
his wounded mind, and supposing he yet knew nothing of O^telia's Death,
resolved to Conceal it from him, till he had in some measure Estranged his
Affect^ons from her, which he hoped in time to Effect. But after two Months
were passed, and Amasius was rather worse then better, he began to think that
if his Son, knew of Ortelia's death an^ the impossibility of ever enjoying her,
it might by degrees quiet his troubled mind, and put him upon some thoughts of
perfecting the Match he had designed him with much advantage. Accordingly one
Evening he took an opportunity to disclose Ortelia's Death to him omiting those
Circumstances that more particularly concerned her love to him, which would
rather aggravate then allay his passion,

Alas Sir! said Amasius, I have long since known more of that affair then you
are pleased to Communicate to me now; I know that Ortelia is dead, and that
Amasius can never be happy till he is so too; But for this I must blame the
weakness of my Love, that what a Woman could do for me, I cannot for her, nor
dare not, Since I am forbid all violent Remedies, which adds to my affliction,
and prevents that Cure, which otherwise I would soon accomplish.

His Father was strangely Surpised to see himself prevented in his disc^very,
and commanded Amasius to tell him how he came by his Intelligence, supposing
that contrary to his order some of his Friends had acquainted him with it.

Amasius humbly begged his Pardon, and assured him, it was not from his
Relations or any Person else he had Entrusted with the Secret, that he came by
the knowledge of it, and earnestly prayed him not to press that question any
farther, which if in Obedience to his Commands he should be obliged to Answer,
would yet add more to that weight of sorrow he so miserably labored under.

This made the old Gentleman his Father the more Inquisitive, who conjured him
by that respect and duty he owed him as his Father, to give him a plain and
Satisfactory account, which without any excuse he immediately expected from him.

Well Sir, said Amasius, since you will extort a Secret from me, which of all
things can only make me more Unhappy, take it, and Judge if my Duty to you is
not above all regard to my self -- Here Amasius acquainted his Father how he
had s^en Ortelia, and the discourse he had with her, the Night before his
intended Nuptials, Adding withal, that in declaring what he had forced him to,
he should be the most miserable of Men, as the Sequel of his Unhappy Life
approved him to be.

Some time after his Father by the Advice of his Friends, removed Amasius into
the Country, and having several Relations and acquaintance near York, that
place was fixed upon, hoping that Change of Air and variety of Company might be
of advantage to his Health, and a diversion to his Melancholy. But Alas! He
never Enjoyed a Minute free from the thoughts of his fair deceased Ortelia, the
only Intervals of pleasure he had, were when the kind Ghost of Ortetelia came
to visit him, which she was often wont to do, or at least his deluded Fancy
Imagined so, from that time (when by the Severity of his Father he was forced
to discover that he had both seen and discoursed with her the Night before the
intended Marriage.) At several times would he start upon a sudden from his
Company, saying, do you not hear Ortelia's voice? I come, I come, my Dear, Ah
there she is, pray do but observe how kindly the poor Ortelia looks on her
Amasius, see how Melancholy and pale she is, how beautifully sorrowful she
Glances at me, Oh my Dear I come, but when shall I come, never to part from
thee more? Oh that this was that blessed Hour that would make me for ever happy
with thee! And then retireing into the next Room, would talk with the same
passionate Expressions of Love and tenderness to her, as if he did really
Converse with her in the visible form of Flesh and Blood. Thus did he pass away
about half a year, when one Night after he had been walking and discoursing
with her for at least two Hours (though at all these several times she was never
seen by any Person but himself, sometimes indeed they could distinguish two
several Voices) when returning to his Friends more pleasant and Merry then ever
he had been before, I thank Heaven, says he, my sorrows have now found a
period; I have but few nights more to repose on Earth, and then shall I live
with my Ortelia, and enjoy Eternal Rest of Body and Tr^nquillity of mind. That
Night he Slept heartily and next Morning arose early in a most Serene and
Composed Temper, at which his Friends were extremely pleased, and though they
were much Surpised at the discourse of his approaching Death, yet seeing him
continue so well for three days, they began to forget their fears, and please
themselves with the vain hopes of his perfect recovery. The next day being
Thursday, and Bowling-day, it was agreed they should take their Horses and Ride
to the Green, and there Dine with other Gentlemen who usually Met there once a
Week: Amasius cheerfully consented to it, which was the more taken Notice of,
it being the first time they could ever prevail with him to go into a public
Company, or divert himself with any Sociable Recreation. After Dinner they
Bowl'd again, when a dispute arising about a Cast, Amasius took his friends
part, at which his Adversary was so Incensed (being a Choleric Person) that he
struck him with his fist, but the Gentlemen who were present interposeing they
prevented any farther Mischief. Amasius, who disdained to receive so public an
Injury with the patience of a coward, w^thdrew into the Garden, and privately
sent a note to the Gentleman to let him know, he there expected with his Sword
in his Hand Satifaction for the Affront he had put upon him. His adversary
came, and after some few passes ran Amafius through the heart, of which he
immediately dyed, and went with Joy to meet his Dear Ortelia in the Shades
below, to the great Grief of his Father and all his friends, who had known his
Virtuous and Honorable Accomplishments.

Aurelia having thus Finished her Tragical Relation, Melintus paid her his
more particular acknowledgements, nor did the Rest of the Company forget their
Respe^ts, though all thought it an unreasonable Entertainment for a Gentleman,
whose present Distemper had too much affinity to Honorius his Melancholy
passion, and were not a little apprehensive of the ill Effects it might
produce. However to prevent his being too serious and considerate upon it,
Lysander, who was next in the Rota, took his turn and thus addressed to the
Company.

NOVEL the Third.
By LYSANDER.
IT was the unhappiness of Cratander, whose Generosity very often out-stript
his prudence, and his Natural Bounty the Narrow Confines of his Estate, to be
at last reduced to great necessity, his Friends Commiserating his Condition
advised how they might best assist his present distress, and prevent his own
and the dishonor of his family. They resolved at last upon a friendly
Contribution to raise some Moneys, and present him with a good Gelding, and
proposed to him the going up to London, where he might put himself into some
employ and particularly that of the Kings Guards, which would afford him a
Gentile and competent Support. Cratander was easily persuaded to embrace the
Council of his friends, and not long after left the North his Native Country,
and took his Journey to London. After he had spent some Months there in vain,
either through his own ill Conduct, the Modesty of his Temper which could not
Sue for favors with that Confidence which others succeed by, or that his Stars
had designed him for some greater end, having almost Spent the little Stock he
had, he saw he should be soon forced to Sell his Horse to buy Hay, and to Live
longer there at so great Expense, would most certainly involve him in Debt and
Misery. In the midst of these distracted thoughts he resolved to quit the Town,
and make a Visit to an old Acquaintance who was Master of a plentiful Estate,
and lived in the West of England, and accordingly did so. The next Morning he
set out early, and Traveled almost fifty Miles, when Night coming upon him
hastily he lost his way upon a great Common, and not knowing the Coast of the
Country wandered up and down, till at last he spied a Candle at a Shepherds
Cott about half a Mile, distance, which he steered up to. Hallowing to know who
lived there, the Shepherd came out, of whom he Enquired the way to the Town he
intended to Lodge at that Night, the Shepherd told him he was five Miles off,
and the way difficult to find, if he was a stranger in the Country, Cratander
told him he was, and had already lost his way and tired his Horse, and if he
would be so kind to give him Accommodation for that night, he would gratify
him to his Content.

The Shepherd told him his was a House but of one Room, though plentifully
Furnished with Inhabitants, that besides his Wife and himself he had Six
Children, and but one Bed, and a Matress, and not so much as a Hovell to put
his Horse in.

Cratander then enquired if there was no neighboring Village could give him a
Reception for one night, the Shepherd told him a mile off there was one, and if
he pleased he would be his Guide, which Crata^der accepted of when they were
Arrived at it, they found but one Alehouse in the Town, and that afforded no
better Accommodation then the Shepherds Hutt; Cratander in this distress, asked
if there was no Gentleman or Farmer in the Town would be so kind to Entertain
him for a Night, the Shepherd told him it was a very poor Village, but there
was a Manor House in it, at which a Gentlewoman now l^v'd who was Daughter to
the Lord of the Manor, who died six Months ago, that she probably might be so
kind to him as a stranger, when others for the same reason would distrust and
refuse him so Charitable a favor. Cratander, with the directions of the
Shepherd, went up to the Hall, the Shepherd knocked at the gate, and told the
servant a Gentleman d^sir'd to speak with her Mistress, who immediately sent to
Invite him in, Cratander excused himself, that it would be too great a boldness
in him who was a stranger to the Lady, but he would wait as a beggar at her
Gate to entreat a Boon from her Hands. The Maid carried back this answer, which
surpised the Young Lady, especially when her Servant told her he was a
Gentleman on Horseback well accoutred, and Robin who was her Shepherd was with
him, the Lady came presently to the Gate to whom Cratander with all Modesty and
respect addressed himself.

I am, Madam, though a Stranger to you, forced to presume upon your Favor, that
you will please to give leave to a Traveller who has lost his way to beg a
Lodging for himself and Horse, the same Stable shall Entertain us both, nor
should any thing but downright necessity oblige me to this Confident Petition.

The Lady who was of a most affable and sweet Temper told him readily he was
most heartily Welcome, and she only wished her present Hospitality could answer
the Merits of her Guest; upon this invitat^on Cratander alighted, whom the Lady
Conducted into the House and ordered his Horse to the Stable. He was
Entertained in the principal Room with a plentiful Supper, which being ended,
Cratander in the most Obliging Expressions paid his thanks to the Generous
Lady, and taking up his Sword and Pistol, which lay upon the Table, now Madam
if you please, I will walk into the Stable and repose my self by my Horse, for
this day, Journey has made me both weary and Sleepy; The Lady at these words
seemed extremely Surpised, and with a graceful sharpness told him, She was
very sorry that the Cordial Welcome She better designed him, then was able to
express upon so sudden an Occasion should be so far mistaken; That she hoped
her House, how meanly soever Furnished, might afford him a better Lodging then
her Stable, which she desired he would believe by accepting of it. Cratander
was much out of Countenance at this reprimand, but recovering himself, Modestly
replied, Dear Madam, you have already so infinitely obliged me that I had not
Confidence enough to Trespass farther upon so Generous a Temper, especially
when at the same time I consider my self an absolute stranger to you, which
perhaps may create some fears and Jealousyes in your Family, though your Noble
Breast which knows no Guilt in it self, can Harbor no suspicion of others. The
Lady Blushed and told him, She saw too much Honor in his Person and demean to
Judge so unworthily of him, and desired he would please to take his Chair and
pass away half an Hour, till his Chamber was prepared for him. Cratander had
observed that both before and at Supper the Maid that waited had her eye
constantly fixed upon him, and with a look that spoke Horror and Consternation,
as if she suspected him for a Person who had some Villainous design brooding in
his heart, which his being so well Armed gave occasion for, Nor was he mistaken
for she had several times pressed her Mistress that the stranger might lie in the
Stable with his Horse as he himself requested, That it happened out very odly
that this stranger should come this very Night upon those pretentions when no
such accident ever was before, a Night when all the Menservants, ^ad leave to
be abroad at a Country Wake and none but Women and a poor Boy w^o b^long'd to
the Stables left at home, her Mi^^ress heard her reasons and inclined to her
O^^n on, ^ut considering what a reflection it would ^e upon her, if this
stranger was really that wort^y ^^ntleman he appeared to be, she resolved to
run all risques rather then be guilty of so base and degenerous an Action. The
Gentleman and Lady had passed away the time in variety of discourse, by which
she was now fixed in a good Opinion of him, and had fu^ly banished those fears
and apprehens^ons her Maid had whispered in her Ear, when the Servant came down
and told her the Chamber was ready, if the Gentleman pleased to go to Bed, upon
which her Mistress ordered her to take the Candle and wait upon him to his
Lodging. The Lady attended him to his Chamber, and smilingly told him, Sir,
pray Command whatever you want, and my house affords, I wish you good Rest and
hope your Lodging will be as pleasant here as in the Stable -- Cratander would
have replied, but the Lady was gone. The Maid having left the Gentleman to his
rest, went to her Mistr^sses Chamber, wh^re she began a fresh to discourse her
form r Suspicions, but the Lady with a frown bid her be Silent and make h st to
Bed; those Jealousyes were idle fancies only, and should never discompose her
rest w^atever should be the issu^ of them, The Maid went to her Chamber, put
out the Candle and laid her self upon the Bed, wishing for the Morning, which
would dispell those Melancholy thoughts that now oppressed her mind. Her present
fears banished all Sleep from her Eyes, and the Clock had now struck One, when
she heard a Noise in the Courtyard, starting up she ran to the window, where
she saw four Men at the door, who first Tried the Latch to see if it was open,
and finding it fast Bolted and Locked, they endeavored by main strength to
force their Entrance, the Maid frighted out of her wits, ran to her Mistresses
Chamber, where with her passionate Out cries, She awakened her, and told her,

There were four Robbers in the yard breaking into the House, who would
certainly Murder them all, and the Person She had Entertained was no doubt of
their Gang*

The Lady Alarmed at this unexpected News, half distracted flew to Cratanders
Chamber, who was fast asleep and loudly Snoreing, but she soon awakened him
with her loud complaints, and upon her Knees with all the passion, and moving
Rhetoric her fears could inspire her with.

Begged her Life and Honor of him, and the preservation of her Family, and She
would immediately deliver him all her Money, Plate, Jewels, or whatever else he
thought worth his acceptance; And in the same Breath repeated, but pray Sir
Spare my Life, Spare my Honor, and I shall think my self indebted to you for
whatever I part with besides.

Cratander, whose thoughts at the lowest Ebb of fortune could never Entertain a
base design, was no less Surpised then the Lady, and told her.

Madam, I understand not your meaning, but if you please to be plain in your
Expressions, I will defend both your Life and Honor with the utmost hazard of
my own. Oh Sir, says the Lady, there are Theives breaking into my House, and
pardon me if I mistake you for one of their Confederates. Il^e convince you
presently, replied Cratander, and leaping out of Bed Slipped on his Clothes, and
with his Sword and Pistols, by the Maids direction, made to that part of the
House they first attempted, Cratander had the fortune to have just got to the
door, when they forced it open, and discharging one of his Pistols amongst
them, he saw a Person drop, upon which they gave back; but he with his Sword in
Hand, advanced two or three Steps, and by the opposition he met with, from one
of them received a Slight Wound upon his Breast, which he revenged by another
upon his Adve^saries right Arm, which so d^sabled him that he gave back, and
Cratander retreated to the door for fear their odd's might oppress him, whose
safety depended only on his single Courage. The Thieves seemed to go off, and
left one of their Companions bleeding upon the Ground, which Cratander (by his
Groans) supposed to be dying, but not knowing what reserve of strength they
might have, he made fast the door and went up to his Chamber, where he had left
the Lady half dead with fear.

Madam, says he, was it not for what your Lady ship has suffered in the
affright I am heartily glad of this opportunity, which has I hope in some
measure made me Serviceable to your Ladyship, and given a Testimony of that
Honor and Justice which before as a stranger might be quest^on'd in me. The
Lady with tears in her Eyes, which stood ready to sal^y out either with Joy or
sorrow, returned her thanks in the most gr^teful Sense her words could express,
called him the Preserver of her Life, Honor and Fortune, who certainly was
s^nt from Heaven, like a Guardian Angel, to defend her from the rapine and
Violence of Theives and Murderers. After some care taken of his wound, which
was not deep, they resolved not to go to Bed for fear of a Second Attaque, but
in Cratanders Chamber spent the remainder of the Night, wishing for the Morning
light, that they might safely discover the Person who was left behind dead upon
the Spot; As Soon as the day appeared, Cratander, the Lady, and the rest of the
Family opened the door, and in the yard found a great quantity of blood spilt
upon the Ground, but the Body was conveyed away, which they could trace no
farther then the out-ward Gate, which was left open, and the loc^ broke off;
Cratander stayed two days till his wound was Closed, and the Lady recovered
from that Consternation she was under, when ready on the third day to take his
leave against all those arguments of kindness and respect the Lady could press
upon him, a Servant came over to invite her to the Funeral of her Uncle, a
Gentleman of Competent Estate who lived ten miles off. The Lady was very much
Surpised to hear of her Uncles so sudden death, whom she had not known to be
ill, and particularly inquired the cause, to whom the Servant could give no
other Answer, but that going to Bed something indisposed, he was found dead in
the Morning, the Lady was now Furnished with fresh occasion of Grief, which she
made use of as a powerful reason to persuade Cratander to stay one day longer,
and particularly desired him to bear her Company to that mournful Solemnity.
Cratander told her he was extremely sorry for her loss of so near a Relation --
Alas Sir, says she, it is not that alone, I have a second loss in a good
Friend, to whose Care and Advice my dying Father recommended me, and I have
been sufficiently sensible of his kindness in the management of those worldly
affairs Women are generally bor^ strangers to. The next day being that of his
Funeral, Cratander promised to wait upon her, and in the Interim endeavored to
cheer up her drooping Spirits with a Suitable Conversation to her Solemn grief.
Being arrived at the House the Lady was earnest to know what sudden Distemper
was the cause of her Uncles death, her Aunt told her she supposed an Apoplexy,
but desiring to see the Corpse, she answered that being a Corpulent Fat Man the
Coffin was nailed up early in the Morning for fear the Body, which began
already to Corrupt, should be offensive to the Company. The Lady was very well
Satisfi^d with the answer, and led by Cratander, attend^d the Corpse to the
Grave. At their return home discoursing of the Funeral, Cratander asked who
that Gentleman was in the Brown Periwig that assisted at the Interment, The
Lady told him, he was a Gentleman of intimate a^q^aintance with her Uncle, who
had formerly a fair Estate, but his too lavish Hand had now forced him to
receive his Support from the kindness of hi^ more familiar and Charitab^e
Friends. Madam, says Cratander, did you not observe a black Ribbon tied about
the wrist of his Right Hand; yes Sir, says she, I did so, he is a Gentleman
who drinks high and is often in Broyls, I wish Madam, says Crata^der, he was
guilty of no other fault, though I cannot comm^nd a quarrelsom Temper in my b^st
Friends; but proceeds he, would you please to Seal my pardon beforehand, I
would make one step farther, which I shall do with all respect to the Memory or
reputation of any Gentleman alive or dead. Sir, says she, I am altogether in
the dark, and cannot Guess at your meaning, b^^ ^ssure your self it is not in
your power to di^oblige me: Madam says Cratand r, when 'twas my good fortune
the other Night to eng^ge the Thieve^ who had broke into your House, after the
fall of one of them I pressed forward with my Sword and received the hurt upon my
Breast from another, which by that glimmering light of the Moon we then had
bo^e the perfect Shape and likeness of this Gentleman who at the same time
received a hurt on his right Hand, which this Person seems to have; Sir, (says
the Lady, a little warmly) pray what do you infer, Madam, says he, I ^o
suspect this Gentlem^n to have been in the Company and I should be very glad to
be satisfied in it. Sir, says she you seem to hint someth^ng more then I am
willing to believe you do. Madam, replied Cratander, I shall make no reserves
in your Ladyships Company, but I heartily wish this Hand did not Contribute
more to your Uncles death then I ever designed it should.

Sir, says she, it is impossible I dare acquit you, and do at this Minute, and
pray let us discourse no farther on so unpleasant a Subject.

Madam, says he, I will Trespass but in one word more, my Suspicion commenced
when I first saw that Gentleman at the House, before I ever knew he had any
hurt on his Hand, for I observed I could never fix my Eye upon him but either
through shame or Guilt he avoided the Test of my looks, and either changed
Countenance, or Showed some inward emotion of Spirit, which they who are better
Read in the lines of Nature, and more Critically observe her Rules, would
Construe in the same Sense that I do.

Sir, says the Lady, I am no ways averse to your Satisfaction in that point,
but I would at the same time have a due regard to my Name and Family.

Madam, replied Cratander, I will proceed by such wary Methods as you your self
shall approve of; I will go to some Surgeon thereabouts, and complain the
wound I received on my Breast Festers within, and advise with him for the Cure,
and so from one to another; and if this Gentleman's wound appears to be so, and
no strain, in all probability he applied himself to some Neigbouring
Chiru^gion, and by him may receive some leading Circumstances to confirm or
abate my Suspicion.

Sir, says the Lady, upon the Terms I before mentioned, you may use your
pleasure. Cratander accordingly the next day took his Horse, and at a public
Inn near the Town wh^re the Uncle lived, desired to know if there was ever a
Surgeon in that part of the Country, whom he might safely entrust. The
Landlord directed him to one at the next Town, to whom Cratander Showed his
wound, which was not perfectly Cured, and in discourse, was asking if he had
much practice in the Country for green Wounds, the Surgeon told him every
tittle, and that by accident the other day, a Gentleman who had been engaged in
a quarrel received a Cut on his Right Hand, whom he now had under Cure, which
had it not slanted a little had certainly Cut all his Muscles in two and for
ever disabled him. The Person and Circumstance of time he more particularly
urged, but at that distance, as if rather for discourse sake then Enquiry, and
found them all Correspond with his first Suspicion. At Night he acquainted the
Lady with the particulars, and prevailed with her, that he might get a Justice
of Peaces Warrant to apprehend him, and oblige him upon his Examination to give
a Satisfactory account where and when he r^c^iv'd that wound. This was done and
the Gentleman taken into Custody, who giving only Evasive Answers, was told if
he would not be more positive and direct, they should be forced to charge him
more Criminally, which an ingenious Confession might prevent o^ in some measure
atone. The Gentleman was in great confusion what to say, but at last fully
Confessed the whole matter, that he with two more whom he Named, were won by the
Uncle upon the promise of a Considerable reward to assist him in this
Enterprise, that they pitched upon that Night rather then any other, because
the Menservants would be abroad, and the House defenseless, that they had
resolved to Murder the Young Lady and all the Family, for f^ar they should
hereafter tell any Tales, that the Uncle was Shot at the door where he received
his hurt by Cratander, and afterward they came back and brought of his Body
for fear of a discovery. Upon this the Gentleman was committed to Winchester
Gaol, the other Two having some Notice of it fled. The Body of the Uncle was
taken up and found to be Shot into the Heart with a Pistol Bullet which was
there found, the Motive to so bloody and barbarous a design, (besides the
instigation of the Devil and his own Covetousness) was generally supposed to be
the Estate of the Young Lady which descended to him, who was her Fathers
Younger Brother, and she the only Child he left behind. The Young Lady
considering how miraculously she had been preserved, and that next to Heaven
she owed her Life to the Courage and Gallantry of Cratander, Franckly told him.

Sir, I never yet Enquired whether you was Married or no, nor was it a question
ever in my Thoughts before, if you are not and will accept of my Person with
the Fortune that attends it, I hope to be Happy in your Embraces.

Cratander, who little Expected that Fortune who had been always a niggard to
him, should now pour down her Blessings with so Lavish a Hand, in a Rapture of
Bliss, cried out, O happy Cratander, for ever happy, Dear Madam I am yours for
ever, and let the declining Sun tell the other part of the Globe how happy his
Fellow Traveller is made to day; which she readily consented to, and they were
immediately Married* within a Month after the Aunt dyed for grief, and that
Estate fell to Cratander in Right of his wife who was next Heyr at Law; Thus
Lives he Master of a fair Estate which his courage and generosity most worthily
deserves.

Lysander ended his Story with the applause of the whole Company, and Melintus
himself Smiled at the Close, and said the Lady could do no less then Crown her
Champion with the full Enjoyment of her Estate and Person.

Florimel whose turn it was to lead, desired to be Excus d, that she had never
a Story fit for such sober Company, but Melintus told her he would admit no
Excuse, She was not so Airy, hut She had some more serious Intervals, and he
hoped this was one of them. Well Sir, says Florimel, I Will take my Course and
you must take your Chance.

NOVEL the Fourth,
By FLORIMEL.
CHarilus, (for under that Title I intend to disguise his proper English Name,
out of respect to his Person and quality) was the Eldest Son of a Worthy
Gentleman in Oxfordshire, and Heir to a fair Estate. His Father took particular
care in his Education, to furnish him with all the Accomplishments Suitable to
his parts and Character, for Nature had been prodigal to him in all the gifts
of mind, which she inchas'd in a Body of Elegant Composure and perfect
Symmetry. After he was arrived to more Natural years, his Father brought him up
to London, and entered him into the Society of Grayes-Inn, where he not so much
designed him for a profound Lawyer, as to be Capable to serve his Country in
that Station and Quality he was born in. For the first two years he wa^
observed by all, for a Sedulous Student, and knew no other pleasures or
diversions of the Town, then those of the Playhouse or Dancing-School, both
which he rarely frequented, and then rather out of Complaisance to his Friends
then Inclination in himself. It fortuned one day he was Invited abroad by some
of his acquaintance to an Entertainment of the Spring-Gardens, where they were
Engaged to Meet some Ladies, to whom the last Night they had lost a Collation
at a Game at C^rds. Charilus who knew nothing of the design, was very ready to
accept the Treat, and promis d his Company, The Gentlemen and Ladies met
accordingly, the Entertainment was Noble and Costly, the Gentlemen Generous and
Frank, and the Ladies fair and Obliging. Charilus whose heart was yet a
st^anger to Love, began of a sudden to feel its warmer powers, and himself
discomposed that he resolved all happiness into that of Love, and Condemned the
ignorance of his past Life, who had only Studied Men and Books to know the
worst half of Mankind, and neglected the faire^ Sex, the Beauty and Glory of
the whole Creation. Having thus but dipped his Foot in the water he found it so
refreshing he resolved to wade farther and plunge himself into that Abyss of
pleasures his Thirsty Soul so eagerly Coveted. These Ladies brought him into
the Acquaintance of others, which they enlarged to their own Friends, till in a
short time the day was not long enough for him to pay his Visits (which he
punctually observed) to each expecting Mistress. About this time his Father
dyed and left him a plent^full Estate with a considerable Sum of ready Money,
which he improved to the better Conduct and more easy Management of his Amorous
Intrigues, Numerous were the Female Clients of this young Lawyer, and the
rather because he gave, but received no Fees, except those in Tail, besides ^he
great ad^antage he had of other Gentlemen in his comely personage and courteous
behavior, that he wounded more hearts in a week then he could Cure in a Month
with his best performances. It Chanced one Evening being at a Ball in
Leicester-Feilds he saw the Beauteous Bellinda, whose powerful Charms would
have Conquered a more stubborn heart then Charilus wore, which by its frequent
wounds was now grown soft and tender, and easily received the lightest
Impression. Bellinda was now the only game Charilus pursued, which he did so
Vigorously, that he lost no opportunity he could improve, to render himself
respected by her; He danced with her, and afterward obtained the favor to
wait upon her home in his own Coach, which he looked upon as a promising
earnest of a more ample reward in future. But after several Visits made with
all passion and diligence as the Devil would have it, Bellinda proved of a
different mould from other Ladies of her Sex, and Virtue had been Regent at her
Nativity, above Beauty or pleasure. Charilus who had never met a repulse like
this in the whole Career of his hot desires; Entreated, Treated, presented,
which the Lady still accepted upon honorable terms. When he found these Bait^
would not take, he offered Marriage as the last and most prevailing ar^ument.

Bellinda told him, She was under no Vow to a single Life, but could dispose of
her Person and Fortune as best pleased her self.

Charilus told her that was the only happiness he aimed at, and would complete
immediately, but that he was under a Sacred Obligation not to Marry for some
time which was now Expired to Six Months, that he did believe a contract in the
Eye of Heaven, was as Obliging as the public Solemnization of the Wedding,
which was only required by Law for the more known and certain descent of
Estates, that if she pleased to consent to a Contract now he would m^st
assuredly Consummate the Marriage Six Months after.

With these and other arguments and the most Solem^ protestations his quick
Invention, could Furnish his Expressions with, he won the credul ^us Bellinda,
who without any tedious or formal Ceremony of contract, took his word Charilus
immediately ordered private Lodgings for himself and Bellinda, where they lived
with the highest content and Satis^action, the six Months being expired,
Bellinda remembered him of his promise; which he excused at that time, as a
thing that mig^t be done any day, for that he was eng^ged in some Affairs of
great Importance. Thus from time to time he had always some Studied Answer to
divert the discou^se, which at last she found had no place in his intentions,
and p^est no farther. However no Persons lived more amicably and Friendly
together, that I much qu^stion (were there not other more Substantial reasons
to be given) whether an indisso^veable Tie of two Persons, does not render
their Converse more uneasy, and their whole Lives more querulous, then if it
was only a Knot which each Person* might unloose at pleasure. Char^les who was
always of a Generous and Noble Temper (nor was Bellinda parcemonious) having
one day an Occasion for two hundred pounds, b^gan to consider his present
Circumstances and inspect his accounts for the last seven years, when first his
Acquaintance commenced wi h Bellinda; He sound his Estate much impaired by the
negligence of Tenants, his Rent fallen one third, and the Body of the Estate
sunk under a weighty Mortgage, which still preyed upon the Vitals, besides
several Debts abroad, which would grow Clamorous and disreputable to him, and
fif^een Hundred pounds, which he had received as Bellinda's Portion, was
sometime since spent and forgo^ten, the Unwelcome prospect he now had of his
Shattered Fortunes, raised different passions in his Laboring Breast, which
after he had singly examined, he found himself only to blame, who either by his
own Inadvertency or too much Confidence in others, had suffered h^s Estate to
steal from him, without that prudent observance which might only preserve it.
At last he resolved to disintangle himself from the trouble of Lands and
Mortgages and part with all for a valuable consideration in Money over which he
would keep a strick Eye, This he resolved and in part performed. He sold the
whole Estate paid all his Debts, preserved his Reputation with the world, and
had two Thousand pounds Overplus, to lay the foundation of a New fortune, which
he promised himself might be easily done. But being naturally averse to
business, and unwilling to descend below his former Grandeur, he so long
deferred it, that there was not Room left for that consideration, and Calling
Bellinda one Morning into his Closet he showed her a draught of his present
Misfortunes and withal told her there was but Three hundred left of the last
two Thousand pounds, that though he never was Ceremoniously Married to her, yet
he looked upon himself as obliged to provide for her; and not for that respect
only, but as he ever had a most Sincere Love for her and that whatever
distresses should befall him, her Share should be ^he least in them. She began
to Lam^nt her great U^happ^ness, who must shortly be Exposed to he ^nj^ryes of
the World, and the ^ncleme^cy of F^iends, when Char^^us prayed her patienc^ to
hea^ him a few wo^^s

My Dear Bellinda, says Charilus, that my Aff ctio^s have bee^ hearty and
unfeigned you you^ self shall Judge, and think not that those v^go^ous Flames,
hich were first inkindled betwe^n u^ shall ^ver know decay or Period. Di tress
if rightly used, is but a poignant Saw to whet our Cloyed Appetites; Loves
fire may be as intense in the heat, 't^o the Flames are not so active, but
affliction Rowzes up the Sleeping Embers and seems to give N^w Life and heat.
But this I only speak as Conselatory, now to the point I intend; There is but
one way to retrieve our drooping f^rtunes, and that with your approbation, I am
resolved to prosecute, which is this, I have an Acquaintance in the City, a
Person of Eminent Reputation, and my particular Friend, whose Assistance I am
assured of in this affair; You shall take two hundred and fifty pounds of this
Money, a Footman and Two Maids to wait upon you, and assume a Name both
honorable and well known in the West of England, and pass for a Gentlewoman of
the same Name, of a very considerable Fortune and at her own disposal. My
Friend I spoke of, shall take you fair Lodgings in a Merchants House, give you
the Character I m^ntion'd, and assist you in the whole Conduct of this design.
Very well, says Bellinda, now you have reduced me to nothing, you intend to
set me up for a Fortune, like a Gilt of the Town -- Soft! says Charilus, you
are too quick upon Me and overshoot the mark this being done I Will go down into
the Country, and reconcile my self to my Uncle, (who has a fair Estate, which I
am next Heyr at Law to, if he don't Cut of the Entail) and make use of my
Courtship to you, and the hopes I have of your Favor to Cement the difference
between us, and Engage his Interest for the obtaining your Love, of which I
know how to make good Advantage.

Well then, and what must be the Issue of this? Why nothing Child but an
Established Felicity to us both in Matrimony, and the Secureing my Uncles
Estate, when ever Heaven shall call him into a better World.

I know not how (says Bellinda) to trust any affair where there is Matrimony
in it, it is a word so abused upon all Occasions, and I my self have had some
litttle Experirience of it -- but I forbear, that is a tender part. But do what
you please you shall always find me of the same obsequious humor.

Charilus having fixed this point, and seen Bellinda placed at a Merchants
House, (where she had the Reputation of a Fortune of Eight Thousand pounds and
five Hundred li. per An.) and made some Visits to ^er, he went down into the
Country where his Uncle received him as a Gentleman and a stranger, of whom he
had not heard a word this seven years, bu^ as Common fame reported him to his
disadvantage. After he had Spent two days there, his Uncle came to a more easy
familiarity, and enqu^r'd of his affairs blameing his Imprudent management of
his Estate and Riotous Expenses, which Charilus in part Confessed, and laid his
finger where he thought his Uncles Eye had not yet discovered the blemish* this
he thought a proper Season to discourse him, of his Courtship to Bellinda
(whose Name we w^ll preserve though her Character's altered) he assured him of
her fortune and his Interest with her, and that if he would please to afford
him, the least Umbrage of his favor he did not question Success, and that he
should be not only able to repair the Breaches in his Estate, but considerably
advance it by this plentiful Addit^on. His Uncle told him he had in so high a
Measure forfeited his Esteem with him, that he might reasonably im^gine he
suffered as much in the Opinion of others; That this would be a work of great
difficulty, and beside fortunes now a days were grown so common and Cunning,
that very often the most Judicious Eye, could not distinguish the real from the
Counterfeit. After other reasonings on both sides the Uncle seemed to be
satisfied with. Charilus his discourse of the fortune, and told him that if he
would stay with him till Term which was not long, he would consider farther of
it, and then he had buisness at London. During his stay in the Country, he
wrote two Letters to Bellinda, which he Showed his Uncle and the Answers he
received, by which he abated the difficulty of the Courtship so that now the
great Q^^a^e was the certainty of the Es^ate an^ Money. At the beginning of
Easter Term they both came up to Lond^n, and Charilus would have made a Visi^
the next Afternoon to his Mistress, but his Uncle told him the Tailor had been
with him in the Morning, and promised him to bring his Clothes by twelve the
next day, and that he had a mind to go along with him, if he would defer it to
the next Afternoon, which Charilus consented to, and they acc^rdingly went
together. At the door he met with one of Bellinda'^ Maids, and asked if her
Lady was within, who Answered, yes, pray Sweet heart, says he

Present my very humble Service to her, and let her Ladyship know my Name is
Charisus, who beg the Honor to kiss her Hand.

The Maid went up with the Message, and presently down came her Woman with this
Answer.

Sir, my Lady presents her Service to you, She Is something indisposed at this
time and begs your pardon.

Upon which Charilus and his Uncle returned to their Lodging. Where the Uncle
Umph'd, and Umph'd! And told Charilus, this was a Sort of a cold indifferent
Complement, which he excused, that Ladies of that quality and fortune did often
put on State to give a greater value and Esteem to their Character. However the
Uncle was much disatisfied to see his Nephew thus Slighted and urged, that they
should make a Second Visit by Nine next Morning, which he Excused as not the
Mode of the Town to Visit Ladies, but in the Afternoon. Next day he was
Impatient till the Clock had struck Three, that he might have a Sight of this
Lady, after thre^ they made a Second attempt to a V^^^, an^ sent up the same
Message as before, but the Uncle for fear of some excuse pulled Charilus by the
Sleeve and followed the Servant up stairs, where they met her returning to
Invite them up. At their entrance into the Dining Room, they saw the Lady at
the Table talking with a Gentleman, and a great heap of writings and parchments
before them, upon which Charilus step^ back, but the Lady very familiarly
called him in, and desired his Friend would please to walk in too, which
Invitation the Uncle had already prevented out of his great Curiosity to see
the Lady; Charilus saluted her with all imaginable respect and asked pardon for
interrupting of her in the midst of Buisness. She answered, it was no great
Buisness, this Gentleman was her Lawyer, and they had been looking over some
loose papers, at which she turned the Carpet gently over them, and told the
Gentleman if he pleased to come at Ten in the Morning they would Inspect the
rest, upon which he took his Ieave. Then she particularly apolog^z'd for
yesterdays rudeness as she pleased to call it, that indeed she had been busy
all day wi h her Lawyer, was undrest, and understanding there was a stranger
with you Sir, to Charilus, I was forced to use the frequent exc^se of our Sex,
which I beg this Gentleman's pardon for -- to the Uncle, which Complement after
he had taken care to Answer -- She invited them to sit down, and put on a most
facetious and obliging Countenance. Amongst other discourse Charilus asked if
the Painter had finished her Ladyships Picture yet, yes Sir, says she, it
hangs in the withdrawing Room -- and rising up, pray Sir, says she, give me
your Opinion, whether it is like or No, with that Charilus waited upon her into
the Room, and the Uncle (thinking it but common manners to let the Lovers be
private at their first Enterview after so long a Vacation) stayed ^ehind;
Charilus gently putting the door too, which the Uncle observing b^gan to peep
under the Carpet, wh re he saw several Bonds, Letters, and one Mortgage for
four Thousand pounds. After half an Hours stay the Lovers returned, and the
Lady afresh excused the incivility of her absence, to a Gentleman of his
quality, whom she now understood to be a near Relation to this Worthy Gentleman
her Friend; Mutual Complements having passed between the Uncle and Lady they
sat down, and fell upon other discourses. After half an Hours stay longer
Charilus and his Uncle took leave of the Lady, and in the next street parted;
his Uncle telling him he would make a particular Enquiry for his own
Satisfaction, and within two days he would resolve him what he would do. Two
days after he came early into his Chamber with a Letter in his Hand and told
him he had weighed all Circumstances of Truth and improbability, had made a
most particular Scrutiny into the Ladies fortune, her Relations, and whatever
was to be considered upon that point, and did agree with him, that she was a
most Beautiful Virtuous Lady and Mistress of the same Estate in Money and Land
(if not more) as he first reported to him. That he was withal very sensible
that she had more than ordinary Ref^ect for him by those familiar kindnesses
she Expressed, that delay was the greatest Enemy he could have in this affair,
and whatever was resolved must be with Expedition. I do withal think it
proper, says he, you should make her some Handsome present as either a Locket
of Diamonds, a fair Necklace of Pearl, or what you think is most Modish and
acceptable, Sir, says Charilus, I humbly thank you, you certainly advise the
best Method that can be; yes, says the Uncle, interrupting of him, and you
ought likewise to appear in a fine Gilt Chariot drawn by two Flanders, these
are very taking with Young Ladies, they were so in my time, yes Sir, says
Charilus, but my present Stock of Money will not reach so far, and I am
unwilling to run in debt to Tradesmen it may prove a disadvantage to me, if
known, you are in the right says his Uncle, and I did fear as much, and for
that reason I have here writ a Letter to Badley my Steward, to furnish you with
Eight Hundred, or a Thousand pounds* which you would rather have, and do you
take it, and go down into the Country with all speed, if he has not so much in
his Hands let him raise it of the Tenants, but I expect, Nephew, you shall
return it to me Six Months after Marriage: which Charilus submissively promised
to do, and to take Post immediately into the Country. Charilus overjoyed at
this great Blessing of fortune beyond his utmost Expectation, Stole a Visit
first to Bellinda, and told her all his Uncle had said, showed the Letter, and
after they had Congratulated each other in this happy Success, took leave for
the Country promising all speed in his return. In the Afternoon the Uncle made
a Visit to the Lady, and talking Jo^osely of Marriage, made his address to her,
and told her, if she could comply with a little disproportion of Age, no Person
had more Vigorous Flames, or a more passionate affection to her Service then
himself, that as for his Nephew, to whom he believed she had some respect, he
was a wild Extravagant Young Man, that he who had already ruined his own
fortune, would be unsafely trusted with another, and an Empire in the Cup of a
Voluptuary would be as soon quaft of, as that Narrow Spot left by paternal care,
which his Riotous humor had already Spent, and yet not quenched his Thirst.
The Lady was very much Surpised at his discourse, and told him she rather
expected he would have been an Advocate in his Nephews behalf, then have
Furnished her with such powerful Arguments o^ disesteem. The Uncle made his
Attaqus so close and quick, that she began seriously to consider of her own
Circumstances, and at last told him, it was a matter of so great Moment he
could not reasonably expect a present Answer. After some other discourses to
the same purpose the Uncle took his leave, prom sing to wait upon her the next
day. Upon the Second visit he presented her with a Necklace of Pearl, and a
Gold Watch studded with diamonds, which he begged of her to accept, and in the
close of all told her he had a clear Estate of a Thousand pounds per Annum
besides Money abroad, that he would settle Six Hundred pounds a year in
Jointure, and what more she pleased of her own fortune. The Lady thanked him
for his great Respects to her, and those Generous offers he was pleased to
make, that was she determined, as she was yet no ways inclined to Marry; She
should Entertain as worthy and deserving thoughts of himself as of any other
Gentleman in England. The Esquire, for to that Title his Character is now grown
up, looking upon this last Answer to be as absolute a Surrender as would
Consist with her Modesty, told her that from the first Minute he had the
happiness to see her, he was struck with Love and admiration, that he
designedly sent his Nephew into the Country upon an April Errand, that he might
have the freer access to her Person, and then earnestly pressed the Wedding might
be over before his return.

At last She told him, within two days He should have the Result of her more
serious Consideration.

B^l^inda was now more posed then ever which way to Steer, the Uncles great
kindness to Char^lus was but Counterfeit, but to her real, that it was much
better to save one, then that they both should perish, nay, this might pres^rve
both for upon this Marriage she hoped to be in a Condition to serve him; Nor
was she so much too blame who had been ruined by one Branch of the Family, if
she prudently Endeavored her safety by another, and the Uncle repair those
Breaches the Nephew had made, Thus she pondered the Morning before she expected
his return, and at last resolved to Marry him, but first secure the Jointure.
In the Afternoon came the Esquire, and after a Cunning Harangue of reason all
in his own Commendation why she should Marry him, she declared her consent,
That as to matter of Jointure, She was well satisfied with the six Hundred
pounds a year at present, and what part of her own fortune he would put into
her Hands, should be as he pleased at his own time. Thus the Bargain was made,
and her Lawyer who was prepared before Hand, sent for and ordered to make the
Jointure upon such particulars and to be ready upon Thursday Morning by Eight,
when the Jointure was Sealed and the Espousals Consummated. Charilus came late
to Town the same Night to his Uncles Lodgings, with a return of Eight Hundred
pounds, and waiting his coming in till it grew late, went to Bed, in the
Morning early he asked what time his Uncle came in, and if he was yet stirring.
The Servant told him he did not come in all Night, nor had he seen or heard
from him since he last went out the Morning before. Charilus was very much
troubled at this, fearing some Misfortune had befallen him (which was true
enough, though not in his Sense) but not knowing where readily to find him, he
went first to give Bellinda a Visit, and acquaint her with the Joyful News of
the Eight Hundred pounds, when off^ring to go into the Bedchamber her Maid
would have stopped him, which be took little Notice of, but pressed in, and saw
some Body in Bed with the Lady, Upon which in the greatest rage and fury he
drew his Sword, and Swore he would be the death of that Villain who had thus
abused him. The Uncle crept under the sheet for fear expecting the Sword either
in his heart or Guts at each Oath he Swore, Bellinda was strangely Surpised,
and Shrieked out for help, whilst Charilus discharged whole Valleys of Oaths
and Curses on those two miserable Wretches, and violently pulling down the
Clothes, discovered his own Dear Uncle in B d with his Mistress. Charilus at
this was no less astonished, then they affrighted, when Bellinda interp^s'd,
and desired his patience but for two words; Sir, says she, I beseech you
Compose your self, and be not angry with this Gentleman or my self, for we are
Man and Wife. This was so amazing a Story he did not know what to answer to it,
but after a little pause, considering it as a truth, there might be a good
improvement made of it, he fell into a violent passion with his Uncle, called
him all the infamous Names he could invent, and with the point of his Sword
threatened immediate Vengeance upon that false Heart, which had so basely and
Treacherously supplanted him, After his passion was grown more cool, the Uncle
offered terms of reconciliation, and acknowledged the hainousness of his crime
in betraying that trust he had reposed in him and Robbing him of a Mistress of
so considerable a Fortune, for all which he was ready to make present
Satisfaction. The terms agreed upon were these, that Charilus should have the
Eight Hundred pounds now in his Hands, and his Uncle make over to him four
Hundred pounds a year out of his Estate, and put him into immediate possession
of it, in consideration of the Injury he had done him in the loss of his
Mistress, all which the Uncle perform^d that day according to the Tenor of the
Articles. Within a Month after he discovered some part of his own Error, as to
the mistake of the Fortune, but nothing farther, however they went down into
Oxfordshire together, where in less then a Twelvemonth he dyed, and Bellinda's
Jointure being an Entailed Estate came into Charilus his Hands, who ^n Memory
of former kindnesses was highly Generous and Noble to her.

Here Sir, says Florimel, should I conclude with my Story, but that I have
something to say by way of Consolation to you Melintus, and therefore beg leave
to carry on Bellinda's Character one step farther.

This Lady Sir, after the death of her Husband came up to London, and 'tho she
had for some years of her acquaintance with Charilus resided here, yet was she
seldom abroad, and not at all known to the Gallants of the Town, so that upon
her return she passed for a New Face, and was generally thought to be a Maid.

Amongst other Sparks who made search up and down for fresh Beauties, that
Matchless piece of Chivalry, Sir -- was one, you all know, who was the Person
that first discovered that Notable way of affronting Ladies of Quality by
breaking their Windows with Crown pieces; It was his fortune to Meet with this
Lady and after some necessary Treats to introduce a more familiar acquaintance,
he fell Smart upon her, but all in vain, her Honor was Lodged in an
impregnable Fortress; when that would not do, he betook himself to his last
Remedy, Marriage; Offered a fair Jointure and whatever else should be thought
convenient, this at last was approved of, but the Knight was mistaken in his
Measures she would yield up no part of the premises till the Jointure was
Sealed, and the Marriage completed; which, rather then lose his longing he
consented to. A short time after the Wedding, he asked her what reason she
imagined more particularly Influenced him to Love her, when she could not
Guess, he told her, it was for her strict Virtue and Chastity, for he had made
a Resolution never to Marry any whom he could prevail upon without it, and that
is the reason that though I have Courted Hundreds I was never Married till now;
Why look you Sir says she, I had that Trick put upon me once too, but I was
resolved I would never be Caught Twice with the same Bait.

Now Sir, as to the application, why should you be in the Dumps and Melancholy;
hide your self from your Friends, and call those Stars, you ought to Bless by
all the Naughty Names you can think of, when who knows but that beloved she
might have proved another Bellinda, and take her at the best -- but with your
permission I have done Sir.

The Company all Laughed heartily, and Melintus could not forbear a public
Smile, I knew says he, we should have one Roguish Story or another, I expected
it Florimel, but above all commend me to your close, where you come off with a
Relish indeed -- Parmenio, says Melintus, I think it now falls into your
division, pray will you oblige us with a Story that may Temper the heat and
passion of Florimels, and Compose us to our wonted Gravity.

NOVEL the Fifth,
By PARMENIO.
A Gentleman who had been formerly a Merchant in the City of London, and
acquired a considerable Estate, withdrew into the Country, having Spent his
younger years in the Noise and hurry of Business, resolved now to enjoy the
fruits of his Labors in quiet, and Gratify himself with Solitude and
Retirement; having a fair House in Hartfords^ire he inclined to fix there,
where he was eminently hospitable to the Gentry, and Charitable to the poor.
But that he might not be out of all concern of business in the world like an
idle person, he still kept some Ventures a broad, which he called the poors
Stock, in which and all other his endeavors, providence blessed his Industry
with that constant success, that he used familiarly to say he grew Rich in
spite of his Teeth, for if he shut Money out at the door, it would come in at
the Window. This Gentleman at his death left only one Child a Daughter called
Joanna, to whom he gave a very great Fortune, and committed the care of her
Person and management of her Estate to two Gentlemen her Guardians. She was now
about Eight years old when she desired she might (as she usually did once a
year) go see her Uncle, a Gentleman of fair Reputation and good Estate in
Ess^x, which they granted, and s^nt her over attended with two Servants. After
she had been there a Month, her Uncle wh^ was a passionate Man, catching her in
some fault threatened to whip her; She farther provoking him with some Scurvy
reply, he d^d so, at which time as she cried out, was heard to say by some of
the Neighbors, O pray Uncle don't kill Me, which neither he or any of the
Family took much Notice of at that time. The next Morning early she stole out
of the House, and after she had wandered some Hours not knowing whether to go,
met with a Company of Gypsies who took her up, made much of her, changing her
Cloths and staining her C^mplexion, brought her with them in few days to
London, and from th^nce went their Rounds into Hampsh re, Wiltshire, and about
the Country. The Uncle missing his Niece next day, made all possible Enquiry
after her, sent to all the Neighboring Villages, searched all the public
Roads, but could not receive any account of her. He next sent into
Hartfordshire to her Guardians to know if she was returned home, but meeting
with no satisfaction, concluded that some young Gentleman who knew she would be
a great fortune had Stole her, and carried her far away to some distant County
where she lay concealed. This the Guardians believed too, till some of the
Neighbors at their Gossipping, were prattling what they heard others say, and
began to wish seriously that it was not too true, esp^cially when they
considered that if the Child dyed in her Minority, the whole Estate would
descend to the Uncle. This was buzzed about till at last it reached the
Guardians Ears, who making more particular enquiry into the truth of it, were
informed by some of the Neighbors that the Night before the Child was missing,
they heard her cry out most lamentably, pray Uncle don't kill Me, this they
considered as an odd Circumstance to happen just the Night before, an^ asked
the Persons who thus informed, if they could safely take their Oaths of it, and
would do so before a Magistrate, who said, yes, it was all true and nothing but
the truth. After some delibe atio^ they acquainted the Uncle what the N^
ghb^^rs said, and how nearly it did touch his ^^putation now, and might his
Life hereafter, if his Niece was not found. He told them he was altogether
innocent of any Injury done to her, nor did he remember that ever she sa^d so,
though he owned he whipped her severely* which was for telling a notorious Lie, and
using some other indecent expressions, which he thought she deserved to be
Corrected for. Upon this all the ponds and Rivers were searched, and a
considerable reward promised to any Person, who could give an account of her
alive or dead. No News being heard of her, the Neighbors b^gan to Grumble and
said, that the Guardians and Uncle had Complotted to Murder the Child and Share
her E^tate: This being now grown a public discourse in the Country to the
great disadvantage of their Reputation, who before were Esteemed a^ Gentlemen
of Honor and integrity; They reso^ved to probe the bottom of this cause, and
prosecute the Uncle as far as the Law directed them. Accordingly they went over
into Essex, and s^n^ for him to a Gentleman's House who was his Neighbor, and a
Justice of the peace. Being altogether, the Guardians complained to the Justice
of this report, and desired him that he would take Cognizance of it as far as
the Law required, that if possible their Reputations, and the Gentleman's might
be preserve^ free from such an undeserved calumny. The Justice sent for the
witnesses, who Swore positively that on such a Night, which was the immediate
Night before she was missing, they heard her cry out with a lamentable voice,
pray Uncle don't kill Me. Upon which the Justice bound the Uncle in a
Recognizance of two Thousand pounds to appear at the next Assize, and the
Guardians in a bond of five Hundred to prosecute the Uncle. In this Interval
the Uncle having used all the probable means for a discovery that humane Wit
could imagine, but not being able to make any, began to think what was to be
done, the time of the Assize drew on, and then he should certainly be Indicted
for the Murder of Joanna, nor had he any way to clear his Innocence against
such Circumstantial Evidence, but by a downright Negation, which though some
of his Friends might Credit, would yet take no place in a Court of Judicature.
Having thus considered the difficulty of his Case, he at last resolved thus. In
his search after Joanna, he had found a poor Man's Daughter in another County,
who both in Age, Features* and Complexion, so much resembled her that at first
sight he thought she had been the real same, now says he to himself, if I can
get this Girl of her Parents, and dress her up in the same habit, Joanna wore,
the very Guardians shall not distinguish her from their own Pupil, she will
appear so like the very same, nor have I any other course but this to preserve
my self, he accordingly did so, and for a Sum of Money bought the Girl of her
poor Relations, diligently instructed her in the part she was to act, who being
of a ripe Wit and very apprehensive had her Lesson to a hair. A day or two
before the Assize, he gave out he had by great fortune found his Niece, brings
her home to his House with her real Father and Mother, who gave a Satisfactory
account to all persons how accidently they found her in a wood almost Starved,
and She not remembering from whence She had wandered they Entertained her amongst
their own Children. The Girl owned how she Stole away for fear her Uncle should
whip her again as he threatened, all which Romance hung so well together, that
the Guardians believed her the same, and no body questioned the truth. At the
Assize he was called to appear which accordingly he did, the Judge asked him for
his Niece Joanna if she was found yet, Yes, my Lord, says the Gentleman, she
is in Court, Very well, says my Lord, produce her, and bid the Guardians
appear, accordingly they did, and the Counterfeit Joanna, Are you satisfied, to
the Guardians says the Judge, that this is your Pupil, the Daughter of Mr. --
with whom you were left in trust? Yes, my Lord, said the Guardians, After a
farther account how she was found the Judge ordered their Recognizance should
be withdrawn, and the Uncle discharged. It happened that an old Woman who was
in Court about other business, hearing what a Bustle had been made about her
young Mistress, and that she was found again, as they came out of Court crowded
to see her, and looking full upon her, believed it to be the same, but the Girl
not taking Notice of her, She cried out, O Mistress you don't know Me, upon
which She answered presently, no, what says She, don't you know old Nurse? I
am sure you are not the same then, upon this the Girl was startled, the
Guardians made a stop and asked her how she came to forget Nurse so soon, she
not giveing a present answer, they began to suspect something and brought her
again into Court and Nurse with her.

The old Woman said, She did believe it had been the same at first, but upon
review she much questioned it, that she her self had Nursed her till she was
almost four years old, and if it was her Mistress she had a Scar upon her left
Arm above the Elbow.

The Judge ordered they should look upon her Arm, which they did, and reported
there was no Scar above but one below the Elbow, upon this it was generally
believed she was the lame, and all things set right again. However the Judge
seemed more disatisfied then before, ordered the Uncle to withdraw, and
examined the Girl, Afterward the Man apart, who said he had found her in a
Wood, and then the woman, and here he found they all disagreed in one point or
other, at length by crossing the account of the Man and Wife, and then
considering that both the Guardians and Nurse agreed the true Joanna, must
needs have remembered her Nurse, since it was not a Twelvemonth ago since she
saw and particularly knew her, they agreed it was yet a Cheat, which the Woman
for fear of punishment, first Confessed, and then her husband owned it, and
lastly the Girl; They proved the Receipt of so much Money at such a time, proved
by several neighbors, who had known this Girl for five or six years together,
that she always was looked upon and reputed as their own Child and always
lived with them. Upon this discovery an Indictment was preferred against the
Uncle, for the Murder of his Niece Joanna, but he having no proof to clear
himself by, and this appearing with so foul a Face against him, he was
Condemned to be hanged, and was within a Week after Executed. It fortuned about
nine years after at the Summer Assize at Nottingham, two young G^ntlemen who
were lately called to the Bar, whereof the Judges Son was one, walking out
early one Morning in the fields they saw a whole Covie of Gypsies under a
Hedge, when they came near, two of them stepped out, and in their Cant told them
a great deal of good fortune by looking into their Hands, and viewing the lines
of the Face as they pretend, upon which one Gentleman threw them a Shilling,
the other called them idle Whores, and said they deserved to be whipped for
public Cheats, upon which one of them a tall black Girl told him, he ought not
to despise a Gypsy for he should Marry one before he was Three Months older,
at this the Gentlemen fell a laughing and entertained them with other lik^
discourse; when they came home one of them mist his gold Watch, and another had
lost all his Money. They began to grow angry to be thus Cheated, and getting a
Constable very luckily, met with these two going off another way; They charged
them with the Watch and Money, which they as peremptorily denied, upon which
the Constable brought them along into open Court which was then sitting, upon
Examination they denied the Fact, nor could they upon search find either about
them. However, the Judge ordered them to be soundly lashed for Vagrants, and
sent out of Town, as the Constable was taking them away, the Gentleman who was
the Judges Son, called out Jocosely to the Constable, pray favor the
black-woman, for she tells me, I shall Marry a Gypsy within these three
Months; which his Father overhearing called them back again, and asked them*

How long they had pretended to telling of Fortunes, I had thought, says the
Judge, all your Trade had been Picking of Pockets; No, and please you my Lord
says the black-Woman, my profession is only telling of Fortunes, I never
understood nor practiced such unlawful Arts, at which the Court laughed (...)
My Lord then asked (seeing her a good favored young Woman, and so quick in her
Answers) what Country-Woman she was, to which she said, she thought
Hartfordshire. Then he asked, if she was born a Gipsy; She said No, but She was
as good, for She had been Nine years Apprentice to a Gipsy. At which he asked
her, if she had e're a Christian Name, yes, my Lord, says she, I think so, for
my Name is Joanna, the Judge hearing the Name Joanna recollected himself, and
remembered the Story of the Essex Gentleman, who was by him Condemned for
Murdering his Niece of that Name. He then asked her, if she had ever been in
Essex, or had any Relations there; She said, not since she was very Young,
which was at the time she met with the Gipsys first, and then She had an Uncle
there, who used her very hardly, and so she ran away from him, and was never
there since, nor never Enquired after him. Upon this he concluded her to be the
same Person, and called to the Constable and told him, he should not let them
be whipped, but carry them home to his own House and Entertain them there, till
the Court was up, and then he should receive farther Orders. The whole Court at
this began to Wonder, and believe one or both of them to be Gentlewomen of good
Families, nor did they spare telling the young Gentleman that for ought they
knew it might be his Fortune indeed to Marry a Gipsy, if this Young Woman
should prove to be a Person of Quality and Estate, which fell out even so, for
the Assizes being over, the Judge who had a Seat in Hartfordshire, and had
known her Father formerly, brought her up in his Coach, and presented her to
the Guardians who owned her to be the same Person, which the Nurse and all her
Surviving Relations Confirmed. At the same time his Lordship, who knew her to
be a very great Fortune, proposed a Match between his Son and her which she
Franckly consented to, and was presently after Solemnized.

Thus ended Parmenio when the whole Company Bowed their respects, and were all
extremely ple^s^d with the fortune of the Gipsy, But Sir, says Melintus, I
could have wished you had carried a lighter Hand over the hard fate of the
Uncle, whom I pity with all my Heart. Sir, says Parmenio, I could have wished
it had not been true, but as it is so under unquestionable Evidence, I durst
not give my Hand the Liberty of one Sweetning Stroke.

Now, Madam, says Melintus to Evadne, we must beg the next favor from your
fair Hands, No Sir, said she, your power with me always Commands.

NOVEL the Sixth
By EVADNE.
ORithia the Beauty of her Sex and Glory of her Age, was the Daughter of an
English Earl, of an Ancient Family, whose Noble Acts in Chivalry stands first
upon Record in our most early Histories, Her great Wit and Excellent Sweetness
of Temper obliged all who had the Honor of her Acquaintance, which every
Gentleman both Courted, and admired. And if amongst those Thousands who were
ready to Sacrifice their bleeding hearts to the fair Orithia, any was thought
to have a more particular interest in her Favor, it was the Lovely Philanthus,
who was only able to make a Reprisall of Hearts amongst the Ladies, for those
Orithia Captivated from the Men. Philanthus his Family was somewhat inferior,
but much more Opulent, he being the Eldest Branch of it, who for the great
Service of his Father, (who lost his Life in the Wars against the French) had
the Honor of Knighthood Conferred upon him, whilst yet a Schoolboy, by his
Gracious Prince. The Assiduous Address of Philanthus, his kind Reception, and
more intimate familiarity obliged us all to believe he would be that happy
Conqueror, who should carry off this Noble prize from the Rest of the
despairing world. But amongst those Stars which influence the great affairs of
Love, some are kind and propitious, whilst others infect their good intents by
their poisonous Neighborhood, some such unhappy Conjunction there was which
suddenly blasted Philanthus his blooming hopes, robbed him of all his Glorious
Expectations and left him the Pity or the Scorn of his Rivals.

The Count de Montallo who was Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy, at the
English Court, being shortly to return, and having often admired the Beautiful
Orithia, as the most lovely Creature his Eyes yet beheld, made his private
Addresses to her, and without the knowledge or Consent of her Relations was
Married to her.

My Lord, her Father, and all her Friends were extremely concerned at it, there
not being any but who gave Philanthus the Encouragement to hope he should be
that happy Person, nor had he any reason to question Orithia's Favor, till the
Count made his applications, and then the Ambition of being so great a Countess
soon prevailed over the more easy powers of Love. Within four days after,
Orithia went along with the Count her Husband for Savoy, without seeing or
taking leave of any of her Friends or Relations. This sudden Marriage with the
Count had at first extremely incensed my Lord her Father, but considering she
had Honorably disposed her self, without the Charge of a weighty portion,
which his Circumstances could not so conveniently spare, he now called that
prudence and discretion, which before he thought a rash and inconsiderable
Action. After her Arrival at Savoy, for three years she lived as happy and as
great as heart could wish, the Count her Husband loved her above all the World,
and his Estate, which was very considerable, was absolutely at her Command. No
Empress, though she might have more large Dominions, was better beloved, or more
willingly obeyed then she was. It happened that the Duke of Savoy making Wars
upon some of the Neighboring Princes appointed the Count de Montallo General
of his Army, which was an Honor he could not refuse, though with some regret
he parted from the Arms of his beloved Orithia. That he might leave the affairs
of his Family under the better Government, he appointed three of his Friends as
Commissioners to take an account of his Rents, assist the Countess upon all
occasion with their Advice, and manage all his business to his greatest
advantage and reputation. To these he added one more, who was the honest
Sabrino as he used to call him, a Gentleman of some Relation to the Count, but
his intimate Friend and Confident. The Duke being now with his Army, and not
expected back till a peace was concluded, which was yet but uncertainly
discoursed; Sabrino, who had the largest Commission of any of the rest, and
much more respected, considered that this was the only opportunity his heart
could wish for, to complete those desires he had so long languished under.
Accordingly one day coming up to the Countess, as if upon some Urgent business,
he found her alone in her Closet, where without any regard to the Honor of the
Count, the Virtue of the Lady, which he had no reason to suspect, or to the
Modesty and good manners in himself, of which he ought to have had some share,
he discovered his unlawful passion, which she received with that abhorrence
and detestation that he was well assured he was now undone for ever, if he did
not preserve himself by being the first Accuser, though he had nothing to Charge
the spotless Orithia with, but what was false as Hell or Devils could invent.
However envenomed malice will want neither Instruments or Methods to perfect
its Revenge; though what wrong had Sabrino received? He first gives the affront,
and then demands Satisfaction, and first Tempts the Lady with his lascivious
address^, then calls himself injured, so great a Crime is it to be good and
Virtuous in the prospect of those who are wicked and debauched. Sabrino, that
he might lose no opportunity, sent presently to the three Commissioners to meet
him at his own Chamber, where he told them,

He had a secret of that importance to communicate to them and of that strange
Surprise, that he wanted words to express the present Horror of his thoughts;
I have for some time suspected, and I wish I could say I did yet but suspect,
Oh shall I speak it! The Fidelity and Chastity of the Countess -- upon which
one of them told him, Sir, I will as soon believe, the Glorious Cherubins may
be tainted in their pure Angelic Natures, as that any Temptation of dishonesty
has or ever shall assoil the Virtue of that immaculate Lady. Oh Sir, says
Sabrino, be not too forward I once thought so too, but I am afraid I shall be
able to convince you sooner then you or I could wish for. In the Interim pray
make your own Observations, and let this pass no farther.

Sabrino had a Nephew a proper young Gentleman, who had been Page to the Count
in England, and since his return, was preferred to be Gentleman Usher to the
Countess; This Gentleman he sent for privately to his Chamber, and told him he
understood what a particular kindness the Countess had for him, and that now
was the time for him to make his fortunes in the absence of his Lord The young
Gentleman told him he did not understand his meaning; O Nephew (said he) are
you so short sighted, why the Countess is in love with you above all the World,
and wants nothing but an opportunity, to complete yours and her own happiness
in Bed, which I have promised her this Night: Wherefore you must in the Evening
pretend to go Sick to Bed, and then undress to you^ Gown, and Steal into the
Countess's Chamber, and lie under the Bed till she gives you Notice to come
forth, but be sure no Body sees you enter her Chamber, if they do, make some
excuse and go out again and so wait till you have an opportunity: pray Uncle,
(says he young Gentleman) did the Countess her self bid you tell me thus? I,
I, She her self bid me, and said that very suddenly she would make you
Gentleman of the Horse The innocent Gentleman discovered not the Snares his
Uncle had laid for him, but in the Evening accordingly did so: after Sabrino
had been at his Chamber and found him not there, nor about the House, he
concluded he was then safe^y Lodged under the Bed, and a little before the
Countess went to her Chamber, sent for the Commissioners, and told them, he was
informed that the Countess's Gallant was to be with her that Night, but who he
was that he could not tell; Sabrino and the rest concluded to pretend some
extraordinary business, to be dispatched that Night and to desire to speak with
her as soon as her Women had left her, and then if there was any Gallant, they
should certainly discover him, if not give the Countess no reason to suspect
their design, Accordingly they did so, and coming softly up stairs knocked at
her Chamber door, an old Gentlewoman (who had formerly been her Nurse) lay in
the Chamber with her and was going in to Bed, when she heard some Body knock at
the Chamber door, She asked who was there, And their business, to which one of
them ^nswered, we are the Commissioners and want to speak one word with her
Honor upon Urgent business, which was forgot before, and must be dispatched
this Night. She acquainted the Countess with what they said, who ordered her to
let them in. As they were by her Bedside discoursing with her, Sabrino cries
out, I, here he is, here is the Rogue, and pulls his Nephew by the heels from
under the Bed, and calling him Rogue, Villain and Traitor, to abuse so good a
Lord, struck him through the heart with his Sword, before he could speak one
word to Vindicate himself or his Ladies Honor. It was now in vain for the
Countess to Endeavor to purge her self from a Crime which appeared against her
by so Notorious an Evidence, though she did in the presence of several Worthy
persons take the Sacrament upon it, that as she never had been Guilty against
her Husbands Bed, so she knew nothing of that Persons being there; that it was
all the malicious Contrivance of Sabrino (whose unlawful desires she had
refused with Scorn and contempt) that had now plotted this Revenge to Rob her
of her life and Honor at the same time. This some believed, who thought the
Countess to be as incorrupt as Virtue it self. But others said here is plain
demonstration against her, and she who dares commit Adultery, will not stick at
a lie to defend her Guilt. The Commissioners writ a Letter to the Count to
acquaint him with this unhappy News, in which they gave a most particular
account, and in the Close highly Commended the Fidelity and Justice of Sabrino,
who seeing his Honor abused, would not spare his nearest Relation. The Count
was astonished at the News above any Misfortune that could have happened, and
notwithstanding this demonstration, as they called it in their Letter, he put a
greater Confidence in the Justice and integrity of the Countess, then in all
their Solemn protestations. And as he sent them word

He was extremely troubled for the Countess that she should lie under so heavy
an Aspersion, which if he did not believe the World would, and therefore with
prayers for her deliverance (if Innocent) did resign her up to the Law, so he
should have been much better Satisfied in the Guilt of his Wife, if Sabrino had
Spared his Kinsmans Life, in that Transport of rage in which he killed him.

Upon the Receipt of this Letter the Commissioners, (as the Custom is there)
disposed the Countess into a Nunnery, where She is to continue a year and a
day, and if in that time no Champion appears to justify her Innocence against
her Accuser, She is upon the last day brought into the List appointed for the
Combatants (if there be any) and there burnt at a Stake, which death she
Legally suffers if her Champion has the worst of it. The Countess was highly
sensible of this as the greatest affliction that ever befell her, yet her own
Innocence, and the Satisfaction that arose from thence made the distress much
more easy and supportable. The Count was st^^l Engaged in the Wars, and the
Countess had now been three quarters of a year a Prisoner in the Nunnery, and
no Person appeared in her behalf to Vindicate her Honor and Virtue. She now
considered that the small remainder of her Life would soon be gone, and unless
some Gentleman would Entertain such Honorable thoughts of her, as to believe
her Guiltless, and Engage his Life to preserve hers, she must certainly suffer,
and as no Person had yet offered himself, so was she altogether at a loss where
to find that Gallant Friend. At last amongst other English Gentlemen who had
been formerly her Friends and Acquaintance, She fixed upon Philanthus, but at
the same time Corrected her Error in thinking that he who believed himself the
most disobliged of all Mankind, should now hazard his Life to Vindicate her
Reputation, No, certainly he would be pleased to hear of her Miseries, and
rejoice to see her proud heart now humbled under the deepest afflictions, but
on the other Hand considering him as a Gentleman, a Person of unquestionable
Courage and Gallantry, and one whose former affections were most sincerely
devoted to her Service, he would rather Court such an opportunity to lay an
everlasting obligation on her which all her Treasury of thanks and Gratitude
should be too poor to recompense. And this took place in her resolution;
Accordingly She writ a Letter to Philanthus, and sent it by a Gentleman who had
been formerly her Servant, with orders where to find or Enquire for him at
London, and to deliver him that Letter, receive his Answer, and return with all
speed. Philanthus who had still the same respect and love for Orithia as would
consist with Honor, having read the Letter, was extremely troubled at it, but
at the same time being Ruined himself in his Fortunes, his mind sunk under the
load of miseries which oppressed him, writ back a most passionate Letter of
excuse, with which she was no less affected as well for his as her own sake.
Orithia Spent her short time (which now wanted but a week of the fatal day) in
recommending her Soul to Heaven, wholly despairing of any relief on Earth.
Philanthus having since seriously considered the present distress of the
Countess, and that she must for ever suffer in her Memory, which to all Noble
Spirits is Ten times worse then a Thousand deaths, and that though in his
excuse to her he had not put his own interest or business into the Scale to
balance against her Life and Honor; But that strange and unexpected disasters
had reduced him to that mean degree of want that he was not able to Equip
himself for the Service; Yet this from a Generous Spirit was mean and pitiful,
that however his Friends would not assist him here, he could want nothing there
of Horse or Arms a Cavalier could ask. After he had pondered a while on this
thought he went to a Gentleman of his intimate acquaintance, showed him the
Letter, and begged of him to furnish him with Moneys for that design which he
did, and Philanthus a short time after went privately over to Savoy. Being
arrived at Turenne he Enquired at what N^nnery the Countess de Montallo was,
and what the general opinion were concerning her Guilt or Inn^cence;
Understanding the Nunnery wa^ Thirty Miles from Turenne, and that all Persons
spoke well of her and did believe her falsely accused, he went directly
thither. Being come within Four Miles of the Nunnery, by the side of a great
Wood, he spyed a Hermits Cell, at which alighting, he asked of the Holy Father,
what the discourse was about the Countess, he told him that in a fair Plain
before the Nunnery, She was to suffer to Morrow Morning before Eleven of the
Clock, if there was no Person f^u^d so hardy to fight her Accuser, nor did he
yet hear of any Champion who had appeared in her behalf. Upon which he told
him, he had a very great desire to see her before she suffered, but he supposed
it would b^ very difficult to obtain that Favor unless he had on a Religious
habit, and if he would do him that kindness to lend him his Weeds, he would
wa^k over that Afternoon and return in the Evening, and leave his Horse and
Armor there till he came back; the Herm^t very readily agreed to it, then
Philanthus (who spoke Italian well) put on his Weeds, and in all Respects
appeared to be a grave Religious Hermit, having a long Beard and all things
answerable. He was now Arrived at the Nunnery, and out of Respect to his habit
(for Hermits are there had in great Veneration) was immediately conducted into
the Countesses Chamber, where entering, those Nunns who were attending upon her
withdrew, that she might have the more freedom of discourse with this Religious
Father. He stayed with her three Hours, and was as well satisfied of her
Innocence and Sabrino's Roguery as his heart could wish. Asking her, if she had
no hopes of any Friend to appear in the Lists to Morrow on her behalf, She
said, No, She never sent but to One English Gentleman, and his Misfortunes
happened at the same time to be almost as great as her own. When he took his
leave of the Countess, she pulled off a Diamond Ring from her Finger, and told
him, Holy Father, I am obliged to you above what I am able to Express for your
Prayers, and good Advice, I have nothing of Worldly Goods left Me to dispose of
but this Ring, which was given Me by my Brother in England, a little before I
Married into this Country, I pray accept it, and keep it for my sake. The
Hermit received it with all Thankfulness, and taking his leave, burst out into
tears to see so great a Beauty reduced to those thin meagre looks, and that
Virtue of which she had so large a portion should be Triumphed over by
wickedness and Villainy. At parting the Countess shook him by the Hand and
cheerfully b^d him not weep, this was the last day she could be miserable.
Philanthus returned to the Cell where he again put on his own Habit, and told
the Hermit what he thought of the Innocence of the Countess. The next Morning
at Nine of the Clock the Countess all in white, was brought from the Nunnery
into a fair adjacent plain, in the middle of which was fixed a Stake, with a
great deal of dried Wood and other Combustible Matter. On a large Scaffold on
one side was a Chair placed for the Countess, and at the other end a Tribunal
Erected for those who were appointed to see the Execution performed, and if
there should happen to be any Combatants, to determine any matter of difference
that should arise. The Judges being Seated on the Tribunal and the Countess in
the Chair, Proclamation was made, that if any Person would Venture to Wage War
in defense of the Countess de Montallo's Innocence, Seignior Sabrino the
Accuser was ready to Answer him at single Combat. Before this Proclamation was
made, all the Drums, Trumpets, Clarions and Instruments of field Music first
sounded, and then the principal of the Judges gave order for the first
Proclamation, and so for the Second, when being ready to give the last Summons,
at a distance appeared a Champion who by the waving of his Sword, gave Notice
what he intended, he was Mounted on a Milk white Courser in black Mourning
Armor, his Beaver fast locked down, his Device, the Sun Shining gloriously
from a Cloud upon distressed Innocence, which was a Virgin habited all in
white. As soon as this strange Champion was Entered the Lists, a Herald
demanded of him who he was that came thus Armed? he told him, he came to lose
his Life or Vindicate the Honor of the Countess of Montallo, who was unjustly
accused by a Rogue a Liar and a Vilain; and that he would prove him to be. Upon
this the Herald demanded of the Countess, if she was willing to Venture her
Life and Honor upon the Success of her Champion, to which she answered, yes, I
pray God prosper him. Immediately after upon the Sound of the Trumpets, the two
Warriors set Spurrs to their Horses, and in the first Career, the Ladies
Champion had the worst, and lost one of his Stirrups, when recovering himself
he redoubled that disadvantage upon his Enemy, having broke their Spears they
fell to their Swords, when Philanthus lent him such a blow on the Helmet, that
one half of it fell down upon his Shoulders upon which followed whole streams
of Blood; At this the whole Cirque (which consisted of Thousands of Spectators)
gave a loud Shout, Sabrino being Cut deep into the Scull, and having lost a
great quantity of Blood, in the middle of the next Course fell headlong from
his Horse. Philanthus lept readily down and putting the point of his Sword to
his Throat, bid him ask his Life, it is too late, says Sabrino, But I Will clear
my Soul from all filthy Sin before I dye, Upon which a Confessor was called, to
whom he publicly Confessed his unjust Accusation of the Countess, and the reason
that put him upon such a Bloody Revenge, so long as he had Breath he called
often upon her to forgive him, which was not long, for his Wound was past Cure,
and in less then half an Hour he dyed. I shall forbear to mention the loud
shouts and acclamations of the people, for the Countesses deliverance, and that
her Innocence was cleared in the Face of the whole World; In the midst of all
this Joy and Triumph, Philanthus stole privately away without being known by
any Person who he was, and came over to England, where he never discovered the
least Syllable of what he had done to any of her own Relations.

The Countess was now led back in Triumph, and Complemented with the Visits of
all Persons of Quality, and Congratulations of all her Friends, when every one
Inquired of her, this Gentleman's Name and Country who was her Champion, She
told them, at the place of death she expected none, nor knew of any, that as he
came from Heaven for ought She knew he was returned thither again, for
notwithstanding the strictest Enquiry She could make, she heard no account of
him. A Courser was immediately dispatched with Letters to give the Count a
Relation of this great News, who was so extremely Transported with it, that
being but lately recocover'd from a dangerous Fever, it threw him into a
Relapse of which within few days he dyed. But before his death, in his Cooler
fits he ordered his Secretary to write a most kind and passionate Letter to the
Countess to rejoice with her for her Miraculous preservation, which afterward
she received, he made his Will and left her all his whole Estate for Life,
besides Jewels Plate and Money to a very great Value. Soon after his death she
parted with all the Land to the next Heyr, for a Valuable consideration in
Money, and returned to England after She had been five years and three Months
absent. Philanthus went as other Gentlemen and Ladies did to give their Service
and Welcome to Orithia, and Fortuned to find ber in the Dining Room all alone,
who received him with all Respects, but upon discourse of the Letters extremely
blamed his unkindness and degenerous Spirit, that could value any thing to the
World above the Honor and Life of a Lady for whom once he had some regard.
Philanthus endeavored to Excuse himself from the great necessity and distress
he was then under, that though when her Ladyship left England he was Master of a
fair Estate, yet since by some extraordinary Losses he had received, and
Charges in Lawsuits he was at this present reduced to down Right poverty and
want. She told him she was heartily sorry for it, but that Fate and Chance ran
through the whole World. Company coming in, Dinner was placed upon the Table,
and when it was almost over, Philanthus put on the Ring and presented his
Service to the Countess in a Glass of Wine, She presently saw the Ring and
Changed Color, which was taken Notice of by my Lord her Brother, and all the
Company, who asked if she was not well, at that she blushed again, and said yes
my Lord, ind^fferent, however they perceived some sudden alteration which they
could not Guess the reason of. After Dinner was done she stepped to Philanthus,
and taking him on one side, desired to know from whence he had that Ring.
Madam, says he I had it from a Lady f^r whose sake I will never part with it.
Sir, sa^d she, I presume I know it, yes, Madam, y^u do so, and gave it to a
Hermit on the Evening before you was to suffer. I, Madam. was that Hermit, and
next day your, Champion. Upon which the Countess gave the whole Relation of it
to the Comp^ny, and promised Philanthus in Gratitude to him, she would make him
M^ster of her self and all her Fortune next Morning, which was accordingly
done, and the Marriage Celebrated with all pomp and Sol^mnity.

Evadne having thus Finished her Relation, the whole Company bowed their
respects, and were all extremely pleased with it, especially Melintus, who
Styled it a most pleasant and divertive Story; and Philotas being next in turn,
Melintus told him he remembered a Story he had formerly the happiness to hear
him relate, which (if he mistook not) was the unhappy History of Leander and
Clitia, and as it pleased then, if he would now Oblige the Company with a
Recital of it, he questioned not but it would be ^o their entire Satisfaction,
accordingly Philotas thus began.

NOVEL the Seventh.
By PHILOTAS.
THe vast Number of Candles, that in the Winter Quarter are hung out every
Night, and serve as an Ornament to the streets of London, began to light those
who walk late without Torches, when one of the most Famous Surgeons of that
populous City was sent for in great have, and his Assistance desired at a House
not far distant from his own, where he was immediately conducted, and there
found a very Handsome Young Gentleman, (whom the Company called Leander) very
desperately wounded, and upon search found, he had receiv^d two dangerous
pricks from a Sword; He heard those about him whispering that he had given
himself those Wounds, so unexpectedly that none could divert the evil
consequence of so bloody an Enterprise: The Surg^on would have applied the
first dressing to his Wounds, but Leander would not permit him, saying, that he
did not deserve longer to live on the Earth, and desired therefore that death
might put a period to his Life; This gave occasion for some of the Company to
Entertain an opinion that he was somewhat distempered in mind, whilst the rest
did really believe him to be distracted, which he perceiving did earnestly
desire their silence, and he would give them a Recital of his Misfortunes,
accordingly he began his discourse in this manner.

My Wife being some Months since g^ne to divert her self at a Country House
belonging to some of her Kindred, I had the Misfortune to happen into the
Company of a Young Person, whose beauty might claim precedence ^o're her whole
Sex. The charming Features of her Face, and deluding witchcraft of her Tongue,
had such a powerful Influence over my Spirits that my Heart was suddenly Fired
with the wanton desires of an unlawful passion and an amorous inclination
dunwarily stole upon me.

Her Lodging being in a quarter of the City remote from mine, I thought I might
easily bring her into an opinion that I was a Batchellor, which I Endeavored to
persuade her to, as knowing such most acceptable to them, the quality of
Husband in such case being no ways pleasing to them, by reason they cannot hope
(if occasion should so require) to obtain them for their own; I had wrought my
self in a short time into her favor and good opinion, that all outward
appearances persuaded me that nothing was wanting on my behalf, but a good
courage and confidence to render me happy and contented, I resolved therefore
vigorously to put the Lady to it, but though I made a good attaque, she made no
worse a defense, and told me, that unless it were in the way of Marriage, I
must expect no favor from her. I was surprised at the resistance she made,
whereby I learned that outward appearances are often deceitful, and that those
Women which seem most complying by the manner of their carriage and
conversation are quite otherwise then what we take them for, when they are
pressed to any thing beyond the bounds of an honest Affection.

The resistance of that Lovely Maid who was called Clitia, did but the more
inflame me, but it also greatly perplexed me, for (in short) I was Married to a
Person of whom I had no reason to complain, and whose return from the Country I
daily expected; All the protestations of Marriage which I made to this
beautiful Maid availed me nothing, and all my Prayers and entreats stood me in
little stead, neither would the Finest arguments I could invent to persuade her
to yield to my desires win any thing upon her, she still stood firm to her
first design.

This Counterfeit modesty and Virtue charmed me with the more love, which
seemed to me as the greatest Marks of the entire Affection and Good Will she
bore me; not in the least perceiving that she Entertained a Gallant Named
Clitophon, who was of Intellig^nce with her, to draw me into the snare of
M^trimony with her, so that I must be the Husband, and he the Gallant who would
continue his Pastime at my Cost.

Leander beginning to grow weak, by reason of the great Loss of Blood he had
sustained, was Interrupted in this part of his Story, that care might be taken
of his Wounds, but he would not suffer their endeavors, notwirhstanding
whatsoever Entreaties they made him, or whatsoever Efforts they used to Cure
him, even against his Will; All the Compliance they could obtain of him was,
that he would suffer himself to be succored so soon as he had Finished his
Discourse, but was sensible all their Endeavors would come too late, for he was
certain that Death (which he so much desired) would quickly put a Period to his
days, they were forced to grant his Demand, though not without some Reluctance,
and then he pursued his Discourse after the Manner following,

My Perplexity having continued some time and not having yet Fixed upon any
Resolution, I Received a Letter from my Wife, wherein she gave an Account what
day she would Arrive at London. After the Reading of her Letter, I went to
Clitia, and found her that day so Beautiful and Charming (in my Imagination)
that forthwith there was Framed in my Mind this horrible Design, which I am
about to Relate, and which Caused me to Promise Clitia, that within a short
time I would Espouse her, I then took my leave, my Mind being Fixed upon the
damnable Resolution I had Pitched upon before; So soon as I Arrived at my own
Lodging I Res^sted this Devilish Enterprise, and took up Resolutions quite
contrary to the former, but the next day making another visit to Clitia, my
depraved mind re^ss^med its first wicked Sentiment? and I fully determined
within my self, to go in disguise and Kill my Wife in her way home, which
bloody Enterprise I had no sooner Executed and returned free from discovery,
but I went immediately to her House who had first inspired my Evil Genius with
the wicked Sentiments of so Horrid a Murder, but Oh! the admirable Justice of
Heaven? I found her dead and was informed that she was with Child by the
Gallant, who had hitherto con^e^l'd himself from my taking Notice of him, and
that she had used violent means upon her Body to force an abortion, after that
I had promised her Marriage, which precipitate and cruel procedure had been the
cause of her Death.

Immediately my Crime returned into my remembrance and it presented it self
with such Horror to my imagination, that I could not endure to think of so
vile a wretch as my self, then it was that I Framed a design to Kill my self,
which just now I have put in Execution. Now that you know my Crime (added he) I
cannot believe you so cruel to bestow your care in preserving a Life, which
within a short time would be forced from me by the Hangman.

In Finishing these words he was Seized with a great weakness, and dyed in a
short time after. The Company (being his Friends) desired the Surgeon not to
discover any thing of the matter; and the Confession he had made of his Crimes
did greatly surprise and astonish the whole Company.

The whole Company were extremely pleased with the Recital of this Tragical
History by Philotas, which they Expressed by a grateful acknowledgement, but
the Misfortune of Leander moved compassion in the minds of the Auditors,
Theodosia then knowing it to be her place to conclude, declared to the Company
that part of the Stories already Recited, had made an alteration in her mind,
that she must of necessity pass by that she intended next, having so near
affinity to the former, and proceed to another, which she began in this manner.

NOVEL the Eighth.
By THEODOSIA.
IN the Late Reign of Queen Mary; Baldwin a Swedish Gentleman by Birth (being
Younger Brother to the Count de Walbourgh) espoused an English Lady, and was on
his return from Canterbury in the County of Kent, to his own House not far
distant from an adjacent River; It was in the long days of Summer, when the
greatest heats make the Shades to be most affected; His Man who carried his
Male, and his two Footmen, being more thirsty than their Master, were stayed at
a Tavern to drink and refresh themselves, whilst Baldwin went leisurely on
dreaming, and arri ed alone at the River side; as he stayed there for his Men
to pass over with him, there came a handsome Young Man reasonably well Clothed,
who proffered to take the Bridle of his Horse, the comely aspect of this Youth
caused him to commiserate his Fortune, when questioning him what he was, the
Youth with a Voice able to inchant the Rocks; said, I am an Orphan having
neither Father or Mother, my Country is the Northern part of England right to
the borders of Scotland, forsaken by all there, and am going toward Normandy,
to find out ^n Uncle of mine, Brother to my Mother, and see if he will take
pity on me, or find me out some place whereby serving I may get my Living;
Youth, said Baldwin, it is easy to be seen that you have not been brought up to
serve, at least wise in painful Offices, it is true, Replied he, if it had
pleased God to have spared me my Father, who was an Honest Merchant, I should
not be reduced to this misery, but Merchants are not known till they dye, his
Shop was fair, and his Credit great, but at his death all failed, and his debts
were found far greater th^n all he had; So that being destitute of all means, I
must make a Virtue of neces^ity, and seek to eat my Bread by the Swe^t of my
Brow. Baldwins heart was mollifyed at this Youths Disaster, and he resolved to
r^t^in him in his Service, imagining that he had on h^s Forehead a certain R^y
of (...) and ^id^dity, w^ary with staying for his Men, he entered the ^oat with
this Youth, who Named himself Gervase, Baldwins Habitation was from thence
about three short English miles; wherein Gervase found himself but a bad
Footman, yet on the way he entertained his new Master with such good discourse
that the time seemed not long.

Being arrived home, and saluting his Wife, he said unto her, Madam, I bring to
you a new Guest, whose good Countenance serves for Letters of Credence, I have
destinated him to wait on our Son (this was a Child of some Nine or Ten years
of Age,) his Lady looking on Gervase found hi^ to be perfectly acceptable, and
praised her Husbands judgment, for applying him so worthily as to wait on
their Son. Vincent (for that was the ^hilds Name) was in a short time so taken
with the Conversation of Gervase, and Gervase betook himself with so much care
and diligence to tend and serve him, that Father Mother and Son, were equally
satisfied therewith, the whole Family taking extreme delight in the modest
behavior, gentle d^sposition and charming Conversation of this Beautiful Young
Man, which could not but Charm the most Savage Spirits.

But, Alas! Beauty that acceptable Gift of Heaven, as it is a pleasing illusion
of the Sense, so it is a Snare to the Soul, it Tyrannically extends its power
over the heart of Aurelia, Baldwins Lady, insomuch that Love and Honor are at
strife which shall most predominate, the one striking her Soul with a cold
fear, the other with a burning desire; but all the efforts of honor were vain,
Love usurping Sole Dominion over her he^rt; When having made choice of one of
her Maids (Named Judith) for her Confident, She made known to her with what
Disease she was infected, and how she was forced to seek Remedy from the
Serpent that had bit her, Judith promises her Mistress to assist her with the
utmost of her endeavors, although her thoughts were quite contrary to what her
Mouth uttered for she was struck with the same Dart her self, however she
thinking it a probable means to oblige Gervase, that he might no longer
continue the disdain wherewith he had hitherto repayed her Love, she declared
to him the passion and affection of Aurelia toward him, Gervase who had diverse
times showed unto Judith that those discourses were no ways pleasing to him,
rejected this also; Judith finding she could not obtain Credence in his mind,
Councelled her Mistress to speak her self, if she would be understood, this
froward Youth having no Ears to her persuasions; What Grief felt Aurelia to
find she had in vain declared her self to this Maid, whose Answer was a sad
presage of the small hopes she might have to bring Gervase to her desire, what
new pains took she to pluck this Thorn out of her Soul, but at the first Sight
of this fair Object, all these Endeavors vanished into Smoke, and new fires
took possession of her Heart; Judith had brought them together, and to give her
Mistress more freedom, retired her self into another Chamber, Aurelia then
talks to Gervase with Stuttering Language, and with anxious fears, like unto
those of a Guilty Person before a Judge, she Labors to make him Susc^ptible of
her Torment.

Fair Gervase is Amazed to find himself alone without a Witness, by a Woman
which uttered unto him such Language, as he could not hear without Extreme
perplexity, the different Charges of his Color, suffici^ntly witnessed by h^s
Face the inward Resentments of his mind, his Eyes b^nd^d to the Ground, his
Silence, and his immovable Countenance gave Aurelia an Answer which was not
pleasing; Her presents were Liberal, her promises large, her intreatyes
unseemly, her Sighs Vehement, her tears in abundance, but these Winds and these
Waters were as Storms against a Rock; Gervase appeared insensible like the
Statue Pigmalion fell in Love w^thall; The heat of Love pierced by a bloody
contempt, commonly turns into a ^u^ious Wrath, Aurelia was upon the point of
this Change, when Gervase to conjure this Tempest, and cut out the Root of this
Disease at its first breeding, resolves to Unmask the Counterfeit, and cause
pity of himself in her, who Craved it of him. Madam, (said he, unbuttoning his
Doublet) behold these Breasts, and ask no Answer, except you will see me dye at
your Feet with shame; Men are not better known by the Beard than Women by their
Breasts; This sight left no manner of doubt in the Soul of Aurelia, but that
Gervase was a Woman, and as it is said, that Thunder falling upon a Serpent, in
lieu of taking away life, does but take away his Venom, so this sudden Clap
rooting out of this Woman's Heart all the poison of her bad desires, took not
away her Love to Gervase, but left it there with pity, and this pity bred a
desire to know the fortune of this Man-Maid, that she might seek to yield her
some Assistance in her Disaster, and with this intent said, since Heaven has
made me Fortunate by this knowledge, and changed the Rock whereon I would have
made Shipwreck, into a Haven of safety for mine Honor, I do promise you for
your freeness toward me, to conceal your Sex as long as you please, and if you
desire any help, you may as freely discover the cause of your being in this
State, assuring you that you shall find in me all the Assistance which you can
Expect from a Woman desirous of the preservation both of your Honor and of
your Person.

Madam, Replied Gervase, mischiefs are so contagious, that the very Recital of
them does ever breed some Alteration, even in the calmest Spirits: Let me
therefore Groan under the burden of my Misfortunes, and suffer not your
Felicity to be troubled by the Recital of them; Rest contented to take Pity on
a Poor Maid, who puts her Honor and her Life into your Protection: This
Evasion did but whet in Aurelia that Curiosity so Natural in Women, and gave
her occasion to reply thus, as ^hysicians heal no Diseases, but those they
know, so likewise cannot I as^ist you in your Misfortunes, if you discover not
unto me the cause thereof, to the End that knowing who you are, and in what
manner you came to be in this disguise, I may behave my self toward you, as I
ought, and since there is a Remedy for all things but Death, strive to
re-establish your self in the degree from whence Fortune it seems has made you
fall, for you have a Ray of Nobility on your Brow shines through the Clouds of
your present Condition, and makes it appear even to the weakest understanding,
that you have not been bred after a common manner; Madam Replied Gervase, my
woes are past Recovery, since they proceed from a Death, and therefore being my
miseries ought to be put among incurable Maladies, let me entreat you to cast
away that Needless Care which you take to Cure me, and let me pass away under
your Protection my small remainder of Life, as well I feel that Sorrow and
Grief for my Fault do undermine it by degrees, and will not let me long Survive
him, without whom the Fairest days are to me as darkest, and like a Lingering
Death, in saying this, Gervase let fall from his Eyes, tears resembling those
Drops of Rain which the ardent Heat of the Sun does Squeese out in the fairest
days of Summer; but so far was Aurelia's curious desire from being quenched,
that this Water resembled that which Smiths put on th ir Cinders, whereby the
Fire is increased and not put out; Therefore extraordinarily pressing Gervase
to disclose unto her his Adventures, he was constrained to satisfy her, when
having dried his Eyes, and obtained a Truce from his Sighs, he began in this
manner.

I am Daughter to a Cambridg^shire Gentleman, of the Ancient order of
Knighthood, he has diverse Children, and I am the Second of his Daughters, and
the cause of this dishonor, and trouble of his House, Baptism Named me,
Sophronia, which was the Name of my Mother who dyed when I was but Six Years of
Age; When my Sister and my self were grown up to some years of Maturity, Love
assailed us and made a Conquest ^^re our Hearts,

My Eldest Sister loved a Young Gentleman whom she Wedded not; But to obey the
Will of our Father She Wedded an Old Gentleman whom she never affected: She
made me such strange Complaints of being Tied to a Man she loved not, that it
seemed she endured the Torment which that Tyrant inflict^d, who fastened dead
Bodies to the Loving, till they dyed (...) this Cruel languishing manner; Nay,
she described to me, her Torment to be equ^l unto that which is s^ffered in
Hell. And indeed such may one call a Marri^ge wherein the parties do neither
agree in the Wills of the Heart, nor the delights of the Body, this misery
which I considered in her, made me resolve to avoid the like, how dear soever
it cost me. But, Aias! to shun one G^^f, I cast my self into another, and I may
say, if my Sisters Marriage were a Hell, the E^rics carried the Torches at
mine, and cond^cted me to a Disaster worse than Hell.

Valerius a Young Gentleman, but a Younger Brother of our Neighborhood, had my
first, and shall have my last affection: He was placed at the University to
Study the Law and Cambridge not being many miles distant from my Fathers House
he made me fre^^ent Visits, and we lived some years in so perfect a
Correspondence; That if my Father would have Matched us together, the Elysi^n
Fields could never have equalled our Felicity. But because this Young Man could
not make so large a Jointure as he required, my Father would never consent to
our Union: But I fearing a Lot like my Sisters, would needs Spin my destinies
with my own Hands, and so have I fashioned the Cord which has dragged me to the
misfortune wherein I am, Valerius ever behaved himself toward me with a very
incomparable modesty, so that it was not so much by his Solicitation, as by my
own proper inclination, that we made reciprocal promises of Marriage,
accompanied with so many Solemn Oaths, and such horrible Execrations against
the party that should violate the same, that if I had had but the least thought
of breaking the same, I should not have believed Heaven sufficiently furnished
with Thunders to strike me according to my desert. After some time we
Consummated our Clandestine Marriage, and resolved whenever I should find my
self laden with the Fruits of Lucina, to take Flight with my Husband rather
than undergo the Thunder of my Fathers anger.

This happened not but a more terrible Tempest o^ertook us, which brought me to
the wrack wherein you see me, Sir G -- a Yorkshire Knight who had been in
Marriage but Three years, and was then lately become a Widower being about
Thirty five years of Age, happened to Lodge at my Fathers in his Journey to
London being an acquaintance of my Fathers formerly in his Travels, he found I
know not what in my Face that liked him, he was a Match so advantageous, that
to see me, to desire me in Marriage of my Father, and obtain me, were all such
sudden Blows, that I had neither time to foresee them, nor to shield my self
from them. My Father (witho^t consulting my will) told me that he had disposed
of me to Sir G -- and that I must dispose my self to receive him for my Husband
in some few days, if a Thunderbolt had fallen at my Heels I could not have been
more astonished; I made no Answer to my Father for what could I have said that
would have pleased him, and oppose Cold Excuses to his resolutions, had been of
no more Effect than Bullets of Snow against the Sunbeams, I resolved suddenly
to make Effects speak, and that was all that I could in so pressing a
necessity, my Father took my Silence for consent.

Next day my amorous Widower came to see me, and after the first Complements of
a first interview, he would have offered me his Service, under the Allowance
(said he) of my Father, my Father (said I) has not willed me to receive your
Service, but your Commands, obligeing me to behold you as a Master, this
proceeding is to be admired thus to give away free Persons without their own
consent, I am born his Daughter, and not his Slave: However I declare to you
that I belong ^o a gre^t^r Master, having made a Vow (...) that made Heaven and
Earth, ne^ (...) any ^odi^^ b^t his: If it had (...) you to have seen me before
you had (...) to my Father, I had saved you the Labor (...) asking a thing
which you cannot Lawfully get nor poss^^s without Sac^il^^ge: Never did I
behold a Man more Amaz^d than he, when by this fr^^ declaration he saw his
hopes undermined to the very Foundation, he feared God, and therefore I co^ld
not oppose any thing of more force to stay his desires, for Answer I ^ad none
other, but that he was sorry to have been trouble^ome to my designs, yet he
believed a Dispensation might Remedy all this, if I would give Ear thereto, I
told him a dispensation presupposed some reasonable cause, and that I saw no
necessity to ^e^oke a Vow which I had made without necessity. He sees my
Father, and communicates my Answer to him: Who instantly falls into anger, and
from thence into inj^rious words and Threats. He had once gotten knowl^dge of
my affection to Valerius, and had interdicted me the commerce thereof, and now
presently believes. That in despite of that, I had made this Vow, and (such is
the Tyranny of Paternal Authority) he imagined that I could not Vow without his
consent, he immediately consults a Civillian, who gave him to understand that
nothing was more easy, than to get a Dispensation of this Vow, he who was no
less desirous to have Sir G -- for his Son in Law, than Sir G. -- to have me
for his Wife, gets a Dispensation, and all preparations being made for our
public betrothing, and the Articles signed between Sir G. -- and my Father,
what should I have done? declare my Clandestine marriage Consummated with
Valerius, no, I had not Brass enough in my Face, to undergo so much shame,
besides I should have Exposed my Husbands Life to manifest danger; The Council
we took was to retire disguised from the Country to London, and from thence to
France, he had for some time born Arms under a Prince of the house of Austria
in the Wars betwixt the French and the Spaniards, in which he always behaved
himself with that Skill and Valor that he had gained acquaintance with the
most Noted Officers of the Army, and there we thought we might Live in Shelter,
and in Case of pursuit that we might Sail from thence into Holland and hide our
selves from the fury of my Father, he Clothed me in Man's Apparel as you see,
and in this manner we lest Cambridgeshire, passing through London, we were on
our journey toward Dover, where we designed to take Shipping for France.

But Fortune my Capital Enemy, to end on me the last Stroke of her Vengeance,
permitted that as we crossed a Forest, we were set upon by four Theives, who had
given Valerius two Wounds before he could put himself in a Posture of defense,
as soon as he had drawn his Sword he ran him through who had first Wounded him,
the others to revenge the Death of their Fellow made an end of him presently,
affrighted as I was and dazzled with the Glittering o^ so many Swords, I fled
into the Thick of the W^od, where turning my Horse loose I remained till
midnight with dolours of fears, at last under the Moons pail Light, I began to
seek what I feared to meet with; alas, I found Valerius naked (for these
Theives had taken away his very Shirt, and pierced him through in so many
places, that I believe their Rage extended to give him many thrusts after his
Death, at hi^ Feet lay also their Fellow stretched along N^ked, whose Face they
had mangled that he might not be Known, I was so overcome with sorro^, that had
it not been for a secret fear of Eternal Damnation which Seized my Soul, I had
a Thousand times struck a Knife into my Heart, I past the rest of the Night in
Griefs which cannott be imagined, and in troubles unconceiveable, for me to
return to my Friends after so Gross a fault, was a thing whereunto I could not
resolve, nor on which side to turn, in a Country altogether unknown to me; At
last I resolved to give my sel^ over unto Divine Providence, and to tend
toward those in France, whereof my Husband had so much told me; And after I
had wet him with tears, I fled from this infamous Wood for fear of being
apprehended as Guilty, having passed along till I had lost Sight of the
Forest, I happened I know not how to be at the River, when my Master arrived
there to pass, I helped him down from his Horse, and afterward to get up again
when we were on the other side, he asked me who I was, I made him believe what
I would to cover my true disgrace, under a feigned History, he took me to serve
your Son, a place proportionable to my strength, and wherein I intended to
expect with patience how God would dispose of me, but you would needs with pity
take some part in my pain, but I humbly entreat you, Madam, let that pity be to
keep close that Secret which you have Commanded me to discover to you, and to
be care^ul in preserving that small remainder of Hono^r i^ this miserable
Creature whom Excessive, but Lawful Love of a Husband has born into
extremities whereunto you see her now reduced; Gervase Ended in this manner the
Recital of her Fortune, falling down on her Knees before Aurelia, who in
Compas^^on mingled her tears with the tears of this disconsolate Woman, and
Kissing and Embracing her, promis^d never to forsake her, and to have the same
care of her as if she were her own Daughter.

After that time reason took place in the affection of A^relia, from whence it
had been drawn by passion, her actions were better ordered, her frame Sweeter
and more Moderate; it was not so wirh Judith whose passion augmented daily by
the Shunnings, Refusals, and contempt of Gervase, which this Foolish Wench
attributed unto the pride which she thought he took in the Enjoyment of his
Mistress, and though A^relia (without discovering the S^cret of G^rvase)
assured her that her Love was convert^d into Frie^dship, and Gervase was the
most Chaste and Virtuous Youth in the World, this Maid heated by another Fire*
imagined that A^^elia held this discourse, but t^ cover her Game, whilst she
poss^ssed her Adonis, and truly Judith's Suspit^o^s were not without some show
or likel^hood of Ground, for Aurelia now beholding Gervase but as a Woman, used
so much freedom with him, and made him come into her Chamber at such Suspicions
Hours, that the least Credulous would h^ve been tempted to take it (...) this
was that put J^dith into a desper^te j^alousie, which peevish Humor made ho^
do a base, and Treacherous Act, that caused a Tragical Event, and a Mi^f^^tune
which gave birth unto a prosperity, and thus it was: After she saw that all her
Solicitations to fair Gervase were lost Labors, and imagining that the
Refusals were disdains, being stung with anger at th^se imaginary contempts,
she resolved seeing she could not content her Love, to satisfy her Revenge,
and undo her Rival Mistress, together with him that would not correspond unto
her affections, it was by an Advertisement she gave her Master of the bad
dealings of Aurelia and Gervase, whereof she showed such apparent Colors, that
Baldwin nothing doubted but that he was dishonored by his Wife.

Immediately then how to Revenge it at full, he makes show of lying forth, and
by the help of Judith hides himself in a Closet near Aurelia's Bedchamber,
this Lady who took extreme delight in Gervase, and in making him relate the
particularities of his House and Country, of his Love and Fortune, failed not
to make him come at Night, when she would put him into his discourse, and fall
a sl^ep thereon, but whilst she is in Bed and Gervase sitting at her Beds-Head
talking to her, Baldwin is preparing Fire and Sword to revenge the injury,
which he believes to be but too Apparent, he starts forth of his Ambuscado, and
comes with his Pistol in Hand, crying with full Mouth, Ha? Accursed Woman now
is the time that thou shall Wash my Spoted Honor with thy Blood, and that both
your Self and your Adulterer shall pay interest for the wrongs you have done
me, and without hearing any Answer shoots of his Pistol, thinking to dash out
Aurelia's brains, but she turning her Head aside, the shot went into the
Feathers without doing any other Effect, only that it burned the Cheek of this
poor Lady, who in this trouble misdoubted the cause of her Husbands Wrath, but
had no more leisure than to cry out, O Sir, Gervase is a Woman, wherein Baldwin
whose Sword was already drawn to end therewith what the Fire had spared, as if
a flash of Lightning had dazzled his eyes, stood in Suspense at these words,
when Gervase more dead than Alive, cast her self at his feet, and with the
discovery of her Breasts assured him that Aurelia's Words were but too true;
And presently to clear his understanding, of so many confu^ions wherewith his
Soul was troubled, Gervase though tremling, related to him the whole History,
as you have heard of her Misfortune, which drew tears from the Eyes of Baldwin,
and made him infinitely repent what he had done; m^an time Rem^dies were
applied to the burn on A^relia's face which beside the pain threatened her with
a great deformity, but whether* it were the in^lamation that redoubled, or
through the extreme terror which she had felt in hearing a Pistol Thunder at
her Ear, and see her self near losing her Life, she fell into a strong Fever,
which in three days laid her in her Grave; Baldwin la^ented much for her, both
because he truly Loved her, and for that he saw himself to be the cause of her
death, he had almost discharged the burden of his Wrath on Judith and
Sacrificed her to the Manes of her Mistress, but when he knew that she her self
had been deceived, and that the Conjectures of the Evil had been so strong, he
was contented only to discharge her his House.

Mean time Gervase having changed her habit and being become Sophronia,
appeared so fair in the Eyes of Baldwin, that Love being Entered into his Soul,
by the two Gates of Beauty and pity, he resolved to Marry her as being a
Gentlewoman of good descent, and the Widow of a Gentleman; Sophronia perceiving
her Fortune to be desper^te if she with open A^mes re^^ived not this occasional
proffer, immediately consented to Baldwins proposition by a S^lemn Marriage;
and since h^ving advice that Sophr^nia's Father was dead: Baldwin had that part
of the inheritance that fell to her thereby, which amou^ted to as good a
portion as he could have had with a Wife chosen out of his own Country.

That Sophronia's Misfortune was by Divine Providence changed into a good
Fortune, and that moment of tim^ intended for her Death, was to her a b^ginning
of a Happier Life, it may be that the patience which she showed in that extreme
adversity, for the loss of Vale^ius, and her Wise Carriage and behavior in the
Government of Baldwin's Son, brought her to this felicity not without great
wonder to little Vincent, who saw his Tutor in a short time changed to his
Mother in Law.

As Theodosia had concluded her Story, in came Count Melintus his Uncle and
some other Persons of Honor from Court to give him a Visit upon which the
Company broke up M^lintus p^ying his more p^rticular thanks to Theodosia for
her Delightful Story, which was Seconded by all the Gentlemen and Ladies, and
as they took ^^ave Melintus told the Company he was in Arrears himself, but
must b^g Pardon till their next Meeting, when he did not question but he should
discharge himself to their Satisfaction.

FINIS.

