THE Lives and Deaths Of the Holy APOSTLES Of Our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Together With the Two Evangelists, SAINT Mark and Luke.



THE Lives and Deaths Of the Holy APOSTLES Of Our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Together with the Two Evangelists, St. MARK and St. LUKE.

As Also, Some other of our Saviors Disciples: Containing An Account of Their
Travels, Sayings, Miracles, Sufferings, and Martyrdoms.

All Collected from the Best Authors, for Public Use and Benefit.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, 1685.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here Presented with the Lives of the Holy Apostles; Men, ^ho as they
were Honored ^ith the highest Offices in ^he Church, so they are ^f highest
Renown in the ^hristian World, both for their Lives and Deaths. Great Subject,
and a No^^ Study; in the managi^^ whereof, I have glean^ what I could meet wi^^
that I thought was most m^terial for the Reader to kno^ That which first put me
upon Writing it, was the Acce^tance the Book Entitled, T^^ Testament of the
Twelve P^triarks, found amongst mo^^ men: But this, as the Autho^^ are more
Venerable amo^^ Christians, so I have pu^posely omitted all things th^^ might
occasion any Dispu^^ concerning them. This Book being calculated as well for
delight as profit; and indeed it can be no small pleasure, to have so many
great pieces of Antiquity, (as you will find in this small Book) brought to
speak English; whereby a common eye may look into Divine and Inestimable
Treasure of the Wisest and best Ages of the World. In these Lines, the Reader
will see the first and purest Ages of the Christian Religion, when Men were
really what they pretended to be; when a solid Piety and Devotion, a strict
Temperance and Sobriety, a Catholic and unbounded Charity, an exemplary
Honesty and Integrity; a great Reverence for every thing that was Divine and
Sacred, rendered Christianity beautiful and lovely to the World Here thou will
see the Reasons and Occasions of the Feasts and Fasts of the Church, and what
made those Primitive Times thrive. To provoke thy imitation, my business was to
deliver this Work in that Form and Order, that I think it may not be unfitly
styled the Story of Stories; wherein you will find contrived in one continual
Order of Historical Reading, those Famous and Glorious Acts, which are
contained in the Lives of these Holy Apostles.

He that reads these great Saints Lives, will see the Grounds of the Christian
Religion to be so noble and excellent, all its Laws so just and rational, all
its designs so Divine and Heavenly, that he cannot but conclude the Principles
to be perfect: and conducive to the happiness of Humane Nature, a Religion so
worthy of God, so Advantageous to Human Nature, built upon the strongest
evidence, clothed with such strong and powerful Arguments, that he will
presently be convinced of the Decency that resides in it.

And certainly, nothing can be of more efficacy to persuade Christians to, and
engage them in, a Pious, Godly, and Religious Life, Then the Considerations
they may be able to make upon reading the Lives and Actions of these Holy
Saints and Martyrs, when we reflect upon their extraordinary Self-denial,
Piety, Charity, Justice, Moderation, and all other Virtues so Conspicuous in
the whole course of Their Apostleships.

If to be Short will please thee, here is Brevity; If Change will please, here
is Variety; If Profit will please, I dare say it shall be thy fault if thou be
not the Better for it: May these Lines be as so many Sparks from Heaven
collected thus together, which may not only afford Light to our Understandings,
but Divine love to all sincere Souls: That as it had a Heavenly heat in them,
it may influence all the lovers of Devotion and Piety; is the hearty desire of
the Publisher.

P. D.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Dorman Newman at the Kings-Armes in the Poultry.
THe History of the Seven Wise Masters. The History of St. Patrick of Ireland.
The Lives and Deaths of the Holy Apostles, etc. The History of Fortunatus. The
Crown Garland. Poor Robins Preambulations.
Small Histories.
A Merry Book of All Fives. Crossing of Proverbs. Sir Laurance Lazy. The
Unfortunate Welsh-Man. Venus Turtle Doves. Unfortunate Jack. Vinegar and
Mustard. The History of Valantine and Orson. The History of Friar Bacon. The
History of the Seven Champions of England. With most other, both Large and
Small Histories.
The Life of St. PETER.
St PETER



IN the Land of Palestine stood a Village called Bethsaida, formerly an obscure
and inconsiderable place, belonging to the Tribe of Nepthali, but lately
re-edified, and greatly enlarged by Phillip the Tetrarch, and by him advanced
to the Place and Dignity of a City, replenished with many Inhabitants, and
strongly Fortified with Power and Strength, which Augustus Caesar, in honor of
his Daughter, called Julias. It was situated upon the Sea of Galilee, and had
a Wilderness upon the other side thence, called, The Desert of Bethsaida. But
for as great as its Splendour was at this time, late Travelers assures, that
now it is become a most desolate and contemptible Village, consisting of a few
Cottages of Moors and Wild Arabs: And later Travelers have since assured us,
that even these are dandled away into one poor Cottage at this day. So fatally
does Sin undermine the greatest and goodliest pleces; so heavily did our
Saviors old Predict (one for their contempt of the Gospel) light on them.

Next to the Honor that this place had by our Saviors presence, who living
most in these parts, did often resort hither. It had nothing greater to
recommend it to the Notice of Posterity, then that (besides some other of the
Apostles) it was the Birthplace of St. Peter; a Person how inconsiderable
soever in his private Fortunes, yet of great Note and Eminency, as one of the
prime Ambassadors of the Son of God, to whom both Sacred and Ecclesiastical
Stories gives high and Eminent Elogies among the Apostles.

We are much in the dark as to the particular time of his Birth, no probable
Footsteps nor intimations of it being found in Antiquity; yet in the general,
we may conclude him at least, to have been about Ten Years Elder then his
Master; his Married Condition and settled course of Life when he first came to
Christ, and the great Authority and respect which the Gravity of his Person did
procure him amongst the rest of the Apostles, with other such Circumstances,
can speak him no less: But for any thing more positive and particular in this
matter, we cannot affirm for a certain truth, though one positively tells us,
that he was Born three Years before the Mother of our Lord, and just Seventeen
Years before the Incarnation.

Being Circumcised according to the rites of the Mosaic Law, the Name given
him at his Circumcision, was Simon, or Simeon; a Name common among the Jews,
especially in their latter times. This Name was afterward not abolished by our
Savior, but additioned with the Title of Cephas, which in the Syriack, which
was the Vulgar Language of the Jews at that time, did signify a Stone, or
Rock, was thence derived unto the Greek Word Petros, rendered in the English
Language Peter.

His Father was Jonah, probably a Fisherman of Bethsaida; the Sacred Story
taking no further notice of him, then by the bare mention of his Name. Brother
he was to St. Andrew the Apostle, and there is some question among the
Ancients, which of the two was the Elder Brother; Epiphanius clearly adjudges
it to St. Andrew: St. Chrysostom upon the other hand, says expressly, That
though Andrew came later into Life then Peter, yet he brought him first to the
knowledge of the Gospel. But however it was, it sounds not a little to the
honor of their Father, (as of Zebedee, also in the like case) that of but
twelve Apostles, two of his Sons were taken into the number. In his Youth he
was brought up to Fishing, which we may guess to have been the Staple Trade of
Bethsaida, (which hence probably borrowed its Name) signifying an House, or
Habitation of Fishing, much advantaged herein by the Neighborhood of the Lake
of Genesareth (on whose Banks it stood) called also the Sea of Galilee, and the
Sea of Tiberius, according to the Mode of the Hebrew Language, wherein all
confluences of Waters are called Seas. It was an hundred Furlongs in length,
and forty in breadth; the Waters of it most clear, sweet, and most fit to
drink; stored with several sorts of Fish, and those different both in kind and
taste, from those in any other place.

Here it was that St. Peter closly followed the exercise of his Calling, from
whence it seems, he afterward removed to Capernaum, probably upon his Marriage
(at least frequently resided there) for there we meet with his House, and there
we find him paying Tribute: An House, over which it is said, that Heben the
Mother of Constantine, built a Temple in Honor of St. Peter. This place was
advantageous for the managing of his Trade, standing on the entrance of Jordan
into the Sea of Galilee; and where he might as well reap the Fruits of an
honest and industrious Diligence. It Is true, it was a mean and servile course
of life; for besides the great pains and labor it required, he was by it
exposed to the injuries of Wind and Weather, to the Storms of the Sea, the
darkness and Tempestuousness of the Night, and all to make a mean and very
small return; but meanness is no Bar in Gods way: Nay; our Lord seems to cast a
peculiar Honor upon that Profession; When afterward calling him, and some
others of the same Trade, from catching of Fish, to be Fishers of Men.

And now to reflect a little upon the Wise and Admirable Methods of Divine
Providence, it is Wonderful to behold it in its Methods, in Propagating the
Christian Faith in the World; that such low and mean Men should be armed with
such Divine Power to the running down the Kingdom of Satan: The vile Apostate
Julian thought this a reasonable Exception against the Prophets of the Old
Testament, that they were a Company of Rude and Illiterate Men; but here lay
the Wonder of it, that the first Preachers of the Gospel should be such rude
unlearned Men, and yet so suddenly, so powerfully, prevail Over the Learned
World.

We find not whether Peter, before his coming to Christ, was Ingraffed in any
of the Sects at that time in the Jewish Church; yet is it greatly probable,
that he was One of the Disciples of John the Baptist, for it is certain that
his Brother Andrew was so; and we can hardly think these Two Brothers should
draw two contrary ways, or that he who was so ready to bring his Brother the
early Tidings of the Messiah, should not be as solicitous to bring him under
the Discipline and Influence of John the Baptist, the Day Star that went before
him. As also Peter's forwardness and curiosity at the first news of Christ's
appearing to come to him and Converse with him, show that his Expectations had
been awakened, and some light in this matter conveyed to him by the Preaching
and Ministry of John.

St. Peter was introduced into Christ's Acquaintance by means of his Brother
Andrew; at which time our Lord gave him the Title of Cephas. What passed
further between them, and whether these two Brothers henceforward Personally
attended our Saviors Motions in the number of his Disciples, we cannot
certainly determine; it seems probable that they stayed with him for some time
till they were Instructed in the first Rudiments of his Doctrine, and by his
leave departed home; for we may reasonably suppose that our Lord being
unwilling, at this time especially, to Awaken the Jealousy of the State by a
Numerous Retinue, might dismiss his Disciples for some time, and Peter and
Andrew amongst the rest; who, hereupon, returned home to the Exercise of their
Calling, where they continued somewhat more than a Year; at which time our Lord
came along one Morning where they had been all Night at their Work, but taught
nothing; but at his desire the Net being let down, there was a miraculous
draught of Fish caught; whereupon Peter presently leaving all, followed him:
the first Way he went was to Capernaum, where Christ healed Peter's Wifes
Mother.

Our Lord being to Elect some Peculiar Persons as his Immediate Vicegerents
upon Earth, withdrew himself Overnight to a solitary Mountain: early the next
Morning his Disciples came to him, out of whom he made Choice of Twelve to be
his Apostles; in the ennumeration of which, the Evangelists place Simon Peter
in the Front: And St. Matthew expressly tells us, that he was The First, that
is, he was the first that was called to be an Apostle; his Age also, and the
Gravity of his Person, more particularly qualifying him for a Primate of Order
among the rest of the Apostles, as that without which no Secrecy of Men can be
managed or maintained.

It may be here enquired, When and by whom the Apostles were Baptized? That
they were is unquestionable, being themselves appointed to Conferr it upon
others. Nicephorus tells us, That of all the Apostles, Christ Baptized none but
Peter with his own Hands, alleging Evodius, Peter's immediate Successor in the Sea of Antioch, for his Author; and that Peter Baptized Andrew, and the Two
Sons of Zebedee, and the rest of the Apostles: But Baronius confesses that this
Epistle of Evodius is altogether unknown to the Ancients.

Amongst these Twelve our Lord Chose a Triumvirate to be his more intimate
Companions, whom he admitted, more familiarly than the rest, unto all the more
secret passages and transactions of his Life: the Three were Simon Peter and
the Two Sons of Zebedee; these were with him at the Raising of Jairus his.
Daughter, as also at his Transfiguration upon the Mount, where Peter desired
our Lord that he might let them Build Three Tabernacles in memory of these
great Transactions: One tells us, That in pursuance of this Petition of Peter's,
there were afterward Three Churches Built upon the top of this Mountain, which
in after times were had in great Veneration; which possibly might give some
foundation to that report which one makes, That in his Time there were showed
the Ruins of these Three Tabernacles, which were Built according to St.
Peter's desire.

After that our Lord had entered Jerusalem in Triumph, he soon retired to
Bethany, whence he dispatched Peter and John to make Preparation for the
Pasfeover; accordingly they found the Person whom he had described to them,
whom they followed home to his House; Whether this was the House of John the
Evangelist, seituate near Mount Sion, or of Simon the Leper, or of Nicodemus,
or of Joseph of Arimathea, is not certain.

These Three also accompanied him to the Garden, where he labored under his
Agony; to this Garden, Eusebius tells us, That Christians, even in his time,
were wont to come Solemnly to offer up their Prayers: where also, another tells
us, there was a fair and stately Church Built to the Honor of the Virgin Mary.

The Lord being Ascended into Heaven, and having fulfilled his Promise of
sending the Holy Ghost, the Apostles and Disciples continued a while at
Jerusalem, being tossed only with gentle Storms; but now a more violent Tempest
overtook them upon the occasion of Stephen's Death, which dispersed the
Disciples, one of which, to wit, Phillip the Deacon, went to Samaria, where he
Preached the Gospel with great success, confirming the same with Miracles: In
this place was one Simon, who by Magic and Diabolical Sorceries sought to
advance himself into a great Fame and Reputation with the People, insomuch that
they generally beheld him as the Great Power of God, for so the Ancients tell
us he used to Style himself, giving out himself to be the first and Chiefest
Deity, that is, That he was that which in every Nation is accounted the Supreme
Deity. The Apostles who were yet at Jerusalem, hearing of Phillip's success,
sent Peter and John to his assistance, who when they came thither, laid their
Hands upon these new Converts, whereupon they presently received the Holy
Ghost; which when Simon saw, he offered them Money if they would conferr this
Power upon him: Peter perceiving his vile intentions, scornfully rejected his
impious offer, telling him, That it concerned him to Repent of so great and
heinous a Wickedness.

Not long after, Peter wrought a miraculous Cure upon one Aeneas, who had been
a Cripple for a long time, and another soon after at Joppa upon one Tabitha;
where he tarried till Cornelius called him.

It was now about the end of Caligula's Reign, when Peter after his Visitation
being returned to Jerusalem, not long after Herod-Agrippa, Grandchild to Herod
the Great, having attained the Kingdom, the better to ingratiate himself with
the People, had put St. James to Death, and finding that this gratified the
vulgar, resolved to send Peter the same way after him; in order whereunto, he
is Apprehended and cast in Prison, and set strong Watches to guard him, but the
Lord by his Angel carried him out of the Prison the Night before the intended
Execution, so that he escaped: But before this, he is said to have gone down to
Antioch, where he Planted the Christian-Faith, and there Founded a Church, and
to have been the first Bishop of that See. This Eusebius and others expressly
declare.

What became of Peter after his Deliverance out of Prison is not certainly
known, probably he might have Preached in some parts a little farther distant
from Judea, as we are told he did at Bizantium, and in the Countries
thereabout. After this he resolved upon a Journey to Rome, where most agree, he
arrived about the Second Year of the Emperor Claudius: A Learned Author tells
us, That coming to Rome he brought Prosperity along with him to the City; for
besides several other extraordinary advantages which at that time happened to
it, this was not the least observable, That Camillus Scrivonianus Governor of
Dalmatia, Soliciting the Army to Rebel against the Emperor, the Eagles, their
Military Standard, remained so fast in the Ground, that no power nor force was
able to pluck them up; with which unusual accident, the minds of the Soldiers
were so amazed and startled, that turning their Swords against the Author of
the Sedition, continued firm and loyal in their Obedience, whereby a dangerous
Rebellion was prevented, likely enough otherwise to have broken out.

It is not to be doubted but that at his arrival he disposed himself among the
Jews his Countrymen, who ever since the time of Augustus, dwelt in the Region
beyond Tyber; but when afterward he began to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
he was forced to change his Lodging, and was taken in by one Pudens, a Senator,
lately Converted to the Faith; here he closely plied his Main-Office and
Employment to Establish Christianity in that place. Here, we are told, he met
with Philo the Jew, who was lately come upon his Second Embassy to Rome in the
behalf of his Countrymen at Alexandria, and to have contracted an intimate
Friendship and Acquaintance with him: and now it was, that Peter being mindful
of the Churches which he had lately Founded in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Bythinia, and Asia the less, Wrote his First Epistle to them. Next to the
Planting Religion at Rome, he took care to Propagate it in the Western parts,
and to that end he sent abroad Disciples into several Provinces. It happened
that after St. Peter had been several Years at Rome, Claudius the Emperor
taking advantage of some Seditions and Tumults raised by the Jews, by a Public
Edict, Banished them out of Rome, in the Number of whom (it is said) St. Peter
departed thence, and returned back to Jerusalem, and was present at the Great
Apostolical Synod, where the Controversy about Mosaical-Rites was Debated and
Decided; what became of him after this, we cannot certainly determine; We are
told by some that he came to the Western parts, yea, that he was particularly
in Britain, where he Converted many to the Faith; but, where ever he was, it
is certain that toward the latter end of Nero's Reign he returned to Rome,
where he found the Peoples minds strangely bewitched and hardened against the
embracing the Christian Religion by the Subtilties and Magick-arts of Simon
Magus whom he had formerly Baffled at Samaria: This Simon was Born at Gitton a
Village of Samaria, Bred up in Arts of Sorcery and Divination, and by the help
of the Diabolical Powers performed many strange Feats and wonders of activity,
insomuch that the People generally looked upon him as some Deity come down from
Heaven; but being discovered by St. Peter at Samaria, he left the East and fled
to Rome, where by Witchcraft and Sorceries he insinuated himself into the
Favor of the People, and at last became very acceptable to the Emperors
themselves, insomuch that no Honor nor veneration was too great for him,
especially Nero, who was the Patron of Magitians, and all who maintained Secret
ways of Commerce with the Infernal Powers, had a singular Respect to him: With
him St. Peter thought fit in the first place to encounter, and to undeceive the
People by discovering the Impostures and Delusions of the Wretched Man. Which
he did thus;

There was at this time at Rome an Eminent young Gentleman, and a Kinsman of
the Emperors, lately Dead; the Fame which Peter had for raising of Dead
persons to Life, persuaded his Friends to send for him; others also prevailing
that Simon the Magitian might be sent for: Simon glad of the occasion, to
magnify himself before the People, propounded to Peter, That if he raised the
Gentleman to Life, then Peter, who had provoked the Great Power of God, should
lose his Life; but if Peter prevailed, he himself would submit to the same
Fate: Peter accepted the terms, and Simon began his Charms and Enchantments,
whereat the Dead Gentleman seemed to move his Hand. The People that stood by
presently cried out that he was alive, and that he Talked with Simon; whereupon
they began to fall foul upon Peter, the Apostle entreated their patience, told
them that all this was but a Phantasm and appearance, that if Simon was but
removed from the Bedside, that all this Pageantry would soon evanish; who
being accordingly removed, the Body remained without the least sign of Motion:
Peter standing at a good distance from the Bed, silently made his address to
Heaven, and then before them all Commanded the young Gentleman, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, to Arise; who immediately did, so spoke, walked, and eat, and
was by Peter restored to his Mother. The People who saw this, suddenly changed
their opinion, and fell upon Simon Magus, with an intent to have Stoned him;
but Peter begged his Life, and told them, It would be Punishment enough for him
to see, that in despite of his Malice, the Kingdom of Christ should increase
and Flourish.

The Magician was inwardly Tormented with this Defeat, and vexed to see this.
Triumph of the Apostle, and therefore mustering up all his Powers, Summoned the
People and told them, That he was offended at the Galilaeans, whose Protector
and Guardian he had been, and therefore set them a Day when they should see him
flee up to Heaven: at the time appointed he went up to the Mount of the
Capitol, and throwing himself from the top of the top of the Rock, began his
Flight; a sight which the People entertained with great Wonder and Veneration,
affirming that this must be the Power of God, not of Men. Peter standing in the
Crowd, Prayed to God that the People might be undeceived, and that the vanity
of the Impostor might be discovered in such a way, as he himself might be
sensible of it. Immediately the Wings which he had made himself, began to fail
him, and he fell to the Ground, miserably bruised and wounded with the fall;
whence being carried to a neighboring Village he soon after died: But the
death of this miserable man, coming to the Emperors ears, no doubt, hastened
Peter's ruin. The Emperor probably had been before displeased with Peter; not
only upon the account of the general disagreement, and inconformity of
Religion, but because he had so strictly pressed Temperance, and Chastity; and
reclaimed so many women in Rome from a dissolute and vicious life; whereby
crossing that Lascivious and Wanton temper, to which that Prince was so
immoderate a Slave; and being now by his means robbed of his dear Fovourite and
Companion, he resolved upon revenge, commanded St. Peter (as also St. Paul, who
was at this time at Rome) to be apprehended, and cast into his Mamertine
Prison, where they spent their time in the exercise of Religion especially in
Preaching to the prisoners, and those who resorted to them: and here we may
suppose it was, that Peter wrote his second Epistle to the dispersed Jews;
wherein he endeavors to con^^^m them in the belief of Christianity, and to
fortify them against those pernicious Principles, and Practices, which even
then began to break in upon the Christian Churth.

Hero returning from Achaia, and entering Rome with a great deal of Triumph and
Pomp; resolved now that the Apostle should fall as a Victim to his reveng and
cruelty: While the fatal stroke was daily expected, the Christians at Rome,
did, by daily, and earnest prayers solicit Peter to make his escape, and to
reserve himself for the use and service of the Church. This at first he
rejected, as that would ill reflect upon his constancy and courage; but the
prayers and tears of the people, overcame him, and made him yield. At cordingly
the next night, having prayed with and taken his farewell of the Brethren, he
got over the Prison Wall, and coming to the City-Gate, he is there said to have
me^ with our Lord, who was just entering the City: Peter asked him, Lord,
whether art thou going? from whom he presently received this answer; I am come
to Rome to be Crucified the second time. By which answer, Peter apprehended
himself to be reproved, and that our Lord meant it of his death, that he was to
be Crucified in his Servant; whereupon he went back to the Prison, and
delivered himself into the hands of his Keeper, showing himself most ready and
cheerful to acquiess in the will of God. And we are told, that in the Stone
whereon our Savior stood while he talked with St. Peter, he left the
impression of His feet; which Stone has been preserved ever since, as a very
Sacred Relic; and after several Transtations, was at length fixed in the
Church of St. Sebastian the Martyr; where it is kept and visited with great
Expressions of Reverence and Devotion at this day. Before his suffering he was
scourged according to the manner of the Romans, who were wont first to whip
those Malefactors, who were adjudged to the most Severe and Capital
punishments. Having saluted his Brethren, and especially having taken his last
farewell of St. Paul, he was brought out of the Prison, and lead to the top of
the Vatican Mount near to Tybur, the place designed for his execution. The
heath he was adjudged to, was Crucification, as of all others accounted the
most shameful, so the most severe and terrible. But he entreated the favor of
the Officers, that he might not be Crucified in the ordinary way, but might
suffer with his head downwards, and feet up to Heaven; affirming, that he was
unworthy to suffer in the same posture wherein his Lord had suffered hefore
him: his body being taken down from the Cross, is said to have been Embalmed by
Marcellinus the Presbyter after the Jewish manner, and was then buried in the
Vatican near the Triumphal way. Over his grave, a small Church was soon after
erected, which being destroyed by Heliogabalus, his body was removed to the
Cemeterce, in the Appian way two Miles from Rome, where it remained till the
time of Pope Cornelius, who conveyed it back again to the Vatican, where it
rested somewhat obscurely until the Reign of Constantine, who out of the mighty
reverence he had for the Christian Religion, caused many Churches to be built
at Rome; but especially rebuilt and enlarged the Vatican to the honor of St.
Peter; in the doing whereof, himself is said to have been the first that began
to dig the foundation, and to have carried thence twelve Baskets of rubbish
with his own hands, in honor (as it should seem) of the twelve Apostles. It is
said, that amongst other Relics, here is kept that very wooden Chair wherein
St. Peter sat when he was at Rome; by the only touching whereof, many Miracles
are said to be performed.

Having ran through the various passages of St. Peter's life, from his Birth
till his Martyrdom; it may not be amiss in the next place to survey a little
his Person and Temper. His Body is said to have been somewhat Slender of a
middle size, but rather inclining to Tallness; his Complexion very pail and
almost white; the Hair of his Head and Beard Curled and Thick, but withal
Short; his Eyes black, but speckt with red, which one will have to have
proceeded from his frequent Weeping; his Eyebrows thin, or none at all.

Let us next look inward, and view the Jewel that was within; take him as a
man, and there seems to have been a natural eagerness predominant in his
Temper; which as a Whetstone, sharpened his Soul for all bold and generous
undertakings; it was this that made him expose his Person to the most eminent
dangers; promise those great things in behalf of his Master, and resolutely
draw his Sword in his quarrel against a whole Band of Soldiers, and wound the
High-Priest's servant; and possibly he had attempted greater matters, had not
our Lord restrained, and taken him off by that seasonable check that he gave
him.

This temper he owed in a great manner to the Genius and temper of his Country,
of which Josephus gives us this true character, that it naturally bred in men a
certain fierceness and animosity, whereby they were fearlesly carried out upon
any Action, and in all things showed a mighty strength and courage, both of
mind and body: the Galileans being fighters from their Childhood, the men
being as seldom taken with cowardice, as their Country with want of men; and
yet notwithstanding all this, his fervor had its Intervalls; witness his
passionate crying out, when he was upon the Sea in danger of his Life, and his
fearful deserting of his Master in the Garden. But he was in danger, and
passion prevailing over his understanding, made him intent upon nothing but the
present safety of his life; so dangerous it is to be left to our selves, and to
have our natural passions let loose upon us.

Yet consider him as a Disciple and a Christian, and we shall find him
eminently examplary in the great instances of Religion. His humility, and
lowliness of mind, was singular; with what a passionate earnestness, upon the
conviction of a miracle, did he beg of our Savior to depart from him; when
our Lord by that wonderful condecension stoopt to wash his Apostles feet, he
could by no means be persuaded to admit it, until our Lord was in a manner
forced to threaten him into obedience; with how much candor and humility does
he treat the inferior Rulers and Ministers of the Church; he, upon whom
Antiquity heaps so many honorable Titles, stiling himself no other than their
fellow Presbyter: admirable his love to, and zeal for his Master, which he
thought he could never express at too high a rate; for His sake venturing upon
the great estdangers, and exposing himself to the most eminent hazards of Life;
telling the Jews with great plainness at every turn to their Faces, that they
were the Murderers and Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory; Nay, with what an
Undaunted Courage, and Heroic Greatness of Mind, did he tell the very
Sanhedrim that had Sentenced and Condemned him, that they were guilty of his
murder, and that they could never be saved any other way, than by this very
Jesus whom they had Crucified and put to death.

Consider him also as an Apostle, and Guide of Souls, and you will find him
faithful and diligent in his Office, with an infinite zeal endeavoring to
instruct the Ignorant, reduce the Erroneous, to strengthen the Weak, and
confirm the Strong; we find him taking all opportunities of Preaching to
people, Converting many thousands at once: How many Voyages and Travels did he
undergo? with what unconquerable patience did he endure all Conflicts and
Trials, and surmount all difficulties and oppositions, that he might plant and
propagate the Christian Faith; not thinking much to lay down his own Life to
promote and further it; nor did he only do his duty himself, but as one that
was sencible of the value and worth of Souls, he was careful to put others in
mind of theirs; earnesty pressing and persuading the Governors and Rulers of
the Church to feed the Flock of God, to take upon them the Ruling and
Inspection of it; freely and willingly, not out of a sinister end, merely of
gaining advantage to themselves, but out of a sincere design of doing good to
Souls; that they would treat them mildly and gently, be themselves examples of
Piety and Religion to them, as the best way to make their Ministry succesful
and effectual.

But to conclude what we are to Remark in this great Apostles Life, we are in
the last place to consider him in his several relations; that he was married,
is without all controversy, the sacred story making mention of his Wives
Mother: His Wife (as some alledg) was the daughter of Aristobolus, Brother to
Barnabas the Apostle, whom St. Jerome says he left behind him, together with
his Nets, when he forsook all to follow Christ; but Clemens Alexandrinus says,
that Peter seeing his wife going toward Martyrdom, exceedingly rejoiced that
she was called to so great an honor; and that she was now returning home,
encouraging, and earnestly exhorting her, and calling her by her name, bid her
be mindful of the Lord. By her, some say, he had a daughter called Petronella.

The Life of St. PAUL.
S: PAUL



ST. Paul was born at Tarsus the Metropolis of Cilicia, a City infinitely Rich
and Populous; and what was more to the fame and honor of it, an Academy
furnished with Schools of learning, where the Scholars so closely plied their
Studies, that (as Strabo tells us) they excelled in all the Arts of polite
Learning and Philosophy; those of other places, yea even of Alexandria, and
Athens it self, and, that even Rome was beholden to it for many of its best
Professors: It was a Roman Municipium or free Corporation invested with many
privileges by Julius Caesar, and Augustus; who granted to the Inhabitants of
it, the honors and immunities of Cityzens of Rome. In which respect St. Paul
owned and asserted it as the Privilege of his Birthright, that he was a Roman,
and thereby free from being bound or beaten.

His Parents were Jews, and that of the Ancient stock; not entering in by the
gate of Proselytisme, but, originally descended of that Nation; they belonged
to the Tribe whose Founder was the youngest Son of the Old Patriarch Jacob, who
thus prophesied of him: Benjamin shall ravin as a Wolf, in the morning he
shall devour the Prey, and at night devide the Spoil. This prophetical
character, Tertullian, and others after him, will have to be accomplished in
our Apostle; As a ravening Wolf, in the Morning devouring the prey. That is,
as a persecuter of the Church ^n the first part of his life, destroying the
Flock ^f God; in the Evening deviding the Spoil. That is, in his declining and
reduced age, as Doctor of the Nations, feeding, and destri^uting to Christ's
Sheep.

We find him described by two names in Scripture; one Hebrew, and the other
Latin; probably referring both to his Jewish and Roman Capacity and Relation:
The one Saul, a name common in the Tribe of Benjamin, ever since the first
being of Israel, who was of that name, was chosen out of that Tribe; in memory
whereof, they were wont to give their children that name at their Circumcision.
His other was Paul, assumed by him, as some think, at his Conversion, to denote
his humility; as others, in memory of his converting Sergius Paulus the Roman
Governor, in imitation of the Generals and Emperors of Rome, who were wont
(from the Places and Nations which they conquered) to assume the name, as an
additional honor and title to themselves; but this seems no ways consistent
with the great humility of the Apostle. More probable therefore it is, that
others think that he had a double name given him at his Circumcision: Saul
relating to his Jewish Original, and Paul relating to the Roman Corporation
where he was born: or, if it was taken up by him afterward, probable it was
done at his Conversion according to the custom an^ manner of the Hebrews; who
used many time^ upon solemn and eminent occasions, especiall^ upon their
entering upon a more Strict an^ Religious course of Life, to change their names,
and assume one which they had not before.

In his Youth he was brought up in the Schools of Tarsus, fully instructed in
all the Liberal Arts and Sciences, whereby he became admirably acquainted with
all Foreign Authors; together with which he was brought up to a particular
Trade, and course of Life, according to that great Maxim and Principle of the
Jews, That he who teaches not his Son a Trade, teaches him to be a Thief.
They thought it not only fit, but a necessary part of Education, for the Wisest
and most Learned Rabbis to be brought up to a Trade, whereby if occasion was,
they might be able to maintain themselves; hence nothing more common in their
writings, than to have them denominated from their Callings; Rabbi Jose the
Tanner, Rabbi Jochanan the Shoomakerker, Rabbi Juda the Baker, etc. A custom,
taken up by the Christians, especially the Monks of the primitive times; who,
together with their strict professions, and almost incredible exercises of
devotion, each took upon him a particular Trade, whereat he daily wrought; and
by his own hand-labour maintained hemself: The Trade our Apostle was put to,
was Tentmaking, whereat he wrought for some particular reasons, even after his
being called to the Apostolat.

Having at Tarsus laid foundations of humane learning, he was by his Parents
sent to Jerusalem, to be perfected in the Study of the Law, and put under the
Tuterage of Rabban Gamaliel; this Gamaliel was the Son of Rabban Simeon
(probably supposed to be the same Simeon who came into the Temple and took
Christ in his arms,) President of the Court of the Sanhedrim; he was a Doctor
of the Law, a Person of great Wisdom and Prudence; and Head at that time of one
of the Families of Schools at Jerusalem; a Person of Chief Eminence and
Authority in the Jewish Sanhedrim: He it was that made the wise and excellent
Speech in the Sanhedrim, in favor of the Apostles and their Doctrine; nay, he
himself is said to have been a Christian, and his sitting in the Senate to have
been connived at by the Apostles, that he might he the better friend to their
Affairs: At the Feet of this Gamaliel St. Paul tells us he was brought up;
alluding to the custom of the Jewish Masters, who were wont to sit, while their
Disciples and Scholars stood at their feet; which honorary custom was
continued till the death of this Gamaliel, and then left off.

Under the Tuition of this great Maste^ St. Paul was educated, in the knowledge
o^ the Law, wherein he made such quick an^ vast improvement, that he soon
out-striped a^^ his fellow Disciples; amongst the variou^ Sects at that time in
the Jewish Church, h^ was especially educated in the Principles an^
Institutions of the Pharisees, of which Se^^ were both his Father and his
Master.

This Sect was excessively proud and insolent censuring whoever was not of
their way, a^ Villains and Reprobates: All Religion an^ Kindness with them was
bound within the confines of their own Party; and the first Printi^ples
wherewith they inspired their new converts, were, That none but they were the
Godly party, and that all others were Sons of the Earth.

But though this appears to have been the gr^^neral temper of that Party, yet
doubtless ther^ were some among them of better and more honest Principles than
the rest; in which number, we have Just reason to reckon our Apostle, who yet
was deeply leavened with the active and fiery Genius of this sect, not able t^^
brook any opposite Party in Religion, especially if late and Novel; insomuch,
that when the Jews were resolved to do execution upon Stephen, he stood by and
kept the clothes o^ them that did it: whether he was any further engaged in the
death of this innocent and holy man, we do not find; however this was enough
Loudly to proclaim his approbation and consent.

The Storm thus begun, increased apace, and a violent Persecution began to
arise, which miserably afflicted and dispersed the Christians at Jerusalem; in
which our Apostle was a prime Minister and Agent, being employed by the High
Priest to hunt and find out these new upstart Heretics, who Preached against
the Law of Moses (as they thought); accordingly having made strange havoc at
Jerusalem, he addressed himself to the Sanhedrim, and there took out a Warrant
to go down and ransack the Synagogues at Damascus, whether many of the poor
dispersed Christians had fled; but God who had designed him for work of another
Nature, stopped him in his Journey, drawing him back with a strong hand: The
particulars of which are at large set down in the Holy Story.

Now for his Travels in Palestine and the adjacent Countries, as also his acts
and sufferings in that fearful and dangerous voyage to Rome, being they are
recorded particularly in the Acts of the Apostles; we shall not trouble the
reader with it, but shall begin where it ends, and so meet him at Rome, whether
he was sent upon his appealing to Caesar.

The first thing that he did after his arrival at Rome, was, to summon the
heads of the Jewish Consistory there, whom he acquainted with the cause and
manner of his coming; that though he had been guilty of no violation of the
Laws of their Religion; yet had he been delivered by the Jews, into the hands
of the Roman Governors, who would have acquitted him once and again, as
innocent of any capital Offense; but by the perverseness of the Jews, he was
forced (not with an intention to charge his own Nation) to make his Appeal to
Caesar; that being come, he had sent for them, to let them know, That it was
for his constant Asserting the Resurrection, the hope of every true Israelite,
that he was thus dealt with. They replied, that they received no addice
concerning him; but for his Religion, they desired to be somewhat informed about
it, it being every where decryed, both by Jews and Gentiles. Accordingly upon
a day appointed, he discoursed to them from Norning till Night, concerning the
Doctrine of the Holy Jesus; but his Discourse succeeding not with all alike,
some persisting in their infidelity, he told them plainly, That henceforth he
should turn his Preaching to the Gentiles, who would be glad to accept, what
they had scornfully rejected.

It seems it was not long after this that he was brought to have his first
hearing before the Emperor, where those Friends which he expected should stand
by him, plainly deserted him; but God stood by him, and encouraged him. Two
years he dwelt at Rome, in a house which he had hired for his own use, wherein
he constantly employed himself in Preaching, and writing for the good of the
Church: Converting some of all Ranks and Qualities; yea some belonging to the
Court it self, among which was Torpes, an Officer of prime note in Neroes
Court, and afterward a Martyr for the Faith; as also one of Neroes Concubines
called Pappea Chrysostom, also adds Neroes Cupbearer.

Amongst others of our Apostles converts at Rome, was one Onesimus, who had
formerly been servant to Philemon, an eminent person in Colosse, but had run
away from his Master, and taken things of some value with him: Having rambled
as far as Rome, he was now Converted by St. Paul, and by him returned, with
recommendatory Letters to his Master Philemon, to beg his pardon, and to be
received again into his favor.

The Christians at Philippi, having heard of St. Paul's Imprisonment at Rome,
and not knowing what straits he might be reduced to, raised a contribution for
him, and sent it by the hands of Epaphroditus, who was now come to Rome, with
whom, when he returned back, Paul writ his Epistle to the Philippians.

Our Apostle being now after two years Imprisonment, perfectly restored to his
Liberty, remembering that he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and had therefore
a larger Diocese than Rome, accordingly prepared himself for a greater Circuit,
though which way he directed his Course, is not absolutely certain; by some he
is said to have returned back to Greece, and the parts of Asia; by others that
he Preached both in the Eastern and Western parts, which is not inconsistent
with the time he had after his departure from Rome: Clemens, who was his
Cotemporary in his Epistle to the Corinthians, expressly tells them, that, being
a Preacher in both the East and West, he taught Righteousness to the whole
world, and went to the utmost bounds of the West; probable it is, that he went
into Spain, a thing which he himself tells us, he had formerly, once and again
resolved upon: certain it is that the ancients do generally assert it, without
seeming in the least to doubt it. Theodoret and others, tells us, that he
Preached not only in Spain, but that he went also to other Nations, and brought
the Gospel to the Isles of the Sea: by which they undoubtedly mean Britain;
and therefore elsewhere reckons the Gauls and Britains, which the Apostles,
and particularly the Tent-maker, persuaded to embrace the Law of Christ; nor is
he the only man that has said it, others also giving their Suffrage in this
case.

To what other Parts of the World our Apostle brought* the tidings of the
Gospel, we have no certain, nor probable footsteps in Antiquity, nor any
further mention of him till his return to Rome, which probably might be about
the eighth or ninth year of Neroes Reign. Here he met with Peter, and were ^oth
together thrown into Prison; no doubt upon the Persecution raised against the
Christi^ns, under the pretense that they had fired the City: But besides this
general cause, we may ^robably suppose, that there were other more ^articular
causes for his Imprisonment; some (...) the Ancients make him engaged with
Peter (...) procuring the fall of that miserable wretch ^^mon Magus, and that
that did cause the ^mperors implacable fury and rage upon ^m: Another gives us
this account of it, That having converted one of Neroes Concu^nes, a Woman of
whom he was infinitely and, and reduced her to a life of great strict^^ss and
chastity (who formerly had been ^^voted to all kind of lasciviousness, and
^^odness); so that now she altogether refused to comply with the Emperors
wanton, and impure Embraces: The Emperor finding this, stormed exceedingly,
calling the Apostle a Villain, and Imposter, a wretched Perverter, and
Debaucher of others; giving Orders that immediately he should be cast into
Prison; but understanding, that for all this he still persisted to persuade the
Lady to continue her Chaste and Pious resolution; he commanded him forthwith to
be put to death.

How long he remained in Prison is not certainly known; at last his Execution
was resolved on, that his preparitory treatment was whether scourged, as
malefactors were won^ to be in order to their death, we cannot tell As a Roman
Citizen, by the Valerian an^ Parsian Law, he was exempted from it; thoug^ by
the Law of the Twelve Tables, notoriou^ malefactors were first to be scourged,
and then put to death. An Ancient writer also tells u^ That in the Church of
St. Mary, beyond t^^ Bridge in Rome, the Pillars are yet extan^ to which both
Peter and Paul were bou^ when they were scourged.

As he was led to Execution, he is said (...) have converted three of the
Soldiers th^^ were sent to Conduct and Guard him, wh^ within few days after
by the Emperors command, became Martyrs for the Faith. Bei^^ come to the place
which was the Agnae S^^viae, three miles from Rome; after some solemn
preparations, he cheerfully gave his Neck to the fatal stroke; as a Roman, he
might not be put upon the Cross, too infamous a death for any, but the worst of
Slaves and Malefactors; and therefore was Beheaded, accounted a more noble kind
of death, not among the Romans only, but among other Nations, as being fitter
for Persons of better Quality, and more ingenious Education; and from this
Instrument of his Execution, no doubt first arose that in all Images and
Pictures of the Apostle, he is constantly represented with a Sword in his right
hand.

Tradition reports (which many of the Fathers do justify) that when he was
Beheaded, a Liquor more like Milk than Blood, flowed from his Veins, and
spurted upon the Clothes of his Executioner, which St. Chrysostom says,
became the mean of his Conversion, with many others, to the Faith.

The same Father adds, that the Apostle suffered Bartyrdom about the Sixty
eighth year of his Age. But some question there is, whether he suffered at the
same time with Peter. Many of the Ancients positively affirm, that both
suffered upon the same day and year; but others, though allowing the same day,
tells ^us, that St. Paul suffered not till the year after; nay, some also go
the length to interpose the distance of several years; amongst whom is a
manuscript, of the lives and travels of Peter and Paul, brought amongst many
other venerable Pieces of Antiquity out of Greece; will have Paul to have
suffered five years after Peter, which he justifies by no less than the
Authority of Justine Martyr and Ireneus; but what credit is to be given to this
nameless Author, we see not; and therefore can lay no weight upon it, nor think
it fit to be put into the Balance, with the testimonies of undoubted
Antiquity; certainly if he suffered not at the very same time with St. Peter,
it could not be long after, not above a year at most; the best of it is, which
of them soever started first, they both came at last to the same end of the
race, to those Palms and Crowns, which are reserved for all good men in Heaven,
but most eminently for Martyrs of the Christian Faith.

He was buried in a certain place called Via Ostiensis about the space of two
miles from Rome, over whose Grave, about the year three hundred and eighteen,
Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope Sylvester built a most fair and
stately Church with in a Farm, which one Lucina, a noble and famous Christian
Matron of Rome, had long before Settled upon that Church; he adorned i^ with an
hundred of the best Marble Columns, and also Beautifyed it with most exquisite
workmanship: The many precious Gifts of all sorts, which this Great and Worthy
Prince bestowed upon it, are very particularly set down in the life of
Sylvester.

This being thought too narrow and little, for the honor of so great an
Apostle; the Emperor Valentinian by a rescript directed to Salustius Prefect of
the City, caused it to be taken down, and began to build a more stately and
spacious Church in the place of it; but Valentinian not living to see it
finished, Theodosius his Successor did perfect it in great splendour, which, as
Historians tell us, was further Beautified (as appears by an ancient
Inscription) by Placida the Emperess, at the persuasion of Leo Bishop of Rome;
what other additions of Wealth, Honor, and Stateliness it has since received,
both by Popes, Emperors, and other Benefactors, were too tedious here to
relate; neither is it my province to enquire into it.

As for St. Paul's Person, we find him thus described, He was of a little
Stature, and somewhat Stooping, his Complexion fair, his Countenance grave, his
Head small, his Eyes carrying a kind of sweetness and beauty in them, his
Eyebrows a little hanging over his Nose, long but Gracefully bending, his
Beard thick, and like the Hair on his Head, mixed with Gray Hairs.

But how mean soever the Cabinet was, there was an unvaluable Treasure within:
for as to his Natural indowments, he seems to have had a clear and solid
Judgment, quick Invention, a prompt and ready Memory; all which were abundantly
improved by Art, and the advantages of a more liberal Education, which raised
him to a mighty reputation, both for Parts and Learning.

Yet all these were but a shadow to that Divine Temper of Mind that was in him,
which discovered it self through the whole course of his Life; he was humble to
the Lowest step of condescension: Great was his Temperance and Sobriety, so far
from going beyond the bounds of regularity, that he abridged himself of the
conveniences of a lawful and necessary accommodation. His Kindness and Charity
was truly admirable, having a compassionate tenderness for the Poor, and a
quick sense of the wants of others, both in their Souls and Bodies. His Zeal
most ardent and hot, Warning, Reproving, Entreating, Persuading by Night and by
Day, by Sea and by Land; Preaching in Season and out of season. The Sum is, He
was a Man in whom the Divine Life did eminently manifest, and display it self;
being always careful to keep a Conscience void of offense, both toward God
and Man.

The Life of St. ANDREW.
S. ANDREW



THe Sacred Story, which has hitherto been very larg and copious, in describing
the Acts of the two first Apostles, is henceforwards very sparing in its
accounts, giveing us only now and then a few accidental remarks concerning the
rest, and some of them no further mentioned, than the mere recording of their
names.

Amongst the Apostles that succeed, we first take notice of St. Andrew; he was
born at Bethsaida, a City of Galilee, Son to John or Jonas, a Fisherman of that
Town, and Brother to Simon Peter; he was brought up to his Fathers Trade,
whereat he wrought till our Lord called him to another kind of Fishing.

John the Baptist, having lately risen up in the Jewish Church; great
Multitudes flocked to him, to hear his discourses; besides, he had also a
number of select Disciples, who waited more particularly upon him: In the
number of which, was our Apostle, who was with him about Jordan; when our Lord
came that way, upon his approach, the Baptist told them, that this was the
Messiah; whereupon Andrew, and another Disciple follow our Savior to the place
of his abode. After some discourse with him, Andrew goes and acquaints his
brother Simon, and both together came to Christ; yet stayed they not long with
him, but returned home, and exercised their Calling for more then a year, till
our Lord passing through Galilee, fully satisfied them of his Divinity, and
commanded them to follow him, which they did immediately: shortly after, St.
Andrew, together with the rest, was chosen to be one of those that were to be
Christ's immediate Vicegerents for planting and promoting the Christian Faith;
little else is particularly recorded of him in the Sacred Story, being
comprehended in the general account of the rest of the Apostles.

Our Lord being Ascended, and the Apostles gone out to their work all the World
over; St. Andrew went to Scythia, where some of the Ancients say he continued a
considerable time, going from Plate to Place, Preaching the Gospel, and
Settling Churches, meeting with a great deal of opposition in many places:
Hence in process of time, he came to Byzantium (since called Constantinople),
where he instructed them in the knowledge of the Christian Religion, and founded
a Church. After this he Traveled over Thrace, Macedonia, and Achaia, where for
many years he Preached, and Propagated Christianity; at last he came to Patrae,
a City of Achaia, where he gave his last, and great Testimony to it, by laying
down his Life for it; the manner of his Martyt^^m one describes thus.

Aaegaas Proconsus of Achaia, coming to Patrae, and observing many of the
people embrace Christianity, he endeavored by all means to reclaim them,
whereupon the Apostle went to him, and expostulated with him about the matter;
but the Proconsul derided him, as the Propagator of that Religion, whose Author
the Jews had infamously put to death upon the Cross.

The Apostle from this took occasion to discourse more fully of Christ; but the
other told him plainly, that he might persuade them so that would believe him;
for his part, if he would not do Sacrifice to the Gods, he would make him
suffer upon the same Cross which He so much extolled. Afterward he was
committed to Prison again.

The next day, he was again brought before the Proconsul, where they began to
entreat one another: The Proconsul the Apostle, that he might not foolishly
forgo the pleasures of this Life: The Apostle the Proconsul, that he might not
wickedly throw away his Soul.

This so enraged the Proconsul, that he told the Apostle, he must either
forsake that new Religion, or resolve to be tortured severely. He replied, that
he feared not his torture, he might do his worst; and that if he had one
torture greater than another, he might heap that upon him.

The Proconsul first commanded him to be Scourged by seven Li^ors, successively
whipping his naked Body: But seeing his great patience, commanded him to be
Crucified, but not to be fastened to the Cross with Nails, but Cords, that so
his death might be more lingering and tedious.

Being come within sight of the Cross, he heartily saluted it, saying, That he
long desired, and expected that happy hour wherein he might show an honorable
Testimony to his Glorious and Renowned Master. After having prayed and exhorted
the people to constancy in that Faith, which he delivered to them, he was
fastened to the Cross, whereon he hung two days, Teaching, and Instructing the
people all the time, and Exhorting them to suffer cheerfully for Christ and his
Truth, whenever they should be called to it. And when great importunities, in
the mean time were used by some to the Proconsul in his behalf, he earnestly
begged of our Lord, at this time, he might Seal the Truth with his Blood. God
heard his fervent prayer, and he immediately expired on the last of November,
though in what year, no certain account can be recovered.

The Life of St. JAMES the Great.
S: JACOB MAYOR



JAmes surnamed the Great, (either because of his Age, or for some peculiar
honors, which our Lord conferred upon him), was a Galilean born, the Son of
Zebede a Fisherman; his Mothers name was Mary, surnamed Salome; his Education
was in the Trade of Fishing, which Trade his Father also followed; in the
exercise of which, our Savior found him, when he passed by the Sea of Galilee,
where he called them to be his Disciples; which Call, they readily obeyed,
leaving their aged Father with the Servants to manage the Trade.

It was not long after his first calling, till he was called from the station
of an ordinary Disciple, to the Apostolical Office; and not only so, but
honored with some peculiar Acts of Favor beyond most of the Apostles; being
one of the three whom our Lord usually made choice of, to admit to the more
intimate Transactions of his Life.

Thus with Peter, and his brother John, he was taken to the Miraculous raising
of Jairus his daughter; admitted to Christ's glorious Transfiguration upon the
Mount; taken along with him into the Garden, to be a spectator of his bitter,
and terrible Agonies.

Nor was it the least instance of that particular honor which our Lord
conferred upon these Apostles, that at his calling of them, he gave them a new
Name and Title.

The Lord setting forward in His Journey to Jerusalem, in order to his
Crucifixion; and the better to prepare the minds of his Apostles, for his
departure from them; he told them, he was to suffer, and yet after all, he
should rise again; but they, whose minds were big; yet with the expectation of
a Temporal Power, and Monarchy, understood not well the meaning of his
discourse: However James and his Brother supposing the Resurrection, which he
spoke of, would be the time when his Power and Greatness would commence;
Prompted their Mother to put up a Petition for them; she after leave, modestly
asked for her Address, begged of him, That when he took possession of his
Kingdom, her two Sons might have the Principal places of Honor and Dignity,
next his own Person. Our Lord directing his discourse to the two Apostles, told
them, they quite mistook the nature of his Kingdom, which did not consist in
External Grandeur, but in Inward Life and Power; that they would do well, to
consider, whether they were able to undergo what he was to undergo. They
probably not understanding the force of his reasoning, answered, They were able
to do all this; but He not taking advantage of their rash and inconsiderable
Reply, told them, That as for suffering, they would indeed undergo it as well
as he; but for any peculia^ honor or dignity, he would not by any absolute and
peremptory favor of his own, dispose of it any otherwise then according to
those Rules and Instructions, which he received from his Father. The rest of
the Apostles were offended with this Ambitious request; but our Lord, to Calm
their passion, discoursed to them at large of the nature of the Evangelick
State, and its difference from the Kingdoms of the World; with which discourse
the storm blew over, and their exorbitant passions began on all hands, to be
allayed and pacified.

What became of St. James, after our Saviors Ascension, we have no certain
account either from the Sacred, or Ecclesiastic Stories: some affirm, that
after the Martyrdom of Stephen, when the Christians were dispersed, he came to
the Western parts of the world, even to Britain and Ireland; and having planted
Christianity amongst them, went back again to Jerusalem; but this seems
improbable upon several accounts, and therefore its safest to confine his
Ministry to Judea, and the parts there abouts, and to seek for him at
Jerusalem, where we are sure to find him.

Herod-Agrippa, Son of Aristobolus, being great in favor where the Emperor
Claudius was settled, and confirmed by him in all that his Grandfather Herod
the great enjoyed, and seeing that this most probable way to gain the affection
of the Jews, was to fall heavy upon the Christians; he resolves accordingly to
do it: Finding St. James Vigorous in contending for the Truth, Him he commands
to be apprehended and cast in prison, and sentence of death to be passed upon
him; as he was Led forth to the place of Martyrdom, The Soldier that had
guarded him to the Tribunal, having been convinced by that mighty courage, and
constancy which St. James showed at the time of his Trial, repented of that he
had done, came and fell down at the Apostles feet, and heartily begged pardon
for what he had done against him. The Holy man after a little Surprise at the
thing, raised him up and kissed him: Whereupon before them all, he publicly
professed himself to be a Christian, and so both were beheaded at one and the
same time. Thus fell St. James, Cheerfully taking that most bitter Cup, which
formerly he told his Lord he was most ready to drink of.

His death was not long unrevenged upon Herod, the account of it is thus:
Shortly after St. James his Martyrdom, Herod removed to Cesarea, while he was
there, he proclaimed Solemn Sights, and Festival enterments to be held in
Honor of Caesar: Early in the morning, the second day, he came with great
State into the Theater, to make in Oration to the people, having on a most
Sumptuous Robe, Curiously wrought with Silver and Gold; the Luster of which, so
dazzled the eyes of the people, that they cried out it was some Deity; and that
he who spoke, must be something above the ordinary Standard of Humanity. This
impious applause he received without any token of dislike. But a sudden
Accident Changed the scene, and turned the Comic part to a black and fatal
Tragedy. Looking up he espied an Owl sitting over his head, which he presently
beheld as the fatal Messenger of his eminent, and inevitable ruin by the just
Judgment of God; an incurable Melancholy immediately seized upon his mind, as
Exquisite Torments did upon his Bowels: Behold, said he, turning to those about
him; The Deity whom you admired, and your selves evidently convinced of
flattery and falsehood: see me here by the Laws of fate condemned to die, whom
just now you styled Immortal. Being removed into the Palace, his pains still
increased upon him; and though the people mourned, and wept, fasted and prayed
for his life and health, yet his accute Torments got the upper hand, and after
five days put a period to his miserable life.

The Life of St, JOHN.
S. JOHN.



ST. John was a Galilean, the Son of Zebedee, and Salome younger brother to St.
James, together with whom he was brought to the Trade of Fishing: Before his
coming to Christ, he seems for sometime, to have been Disciple to John the
Baptist, being probably that other Disciple that was with Andrew, when they
left the Baptist to follow our Savior; so particularly does he relate all
Circumstances of the Transactions, though modestly, as in other parts of his
Gospel, concealing his own name.

There is not much spoken concerning him in the Sacred story, more than what is
recorded of him in Conjunction with his brother James. He was peculiarly dear
to his Lord and Master, being the Disciple whom Jesus loved; witness his lying
in our Saviors bosom, at the Paschal Supper; as also when Peter was desirous
to know which of them our Savior meant, when he told them, one of them should
betray him, and durst not himself propound the question, he made use of St.
John, to ask our Lord. Indeed, when our Lord was first apprehended, he fled
with the other Apostles: it not being without probability of reason, that the
Ancients conceive him to have been that Young man, that followed after Christ
having a Linen Cloth cast about his naked body, whom when the Officers laid
hold upon, he left the Linen Cloth, and fled naked from them. But though he
sled, at present to avoid that sudden violence that was offered to him, yet h^
soon recovered himself, and returned bac^ to seek his Master, and waited upon
him through the several passages of his Trial ^till his Crucifixion. Here it
was that our Savior appointed him Guardian of his Mother, and made her apart
of his charge, and care. At the first news of our Lords resurrection, he
accompanied Peter to the Sepulcher, these two Apostles having a more mutual
intimary then any of the rest, having run many hazards together, and adhering
Close to one another, for the most part.

The Ancients say, that after the death of our Lords Mother, John went to-
Asia, where he applied himself wholly to the propagating of Christianity.
Having planted several famous Churches there. Having spent some years there, he
was at length accused to Domitian, as a Subverter of the Religion of the
Empire, by whose command the Proconsul of Asia sent him bound to Rome, where he
was put into a Cauldron of boiling Oil: but the Divine providence brought this
holy man out of this (one would thought) unavoidable destruction: The Cruel
Emperor not being satisfied with this, presently orders him to be banished
into Patmos, a disconsolate Island in the Archipelago, where he remained
several years, instructing the inhabitants in the faith of Christ. Here it was
about the latter end of Domitian's Reign, that he writ the book of the
Revelations.

Cruel Domitian being taken out of the way, Coccecus Nerva succeeded in the
Empire, who being of a milder tempee, rescinded the odious acts of his
predecessor, recalling the banished; whereupon St. John left Patmos, and
returned to Asia, fixing his residence at Ephesus, where it is said he wrote
his Gospel.

He lived till the time of Trajan: about the beginning of whose Reign, he
departed this life, about the Ninety eighth, or Ninty nineth year of his life,
as is generally thought. But others think that he dyed a Martyr, upon no other
ground, then of that our Savior told him and his brother: That they should
drink of the cup, and be Baptized with the Baptism wherewith he was Baptized,
which was indeed Literally verified of his brother James. Yet for him though
(as. one observes) he was not put to death, yet may he be truly stylled a
Martyr, his being put in a Vessel of Boiling Oil, his many years banishment,
and other sufferings in the cause of Christ, Justly Challenging the Title, it
being not want of good will either in him, or his enemies; but the divine
providence Immediately overruling the powers of nature, that kept the Malice of
his enemies from its full execution.

Others deny that he dyed at all, but is still alive; the foundation of which
error, was founded upon what passed between our Lord and Peter, concerning this
Apostle: for Christ having told Peter, what was to be his own fate, Peter
enquires what would become of St. John. To whom the Lord answered, If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee; which was mis-understood by
the Apostles; though St. John himself, who records that passage, inserts a
causion, That Jesus did say he should not die. From the same Original also
sprang this report, That he only lay sleeping in his grave at Ephesus; which
report, was for a long time current.

He seems to have always led a single life; and so the Ancients tells us, that
all the Apostles were married, except St. John and St. Paul: He was polished by
no arts of learning, but his want of it was made up abundantly in his Excellent
Temper of mind, and the furniture of divine graces, which he was adorned
withal: His Humility was admirable, studiously concealing his own Worth and
Honor.

He showed a mighty care to the souls of men, unwearied by spending himself in
the service of the Gospel; Traveling from East to West, to leaven the world
with the principles of that Holy Religion, which he was sent to propagate. He
was infinitely Vigilant against Heretics, Countermining there Artifices,
Antidoting against the poison of their errors, and shuning all communion and
conversation with their persons.

The Life of St. PHILIP.
S. PHILIP



OF all parts of Palestine, Galilee seems to to have passed under the greatest
character of Ignominy and Reproach; therefore called Galilee of the Gentiles:
both Jew and Gentile conspiring in this, that they thought they could not fix a
greater title of reproach upon our Savior and His followers, than that of
Galilean. But to confute this, our Lord chose hence, those excellent Persons,
whom he made the great instruments to Convert the World; some of which we have
already given account of, and more are yet behind.

Of this number was Philip, born at Bethsaida, a Town near the Sea of Tiberias:
Of his Parents, and way of Life, the History of the Gospel takes no notice;
though probably he was a Fisherman, the common Trade of that place: He had the
honor to be the first called to be Christ's Disciple; which came thus to pass.
Our Lord, after His return from the Wilderness, having met with Andrew, and his
brother Peter, after some short discourse parted from them; and the next day
passing through Galilee, he found Philip, whom he commanded presently to follow
him, which he accordingly did.

No sooner had Religion taken possession of his mind, then away he goes, and
Finds Nathaniel, acquaints him with the tidings of the newfound Messiah, and
conducts him to Him: After his call to the Apostleship, there is not much
recorded of him in the Holy Story. It was to him that the Lord propounded the
question, what they should get in the Wilderness, as would feed so vast a
multitude; To which he answered, That so much was not easily to be had. It was
to him, that the Gentile Prosylites that came up to the Passover, addressed
themselves, when they desired to see our Savior. It was with him that our Lord
discoursed concerning himself, a little before the last paschal Supper. The
Lord Jesus had been fortifying their minds with fit considerations against his
departure from them: He told them, That no man could come to the Father, but by
Him. Philip not duly understanding the force of our Saviors reasonings,
begged of him, that he would show them the Father. Our Lord gently reproved his
ignorance, that after so long attendance upon his instructions, he should not
know that he was the Image of his Father; the express character of his infinite
Wisdom, Power and Goodness appearing in him; that he said, and did nothing, but
by his Fathers appointment, which if they did not believe, his Miracles were a
sufficient evidence; that therefore such demands were unnecessary, and
impertinent, and that it argued great weakness after more than three years
education under his discipline and instruction, to be so unskilful in those
matters.

In the distribution of the several Regions of the World made by the Apostles;
some think that the upper Asia was the Province which was assigned to Philip,
where he applied himself with an indefatigable diligence and industry, to
recover men out of the snare of the Devil, to the imbraceing and acknowledgment
of the Truth, by constancy of his Preaching, and Efficacy of his Miracles, he
gained numerous Converts, whom he Baptized to the Christian Faith; at once
Curing both Souls and Bodies: their Souls of Error and Idolatry, their Bodies
of Infirmities and Distempers; healing Diseases, dispossessing Demons;
settling Churches, and appointing them Pastors and Teachers.

Having for many years succesfully managed his Apostolical Office in those
parts, he came, toward the latter part of his life, to Hierapolis in Phrygia,
a Rich and Populous, but most Idolatrous Place: Amongst the many Vain and
Trifleing Deities, to whom they paid Religious Worship, was a Serpent or
Dragon, which they Worshipped with great and solemn Veneration: the Apostle was
grieved to see them so grosely inslaved to Error; and therefore continually
solicited Heaven, till by Prayer he had protured the death (at least vanishing)
of this Famed Creature: Which done, he told them how unbecoming it was, to give
Divine honors to such odious creatures; and thence took occasion to discourse
at large of Christianity. The success was, That the People were ashamed of
their gross Idolatry; and many broke loose from their Chains of Idolatry, and
ran over to Christianity; whereupon the great enemy of Mankind, betook himself
to his old Methods, Cruelty and Persecution; the Magistrates of the City seized
the Apostle, and having put him into Prison, caused him to be severely
Scourged. This preparatory Cruelty passed, he was led to Execution; and being
bound, was hanged up by the Neck against a Pillar, though others tell us that
he was Crucified; the Apostle being dead, his body was taken down by St.
Bartholomew his fellow Sufferer, and his own Sister, who is said to have been
the constant companion of his travels, and decently buried; after which, having
Confirmed the people in the Faith of Christ, they departed from thence.

It is generally affirmed, that St. Philip was Married, and that he had
Daughters, whom he disposed in Marriage; but though this be granted, as it is
not improbable; yet the not carefully distinguishing between Philip the Deacon,
and Philip the Apostle; has bred some confusion among the Ancients in this
matter; insomuch that some have concluded them to be one and the same person;
but with how little reason, will appear to any that shall consider, that
Philip, who was chosen to be one of the Seven Deacons, could not be one of the
Apostolical College; the Apostles declaring upon that occasion that they had
affairs of a higher nature to attend upon: So then upon the Persecution that
arose, upon St. Stephens death, the Church was dispersed; they were all
scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and Samaria, (and Philip the
Deacon, among the rest who went down to the City of Samaria) except the
Apostles who tarried behind at Jerusalem; and when Philip had Converted and
Baptized a considerable number in that place, he was forced to send for two of
the Apostles from Jerusalem, that so by their hands they might receive the Holy
Ghost, which had been wholly needless, had he himself been of the twelve
Apostles.

St. Philip was one of the Apostles, who left no sacred writings behind him;
the greater part of the Apostles, having little leisure to write Books, being
employed in the Ministry more immediately useful, and subservient to the
happiness of Mankind.

The Life of St. BARTHOLOMEW
S: BARTHOLOME



IT is not questioned at all, but that S. Bartholomew was an Apostle; but the
Holy Story, taking no further notice of him, then the bare mention of his name
gave occasion to many both Ancient and Modern, not without occasion to Suppose,
that he lies concealed under some other name, and that this can be no other
than Nathaniel, one of the first Disciples that came to Christ, accordingly we
may observe that as some of the Evangelists, never mention Bartholomew in the
number of the Apostles, so others take no notice of Nathaniel, propably. But
that which renders the thing most specious, and probable is that we find
Nathaniel, particularly reckoned up with the other Apostles, to whom our Lord
appeared at the Sea of Tiberias.

This difficulty being cleared, we proceed to a more particular account of him:
By some he is thought to have been a Syrian of a Noble Extract, and to have
derived his extract from the Ptolemes of Egypt. But it is plain that he as the
rest of the Apostles was a Galilean; and of Nathaniel we know it is
particularly said, that he was of Cana in Galilee; the Scripture takes no
notice of his Trade or way of life, though some Circumstances might seem to
intimate that he was a fusherman. At his first coming to Christ he was
conducted by Philip, who told him that they had found the long-looked-for
Messiah; and when he observed that the Messiah could not be born at Nazareth,
Philip bids him come, and satisfy himself; at his first appearance, the Lord
entertains him with the Character of a man of true simplicity, and Integrity:
Surprised he was at our Lords Salutation, wondering how he could know him so
well at first sight, whose face he had never seen before; But he was answered,
that he had seen him, while he was under the Fig Tree, before Philip called
him. Convinced with this instance of our Lords Divinity, he presently made his
confessions, that now he was sure that Jesus was the promised Messiah the Son
of God, whom he had appointed to be the King, and Governor of his Church: Our
Savior told him, that if upon these inducements he could believe him to be the
Messiah, he should have far greater arguments to confirm his faith; yea, that
err long he should behold the Heavens opened to receive him thither, and the
Angels Visibly appearing to wait; and attend upon him.

Concerning our Apostles Travels up and down the world, to propagate the
Christian Faith, we shall present the reader with a brief account of them from
Antiquity; that he went as far as India is owned by all, which must be meant,
only of that part of India lying next to Asia; yet others say it was the India,
bordering upon Aethiopia, and also tell us that here he left St. Mathews
Gospel: The particular relation of which a famous Author gives thus; that when
Pantenus a man famous for his skill in Philosophy, and especially in the
institutions of the stoics, but much more for his hearty affection to
Christianity, in a devout, and Zealous imitation of the Apostles, was inflamed
with a desire to propagate the* Christian Religion, unto the Eastern Countries:
He came as far as India it self, here among some, that yet retained the
knowledge of Christ, he found St. Mathews Gospel written in He^re^; left here
as the Tradition was by St. Bartholomew, one of the Twelve Apostles, when he
Preached the Gospel to these Nations.

After his Labors in these parts of the world, he returned to the more
Western, and Northern parts of Asia. At Herapolis in Phrygia we find him in
company with Philip, instructing that place in the principles of Christianity,
and convinceing them of the folly of their blind Idolators: Here, by the
enraged, he was at the same time with Philip, designed for Martyrdom, in order
thereunto, he was fastened upon the Cross, with intent to dispatch him; but upon
a sudden Conviction, that the Divine Justice would Revenge their death, he was
taken down and dismissed. Hence it is probable that he went to Lyconia. His
last remove was to Albanople, in Armenia the great, a place miserably
overgrown with Idolatry, from which, while he sought to reclaim the people, he
was by the Governor of the place, commanded to be Crucified, which he
Cheerfully under-went, comforting and confirming the convert-Gentiles to the
last minute of his life; some add, that he was Crucified with his head
downward, others that he was flead, and his skin first taken off, which might
consist well enough with his Crucifixion; Exeoriation being a punishment in
use, not only in Egypt, but among the Persians; and from whom they might have
borrowed this piece of Barbarous Cruelty.

The Life of St. Matthew,
St. Matthew.



St. Matthew called also Levi, was, though a Roman officer, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, and probably a Galican; he was the Son of Alpheus, and Mary Sister or
Kinswoman to the blessed Virgin. His way of life was that of a publican, or
toll gatherer to the Romans, an office of bad report, among the Jews; indeed,
among the Romans, it was a place of power and credit, and Honorable
^^^^tation, not ordinarily conferred upon any b^^ Roman Knights. The Jews
thought this Office odious, upon these two accounts first that the persons,
that managed it, were usually covetous, and great exacters* which doubtless
Zacheus was sensible of, when after his conversion he offered fourfold
Restitutions to any man, from whom he had taken any thing by fraud, and evil
arts* and upon this account they became unfamous, even among the Gentiles
themselves. The other thing that made the Jews detest them, was that this
Tribute was not only a grievance to their purses, but an affront to the
liberty, and freedom of their nations, for they looked upon themselves, as a
freeborn people invested in this privilege immediately by God himself, and
therefore looked upon this as a daily, and standing instance of their slavery.

Hereby Publicans, became Universally to be abhorred by the Jewish Nation, that
it was accounted unlawful for them to show such men any Courtesy or Common
kindness. Of this Trade and Office was our St. Matthew, and it seems more
particularly to have consisted in gathering the Customs of Commodities, that
came by the Sea of Galilee; and the Tribute the Passengers were to pay, that
went by water, a thing frequently mentioned in the Jewish writings. For this
purpose they kept their Office or Custom House by the Sea side, that they
might always be near at hand; and here it was, that St. Matthew had his
Tol-booth, where he sat at the receipt of Custom; Christ having lately cured a
famous Paralitick, retired out of Capernaum to walk by the Seaside; where he
taught the people that flocked after him. Here he espied Matthew sitting in his
Custome-Office, whom he called to come, and follow him; the man was rich, had a
wealthy and gainful Trade, but he overlooked all these considerations, left all
his interests, and Relations to become our Lords Disciple; and to show that he
was not discontented with his choice, nor apprehended himself a looser by this
bargain, he entertained our Lord, and his Disciples at a great dinner in his
house, whether he invited his friends, especially those of his own profession.

After his Election to the Apostolate, he continued with the rest, tell our
Lord's Ascension, and then for the first eight years at least preached up and
down Judea. After which, being to betake himself to the Conversion of the
Gentile World, he was entreated by the Convert Jews to commit to Writing the
History of our Lords Life and Actions, and to leave it among them, as a
standing Record of that he had Preached to them, which he did accordingly, and
so composed his Gospel; little certainty can be had, what Travels he underwent
for the advancement of the Christian Faith. Some tell us that he went into
Parthea, and having successfully planted Christianity in those Parts, thence
traveled into Aethiopia, where by Preaching, and Miracles, he mightily
Triumphed over Error and Idolatry.

As to the manner of his death, it is related by some, that he went into the
Country of the Canibals, where Christ appeared to him in the form of a
beautiful Youth, and gave him a Wand, which he pitching in the ground,
immediately it grew up into a Tree, that he also miraculously Converted the
Prince of the Country, and after all, dyed in peace, and was most sumptuously
buried: But others of the Ancients, with as much probility, affirm that he
suffered Martyrdom at a City in Aethiopia; but that kind of death is altogether
uncertain.

He was a great instance of the power of Religion; how much a man may be
b^o^ght off to a better temper, if we reflect upon his circumstances, while yet
a stranger to Christ we shall find the world had very great advantages upon
him, and yet notwithstanding, no sooner did Christ call, but without the least
scruple or dissatisfaction, not only renounced his gainful incomes, but ran an
immediate hazard of the displeasure of his Masters the Romans, that had
employed him for quitting their service, and leaving his accounss entangled and
confured behind him.

The last thing remarkable in the Life of this Apostle, is, his Gospel Written
at the entreaty of the Jewish converts, and as some say, at the command of the
Apostles while he was yet in Palestine, eight years after the death of Christ,
which St. Bartholomew took along with him into India, and left there: He wrote
it in Hebrew, as primarily designed it for the use of his Countrymen; it was
without doubt, soon after translated into Greek, as some think by St. John;
others attribute the translation of it to St. James the less.

After the Greek translation was entertained, the Hebrew Copy was chiefly
owned, and used by the Nazarens, a middle Sect of men between Jews and
Christians; what the Christians, they believed in Christ, and embraced his
Religion; what the Jews, they adhered to the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Mosaic Law, and hence this Gospel came to be styled the Gospel of the Hebrews,
and the Gospel of the Nazarenes; by them it was by degrees interpolated several
passages of the Evangelical History, which they heard from the Apostles; or
those who had familiarly conversed with them, being inserted; which the
Ancients Fathers frequently refer to in their writings: This Hebrew Copy was
found in the Treasury of the Jews at Tiberias, by Joseph a Jew, and after his
Conversion a man of great Honor and Esteem; in the days of Constantine, one of
the Ancients assures us that there was another kept in the Library of Caesarea,
in his time; and another by the Nazarenes at Berea, from whom he had the
liberty to Transcribe it, and which he afterward Translated both into Greek and
Latin: A Copy also of this Gospel was dug up and found in the Grave of
Barnabas in Cyprus, Transcribed with his own hand, but these Copies are long
since perished.

The Life of St. THOMAS.
S: THOMAS



THe Jews used commonly (when Traveling into foreign Countries, or familiarly
conversing with the Greeks and Romans) to assume to themselves a Greek or a
Latin name, of affinity, and sometimes of the very same signification with
that of their own Country. Thus our St. Thomas, according to the Syriacks
importance of his name, was called Didimus, which is the same with his other
name, expressed in different Languages. The History of the Gospel takes no
particular notice, either of his Country or Kindred; that he was a Jew is
certain, and in all probability a Galileean; he was born (as some says) of
very mean Parents, brought up to the Trade of Fishing: He was afterward,
together with the rest, called to the Apostleship, where, not long after he
gave an eminent instance of his hearty willingness to undergo the saddest Fate
that might attend them, for when the rest of the Apostles, dissuaded our
Savior from going to Judea, lest the Jews should stone Him, as but a little
before they had attempted it: St. Thomas desires them not to hinder Christ's
Journey thither, though it might cost them their Lives, probably concluding,
that instead of raising Lazarus from the dead, they themselves should be sent
with him to their own Graves; so that he made up, in pious a^fections, what he
seemed to want in the quickness of his understanding, not readily apprchending
some of our Lords discourses, nor overforward to believe more than himself had
seen; when Christ, a little before his fatal sufferings, told his Disciples,
that he was going to prepare for them that they might follow, and that they
knew the place whether he was a going, and the way thither. Our Apostle Roundly
replied, that they knew it not: To which, our Lord gives this satisfactory
answer, That he was the true Living Way.

Our Lord being dead, the Apostles were exceedingly distracted, between hope
and despair concerning his resurrection, which engaged him the sooner to hasten
his appearance; wherefore, the very day in which he arose, he came into the
house, in which they were, while for fear of the Jews the Doors were fast shut
about them: At this Meeting St. Thomas was absent, having probably never
recovered their company since their last dispersion in the Garden, where every
owns Fears prompted him to Consult his own safety. At his return, they told
him, That the Lord had appeared to them, but he obstinately refused to believe
that it was he, except he might see the very prints of the Nails and feel, the
Wounds in his Hands and Sides: But his compassionate master would not take
advantage of the man's refractory unbelief; but upon that Day seven night came
to them, as they were solemnly met at their Devotions, and calling Thomas, hade
him look upon his Hands, and put his Fingers into the prints of the Nails, and
thrust his Hand into the hole of his Side, and thereby satisfy his Faith. The
Man was quickly convinced of his Error, confessing, That he now acknowledged
him to be his very Lord and Master.

Our Lord being Ascended, and having eminently given Gifts, and miraeulous
Powers to the Apostles. St. Thomas moved thereto by divine Intimation, is said
to have dispatched Thaddaeus, one of the Seventy Disciples to Abgaras, King of
Edessa, whom he first Cured of an inveterate Distemper, and afterward Converted
him and his Subjects to the Faith. The Apostolical Assigned to St. Thomas, was
Parthia, after which, some inform us, he preached the Gospel to the Medes,
Persians, Carmans, Horcany, Bactrians, and the Neighbor Nations. One of the
Ancients says, That in Persia he met with the Wise Men, who came that long
Io^eney from the East, to bring Presents to our Newborn Savior, whom he
Baptized, and took along with him, as his Companions and Assistants in
propagation of the Gospel; Hence he Preached in, and passed through Aethiopia,
and afterward came to India, where we are told he was afraid to have ventured
himself, until he was encouraged by a Vision, that assured him of the divine
Presence to assist him. He Traveled a great way in these Eastern Nations, as
far as the Country of the Brachmans Preaching every where, where by mild and
Gentle methods, he brought over the people from their grossest Superstition and
Errors.

The Portugals tell us, that St. Thomas came first to Socotara, an Island in
the Arabian Sea; thence to Canyanor, where having converted many, he traveled
farther into the East; and having successfully preached the Gospel, returned
back to Carmandal, where he began to Erect a Place for Divine Worship, till
prohibited by the Priest and the Prince of the Country: But upon conviction of
several Miracles, the work went on, and the Sagamo or King himself embraced the
Christian Faith. The Brachmans, who plainly perceived that this would certainly
spoil their Trade, and in time extirpate the Religion of their Country; thought
it high time to put a stop to its growing, and resolved in Council, that some
way or other the Apostle must be put to death. There was a Tomb not far from
the City, whether the Apostle was wont to retire to his Solitudes and private
Devotions. Hither the Brachmans and their followers, persued him, and while he
was intent at prayer, they first loaded him with Darts and Stones, till one of
them coming nearer, ran him through with a Lance. His Body was taken up by his
Disciples, and buried in the Church, which he had lately built.

While one of the Vice-Royes of Portugal resided in those parts, there were
brought to him certain Brass Tables, whose Inscriptions none could read, till
at last, by the help of a Jew, they were found to contain nothing but a
donation made to St. Thomas of a piece of Ground for the building of a Church.
They tell us also of a famous Cross found in St. Thomas his Chapel, wherein
was an untelligible Character, which learned Dramin rendered to this effect:
That Thomas a Divine person was sent into those Countries by the Son of God, in
the days of King Sagamo, to instruct them in the knowledge of the true God, that
he built a Church, and performed admirable Miracles, but at last, while upon
his Knees at prayer, was thrust through with a Spear, and that the Cross
stained with his blood was left as a memoral of these matters.

The Life of St. JAMES the Less.
St. JACOB MINOR.



HE was the Son (as we may probably conjecture) of Joseph, afterward the
Husband of the Blessed Virgin, by his first Wife. Hence reputed our Lords
Brother, in the same sense that he was reputed the Son of Joseph. One thing
there is that seem to lie against this, that he is called the Son of Alpheus,
but this may probably mean no more than either that Joseph was so called by
another name, or it may relate to his being a Disciple, of some particular Sect
among the Jews, called Alpheans.

Of the place of his birth, the Sacred Story makes no mention. The Jews
frequently style him a man of the Town of Sechania though, where that place
was, we are not able to conjecture; what was his particular way and course of
Life, before his being called to the Discipleship and Apostolate, we find no
intimations of in the History of the Gospel, nor any distinct account
concerning him, during our Saviors Life. After the resurrection, he was
honored with a particular appearance of our Lord to him, which, though
silently passed over by the Evangelists, is recorded by Paul. One of the
Ancients gives us a fuller account of it, which is, that St. James had solemnly
sworn, That from the time that he had drank of the Cup at the Institution of
the Supper, he would eat Bread no more, till he saw the Lord risen from the
dead. Our Lord therefore being returned from the Grave, came and appeared to
him, commanded Bread to be set before him, which he took, blessed, and beak,
and gave to St James, saying, Eat thy Bread my Brother, for the Son of Man is
truly risen from among them that Sleep.

His residence was for the most part at Jerusalem, being the Bishop and Pastor
of it. To him we find St. Paul make his address, after his conversion. To him
St. Peter sent the news of his miraculous deliverance out of Prison. But he
was principally active in the Synod at Jerusalem, in the great controversy
about the Mosaic Rites.

He discharged his Office with all possible care and industry, omitting no part
of a diligent and faithful Guide of Souls; strengthening the Weak, informing
the Ignorant, reducing the Erroneaus, reproving the Obstinate; and by the
constancy of his Preaching, conquering the stubbornness of that refractory and
perverse Generation that he had to deal with; many of the Nobler and Better
Sort being brought over to a compliance with the Christian Faith, which
awakened the spite and malice of his enemies to conspire his ruin. Vexed they
were that St. Paul (by appealing to Caesar) had escaped their hands, and
therefore now they turn their revenge upon St. James, which they not being able
to affect under Festus's Government, they more effectually attempted under the
Procuratorship of Albinus his Successor; resolving to dispatch him before the
new Government could arrive: To this end a Council is hastily summoned, and the
Apostle with others Arraigned and Condemned as Violators of the Law; but that
the thing might be carried in a more platisible and popular way, they set the
Scrives and Pharisees at work to ensnare him; who coming to him, began with
flattering Insinuations to set upon him: They tell him, that they all had a
mighty Confidence in him, and that the whole Nation gave him the Testimony of a
Just Man; that therefore they desired he would Correct the Error, and false
Opinion, which the People had of JESUS, whom they looked upon as the Messiah,
and would take their Opportunity of their Universal Confluence to the paschal
Solemnity, to set them right in their notions about these things, and would to
that end go up with them to the top of the Temple, where he must be seen and
heard by all. Being advantageously placed upon a Pinnacle or Wing of the Temple,
they made this Address to him. Tell us, O Iustus, whom we have all the reason
in the world to believe, that seeing the People are thus generally led away
with the Doctrine of JESUS that was Crucified; tell us what is this Institution
of the Crucified JESUS? To which the Apostle answered with an audable voice,
Why do ye inquire concerning JESUS the Son of Man? He sits in Heaven on the
right Hand of the Majesty on high, and will come again in the Clouds of Heaven.
The People below, hearing it, glorified the Blessed Jesus. The Scribes and
Pharisees Perceiving now, that they had overshot themselves, and that instead
of reclaiming, they confirmed the People in their supposed Error, thought that
there was no way seft, but presently to dispatch him, that by his sad fate,
others might be warned not to believe him: Whereupon suddenly crying out, that
Justus himself was seduced, and become an Impostor; they threw him down from
the place where he stood, though bruised, he was not killed by the fall, but
recovered so much strength, as to get upon his knees, and pray to Heaven for
them; vexed that they had not done his work, they fell fresh upon the poor
remainders of his Life; and while he was yet at prayer, and One stepping in,
and entreating them to spare him; a Just and Religious man, and who was then
praying for them; they began to load him with a shower of stones, till one more
mercifully cruel than the rest, with a Fullers Club beat out his Brains: Thus
dyed this good man, in the Nintyeth year of his Age, and about Twenty four
years after Christ's Ascension; being taken away, to the great grief and regret
of all good men; yea, of all Sober and Just Persons, even among the Jews; he
was buried upon Mount Olivet in a Tomb which he had built for himself, and
therein he had buried Zacharias, and Old Simeon.

He was of exemplary and extraordinary Piety, educated under the strictest
Rules and Institutions of Religion, being (as is supposed) of the Ancient Order
of the Rechabites. Prayer was his constant business and delight; he seemed to
live upon it, and to trade in nothing but the frequent returns of Converse with
Heaven: and was therefore wont to retire alone to the Temple to pray, which he
always performed kneeling, and with the greatest Reverence, till by his
Devotion his knees were become as hard and brawny as a Camels. Nor was his
Charity toward Man, less than his Piety toward God; he did good to all,
watched over men's Souls, and studied to advance their eternal interest: He was
of a meek and humble temper; honoring what was excellent in others, concealing
what was valuable in himself: His Temperance was admirable, he wholly abstained
from Flesh, nor drank neither Wine nor strong Drink: His holy and mortified
mind was content with the meanest accommodation; he went barefoot, and never
wore other than Linen Garments.

He wrote only one Epistle probably not long before his Martyrdom; he directed
it to the Jewish Converts, dispersed up and down those Eastern Countries, to
comfort them under Sufferings, and to confirm them against Error.

The Life of SIMON the Zealot.
S: SIMON



ST. Simon the Apostle was, as some think, one of the four Brothers of our
Savior, Sons of Joseph, by his former Marriage. In the Cata^^gue of the
Apostles, he is styled Si^on the Cananite: as also Simon ^^elotes, or the
Zealot, probably from ^^s warm active temper, and Zealous ^rwardness in some
particular way and profession of Religion, before his ^oming to our Savior.
But that ^^e may the better understand this we must know, that there was a
distinct sect among the Jews, called, the sect of the Zealors; they were
mighty assertors of the honor of the Law, and of the strictness and purity of
Religion; insomuch, that they took upon themselves to question notorious
Offenders, without staying for the ordinary Formalities of the Law; yea, when
the case required executing Capital vengeance upon them, till at length, their
Zeal degenerating unto all manner of licenciousness and extravagance, that they
not only became the pests of the Commonwealth at home, but opened a door for
the Romans to break in upon them, to their final and irrecoverable ruin. The^
were continually prompting the People to throw off the Roman Yoke and vindicate
themselves into their Native Liberty; and when they had turned all things into
hurry and confusion, themselves in the mean while fished in these troubled
Waters* Josephus gives a large account of them, and every where bewailes them
as the great Plague of the Nation: Nay, when Jerusalem was straightly besieged by
the Romans, they ceased not to create tumults, and factions within, and were
indeed the main cause of the Jews ill success in that fatal War. It is
probable, that all who went under the notion of this Sect, were not of this
wretched and ungovernable temper, but that some of them were of a more sober
and peaceable disposition; and as it is not to be doubted, but that our Simon
was of that sect in general; so there is reason to believe he was of the better
sort. However, this makes no more reflection upon his being called to the
Apostleship, than it did for St. Matthew, who was before a Publican, or St.
Paul's being a Pharisee, and so Zealously persecuting the Church of God.

Being invested in the Apostolical Office, no further mention appears of him in
the History of the Gospel, containing what the Apostles did, till their
dispersion up and down the World, he then applied himself to the execution of
his charge. He is said to have diverted his Journey toward Egypt, thence to
Cyrene and Africa, and throughout Martania, and all Lybia, Preaching the Gospel
to those remote and barbarous Countries: Nor could the coldness of the Climate
benumb his Zeal, or hinder him from Shiping himself over into the Western
Islands, yea even to Britain it self: Here he is said to have Preached and
wrought many Miracles, and after infinite troubles and difficulties which he
underwent, suffered Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, being Crucified by the
Infidels, and buried among them.

Others indeed affirm, that after h^ had Preached the Gospel in Egypt he went
into Mesopotamia, where h^ met with St. Jude the Apostle, and together with him
took his Journey in to Persia, where having gained a considerable harvest to
the Christian Faith they were both Crowned with Martyrdom: but this is granted
by al^ Learned Men to be fabulous, wanting all clear Foundation in Antiquity to
stand on.

The Life of St. JUDE.
S: JUDAS

THADEVS.



THere are three several names by which this Apostle is described in the
History of the Gospel, Jude, Thaddeus, and Lebbeus. It being usual in the Holy
Volumes for the same Person to have more Proper Names than one; as for the
first, it was a name common among the Jews, recommended to them, as being the
name of one of the great Patriarks of their Nation. This name he seems
afterward to have changed for Thaddeus, a word of the very same import and
signification, as some think from a particular dislike of the Name of Judal
among the Apostles, the bloody and Treasonable practices of Judas Iscariot,
having rendered that name very odious and detestable to them; wherefore to put a
difference, he often styles himself, Judas the Brother of James; for his name
Lebbeus it seems to have been derived from an Hebrew word, signifying a Lion,
and therein to have respect to old Jacobs Prophecy, That he should be as a
Lion, which probably might have a main stroke to fasten this name upon St.
Jude. From this Patriarchal Prophecy we are told, that one of the Schools of
Learned men among the Jews, took occasion to denominate themselves Labij, as
accounting themselves the Scholars and Descendants of this Lion like Son of
Jacob; and that St. Jude was of this Society, and because of his Eminency among
them retained the Title of Labius, or as it was corruptly pronounced Lebbeus.

For his descent and Parentage, he was of our Lords Kindred, the Son of Joseph,
and the Brother of James the Less. We find not when he was called to the
Discipleship, not meeting with him, till we find him enumerated among the
Catalogue of the Apostles, nor is any thing particularly recorded of him
afterward, more than one question that he propounded to our Savior: Who having
told them what great things he and his Father would do, and what particular
manifestations, after his Resurrection, he would make of himself to his
Disciples and followers; St. Jude (whose thoughts, as well as the rest, were
taken up with the expectation of a Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah,) not
knowing how that could consist with the Public Solemnity of that Glorious
State they looked for: asked them what was the reason, that he would manifest
himself to them, and not to the World. Our Lord replied, That the World were
not capable of those Divine Manifestations, as being a Stranger, and an Enemy
to what should fit them for Heaven; that they were only good Men, Persons of a
Divine temper of Mind, and Religious Observers of his Laws, and will, whom God
would honor with these familiar Converses.

Eusebius faith expressly, That soon after our Lords Ascension, St. Thomas
dispatched Thaddeus the Apostle to Abgarius Governor of Idessa, where he
healed diseases, wrought Miracles, expounded the Doctrine of Christianity, and
Converted Abgarus and his People to the Faith; for all which pains when he
offered him vast gifts and presents, he refused them with a noble scorn,
telling him, They had little reason to receive from others, what they had
relinquished themselves. Here he is said to have died peaceably, and to have
been most Honorably Buried. But by the general consent of the Latin Church, He
is said to have Traveled to Persia, where, after great success in his
Apostolical Ministry for many years, he was at last, for his free and open
reproving the superstitious rites and usages of the Magi, cruelly put to death.

That he was one of the Married Apostles, appears sufficiently from his
Grand-Sons mentioned by Fusebius, of whom one gives this account. Domitian the
Emperor, whose heinous Wickedness had awakened in him the quickest Iealousies,
and made him suspect every one that looked like a corrival in the Empire, had
heard that there were some of the Line of David, and Christ's Kindred that did
yet remain, Two Grandchildren of St. Jude, the Brother of Our Lord, were
brought before him, having confessed, that they were of the Family and race of
David, he asked them, what Possessions and Estates they had. They told him,
that they had but a very few Acres of Land; out of the Improvement thereof,
they both paid him Tribute, and maintained themselves with their own hard
Labor, as by the hardness and brawniness of their hands (which then they
showed him) did appear. He then enquired of them concerning Christ, and
concerning the State of his Kingdom, what kind of Empire it was, and when and
where it would commence. To which they replied, That his Kingdom was not of
this World, nor of the Seiginories and Dominions of it; but Heavenly and
Angelical, and would finally take place at the end of the World; when coming
with great Glory, he would Judge the quick and the dead, and reward every one
according to their deeds. At length looking upon the meanness and simplicity of
the men, as below his Iealousies and Fears, He dismissed them without using any
severities against them; who being now looked on, not only as Kinsmen, but as
Martyrs of Our Lord, were honored by all, and preferred to great places of
Authority, amongst the Christians, and lived till the time of Trajan.

St. Jude left only one Epistle of Catholic and Universal Concernment,
inscribed at large to all Christians; It was some time before it met with a
general reception in the Church, or was taken notice of. The Author indeed
styles not himself an Apostle, no more does St. James, St. John, nor sometimes
St. Paul himself, and why should he fair the worse, for calling himself The
Servant of Jesus Christ, when he might have added, not only an Apostle, but
Brother of our Lord?

Being satisfied in the Canonicalness of this Epistle, none but St. Jude could
be the Author of it, for who but he could be the Brother of St. James, a
Character by which he is described in the Evangelical story more than once. A
Modern Writer indeed will needs have it Written by a yunger Jude, the Fifteenth
Bishop of Jerusalem in the reign of Adrian. And finding that that passage (the
Brother of James,) stood full in his way; He concludes (but without any reason)
that it was added by some Transcriber. But this is too bold dealing with sacred
things, no wise to be allowed. The design of the Epistle is to preserve the
Christians from being infected by the Doctrine of the Gnostics, the Loose and
Debauched Principles vented by Simon Magus, and his followers, whose wretched
Doctrines and Practices, he briefly and elegantly represents, persuading
Christians heartily to avoid these pernicious Seducers as pests and Firebeands,
not to communicate with them in their sins, lest they perished with them in
that terrible vengeance that was ready to overtake them.

The Life of St. Matthias.
S: MATHIAS



PArticular Remarks concerning St. Matthias, are not to be expected from the
History of the Gospel, he not being an Apostle of the first election. He was
one of our Lords Disciples (and probably one of the Seventy) that had attended
upon him the whole time of his Public Ministry, and after his Death, was
Elected unto the Apostleship, upon this occasion: Judas Iscariot who had been
one of the Twelve immediately called by Christ to be one of his intimate
Disciples, equally empowered and commissioned with the rest to Preach and Work
Miracles, and yet all this while, was a Man of Vile and Corrupt designs,
branded with no meaner Character, than Thief and Murderer, prostituting
Religion, and the Honor of his place to Covetousness and evil Acts; This
Covetous temper betrayed him, as in the Issue to the most fatal end; so to the
most prodigious impiety that ever the Sun shone on, The betraying his innocent
Lord, into the Hands of his cruel Enemies; but afterward awakned with the
horror of the Fact, his Conscience began to rouse and follow so close, that he
was not able to bear up, under the furious revenges of his own mind never
rested till he had dispatched himself by a violent death: A vacancy being thus
made in the College of Aposties, the first thing they did after their return
from Mount Olivet, (where our Lord took his leave of them to go to St. John's
House in Mount Zion) was to fill up the number with a fit proper Person; two
were propounded in order to the choice, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias;
the way of Election was by Lots, a way frequently used amongst Jews and
Gentiles, in doubtful and difficult cases: The Lots being put in, the now
Matthias his Name was drawn out, and thereby installed in the Apostolic Office
and Dignity.

Not long after, the promised powers of the Holy Ghost were conferred upon the
Apostles, to fit them for that great and difficult Employment, upon which they
were sent, and among the rest, St. Matthias betook himself to his Charge and
Province. The first Fruits of his Ministry he spent in Judea, where having
reaped a considerable harvest, he betook himself to other Provinces. One tells
us, that he Preached the Gospel in Macedonia, where the Gentiles, to make an
experiment of his Faith and Integrity, gave him a poisonous and intoxicating
Potion, which he cheerfully drank off in the Name of Christ, without the least
prejudice to himself; and that then the same Potion had deprived an hundred and
fifty of these sight, he laying his hands upon them, restored them to their
sight again.

The Greeks, with more probability, report him to have traveled Eastward. He
came, says one, to the first; says another, to the second, Ethiopia. The
place whether he came, was very Wild and Barbatous, and his usage was
accordingly: For here meeting with a People of a fierce and untractible temper,
he was treated by them with great rudeness and inhumanity; from whom, after all
his Labors and Sufferings, and a numerous Conversion of Men to Christianity;
he obtained at last the Crown of Martyrdom, in the sixty first year of our
Lord; or as others, the sixty fourth.

Little certainty can be retrieved concerning the manner of his death: (...)
Writer of great note, tells us, That he died at a place called Sebastople, and
that he was buried near the Temple of the Sun. Another reports him to have been
seized by the Jews, and as a Blasphemer, to have been first stoned, and then
beheaded. But the Greeks seconded herein by many antiquaries, tells us, That he
was Crucified, and that as Judas was hanged upon a Tree, so Matthias suffered
upon a Cross; his body is said to have been kept a long time at Jerusalem,
thence thought, by Helene the Mother of the great Constantine, to have been
Translated to Rome, where some parts of it are showed with great Veneration
this day; though others, with as great eagerness contend, that his Relics were
brought to, and are still preserved at Triers in Germany.

His memory is celebrated in the Greek Churches, August the Ninth; which
appears not only from their Calendars, but from a Novel Constitution of
Comnenus, appointing what holy days should be kept in the Church. But the
Western Churches kept the twenty-fourth of February sacred to his memory, among
many other Apocriphal Writings attributed to the Apostles, where was a Gospel
Published under St. Matthias his Name, mentioned by Eusebius, and condemned
with the rest, by Golasius Bishop of Rome: as it had been rejected by others
before him: under his name also there were extant traditions cited by Clemens
of Alexandria, from whence, no question it was, that the Nicolaitans borrowed
that saying of his, which they abused to so vile and beastly purposes, as under
the pretended Patronage of his Name and Doctrine, the Marcionites and
Valentinians defended some of their most absurd and impious Opinions.

The Life of St MARK the Evangelist,
S: MARK



THough this great Evangelist carries something of Roman in his Name, without
all question born of Jewish Parents, Originally descended of the Tribe of Levi,
and the Priestly Line, and (if some of the Ancients mistake not) Sisters Son to
Peter; though others, without any shadow of reason, have confounded him with
John Surnamed Mark, the Son of Mary, and Mark's Sisters Son to Barnabas. The
particular reason of his changing his Name from Jewish to Roman, is not clear
from History; yet it is most probable, that he assumed the Roman Name Mark,
upon some great change or accident of his Life; or (which was not unusual among
the Jews, then going to the European Provinces of the Roman Empire) taken up
at his going for Italy and Rome.

By the Ancients, he is generally thought to have been one of the Seventy
Disciples; and some of them positively affirm, that he was one of them, who
taking exceptions at our Saviors discourse of Eating his Flesh, and Drinking
his Blood, went back, and walked no more with him, but was seasonably reduced
and reclaimed by Peter; but others as confidently, and with as great Reason
affirm, That he was no Hearer, nor Follower of Christ; and therefore could be
none of them, who, upon that occasion, forsook him. He was Converted by some of
the Apostles, and probably by St. Peter, who calls him his Son; from which some
conclude, That Peter was his undertaker at his Baptism. He was indeed his
constant Attendant and Follower all along in his Travels, supplying the place
of an Amanuensis and Interpreter. For though the Apostles were divinely
Inspired; and among other miraculous Powers, had the gift of Languages
conferred upon them; yet were the Interpretation of Tongues a Gift more
peculiar to some than others; this might probably be St. Mark's Talent, in
expounding St. Peter's Discourses in word or writing, to those who understood
not the Language wherein they were delivered. He accompanied him in his
Apostolical progress, Preached the Gospel in Italy, and at Rome, where, at the
request of the Christians in those parts, he Composed his Gospel. By St. Peter
he was sent to Egypt, to plant Christianity in that Country. He fixed his main
Residence at Alexandria, and the places thereabouts, for a considerable time,
where so great (as one of the Ancients writes) was the Success of his Ministry,
that he Converted vast Multitudes, both of Men and Women, of all ranks and
degrees, not only to the embracing the Christian Faith, but to a more than
ordinary strict Profession of it: Insomuch, that Philo the Jew wrote a Book,
which treats only of their particular. Rites, and way of Life; for which
reasons, one of the Fathers reckons him among the Writers of the Church. Philo
did indeed write a Book, which is extant to this day, wherein he Treats of a
sort of People, who (in many parts of the World, but especially in a pleasant
place Situated upon the Mardolick Lake in Egypt, had formed themselves into
Religious Societies, and gives a large Account of their Rites and Customs,
their strict phylosophical and contemplative Course of Life: He further tells
us, That when they did first enter upon this course of Life, they renounced all
secular Interests and Employments, and leaving their Estates to their Friends,
retired into Groves and Gardens, and places devoted to Retirement and
Contemplation; that they had their Houses or Colleges, not contigious, that so
being free from noise and tumults, and such like encumbrances, they might the
better minister to the Design of a contemplative Life; nor yet removed at too
great a distance, that they might maintain mutual Society, and be conveniently
capable of helping and assisting one another, as their need required: in the
middle of these Houses, there was an Oratory, wherein they discharged the more
secret and solenm parts of their Religion, divided in the middle, by a
partition Wall, three or four Cubits high; the one Appartment being for the
Men, the other for the Women. Here they publicly met every Seventh Day, where
being set according to their Seniority, and composing themselves with great
Decency and Reverence, the most aged Person among them, and the best skilled in
the Precepts and Principles of their Institution, came forth into the midst,
gravely and soverly Discoursing of what might make the deepest Impression upon
their Minds; the rest attending with a profound Silence; and only testifying
their Assent with the motion of their Eyes or Head: They were also very
careless of their Bodies, being wholly taken up with Religious Contemplations;
they spent the Day entirely in Divine Meditations, and other exercises of
Devotion; they were also exceeding temperate, neither eating nor drinking till
Night. Any that would be further Satisfied about this People, let them peruse a
book written by Philo the Jew, concerning them, which is extant to this Day.

Some of the Ancients have peremptorily affirmed, That those excellent Persons
were indeed Christians, converted and brought under these admirable Rules of a
strict Conversation, by the Life and Doctrine of St. Mark, at his coming
hither; but yet Philo's Account of them, being seriously weighed, it will be
found, he meant it of Jews, and not Christians; and besides, it seems not
probable, that he being a Jewish Historian, would give such a great Character,
and Commendation to Christians, who were so very hateful to the Jews over all
the World; yea, further this Author speaks of this Institution, to have been
some considerable standing, and therefore cannot take them for Christians;
Christianity being at that time even in the Bud, by means of St. Mark's
ministry.

These, who took them for Christians, might easily be led into this mistake, by
observing the Conformity that was between the Primitive Christians, who entered
upon a more strict and severe course of Life: and these Therapeutae, an
ordinary Fancy being able to draw a fair Parallel between them; and so it was,
but removing them some Ages higher, and imagining them to have been Converted
and Founded by St. Mark* and the Work was done. Indeed it is not to be doubted,
but that Persons educated under these excellent Rules and Methods of Life, were
more than ordinarily prepared for the reception of Christianity, between which,
and their Principles, and Rules of Life, there was so great an Affinity and
Agreement, which must needs render our Evangelists Success great in those
parts, and open the way for men to come flocking over to the Faith. St. Mark
did not confine* his Ministry to Alexandria, and the Oriential parts of Egypt
only, but removed Westward to the parts of Libia, going through the Countries
of Marmarica and Pentapelis, and others thereabouts, where, though the people
were both Barbarous in their Manners, and Idolatrous in their Worship, yet by
his Preaching and Miracles, he made way for the entertainment of the Gospel,
and left them not till he had not only gained them to, hut also confirmed them
in the Profession of it. Returning to Alexandria, he Preached freely, and
ordered, and disposed the Affairs of the Church, and wisely provided for
Succession by Constituting Governors and Pastors of it: but the reffless
Enemies of the Souls of men, would not sufter him long to live in quiet.

All was at the time of Easter, at the time the great Solemnities of Serapis,
happened to be Celebrated; When the Minds of the people being Passionately
Excited to a Vindication of the honor of their Idol, broke in upon St. Mark
when engaged in the Solemn Celebration of divine Worship, and binding his feet
with Cords, dragged him through the streets, and most craggy and stony places,
to the Boucclus, a Precipice near the Sea; and for that night thrust him into
Prison, where his Soul was by a Divine Vision, erected and encouraged under the
Ruins of his shattered Body. Early the next morning, these bloody hounds began
to Act their fatal tragedy; again, dragging him about in the same manner, till
his Flesh being raked off, and his Blood run out in great Streams, all the way
wherever they drew him; his Spirits failed him, and he Expired. But their
Malice ended not with his days; For a Father of very much Respect, Adds, That
when he was Dead, they burnt his Body into Ashes; which Ashes the Christians
carefully gathered together, and decently Buried, near the place where he was
wont to Preach. Afterward it was with great Splendour removed from Alexandria
to Venice, where it now lies Interred, and is Religiously Honored by the
Inhabitants. St. Mark being Adopted to be the Tutelar Saint of that State,
where he has one of the stateliest, and most Magnificent Churches Erected in
honor of his Memory, that the Universal World can boast of at this day.

He suffered Martyrdom upon the five and twentieth of April, though the certain
year of his Sufferings is not precisely agreed upon by the Ancients. Some say,
it was in the last year of the Emperor Claudius; others, place it in the eighth
year of Nero. But another seems extravagantly wide, where with great
confidence Affirms, That he suffered in the time of Trajan.

Among all these various conjectures, that which seems most probable, and
carries most appearance of reason, with it, is, That this Holy Man suffered
about the end of Neroes Reign: For supposing him to have come to Rome with St.
Peter, about the fifth or sixth Year of Nero; he might thence be dispatched to
Alexandria, and spend the residue of his Life, and of that Emperors Reign, in
Planting Christianity in those parts of the World. For it is beyond all debate,
that Irineus affirms St. Mark, to have outlived both St. Peter and St. Paul,
and after their decease to have composed his Gospel, out of those things which
he formerly had heard St. Peter Preach; nay, in many other passages of this
Father's Writings, he supposed (whose Supposition certainly was not founded
upon mere fancy and conjecture) that St. Mark for some considerable time
survived the Martyrdom of those two great Apostles. As to the Person of this
great Evangelist, it may not be impertinent to trouble the Reader with a few
words concerning it, taken from the same Authorities, from which we have
borrowed the res^ of his Life and Actions. As to his Person, he was of a middle
size and Stature, of a comely and well proportioned body, and a wholesome
constitution; his Nose long, his eyebrows turning back; his Eyes full of
gracefulness and amiableness; his Head, by reason of this great Age, very bald,
his Beard long and Gray, his gate quick: in a word, he was endued with all the
desirable qualities of a lovely Person.

His Gospel was, (as we obserded above) written at the request of the Converts
at Rome, who, not content to have heard Peter Preach, pressed St. Mark* his
Fellow Laborer, to commit to Writing an account of these things which he
Preached to them, and that by way of History; which he performed with exceeding
great faithfulness and brevity, all which St. Peter perused, and ratified with
his Apostolical Authority, commanding it to be owned and preserved with the
rest of the Canonical Books of the Scripture. And though some of the Fathers
seemed inclinable to think it was Written after St. Peter's Death; yet all that
can be inferred from thence (taking it for truth) will be, that in it self, is
a matter of no great moment and importance, that the Ancients were not fully
agreed upon the exact time, when every particular Book of the Gospel were
Published to the World. Some have been at great pains to prove the Gospel, not
to have been St. Marks, but St. Peter's; sometimes running to the Fathers, and
finding no shelter there, they recur to Polemical debates of latter times,
wherein they have showed more wit and sharpness, than ingenuity and honesty. It
is true, it was frequently styled St. Peter's Gospel, not so much because
dictated by him to St. Mark, as because he principally composed it of that
account, which St. Peter usually delivered in his discourses to the People;
which probably is the reason, why a Learned Man does observe, that he in his
style and manner of expression, delights to imitate St. Peter representing very
much in a few words: This observation, though bold in some things, yet not in
all; for though St. Matthew is larger in giving the account of our Saviors
Life, than he; yet in many places, he reduces the story into a narrower compass
than St. Mark.

The Last Chapter of his Gospel (as St. Jerome informs us) at least a part of
it was wanting in all the ancient Greek Copies, being rejected, upon the
account of a pretended disagreement with the other Gospels, though as this
Father himself, there shows, they are very fairly consistent one with another;
nor is there any disagreement in any passage of them. His great impartiality in
his Relation does most clearly appear from hence, that he is so far from
concealing or alleviating the shameful lapse, and denial of Peter his dear
Tutor and Master, to whom he was so deeply engaged in the bonds of Love; that
he sets it down with some particular weighty Circumstances, and Aggravations;
which the other Evangelists thought sit (for reasons known to themselves)
though they could not but know it) to take no notice of it. Some dispute has
been made (and kept on foot in the Church) in what Language this Gospel was
Written; some affirm it to have been Written in the Latin Tongue Originally:
that which seems to give most Countenance to this, is a Note which we find at
the end of the Syriack Version of this Gospel; where it is said, That St. Mark
Preached and Published his Holy Gospel at Rome, in the Roman or Latin Tongue.
An Evidence that would undoubtly carry the force of a Demonstration with all
reasonable men, were they assured, that this Note is of equal Value and
Authority with that ancient Version, generally supposed to come very few
Centuries short of the Apostolic Age. Besides, these Jews, which heard St.
Mark preach, being but strangers at Rome, could understand but very little
Latin; but upon the other hand, the Roman Converts could not but understand
Greek, it being at that time the most fashionable and communicative Language in
the World; nor can any good Reason be assigned, why it should be more
inconvenient for St. Mark, to write his Gospel in Greek for the use of the
Romans, than that St. Paul should, in that very Language, write his Epistle to
the Church.

The Original Greek Copy written, with St. Mark's own hand, is said to be
extant at Venice at this Day. Written, as some Inform us, by him at Aquileja,
and thence, after many Hundreds of Years, Translated to Venice, where it is
still preserved to this very day, an ancient Monument, and worth keeping. The
Letters of it are so worn out with length of time, that such, as to satisfy
their Curiosity, obtain a sight of it are not capable to read a Sentence of it
to purpose, though some words appear here and there in some parts of it; in
others, nothing but a few Letters and Characters: so that this Generation is
not a complete judge of its Authentickness; not being capable, either to
approve or disapprove it; but it being of no great weight, whether it be the
Original or not, it is not worth contending for.

The Life of St. LUKE the Evangelist,
S: LUKE



SAint Luke was born at Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, a City celebrated for
its extraordinary blessings and eminencies; the pleasantness of its Situation,
the fertility of its Soil, the Riches of its Traffic, the wisdom of its
Senare, the learning of its Professors, the civility and politeness of its
Inhabitants, by the pens of some of the most eloquent of their time: and yet
above all these, renowned for this one peculiar honor, That here it was, that
the Disciples were first called Christians. It was an University replenished
with Schools of learning; wherein were professors of all Arts and Sciences, so
that this Evangelist being born in the very lap of the Muses, he could not miss
of a liberal and ingenious Education; his natural parts meeting with the
advantages of great improvement. Nay, we are told by some, that he studied not
only at Antioch, but at most Schools both of Greece and Egypt, whereby he
became learned in all parts of Learning and humane Sciences. Being thus
furnished out with Skill, in all the preparatory institutions of Philosophy; he
more particularly applied himself to the study of Physic, for which the
Grecian Academies were most famous. Hence some conclude him to have been of
high birth and noble blood but their mistake is founded upon their not
considering, that this noble act was in these times professed generally by such
as were of no higher value then that of Servants: upon which account, a learned
man conceives that St. Luke, though a Syrian by birth, to have been a servant
at Rome, where he sometimes practiced Physic; and being sent from thence,
returned to his own Country: there probably he continued his Profession all the
days of his life; it being fairly consistent with, and in many cases
subservient to the work of the Ministry, and the care of souls. Besides, his
knowledge in Physic, he is said to have been expert in the art of Painting;
and there are no less than three or four pieces of Painting still in being,
said to have been of his drawing. There is also an ancient Inscription to be
seen in the Via Lactea at Rome, in an old Vault near the Church of St. Mary,
supposed to have been the place where St. Paul dwelt; wherein mention is made
of the Picture of the Blessed Virgin, Being one of the Seven Painted by St.
Luke.

He was a Jewish Proselite; Antioch abounding with Men of that Nation, who had
their Synagogues and Schools of Education; so that we need not, as some do,
send him to Jerusalem to be instructed in the Law. As for the Opinon of some
great Men, That he was one of them who had shamefully forsaken his Lord and
Master, for the unwelcome discourse he made to the People, and was reclaimed
again by St. Paul, being also by them supposed to have been one of the seventy
Disciples; it seems to be no other than a mere fiction; upon no better ground
is it said, That he was one of the Two Disciples who were going to Emaus, to
whom the Lord appeared in their way. For besides other Arguments which might be
brought to evince the contrary to both, he himself confesses plainly, That he
was not from the Beginning an eye Witness and Minister of the Word. It is
therefore most probable, that he was converted by St. Paul during his abode at
Antioch, when as the Apostles were of Catchers of Fish, become Fishers of Men;
so he of a Physician for the Body, became a Physician for the Soul.

Some of the Ancients will have this to have been done at Thebes, the Chief
City of Baeotia about forty Miles distance from Athens; but this seems to have
a bad Foundation, for it does not appear from any credible Author of that time,
that ever St. Paul was at Thebes.

He became ever after his inseparable Companion, and Fellow Laborer in the
Work of the Ministry, especially after his going into Macedonia; from which
time, in Recording the History of St. Paul's Travels, he always (as occasion
serves) speaks of himself in his own Person. He atteneded St. Paul in all his
dangers, was with him at his several Arraignments at Jerusalem, accompanied him
in his most dangerous and desperate Voyage to Rome, where he most constantly
attended upon him, to serve his necessaries, and supply those Ministerial
Offices, which the Apostles confinement, would not suffer him to undergo,
especially in carrying messages to those Churches, wherein he had planted
Christianity: This infinitely indeared him to St. Paul, who owned him for his
Fellow Laborer, called him the Beloved Physician, and the Brother, whose
praise is in the Gospel, throughout all the Churches, which the Ancients,
especially St. Ignatius apply to our Evangelist.

It is more than probable, that he did not leave St. Paul, until that he had
finished his Course, and Crowned all his sufferings with Martyrdom; though some
aver, that he left St. Paul at Rome, and returned back into the East, and
Traveled into Egypt, and the parts of Lybia; where he according to his Custom
Preached the Gospel, wrought Miracles, Converted Multitudes, Constituted
Ministers and Pastors in the Church; yea, that he himself took upon him the
Episcopal charge of the City of Thebais. Epiphanius gives us this account, That
he Preached the Gospel first in Dalmatia and Galatia, (by which Latter, he
means Gaul or France, where, in the Judgment of others, he is very far
mistaken) then in Italy and Macedonia, where he spared no pains, declined not
the greatest and most threatening dangers that he might faithfully, and with
sincerity of heart, discharge that great and important trust, which was
committed to him.

The Ancients are not very well agreed, either about the time, or manner of his
Death and Martyrdom; some of them assuring him to have died in Egypt; others
say, with as great confidence, that he dyed in Greece. The Roman Martyrologie
makes Bythinia the place of his Martyrdom. Dorotheus is at a great deal of
pains to prove, That all the former are in a mistake, and that St. Luke dyed at
neither of the forenamed places, but that he suffered, and paid his vows at
Ephesus. They also disagree as much as to the manner of his death, as they do
as to the place. Some make him die a natural; others, a violent death. Indeed,
neither Eusebius, nor St. Jerome takes any notice of it, whether because they
wanted a certain or true account of it, or for some other reason best known to
themselves, let the Reader determine. Yet Nazianzen, Paulinus Bishop of Nola,
with several others, expressly assert, That he was Honored with a Crown of
Martyrdom; of which Nicephorus gives this particular Account: That coming to
Greece, he Successfully Preached and Baptized many Converts into the Christian
Faith, that the number of Believers did daily increase, and every thing,
wherein his Ministry was concerned, did Successfully prosper; until, at length,
the Lord thinking it time to call home his Servant, with his Commission (having
no more Work for him among the Infidels) A party of Villains made Head against
him, and laid hold on him; where, after they had Glutted their greedy and
hellish Appetites with his Torture, they dragged him to Execution; but when
they came to the place where they intended to Perpetrate the rest of their
Villainy, they could not find a Cross to fix him upon; whereupon being resolved,
by any means, to dispatch him, they carried him a little further, where they
lighted upon an Olive Tree, which they thought meet for their purpose; upon
which they Hanged him the Eightyeth, say some; but others, the Eighty Fourth
Year of his Age.

Kirstenius, from an Ancient Arabic Writer, labors to prove, that he suffered
Martyrdom at Rome; which he thinks might probably be, after St. Paul's first
Imprisonment there; when St. Luke being left behind, as his Deputy, to supply
his place in the Work of the Ministry, was shortly after put to Death, which he
thinks might be the reason why he did not further Prosecute the History of the
Acts of the Apostles; which he would undoubtedly have done, had he Lived any
considerable time after St. Paul's departure.

His Body afterward, by the special command of Constantine; or as others say,
of his Son Constantius, was with great Solemnity removed from Rome to
Constantinople, and was Buried in that great and famous Church, built and
dedicated to the Memory of the Apostles.

He Wrote two Books for the use and benefit of the Church; his Gospel, and the
History of the Acts of the Apostles; both which he Dedicated to Theophilus. Now
it is debated among the Ancients, what this Theophilus is, some conclude it to
have been a feigned Name, made use of by St. Luke in this place, denoting no
more than a Lover of God; a Title common to every Christian: But others, with
more appearance of Reason, conclude it the proper Name of a particular Person;
and that which satisfies them abundantly in their Judgment, is, That the Title
and Style of Most Excellent, is bestowed upon him; which was, in those times,
the particular Title, and proper Form of Address to Princes, and great Men:
Yea, some of the Primitive Fathers, do expressly term him a Man of Consular
Dignity, and probably a Prince; and others are yet more particular in their
Account of him, saying, That he was a Nobleman of Antioch, who was Converted
by Peter; and who, upon his Conversion, gave his House to the Church, for the
place of their public and solemn Meeting.

But it may as probably be supposed, that this Theophilus might have been some
Magistrate, or a Chief Man in Authority, whom St. Luke had brought in to the
Faith, and Baptized; and to whom he now dedicated these Books, not only as a
Testimony of honorable Respect, but also as a means of giving him further
Light into the certainty and assurance of these things, wherein he had been
instructed by him.

As for his Gospel, St. Jerome, and some others, suppose it to have been
Written in Arabia, during his Travels with St. Paul in those Parts, whose help
he is generally said to have made use of, in Composing of it; and that this the
Apostle primarily intends, when he so often speaks of his Gospel; but whatever
Assistance the Apostle might contribute to the Work, it is clear, that the
Evangelist himself tells us expressly, That he derived his Intelligence in those
matters, from those who had, from the Beginning, been Eyewitnesses and
Ministers of the Word: Nor does it in the least detract from the Authority of
his Relation, that he himself was not present at the doing of them; for if we
consider who they were, from whom he derived his Intelligence of those things,
it may give abundant Satisfaction, he had a Stock, both of Credit and
Intelligence; to proceed upon the Authentickness and Sufficiency of which, is
beyond Expectation: for he delivered nothing in his whole History, but what he
had immediately recovered from Persons present at, and particularly concerned
in the things which he has left upon Record.

The occasion of his Writing his Gospel, is conceived to have been partly, to
prevent those false and scandalous Rumors and Reports, which, even at that
time, began to be obtruded upon the World; and partly to supply what was
wanting in those two Evangelists, that Wrote before him; which Supplement, is
particularly noted throughout the whole History by some of the Primitive
Fathers.

The subject Matter of the whole History is, an Account of what relates to
Christ's Priestly Office; and though, when he Records other passages in the
Evangelical Story, he is very particular in his Relation; yet we may easily
observe, that it is always with a peculiar Respect to Christ's Preist-hood:
upon which account the Ancients, in accommodating the four symbolical
Representments in the Prophets Vision, to the four Evangelists, assigned the
Ox or Calf to St. Luke.

His History of the Apostolic Acts, was undoubtedly written at Rome, at the
end of St. Paul's two Years Imprisonment there, with which he concludes his
Story: it contains the Actions, and sometimes the Sufferings of some of the
greatest Apostles, but more particularly of St. Paul; for besides that his
activity in the cause of Christ, and the Gospel, made him have a deeper share,
both in doing and suffering; St. Luke was his constant Attendant, an
Eyewitness of all the most famous transactions of his Life, after his
Conversion; yea, was privy to his most secret Concerns; and therefore was
capable of giving a more accurat and satisfying Account and Relation of them,
seeing no Evidence or Testimony in matters of Fact, is so convictive and
rationally pungent, than his, who Reports nothing but what he has heard and
seen.

Among other things, he gives a particular and exact account of those great and
wonderful Miracles, which the Apostles did Work, for the Confirmation of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which they daily Preached. And this (as one of the
Fathers enformeth us) was the reason, why, in the primitive Times, the Book of
the Acts, though containing those Actions of the Apostles, which were done
after Pentecost, were yet usually read in the Church, before it, in the space
between that and Easter; when, as at all other times, those parts of the Gospel
were Read, which were proper for the Season: It was (says he) because the
Apostles Miracles were the grand Confirmation of the Truth of Christ's
Resurrection, and those Miracles were Recorded in that Book; it was therefore
thought most proper, to be Read next to the Feast of the Resurrection.

In both these Books, his way of Writing is exact and accurat, his Style polite
and elegant, sublime and lofty; and yet clear and perspituous, flowing with an
easy and natural Grace and Sweetness, admirably accommodated to an Historical
Design; all along expressing himself in a Vein of purer Greek, than is to be
found in the other Writers of the Holy Story: Indeed, being Born and Educated
at Antioch (then which no place more famous for Oratory and Eloquence) he could
not but carry away a great share of the Native Genius of that place, though his
Style is sometimes allayed with a mixture of the Syriak and Hebrew Dialect. It
was observed of old (as St. Jerome tells us) that his Skill was greater in
Greek, than in Hebrew; that therefore he always makes use of the Septuagint
Translation, and refuses sometimes to render words, when the Propriety of the
Greek Tongue will not bear it.

To Conclude, As an Historian, he was Faithful in his Relations, Elegant in his
Writings; As a Minister, careful and diligent for the good of Souls; As a
Christian, devout and pious: And who Crowned all the rest, with the laying down
his Life for the Testimony of that Gospel, which he had both Preached and
Published to the World.

FINIS.

