COMPULSION OF Conscience CONDEMNED. WHEREIN, Is plainly Demonstrated how
Inconsistent it is with Scripture, the Fundamental Laws of England, and Common
Equity, etc.

Matthew. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye would, that Men should do to you, do ye even so to
them: For this is the Law and the Prophets.

Quid Tibi non vis, alteri ne Feceris.

By Tho. De-Laune, Gent.

LONDON, Printed, for John How next Door to the Blew-Bore without Bishopsgate,
and Tho. Knowles at the Corner of Great and Little Tower-Street. 1683,

Compulsion of Conscience Condemned, etc.
THere are a sort of Fierce and ill Natured Pasquillers, that keep a Bawling at
all works of this Nature, though the Design be never so Innocent; The Dread of
those, shall not Terrify me from presenting these few Sheets to the Public,
Premising the true State of the Case by me asserted, viz. That the Mind and
Conscience of Man, with respect to Divine Truths, ought not to be Compelled by
outward Violence, and therefore that it is unreasonable and unseasonable to
Prosecute so many of his Majesty's Protestant-Subjects, merely for their
Nonconformity, to Jayls, Fines, Banishment, and to the Spoiling and taking away
their Goods, etc. the Demonstration of which shall be clearly and briefly
offered with all Humillity. It is no small Addition to the Grief of the
Afflicted, that when they propose their Humble Complaints, and produce their
modest reasons against these kind of Severities, they are presently assaulted
with a new kind of Persecution, by a parcel of cruel and unmerciful
Pamphleters, who make it no less then an Arraignment of the State, and a
Murmuring against the Government: In Return to which uncharitable Calumny I
offer a few considerations.

1. It Is an easy thing for those Masters of the Faculty to Bugbear the
Government with aggravated Hyperboles, and overstretch'd Paraphrases; It Is the
very Nature of misery to complain, and I never knew that the Person complained
to (if of a Noble and Heroic mind,) Interpreted the Petitioners Request at
this Rate. The Poor Beggars crying for Relief, is no Arraignment of the Donors
Charity. The Subjects Complaint of Grievance is no Impeachment of his Princes
Justice. Our most Importunate Prayers to Almighty God, are no Arraignment of
Infinite Meroy; no more are the Dissenters applications to a Prince of such
Clemency as his Majesty is, justly to be so represented, neither does he in his
Royal Judgment so esteem it.

2. It is Universally known that our Gracious King (whom God long Preserve) is
a Prince of such Natural Clemency, and of so merciful a disposition, that he is
much more apt to Pardon the Delinquent, then oppress the Innocent, and
therefore his Protestant Subjects are very well satisfied in his Royal
Expressions in a Proclamation Dated April 8. 1681, viz. We will both in and out
of Parliament use our utmost endeavor to extirpate Popery, and to redress all
the Grievances of our Good Subjects, and in all things Govern according to the
Laws of the Kingdom. The Pious Temper of our most Illustrious Sovereign is
Remarkable, in a Speech to both Houses, Monday Feb. 10. 1667. where he says,
One thing more I hold my self obliged to recommend unto you at this present;
which is, that you would seriously think of some Course to beget a better Union
and Composure in the minds of my Protestant Subjects in matters of Religion,
whereby they may be Induced, not only to submit quietly to the Government, but
also cheerfully give their Assistance to the support of it.

This evidently demonstrates that his Majesty considers that Christianity is
full of Mercy, and that Christ the Glorious Author of it, is a Reconciler and
Mediator, and therefore would have his Subjects disputed, or Preached into
Church, not Worried, Jayl'd, Plundered, and Church cursed into Conformity.

I cannot leave this Royal-Text, till I have noted, that whereas his Majesty
expresses the ends of this Composure and Union, viz. 1. A quiet Submission to
the Government, and 2. a cheerful assistance to support it; No Subjects of
equal Quality have outdone the Dissenters in either of these. For,

1. As to matter of Fact, no Treasons, Rebellions, or Insurrections, (no not a
Shadow of any such things) can be justly chargeable upon them, since his
Majesty's Happy Restoration. All the Spys and Eagle-Ey'd Observators that have
been Employed to watch them, cannot produce so much as a probable Circumstance
of any Conspiracy amongst them against the Government, and to be sure, had
there been any such thing, the Nation e're this would have Ring'd of it. Some
few halfpenny Scriblers rant at 'um, and in Spite of the Act of Oblivion,
Revive what the Supreme Authority commands to be forgotten; But of that and the
Single Freak of Venner, more hereafter.

2. As to the Probability of the thing, viz. That any such Conspiracy should be
Contrived by Dissenting-Protestants, the Persons that so think, must suppose
them mere. Fools and Madmen: For as things stand, they must first forfeit
their Reason, before they can abandon their Allegiance. They are not so silly,
whatsoever others think of them, but that they very well understand they hold
their Lives, as well as their Religion by no other Tenure then his Majesty's
Life. And therefore it is their great concern, as they tender all that is dear
and near to them, to preserve his Person and Government, and Defend both with
their Lives and Fortunes. And I am confident that the whole Party of the
Dissenters, (though in some little things differing from each other) would
Universally and Uniformly agree, to Sacrafice their All in his Majesty's
Service, against any power whatsoever that should oppose him.

The Universal experience of unbiased Mankind can Witness the Truth of what is
here said. Yet I know very well, what objections have been and will be made
from that dismal Topic of the Nations late Unhappy Convulsions. But that must
be refered to a Distinct head.

In the second place, It is certain that (these Protestant-Subjects his Majesty
intends, namely) the Dissenters have cheerfully given their Assistance to the
support of the Government. It is well known that they are an Industrious
Trading People, that willingly pay whatsoever Taxes the Law requires. And it is
Remarkable, that no People ever expressed a greater Zeal to oppose the various
attaques of a Foreign (Anti-Spiritual Power) then these Dissenters: And could
I know any one of them that would shrink from his Princes Service, when his
Royal Person and Government are menaced, I would esteem him not only a Fool,
but a Traitor to boot.

To Evidence (further) the Lenity of his Majesty, I shall quote a Memorable
passage in his Declaration from Breda, Dated April 14. 1660. We do declare a
Liberty to Tender Consciences; and that no man shall be disquieted or called in
question for differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; And that we shall be ready to Consent to such
an Act of Parliament, as upon mature Deliberation shall be offered to us for
the full Granting that Indulgence.

What can be more Pious and Consonant to the Rules of the Gospel, then what
this Great Monarch here declares? No Person is excepted from his
Royal-Indulgence, but such as disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. Now if there be
any such among the Dissenters, let them be severely Punished: But if there be
none, I cannot but wonder at the Cruelty and undutifulness of such as Prosecute
their Peaceable and Innocent Fellow Subjects against the mind of their
Sovereign.

His Majesty has not only declared this (so Favorable) Indulgence, but also by
his own experience declares the unfruitfulness of Compulsion, March 15th. 1671.
In these words, Our Care and endeavors for the Preservation of the Rights and
Interests of the Church, have been sufficiently Manifested to the World, by the
whole Course of our Government, since our Happy Restoration, and by the many
frequent ways of Coercion that we have used for the reducing all erring or
Dissenting Persons, and for Composing the unhappy Differences in matters of
Religion which we found among our Subjects upon our Return: But it being
Evident by the sad Experience of Twelve years, that there is very little Fruit
of all those Forceable Courses, we think our Self obliged to make use of that
Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical matters, which is not only Inherent in us, but
has been declared and Recognized to be so by several Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, etc.

That August part of the Legislative power, the House of Commons, Resolved
Janu. 10. 1680, That it is the opinion of this House, that the Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal-Laws, is at this time Grievous to the
Subject, a Weakening the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Besides this, there was a Bill past both Houses at the last Parliament in
Westminster, for the Repeal of the 35 of Elizabeth, but through some unhappy
neglect it was not presented to his Majesty, who doubtless would have past it.
Nevertheless by that and what is mentioned before, we may clearly infer that the
King and Parliament, judge that Compulsion of Conscience (of Peaceable
Protestant Dissenters) is both unseasonable and unprofitable. And if I have the
whole Legislative Authority on my side, viz. King, Lords, and Commons, (that is
all England) I may modestly presume, that no Protestant will be angry at this
Essay, nor censure it of Arrogance; it being so conformable to the Sentiments
of the most Illustrious in the Nation: I must confess that there are Laws in
force against the Dissenters which we shall a little Discourse of hereafter,
and evidence plainly that the intention of the Legislators was to punish such
as they supposed would be Seditious or dangerous to the Government, and they
that stretch these Laws to destroy so many Innocent Peaceable Members of the
Commonwealth, do but Fight against God, and pervert the meaning of the
Lawgivers; and can (at long run) expect no other Fruit of their officiousness,
then what is reaped by such as are unmerciful (to say no more) at the great and
general Tribunal. Here you see those very Laws repealed, in voto, by them that
made it, and though that dots not disanull them, yet let me tell you, that for
some particular Justices of the Peace, merely upon the Information of a sort of
Creatures called Informers, (whose Character in a few words I Will give you e're
long) to Execute the utmost, yea, more then the utmost Severity of the Laws,
against Dissenters, in defiance of the sense of the Lawmakers, who did
undoubtedly know what was best for us, is no less then to oppose a private
Opinion to a public Deliberation, and a private Spirit against a public. But
I Will proceed to my main business; and refer the Opinion (with a respect to this
matter* of as Great. Statesmen as England ever knew to another place.

SECT. II.
HE that will Seriously consider how tenderly the Lord Jesus Recommends the
precepts of mutual Love, to all that profess his Name, making it the very
Character of his Followers, Luk* 13. 35. By this shall all Men know that you
are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another; And how highly the Apostle
Paul exalts the same Duty, reduceing the whole Duty of a Christian to a single
precept, Gal. 5. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this,
Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self. See Levit. 19. 18. Mat. 22. 39.
Cannot but sufficiently wonder, to see such as profess the Christian Religion
Quarrel one with another, upon the account of special and doubtful
Circumstances, respecting Divine Worship!

It is Lamentable to see how much the present Age differs from Primitive
Christianity! The Servants of the Living God in those times, would rather have
given their own Lives to persuade their Enemies to Piety, then seek to undo
their Brethren, to force them to Hypocrisy.

Those Maxims that interfere with the Sacred Rules of the Gospel, and threaten
desolation to Men for what they cannot help, are undoubtedly to be laid aside
in a Christian Commonwealth. And I question not but that our Gracious King,
when he thinks fit to meet his People in Parliament, will order a Regulation of
these proceedings, suitable to his Beneign and merciful temper before expressed.

In the mean time I humby crave leave to offer a few general Reasons against
the present Prosecutions, which my Zeal for Truth and the management of
Church-Wars (like Christians indeed) extort from me.

It is notorious by Universal Experience that it is the perverse Nature of Man,
Niti in vetitum, to long (like Eve) for what is forbidden; A Malady derived by
an uninterpreted succession from our first Parents. Hence grew a necessity of
Establishing Laws and Civil Sanctions, the end of which are, to restrain and
Punish Transgressors, who by the Intemperate Sallys of private or publich
Ambition, Revenge, Lust or other Vice, attempt or actually perpetrate any thing
Injurious to their Fellow Creatures.

These Laws are Calculated for the respective Meridians of several Nations and
Governments, and Levelled against the prevailing vice of the place, Ex malis
moribus bonae leges natae sunt: The pravity of Man's Nature, caused a necessity
of Laws, as Distempers do of Physic. And as the Office of the later, is to
preserve the Health, and Cure the Diseases of the Body; so the Office of the
former is to preserve the Body Politic. Neither of these are so limited, but
that the private or public Physic may be altered according as the Symptoms of
the Disease direct the Application. And so we see that Parliaments (without any
disparagement to their Wisdoms) Repeal Laws proper to the times they were
Enacted in, and make New, as the Vicissitudes of the Public Pulse stands in
need of. The wisest Men have changed Counsels and Resolves upon Second
thoughts: The very Popes themselves, and General Councels have done it, though
the former Arrogate to themselves an Infallibility.

No mere Man is so sharp sighted as certainly to foresee what the Events and
Revolutions of things to come may be, without Divine Inspiration. Therefore it
is rather to be Esteemed a prudential Skill, then an Arraignment of the Acts of
our Predecessors, when what was suitable to them, and improper for us, are
repealed, and a more seasonable remedy Applied, when the inconveniences of the
former are discovered. I am certain that the best way to convince Protestant
dissenters, (and most agreeable to the Dictates of Christianity,) is to Win
them by fair and Charitable Methods; and that those Penalties the Law inflicts,
should at least be relaxt, for Reasons hereafter to be produced. Every
considering Man must needs know that the Biass of Interest and Education are
strong Shackles to the Judgment, which Fetter it from yiedling to Demonstrated
Truth. That of Education is very hard to be over-master'd. We have had
Deplorable Experiments, that Opinion merely got by Education, is sometimes as
hard to be removed, (yea harder) then the Body from the Soul. It so Wheels and
Intoxicates the Brain, that even amongst the Turks, we Read of some Wise and
Moderate Persons, who would Die to maintain their ridiculous Alcaron.

Custom is grown such a Tyrant, that some would rather starve then eat Bread
baked in a Pan (as a Reverend Prelate said) because he used to eat Bread baked
in an Oven. Religion in many is really their humor, and a Darling Fancy passes
with such for Reason; and Fashion is more prevailing then the best Arguments. O
the Deplorable Estate of Christianity: Men will now reject the most Sacred of
Truths, if they can but find a Pique at the Messenger, as if the Raving Patient
would spill the best of Cordials, because not presented in a Golden Spoon!

The Design of what is said, is to make way for what follows, viz.

SECT. III.
Demonstrative Reasons against Compulsion of Conscience.
NO Humane Authority, no not the very Popes (those Infallible Tools) can deny
but that the Word of God is the Rule of Faith, to which all that profess the
Name of Christ ought to Conform. And as all the Children of God have an Equal
Interest in the Testament of their Father, so no one amongst them, has any
Prerogative to Impose a force upon the Judgment of his Brother. One holds this,
the other that, a third denis both, they Examine Scripture, Consult the
Originals, Examine the Opinions of Antiquity; they sincerely Pray for
Illumination: What then? Why pray what Course will you take with your
Dissenting Brother? All that you can say, cannot remove him from his former
persuasion: The best way is to pray for him, if any Rigorous course be taken in
such a Case, and if the fire brings no light with it to Demonstrate the Truth
of it, I profess I cannot but suspect that the Coals are fetched from below.

He that reflects upon the difficulties that Encounter us in the way to Truth,
for Strait is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way, and with all considers how short
sighted the best of Men be, for here we see but in Part, and understand but in
Part, will soon find that there is infinitely more Reason for Christians
mutually to Endeavor the support and assistance, rather then study the Ruin
and Destruction of each other.

Since all have neither an equal Depth of Natural Judgment, nor the same
Measure of Supernatural Illumination, but the Spirit Blows how, and where it
pleases, we ought not to despise or Persecute our Brother, for his Innocent
and blameless mistakes, least we be found to fight against God, who is the free
disposer of his Gifts; we know the way of Man is not in himself, Jer. 10. 23.
But his goings (or steps) are of the Lord, Pro. 20. 24* And therefore, did we
bear a due Respect to God, we would be Content to wait his leisure, who has
Engaged himself by his Apostle, Phil. 3. 15. If in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall Reveal even this unto you. Let us therefore entertain such a
one, (who proceeds in the simplicity of his heart,) with Milk, till he grow
stronger to Digest Strong-Meat.

I am much mistaken, if Compulsion of Conscience borders not upon the very
Skirts of the Implicit Faith of the Papists. For, whatsoever a man is
constrained to Swear, or profess, more then he is convinced of, proceeds from
as Blind an assent, as can be matched in the grossest Popery, and of such a
convert no profession has any great cause to boast. For common Reason tells us,
that such as are Proselyted by violence, will continue such no longer then the
force lasts.

Force is mere Punishment, and consequently not Just, unless the offense be
voluntary: But he that believes according to the evidence of his own Reason, is
necessitated to that belief, and to compel him from it, is to drive him to
Renounce the Essential part of Man, his Reason.

I cannot Imagine why we should be commanded to try the Spirits, 1. John 4. 1.
And to prove all things. 1 These. 5. 21. If there be not a Faculty in the Soul
to judge for it self. It Is a strange Injunction when we are commanded to hold
fast that which we find to be best; if after our most serious and deliberate
Election, we shall be whipped out of our Conscience by Penaltys. To what purpose
do we Preach poor Souls into just so much Liberty of Scripture, as may beget
their torture, and not permit them to rest where they find satisfaction? Either
prohibit to search at all, or leave us sensible of some benefit by teaching. To
believe what seems untrue, seems to me Impossible; To profess what we believe
untrue, I am sure is damnable.

As it is certain, that whosoever swerves from the Dictates of his own
Conscience, commits a grievous Sin, Romans 14. So without Question they that
endeavor by Force or Artifice to draw any Man to profess or Act contrary to
what his Soul believes, are as deeply guilty of the same Crime, as the Apostle
says, When ye wound the weak Consciences of your Brethren, ye Sin against
Christ. 1. Cor. 8. 12. How dangerously then do they expose themselves to the
Just Indignation of God who drive others, (and fall themselves) into this Evil?
etc. How wilfully do they attempt to extinguish the Light of Nature, which
Indispensably obliges all Men to Deal with others, as they would be dealt with
themselves? This Light is placed by God in clear and candid Souls to Shine and
guide them, but in black ones to condemn and burn them. I could heartily wish
that all Men would take the Advice of the Apostle, Romans 14. 13. Let us not
therefore Judge one another any more: But Judge this rather, that no man put a
Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers way. If this Blessed
Counsel were but followed, what a happy Nation might ours be?

Nothing has caused more mischief in the Church then the Establishing new (and
many) Articles of Faith, and the Encumbrance of Gods Worship by Ceremonys,
which all acknowledge to be more for Ornament, then any Essential necessity.
And had these Stumbling Blocks been removed, it is certain that our too too
deplorable divisions would in a great measure vanish, but since there are, and
must be Divisions, let us pray to the Physician of Souls to heal them. To Love
one another is a command of the Almighty, which never was, nor never will be
repealed. And O! how disagreeable to that Sacred precept is it, to vex and
trouble each other! How rare is it to see the very Brutes prey upon their kind!
Yet we see mankind destroy mankind, not only devesting themselves of humanity,
but with a more then Brutish cruelty, rage against their very Brethren. To
break so evident a Commandment, to establish that which is (more then)
doubtful, is certainly contrary to Gospel-Laws.

A thing may be clear to one man that would fain impose it, but it may be
doubtful to him on whom it is imposed, which no Body can help. Must the
doubtful Person be knocked of the head therefore, or must we pick out the Eyes of
all that cannot See as well as our selves.

Suppose the point be clear in Scripture; why then say I, there is no necessity
to make a new Law to Impose it; much less a new Article of Faith. If it be but
deduced or inferred; it is certain that what one thinks clearly deduced, another
as Learned and able as he, may think not to be so.

Men's understandings are as various as their Speech or Faces: And is it Just
for one man to Quarrel with another, because different from him in either of
these? or put him upon a Rack to stretch him to his own dimension, if not so
tall as he? He that thinks all Dissenters either malieiously or wilfully Blind
is (in my Judgment) defective in Charity. If these People Dissent out of humor
or Hypocrisy, every thinking Man will pronounce them absolute Fools. For they
that play the Hypocrites; do it either for Worldly ends, or vain glory. Now
these Men, who are under the lash of every Informer, and suffer so
unmercifully; cannot be charged with Dissenting for worldly ends, because they
may secure themselves by Conformity, and by necessary consequence their
Nonconformity is out of pure Conscience. Else (as was said*) they are stark* I
deots, and if so, the State has no need to fear them, and it would be a great
disparagement to so wise and Illustrious a Government to seem to fear such a
Company of supposed simpletons. But then on the other hand, if their Dissent be
really from the strong and convinced persuasions of their minds, I would in all
humility beseech all, that have power to Execute the Laws against them, to
consider, that they are Christians, their Brethren and Countrymen, and that
they would treat them as such, in agreement to what our merciful Prince
declared, as before, viz. To Punish only such as are disturbers of the
Government. For my Pen shall never be an Advocate for any Person of that
Character. If any should think that these Men Dissent out of vain Glory, he
must still suppose them worse Fools then before; For who but a Madman would
purchase the applause of a few Persons (an Idle airey thing that will neither
Feed nor Cloth him) at the dear rate of 20 l. a Month, 20 l. a Sermon, etc. or
a Prison with all its tormenting apurtenances? Is this a comfortable Bargain?

Well then, supposing them weak Brethren, what shall we do with them? why the
Apostle readily answers this question, Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the
Faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. Here is not one word of
sending him to Prison; or Fining of him; No, No, they used to persuade and
convince; not compel men to Conformity. Neither did the strong Christian
Persecute, but Cherish and Instruct his weak Brother. For,

They very well knew that no man can be forced to believe, he may ('it is true)
be compelled to say this or that, but not to believe it; the Dominion over the
External part has no Rule over the Soul. And though a Man may be compelled to
dissemble his thoughts, it is impossible that any outward force can change the
opinion. The Soul of man is a thing so generous, that it is rather persuaded by
mildness, then won upon by figorous and Coercive Methods. And the Nature of
Christianity, is really adapted for such procedures. If Compulsion of
Conscience had been thought by the Almighty, to be the best way of reducing
Mankind, our Lord Jesus would have used it. He that had the Command of the
whole Heavenly Militia, (one of which in a Night Slew 185000 of the Assyrian
Host) could with as much ease subdue the Great Augustus Caesar, as command a
Fish to bring him the Tribute Money.

He that has good Eyes, and has been taught to Read, will Read you a clear
Printed Book, but if he be Blind, or having Eyes wants Light, or never learnt
to Read, or if the Print be Blind, you may sooner dash out his Brains with a
Club, then make him perform an Action he cannot.

Faith is not to be driven like a Nail into the Head, or Heart, with a Hammer:
For a Man cannot believe if he would, till the Gift be bestowed upon him. And
the Scripture is plain, when it tells us, that Faith is the Gift of God.

Arguments are good Inducements, but force has no countenance in the Gospel,
much less a command. Pray peruse these Texts, John 20. 31. 5. 39. 42 Tim. 3.
15. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. It Is an easy thing to pick out ones Eyes, but all the Art of
Man cannot restore those Eyes again, or make Eyes for one Born without them.
Even so Compulsion can make a Man a Hypocrite, but all the severity in the
World cannot make him a true Convert.

If Reason understands not what is declared, how can we by way of Deduction, or
the best framed Syllogisms yield to what we apprehend not to be Demonstrative?
All discourse and Ratiocination ought to be of things Intelligible; The object
of Faith is purely and essentially Divine, and the Soul cannot arrive at that
(Best of) Learning, till the Spirit of God becomes the Tutor.

Before I leave this (by way of digression) I cannot but borrow a few excellent
Notions of an Eminent Prelate now Living. There is no giving way to Rational
deduction and human Argumentations against Scripture, for then a cunning
Sophister may lead men into many Errors. To go about to prove by Reason such
things as are above Reason, is wonderful: And to discourse of what we
understand not, is a spice of madness. The Conclusions drawn from such
Discourses are dangerous, yea, a mere Ignis fatuus that misguides Men, 2 Timothy
1. 13. Divine Mysteries dressed up in the attire of mere humane Oratory, is like
a chaste and Virtuous Matron, trickt up in the habit of a Curtezan. The Divine
Substance is not expressible by human Rhetoric, nor the most delicate
Flourishes of an Artificial Pencil.

That which Men call School Divinity, has been perverted at such a Rate, that
it has proved a mere Plague to Christianity. There you have new Questions, nice
Distinctions, and intemperate Conclusions tossed up and down like Tennis Balls.
And from thence proceed cruel Bickerings, and Theological Wars.

The first Divinity-School was set up at Alexandria by Pantaenus, and from
thence Sprung the Arrian-Heresie, which like an ill weed soon over ran all
Christendom. In the Subtilty of these Schools Heresy grew Refined, and with
their School tricks of distinctions and Evasions, almost bassled the plain and
simple Professors of the Gospel.

The Primitive Doctors, converted from Heathenism, and well skilled in
Philosophy, Antiquity, History, and Logic or Sophistry, Translated these
Sciences (falsely so called) into Christianity, to Illustrate by their
Indiscreet Zeal, and Imbellish Christian knowledge, by Artificial Forms and
Figures, but rather indeed defaced it. Col. 2. 8.

He that seriously and without prepossession considers the Nature of Christian
Doctrine, will conclude, that it must be taught by the Demonstration of the
Spirit and Power, and not by the School harangues of Sophistical Syllogisms and
Enthymoms.

Considering Men are wary, (and so they had need) of the Subtilties of such as
would pervert or deceive them, in so important a matter as Religion is: Because
Heresies appear not first in their own Natural Shape, but they complement you
in Disguise, Masqueraded with specious pretenses; the Author of these Heresies
will press into their Service, this and that obscure place of Scripture capable
of various Interpretations. But (mark I pray) when they have once got Footing,
by degrees they lay a side their Vizards, and march on Brazen Faced, (I mean
Barefaced.)

Well, but as to Compulsion of Conscience, since the affront is only to the
Divine Majesty, supposing the Dissenter errs, methinks we should leave God to
vindicate his own cause: For what can be a greater disparagement or more
derogatory to the honor of the Godhead, then to think he wants the help of Man
to defend him. Mark how Peter was rebuked by our Savior for cutting off
Malchus his Ear. Besides, do but consider the Methods used by the Redeemer of
the World, in Conquering his Enemies, and you will find it was by Preaching and
Suffering, and if his Disciples wont follow so Illustrious an Example, they
deserve not to be called by his Name, nor be Dignified with the Title of
Christians.

In all well ordered Governments the Magistrate may and ought to punish Evil
doers, but not Evil Believers, for God Reserves that to himself, it is his
Divine Perogative, for he only is the Heart searcher; and Man cannot possibly
have a right Cognizance of the concealed or Evil thoughts of another; because,
for any thing he knows, The greatest Professor may be the greatest Atheist.

I do not Remember that Christians ever took up Arms against their Governors
in the Primitive times for propagating their Profession, or to preserve
themselves from Persecution; And he that will do so, merely upon that account,
is either a Fool or an Atheist: A Fool, because he rejects the opportunity of
gaining the Reward promised, Matthew. 5. 12. Blessed are ye when Men Revile you
and Persecute you, etc. Or an Atheist, because he wont believe that God will be
as good as his word. But to Return where I left, I may reckon that common
saying among shallow Fancys, viz. That a Pigmy on a Giants shoulders sees more
then the Giant. The Question is not of seeing more, but clear discerning. If
both these see a Beast at a Miles distance, and contend whether it be a Horse
or an Ox, the Pigmy on the Giants Shoulder, is never the nearer discerning
what it is, because it depends more upon the sharpness of Sight, then the
height of his shoulders: so we have no possible assurance that the Doctrine
delivered to us by man (if not revealed in Scripture) is absolutely true,
because we are certainly assured that it is possible for him, or any man to
err, yea in this very Doctrine. The Great Augustine (the wonder of his time
for sharpness of understanding, and great modesty withal,) believed it
absolutely necessary that Infants should Receive the Lord's Supper, and termed
it a downright Heresy to affirm that there were any Antipodes. So Lanctantius
a notable Wit, and a great Scholar.

The most Eminent of the Evangelical Doctors grant that even general Councels
have erred, and if anyman should deny it, the thing may be easily Demonstrated.
Our Church Historys declare how often they have thwarted one another, in things
(point blank) contradictory. At which we need not wonder, for they have no
promise of Infallibility; You Will say they are the Churches Representative: What
then? I know no promise in the whole Bible, that the Representative should be
Infallible. It Is true The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church,
but what is that to a General Council which (by a modest Calculation) cannot
amount to one part in 10000 of the Universal Church. But I need say no more,
then that these (so called) general Councels have been ex diametro against each
other, as before hinted.

Parents are accountable to God for their commands, as well as the Children are
for their Obedience, natural Parents are by mere Nature prompted to seek the
Love of their Children: So ought Spiritual Parents who are Styled Ministers of
God (who is Love) to demean themselves toward their Spiritual Children. And
consequently is it not more suitable to this excellent Grace, and Parental
Tenderness to lead the People into the House of God, rather then to whip them
in by fear? And to put on such a habbit as will Invite them in, rather then
fright them out? What wise and Loving Father would put on a winding Sheet to
Fright his weak and simple Child?

Man (says a Reverend Pen) is a very ticklish Animal to Govern; he will not
always be guided by Reason and Authority. He has a Will as well as Reason, and
will have his own Will in many things; even among the very Godly themselves
(which is to be Lamented) but few are so entirely Pious, as wholly to deny
themselves. This is so high and sharp a point of Religion, that you may break
the Heart strings of many in winding them up so high; and so you may crack all
their Religion.

I cannot in Conscience when I Treat upon so serious a Theme, but Remark, that
the Carriage of some Preachers has created a great dislike of that Sacred Work,
as it is managed by not a few, and so are themselves the causers of that
Dissent, which they exclaim against: too many Preach not Christ but themselves;
They take here and there a Sentence of Scripture, the shorter and more abstruse
the better. Then to show their Skill and Invention, they Divide and Subdivide
it into Generals and Particulars. Here you have the Quid, the Quale, the
Quantum, and such like Quack-Salving Forms, which the People understand no more
then they do Greek or Latin. Then they look into this or that quaint Author
and pick out a Sentence of a Philosopher or Father, some nice Speculation or
other, and Labor to Couch all in Elegant Language. But what is the end of this?
why certainly it is merely to show their Wit, Reading, or whatsoever else is
excellent in them. But, Pray mark, how such practices are Charactered, 1 Cor.
2. the whole Chapter is worth Reading; and plainly demonstrates that this kind
of Preaching is not Apostolic, that is, that they Preach not in the
Demonstration of the Spirit, but in the Demonstration of their Learning.

Many of the Ancient Fathers (especially the Greeks) have been ever Fond of
Nicetys. These, when Converted to Christianity, Transplanted their Beloved
Rhetorical Flowers of humane Learning into Christian Gardens, which proved
indeed Weeds. Common Experience will be my Advocate, when I say that humane
Nature is apter to give Nourishment and vigor to humane Principles then to
such as are Divine.

Pray when did ever any Learned, Witty, Rhetorical Harangue, or cunning
Syllogistical Discourse convert the tenth part of St. Peter's or St. Paul's
Foolish Preaching, as he terms it? (tho it is indeed the Wisdom of God to them
that are Perfect.)

How widely different is the manner of Preaching in the Apostles time from
Philosophical Arguing, and Rhetorical declaiming? the Preaching then, was
either Catechistical Instructions, or Pious admonitions, not tying themselves
to any form; but past from one matter to another, as the condition of the
Hearers required, and not as the Preachers Fancy and Reading prompted him.

It Is Reported of the Emperor Caligula, that he Judged, Condemned or acquitted
Delinquents as best agreed with the Current of his Oration; So some now a days
shape their Discourse more to the Applause, then Edification of the Hearers.
Such Sermons may be better termed Banquets for full wantons, then Instructions
for such as are almost Starved for want of Spiritual Food. It may nourish an
Auditory of Camelions that Live by Air, but can never make sound and Solid
Christians.

The Schoolmen, and such as greedily Suck their unexamined Dictates, have set
up an opinion, that none are fit to Preach but such as have been Students in
the University; Where if he has Learnt a little to chop Logic, and produce
some nice Speculations from Aristotle, Plato, etc. or some Theological
distinctions from Aquinas, Peter Lombard, or the rest of the distinctionmakers,
or a little gingling from the Poets and Orators, then, O! then, (but you must
suppose him documented by the Guide to the Inferior Clergy) he sets up for a
Spiritual Pastor! the weightiest Office in the world, because Men's Souls,
(their better part) is concerned! it is very strange that such qualifications
(common to Graceless as well as Gracious Scholars) should render him capable
of rightly Dividing the word of Truth: For if you seriously Examine the whole
New Testament, you will not find one tittle of those Sciences in the Gospel;
but you will see they are rather severely arraigned, as Enemies to it; Because
they tend to vain Jangling, Strife, and Contention, not tending to that (which
is the end of Preaching) the Conversion and Edification of Souls, Ephesians. 6. 12.
2. Cor. 10. 4.

The Apostle Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus (two Primitive Bishops,)
tells you the qualifications of Bishops and Deacons, viz. Gravity, Sobriety,
Meekness, Diligence, etc. Not Mathematics, Logic, Physic, etc. Not the Study
of Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Euclid, Scotus, Aquinas, etc. And why? why there
is very good Reason: For it is most evident that the greatest part of Academical
Learning is as useless to a Spiritual Pastor, as the Art of Navigation is to a
Physician: The Apostle telling us in plain terms, that he desired To know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. There Is the qualification with
which whosoever is qualified, may say with David, Come I will show thee what
the Lord has done for my Soul. But without it all the Arts in the World cannot
make a Preacher, as the old verse says.

Qui Christum discit, satis est, si Caetera Nescit.
Qui Christum nescit, nihil est, si Caetera Discit.
Christ may be better Preached by a Grave, Conscientious Man, well versed in
the Scriptures, and the Mysterys of Faith, tho never bred in any University,
nor skilled in any Language but his Mother Tongue, then by the Students of
Aristotle, Scotus, Aquinas, etc. (quat ales) with all their knacks of Quidditys
and Qualitys, Syllogisms, and Euthymemes, Distinctions, and Subsumptions, etc.

It is Remarkable, that no Greek, Italian, or French of a thousand understood
any Language besides his Mother Tongue, when the Gospel first was Planted. And
it is worth noteing, that the Apostles received the Gift of Tongues, because
they were to Preach to all Nations, but we find no infusion of School-Learning
by the Holy Ghost, nor any more Gift of Tongues, when the Gospel was once
spread over the World.

This is further very Remarkable that no Man can produce an Example of any
Nation that was ever Converted to Christianity by Philosophical or Rhetorical
Preaching.

I hope the Digression will be excused, if I note the mischief of Excursions;
For if such be countenanced, we shall never have an end: because the Itch Men
have to show their Learning, will continue this vain and unedifying Practice.
Possibly the Preacher sits in his Study all the week long, picking from this
and that and 'tother quaint-Authour, a few Beautiful Flowers; well, what then?
then he comes on the Preaching day (commonly called Sunday) with his Nosegay in
his Hand (viz. his Notes pinned up in his Bible) to entertain Ladys and
Courtiers. But what have you to say to that? I Will say nothing, but refer the
Reader to the New Testament* and when he has seriously perused it, let him Act
and Believe (with respect to the Premises,) as that Sacred Book plainly Teaches
him* for if that will not do, nothing but a Miracle will do it.

Before I proceed, give me leave (good Reader) to tell you, that by what I have
here written, (partly from Persons Eminent in our Church of England, and partly
from my own experience and observation) I would not be understood to cry down
humane Learning, as a thing of no use; nor throw the least disparagement upon
our Famous and Reverend Divines, for I honor them from my Heart, and know that
amongst the Ciergy of the Church of England, (as Established by Law,) there are
as Eminent Men, Conspicuous to all, not only for their Learning, but also for
their Piety and Gracious Conversations, and their painful and Industrious
Labors in the Service of our God, as any in the World: No, no, it is the Abuse
only I write against, and it is that alone I heartily wish were Reformed.

The knowledge of the Original Languages in which the Scriptures were Pennd is
of very great necessity, that we might converse with that Sacred Book in its
own Emphatical and Native Idiom, and that we may not be Imposed upon by wrong
Translations. But withal let me add (which no Learned Man I am sure will blame
me for, if unbiased) that we are to consider the Bounds of Philosophy and
Humane Literature: These are to be exercised in the things that may be known by
the Light of Natural Reason; But when they Travel beyond that Road, and must
needs be defining things beyond their Sphere, they become extravagant and Saucy.

This was the Judgment of that Excellent and Learned Lord Picus Earl of
Mirandula, in his Epistle to Aldus Manutius, a sharp Scholar: Accinge te ad
Philosophiam, sed hac Lege, ut Meminer is nullam esse Philosophiam quae a
Mysteriorum veritate nos abducat: Philosophia veritatem quaerit, Theologia
Invenit, Religio possidet. That is, Address your self so to the Study of
Philosophy; that no Philosophy should seduce you from the Truth of the
Mysterys. (of Christian Religion) Philosophy seeks Truth, Divinity finds it,
(but) Religion possesses it.

Every* Thing is good and proper in its place, as for Example, Fire is useful
in the Chimney, but it is mischievous in the Housetop. There, that which
before would Warm you, or be Serviceable to Dress your Meat, will Burn you and
your Meat too, unless you can quench it, or Run away from it. So Learning is
good as an Handmaid, Hagar-like, But if it must needs be Mistress, and
Usurp-Authority in the Family, if like Scoffing Ishmael Genesis 21. 9. Gallat.
4. 30. It will Mock at the Spirit, and the Simplicity of the Gospel, let it be
cast out: For nothing Supreme will endure to be Rivaled in his Authority.
Perogative, especially in Divine matters, is as tender as the Apple of ones Eye.

There is no Sober and Impartial Divine, but will Grant, that it is the work of
Faith, by the Aid of Divine Revelation, to be Employed in the Mysterys of
Religion. From which concession it is evident, that when any Man undertakes to
Teach us Divinity, by the mere Guidance of Nature, (call it Natural Philosophy,
University Learning; or what you will,) but shows himself by such an attempt as
absurd and Nonsensical, as if the Eye should Incroach upon the Ear, and would
pretend to Distinguish the various gradations of Musical Notes, or the quavers
of a pleasant Instrument, which it cannot so much Imitate, as the dullest Brute
can Imitate the warblings of the Nightingale.

If the Example and Practice of the Lord Jesus Christ be worth Imitating, you
will find that he made Choice of such as were Despised and Unlearned. Why?
Because his Grace might so much the more be Magnyfied, and that the Honor due
to His Sovereign Converting Power might not be Attributed to any Humane Faculty
of Rhetorical Persuasion. He made Fishermen, a Tent-maker, and other Tradesmen,
Messengers of the Everlasting Gospel, and (as it were) Ambassadors
extraordinary of Heaven. They were not sent to Learn the Facultys of Aristotle,
Cicero, or Aquinas: No no; His Holy Spirit was the only Schoolmaster. He could
with as much ease Employ the whole University of Athens, as those Poor Men; but
he did not, and why such as are called by his Name should despise his Grace
when appearing in Persons of that Quality he Chose, is a mere disconcurrence
with the Sanctions of this Ever-Blessed Lawgiver.

I do not represent these things to Introduce a promiscuous Liberty for all
Persons to turn Preachers that are Christians, but to Reason People (if I
could) our of extremes. For as on the one Hand I believe that mere Learning
does not qualify a Man to be a Preacher, so on the other side I am satisfied,
that Grace without the gift of Utterance and a sound Judgment accompanied with
an Ability to Divide the word of Truth, suitable to the necessity of the
Hearers, does not qualify any Man for a Public Preacher. Of both these I take
the Church to be Judge, and am satisfied that without the Approbation of a
Christian Assembly, such as presume to take that Office upon them, where such
an Approbation may be had, are none of Christ's Messengers but their own,
Because we shall so have no order, but confusion, which must not be Introduced
into the Church of Christ, unless you will change the best of Governments, into
the worst of Anarchys. Let every Man abide in the Calling whereunto he is
called* says the Evangelical unrepealable Statute.

(...) It has been (and will be till reformed) the Reproach of Christianity,
that Preachers have erred on both Extremes, some talk Nonsense, some talk above
common-Sense. I have (says one of our Prelates) seen some Learned Men call
Children together, and ask them a few Questions; and then to begin a Profound
Lecture, shaped according to his own large Dimensions, at whom Boys and Men
gaze at, as a prodigious Monster of Learning: some saying as Festus to Paul,
Much Learning has made him Mad. Sure he knows not where he is, why, he is not
in a University School of Divinity, but in an Assembly of weak and silly Youth,
who understand his English, no more than Hebrew.

He adds, If Men would mark the form and phrase of the Gospel, and what kind of
Matter and Language the Divine Oracle used in Preaching, even to the Learned
Scribes and Pharisees, and read 1 Cor. 1. and the beginning of the second, it
would Inform them what Language that is, that is Clothed in such Meretricious
Attire, etc. Haec Ille.

The Scope and Intention of this Digression, is to show how this Sacred Office
of Preaching is abused, and of what Influence that Abuse is to scare people
away, who love to understand, and profit by what they hear; And so I shall
conclude this Section in imitation of a late Ingenious Author (though not in his
very words) That if there be not such a parcel of things as call themselves
Preachers that Act thus; then no body is concerned in this Character; but if
there be, the Abuse is worth looking after, in order to Reformation, if not
Punishment, of so great a Spiritual Grievance.

SECT. V.
Express Scripture against Compulsion of Conscience.
THese Excellent and Important Truths mentioned, are not only built upon the
firm Foundation of solid and unanswerable Reason, but also upon the Infallible
Authority of the Law, and Word of God. To convince you of which, pray be
pleased to consider the following Texts.

Hear what the Apostle Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. 24. (mark that this Epistle is
written to a Bishop) And the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle
unto all Men; apt to Teach, Patient, (or (...) Bearing.) ver. 25. In weakness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth. ver. 26. And that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him
at his Will.

From this passage it is evident, that the Apostle forbids all rigorous
Courses, even toward Infidels; and that he expressly sets down the right
Christian Course of Convincing and Converting them, viz. By Charity and
Meekness: And if Christians will make use of Church Curses, and Humane Laws,
Enacted only against Seditious persons, and Disturbers of the Government, to
force Innocent Christians that agree with themselves, in the Essential Articles
of Christianity, to Disputable Modes of Circumstantial Ceremonies, confessed by
all to be of Humane Original; In my Opinion, they disagree with this Blessed
Man, who after he Teaches the Bishop his Duty, advises him to leave the success
to God; But not a syllable of Jayling, Imprisoning, or Fining them.

Another Apostle forbids us to Condemn one another* James 4. 12. There is one
Lawgiver (says he) who is able to save and to destroy: Who art thou that
Judge another? suitable to which (mark I pray) what the former Apostle says,
Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that Judge another Man's Servant? to his own Master
he stands or falls; yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand. ver. 5. One Man esteems one Day above another: another esteems every
Day a like. Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own mind. ver. 22. Have
thou Faith? have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that Condemns not
himself in that which he allowloweth. That is, whose Conscience accuses not
his outward Profession.

This most zealous Preacher of the Gospel, returns so condescending and
moderate an Answer to a Case of a far harder sound than is here maintained,
which argues that he took his gentle Pen from the soft Wing of the Dove. 1 Cor.
7. 12. etc. If any Brother has a Wife that believes not, and she be pleased
to dwell with him, let him not put her away. ver. 13. And the Woman which has
a Husband that believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her
not leave him. ver. 14. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the
believing Wife (viz. in a Matrimonial Correspondence.) And the unbelieving Wife
is sanctified to the Husband, etc. ver. 15. But if the unbelieving depart, let
him depart; A Brother or a Sister is not in Bondage in such Cases: But God has
called us to Peace. ver. 16. For what know thou O Wife, whether thou shall
save thy Husband? Or how know thou O Man, whether thou shall save thy Wife?
ver. 17. But as God distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every
one, so let him walk, and so Ordain I in all Churches.

Pray mark, good Reader, what can be said more Efficaciously to oblige
Christians to Christian forbearance, than so plain an Injunction to live
peaceably with mere Heathens. You may see moreover, that 2 Cor. 1. 24. He
denies that even the Apostles themselves have any Sovereignty over the
Conscience, but only Commissions to assist the Conscientious. -- Not for that
we have Dominion (says he to the Corinthians) over your Faith, but are helpers
of your Joy: For by Faith you stand. In this he exactly observes the Orders
which Christ gave to his Apostles, Go and Teach, (not compel) Math. 28. 19. And
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that House or City, shake off the Dust of your Feet, as we find practiced, Act,
13. 51. Mark, they are not commanded to trample upon them as Dust under their
Feet; the Planters of Christian Religion had never any such Commission. If the
people would not believe, they did even let them alone, with only that harmless
Testimony that they had done their Duty, and left them to God* -- O how widely
different is this little Dust-shaking, which neither Killed not Jayl'd any
body, from the Thunderclaps of Popish Bulls, Interdicts, Smithfield Flames,
Imprisonments, Fines? etc.

Consonant to this Principle of Meekness, our Savior himself instructs his
Disciples. Matthew. 23. 10. Be not called Rabbi, (that is, Imposers in Spiritual
Matters, or Lords over the Conscience) For one is your Master, even Christ; and
all ye are Brethren. From these Texts Reader, infer what you can rationally, --
for it were but to light a Candle to the Sun, for me to go about to Illustrate
them.

I wonder what the Patient forbearing of the Tares means, and letting them grow
together till the time of Harvest, Ay, and along with the Wheat too, til the
Spiritual Reaper comes, -- unless it be a Christian Tolleration. I cannot fix
any other Sense upon that Scripture Parable, but that we ought not to pluck up
each other by the Roots, because we are not alike, -- for it may happen that
some of the very Wheat may be destroyed by Corn-Weeders. Therefore it is
certainly the safest and soberest way to be quiet, and leave the management of
the Spiritual Cornfieldsd to the Lord of the Harvest, till he Orders the
contrary.

That admirable President of mildness toward the Samaritans, a Surly
Inhospitable sort of people, (that would not receive even Christ himself) is
very Notable. The Disciples James and John, would have Fire immediately
Commanded down from Heaven to Consume them, as in the Days of Elias; but our
Merciful God Rebuked their Zeal with this sweet and tender reply, Luke 9. 55,
56. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of: For the Son of Man is not come
to destroy Men's, Lives, but to save them. This one Example abundantly satisfies
all Objections drawn from the Practice of Elias, Jehu, the Sons of Levi, etc.
in the Old Testament; For as they had an Express Command from* God to warrant
their Zeal, we have an Express Warrant from Christ to Command Meekness.

If any one shall shuffle in a suspicion that this moderate temper was meant
only for the Times of Persecution, when the Christians had no temporal power;
let him first confess that these were the best and purest Times, and then show
a Warrant Dormant under our Savior's hand (that is in his Gospel) to
Commissionate his Disciples, as soon as they should get the Sword into their
hands, to use the severity of Penal Laws against all disobeyers, and I submit.
But if they can cite no such Authority, let them consider whether compulsion of
Conscience is consistent with the just Liberties and Privileges of a Christian.

The Church of England approves not of Donatism, nor that Romish Arrogance
which pronounces All Dissenters ddmn'd. No, no; it is evident both by public
Declarations, and the Writings and Preachings of many of the most Eminent
Churchmen, that Salvation is not tied up here, to a mere Conformity to what
the English-Church differs in, from others; Of this we have a fresh and famous
Instance in the Charitable and Christian-like entertainment given to the French
Protestants that came hither for Sanctuary, from the present Persecution in
their Native Country. This clearly manifests that our Church Quarrels not with
the Dissenting-Protestants; For it would be a very strange Riddle, to entertain
Protestants of the very same persuasion with so much tenderness and
hospitality, and at the very same Instant, exact the utmost mite, that the
Penal Laws require, from their Protestant Countrymen, who disagree in nothing
from these foreign Brethren, but only in Language (I mean with respect to
Articles of Religion) so that lie that will charge the present Prosecutions
upon the Church of England, does charge her at one and the same time, with
severity to our own Natives, and Charity to Strangers of the same Profession.
Now, since it is not to be presumed that the Church of England would act with
such Partiality and Condradiction, may we not rationally conclude, that this
unseasonable Prosecution, (when Popery is watching all opportunities to Ruin
Conformists, as well as Nonconformists) is to be charged only on some
particular Self-seeking persons, or such as do not calmly consider what the
Circumstances of things are?

The Judgment of His Majesty, and the Resolves of our last Parliaments, (all
true Patriots and Churchmen, that have given security to the Government, by
taking such Tests and Oaths as the Law requires,) are convincing
demonstrations, that it is not the Church and State, but some certain persons
that care not how the World goes, (so their present ends be acccomplished,) are
Authors of the severeties some feel, from the Execution of such Laws, as stand
looked upon, rather to be forborne by public Votes, as aforesaid; And which
('it is hoped) that August Assembly (King, Lords, and Commons) when His Majesty
will be pleased to call a Parliament, will mitigate, to the great joy of many
Innocent Subjects, that mind only their own particular Concerns, and quietly
submit to the Established Government.

SECT. VI.
AT the writing of this, there came to my hands a Paper newly published, with
this Title, A Second Argument for a more full and firm Union amongst all good
Protestants, wherein the Nonconformists taking the Sacrament after the manner
of the Church of England, is justified, etc. In a Letter to a Friend. Because
the Scope of it is not only to magnify the Church of England, (which I do not
in the least reflect upon) but also to fix an Odium upon Dissenters, and render
them more intolerable in the Eye of the Government, than the Charity of many
Pious and Learned Conformists either desire, or think seasonable; I have
thought it agreeable to the Nature of my Subject, to leave a few modest Remarks
upon it. And,

1. If the Conversion of such Dissenters, as are mentioned p. 1. be really the
Effect of Conviction of mind, without any sinister ends, I shall not blame them
for walking according to their Light, for that were to contradict the Design of
these few Sheets, viz. The Exercise of a Charitable meekness toward our weak
Brethren. But if it be merely for fear of the Penal Prosecution there likewise
mentioned, it is probable that the Advocates of such a practice, (viz.) to
Conform to such things as they before cried down as not Evangelical, or at best
think still to be doubtful,) will hardly prove Martyrs.

Temporizing is Diametrically opposite to the Nature of Christianity; And such
as are for selfish worldly ends, list themselves among the purest Professors of
Evangelical Truths, are justly branded with the Ignominious Name of Hypocrites.
But whether these Men do it out of Conscience, or for any By-ends, The Lord
only knows, for he is the Searcher of Hearts; and there we leave it.

The Expressions p. 2. are so perplexed and unintelligible, that I cannot well
pick out the meaning of it. If by Sons of Leviathan (bating the unusualness of
the Phrase) be meant, the Romish Clergy; the Paper then supposes such, to be
Instructors among the Dissenters, and of great Influence overthem: But that
isno less than a malicious and groundless Slander. And I Challenge this Author
to justify the surmise by any Demonstrative Instances. Or,

2. If it means the Teachers of the Dissenters, (for one of these it must be)
who are represented as frighting the people from Conformity, and scaring them
out of Church by calling it, and its Ministers, Antichristian; let the Author
produce the Words or Writings of any eminent Nonconformist Preacher or
Preachers, that have branded the Church of England with that Odious Epithete,
and I will join with him to abhor the Calumniators. All Sober Dissenters
universally agree, that the Romish Hierarchy is the Antichrist spoken of in the
Scripture; and it was lately well proved in a Treatise Entitled,
Schematologia, by a Dissenting Preacher. And for them to make the Church of
England another Antichrist, is not only disconsonant to their public and
avowed Principles, but the highest violation of that Charity, and Divine
Principle of Love which they owe to their Christian Conforming Brethren, that
agree with them in all the substantial parts of the Faith, and differ only in
Circumstances confessedly indifferent by the very Imposers.

I am surprised to find such a Scheme of Divinity in this Paper, p. 3. as I
never yet saw or heard from a Protestant Writer. All things necessary to
Salvation are peremptorily laid down by this Author, in these four particulars;
upon which take a few Notes.

1. The Learning of a good Catechism, to aid and conduct their Faith.

2. A good and well Composed Form of Prayer to discharge their Devotion.

3. To hear Learned and Good Men Preach to revive and quicken them to Duty.

4. To Square and Regulate their Lives by Moral Precepts (or the Law of Nature.)

Here Is the sum total of what is necessary to Salvation in this Authors Opinion.
-- But he is not content Dogmatically to make so Diminutive a Reduction of
Christianity, but will also ensure your Soul for you, in these words, -- The
which [meaning the said particulars] whosoever shall humbly and carefully
observe, constantly and Conscientiously perform, we [that we is himself, as if
he had been the Representative of the Church of England] will assure them
Salvation, and undertake to Answer to God for them, and be content to stand
chargeable with their Blood, if they do miscarry, etc.

1. As to the First, it is confessed that Catechistical Instructions were used
in the Primitive Times, and since; and that if rightly managed, it is a
necessary expedient to Inform the Judgments of the Ignorant. But I never yet
knew that it was made to lead the Van of such Articles, as are necessary to
Salvation, before. It is a means indeed, which (as the Spirit of God
Influences) may be Instrumentally subservient to Convert the unconverted. But
it is mere Popery to Attribute any such Virtue to it, as if the mere Learning of
a bare Form of Catechistical Questions and Answers, were a thing necessary to
Salvation; and this I take to be the Papers meaning.

The way of Catechizing in the Primitive Ages of Christianity, was for some of
the Church Elders to call the Youth and other Ignorant Persons together, at
some certain Times, and examine them concerning the Faith, always explaining
what was obscure to their weak understandings, nottying themselves to any Form,
but administering their Questions, and shaping their Instructions as the
Capacity of the Catechumeni required, like Divine Schoolmasters teaching their
Spiritual Pupils, and with servent Prayers recommending the success to God, the
Converter of Souls. So that Catechizing is no more than a Christian endeavor,
or expedient for the begetting of Faith, -- not an aid and conduct of Faith (as
the Paper words it) because the persons Catechis'd, were supposed to be yet
unconverted. Besides, to make formal Catechizing a positive means of Salvation,
is to Damn all that have not the opportunity to Learn it by Heart, and yet that
there are many such in the World, that are nevertheless saved, is undoubtedly
known to this Author, who seems to make Christianity consist in External Forms,
and a Moral Deportment, or Conversation.

2. As to the Second, viz. A good and well Composed Form of Prayer to discharge
their Devotion. It sounds so different from Praying with the Spirit and
Understanding, that I cannot but marvel at it.

I do not at all blame such as use Forms of Prayer, for they may, for ought I
know, Pray with the Spirit likewise, considering the Form prescribed by our
Lord Jesus himself, Matthew. 6. But this is as clear as the Sun, that neither in
all the New Testament, nor the First Three Hundred Years, there) can be
produced any Record of known Credit, that any stinted Forms were Imposed; And
good Reason, for all the Children of God, can represent their grievances to
their Heavenly Father* And though their Petitions are expressed in Lisping
Notes, or by the unutterable groans of the Spirit; yet they are not for all
that rejected any more than a loving Father would deny his hungry Child a piece
of Bread, because he cannot speak plain, or uses not a Formal Address for it.

But for this Author to make a Form of Prayer necessary to Salvation, is to
Damn such as will not, or do not, make their Applications to the Mercy Seat, in
the stinted and Composed Conceptions of others, which possibly may not reach
their Case, or (as he calls it) discharge their Devotion.

3. As to the Third thing necessary to Salvation, viz. To hear Learned and Good
Men Preach, to revive and quicken to Duty. I say, That to attend the Sacred
Dispensations of the Word of Truth, in order to growth in Grace, and Spiritual
Edification, is a Christian Duty. -- And that the Preacher ought to be Learned
in the Scriptures, and a Good Man, that is of such Goodness as the utmost
pressing after it, can arrive at. If the Author means by Learning and Goodness,
what may be merely attainable by School Faculties, and that which the
Philosophers call Morality, abstracted from the Influences of Converting and
Evangelical Grace, I must Dissent from him till he proves, that Christianity
and Morality are one and the same thing; Or that, Morality is that Grace by
which we are saved through Faith. If he proves that, it will follow that the
coming of Christ to Plant an Evangelical Religion in the World, and by his
Death to save Mankind was unnecessary, because Salvation might have been
attained by the Philosophy of Plato, and the rest of the Heathen Moralists.
This Authors Divinity seems to look this way: For his fourth thing necessary to
Salvation, is for Men to Square and Regulate their Lives by Moral Precepts (or
the Law of Nature.) To which I say, That Christians ought to do not only this,
but more too, so that Christian Duty terminates not here; It is not confined to
practical or speculative Morality, which is only a Branch or Species of
Christianity, and is as much in degree below that Faith and Spiritual Grace
that saves the Soul through the Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, as the Body is
below the Soul. The one is exercised in Principles of Common Equity betwixt Man
and Man, -- comprehended in that saying, Do as ye would be done unto: The other
is exercised in a Spiritual Commerce with the Divinity by Faith, Prayer, and
other Gospel Graces, which Natural Philosophy (merely considered as such) can
no more perform, than a Man stark Blind can judge of Colors, or Lazarus could
get out of his Grave before the All quickening power of the Mediator raised him.
The Gospel represents such as were Naturally Alive, to be Spiritually Dead. And
Philosophy without Grace is Charactered by the Apostle to be a vain, seducing
thing.

Before I touch upon the Reasons of this Authon, in justification of
Nonconformists taking the Sacrament after the manner of the Church of England,
give me leave to put in this Caution; That I do not in what I write directly or
indirectly, dispute against the Lawfulness of the Administration of this
Ordinance, as used in the said Church; but my Scope and Intention is, to show
how unreasonable it is, for this Author to represent the Nonconformists as such
silly Sectaries, because they hant so wide a Throat as he, to swallow what they
cannot Digest; and consequently, that such of them as Dissent out of pure
Conscience, though they suffer such Penalties, as this Gentleman it seems does
not care to be concerned in, are to be born withal, whilst they behave
themselves peaceably and dutifully toward the Civil Government. And to give
him a hint, that if he be one of those wellineaning Dissenters, that has
Conversed well near 30 Years amongst them (as he says) p. 1. then either he saw
their folly and groundless scrupulosity (as he angerly calls it) before the
present juncture, or not: If he saw it before, and would not make discovery of
it in order to his full and firm Union, as he Baptizes his Pamphlet, how can he
clear himself of Unfaithfulness, if not Hypocrisy, in not beginning this
Blessed Achievement sooner, that he might prevent the jealousy of the
Government, and the sufferings of so many Poor Families as he talks of.

But if he be but a new Proselite to the Church of England, and is Converted on
a sudden, as on the one hand people will be apt to suspect him, because he
chooses a time of suffering to forsake his Old Brethren, and think him a
Temporizer: so on the other hand, he will be looked upon as a Novice in
Reformation, and Old Experienced Men, will hardly be persuaded to Learn their
Religion from the little pedantick subtilties of such variable Dissenters, who
move with the State Compass.

These things I speak not from any prejudice against the Author, (whoever he
be) but to put him in mind, in a Spirit of meakness, that it would better
become him rather to exercise Charity toward his forsaken Brethren, (if he has
been a Dissenter) and since he has freed himself from the lash of suffering,
that he would not add to their burden, at so Licentious a Rate as he does in
this Pamphlet. If they are in an Error, let him leave them to God, as they are
willing to leave him quietly to the happiness of the secure Station he has
chosen.

In p. 4. he begins his Proofs, which the Judicious and Conscientious
Nonconformist will look upon more subtle then solid. All that I shall remark as
to that, will be this, because my Work is not to disapprove the Communion of
the Church of England, but to entreat the Prosecutors to show Christian
Compassion to peaceable Dissenting Protestants; that this Author would if he
writes a Third Argument, resolve me a few plain Quaeries.

1. Whether the positive Rules set down by the Sovereign Legislator (with
respect to his Ordinances) are not to be observed by Christians exactly,
without any Addition or Substraction, as near as can be?

2. Whether it be not an Impeachment of the Divine Wisdom, to suppose his Laws
imperfect? Or that he stands in need of Spiritual Privy Council, to Regulate
and Establish the Circumstances of his Lordship?

3. Whether, if the said Divine Laws be perfect, and unalterable, (as they
certainly are) any quiet, and Conscientious Dissenter, ought to be punished for
Non observance of such Ceremonies as are confessed to be of a mere Humane
Original?

4. Whether it be an Argument of Piety, for such as have got on the warm side
of the Hedge, to pelt dirt at those that cannot stride so largely, or jump over
so nimbly as they do?

For my part I thought, and still think, that the things necessary to
Salvation, may be comprehended under this short Sentance, viz. To Love God with
all our Hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves; which is the Epitome of
Christian Religion, and a Compendium of the first and second Table.

Faith in Christ Jesus, the Savior of the World, who is God, Coequal and
Co-essential with the Father, and, a Life and Conversation suitable to the
Sacred Rules of the Scriptures of Truth, which comprehends Morality and Duties
purely Divine too, do constitute a Christian: And if this Man's Scheme of
Religion mentioned before, be true, which as far as I can see, reaches no
further then to what the Law of Nature teaches, -- then he may throw away that
superfluous thing called the Bible, and study Seneca, and Hobs his Leviathan,
etc.

Certainly this Author has but a despicable Opinion of Faith, though the
Scripture says, That it is impossible to please God without it; when he cannot
afford it a little room among his things necessary to Salvation, -- only
supposes Men to have it, by which I have ground to suspect, that the Faith he
means, is nothing but some kind of Moral persuasion, or other, that being
suitable to the rest of his Discourse. His little Pedantick Dilemma's, to
justify the Communion of the Church of England, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. are merely
frivolous; because no sober, nor wise Dissenter (as far as I can see) Condemns
that Communion. It Is only some things respecting the Circumstances of
Administration, that they disallow, as being not so exactly Quodrate with the
Rule. Therefore let this Author, (if he will do any thing to the purpose) leave
beating the Air, and draw a parellel between the Communion he justifies, and
what is written of it in Scripture, --

1. Respecting the persons Administering. 2. The persons receiving 3. The manner
how. 4 ly. The Time when. And 5 ly. To what end. And if he makes them agree,
then he will Convert all the Dissenters in that great Point, for which they
suffer. But if they do not agree, then let this Dilema-maker give us some
Reasons for the Disparity, and by what Authority the alteration was made: Or
else in good earnest let him even appear barefaced, and blunder it out in
plain English, That the Laws of God are subservient to the Institutions that
Humane Policy thinks fit to superadd. I would withal, entreat the Author to
bless the World with a like parallel about Infant Baptism, that he may reduce
those Dissenters that have no good Opinion of it.

But now comes the Mortal Wound (as he thinks) have a care poor Phanaticks! --
Here the greatest number of them are affirmed to hold Principles dangerously
Heretical, and most abominably abusive of the most Holy and Blessed God, --
yea, they ungod him. This is most sad indeed, -- but wherein I pray? By making
him the greatest Author of mischief, -- folly, etc. by their idle Dreams about
his Peremptory and Eternal Decrees. Oh! There'sthe business; this is the
excellent and stupendous folly [fine Rhetoric.] which he admires at.

Here you see how he brands the poor Dissenters for the most abominable of
Heretics; and how does he prove it? Why he Fathers an Opinion upon them, which
none but a Madman will own, and then pours you out a long winded Rhapsody of
such Devilish Consequences, as are able to scare abody out of all Charity with
the Dissenters.

For my part, if I had thought it had been such a Damned thing to believe, That
God fore-ordain'd whatsoever should come to pass, -- I would never have done
it. Well, but the Author is pelting soundly at his Man of Straw, and the Odium
is thrown upon the greatest part of the Dissenters. What I shall say in reply,
is this,

1. If there be any body guilty of this Heresy, viz. That God is the Author of
Sin, I heartily leave him at this Authors Mercy, for I look upon that Opinion
to be no better then he represents it. But,

2. He is too uncharitable to charge the greatest number of the Dissenters with
it, who for any thing, I find Discourse only of the Decrees of God, as
Predestination, Election, etc. as the Scripture represents and as the greatest
part of the Church of England holds.

3. I could wish that Men were temperate, and modest in writing and discoursing
of these great Secrets of Gods Decrees, and forbear to Extort Consequences with
such violence from doubtful and obscure places. Men have got such an Itch to
Espouse some Darling Opinion or other, that no reason can remove them from it,
though Christianity languishes in the very Vitals of it, by these Brawls and
Animosities. I have known too many that will not trouble their Heads with the most
certain and most Important Duties of the Gospel, that instead of reading the
Commandments, and the plain Practical Parts of Scripture, will needs be making
Comments upon the obscurest Allegories of the Prophets, and the Revelation of
St. John. Pray what necessity have we to confound poor simple Christians with
those School Tricks, which much Idle and Licentious Wits, pester the Church of
Christ? It was enough for the Apostle to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified, (as was said) and it is most assuredly true, that whatsoever is
necessary to Salvation, is so plainly laid down in the Scripture, that the
meanest Capacity may (by the aid of Divine Grace) understand it.

It Is therefore a dangerous piece of wantonness to be peeping into the Secret
Cabinets of the Almighty, and I am sure, such Fooleries have done much mischief
in the World. For,

1. It Is enough for us to know that the Lord God has chosen a people for
himself, viz. such as believe in him, and obey his Laws, and that he will
Eternally save them. And,

2. That such as reject his Grace and Mercy, and disobey his Gospel, will fall
under his Eternal Wrath.

With this Belief I content my self, and firmly hold, That God is not, nor
cannot be the Author of any Evil, but on the contrary that he is the Author of
all Good. I believe that Man's Damnation is purely and Originally from his own
wickedness, and that his Eternal Destruction is not from any Decree of God;
which whosoever says, does at the same time affirm, That God does Damn him for
what he cannot possibly avoid.

On the other side I Believe, that no Man can save himself, but that the Lord
Jesus Christ is the only and sole Author and Cause of Salvation, and that he
alone purifies the corrupt Wills and Hearts of Men, adapting and preparing them
to receive his Grace and saving Truths, through the Power and Influence of the
Holy Spirit. This is my Creed, in this Point, and here I rest, not proposing it
by way of Imposition on others, but to show that this moderate middle path,
which in my Judgment is Sound and Orthodox, and would lead us to the desirable
Mansions of Peace, out of which our Pulpit-Wars have a long time kept us.

I doubt some Intemperate Zealots, that would as soon part with their Eyes, as
their Notions, will be grumbling at what I say, as too favorable to one side
or other. But as I regard not unjust censure, so I Challenge them to mend it.
Methinks if these general Truths, and some such like, be enough for the people
to know they do the Church no good service, that instead of Preaching Practical
Duties, will needs be frightening the Auditory with hidden Decrees, absolute
Reprobation, and some such new made Thunderbolts, able to scare 'em into
Despair. God Commanded his Gospel to be Preached to all the World, that such as
would receive it should be saved. But these Men have got you a hidden Decree,
which Damns the greatest part of Mankind, yet without the hand of any Heavenly
Notary to testify it. And pray tell me, what is it more or less, than to mock
the poor people, to invite them to believe, etc. when it is impossible for them
savingly to do it, if their Names be Registered in that black and irreversible
Muster Roll.

I do not design to reflect upon any, nor do I List my self with those who
follow Arminius, or Calvin; I am sorry to find extremes on both hands. I would
only beseech Dissenters to Preach necessary Truths, and let the hidden Decrees
of God alone, with other unnecessary Notions; which practice will undoubtedly
be of great and useful Consequenc, and will preventthe Bawling of such Authors
as this is, who I believe will not Quarrel with what I here write, nor charge
his horrible Consequences upon it; and yet I am sure, all Sober Dissenters are
of this mind; For I never yet met any of them, but upon a sober debate, as
occasion offered it, were obliged by fair Argument to own it. And he that
believes this, believes enough, as to this Point, and more will but distract
and confound the plain and honest Christian. I have been the longer about this,
tolet this Author know that his charge of Heresy is stretched unreasonably
wide, and I hope I have gained thus much by taking notice of this Pamphlet,
that upon a serious and unbiased perusal of this few Remarks, any Reader of
common Capacity will see a necessity of better Arguments then he uses. And it is
hoped that our Church will use that way of reducing Dissenters, viz. Mild
Christian Debates and Conferences, Sober Brotherly Persuasions, with hearty
Prayers for each other; which were the Church Weapons of the Primitive
Christians, not such Whirlwind and Thunder* as some certain Renegado's yonder
at Algier, or thereabouts, would Conjure up, against a little scattered Fleet
of their Quondam Friends.

I profess I cannot but wonder at the unparalled Confidence of this Pamphlet,
that blushes not to charge the greatest part of the Sectaries, (as its young
zeal words it) meaning Protestant Dissenters) with making God the Author of
wickedness, in such terms as quoted before; which is no less then to charge
them with the blackest of Blasphemies. Now the Laws of our Land have provided
Condign punishment for that (most) Monstrous of Treasons, against the King of
Kings. And the Author cannot acquit himself of Misprision, if he gives not a
Catalogue of such horrible Delinquents, that the Law may punish them, and that
all Christians may shun them as the worst of Heretics. Let him produce that,
together with Legal Evidence, and then fiat Justitia, let new Tyburns be
erected for them, if the Legislative Authory thinks fit.

Reader, I have almost done with this Pamphlet, which I believe will Proselite
only such as are under the Influence of something I shall not name. Only give
me leave to add a few Lines by way of observation, upon the specimen, the
Author gives of the Wit and Policy of these giddy Sectaries, (as he calls them.)

Would they have (says he) p. 12.) Archbishops, -- Bishops, -- the best
Clergy, -- all the best Clergy of England, -- Tithes, -- Universities, --
Parish Levy's, -- Down? This he Answers with a parcel of Gingling, Yes, Yes,
Yesses.

Then to fill up the Vacuities, he insinuates that these same Sectaries would
Elect Tinkers, Tailors, Watermen, Shoomakers, Coffee-men, Hat-Dressers, etc.
concluding with a pious Irony, That the Christian World must be acquainted with
this Honorable -- Reformation!

In the first place the Slander is Venomous, and the Deportment of the Grave
and Reverend Nonconformist Preachers since His Majesty's happy Restoration,
confutes this wild Calumny. Let him name those giddy Fools, and let them be
exposed for their silliness; Else let him avoid the charge of turning a false
Accuser of the Brethren, if he can.

All that Protestant Dissenters desire, is but a Liberty to serve their God,
according to their Light, in Cottages, or any where, quietly, without any
Combination against the Government; nor do they begrudge the Governors of the
Church their Dignities or Revenues. When they do otherwise, let them be
stigmatized with a Witness for me; for then they cease from being the Disciples
of Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World.

Secondly, If he has been a beneficed Holder-forth amongst these Sectaries, he
might have named his own Trade with the rest; And should have Demonstrated
which of those Mechanics, have aspired to such high Church Dignities; without
that, the Tale signifies nothing. There were Mechanic Preachers in the
Primitive Times, I am sure; it is well they escape this Gentleman's lash; he
deserves thanks for that Civility, however.

Well but (says the Pamphlet, p. 13.) for forty years they have made no Bank,
built no Free-Schools, purchased no Church Lands, -- pay no Tithes, -- wont
consent to have all things common, -- their Preachers go a Begging, -- etc.

This I must confess is a frightful charge, and able to scare their Preachers
away from them, if they only gape for a Benefice. But the Author did not
consider that this is a good Argument against his Insinuations of their
Ambition, for if this be true, then the Government needs not fear them, and the
Prosecution of Penal Laws may be spared, when the Sectaries make no provision
for their Ministers, nor do Incorporate themselves into a formidable Faction.
Besides, since the Case is thus (or the Pamphlet tells a Whisker) either the
Dissenting Preachers, (as formerly hinted) are Fools to go a Begging, when they
may be welcome to our Church, and provided for, or else their Dissent is from
pure Conscience, and so, Christian Charity would rather pity then persecute
them.

To conclude this Section, if the Author of this Paper thinks fit to go on, let
him produce Arguments of weight and solidity, and wave the Language of
Reproach, and he will either convince us, or be answered soberly.

SECT. VII.
AFter this tedious Parenthesis, which unlookt for, fell in my way, I will
reassume my Discourse, and in all humility offer some Reasons, that the
Intention of the Lawmakers, was for suppressing Sedition, and Conspiracies
against the Government, and not merely to punish quiet and peaceable
Dissenters. And will in order thereunto, give you an Abstract of the words of
an Ingenious Author, lately published.

The Laws against Dissenters are of two different Natures. 1. Some Statutes are
wholly designed against Papists, and ought only to be Executed against them,
though some would have them put in Execution against Dissenting Protestants, for
not coming to Church, and receiving the Sacraments, etc.

2. The Laws indeed that were made against Puritan Sectaries (as they call
them) or Dissenting Protestants. The Statutes of the first sort, are in Number
five, viz. The 1. Elizabeth, ca. 2. the 23. Elizabeth, ca. 1. the 29.
Elizabeth, ca. 6. the 1. Jac. ca. 4. and 3. Jac. ca. 4.

Here good Reader, I thought to have enlarged, but upon second thoughts (having
resolved to be as brief as may be) I judge it more to your satisfaction to
refer you to a late Treatise Entitled, English Liberties, where from p. 171.
to p. 200. you have this Subject handled with much judgment, candor, and
clearness; the Book is to be had at any Booksellers, and is well worth every
English-mans perusal.

The Author plainly demonstrates that these Statutes intend only the
Prosecution of Papists, and therefore all the reason and equity in the World
will disallow their being put in Execution against peaceable Protestant
Subjects, who are no way concerned in them; which was the Opinion of the House
of Commons, who were more likely to Interpret a doubtful Law, then such
particular Justices and others, as are now so busy to Execute them against the
mind of the Lawmakers.

Sabbati, Sexto Die Nov. 1680.
Resolved nemine contradicente, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the
Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
against Popish Recusants, ought not to be extended against Protestant
Dissenters.

That the 35 th. of Eliz. is not now in force, the same Author Evidences by
such solid and convincing Demonstrations, that they are in my judgment
unanswerable, p. 181. etc.

And the sum is, that there are now no Laws in being to punish the
Conventicles, and the Nonconformist Ministers, who did not Conform to the Act
of Uniformity, made in the Reign of His present Majesty; But the Act commonly
called the Five Mile, or Oxford Act, and the Conventicle Act, made the 22 th.
of our present Sovereign. These you have also judiciously handled, Ibid.

He that will seriously peruse these several Statutes, and lay aside prejudice,
must needs conclude that it is not the mere Dissent which our Lawmakers intend
to punish, for the Conventicle Act allows any Family to Worship God in their
own way, provided there be no more then four persons besides the Domestics.
Nor does it punish merely for the number neither, unless them be Sedition, or a
Conspiracy of the Parties meeting to disturb the Peace, or contrive
Insurrections, or Traytorous Designs against the Government.

If there be any such meetings to be found, that instead of a pious and
peaceable Worshipping of God, will be meditating Rebellion, let the utmost
severity of the Law be put in Execution against them, for then they cease from
being Christians, when they become Traitors, and such only, viz. Disturbers of
the Peace, the just Laws of England design to suppress. But if there be no such
wicked Practices or Conspiracies, but on the contrary a peaceable Deportment,
and quiet, harmless behavior to be found, in the meetings of these Dissenters*
with what Conscience can those Laws be put in Execution against the Innocent,
which were meant only to suppress Sedition, and secure the Government against
such as actually disturb it? That that was the intention of the Legislators,
viz. to punish only the guilty, is evident, and for any one to stretch those
Statutes beyond the ends for which they were designed, is no less, then to show
himself undutiful to his Sovereign, unnaturally cruel to his poor Countrymen,
an oppressor of his Brethren, and obnoxious to a severe Reckoning, in the great
Day of Accounts. I have demonstrated before that, Compulsion of Conscience is
Diametrically opposite to the Law and Word of God, yea, that it is morally
impossible to make a Man believe against his Reason; and consequently that the
Effects of Compulsion is only to force Men to Hypocrisy, since no external
force can Convert the Soul.

Now I shall annex some Quotations from the Fundamental Laws of England, which
express such a tenderness of the Law of God, that it tells you in downright
terms, That no Act of Parliament, or Law, refugnant to the Law of God, is of
any force, Finch. p. 3. And that no Man of what Estate, Degree, or Condition
whatsoever, has power to dispense with Gods Law, as all the Clergy of the
Realm, and most of the Universities of Christendom, and we also affirm, 28. H.
8. And that against Scripture, Law, Prescription, Statute, nor Custom may
avail; and if any be brought in against it, they be void, and against Justice.
Doctor, and Student, etc.

Now, besides what has been said before of the Law of God, (which the Law of
the Land positively declares -- indispensible,) take here a brief specimen of
it.

1. All Men are Commanded to hear, learn, and keep it, and ought to be in their
respective Stations, according to Divine Rules, ready to Communicate such Gifts
as Christ bestows upon them, in order to Edify others. Mistake me not (Reader)
I do not plead for any promiscuous or irregular Liberty, for any person to step
beyond the bounds prescribed by the Sovereign Legislator, but to show you that
where a Talent is given, it should be improved. We find in Scripture, that
there were Preaching Kings, Princes, Judges, Levites, Psalm. 40. 9. Eccl. 1. 1.
and 12. 13. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. Yea, Preaching Mechanics, Tradesmen,
Tent-makers, Fishermen, etc. Mark 6. 3. Amos 1. 1. Mark 1. 16, 17. Act. 18. 2.
1 Cor. 14. 1, 2, 31.

2. God's Law pronounces a Woe to his Preachers, if they Preach not his Gospel,
1 Cor. 9. 16.

3. Rewards and Promises are promised to Preachers, Matthew. 10. 41. and 25. 21.
and 5. 19. James 5. 20.

4. God's Law allows Preaching in Houses, Streets, Fields, etc. Yea, to great
multitudes, with promised Mercies to the owners so receiving them, Act. 20. 20.
and 28. 31. Luk 13. 26. Matthew 3. 1. and 10. 40, 41, 42.

5. God's Law denounces wrath to such as abuse his Preachers, and beat their
fellow Servants, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Matthew. 24. 48, 49, 50.

6. God's Law injoyns Men to Assemble together in order to his Worship, Heb.
10. 25. and 3. 13. Act. 2. 42. Mal. 3. 14. 16. Yea, Thousands at a time, John
6. 10. Act. 44. and 2. 41. etc. much more to the same purpose may be quoted.
Now, I appeal to all sober Christians, whether any Law that contradicts this
Divine Law, or by coercive means, and riged penalties, keeps Christians from
these Duties, ought not to be relaxt, and forborne to be put in Execution,
because all humane Laws, are to give place to the Law of God, as our very
National Laws assert? and whether the Dissent of a peaceable Conscientious
People, from mere Ceremonies not enjoined by the Statute Law of Heaven,
deserves so rigorous a Treatment as a great many have felt, and still feel? etc.

SECT. VIII.
BEsides the Law of God, and the Law of the Land, which sweetly harmonize
together, (when the latter is not stretched beyond its meaning, by some whose
Charity appearsonly in the Ruin of their poor honest Neighbors,) I would urge
that great Magna Charta of Nature, a Law so just and comprehensive, that no Man
can deny it, unless at the same time he devests himself of Humanity, and
assumes the shape of a barbarous, and more then brutish Cruelty. It is this
(in few words) Do as you would be done unto. This Golden Text Reverenced
amongst the very Heathens (whose Precept it was, Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne
feceris) might administer a Copious Theme, but I shall be brief; And content my
self to ask two Questions of those Gentlemen, that are so busy in putting
these Penal Laws in Execution; But still letme repeat the Caveat I have so
often mentioned, -- that I plead not the Cause of Seditious Meetings, or such
as contrive or design any evil against the State, but only such as Dissent
purely out of Conscience, and manage their separation with Piety toward God,
and Loyalty to the King, together with a Christian becoming Deportment toward
their Neighbors.

1. Whether they, (that is such as prosecute the Protestant Dissenters,) would
be so dealt withal themselves? viz. to be Imprisoned, Fined, Deprived of their
Goods, Banished from their dearest Relations, Wives, Children, etc. forced from
their Trades and Callings, (when they live by the Labor of their their hands,
or the faculties they were brought up to,) have their Families beg or starve,
and in a word, utterly ruined, as to this World, and that merely because they
cannot Conform to what they are not convinced of, to be of Divine Institution?
Or, being Men of Conscience, will not be led by any Implicit Faith? If not,
methinks they should use the same tenderness to others, or else they violate
this Law, (made Sacred Matthew. 7. 12.)

2. Whether, if it had been their Lot to live in a Country where Popery, or
Presbyterianism, is the public Religion, would they look upon it to be just
and fair dealing, merely for their Conscientious Dissent to be forced to a
Hypocritical Compliance, or be ruined in their Estates, if not Lives?

SECT. IX.
THe Grand Topic which the little mercenary Pasquillers use to justify their
Invectives against Dissenters, is the late dismal Rebellion, and the horrid
Murder of His Majesty's Royal Father, etc. This is a Subject which I would not
touch upon, but that I am forced by the daily Clamours of these Pamphletters to
speak a few words to it. And,

1. If I know my own Heart, I can truly say, That I do from my very Soul abhor
and detest all Principles that tend to Rebellion, or Disturbance of the public
or private Peace, and all such wicked persons as Imbrue their hands in the
Blood of any Man, Woman, or Child, much more any such Traitors as practice
against the Sacred Life or Person of the Lord's Anointed, for such persons are
so far from deserving any favor or protection from the Government, that they
ought to be rooted from off the face of the Earth, as the most execrable of
Misereants. And therefore let the Authors of our late Calamities, and the
unparalled Murder of that Great and most Excellent Prince, be branded with
everlasting Infamy for me. It Is not for Traitors, but for my Innocent
Fellow Christians, that I beg the favor and pity of such as are entrusted
with the Execution of Penal Laws for Religion.

2. How far the Papists did Influence those fatal Convulsions, and whether the
Nation ows not all its Calamity to their black and mystical Stratagems, the
judicious unbiased Reader will soon determine, if he peruses Mr. Care's
History of the Plot, reprinted 1681. from p. 42. to 71. I have not Room to
transcribe it, and therefore would advise (any that doubts it) to peruse it
there Entire, it is worth his while.

4. It Is Diametrically opposite to Justice, to punish the Innocent for the
Crimes of the Guilty. -- And admitting that a great many under the Vizard of
Religion, had a main hand in these lamentable (and too too deplorable)
mischiefs before mentioned; there is no equity in the World, that their
Villainies shall be chargeable upon (and their punishment extend to) such as
were never concerned in them.

The best Religion in the World cannot secure it self from Hypocrites, that
disguise themselves till they have an opportunity to serve some Devilish turn,
or other. That Arch-Traytor and Informer Judus, got in among the very Apostles,
and many false Brethren crept in among the Primitive Saints; -- the Devil
himself will sometimes come Masqueraded as an Angel of Light. Why is the
Christian Religion ever the worse for this? No, no, Divine Truths are still
such, though the Sacred Profession of it is profaned and abused by such
Hypocritical Wretches, to their own Damnation.

What I aim at, is this, viz. that we are to examine the Principles of such as
profess Christianity under any form, declared in their public Confessions of
Faith, and the Writings of such as are owned, and approved by them, and if we
find them pernicious to the Government, or tending any ways to the disturbance
of the public peace; such are without Dispute to be suppressed and punished as
Enemies to the State. But if their Principles be in all Articles of Religion
suitable to the Word of God, and (in Fundamentals) to the Established Religion;
it will unavoidably follow, That the miscarriages, or wickedness of some that
creep in amongst them, are not to be charged upon their Christian Profession,
(which allows no such thing) but upon the Delinquents themselves.

From hence I infer, that the Murder of His late Majesty, those Rebellions,
Bloodsheds, and Overturnings of State, etc. then noted, are to be chargeable
only upon such as were personally and actually guilty, -- For I never heard,
(and I dare boldly say that no Man ever did hear) that any of our Dissenting
Protestants in their Confessions of Faith, have ever had so much Traytorous
Impudence, as to justify the least tittle of such horrid things, but the quite
contrary, as may be shown in time.

If there be any now alive, who have had any hand in those dreadful Commotious,
etc. If they have received His Majesty's Pardon, they are thereby reinstated
into equal Privileges with the Innocent, unless by new Treasons they forfeit
that Royal Grace* But if there be any of them excluded from the benefit of the
Act of Oblivion, let them be punished, fiat Justitia.

I insist the longer upon this, to show how unreasonable it is, for such a
parcel of Hackney Scriblers to be perpetually bawling of 41, 41, and making the
crimes of such as are Dead, or were Executed for their Treasons, not only
survive them, but persecute their poor Innocent Fellow Subjects with them; I
could wish with all my Heart, that all those halfpenny Pasquillers on both
sides, who merely for their Bellies, pester City and Country, inventing Names
of Reproach, as Whigg, Tory, Trimmer, etc. and begetting Feuds and Animosities
betwixt His Majesty's Liege People, were severely punished as Disturbers of the
public Peace; I am sure they deserve it more then the Dissenters, who are a
peaceable trading People, and useful Members of the State, who pay His Majesty
all His Taxes and Revenues, to the utmost of what the Law requires* (which is
not inconsiderable.) How untollerable is it then, for free born Subjects, Loyal
to the King, and helpful in supporting the charge of the Government to be daily
and weekly Libel'd, and abused by those Rascally Leeches of the Press, that to
serve their own little Craving Necessities, care not if they set the People
together by the Ears?

His Majesty out of His Royal Clemency was pleased to pass an Act of Oblivion,
yea, so impatient was he, that he pressed the Parliament with much earnestness,
to make it ready for his Royal Assent* What then? why here you have his
goodness* and Princely Lenity reviled, and contradicted, (almost daily) by a
certain Incendiary, who Conjurest up the Memory of those fatal Times, and keeps
the Nation Old Wounds a Bleeding, in defiance of that Act, which was designed
to heal, and make them forgotten.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Intended upon this Subject to have given you a parallel between the Doctrine
of the Church of England, and the Dissenters, but that I find it already well
done by Mr. Henry Care, in his Book Entitled, Vltrum Horum, etc. Printed 1682.
To which I refer you, as also to the truly pious Treatises of that worthy
Author (whoever he be) of the Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, etc.

2. I purposed likewise to lay down some Demonstrative Reasons, why the
profession of Popery is intolerable in a Protestant Kingdom, (whom they
account Heretics) because their Principles are Pernicious, and their Practices
have been Dangerous, etc.

3. To show the mischiefs, and sad Consequences of prosecuting quiet and
peaceable Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, as having a direct tendency to weaken
the Protestant Interest, for whose Ruin that common Enemy greedily gapes, (2.)
How much it destroys Trade, and ruins Thousands of Families, (3.) What a
Scandal it is to the Protestant Reformation, when we quarrel and persecute each
other, (4.) What a disparagement it is to the Actors, etc.

4. To show the quality of Informers, and the quality of such as they
prosecute; with the Ravenous and Illegal proceedings of the former.

5. Produce Illustrious Testimonies of the worth of the Dissenters, and how
serviceable they have been to the Crown, as also the Witness of as eminent
Churchmen and Statesmen, as ever were in England, who gave them great
Encomiums, and owned them as Brethren.

6. Propose a modest Essay for Union amongst all Protestants, with
Demonstrative Reasons, that it is not only practicable, but absolutely
necessary; together with the Blessed Effects of such an Accommodation.

But having already exceeded my intended limits, I must leave it to another
opportunity, and my poor endeavors to the Blessing of the God of Peace.

FINIS.

