THE Six Distinguishing Characters OF A Parliament Man.

THE Six Distinguishing Characters OF A Parliament Man.

Addressed to the Good People of England.

And that in Respect of some Matters of the Highest Importance to this our
Kingdom, we do intend to give Directions for the calling a new Parliament,
which shall begin, and be holden at Westminster, on Thursday the Sixth Day of
February next.

Vide Proclamation.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCC.

THE Six Distinguishing Characters OF A Parliament Man.
Good People of England,
THE Disuse, or Distrust of Parliaments in the Four last Reigns, was the
Nation's general Grievance; and 'twas but lately that parliaments were
consulted in the Matters of Highest Importance to the Kingdoms.

This was the Destruction of that Mutual Confidence between King and People,
which is so Essential to the Prosperity of a Nation.

Parliaments were called together, a long Speech, and great Pretenses for Money
opened the Session; and as soon as the End was answered, they were sent Home
about their Business.

If they began to show their Resentments, and appear Sensible of their being
Imposed upon, if they began to search into the Intriegues of the Court, if they
began to Question Favorites, and Ministers, they were equally certain of being
dismissed.

Now to show us what kind of a Nation we are (that according to the Old
Character of an Englishman) can never tell when we are Well, Providence has
changed the Scene.

Former Kings have been Addressed by their Parliament to make War against the
French, and Money given by Millions to carry it on, and have had their Money
spent, and no War could be had.

Now we have a King that has Fought our Battles in Person, and willingly run
through all the hazards of a bloody War, and has been obliged to use all the
Persuasions possible to bring us to Support him in it.

Former Kings would stand still, and see the French overrun Flanders, and ruin
our Protestant Neighbors, though the Parliament and People have entreated them
to Assist them, and save Flanders from the falling into the hands of the French.

Now we have a King, who Solicites the People to enable him to preserve
Flanders from falling into the Hands of the French, and to stand by and assist
our Protestant Neighbors. And we on the Contrary are willing to see the French
and Popish Powers, unite and possess Flanders, and every thing else, and glad
the Dutch are in danger to be ruined; nay, so willing we are to have the States
General destroyed, that Damn the Dutch, is become a Proverb among us.

Formerly we had Kings who raised Armies in Times of Peace, and maintained them
on sham Pretenses of a War never designed, and received Aids from the
Parliament Three times for the Disbanding One Army, and having spent the Money,
left the Parliament to do it themselves.

Now we have a King who against his Judgment, and, as it now appears, against
the Nation's Interest, consented to Disband the Army at the first Word from his
parliament, though he left all the most powerful of our Neighbors with their
Forces in full Pay,

Formerly we had Kings who did what they pleased, now we have a King who lets
us do what we please.

And yet Englishmen are not contented, but, as it were with our Savior, when
our Kings come Eating and Drinking, they Cry, Behold a Glutton and a Drunkard;
and now they have a King that comes neither Eating or Drinking, they cry out,
He has a D -- l.

It Is a vain thing to pretend to open the Eyes of the English Nation, but by
their own immediate Danger, any Body might have known in former times what the
Issue of a Popish Successor would have been, and some wiser than others told the
People of it, and were rewarded with the Ax and the Halter for their News.

But when that Popish Successor came to the Crown, and had reduced the
Liberties and Religion of the Nation to the last Gasp, then those very People,
who could not see their Danger at a distance, took a fright when it was upon
them, and what was the Consequence? Nothing but all the Blood and Treasure of
this last War.

Had the Nation seen with the same Eyes as the late Lord Russel, Earl of Essex,
and the Oxford Parliament, did see, could they have been convinced by Argument
that It was inconsistent with the Constitution of this Protestant Kingdom to be
governed by a Popish Prince. Could the B -- ps, who threw out that Bill, have
known that a Popish King would erect a High Ecclesiastic Commission Court, and
send them to the Tower for refusing him a Power to Dispense with the Laws, this
War had been prevented, and the Blood of 300000 English Protestants, who have
perished in it, had been saved, all the Ships our Merchants have lost to the
French, had been safe, and the many Millions of Money, which have been spent,
had been in our Pockets; all this is owing to the blindness of that Age, who
could not see the danger of the Nation, till it was just upon them.

Now, Gentlemen, this is to give you Notice, that the Nation is in more danger
at this time from abroad, than ever it was then in at home.

The King in his Proclamation for the calling a Parliament, has done two things
which no King his Predecessor ever did in our Age.

First, He has told us that he has such a Confidence in his People, that he is
very desirous to meet them, and have their Advice in Parliament.

Secondly, He tells us, that what he will advise with them about are Matters of
the Highest Importance to the Kingdom.

Matters of the Highest Importance to a Kingdom must relate to some of these
things, Peace and War, the Safety of Religion, Liberty and Trade; at least it
will be allowed that these are Matters of the Highest Importance to the Kingdom.

Now, though I shall not adventure to explain His Majesty's Meaning, yet I may be
allowed to build the following Discourse on the Supposition of this Explication:

And venture to suppose His Majesty had said, that the Danger the Protestant
Religion seems to be in from the formidable Appearance of the French Power, and
the Danger our Trade is in from the Succession of Spain devolving to the House
of Bourbon, and the Danger of a new Flame of War breaking out upon our
confederated Neighbors, whom our Interest, as well as Leagues and Alliances,
oblige us to assist; all these things being Matters of the Highest Importance
to the Kingdom, he has resolved to call a new Parliament, to advise with them
about these important things.

And because the Circumstances of Affairs are such, as may bring us under a
necessity of Armies, which People are so mightily afraid of; and that the
Condition the Breach of our Army has left us in has been such, that if another
should be wanting to defend us, it is a Question where it could be raised.

Wherefore our proper Defense, may be one of the Important things, for ought we
know, about which they are to Advise.

And because the Debate of an Army is a tender nice Point, I shall explain my
self; I do not mean that a Standing Army should have been kept up in England in
time of Peace, but, I say, it had been better for England and all Europe that
we had not disarmed our selves so soon; and if we had disarmed, that we had not
so entirely done it all at once; whereby we rendered our selves so despicable,
that the French King has had an opportunity to Affront the whole Confederacy,
in renouncing a League ratified and exchanged, and taking Possession of a Crown
for his Grandson, on the new invented Title of a last Will and Testament.

This he would not have adventured to have done, had the English been in a
Capacity to have possessed Flanders, and to have appeared at Sea, to have
protected the Princes of Italy in their adherence to the Emperor.

But the English having reduced themselves to such a Condition, that whenever
the French, or any body else please to Quarrel with us, we must be a
considerable while before we can be in a posture to act offensively, and the
French having so insulted us in the Affair of Spain, that it will stand as an
effectual Proof, whether we are in a Capacity to resent an Affront or no; His
Majesty, who, when in a much lower Station, did not use to suffer himself to be
so treated, has thought fit to advise with the English Parliament in the Case.

By advising with the Parliament, I understand, informing them of the State of
Affairs, telling them his own Opinion, and asking theirs, proposing the
Measures he thinks fit to take, and desiring their Opinion of the matter, and
if they agree with him in the Measures which are to be taken, then to Propose
their making provision in a Parliamentary way, for enabling him to Prosecute
such Measures as they agree to.

For to debate and consider Matters of so much Consequence, the King has
directed Writs for the calling a new Parliament, to meet at Westminster the
Sixth of February next.

Since then the Matter is referred to the People of England, and they are to
choose Representatives for so great a Work, as to advise with a Protestant King
about things of the highest Importance to the Kingdom,

Give a stander-by leave, Gentlemen, to offer something to the People of
England, by way of Advice or Direction, in the great Affair they have before
them, and if it be with more freedom than is usual, bear with him for once,
because it is about Matters of the highest Importance.

The usual Advices given in like Cases, formerly (when the Elections of Members
were so corrupted, that indeed Advice was necessary, though hopeless) use to be,
to choose Men that had Estates, and Men of Honesty, Men that had Interests in
the Freehold, and in the Corporations, and that would not give away their
Liberties, and the Advice was good: And had the Country taken that Advice, the
P -- would not have been huff'd by King James into a tacit Permission both of a
standing Army at home, and the dispensing the Popish Officers continuing in
Commission without taking the Test.

But my Advice must differ from, though it must include part, of the
forementioned Particulars; and therefore while I am directing these Sheets to
the Freeholders of England, I beg them to consider in their Choice of
Parliament Men, that there may be Men of Estates, and Men of Honor in the
Countries, who by some Circumstances may not be proper to serve in this
Parliament, because by Prejudice or private Principles their Judgment may be
pre-engaged to the Disadvantage of the Nation's Interest; and since there are
such, it is necessary, Gentlemen, to caution you,

First, That you be well assured the Gentlemen you shall choose are thoroughly
engaged with the present Circumstances of the Nation, and thoroughly satisfied
with the present Establishment of the Government; as Papists are justly
excluded by Law from coming to Parliament, because it cannot be expected that a
Roman Catholic can be a proper Person to consult about the Interest of a
Protestant Kingdom, so it cannot be rational that he who is a declared Friend
to King James or his Interest, can be a proper Person to advise with King
William about Matters of the highest Importance to the Kingdom; it cannot be
rational, that he who would be willing to have this Nation return to her
Obedience to a Popish King, can be a proper Person to be consulted with in
Parliament about securing and defending the Protestant Religion; this were to
pull down what we intend to build, and would be as proper a way to help us, as
a French Army maintained in England, would be proper to defend us against Lewis
the XIV.

Those Men that Drink Healths to King James, and wish him all manner of
Prosperity, are they fit Men to represent a Protestant Nation, and to advise a
Protestant Prince for the security of the Protestant Religion?

Wherefore, Gentlemen, for God sake, and for your own sakes, take heed, and set
a mark on such Men; if you choose Men disaffected to the Present Settlement of
the Nation, Friends to the late King, or to his Interest, you may be certain,
such Men will pull back the Nation's Deliverance, and hinder, not further that
Unanimity of Councils, which is so much more needful now than ever, can the
Friends to a Popish Prince be fit to represent a Protestant People, I have
nothing to say to those we call Jacobites, though I wonder any can be such, and
yet be Protestants; but as to their Persons I say nothing to them, no, nor to
the Papists, provided they keep the Peace, but to single such out to serve the
Nation in a Protestant Parliament, and to advise with King William in Matters
of the highest Importance, this is a thing so Preposterous, is such a
Contradiction, that I know not what to say to it; it is like going to the Devil
with a Case of Conscience.

Even our Adversaries cannot but laugh at the folly of the English Nation, that
they should choose their Enemies to be their Counselors, and think to Establish
King William, by King James's Friends, nothing can sooner complete the Ruin of
the Kingdom, than to fill the House of Commons with Jacobite Members, who will
be sure to forward any thing that tends to division, in order to hinder the
Nations Happiness, wherefore though I might imagine such Advice to be needless, I
must insist upon it, that you will avoid such Men as either have discovered a
Disaffection to King William, and the Present Settlement of the Nation, or that
have been upheld by that Party.

In the next place, Gentlemen, let your Eyes be upon Men of Religion; choose no
Atheists, Socinians, Heretics, Asgillites, and Blasphemers.

Had the Original of the late War been under the Reign of such a Body of Men,
England might have made a Will, and given her Crown to the Duke d' Berry, as
Spain has to the Duke d' Anjou, and have sought Protection from the French.

The danger of Religion calls for Men of Religion to consult about it; you can
never expect that Atheists, Socinians, or Asgillites, will have any tenderness
upon their Minds for the Protestant Religion; Jacobites will as soon support
King William, as Atheists will preserve the Protestant Religion; what concern
can they have upon their minds for the protestant Religion, who really are of
no Religion at all? They Will think it hard to raise any Money for the
preservation of Religion, who fancy all Religion to be a trick, and the cheat
of the Clergy; they can never think the danger of the Protestant Religion to
signify much, who would not give a Shilling to secure it; and they will never
give a Shilling to secure it, who Believe nothing of the matter; besides this,
What goods Laws? What Reformation of Manners? What wholesome Orders for the
Morality of Conversation can we expect from Men of no Religion?

Of all things therefore the Members you choose should be Men of Religion, Men
of Orthodox Principles, and Moral in Practice, and that more especially now,
because the security of Religion not only here, but over the whole World, may
lie before them, and have a great dependence upon their Councils.

3. Men of Sense; the House of Commons is not a place for Fools; the great
Affairs of the State, the Welfare of the Kingdom, the public Safety, the
Religion, Liberties, and Trade, the Wealth and Honor of the Nation, are not
things to be debated by Green Heads; the saying we have, that the House of
Commons is a School for Statesmen, is an Error, in my Opinion they should be
all well Taught, and thoroughly Learned in Matters of the highest Moment before
they come there.

There has always been a sort of Gentlemen in the H -- se who use to be called
the Dead Weight, who pass their Votes in the House as the poor Ignorant
Freeholders in the Country do, just as their Landlord, or the Justice, or the
Parson directs; so these Gentlemen understanding very little of the Matter,
give their Vote just as Sir such a one does, let it be how it will, or just
follow such a Party, without judging of the Matter.

Pray Gentlemen, if we are ruined, and the Protestant Religion must sink in the
World, let us do our best to Save it; don't let us have cause to say, we sent a
parcel of Fools about the Business that fell into Heats and Parties, and spent
their time to no purpose, for want of knowing better.

Of all Employments a Fool is the most unfit for a Parliament Man, for there is
no manner of Business for him; he is capable of saying neither Ay, nor No, but
as he is lead.

I desire to be understood here what I mean by a Fool, not a Natural, an Idiot,
a Ben in the Minories, a Born Fool, no, nor a silly, stupid, downright
Blockheaded Fool: But Men are Fools or Wisemen, comparatively considered with
respect to their several Capacities, and their several Employments; as he may
be a Fool of a Parson who is a very Ingenious Artificer; a Fool of a
Clockmaker, and yet be a very good Sailor; so a Gentleman may be a good
Horse-racer, a good Sports-man, a good Swords-man, and yet be a Fool of a
Parliament Man, therefore so I am to be Understood.

That he who is Capable to serve his Country as a Representive in Parliament,
ought to be a Man of Sense, that is, a Man of a general Knowledge, and
receptive of the general Notions of things, acquainted with the true Interest
of his Native Country, and the general State of it, as to Trade, Liberties,
Laws, and common Circumstances, and especially of that part of it for which he
serves; he ought to know how to deliver his Mind with freedom and boldness, and
pertinent to the Case; and he ought to be able to distinguish between the
Different Circumstances of things, to know when their Liberties are encroached
upon, and to Defend them, and to know how to value a Prince who is faithful to
the Liberty and Interest of his Country, and to distinguish such a one from
those who have made it their Business to Oppress and Invade the Liberties and
Properties of the People, and betray them and their Interest to Popish and
Bloody Enemies.

4. Men of Years; though it is confessed Wisdom makes a young Man old, yet the
House of Commons is not a House for Boys; we have seen too many young Men in
the House, and rash Councils are generally the Effect of young Heads. Fools and
Boys would do less Harm in the House, and grow wiser by being there, were they
but allowed to sit, and not give their Votes; but while a Boy may do as much
mischief as a Man, and a Fool as a Man of Sense, it is hard the material Points
of the Nation's Happiness should be committed either to young or weak Heads.

The Grandeur of the present French Monarchy is not unjustly ascribed to the
extraordinary Men, who are of the King's Council. The Parliament of England is
the Great Council of the Nation, and on their Resolutions depends the
prosperity both of King and People. Now if these Councils are committed to
young Heads, the Proceedings will be suitable; as he that sends a Fool with a
Message must expect a foolish Answer; so he that sends a Boy to Market, expects
to make a Child's Bargain.

5. Men of Honesty. It was formerly said, Choose Men of Estates; the reason was,
that they might not be tempted by places and Pensions from the Court, to sell
the Nation's Liberties; and indeed the Caution was good; but, Gentlemen, the
Case is altered, the Court and the Nation's Interest are now all of a side,
which they were not then, nor indeed never were since Queen Elizabeth. The King
desires we should do nothing but what is for the Security and prosperity of
Religion, and the Glory of the Nation; the Caution about Estates can do no
harm, but a Man's Estate does not qualify him at all to judge of the Necessity
of Giving.

The Article of Estate was only supposed to make a Man cautious what he gave,
because he was to pay the more of it himself. Now let a Man have but Sense to
know when there is a Necessity to give, and that Sense backed with Honesty, if
he has not one Groat Estate, he will be as cautious of giving away the Nation's
Money, as he would be of his own: To desire Men should have Estates, that their
Interest should make them shy, and backward to give Money, supposes at the same
time they should want both Sense and Honesty. Sense, that they could not value
the Nation's Money, unless they were to pay part of it themselves; and Honesty,
that they would not take as much care of giving away the Nation's Money as
their own. Wherefore do but choose Men of Honesty, and I do not lay so great a
stress upon a Man's Estate. If there was any Body to bribe them, something
might be said, but that Trade is over, (God be thanked) King William has no
need for it, and King James cannot afford it, and so that Fear ceases.

The last Character I shall recommend for your choice is, let them be Men of
Morals.

Rakes and Beaus are no more fit to sit in the House of Commons, than Fools and
Knaves. It Is hard we should put the Work of Reformation into the Hands of such,
whose own Conversation is vicious and scandalous. A drunken Parson is a very
improper Agent to reform a Parish, a lewd swearing Justice is not likely to
reform the Country, no more is a vicious immoral Parliament likely to reform a
Nation. Reformation of Manners is an Article of the highest Importance to the
Kingdom; the King has recommended it to every Parliament, and yet we find it
very much retarded; it goes on so heavily, that the Proceedings are hardly
visible; and till you have a reformed parliament, you cannot expect a
Parliament of Reformers.

Unless our Members are Men of Morals, we must expect very few Laws against
Immorality; and if there should such clean things come out of an unclean, it
would be all Hetrodox, and Unnatural; it would be like a monstrous Birth, the
Parent would be afraid of it, and it would be ashamed of its Parent.

Besides, how can ye expect that God should accept of the Offering dedicated by
Impure Hands? The Work can never be supposed to Prosper while the Undertakers
plead for God, and at the same time Sacrifice to the Devil.

It Is true, that God oftentimes Works by unlikely Instruments, but it is not
often that he Works by contraries; Jehu was made use of to bring to pass the
Ruin God had foretold to the Family of Ahab, but 'twas a Josiah and a
Jehosaphat, for whom God reserved the Work of Reformation, and the Destruction
of Idolatry.

But allow that God may make use of improper Methods, and unlikely Instruments
when he pleases to bring to pass what his Providence has designed, yet we are
not to confine him to show his Power, and oblige him to make use of such
Instruments, as he can have no Pleasure in, least he should think fit to refuse
his Blessing, and make the Work abortive, or at least delay his Concurrence to
the Work of our Reformation, till we shall think fit to choose such Persons for
the carrying it on, as are fit to be employed in so great a Work.

FINIS.

