SOME REFLECTIONS On a Pamphlet lately Published, Entitled, AN ARGUMENT
Showing that A Standing Army Is inconsistent with A Free Government, AND
Absolutely Destructive to the Constitution of the English MONARCHY.

Hard words, Iealousies and Fears,
Sets Folks together by the Ears.
Hudibras Lib. 1. The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1697.

The PREFACE.
Mr. ABCDEFG, SIR,
SInce I am to Address to you Incognito, I must be excused if I mistake your
Quality; and if I treat you with more or less Civility than is your due, with
respect to the Names or Titles, by which you may be Dignified or Distinguished;
but as you are in Print, you give your self a just Title to the scandalous Name
of a Pamphleteer, a Scribler, a seditious broacher of Notions and Opinions, and
what not, for as is the Book such is the Author.

I confess you are something difficult to be known, for your Note is so often
changed, and your Trumpet gives such an uncertain sound, that no man can
prepare himself to the Battle; sometimes you talk like a Common Wealths Man,
sometimes you applaud our present Constitution, sometimes you give high
Encomiums of the King; and then under the Covert of what Kings may be, you
sufficiently Banter him; sometimes the Army are Ragamuffins, sometimes Men of
Conduct and Bravery; sometimes our Militia are brave Fellows, and able enough
to Guard us, and sometimes so inconsiderable, that a small Army may Ruin us,
so that no Man alive knows where to have you.

Possibly I may not have made a particular Reply to a long Rapsody of
Exclamatory Heads; for indeed, Sir, Railing is not my Talent: Had I more time
to consult History, possibly I might have illustrated my Discourse with more
lively instances; but I assure you I have not looked in a Book during the
Composure, for which reason I desire to be excused if I have committed any
Errors, as to the Dates of any of my Quotations.

If I were a Member of the Army, I would thank you mightily for the fine sweet
words you give them at the end of your Book: you have a pretty way with you of
talking of Kings, and then you don't mean this King; and then of Armies, but
you don't mean this Army; no, by no means, and yet it is this King that must not
be trusted with Men nor Arms, and it is this Army that must be Disbanded; and
his Majesty is exceedingly obliged to you, Sir, for your usage of him as a
Soldier; for it is plain you are for Disbanding him as well as the Army.

But of all things I magnify you, Dear Sir, for that fine turn of Argument,
that not to Disband the Army is the way to bring in King James; but to Disband
them is the most effectual way to hinder them. You have read, no doubt, of the
Fable, how the Sheep were persuaded to dismiss the Dogs who they had hired to
defend them against the Wolves; the Application, Sir, is too plain; and this is
the Clause makes me suspect you for a Iacobite.

Well you have driven furiously, and like Jehu called all the World to see your
Zeal for the Lord; but like him too you have not Demolished the high Places;
you have Demolished the Army, but you have not provided against Jacobitism; you
take care to leave the King naked to the Villainy of Assassines, for you are not
for leaving him so much as his Guards; and you take care to leave the Nation
naked to the insults of an Enemy, and the King and the People must defend
themselves as well as they can. This is the way indeed to teach us Obedience
with a Rod of Iron, and to make us pass under the Axes and Harrows of a
barbarous Enemy.

All your Plea is Liberty, an alluring word; and I must tell you, Liberty or
Religion has been the Mask for almost all the Public Commotions of the World:
but if Freedom be the English Man's Right, you ought to have given the King and
his Parliament the Freedom of Debating this matter by themselves, without
putting your self upon them to raise a Controversy, where for ought you know
there may be no occasion.

What is there no way but an entire Disbanding the whole Army? Can no Expedient
be found out to secure us from Enemies abroad, and from Oppression at home,
etc. no way but this, Sir, How do you know what a Parliament may do?

Parliaments are Magnipotent, though they are not Omnipotent, and I must tell
you, Sir, the Commons of England are not a Body that can be Enslaved with 20000
Men; and all that have ever attempted it, formed their own Ruin in it, and I
hope ever will do so; but the Wicked fear where no fear is, and fly when none
pursues.

Sir, I wish you would let us know your Character, that we might judge of the
Manners by the Man, for I am sure we cannot judge well of the Man by the
Manners.

Your most Humble Servant, D.F.

Reflections on a late Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, An Argument against a
Standing Army.
SOME Men are so fond of their own Notions, and so impatient in the Pride of
their own Opinions, that they cannot leave Business of Consequence to them to
whom it specially and peculiarly belongs, but must, with as much Brass as
Impertinence, meddle with a Cause before it comes before them, though it be only
to show they have more Wit than Manners.

I observe this by the way, before I enter the List of Argument which a
Nameless Author of a most Scandalous Pamphlet, called, An Argument against a
standing Army.

If the Author of that Pamphlet be, as he would be thought, a true honest
spirited Englishman, who out of his mere Zeal for the Safety, Liberty, and
Honor of his Country, has made this false Step, he is the more to be
considered: But if so, why should he fear his Name? The days are over, God be
thanked, when speaking Truth was speaking Treason: Every Man may now be heard.
What has any Man suffered in this Reign for speaking boldly, when Right and
Truth has been on his side? Nay, how often has more Liberty been taken that way
than consisted with good Manners, and yet the King himself never restrained it,
or reproved it; witness Mr. Stephen's unmannerly Books, written to the King
himself.

But since the Author Conceals himself from all the World, how can we guess him
any thing but a Malcontent, a Grumbletonian, to use a foolish term, a Person
dissatisfied with his not being Rewarded according to his wonderful Merit, a
Ferg --, a Man --, or the like. Or a downright Iacobite, who finding a French
War will not do, would fain bring in Fears and Jealousies to try if a Civil War
will. I confess I cannot affirm which of these; but I am of the Opinion he is
the latter of the two, because his Insinuations are so like the Common Places
of that Party, and his Saucy Reflections on the King's Person, bear so exact a
Resemblance to their usual Treatment of him, that it seems to be the very style
of a Malignant.

I may be readily answered to this (I confess) Let me be what I will, what is
that to you, Answer my Argument; If the Doctrine be true, let the Devil be the
Parson; Speak to the Point.

In good time I shall: And to begin with him, I agree with him in all he says,
or most part at least of his Preamble, saving some triflng Matters of Style and
of Notion, and we will not stand with him for small things. And thus I bring him
to his Fourth Page without any trouble; for indeed he might have spared all the
Three Pages for any great signification they have, or relation to what comes
after.

The Fifth Paragragh in his Fourth Page, and indeed the Substance of the whole
Book brings the Dispute to this short Point; That any Army in England is
inconsistent with the Safety of the Kingdom; That Liberty and an Army are
incompatible; That the King is not to be trusted with either Men, Arms, nor
Money, for the last will be the Consequence of the former; lest he that has
ventured his Life in the Extremest Dangers for us, should turn our Devourer
and destroy us. A great deal of very handsome Language he bestows upon the King
on this account, calling him, with a tacit sort of necessary Consequence, Wolf,
Beast, Tyrant, and the like.

He tells us, Page 3. All the Nations round us have lost their Liberty by their
permitting standing Armies; and that they permitted them from Necessity or
Indiscretion. If from Necessity, 'twas their Misfortune not their Fault. If
from Indiscretion, that was their Fault indeed.

But he is not pleased to give us one Instance of any People who were brought
under that Necessity, and lost their Liberty by it; and yet if he had, 'twas no
Argument, but that if we were reduced to the same Necessity, we must run the
risque of it: Of which more by and by.

In the same Page he lays down the Draught of our Constitution. Depending on a
due Balance between King, Lords and Commons; and affirms from thence, That
this Constitution must break the Army, or the Army destroy this Constitution:
and affirms absolutely, with a Confidence Peculiar to himself, That no Nation
can preserve its freedom, which maintains any other Army than such as is
composed of a Militia of its own Gentry and Freeholders. And being gotten into
a Positive vein, he says, What happened yesterday, will come to pass again; and
the same Causes will produce like Effects in all Ages. And indeed all is alike
true, since nothing is more frequent, than for the same Causes to produce
different Effects; and what happened yesterday may never happen again while the
World stands, of which King James is a visible Instance. But to descend to
Particulars.

I shall give you only this remarkable Instance; King Henry VIII made as
vigorous and irregular Efforts to destroy the Religion of the Kingdom (as then
'twas established) as ever King James did, and perhaps his Methods were more
than ordinarily parallel; he Governed this Nation with as absolute a despotical
Power, though the Constitution was then the same it is now, as ever King
Charles II. or King James II. attempted to have done, and yet the Effects were
not Abdication, or calling in a Foreign Aid. I could go back to other Kings of
this Nation, whose Stories might illustrate this; but the Gentleman is
Historian good enough, I perceive, to know it; and by the way, it is to be
observed also, that he did this without the help of a Standing Army: From
whence I only observe, as all the present use I shall make of this Instance,
that there are ways for a King to tyrannize without a standing Army, if he be
so resolved: e contra, there may be ways to prevent it with an Army, and also
that I think this proves, that the same Causes does not always produce the same
Effects; and a little further, if the same Causes will produce the like Effects
in all Age, why then, Sir, pray lay by your Fears, for if ever King William
(which we are sure he will not) or any King else, goes about to destroy our
Constitution, and overturn our Liberties, as King James did, the People will
call in a Foreign Aid, and cause him to run away, as they did then; for what
happened Yesterday will come to pass again, and the same Causes will produce
the like Effects in all Ages.

Page the Sixth he begins very honestly, with a Recognition of our Security
under the present King, and softens his Reader into a belief of his Honesty, by
his Encomiums on his Majesty's Person, which would be well compared with his
Seventeenth Page, to show how he can frame his Style to his Occasion; but in
short, concludes, that when he is dead, we know not who will come next; nay,
the Army may come and make who they please King, and turn the Parliament out of
Doors and therefore in short, we ought not to trust any thing to him, that we
would not trust to the greatest Tyrant that may succeed him. So that our
Condition is very hard, that the Person of a King is no part of the
Consideration, but a King, be he Angel or Devil, it is all one, is a Bugbear,
and not to be trusted. A fine Story indeed, and our great Deliverer (as he
calls the King) must not regret this, but be contented: that now he has cleared
the World of all our Enemies, but himself, he should be esteemed the great
Charibdis which the Na^ion was to be split upon, and we must entirely disarm
him, as a Wolf who ought not to be trusted with Teeth; for these are his own
Words.

Then he tells us, No Legislators ever established a Free Government, but
avoided this, as the Israelites, Athenians, Corinthians, Accaians,
Lacedaemonians, Thebanes, Sammites, Romans. Now it is notoriously known, that all
these were first established Commonwealths, not Monarchies: and if this
Gentleman would have us return to that Estate, then I have done with him; but I
appeal to himself, if all these Governments, when they became Regal, did not
maintain a Millitary Power more or less: Nay, God himself, when the Israelites
would have a King, told them this would be a Consequence: as if it might be
inferred as of absolute necessity, that a Military Power must be made use of
with a Regal Power; and as it may follow no King, no Army, so it may as well
follow, no Army no King. Not that I think an Army necessary to maintain the
King in his Throne, with regard to his Subjects, for I believe no Man in the
World was ever the Peoples King more than his present Majesty. But I shall
endeavor a little to examine by and by, what the King and Nation, so as
Matters now stand in the World, would be without an Army.

But our Adversary rests not here, but Page 7. he proceeds; truly he would not
have the King trusted with an Army; no, nor so much as with Arms, all the
Magazines too must be taken from him. And referring to the Estates, mentioned
before, he says, They knew that the Sword and the Sovereignty marched Hand in
Hand, and therefore a general exercise of the People in Arms, was the Bulwark
of their Liberties, and their Arms, that is, Magazines of Ammunition, etc. for
the Term is now changed, were never lodged in the Hands of any but the People:
for so the following Words directly imply. The best and bravest of their
Generals came from the Plough, and contentedly returned to it again when the
War was over. We should have made a fine War against France indeed, if it had
been so here. And then he goes on with Instances of Nations who lost their
Liberties when ever they deviated from these Rules. At the end of these
Examples, our Author tells all the World in short what he would be at: For
there he has, like God Almighty, divided the World, and he has set the Sheep on
his right hand, and the Goats on his left; for he has reckoned up all the
Monarchal Governments in the World, with a Go ye cursed into the most abandoned
Slavery, as he calls it; and all the Commonwealths in the World, on the other
side, with a Come ye blessed into freedom from Kings standing Armies, etc.

Nay he has brought Algiers and Tunis in for People who enjoy their Liberty,
and are free. I suppose he has never been there: and truly, I believe the
Freedom he mentions here, would be very like that, or like the Days when there
was no King in Israel, but every Man, did what was right in his own Eyes.

Thus far I have followed him only with Remarks in general to Page 13. he
proceeds then to tell us the Danger of an Army, and the Misfortune of all
Countries to be forced sometimes to take up Arms against their Governors. A
Man ought to be an universal Historian to affirm that, and I have not time to
examine it now. From hence he draws this Assertion, That it is therefore
necessary to put us into a Capacity always to be able to Correct our Kings,
that we may have no occasion for it; for when we are enabled to do it, we shall
never be put upon it. The English is this, Keep your King so weak that he may
always be afraid of you, and he will never provoke you to hurt him. For, says
he, that Nation shall be sure to live in Peace which is most capable of making
War: But if the King has 20000 Men beforehand with us, observe it [ with us]
in totidem verbis I leave his meaning to be construed, the People can make no
Efforts without the Assistance of a Foreign Power.

Another Consequence of an Army is, They may come and force the People to
choose what Members they please, to sit in Parliament, or they may besiege the
Parliament House, and the like. Now it happened that both these things have
been done in England, and yet the People preserved their Liberties, which is a
Demonstration beyond the Power of Words, from his old Maxim, What happened
Yesterday, will come to pass again, and like Causes will have like Effects: The
choice of Members of Parliament were obstructed, and the House of Parliament
was besieged and insulted by the Soldiers, and yet the People were not deprived
of their Liberties; therefore it may be so again, for what happened Yesterday
will come to pass again.

Page 14. He descends to a particular, which reverst, I think, is a lively
Instance what a vigorous Opposition may do against a far greater Force than
20000 Men: If King Charles the First, says he, had had but 5000 Men, the People
could never have struck a Stroke for their Liberties.

Turn this Story, and let us but recollect what Force the Parliament had, and
what the King had, and yet how many Strokes he struck for his Crown.

The Parliament had the Navy, all the Forts, Magazines and Men in their Hands:
The King, when he erected his Standard at Nottingham, had neither Ships, Men,
Arms, Ammunition or Money, but seemed to be turned loose into the Field, to
fight with the Commons of England, and all the Militia was in the Hands of the
Parliament by the Commission of Array, and yet the King was ready in Keynton
Field, and at the Head of an Army, sooner than the Parliament were ready to
fight him, nor do the Writers of that Side pretend to call that a Victory.

Then he comes to King James, and says he, If he had not attempted Religion*
but been contented with Arbitrary Power, we should have let him bound us Hand
and Foot; and though King James had all the Nation, and his own Army against him,
yet we account the Revolution next to a Miracle. To this I reply, No, Sir; no
Miracle at all on that Score; for the Nobility, Gentry, and People of England
did not question but they should reduce him to reason, else they had never
called in the present King, for they did not expect him to work Miracles, but
to procure a Free Parliament, etc. as is at large expressed in his Majesty's
Decla^ation. But here lay the Miracle of the Revolution:

The Providential Removal of the French Kings Forces to the Siege of
Philipsburgh, against all manner of Policy, when if he had made but a feint on
the Frontiers of the Dutch, they could neither have spared their Troops nor
their Stadtholder.

The wonderful Disposition of the Wind and Weather which locked up King James's
Fleet, so as to make the Descent easy and safe.

And at last the Flight of King James, and the Re-settlement of the whole
Kingdom without a Civil War, which was contrary to the Expectations of all the
World; this was that which was next to Miraculous.

Now we must come to examine his Quotations, by which I must be excused to
guess at the rest of his Instances, which indeed, generally speaking, are
chosen very remote; he tells us, a very small Army is capable to make a
Revolution; Oliver Cromwell left behind him but 17000, Oportet Mendacem esse
Memorem; Oliver Cromwell did not work the Revolution which he brought to pass on
the Parliament with less than 35000 Men, and if he left but 17000 behind him,
which nevertheless I do not grant, there must be reckoned the Army left in
Scotland, with General Monk, which was at least 12000, and the Settlement in
Ireland, which at least also took off from the old Army above 10000 Men more,
besides those which had changed Parties and laid down their Arms: As to the
Pretorian Soldiers, I don't read that they by themselves made any Revolution in
the Roman Empire. Julius Caesar had a much greater Force when he Marched out of
Gaul; and they were great Armies who Declared Galba, Otho, and Vespasian
Emperors. Then as to the Ottoman Empire, of which this Author, I suppose, knows
very little; the Ianisaries have not been less in that Empire till this War,
than 70000 Men; what he calls the Court Ianisaries I know not, but when Selimus
Deposed and Murdered his Father Amurath, you will find above 50000 Ianisaries
and Spahis in the Action; but if an Army of 17000 Men can enslave this Nation,
as he foolishly supposes, our Militia are good for much at the same time.

As to his Paragraph, p. 15. wherein he says, we are told, this Army is to be
but for a time, and not to be part of our Constitution. I must say to him, I
never have been told so, but I am of the Opinion, and shall acquiesce in it,
that such an Army and no other, as the King and Parliament shall think needful
for our Preservation shall be kept on Foot, so and so long as the said King and
Parliament shall think fit; and from them I dare say no Danger can befall our
Liberty. We have a blessed happy Union between the King and the Parliament; the
King offers not to invade the Peoples Liberties, nor they his Prerogative; he
will desire no Army but for their safety, nor they will deny none that is: But
here is an Author, who in the beginning of his Pamphlet says, the Safety of the
Kingdoms depends upon a due Balance; and at the same time tells us, our
Armies, no nor our Magazins, are not to be trusted with the King; is that a due
Balance?

Then he tells you, that saying the Purse is in the Hands of the People, is no
Argument at all, and that an Army will raise Money, as well as Money raise an
Army; he suggests indeed, that it is too desperate a Course, as well he may; for
I would only ask him, if he thinks an Army of 20000 Men could suppress this
whole Kingdom, and live upon Free Quarter on the Inhabitants by Force. I would
put him in mind of the Alarm Ship Money made in England, and yet King Charles
had then an Army and no Parliament Sitting. Then he supposes a shutting up the
Exchequer, for indeed he is upon the Point of Supposing every thing that has
but a Possibility in it, and what if the Exchequer should be shut up? why this
Gentleman wants to be told that the Money is not in Specie in the Exchequer,
and it must be raised and brought thither by the Help of the Army; so that all
that amounts to the same thing as the other, raising Money by Troops of Horse,
which has been tried in England, to the Destruction of the Contrivers; and what
has been, he says, will always be again.

From this he proceeds to an insolent saucy Banter on his Majesty's Person,
whose Virtue, he says, we ought not to hazard by leading it into Temptation:
Our Heroes, he says, are of a course Allay, and he has observed most Men to do
all the Mischief they can, and therefore he is for dealing with them as with
Children and Mad Men, that is, take away all Weapons from them, by which they
may do either themselves or others any Mischief; as the Sheep who addressed to
Apollo, that for the future the Wolves might have no Teeth.

His placing this in the Plural, the Courtiers, is too thin a Screen to blind
any Man's Eyes; but it is as plain as if it had been said in so many Words, that
all this is meant directly of the King; for who is it we have been speaking of?
it is the King, who is not to be trusted with an Army, or with the Arms of the
Kingdom; it is the King who must be the Tyrant, and must raise Money, and shut
up the Exchequer, and the like; and he speaks here of nothing but what the King
only can be supposed to do.

In Confutation of his 18th Page, I could very plainly demonstrate, that even a
Slavery under a Protestant Army would differ very much from a Slavery under a
Popish and French Army. England has felt the First, and seen others feel the
last: there is a Difference in Slavery, Algiers is better than Sally; and there
are Degrees of Misery; and this is no putting an Epethite upon Tyranny, ask the
Protestants of Languedoc if the French Dragoons were not worse than the Spanish
Inquisition: But this is Foreign to the Point, it does not appear to any
considerate Person, that here is any of these Slaveries in view, and therefore,
I thank God, we are not put to the Choice.

I shall leave him now, and discourse a little in Particular of the thing it
self, and what other Pretensions he makes will meet their Answer in the process
of the Story as they come in my way.

As I said at the Beginning, what is all this to us? we who are English Men have
the least Reason of any People in the World, to complain of any of our Laws, or
of any Public Affairs, because nothing is or can be done, but I, and every
individual Free holder in England, do it our selves, we consent to it, and
tacitly do it by our Representatives in the Parliament; and since then our
Liberties, aye and our Lives are committed to them, who are you, Sir? that you
should run before you are sent, and dictate to the Collective Body of the
Nation, what they ought or ought not to do? if the House of Commons think fit
to continue 50000 Men, there is no doubt but they will find ways so to keep
them at their dispose, that even that Army shall be the Preserver of our
Liberties, not the Destroyer of them, and to them let us leave it.

But it is the King is the Bugbear, a Royal Army shall destroy us, but a
Parliament Army shall protect us. Page 11. Commonwealths, he says, may have
Armies, but Kings may not. Now if putting Arms into the Hands of Servants is so
fatal, why it is as dangerous to make a general Muster of the Militia, as 'twas
to the French in the West Indies, to give their Arms to their Servants, a
standing Militia regulated and disciplined, such as the Vaudois or Miquelets,
why that is a Standing Army, and shall be as insolent as they, if you give them
an Opportunity, and a Standing Army, as they may be regulated, shall be as safe
and as far from Tyrannizing as they.

And with this Gentleman's leave, I believe I could form a Proposal how an Army
of 20000 Men might be kept in England, which should be so far from being
destructive of, that, they should on all Occasions be the Preservers and
Protectors of the Peoples Liberties, in case of a Court Invasion, for that is
the Outcry; I confess, I do rather beg the Question here, than produce my
Schemes of that Nature, because I do not think it becomes me to dictate to my
Superiors, who without Question, know better what to do in that great Concern
of the Government, than I could direct.

The Question here may be more properly, What sort of an Army we talk of? If
'twere an Army Independent of the People, to be paid by the King, and so
entirely at his absolute dispose. If 'twere to be an Army of 50000 Men, why
then something may be said; but our Gentleman has not talked of above 20000,
and I presume he speaks of that without any Authority too, and at the same time
talks of the Valor and Performances of the Militia, and would have Sixty
thousand of them settled and regulated. This Argument of the Militia is
strangely turned about by him; sometimes they are such Hero's that they are
able to defend us, and why should they not, and the like, page 20, 21. and
sometimes so weak that 20000 Men will ruin us all; nay, any thing of an Army.
If they are strong enough to defend us from all the World, a small number of
standing Troops cannot hurt us; if they are not, then we must have an Army, or
be exposed to every Invader.

I wonder therefore this Gentleman does not descend to show us a time when the
Militia of any Country did any Service singly, without the help of the
Regulated Troops; I can give him a great many Instances when they did not. The
best time that ever the Militia of England can boast of doing any Service, was
in our Civil War; and yet I can name a Gentleman, who is now alive, who was an
Officer of Horse in the Parliament Army, he was posted by the General at a
Defile, to dispute the Passage of some of the King's Horse, who advanced from
Warrington-Bridge in Cheshire, finding himself pressed, he sent away to the
General for some Foot to support him: He sent him a Company of Foot of the
Militia, and a Detachment of Dragoons; the Foot were placed behind the Hedges
to line the Pass where they might have fired almost under Covert, as behind a
Breast-work; but as soon as ever the King's Horse appeared, without firing one
shot, they run all away. These were Regulated Militia. But our Author gives us
three Instances of Countries, whose Militia defend them; and three more of the
bravery of a Country Militia, which Instances I must a little examine.

Poland, Switzerland, and the Grisons are his Instances of Nations who defend
themselves against powerful Neighbors without a standing Army. As to Poland, I
shall show afterward at what a rate they have defended themselves. The Swiss
and Grisons subsist between formidable Enemies, just as the Duke of Savoy
defends himself between the French and the Spaniards, or as Hamburgh between
the Danes and the Dukes of Zel, or as Geneva between the French and the
Saveyard; not but that eithre side is able to devour them, but because when
ever one side Ataques them, the others defend them; for it is neither sides
Interest to see the others have them.

But now we come to the Militia, the London Apprentices in the late War, and
the Vaudois and Miquelets in this. As to the London Auxiliaries, which they
call Apprentices, they behaved themselves very well, but it was in Conjunction
with the Regulated Troops, when I must also say, the King's Army at that time
were but raw, and not much better than themselves.

The Vaudois are Les Enfans perdue, a People grown desperate by all the
Extremities which make Cowards fight; a small handful of Ruined Men,
exasperated by the Murder of their Families, and loss of their Estates, and are
to be looked upon as Men metamorphised into Dragons and Furies; and yet even the
Vaudois have never fought but on Parties, Skirmishes, Surprises, Beating up
Quarters, and the like, backed with Retreats into inaccessible Rocks, and
skulking behind the Cliffs, from whence, like Lightning, they break out on the
Enemy, and are gone before they could well find where they were.

The Miquelets in Catalonia are another Instance, and these are but People, who
by the Advantages of the Mountains, lie in wait to intercept Convoys, and
surprise Parties, and have done the French exceeding Damage, on account of the
Distance of the French Armies in that Country from their Magazines; for it is
necessary to state Matters very exactly, to debate with so cunning a Disputant.
But for the Service of either the Vaudois or Miquelets in the open Field, it
has not been extraordinary. As to the Militia in Ireland, all their Fame is
owing to the despicable wretched Conduct of the Irish; for what Army but that
of a Rabble of Irish, could Iniskilling and Londonderry have stood out
against, at the rate they did. So that these Wonders of the Militia are all
Phantosms, and not applicable to the present Case at all.

I shall a little urge here by way of Reply, That there seems to be a Necessity
upon the People of England at this time, to stand in a Posture of Defense more
than usually; if I cannot prove this, then I say nothing

First, This Necessity arises from the Posture of our Neighbors: In former
times, says our Author, there was no difference betweon the Citizen, the
Soldier, and the Husbandman; but it is otherwise now, Sir, War is become a
Science, and Arms an Employment, and all our Neighbors keep standing Forces,
Troops of Veteran Experienced Soldiers; and we must be strangely exposed if we
do not.

In former times the way of Fighting was Common to all, and if Men ran from the
Field to the Camp, so did their Neighbors, and 'twas as good for one as
another. But how did the Romans preserve their Frontiers, and plant their
Colonies? That was not done by Citizens of Rome, but by Legionary Troops; and
shall we Disarm, while our Neighbors keep standing Armies of Disciplined
Soldiers on foot? Who shall secure us against a sudden Rupture? Whoever will
give himself the trouble to look into the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen
and to Examine the Conduct of the French King they will find, He did not then
account Leagues such Sacred things as to bind him against a visible Advantage;
and why should we lead him into Temptation? Let any one but reflect on the
several Treaties between him and the Duke of Lorrain, the Duke of Savoy, and
the Spaniards; after which ensued, the Prize of all Lorrain, the taking of all
Savoy, and the taking of the City and Country of Luxemburgh; let them look on
his surprising the Principality of Orange, directly contrary to the Peace of
Nimeguen, and the like, and is this a Neighbor to live by Naked and without an
Army? Who shall be Guarrantee that the French shall not insult us, if he finds
us utterly Disarmed.

To answer this Necessity says this wise Gentleman, We will have an Equivalent;
why, we will not have a Land Army, but we will have a Sea Army, that is, a good
Fleet. A fine Tale truly, and is not this some of Mr. Iohnson's false Heraldry,
as well as 'tother? Is it not all one to be Slaves to an Army of Masqueteers,
as a Rabble of Tarrs. Our very Situation, which the Author is in his Altitudes
about, and blesses his God Neptune for at such a rate; that very Situation
exposes us to more Tyranny from a Navy, than from an Army: Nay I would
undertake, if I were Admiral of a good Fleet, to Tyrannize more over this
Nation, than I should if I were General of 40000 Men. I remember 'twas a great
cry among the Iacobite Party, about four Year ago; what a vast Charge are we at
about a War for the Confederates, Damn the Confederates, let us keep a good
Fleet, and we are able to defend our selves against all the World; let who will
go down, and who will go up, no Body will dare to meddle with us: But God be
thanked, the King knew better than these, what was the true Interest of
England; a War in Flanders is a War in England, let who will be the Invaders;
for a good Barrier between a Kingdom and a powerful Enemy, is a thing of such
Consequence, that the Dutch always thought it well worth the Charges of a War
to assist the Spaniard; for thereby they kept the War from their own Borders
and so do we.

In defending this silly Equivalent of a Fleet, he has the Vanity to say, If
our Fleet be well manned, it is a ridiculous thing to think of any Princes
Invading us; and yet we found it otherwise. This very War we found King James
invaded Ireland, and the French sent him an Aid of 8000 Men, who stood their
Ground so well at the Battle of the Boyn, that if King James had done his part
as well, it might have been a dearer Victory than is was; after this he fetched
those 8000 off again; and after that sent Monsieur St. Ruth; and after that a
Relief to Limerick, though it came too late; and all this notwithstanding we had
the greatest Fleet at Sea, that ever England had before the time, since it was
a Nation.

Thus Experience Bafles this foolish Equivalent, for Armies are not Transported
with so much Difficulty; and the Six hundred Sail the P. of Orange brought with
him, had not been absolutely necessary for 14000 Men; but there were vast
Stores, Artillery, Arms, and heavy Baggage with them, which are not always
necessary; for we know Monsieur Pointy carried 4500 Men with him, on his
Expedition to Cartagena in but 16 Ships; and the 8000 Men beforementioned,
sent to Ireland, were carried in not above 35 or 38 Sail.

Another wretched Equivalent, which this Author would have us trust to, is the
Militia; and these he magnifies, as sufficient to defend us against all the
Enemies in the World; and yet at the same time so Debases them, as to make them
nothing in Comparison of a small Army: Nay, he owns, that notwithstanding these
we are undone, and our Liberties destroyed, if the King be trusted but with a
few Guards. This is such a piece of Logic as no Man can understand.

If a Militia be regulated and Disciplined, I say they may enslave us as well
as an Army; and if not, they cannot be able to defend us; if they are unable to
Defend us, they are insignificant; and if able, dangerous; But, says the
Author, there is no danger from the Militia, for they are our selves, and their
Officers are Country Gentlemen of Estates: And is not our Army full of English
Gentlemen, of Estates and Fortunes; and have we not found them as inflexible to
the Charms of Tyranny, when closetted in the late Reign; and as true to the
Protestant Interest and Liberties of England, as any Country Gentlemen, or
Freeholders, or Citizens in England. Did they not lay down their Commissions,
did they not venture to disobey his illegal Commands? when the Cowardly
Citizens addressed him with their nauseous Flattering, fulsome Harrangues;
thanked him for their Bondage, and gave up their Charters and Privileges, even
before he asked for them; These are the Persons that must guard our Liberties;
and they would be finely Guarded, God help us. I remember a Speech which I have
to show in Manuscript of Sir Walter Rawleigh, on the Subject of the Spanish
Invasion, which comes directly to this Case. The Author of this Pamphlet, to
instance in the prodigious Navy that is necessary to bring over a small Army,
tells us, the Spanish Armado Embarked but 18000 Men, but he forgot that they
were to take the Prince of Parma on Board from Flanders with 28000 old Low
Country Soldiers more* with which Army, as Sir Walter Rawleigh observed to that
Gentleman, it was no improbable thing to think of Conquering this Kingdom; and
Queen Elizabeth was so sensible of it, that she often told Sir Walter, that if
they had not been beaten at Sea, they had been all undone, for her Armies were
all Tumultuary Troops, Militia, and the like.

To proceed, I Will grant all the Improbabilities which he suggests of the French
King's reviving a War, which has been so fatal to him: And as to King James
Coming, truly I Will allow the Militia are fittest at all times to deal with him;
but to use his own Method of supposing the worst, I Will suppose the French King
waving the Ceremony of a League, and a Declaration of War, when he has
recovered Breath a little, should as much on a sudden as can be, break with us
single, and pour in an Army of 50000 Men upon us; I Will suppose our Fleet may be
by accident so locked in, as King James's was, for what has been may be, and
they take that Opportunity, and get on Shore, and to oppose their Army, truly
we raise the Militia, a Fine Show they would make, but what would they do
against 60 Batalions of French and Swiss Infantry? would this Gentleman venture
to be hanged if they run all away and did not fire a Gun at them? I am sure I
would not.

But on the other Hand, if the Militia are a sufficient Guard against a Foreign
Power, so they are against a Home Power, especially since this Home Power may
be kept down to a due Balance, so as may but suffice to keep us from being
insulted by a Foreign Enemy; for Instance, suppose the King were to entertain
in constant Pay, 20000 Men, including his Guards and Garrisons, the Militia of
England Regulated and Disciplined, joined to these, might do somewhat, but by
themselves nothing. I can give him innumerable Instances of the Services of the
Militia, but I never heard or read of any real Bravery from them, but when
joined with Regular Troops.

To Instance once for all, it is notorious that when the Prince of Conde attackt
the Citizens of Paris at Charento^, that Populous City being all in an Uproar,
sent a Detachment of 20000 Men to dislodge the Prince, who with 1500 Horse and
Dragoons, drove them all away, and they never looked behind them, till they got
within the City Walls.

Another Necessity for keeping up a certain Number of Troops, is the vast
Expense and Difficulty of making a New-raised Army fit for Service; I am bold
to say, as the Nature of Fighting is now changed, and the Art of War improved,
were the King now to raise a New Army, and to be Commanded by New Officers,
Gentlemen who had seen no Service, it should cost him Three Years Time, and
30000 Men's Lives to bring them into a Capacity to face an Enemy. Fighting is
not like what it has been; I find our Author is but a Book Soldier, for he
says, Men may learn to be Engineers out of a Book; but I never heard that a
Book Gunner could Bombard a Town; the Philosophy of it may be Demonstrated in
Scales and Diagrams, but it is the Practice that produces the Experiments; it is
not handling a Musket, and knowing the Words of Command, will raise a Man's
Spirit, and teach him to Storm a Counterscarp; Men must make the Terrors of the
War familiar to them by Custom, before they can be brought to those Degrees of
Gallantry. Not that there is an intrinsic Value in a Red Coat; and yet the
Argument is not at all enforced by the Foul Language he gives the Soldiers,
while they are fighting in Flanders, and laying down their Lives in the Face of
the Enemy to purchase our Liberty; it is hard and unkind to be treated by a
rascally Pamphleteer with the scandalous Term of Ragamuffins, and Henroost
Robbers. I am no Soldier, nor ever was, but I am sensible we enjoy the present
Liberty, the King his Crown, and the Nation their Peace, bought with the Price
of the Blood of these Ragamuffins, as he calls them, and I am for being civil
to them at least.

I might descend a little to examine what a strange Country England would be,
when quite dismantled of all her Heroes (as he calls them); truly were I but a
Pirate with a Thousand Men, I would engage to keep the Coast in a Constant
Alarm. We must never pretend to bear any Reputation in the World: No Nation
would value our Friendship, or fear to affront us. Not our Trade Abroad would
be secure, nor our Trade at Home. Our Peace, which we see now established on a
good Foundation, what has procured it? a War, and the Valor of our Arms,
speaking of Second Causes. And what will preserve it? truly nothing but the
Reputation of the same Force; and if that be sunk, how long will it continue?
Take away the Cause, and our Peace, which is the Effect, will certainly follow.

Let me now a little examine the History of Nations who have run the same
risque this Gentleman would have us do, and not to go back to remote Stories of
the Carthaginians, who the Romans could never vanquish till they got them to
dismiss their Auxiliary Troops. The Citizens of Constantinople, who always
denied their Emperor the Assistance of an Army, were presently ruined by the
Turks. We will come nearer home: The Emperor Ferdinand II. overrun the whole
Protestant Part of Germany, and was at the point of Dissolving the very
Constitution of their Government, and all for what of their having a Competent
Force on foot to defend themselves; and if they had not been delivered by the
Great Gustavus Adolphus, God Almighty must have wrought a Miracle to have saved
them Next look into Poland, which our Author reckons to be one of the Free
Countries who defend themselves without a standing Army. First he must
understand, for I perceive he knows little of the Matter, that Poland has not
defended it self; or if it has, it has been at a very sorry rate, God knows,
much such a one as we should do without an Army, or at much such a rate as we
did of old, when the Picts and Scots were our Hostile Neighbors. Pray let us
see how Poland, which enjoys its freedom without a standing Army, has defended
it self: First, It has been ravaged on the side of Lithuania by the Effeminate
Muscovites, and though the Poles always beat them in the Field, yet they had
devoured their Country first before the Polanders Militia could get together.
On the other hand, the Tartars, in several volant Excursions, have overrun all
Upper Poland, Vkrania and Volhinia, even to the Gates of Crakow; and in about
Fifty years it is allowed they have carried away a Million of this wretchedly
free People into Slavery, so that all Asia was full of Polish Slaves.

On the East side Carolus Gustavus, King of Sweden, overrun the whole Kingdom,
took Warsaw, Crackow, and beat King Casimir out of the Country into Silesia,
and all in one Campaign, and only indeed for want of a Force ready to meet him
upon the Frontiers; for as soon as Casimir had time to recover himself, and
Collect an Army, he looked him in the Face, and with an Invinsible Resolution
fought him wherever he met him: But the ruin of the Country was irrepairable in
an Age.

To come nearer home, and nearer to the Matter in hand, our Neighbors the
Dutch, in the Minority of the present King, and under the manage of Barnavelt's
Principles revived in the Persons of the De Wits, to preserve their Liberties,
as they pretended, they would suppress the Power of the House of Orange, and
Disband their old Army which had established their Freedom by the Terror of
their Arms; and to secure themselves, they came to a regulated Militia, the
very thing this Gentleman talks of: Nay, this Militia had the Face of an Army,
and were entertained in Pay; but the Commissions were given to the Sons of the
principal Burghers, and the Towns had Governors from among themselves. This is
just what our Gentleman would have; and what came of this? These brave Troops
were placed in Garrisons in the Frontier Towns: And in the Year 1672. the
French King, this very individual French King now regnant, during the
continuance of the Sacred Peace of Westphalia, enters the Country at the Head
of two dreadful Armies, and these Soldiers, that were the Bulwark of the
Peoples Liberties, surrendered the most impregnable Towns, garrisoned some with
2000, some 3000 Men, nay some with 6000, without striking a stroke, nay faster
than the French could well take Possession of them; so that in about Forty days
he had taken 42 strong Towns, which would cost him Seven years to take now,
though no Army were in the Field to disturb him; and then the People saw their
Error, and gave themselves the Satisfaction of Tearing to Pieces the Authors of
that pernicious Advice.

And truly, I think these Instances are so lively, that I wonder our Author,
who I perceive is not so ignorant, as not to know these things, should not have
provided some Answer to it, for he could not but expect it in any Reply to him.

These things may a little tell us what is the Effects of a Nations being
disarmed while their Neighbors are in Arms, and all this must be answered with
a Fleet; and that may be answered with this, We may be invaded notwithstanding
a Fleet, unless you can keep up such a Fleet as can Command the Seas in all
parts at the same time, or can, as Queen Elizabeth did, forbid your Neighbors
to build Ships. But the French King is none of those, and his Power at Sea is
not be slighted: Nor is it so small, but it may with too much ease protect an
Invasion, and it is not safe to put it to that hazard.

Another Necessity of an Army seems to me to lie among our ^^^^es: There are
Accidents which require the help of an Army, though the King and People were all
of a Mind, and all of a side. King James and his Parliament had a full
understanding, and they were as Vigorous for him, as ever Parliament was for a
King, and yet what had become of both if he had not had Regular Troops to have
resisted the Duke of Monmouth? If they had been to be raised then, he must have
gone to France then, as he did now, or have stayed at home and have fared
worse; for they would hardly have used him so tenderly as the present King did
to my knowledge.

I am loath to mention the Iacobite Party as an Argument worth while, to
maintain any thing of force, but just enough to prevent Assassinations and
private Murders on the King's Person; for as they never dared look him in the
face when powerfully assisted by the French; so I dare say they will never have
the Courage to disturb our Peace with Sword in hand; what they do, will be by
Caballing to foment Distrusts and Discontents to embroil, if possible, the King
with his People or by private villainous Assassinates to destroy him, and by
that means to involve the whole Nation in Blood and Disorder.

I allow the Speech of Queen Elizabeth to the Duke D'Alanzon was very great and
brave in her; but pray had Queen Elizabeth no standing Army? On the contrary,
she was never without them; she never had less in the Low Countries, in aid of
the Dutch, in France in aid of the King of Navar, and in her Wars in Ireland,
than 30000 Men; and all the difference was, that she kept them abroad, employed
for the Assistance of her Neighbors, and had them absolutely at Command; and
so sensible she was of the want of them on the approach of the Spanish Armado,
that she never lest her self so bare of them afterward: and therefore to
compare her Enemies and ours, and her Force with ours, without an Army, as he
does p. 19. is a Deceptio visus upon our Understanding, and a presumption that
no body has read any History but himself.

Then we come to K. Charles the Second's time in p. 26. and then, he says, we
thought a much less Army than is now contended for a grievance. To which I
answer, Quatenus an Army, they were not thought a Grievance, but attended with
the Circumstances of Popish Confederacies and Leagues, and a Popish Successor
in view, and then visibly managing them they might be thought so; and yet the
Grand Jury presenting them, made them no more a Grievance than if they had
presented the Parliament which granted an established number of Troops to King
Charles.

Another bold Assertion he makes p. 27. That a standing Army is the only way to
bring in K. James. This is a strange preposterous Supposition, and has no
Argument brought to prove it, but the uncertain capricious Humor of the
Soldiery, who in all Ages have produced violent Revolutions, may bring it to
pass; that is in short, the Thing is possible, and that is all he can say; and
it is every jot as possible, that K. William himself should change his Mind,
Abdicate the Throne, and Call in K. James again, therefore pray let us have no
King at all, for really when all is done these Kings are strange things, and
have occasioned more violent Revolutions in the World than ever have been known
in unarmed Governments. Besides, if we had no King, then a standing Army might
be safe enough; for he tells you, in Commonwealths they may be allowed, p. 11.
but in Monarchies they are the Devil and all: Nay he gives two Instances when
we had Armies turned out their Masters, Oliver Cromwell and General Monk, and
yet both these were in the time of a Commonwealth. Now I would know if ever an
Army turned out their King; as for K James, his instance is false, he really
run away from his Army, his Army did not turn him out; it is true, part of it
deserted: but I am bold to say, had K. James, with the Remainder, made good his
Retreat, Soldier like, either to London, or under the Canon of Portsmouth, or
to both, which he might have done, for no Body pursued him, till the French King
had relieved him, it might have been a Civil War to this Hour.

And thus I have followed him to his last Page, I think I have not omitted any
of his material Arguments or Examples; whether he is answered or not, in point
of Argument, I leave to the Reader: what I have discovered in his Sophistical
straining of Arguments, and misapplying his Quotations to gild by his Wit the
want of his Proof, is what I thought needful; his malicious Spirit every where
discovers it self, and to me he seems to be a disconted unsatisfied sort of a
Person, that is for any thing but what should be, and borrows the Pretense of
Liberty, to vent his Malice at the Government: Nor is it a new Invention, when
ever any Person had a mind to disturb the Roman Government, Liberty was always
the Word, and so it is now.

CONCLUSION.
I Shall say no more as to Argument, but desire the Favor of a Word in
General, as to the present Controversy.

To me it seems one of the most impudent Actions that ever was suffered in this
Age, that a Private Person should thus attack the King, after all that he has
done for the Preservation of our Liberties and the Establishing our Peace,
after all the Hazards of his Person and Family, and the Fatiegues of a bloody
War, to be represented at his Return, as a Person now as much to be feared as
King James was; to be trusted no more than a Mad Man, and the like, before he
so much as knows whether there shall ever be any Dispute about the Matter, or
no.

Has the King demanded a Standing Army? Has he proposed it? Does he insist upon
it? How if no such thought be in him? It Is a Sign what a Government we live
under, and it is a Sign what Spirit governs some Men, who will abuse the most
indulgent Goodness. It had been but time to have wrote such an Invective upon
the King and the Army, when we had found the Parliament of England struggling to
disband them, and the King resolute to maintain them: But This! when the King
and the House are all Union and Harmony! it is intolerable, and the King ought
to have some Satisfaction made him, and I doubt not but he will.

I am not, nor, I think, I have no where shown as if I were for the Government
by an Army; but I cannot but suppose, with Submission to the House of Commons,
that they will find it necessary to keep us in a Posture of Defense sufficient
to maintain that Peace which has cast so much Blood and Treasure to procure,
and I leave the Method to them, and so I think this Author ought to have done.
I do not question but in that great Assembly all things will be done for the
Maintenance of our Liberty with a due respect to the Honor and Safety of his
Majesty, that is possible: They have shown themselves the most steady and
Zealous for his Interest and the Public, of any Body that ever filled that
House; and I could never see, and yet I have not been a slight observer of
Affairs neither. I say, I could never see the least symptom of an Inclination
in the King's Actions, to dislike or contradict what they offered: has he not
left them to be the entire judges of their own Grievances, and freely left them
to be as entire judges of the Remedies? Has he ever skreened a Malefactor from
their Justice, or a Favorite from their Displeasure? Has he ever infringed
their Privileges? and as to who shall come after, we have his Royal
Declaration at his coming to these Kingdoms; That his Design was to establish
our Liberties on such Foundations, as that it might not be in the power of any
Prince for the future to invade them, and he has never yet attempted to break
it; And how is this to be done? not at the direction of a Pamphlet, but by the
King, Lords and Commons, who have not taken a false Step yet in the Matter; To
them let it be left, and if they agree, be it with an Army, or without an Army;
be it by a Militia regulated, or by an Army regulated, what is that to him?

I have indeed heard much of a Militia regulated into an Army, and truly I
doubt not, but an Army might be regulated into a Militia, with Safety and
Honor to the King, and the Peoples Liberties. But as I have said, I leave that
to the Government to determine, and conclude with only this Observation; If
ever the Gentleman who is the Author of this Pamphlet be traced, I verily
believe he will appear to be one, who thinking he has deserved more Respect
from the Government than he has found, has taken this Way to let them know,
they ought to have used him better or used him worse.

FINIS.

