Advertisement.
The second Part is now in the Press, and will be published with all convenient
speed.

THE Complete Mendicant: OR, Unhappy Beggar.

BEING The Life of an Unfortunate Gentleman: In which is a Comprehensive
Account of several of the most Remarkable Adventures, that befell him in Three
and Twenty Years Pilgrimage.

Also a Narrative of his entrance at Oxford, his Ordination, his Behavior and
Departure from Court, his taking upon him the habit of a Shepherd, etc. With
general Reflections and Observations upon the Men, Manners, Customs and
Religions, of the several Countries he wandered through.

Likewise Diverse familiar Letters, both Latin and English, Sermons, Poems,
Essays, upon particular occasions, with a singular Character of a Monastic
Life; and the Description of a Monastery, all faithfully Collected from his
Original Papers.

Quisquis enim duros casus virtutis amore.
Vicerit, ille sibi laudemque d^ousque parabit.
Virgil. in Fragm. de littera. LONDON, Printed for E. Harris, at the Harrow in
Little-Britain. MDCXCIX.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE Lady Mary Charleton.
Madam,
THE Character you bear every where of an extraordinary Lady, has brought this
unhappy Mendicant a great many doleful Miles to throw himself at your Feet;
`Tis true, between New Castle and London, I presume, he might have some few
Friends that would have taken him in and refresht him, but then Madam, he had
still wanted some body to have sign`d his Pass, in order to make his Progress,
thro` a stubborn Inhospitable World, a little more safe and easy.

This indeed it is, that has brought him into the North, to your Ladyship, and
tho he comes a stranger, unrecommended, and with all the disadvantages that may
be; yet still the sense he has of your Ladyships Universal Charity, encourages
him to believe you will at least examine his Credentials, before you order him
to be turn`d out of your Gate.

`Tis true Madam, he has no great matters to pretend, to bespeak your
Compassion, only a little Artless Modesty and Innocence; and both those Two are
so unhappily sullied, by this last Insolence, that if your Ladyships Goodness
does not exert it self beyond the common Degree, he can expect little less than
to be treated like a Sturdy Vagrant, and so whipped and sent back into his own
Country.

But let the Success be what it will, the poor Wanderer is under a Necessity
once more to take a melancholy Turn into the World: How far your Ladyship may
be obliged to protect him, the Sequel of his Narrative must declare. As for my
part, what I have done, is by his Direction, and truly I have the same Notion
of it that he had, that your Virtue, Piety and Charity, that have rendered you
for many Years the Ornament of your Sex, will all plead strongly for your
acceptance of these few unworthy sheets, and engage you too to pardon him that
has ventur`d to commend `em to your Protection, who is with the most profound
respect,

Good Madam, Your Obedient Servant.

THE PREFACE. TO THE READER.
THese few sheets might have taken their chance without the sanction of a
Preface, if the Mendicants unhappy Circumstances had not made it a proper
Introduction to his future Progress.

He`s doomed to a second Pilgrimage in a dull Censorious uncharitable Age, upon
which account, without doubt, he`ll have need enough to be equipt with the
utmost Caution; and after all, I`m afraid too he`ll find it far more difficult
for him to wander the World in this Paper Dress, then in his Mendicant,
Itinerant, Shepherds, or Monastic habit.

The first great objection against him will be, that he`s an absolute stranger,
and comes into the World without the assistance of a Name, Place, or
Recommendation; and so consequently may be an Impostor.

It must be granted that this is a very material Objection, and will inevitably
be the occasion of a great many harsh Reflections; but for all that he resolves
to submit to `em all, rather then betray his own modesty, or be the cause of
the least disreputation to his Family.

Indeed, for my own part, I cannot see any single Action, through all the
Occurrences of his Life, that can any ways reflect upon himself or his
Relations, upon which Account I should have been very glad, if it had fall`n
within the compass of my directions, to have made his Name public, but since
I`m solemnly forbid that, I can do no less in his behalf, then let his
Censurers know, `tis in the Judgment of the most considerate part of Mankind,
an Indication of ill manners or ill nature, if not both, to pry into a secret
that is Industriously preserv`d.

The great Query of all will be, whether the matters here related are real
matters of fact; and that they are so, I have as good proof as the Nature of
the thing is capable of, and he that expects more, would do well to erect a new
Scheme of Principles to direct us how to form our belief by; the whole
Narrative is exactly of a piece, all regular, natural and familiar, and withal
confirm`d by such a multitude of concuring Circumstances, that in my sense he
must be a Person that nothing will go down with, but flat Demonstrations that
will object against it.

But after all, supposing the worst that can be, that the whole should be a
well contriv`d Fable; I can see no Reason, why the fabulous Life of a Virtuous
Mendicant should not be as acceptable to the World as an English Rogue, a
Gusman Lazerillo, or any other Romantic History of Villainous Tricks, etc. I`m
sure, there can be no reason given for that, unless it be that the present Age
is grown more in Love with Vanity and Vice, then with Virtue and Sobriety.

There`s enough to be said, if the thing requir`d it, to Vindicate this Unhappy
Beggar from the suspicion of an Impostor but for that, I`ll refer you to this
and the succeeding parts of his Life, which you need not question but to find
gradually confirmed, by the most Authentic Testimonies.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. WHerein by way of Introduction, the Mendicant complains of the
Calamities of Humane Life, and makes some short and general Reflections upon
Charity. CHAP. II. He gives an Account of his Birth and Parentage, the Death of
his Father and Mother, the hardships and Severities he met with in his
Childhood, the Kindness of an Aunt, the Manner of his being sent to School, and
from thence to Oxford, etc. CHAP. III. He relates the Manner of his leaving the
University, recites a short Copy of Verses he writ at his Departure; together
with his Adventure with the Mountebank. CHAP. IV. He gives a further Account of
his Adventure with the Mountebank, who discovers to him the Secrets of his Art.
They straggle together into Bedfordshire, where he first Robs him at an
Alehouse, and then leaves him in pawn for the Reckoning. CHAP. V. He gives a
short Account of his Rencounter with his Landlords; writes a begging Copy of
Verses, and a Letter to a Gentleman in the Town, who gives him Money to pay his
Reckoning, and recommends him afterward to a School. CHAP. VI. He travels
toward Northampton, encounters an Itinerant Parson upon the Road, who
Instructs him in several of the Secrets and Mysteries of Begging, and then
wheedles him to Ioyn with him, etc. CHAP. VII. The Mendicant and Itinerant
straggle together into Leicestershire. The Mendicant writes a Latin Letter to a
Lady, and is Plentifully Rewarded. They are both Seiz`d, and carried before a
Magistrate. The Itinerant is discover`d to be an Impostor, and the Mendicant
Honorably Acquitted. CHAP. VIII. The Mendicant Returns into Northamptonshire,
Delivers his Letter to the Clergyman, by whom he`s Entertain`d as his Usher.
He`s Ordained a Deacon. The Clergy-man's Sister falls in Love with him: to
Avoid which he forsakes his Plaoe, and returns to his former Profession of a
Mendicant. CHAP. IX. The Mendicant wanders into Buckinghamshire, is Entertained
by a Worthy Old Gentleman for his Curate. He Preaches a singular Sermon upon
Humility, which he sets down at length. CHAP. X. Upon the Restoration of the
King he leaves his Curacy, and goes to London, makes several Insuccessful
Attempts for Preferment; and afterward, in a deep Discontent and Melancholy
leaves the Town, with a Resolution to return into the Country, in Quest of New
Adventures. CHAP. XI. The Mendicant wanders into Dors^tshire, takes upon him
the Habit of a Shepherd, and gives a Comprehensive Account of several other
things that befell Him in that Adventure. CHAP. XII. The Mendicant is
Entertained by a Shepherd, as his Servant. He gives a Diverting Relation of the
Circumstances of his Admission, and the Manner of his Instructions, etc. CHAP.
XIII. The Mendicant makes Reflections upon his former and present Condition,
and writes a long Letter of Advice to his Brother in London. CHAP. XIV. The
Mendicant Writes another Letter to his Friend in London; wherein he makes
Passionate reflections upon the Town and Court, and gives a further account of
a Shepherds Life. CHAP. XV. The Mendicant having left the Shepherd, goes to
Shaftsbury, from whence he Writes several Letters, one to his Master, the
Shepherd, another to Squire F -- and a third to Capt -- to whom he sends some
short Essays upon the Calamities of Human Life, which he Writ upon the Downs,
etc. ESSAY I. Wherein he gives a Comprehensive Account of the General
Calamities of Human Life. ESSAY II. He demonstrates Death, simply considered as
an exit out of the World, to be much preferrable to Li^e, both upon the account
of the Evils from which it delivers us, and the Goods into which it Instates
us.
The Reader is desir`d in the first Line of the 2d Chapter, for 87, to read 37.
and for the rest of the Errors, which are generally Literal, to correct, or
pardon `em.

THE Complete Mendicant, OR THE Unhappy Beggar.
CHAP. I.
Wherein by way of Introduction the Mendicant complains of the Calamities of
humane Life, and makes some short and general Reflections upon Charity.

BEside the Original Depravation and frailties of Nature, there are so many
other Accidents and Misfortunes incorporated and twisted into the very Beings
and Const^tutions of Men, that indeed, the Custom Euripides proposes to the
World seems to me the most just and reasonable, i. e. to lament those that are
born, upon the account of the many Evils among which they enter at their Birth,
but when they die, and rest from their Labors, to celebrate their Funerals
with rejoicing and Praises; this the whole Nation of the Thracians, which
justly challenge the praise of Wisdom, were wont to do, without being
instructed by Teachers, but purely from their own Observation of the state and
circumstances of Humane Life,

I need not borrow Instances (I think) to aggravate the Calamities that are
incident to the Life of Man, the Case will appear evident enough from a short
view into the present condition of the World; for considering how many there
are that struggle through their Lives in perpetual toil and drudgery; how many
that are oppressed with Slavery, harrass'd with Cruelty, pined with Want and
Poverty, overwhelmed with Shame and Infamy, and worn out and consumed with
constant Sorrow, Anxiety and Vexation, it must necessarily be allowed, that the
greater part and generality of Mankind are but one bare remove at best from
flat and substantial Misery.

It Is true indeed to most of these miserable ones, the Divine Providence
indulges frequent Intervals of Ease and Satisfaction: Sweetens the bitter Cup
now and then with some grateful Intermixtures, to make the nauseous Draught of
Life go down a little the more easily; yet I dare say, whenever they compare
their few Goods with their many Evils, their Fears, Crosses, and
Disappointments, with their Successes, Hopes, and Enjoyments, they will find the
former much out-ballance the latter in a great many Particulars.

Well, but my own woeful Experiences shall not urge me into complaints, or a
long Introduction. I must own indeed, that the Divine Wisdom foresaw that an
equality of Conditions would naturally breed confusion and disorder in the
World, and therefore without doubt it was that it designed some for Honor and
Riches, and others for Contempt and Poverty; but yet in this great Division,
did not so inseparably dis-unite them, but that they should still have a mutual
dependence, and consistence one upon another; every rich Man being God's
Steward, and particularly entrusted to provide for the indigent parts of his
Family, such as are the poor and needy; and his omissions in that Point, is not
only a breach of his duty and trust, but withal, an Indication of his
unthankfulness, falsehood, and ingratitude.

God, who is the common Father, as well as Friend to Mankind, cannot be
supposed to be so partial to provide for the Pomps and Luxuries of some, and
then leave the rest to languish under the want of necessaries convenient for
the support of Life; and yet methinks if we look into the visible Portions of
the Poor and Rich (according to the present practice of the World) we can
perceive very little to the contrary.

I must confess the thoughts of this has been my sad Companion through my whole
Pilgrimage, and truly it is a Subject fit for the wonder and Sorrow of any
considering Man, that one part of the World should be revelling and
gluttonizing, whilst another is languishing through Want and Indigence, and the
gripings, and pressures of downright Hunger, and Necessity.

Iudeed I have been amazed to see with what indifferency and satisfaction some
of our wealthy Cormorants have beheld their own humane Nature pining and
starving in the Person of their poor Brother, though at the same time perhaps
they have been burdened with an Excess of another kind, and might be relieved
against both by a more equal distribution.

However, for my own part, I must acknowledge it would be ungrateful in me to
make reflections; I have lived already more than twenty Years upon the common
Stock, I mean by the help of my Begging Talent, I have made a doleful Passage
through the World; the manner and Circumstances I intend to relate at large in
the following Sheets.

CHAP. II.
In which he gives an Account of his Birth and Parentage, the death of his
Father and Mother, with the severities and hardships he met with in his
Childhood, the kindness of his Aunt, the manner of his being sent to School,
and from thence to Oxford, etc.

I was born in the year 87. my Father was a Gentleman of a considerable Fortune
and Figure in his Country, having been twice honored by King Charles the First
with the Character of Envoy Extraordinary to two Foreign Courts, and as I have
been often told, behaved himself not only with a great deal of Prudence and
Sincerity in his Negotiations abroad, but likewise acquitted himself like a
true English Gentleman, in the Station of a Justice of the Peace, and
Deputy-Lieutenant of his County.

He was a Member in the long Parliament, and when he saw the Affairs in the
House of Commons inclining apace toward Rebellion, etc. with several other
Loyal Gentlemen, he entered his Protest against their Proceedings, and retired
into the Country, where he continued till the unhappy Tumults broke out, and
then as ^n early Instance of his Fidelity to his Loyal Master, raised a Troop
of Horse at ^is own Charge.

Not long after, the King was pleased to give him a Regiment of Foot, and
appoint him Governor of a Town in the West of England, which he defended to
the last Extremity; but being, through the want of Provisions, or rather by the
Treachery of some of the Officers in the Garrison, which the Parliament had
Bribed to betray him, forced to surrender the Place upon Discretion, he was
immediately made a Prisoner of War, and soon after tried by a Court Martial,
and sentenced to be shot to Death; however, by the friendship of his Keeper,
with the help of a Woman's Habit, he made his Escape the Night before his
Execution, and got beyond Sea, where he continued till King Charles the Second
made his Attempt at Worcester, and there amongst a great many other brave Men,
he had the Misfortune to be wounded by a Musket-Sho^ in the Shoulder, of which
he died within two or three days after, but first got the following Letter
conveyed to my Mother* the Particulars of which for secret causes I have set
down at large.

Coll. -- Letter to his Lady, etc.
My Dear,
BY the Assistance of the Honest Bearer, I have got an Opportunity to give you
a short account of our Misfortunes: our whole Army is entirely routed and
dispersed, and what is become of the King I cannot learn; I pray God deliver him
out of the hands of the Rebels; as to my own part, I have received a scurvy
Wound by a Musket Shot in my Left Shoulder, which the Surgeon tells me is
Mortal; whether it be or not, is no great matter, for it seems they have
discovered who I am, and if I should recover of my Wounds, are resolved to take
me off afterward. Well, My Dear, I have a good Cause, and a Gracious God, and
so am no otherwise affected for the Loss of my Life, than as it relates to you,
and my poor Children. I would advise you if I could, which way to manage your
self in this perplexed State, but alas! my Circumstances are all so entangled,
that I know not where to begin; beside the anguish of my Wound at present is so
very great, that I am hardly able to support my self under it. I know, my Dear,
your Loyalty will dissuade you against Immoderate Grief, and then your Virtue
and Conduct in our long Separation has superseded even the necessity of
advising you, with regard to your Family. As for poor Peregrine (for that is the
name I intend to pass under here) if your Circumstances will permit, and his
own Genius inclines him to it, I would have him bred a Scholar, he may live to
see the World mended, and be an Instrument to repair the Ruins of his Family.
Commend me earnestly to all my Friends, and let my Children know their Father
sends them his Blessing. I am, my Dear till we meet again either in this or the
next World, affectionately thine. Adieu.


About two days after came a Messenger from the Governor of Worcester to my
Mother with the heavy News of my Father's Death, and withal, that he had
obtained a Grant for her to bury him where she pleased. My Mother received the
Message (as I have been told) with a Resolution and Courage beyond the common
behavior of her Sex, and instead of breaking out into passionate Exclamations,
and Reflections, which she knew would be of no use at that time of day.

Immediately dispatches away a Servant, with a Neighbor or two, and a Hearse,
who brought him home, and the Night following he was buried privately in a
Vault amongst his Ancestors.

The Death of my Father was but (in some respects) a Preludium to the rest of
my Misfortunes, for in less than a Month, by an Order of State, all we had was
seized upon, and my Mother, with four Children, forced out of her House to seek
Shelter and Relief where she could find it; the Creditors to mend the matter,
put in their Claims too, so that in a short time all was Sold and tore to
pieces.

Neither did my Misfortunes stop here, for my Mother being deprived of her
Country Habitation, thought London might be the fittest place to fix upon some
method for a Livelihood; but there we had not been, to the best of my
Remembrance, above six Weeks, before my Sister Sickens of the Smallpox, and
dies my youngest Brother dies about ten days after of the same Distemper, and
my Mother the very Week following, and truly if it had not been for the
extraordinary Care, and Charity of an Excellent Woman, in whose House we
Lodged, my Brother and I had both Perished with the rest.

Here I begun to have a small Sense of our Condition, and accordingly got a
Friend to instruct me how I might best recommend it to an Aunt I had in the
Country, who no sooner heard of it, but indeed pitied us, and sent for us home
to her House, and to speak the Truth, used us both with a Tenderness and
Compassion, not very common in such cases.

This good Aunt sent us to School, and though my Master was none of the best,
yet with his Assistance, and my own Industry, in two Years time I became so far
a Proficient in the Latin Tongue, that with the help of a Dictionary, I could
Construe some Verses in Ovid's Metamorphosis, and Translate a Dialogue in
Erasmus, and turn an easy Sentence into Latin, and make a lame Verse, etc.

My Master himself had never been at any University, but was a young Gentleman
that had spent his Fortune in the King's Service, and so was forced to shelter
himself under the Character of a Paedagogue, to be secure from the Suspicion of
the State, and to get a poor Livelihood; but yet I must needs do him this
Justice, that he acquitted himself to me so much like a Friend as well as a
Master, and bestowed so much of his time and pains upon me, that I have reason
to believe* that the best Tutor in the Kingdom could not have improved me more
in so short a time.

I was now in my sixteenth year, and my Aunt considering that her Age and her
Infirmities together might consequently call her off before she had any ways
fixed me in a Capacity to shift for my self, resolves with all the Expedition
that could be, to send me to Oxford, and get me admitted into one of the
Colleges as a Servitor.

This was was not long under debate, but an opportunity offered it self, that
indeed was of considerable Advantage to me. Sir Alexander -- an eminent
Cavalier, notwithstanding the present Disturbances and Corruptions of the
University, resolves to send his Son to Christ-Church for a Year or two, and
withal, at the request of my Aunt, condescended that I should attend upon him
as his Servitor, and that he would pay my Tutor, and allow me a Competency to
supply me with Commons, etc. according to the custom of the College.

This Proposal squared exactly with my Aunts Design in every particular; for
though she was a Gentlewoman of as good a Family as most in England, and had
formerly been the Mistress of a very plentiful Fortune, yet the Wars, and the
Sequestrators together, had reduced her to a poor Annuity of Fifty Pound per
Annum, which, with all her Prudence and Conduct, was but just enough for the
support of her Family; however, upon Sir Alexander's motion, she strained a
Point, and equipt me out very decently and gentilely for the University, and
withal did me the favor to accompany me thither, to see me conveniently fixed
in the College.

I had not been there long, but I perceived, to my great dissatisfaction and
concern, my want of Shool Education, and would often reflect upon what I had
heard Dr. Hammond tell my Mother (who did her now and then the Honor to come
and condole with her in the absence of my Father) i. e. That if she intended me
for the University, she ought to take particular Care to provide me with a
Master that was qualified to instruct me in the grounds and principles of
Learning, before she should suffer me to be admitted; that (says he) will make
his future Studies easy, and delightful, and will be sure to stick fast to him
to the End of his Life; I found my self sadly at a Loss in that Particular, and
was so much affected to see my Fellow-Pupils run through their several
Exercises with a great deal of Freedom and pleasantness, whilst I was forced to
labor and tug for every thing I did; that I was once resolved to quit my
Pretensions, and return to my Aunt, and request her to put me to some other
Business that I was better qualified to go on with.

But my Tutor, that had a singular kindness for me, soon perceived how cases
stood, and accordingly one Evening, after he had finished his Readings, etc. he
dismisses the rest, and orders me to stay behind in his Chamber; Young Man
(says he) I find you have had a very ill Schoolmaster, and I am satisfied both
by your Looks and Actions you are sensible of your own Insufficiency, but come,
don't despair, you have Youth and Parts, and those in Conjunction with your
Industry, and good Instruction, will soon make up your other defects.

The first thing, I think, he enjoined me, was the Translation of one of the
hardest Colloquies in Erasmus, the next a Satyr out of Iuvenal, and then some
Odes from Horace, and withal confined me to a large part in the Greek Grammar
every Morning; but then, what was the greatest advantage of all, he was pleased
to allow me a Study in his own Chamber, and would not fail twice a day at least
to spend half an hour in giving me particular directions and advice, by which
means, in less than a year, I found my self so well Improved, that I was able
to go through with my business with as much ease and satisfaction as the best
of Companions.

But this happy Condition did not last long before Fortune begins again to play
the Jilt with me; my Aunt dies, and what was worse, her Sickness was so sudden
and violent, that she had no time to make her Will, and so all she had fell in
course to a Fanatical Sister, that always mortally hated our Family, upon the
Account of their Loyalty, and me for their Sakes. My Master removes from the
University to the Inns of Court, and what was as great disappointment to me as
either, my worthy Tutor leaves the University, in order to Travel with a young
Nobleman into Italy.

Here I am all unravelled again left friendless and desolate, and to aggravate
my Misfortunes too, lay under the Character and suspicion of being disaffected
to the Commonwealth of England (as they called it) and what to do in this hard
conjuncture I could not determine; sometimes I resolved to go into my own
Country, to try if I had any Friends left there, at other times I propose to
follow my Master to London, and see how the Waters would move in that part of
the World; anon I conclude to represent my Condition to the College, and throw
my self upon the Charity of the House; but after all, from a few second
thoughts I found there was little good to be expected from either of these. So
that in short I thought there was no remedy left, but I must even venture to
commit my self to the Mercy of my cruel Stepmother, Fortune.

This Resolution (though it was the worst) carried the Cause against all the rest;
and now my next business was to equip my self with materials fit for a
Pedegrination; my Books and other Equipage must be Sold in Course, and indeed I
was not long in making my Markets. I think, as near as I can remember, all I
could get for the whole, was not above fifty Shillings, the better part of
which I laid out in some Traveling Necessaries, and spent together in taking
leave of my Acquaintance.

CAAP. III.
Wherein he gives an Account of his leaving the University, and recites a short
Copy of Verses he writ at his Departure, with his Adventures with a Mountebank,
etc.

HAving disposed of my Movables, and furnished my self with some few
Necessaries, which I thought were most convenient for a Pilgrimage. i. e. An
Ink-horn, a Penknife, a Quire of Paper, Wafers, and a Satchel to carry my
little Equipage, and Itinerant Library, which was only a Shirt, two or three
Bands, and Handkerchiefs, and a pair of Stockings, an old Horace, and a Virgil,
a Terence, and an Erasmus, a Greek Testament, a Greek and Latin Grammar, and a
Common Prayer Book, etc. About Seven a Clock, the tenth of March, in the Year
Fifty six, with a heavy Heart, and abundance of Tears and Complaints I left
Oxford, steering my Course directly over Magdalen's Bridge, in order (as I then
thought) to make the best of my Way to Cambridge.

I had hardly reached Headington-Hill, but I was seized with a deep and
profound Melancholy; the Thoughts of my former Misfortunes, with my present
hard Circumstances, fall upon me at once; and truly the Reflection of what I
had already underwent, and the certain Prospect of future Trouble and Misery,
together with the peircing Aggravations I was under for the Loss of my
University Life, and the opportunity of improving my self in my Studies, the
Two only things that hard Fortune had left me, which I thought worth either my
owning or regard, put me into such an Agony and Disorder, that I was forced to
betake me to the shelter of an Hedge, and rest a little before I could
recollect my self.

Having, though with some difficulty, at length overcome this melancholy
Transport, I made up to the Top of the Hill, from whence I took my last View of
beloved Oxford, and upon the Stone where the Scholars usually perform the
Ceremony of Seasoning their Fresh Men, I sat down again, aad writ the
following Verses Farewell dear Oxford; but since we must part,
Here take the sad remainder of my heart,
It Is all thy wretched Son has now to give,
A broken heart's his Sole Perogative.
Hard fate before had me of Friends deprived,
And yet me thoughts in you they all revived,
You were my Friend, my Mother, nay, my Wife,
Whom once, I hoped, I Would wedded for my life:
Oh, pity me, for could I let you know,
With what a strange unwillingness I go,
You Would think 'twas hard that fate should Iilt me so.
I know not what I am, since our devorce,
All my whole frame is Iumbl'd out of course,
The World's a Wilderness, Men are the Beasts of Prey,
And seem to me more Rude, and Wilder far than they.


I had went on with my Melancholy Rythms a little further, I believe, if I had
not discovered a Traveller pass by me, that from his Garb and Aspect I judged,
might be in some respects under my own Predicament. In short, I took up my
satchel and made all the speed I could in order to recover him, and (though I
found he was much a better Footman than I was) after a hard stretch at the Brow
of Shot-over Hill, I came up with him.

After we had exchanged the common Complements of well overtaken and well come
Sir, the next thing in course was, whither are you bound, and upon what
expedition? I told him the very truth, that I was an unfortunate Scholar that
had met with abundance of Disappointments and Cross Accidents, and for want of
longer subsistence, was forced to leave the University to try if I could find
out some way that might Entitle me to a poor Livelihood, and that I intended to
wander the Country till I could be so happy to fix my self in such a
condition, and moreover, that I had some Notion of making Cambridge in my way.

His Answer was much of the same Nature with mine, and indeed, as he
represented his Circumstances, at first sight they looked very near akin, he
told me he was a Doctor of Physic, that by a Complication of malicious and
adverse fortune, had been unluckily bandied about the World from his Childhood;
and, what was worst of all, he had had the ill fate lately to loose his Horse,
and was now upon a hard march to London, to try if he could raise Money among
his Friends and Relations, to equip him with another.

His Candid Relation, I confess, affected me extremely, and indeed in a great
measure took off the Edge, and abated the Severity of my Reflections upon my
own Condition. I began to think that Providence had thrown me into the Company
of this unhapyy Stranger, purposely to let me know that there were other
Persons in the World as unfortunate as my self; and truly to see with what
cheerfulness and fortitude he seemed to bear up under his pretended Distress, I
thought did severely Check and reprimand my present querulity and despondence.

I quoted the old Verse to him; Solamen miseris Socios habuisse doloris. And he
replied to me again out of Mr. Chaucer.

It Is vain to Sigh, and make great Moan,
For there is help, or there is none.
And thus in a mutual Condolement of each others Misfortunes, we trudged on
till we came to Wheatly, a little Country Town about four Miles from Oxford.

Here my new Companion would needs stop and drink, and withal told me that at a
Bridge about half a Mile off, the Road divided, and if I held my Resolution for
Cambridge, we must consequently separate; but come, (says he) since we are so
luckily met, and our Circumstances and Tempers square so naturally, it is pity
methinks we should part so soon, and therefore we will even cast lots whether
you shall take my way, or I yours.

This was no sooner proposed but agreed upon, and the Lot determined him to go
my way, which he very willingly complied with, but first (says he) I think it
will not be much amiss to let the Town know what Profession I am of, perhaps I
may raise three or four Shillings to defray the Traveling Charge.

This I must confess did a little surprise me; I could by no means imagine how
a Doctor of Physic could propose the raising three or four Shillings in a
strange Place in an hour or two, which was the longest Stay we could pretend
to; but for my better Satisfa-he soon pulls off his Budget, and exposes a
mixture of Pills, Powders, and Plasters, with a bundle of Printed Papers, some
of which he immediately delivers to a Runner to be conveniently scattered and
disper'd about the Town.

Here I soon perceived that my Doctor of Physic was nothing else in plain
English but a downright Mountebank, and began now to be as uneasy, and
disturbed with his Company, as I was before pleased and rejoiced in it:
However, I thought my self in point of Honor and Promise obliged to abide our
first Resolution, and so resolved to Travel with him a Day or two, till I could
find out a handsome Pretense to shake him off.

In less than an Hour his Bills had wrought so effectually that the Room where
we sat was crowded with Men, Women, and Children, and truly notwithstanding
the heavy and pressing Thoughts and Apprehensions that hung upon me, I could
not forbear smiling now and then to hear with what profound Nonsense and
Impertinence this worthy Doctor entertained the Spectators.

Sometimes he would cajole 'em with the strange, and almost Blasphemous
Relation of the most miraculous Cures and Operations he had performed, and the
better to incline them to Credit his Report, he shows them several artificial
Cancers, Wenns, Stones, etc. At other times he imposes upon 'em the wonders of
his Travels, and the foreign names of abundance of Emperors, Kings, and
Potentates that he pretended had honored him with their Letters, and
Recommendations; in short, by his hard words, his Legerdemain Tricks, and
impudent Pretenses together, he imposed himself so far upon the Credulity of
the foolish People, that there was few went off without buying some of his
Paultry Medicines.

CAAP. IV.
In which he gives a further account of his Travels with the Mountebank, who
discovers to him the secrets of their Art; they straggle into Bedfordshire
together, where he Robbs him at an Alehouse, and then leaves him in Pawn for
the Reckoning, etc.

ABout Twelve a Clock the Doctor makes up his Budget, having disposed of as
many of his Pills, etc. (as he told me) he had received twelve Shillings and
four-pence for, and so we discharged the Reckoning, and set forward for Tame,
which was the Place we had before agreed upon to Lodge at that Night.

Upon our March I asked him several Questions, but more especially concerning
his knowledge in Physic, and Surgery, and how, and where he acquired it. I
found indeed that these kind of Interrogations were something ungrateful at
first; however after a little pausing, and hesitation, he gave me the following
short and Comprehensive Account.

Young Gentleman, says he, I find you very Inquisitive to know the secrets of
my Qualifications, those are Secrets we do not often, and indeed we ought not
to discover to any body; but because you shall see how willing I am to oblige
and divert you, I Will tell you as much of the matter as is convenient, or
perhaps you may expect.

In short then, I am one of those that the World calls Mountebanks, and truly
but a young Practitioner neither, having not been set up for my self above
three Months at most; as for your University Learning I don't pretend to it,
nor, to tell you the Truth, much regard it; Our Business, and our Profit too,
depends chiefly upon our vending our Pills, Balsams, Powders, etc. and for that
we have a common form; as to our Surgery, and Manual Operations, we have
very few but the meaner sort of People to deal with, and those we venture upon
right or wrong; if we happen to Cure 'em, we get Money and Reputation, and don't
spare to magnify our Success, if we kill 'em, we have ways enough to bring our
Selves off, and so there is no danger in it at worst.

Here I could not forbear interrupting him. Sir, says I, are the Lives of your
Fellow Christians so inconsiderable to you, that you dare venture to trifle 'em
away upon every slight occasion; if I mistake not, this is a sort of deliberate
way of committing Murder, and that so inhances and heightens the Sin, that
renders it not only without Measure, but almost without Pardon.

What strain of wonder and amazement can bear proportion with the desperate
Wickedness of Men, that can thus knowingly, and consideringly rush themselves
upon such an unaccountable undertaking, and of what a Crimson Color must that
Soul appear before the great Tribunal, that is thus dyed with a continual
repetition of Innocent Blood.

My Companion was a little startled to hear me reflect so hard upon his
Profession, and made several frivolous pretenses to acquit himself of the
Charge, and indeed, I had some difficulty before I could persuade him to go on
with his Relation; however, after he had walked himself a little off the
Remembrance of what I had said, he proceeds.

Sir, I find you are very angry with our Chirurgical Proceedings; for my own
part, I have never had any occasion to make use of them; but if I had,
notwithstanding the Severity of your Allegations, I believe I should be ready
enough to venture; and truly I can see no Reason (with Submission to your
Religious Punctilio's) why every Man should not make the most of his Practice.

I would willingly have reprimanded him here too, if I had not been
apprehensive that it would consequently have deterred him from finishing his
Account, and so I only asked him, that since he had never been concerned in any
Manual Operations, how he came by those Cancers, Wens, etc. which he exposed at
Wheatly.

Here he was a little at a stand again: In fine, (says he) You have a strong
Inclination to know the depth of our Art, for once I Will gratify your
Curiosity, and tell you the whole. As to this Wen, and Cancered Breast which
you saw, I must own they are only Counterfeits, which I borrowed of one of our
Fraternity; but notwithstanding, they serve the purposes for which they are
intended, i. e. To amuse, and impose upon the People, as well as if they were
real.

These are of considerable use and advantage to us in several Respects, but
especially upon the Stage, where we not only expose 'em to the public View,
but sometimes fix them to the Bodies of indigent Persons, which we hire upon
such occasions, and then cut them off again with as much Formality, Dexterity,
and Caution, as if they were Natural.

We draw Teeth after the same Method, and indeed, the generality of the great
Cures and Performances which we make such Boasts and Acclamations of, are mere
Cheats and Delusions, and for our Medicines, we have them by a sort of
Tradition one from another, and in the main, do all use the very same.

The gross of our Pills is nothing else but Horse-Aloes, which we sometimes
intermix with the Courser sort of Rosin of Jallop, and make up in
Liquorice-Powder; our Balsams are generally made of Hogs-Lard, and Bees Wax,
tinctured with some sorts of Oils to give 'em a different Color; our Plasters
are the same, with the addition of Burgamy Pitch, or Rosin, to make them draw
and stick; our Powder for the Worms is commonly Powder of Past, and that for
the Teeth, Powder of Tobacco-Pipes, and these we make up proportionably into
small Parcels, and wrap one of each into a Bill of Directions, and sell for
Twelve-pence or Sixpence, according as we find our Markets will best bear.

This Relation seemed so Ingenious and Candid, that I began to have a little
better Opinion of my Fellow-Traveller; I begun to believe that he was some
unfortunate Gentleman that was forced to take up with this scandalous
Profession for want of a Maintenance; however, I was resolved to sound him to
the bottom, and therefore desired him to let me know from whence he derived his
Knowledge of these occult Mysteries.

Indeed he would with all his Heart have evaded an Answer to this, but truly I
pressed him so very hard, that at last he told me, he had been several Years a
Servant to one of the first Englishmen that Traveled the Country under the
Character of a Mountebank; and that he had been assistant to him both in his
Chamber, and upon the Stage (as I learnt afterward he had been his
Merry-Andrew) that he had spoke his Pacquets (as he Phrased it) and helped him
to make up his Compositions, and so from the general, and particular
Observations he had made, he thought he had gained Experience enough to qualify
him to set up for himself; and moreover, he told me he was so well satisfied in
his own Perfections, and in the advantages that were consequent to the Employ,
that if he were but once able to raise Money to keep some Attendance, and build
a Stage or two, he did not question but in a short time he should be able to
keep his Coach and Four as well as the best of `em.

By this time we were come within half a Mile of Them, and now the next motion
was where to Lodge; being both strangers, we were resolved to strike into the
first Substantial Inn we came at, as near as I remember, 'twas the Five Bells,
where indeed we had very Comfortable Accommodations in all Respects.

The next day being Market Day, the Doctor was resolved to go out with his
Pacquets, and accordingly had a Stool fixed in a convenient place where he could
best mount to make his Harangue to the People, but this, notwithstanding 'twas
a public day, did not prove so successful as Wheatly, it seems the place (as
he called it) was too young; his meaning was, there had been one of the same
Profession too lately there, and so there was no good to be done.

We went from hence to Alesbury, where we staid the Night following, and the
next day came to Leighton Buzard, in Bedfordshire, the Doctor still exposing
his Pacquets at every Town we stopped at, but with very little success; this
Scurvy Brother that had ranged the Country before him, had spoiled all.

Well, there was no good to be done at Leighton, neither, and so my Camerade
concludes to lay aside his pretensions for the present, and make the best of
his way to London, and accordingly told me he would go and send his Satchel
with the Carrier, which of a sudden was grown too heavy for him, and then come
and drink a parting Cup, and take a Solemn Farewell of me.

Having traveled together for three or four days with the greatest Freedom and
Familiarity, I could not suspect that he could have any Design to betray me at
last, but finding him stay longer than ordinary, I began to be a little Jealous
that after all the Doctor had dropped me. To make short of the matter, I got out
of Bed where he left me, and from a very small Enquiry, found that he had both
picked my Pocket, and rifled my Satchel, and what was worse, left me in Pawn for
the Reckoning too.

This I thought was a Miisfortune, at least equal to any of my former. I was
wrackt at once with a Thousand dismal terrors, and apprehensions, and that
which tormented me most of all, was, how to dis-entangle my self from the
Scurvy Alehouse; sometimes I think upon one Expedient, and sometimes upon
another, at last I conclude, Honesty was the best Policy, and the safest way to
bring me off, and therefore resolve to declare my Condition to my Landlady, and
commit my self entirely to her Charity.

CHAP. V.
Wherein he gives a short Account of his Rencounter with his Landlady, writes a
begging Copy of Verses, and a Letter to a Gentleman in the Town, who gives him
Money to pay his Reckoning, and recommends him afterward to a School, etc.

PUrsuant to my former Resolution, after I had put on my Clothes, with a great
deal of trembling and consternation, I called for my Landlady, and began to
give her a doleful Relation of my Condition: she heard me with some kind of
Patience and Pity at first; but when I came to that part of it which related
to the Reckoning, she grew in a Instant so outrageous and violent, that I
cannot fancy any thing in Nature so cruel and brutish. The best word I could
get from her was Rogue, Thief, Cheat, and Villain, and no punishment less than
hanging, or Bridewel, was bad enough for me. I offered her all the Equipage and
Books my worthy Companion had left me, but all would not do, the Books she said
were of no use to her, beside, they were Latin, and might be Popery for what
she knew, and so she would not entertain 'em.

Nothing would serve but I should be locked up in my Room till her Husband came
home to get a Warrant to carry me before a Justice of Peace; and indeed there
was no Remedy but I must endure this hard Sentence; however, I had the
opportunity of conversing with the Maid in the Interim, that, as good Fortune
would have it, was washing in the Yard, directly under the Window, who told me
very Compassionately upon the Recital of my Condition, that there was a worthy
Gentleman in Town, that in all probability would take Pity of me, and that if I
would write a Letter she would find a method to get it conveyed to him.

This honest Motion I liked extremely, and truly as Cases stood, I thought
'twas the best Expedient my unhappy Circumstances would admit of. I must
confess indeed that I had a very sharp Conflict with my self before I could so
far vanquish my Modesty to settle my Resolutions in that Point, and then too I
was as much confounded and disturbed to think what Method and Terms were most
suitable to recommend me, with the greatest Innocence and Advantage; but this
was not long under debate, but the Muse steps in, and offers her Assistance,
and indeed I accepted of it, under the notion that the Relation of my
Circumstances in a short Copy of Verses might be something out of the Road of
Common Begging, and so to work I went, and wrote what follows.

From an unhappy Wanderer in Distress;
Accept, and pardon Sir, this bold Address;
Believe him, it is a rigid Turn of Fate,
Has brought the wretched Pilgrim to your Gate,
Oh pity him, for it is the only time
He e're was known to beg Relief in Rhyme.
But Peace base Iilt, to urge me on forbear;
Would thou betray me now, in my despair?
Can thou than this no better way contrive
To keep thy poor distressed Friend alive?
No, let him die, for that is a less offense,
Than to incline him thus to Insolence.
Besides, already to my Cost I know,
That humane Life is so exposed to Woe,
That it can never requite the Pain I Am at,
To forster up the Sickly, peevish brat;
I see, that after all that I can do,
Still Grief and Pain, and Secret Ills pursue.
But yet methinks before my Iourney's end,
It Is strange if my hard Fate should not unbend;
Life's but a Lottery, and one good Cast,
Makes some amends for all the bad ones past:
In spite of Fate there must be some Reserve,
Then sure it is hard in the interim I should starve.
Haste then my Muse to yonder happy place,
And humbly there plead thy poor Master's Case.
Show him where he in deep Confusion stands,
Hanging his Head, and lifting up his Hands;
Blaming the Cause that brought both him and thee,
Thus to transgress the Rules of Modesty.
Then for these Rhymes I charge you there be Just;
Own 'twas your fault, for you provoked me First;
And after this --
If you perceive no pardon nor relief,
Bring the sad news, and to conclude our grief,
You to your hill, I Will to some cave retire,
First mourn my rigid State, then Hermit like expire.
Upon the back side of the verses I writ this Letter which I thought would be
necessary to give a further account of my Condition, etc.

SIR,
THis Poeta de tristibus, is a Poor unfortunate young Man, that a Conjunction
of Cross and Malicious accidents have cast upon your Coast, where for want of
subsistence (like a Person after a Shipwreck) he is forced to seek relief from
the Inhabitants of the place.

How he fell into this foolish vein of Rhyming he can give no Account, unless
it be that his present extremity (like one that was wakn'd by the outcry of
fire) forced him to do something for Relief, and the Muse that was always ready
enough to be meddling upon other occasions, would needs persuade me now, that
this was a little foreign to the ordinary methods of downright Mumping.

As for the profound dullness and flatness of my Verse, there is enough to be
said if the thing required it. Poetry and Poverty, though they are too commonly
convertible terms, yet indeed, they are very Improper Companions. A Poet in
distress is seldom known to write good Verses: Ovid himself, that was the
greatest Wit of the Age he lived in, loses most of his Natural Temper and
Genius in his Banishment; there is a strange difference between his nec Jovis
ira nec Ignis, the Flights and Raptures of his Metamorphosis, and his Hei mihi
quod Domino, in his de tristibus. And Tully too complains passionately of the
disturbance of his mind, and charges the roughness of his Style upon the
depression of Spirits he writ under.

But Sir, all this is very little to the purpose, I wish it were as easy to
excuse the Insolence of this trouble, as it is to plead for a Person that
writes bad Verses under my Circumstances; in this particular I have nothing at
all to say, but am forced to acknowledge my own guilt, and throw my self
entirely upon your mercy. It Is true, it is a violent necessity that has urged me
upon this ungrateful expedient, and that I hope, in Conjunction with your own
Charity and Compassion, will interpose a little for this unfortunate stranger,
that with all the distance and submission that can be, Subscribes himself,

your Obedient Servant, Peregrine.


After I had finished my Letter and the Verses, upon the second reading I
thought them so flat and dull, that I had much a do to forbear tearing 'em in
Pieces; however upon the Importunity of the Maid, I Sealed 'em up, and
Subscribed 'em, and then delivered 'em to her, who according to her promise got
'em instantly Conveyed to the Gentleman.

But certainly, never Mortal was in a deeper perplexity for the success of an
adventure than I was, but whilst I was sadly Ruminating upon the consequence of
what I had done, up comes my Landlady, and with some sort of Jealousy and
Concern, told me there was Squire -- Footman below wanted to speak with me, and
if I pleased, I might go down and talk with him, who told me if I was the
Person that sent the Letter to his Master, he was ordered to desire me to come
to the House as soon as I could.

The Boy having delivered his message and received my Answer that I would wait
upon him, Immediately returns; and now the next thing to be done was to Compound
with my Landlady; who by no means would permit me out of her Doors, without a
sufficient Pledge for her reckoning. I offered her again all I had, but just
the very Clothes of my back, for security.

But all would not do, my Books were but trifles to her, unless I had something
of Real value to deposit; let who would send for me, she would keep me till she had
her reckoning, which after all this Noise and Combustion was but Poor four and
nine pence.

To make short of the matter, I was forced to go to my Chamber and strip off my
shirt, and leave her that, with every thing else that I had, before she would
suffer me to move; but just as I was marching out a doors, in comes my
Landlord, and supposing I was going quite away, would needs force me back to
take his Flagon at parting.

We were no sooner come in, but his Wife, with a great many Falsehoods and
Aggravations, gave him the account of our whole Transactions; but truly the man
was so far from joining with her Barbarity, that when she came to speak of the
shirt, I had enough to do to prevent him from falling fowl upon her, however he
forced her immediately to bring me all my things again, and told me he would
freely take my word for what was owing, and withal earnestly requested me not
to make any Reflections upon his Wife's uncivility and cruelty to me.

Having put my shift on again, and committed my satchel to the Custody of the
maid, I went directly to the Gentleman's House, who sent for me into his
Parlour, where he was playing a Game at Gleek with his Lady and her Mother. He
asked me several Questions, and indeed I gave him a general Account of my
Misfortunes, which I observed did very sensibly affect `em all, but more
especially the Old Lady.

They presently ordered a Servant to show me into the Pantry, and give me some
Victuals, and sent me a bottle of Wine. Whilst I was eating, the good Old
Gentlewoman came to me, and with a Tenderness and Respect beyond what I could
imagine, told me, with Tears in her Eyes, She Knew my Father Personally, and
all his Family; and was heartily sorry these unhappy Times had reduced her to
such a low Ebb, that she could not do for me as she would. After all the
Expressions of a most Compassionate good Woman, and a great many Sweet and
Innocent Apologies for the meanness of the present, she gave me half a Iacobus,
and then left me to finish my Dinner.

As soon as I had Dined, I was conducted back to the Parlour, where the
Gentleman was Writing me a Letter of Recommendation to a Clergyman in
Northamptonshire, that he had accidentally heard enquiring for a Person to
assist him in his School; the purport of the Letter was, that I was a Young
Gentleman of a good Family, that the common calamity had reduced to extremity,
and if he found me qualified for his purpose, he`d engage for my Integrity, etc.

With the Letter, he gave me Ten Shillings, and his Lady a Crown, together with
a great deal of Friendly, and, I may say, Fatherly Advice, and Admonitions, and
what was more, gave me his Word that if ever it should please God to restore
the King, he would take particular Care to have him informed of the hardships
and sufferings of my self and Family.

I could not tell what return to make for these Favors, and truly had much ado
to contain my self from openly betraying the Weaknesses and Frailties of my
Nature; indeed, I did make a shift to bear up till I had taken my Leave, which
I am still jealous of, was not so solemn and decent as it ought to have been
upon such an extraordinary Occasion.

Being thus refresht and relieved, I went back to my Alehouse, and discharged
my Reckoning, which so softened my Landlady, that nothing now was good enough
for me. I soon perceived my Landlord was an honest Cavalier, and after a little
further talk and Enquiry, I found withal he had been a Sergeant in the Regiment
my Father was Colonel of. When I told him that, I never saw any Person in such
a violent Transport, I could hardly force him from returning me my Money,
whether I would or not, and beating his Wife for but seeming to refuse it. The
poor Man was so strangely affected, that he hardly knew what he said or did,
but at length coming to himself, he entertained me through the whole Evening,
with several remarkable passages of the Wars, and particulars of my Father's
Life, which I had never before heard of.

CHAP. VI.
He Travels toward Northampton, Encounters an Itinerant Parson upon the Road,
who instructs him in several of the Secrets and Mysteries of Begging, and then
wheedles him to join with him, etc.

EArly next Morning I got up, and having made the Maid some small
acknowledgments for her Civility, and discharged the House, I set forward
toward Northampton; my Landlord walked with me as far as Brickill, where he
treated me with the best the Town would afford, and gave me a Token to drink
with one of his Acquaintance, that had formerly been a Quartermaster to my
Father, and now kept an Inn upon the Road.

'Twas about twelve or one before my Landlord and I parted, so that that Night
I went no further then Newport-Pannel. I lay at the George, which was the only
House in the Town, where the King's Party frequented, and by virtue of a
private Token I had to the Master, I was Conducted into a Room, where a Society
of Loyal Gentlemen constantly met two or three times a Week to read the News,
and make their Observations and Reflections upon the present Posture of the
World.

I must confess there was one thing even in this most delectable Company, that
rendered it a little ungrateful, I mean their common Custom of hard drinking.
This was indeed too much the general Practice of those unhappy times, which I
find since very sharply and pathetically reflected upon by one of the greatest
Masters that ever adorn`d our English Nation, i. e. the Author of the Whole
duty of Man, in his Preface to his Gentleman's Calling.

It Is (says he) sure a far less deplorable Spectacle to see a Gentleman spoiled
of his Fortune by his Conscience than his Luxury, and to behold him under the
Stroke of the Headsman, than under those more infamous Executioners, his Lust
and Intemperance; yet I fear if the Martyrology even of those suffering times
were duly scanned, Venus and Bacchus would be found to have had many more
Martyrs than God and Loyalty.

My Constitution utterly unqualify'd me for a hard Drinker, and so I was forced
to plead Indisposition and Inability, which in consideration of my being a
stranger and upon a Journey was allowed of; I stayed with 'em till about ten
before I went to my Chamber, whither I was attended by the Landlord, who asked
me several questions in order (I suppose, as he was directed by the Company) to
discover who I was, but that I thought was useless here, and so I only made him
an Answer in the general.

Between four and five next Morning I set out, with a resolution to reach
Northampton that Night; and I believe, had been there in good time if I had not
been Interrupted by an unlucky accident, which carried me another way, and was
the cause of no small trouble and discontent to me afterward.

When I had traveled about eight Miles onwards of my Journey, I overtook a
Person upon the Road in the habit of a Clergyman, and truly, both from his
Garb, Behavior and Dialect, had no grounds to suspect to the contrary. I
accosted him with all the distance and regard that I thought was due to his
Character; and indeed, his deportment and Reply was decent and gentile enough,
he was bound for Northampton as well as me, he told me, and provided I would
not over-walk him, would gladly embrace the benefit of my Company.

We walked together about two Miles before we stopped, and then we called at the
Persons House, to whom I had the Token from my honest Landlord at Leighton; he
treated us with a great deal of Civility and Respect, and nothing would serve
his turn but we must stay all Night; whether he took any thing for our
Entertainment, I cannot remember, but to the best of my knowledge he did not,
and would very willingly have detained us for two or three Days longer, and
withal, offered to lend us Horses to Northampton.

By this time my Associate had sufficiently Instructed himself in my
Inclinations, and accordingly the more to Ingratiate himself with me, pretends
he was one of that unhappy Number, that the Government had maliciously and
unjustly deprived of his Preferment, for not taking the Covenant; and, what was
worse, that a Conjunction of hard Circumstances had driven him from his Friends
and Country, to seek Bread and Liberty among strangers.

Here I began to close with him, and gave him a short Account of my Case, which
he received with so much Hypocritical Compassion and Formality, that indeed I
thought him one of the most Devout and Pious Persons that I had ever Conversed
with, in the whole Course of my Life; He told me, he was of Heart Hall in
Oxford, and gave me such a singular Account of the Manner and Constitution of
the University, and the Names and Characters of so many Eminent Persons, that
there was not the least ground to suspect him. I must confess, the remembrance
of my former Companion often came into my mind, but then, when I came to
compare their different Characters and Demeanors, I could not forbear blaming
my self for my suspicion.

In a few hours we had Contracted a very strict and solemn Friendship, and (as
I thought) began to deal our minds one to another, with all the Candor and
Frankness of true and sincere Friends; he told me several odd, but Delightful
and Pleasant Accidents, that he had been forced to Encounter, since he had been
reduced to the hard State of an Itinerant; I gave him in return an Account of
some of mine, but particularly my late Adventure with the Mountebank: Together
with the manner of my Deliverance; Moreover, I recited the Verses and Letter to
him which I writ at Leighton, and gave him a full and particular Relation with
what extraordinary Candor they received 'em, and how kindly the good Gentleman
and his Family treated and relieved me in all respects.

He told me, upon the hearing of the Letter and Verses, Notwithstanding my
Misfortunes, I was one of the happiest Men living, and if I would but Actuate
that Talent that God had entrusted me with, I need not doubt a subsistence in
any part of the Kingdom; that very Copy of Verses and Letter, says he, if you
knew how to apply them rightly, were a sufficient Vade Mecum, to carry you all
over England; but (says he) I find you are but a youngster in the secrets of
Traveling, and therefore upon our march to Morrow, I Will give you some General
Instructions, by the help of which, you will be able to understand your business
a little better.

To be an exact Master in this kind of Art of Living, I must tell you, requires
a great deal, both of Judgment, Discretion and Experience, and when once you're
arrived to a tolerable perfection a Person of your Sense and Learning, may make
his Passage through the World with abundance of delight and satisfaction.

`Twas too late now to descend into particulars, and so we went to our
respective Appartments for that Night, with a mutual resolution to be up Early
in the Morning in order to Prosecute our Journey, as we accordingly did about
seven the next Day.

When we came at a convenient distance from the Town, I put him in mind of his
promise, i. e. to instruct me in the Secrets and Mysteries of a Traveling
Mendicant, which he readily comply`d with, and withal told me, to prevent being
mis-understood, it would be necessary to give me a general Idea and Notion of
the business.

As to the Science and Occupation of begging, (for that in strictness of sense
is the properest Name I can call it by) `tis in the main, a kind of ars
vivendi, a sort of Trade and Profession as well as any of the rest, so that if
it be not always nicely conformable to the Rules of Virtue, Justice and Truth,
there`s as much if not more to be said for it, than for any other Science or
Calling.

But Sir, says I, Is it impossible for a Man to be Virtuous and a Mendicant? We
have it from the Mouth of a great Man, that a Man may be Poor or Sick by
Misfortune, but none can be Vicious or Unjust, but they must be the cause of
it themselves; and truly, I cannot see what tolerable reason can be ascribed,
Why, an Ingenuous and Faithful Account of our Circumstances, should not be as
moving and acceptable as one that is Forged and Surreptitious.

I grant indeed (says he) that the true State of your Condition, provided you
had none but Loyal Persons to make your addresses to, were sufficient, But then
how would you do, if you should fall into a Country, where there are none of
these sort to be found, which you know is not impossible considering the Age we
live in? Beside, if you take up the Trade (as I said) quatenus ars vivendi, Why
then, I think in point of Prudence, you are obliged to make the most of it; and
if there be a little Prevarication upon occasion, I cannot perceive where the
great sin or harm of it lies; you know a violent necessity can plead to any
thing, even to the breach of the general Rules of Civility and Modesty. But
Sir, this is all Foreign to our Case, and if you throw stumbling blocks in my
way, you can never expect I should discharge my promise.

To go on therefore, if you intend to be a Proficient in the Science of
begging; your first business will be, to consult the Nature and Temper of the
Person you are to make your application to, and by what expedient you may best
recommend your self to him: our method for this is, commonly to go to some
adjacent Alehouse, where for the expense of Six Pence, we may be equipt with
the several Characters and Inclinations of all the Gentry and Clergy within
four or five Miles round.

When you have hit of the Person, the next thing is, to consult whether it be
most proper to attend him your self, or send him the nature of your Case in a
letter; if you do the first, you must be sure to fix upon such a time, when you
are Morally certain he is not engaged in business or Company; if you do the
latter, the great difficulty is, to get your Letter handsomely conveyed to him;
my way (and I think it is the best) is to carry it my self and walk about the
Hall, etc. Till I have got my Answer.

He had went on with his Discourse, if we had not been Interrupted by a third
Person, of whom, my Companion enquiring the way to Northampton, we were
informed that we were come more than Two Miles out of the Road; and that our
way lay directly back again; which I believe from the Sequel of the Matter, was
rather a Design than a Mistake: He asked me, If my Occasions at Northampton
were so urgent, and particular, that I could not avoid going thither? If they
are, says he, I Will accompany you with all my Heart; for my own part, I am not
obliged to any one place, and shall be willing to dispense with a greater
inconveniency than this, for the sake of such good Conversation.

I told him my Business was only to carry a Letter of Recommendation to a Loyal
Clergyman in order to request him to accept me as an Assistant in his School,
from whence I proposed some sort of Settlement, till I could be able to guess
how it would please God to dispose of the World.

If your Resolutions are fixed to undertake the drudgery of an Usher (says he)
far be it from me to oppose it; however, I may tell you as a Friend, it is but
wedding your self to a Life of Slavery, Vexation, and Confinement; and indeed,
were I in your Circumstances, had I your Parts and Youth, and were I Master of
so many Qualifications as you are, it should be the last Business in the
Kingdom I would take up with.

But Sir, (says I, being alas! but too easy to be persuaded in that
particular) if I should relinquish my Pretensions, what must be done for a
Subsistence; I have neither Estate, Money, nor Friends, and to be left
destitute in such a barbarous Age as this, is a reasonable inducement for me to
put my Hand to any thing for an honest Livelihood, that I am in the least
capable of undertaking.

I will (says he) in no respect interpose in your Affairs; as for a
Subsistence, my Condition in every point is the same with yours, and has been
so for diverse Years, and yet thanks to my Stars I have never wanted Food and
Raiment, and what is more, have enjoyed a Freedom and Privilege which you must
not expect under the Capacity of an Usher.

Beside I have had the opportunity of seeing several Countries, and making my
Observations upon the Men and things, which I must tell you is no
inconsiderable advantage to a Man of Parts and Learning. But Sir, supposing all
this, I cannot be so vain to believe, that my Parts and Learning (as you are
pleased to intimate) can any ways entitle me to such extraordinary Privileges;
neither can I understand, provided I were qualified in all respects as you
represent me, how I could be secure of Food and Raiment, and withal enjoy the
grateful opportunity of seeing the Country, which I must own seems to me an
Advantage as great as any thing else you can morally propose.

All that I tell you, says he, is from my own Experience; I have already past
through several happy years in an Itinerant State, and though I had very few of
the Perfections you are Master of, to assist me, have made a very comfortable
Progress; but it is nonsense to multiply Words, and therefore the short of the
Case is this, if you think fit to join your self with me, you may depend upon a
true Friend, and faithful Companion, and then for our Subsistence, I could
easily demonstrate to you, that there is not the least Shadow, or Pretense to
apprehend the wants or defects of it.

CHAP. VII.
They straggle together into Leicestershire, try several Adventures in their
Passage, the Mendicant writes a Latin Letter to a Lady, and is plentifully
rewarded; they are both seized, and carried before a Magistrate; the Itinerant
is discovered to be an Impostor, and the Mendicant Honorably Acquitted.

WIthout very many second Considerations, I resolved upon this new Expedition,
i. e. to take a turn about the Country, in Company with this Ingenious and (as
I thought) honest Itinerant; about three in the Afternoon we reached Oundle,
where we stayed all Night; my Camerade I found was very well known all over the
Place, having, as the Woman of the House informed me, Preached there about half
a year before, to the great Satisfaction and applause of the whole Town.

To give him his due, he was a Man, as far as can be presumed, without
Learning, a Master of the English Tongue, and truly I was mightily satisfied to
see with what Respect and Kindness every body treated him; we were here Merry
and Jocular; but (says he) young Gentleman, you must take this for a general
Rule, never to spend of the main Stock, but upon case of Necessity.

Come, (says he) I have thought of an Adventure, which I am confident will
defray the Charge of the Night. About half a Mile out of Town lives an
excellent Lady, you shall write out your Verses, and the Letter you repeated
yesterday, and I Will get em conveyed to her, which I am very certain will be a
Piece, or at least half a Piece in our way.

I had much ado to reconcile my self to this ungrateful Expedient; however,
after a great many entreaties from him, and Reflections upon my self, and
withal considering that the thing was not malum in se, I did comply with his
Request, and transcribed them just in the very words and form as I first writ
'em at Leighton.

I Am sure he had not sent 'em away above an Hour, but comes a Maid Servant with
a Letter directed to Mr. Peregine -- The Contents were these.

Sir,
BY your Ingenious Copy of Verses, and Letter, I find you must needs be what
you pretend to, an Honest Gentleman in Distress; Indeed I am truly sorry my
present Indisposition will not allow me to see you; you may depend upon it, it
is not want of Respect which your extraordinary Wit and Parts may command from
any body. I have sent a Small Token by the bearer, which I hope you will do me
the favor to accept of,

from your humble Servant, W -- O


The small Token, as the good Lady was pleased to call it, was Thirty
Shillings, four or five of which I think we spent that Night, and put the
Remainder into a Common Bag; nothing could be more innocently pleasant and
merry than my Companion was through the whole Evening, and truly I was so well
satisfied in my new Adventure, that for the present I had utterly forgot all my
former Misfortunes.

We stayed here all Sunday, and upon Monday Morning set forward again,
resolving to make the best of our way to Bosworth in Leicestershire, where he
told me before he went into the South, he left his Horse, and several other
Traveling Necessaries. In our way he would be very often discoursing, and
commending such a kind of Life, and giving such pleasant Accounts of several
diverting Passages he had met with in his Travels, that indeed I was very much
affected and rejoiced in his Conversation.

When we had walked about five Mile, we came to a little Alehouse, and there
inquiring as his manner was, what Gentlemen there was near, the Man of the
House told him, there was one of the worthiest Men in the whole Country that
lived within half a Mile; here he would have had me tried my Verses again, but
that I positively refused; however he would not be denied, but I should write
him a Letter, which I did in the following Words, and put his Name to it.

Sir,
YOu have this from one of the most unhappy Men living, from a poor Clergyman,
which a harsh and severe Law has first forced out of the Church for refusing
the Covenant, and then a Complication of hard Circumstances from his Friends,
and Country, to seek Bread and Liberty among Strangers. Sir, The Character you
bear, both of a good and great Man, encourages me to believe that you will in
some measure commiserate the wretched condition of a most distressed Stranger.
Pity and forgive him I beseech you Sir, and accept his Thanks and Prayers, Who
shall ever esteem it an Honor and a Happiness to be thought worthy to be
admitted into the number of those that are bound to bless you for your Charity
and Beneficence.


This Letter he carried himself, and the Gentleman, as he told me, gave him a
Crown; to the best of my Remembrance we spent two or three Days at this little
Alehouse, my Camerade going out every Morning, to fetch in Contribution (as he
called it.) When we had done there, we set forward again, and the Night
following came to a small Market Town about eight Mile further.

Here my Companion discovers a new Adventure, i. e. A Lady that was an
excellent Mistress of the Latin Tongue, and very Charitable and Compassionate
to all sorts of Strangers, and Travelers, and nothing would serve his turn but
I must attack her in a Latin Epistle, which though I thought was a very odd
Expedient; yet my former Success, and his Entreaties together, so far prevailed
with me, that I was resolved to try the Event, and so sat down, and with some
sort of dis-satisfaction and uneasiness, scribled this hasty Letter.

Dignissima Dom.
SI quis sit Infaelix hujus Epistolae Portitor quaeras, Peregrinus sum; si
sortem quae huc me adduxit, aversae fortunae Ictus et malitia est. In
puerilibus annis bonis literis Educatus, and tandem ad Oxonium missus, ubi per
tres faelices annos incubui, at interim amicis perditis and defunctis a
Collegio (hei mihi) haud invitus discessi. Appropinquans igitur hanc tuaem
Ignotam Patriam, humiliter imploro benignitatem, ut aliquid ad sustinendum
fragile meum Corpus accipiam. Miserere Iuvenis Magnae spei, Iampridem nunc
perituri, sic Divina Clementia tui misereatur in hoc Mundo and in futuro.

Peregrinus.


In Answer to this, next Morning I received a gentile Note with ten Shillings,
with several neat and pretty Apologies for the smallness of the Present. By the
help of these kind of Letters, Letters of Request, Petitions, and other
Mendicant Conveniences my Companion was well furnished with, we wandered the
Country for about a Month before we reached Bosworth, which was the Place my
Associate had pitched upon to continue at for three or four days, in order to
Equip us with Necessaries fit for a Summer's Expedition.

'Twas about eight a Clock, I believe, before we came to our Quarters; and
truly I think we had not been there above half an Hour, but in comes a
Constable with a strong Party of Assistance, and seized us both; it seems they
had discovered my Itinerant Friend to be a a rank Impostor, and, what was
worse, that by an ungrateful piece of Knavery, had cheated an honest Gentleman
in Warwickshire out of the Horse he had left here till his Return from his
Southern Peregrination.

To make short of the Story, we were both immediately carried before Sir B. D.
a worthy Justice of the Peace, that lived in the Neighborhood; my Camerade was
called first to his Examination, and tho he made his Defense with the greatest
assurance and readiness, yet the Charge against him was so heavy and plain, and
confirmed by so many corroborating Circumstances, that there was no possibility
either to stifle, or evade it.

They proved several very black things upon him, but especially that his
Orders, Testimonials, etc. were all forged, and Counterfeited, and that he had
left his Wife at Falmouth, and had straggled the Country with another Woman,
which he either was, or at least pretended to be Married to; upon the whole,
although the Justice was a Gentleman of an extraordinary Temper and Compassion,
and would very willingly have Saved him, the Crimes against him were so
exaltedly heinous, and Scandalous, and so evidently and clearly proved beside,
that he was constrained to order his Clerk to make his Mittimus for Leicester
Goal.

My turn came next, and truly he was not more ready to plead for, and excuse
his Villainy, than I was at a loss to defend my Innocence. The good Gentleman
perceiving me in such a strange Agony and Disorder, kindly told me, I need not
be so mightily terrified, I was not charged with any of his Crimes, but only
with being in his Company, which so far encouraged me, that in a sort of
perplexed manner, I gave a general account of our meeting, and of all our
Travels and Transactions, with which the Justice, and all the Company were so
well satisfied, that with a great deal of Pity and Advice, I was instantly
discharged.

CHAP. VIII.
The Mendicant returns into Northampton shire, delivers his Letter he had from
the Gentleman at Leighton to the Clergyman, by whom he is re^eiv'd as an Usher,
he is ordained a Deacon; the Clergy-Man's Sister falls in Love with him, to
avoid which he forsakes his Place, and returns to his former Profession of a
Mendicant.

BEing divided from my Companion by this unlucky Accident, I was in a deep
Quandary whether I should carry on my new Profession upon my own bottom, or
return into Northamptonshire, and deliver my Letter, which by great accident I
had preserved; my former Success, and Encouragement, together with my rambling
Itch and Inclination to see the Country, had certainly carried the Cause, if
the Fate of my late Associate had not happily interposed, the Prospect of which
was still so dismal and frightful to me, that at length, tho not without some
Reluctance, I conclude upon the latter; but just as I was packing, up comes a
Messenger from the Justice of Peace, with advice, That I must instantly come
and speak with him.

This put me under fresh Apprehensions; and notwithstanding I was sensible I
had done nothing that could any ways expose me to the Law, yet for all that I
was sufficiently terrify`d to think what should be the consequence of this
Second Interview; however, I found there was no Remedy, but I must put it to
the venture, and so that I might be out of my pain, as soon as possible, I went
up to the house.

When I came there, I found the Gentleman and his Lady walking in his Court,
who immediately beckened me to come to him. Young Man, says he, I was very
sorry to find you in such bad Company, but I hope it will be a caution to you
for the future, how you embark your self with Strangers: Says the good Lady,
You have had a very happy deliverance, for it is a thousand to one, if you had
continued your Rambles with him, but he would have drawn you into some
Inconveniency that probably might have been the cause of your Destruction.

They ordered me to follow 'em into their Garden, and commanded me to sit down
with 'em in a Summer House, and to give 'em a particular Narrative of my
Travels and Circumstances; which I did in as comprehensive a manner as I could;
and withal, repeated to 'em my Verses, Letters, etc. with all the rest of my
Transactions since my first departure from Oxford.

They were both extremely pleased and affected with my Relation, and the
Gentleman gave me ten Shillings to help to bear my Charges into
Northamptonshire, and ordered One of his Servants to go Two or Three Miles with
me; to set me in the ready Road; and moreover, enjoined me to send him a
Letter, with an account of my Success, etc. as I did about a month after.

The fourth day at night I came to the End of my Journey, and delivered my
Letter, according to direction; and indeed, was received with a Civility and
Respect beyond what I could reasonably imagine; they told me my good Friends at
Leighton had sent two other Letters in my behalf, and were under very great
Apprehensions and Trouble to find out what was become of me all this while.

I pretended something (I cannot tell what) which passed well enough for an
excuse; and so the next thing was (after some short Examination) upon what
Terms I would consent to live with him? which I referred to himself, and he
very heartily offered me Twenty Pounds per Annum, Meat, Drink, Washing, and
Lodging, and the convenience of his Books and Study, as often as I had occasion.

With this I thankfully complied; and the next Morning he conducted me into his
School, where was about Thirty Gentlemen's Sons; the greatest part of which were
boarded in his own Family.

And now I began to think my self as happy as I could wish; having, beside the
opportunity of a fixed and settled Life, the advantage of a pretty good Library,
and the Conversation of a Learned Ingenious Man, that upon all occasions would
be ready to give me his Advice and Instructions: We lived together like two
Brothers; our Tempers, Inclinations, and Principles squaring so exactly, that
in the space of Twenty Months, I don't remember the least jangle or discontent.

About half a Year afterward there came the Worthy Bishop of -- to a
Nobleman's that liv`d in the Neighborhood, and nothing would serve my Friend,
but I should Embrace the Opportunity, and be Ordain`d a Deacon. This Motion at
first I was unwilling to condescend to, suspecting (as I had good Reason) my
own Insufficiency, and Want of Age and Leaaning.

We had several Debates before he could prevail with me to lay my hand to the
Plow; but having convinc`d me from the Canon, which, as he quoted to me, did
only oblige me, reddere rationem fidei in Latina Lingua; and having cleared up
all my other Doubts and Suspicions, by the help of the Character he had given
of me, and a Title and Testimonial he had procured, upon St. Thomas day
following, which happened to fall that Year upon a Sunday, I was Ordain`d.

My Lord Examin`d me himself, and withal, told me, I came to him so well
recommended, that he should ask me but few Questions. The most material, to the
best of my remembrance, were concerning the Three distinct Offices of our
Savior, with some other short matters relating to the Constitution of the
Church of England, and Kingly Government.

Some time after my Ordination, my Worthy Patron would needs Engage me to
Preach in the Parish Church; which, after several Entreaties, I was forc`d to
comply with. It would look like Vanity in me to tell you with what general
Applause I acquitted my self; I had the Thanks and Caresses of every body for
my Sermon; but from none with so much endearing Sweetness and Friendship as
from the Sister of my Friend.

And here my Cruel Stepmother, Fortune, begins again to try her Experiments
upon me: From this very Instant this poor young Gentlewoman espouses a
particular Tenderness and Esteem for me; which she so long unhappily forsters
and cherishes in her breast, that at length by degrees it swell`d into a
violent and passionate Love.

I should wrong her Memory, and the Judgment of all that knew her, if I should
not give her the Character she both enjoyed and Merited; i. e. of a Virtuous,
Sober and Discreet, and withal, a Beautiful Woman, barring her last mistake in
bestowing her Affection upon such an unhappy Wretch as my self.

She made a thousand pretty and innocent discoveries of her Passion; and truly
I saw it well enough, though I thought it Prudence not to let her know it;
every body in the house (especially her Brother) perceived it as well as my
self; and indeed it grew so violent and rapid at last, that she had enough to
do to contain her self within the ordinary bounds and measures of her Sex.

I knew not what to do in this difficult conjuncture, and indeed was much more
concerned for the unhappy Gentlewoman than for my self. Marriage I was resolved
against, being sufficiently convinced that neither my Circumstances, nor my
Temper would in any respect agree with such a state of Life.

Upon one hand lay a large heap of Obligations and Favors I had received from
her Brother; on the other a compendious chain of her own endearing Kindnesses
and Civilities; and which way to steer a safe course between these two
dangerous Rocks, I could not determine; First, I thought if I should stay here
till her Brother or some Friend should move the thing, and then reject it, they
could esteem it no less than the height of Baseness and Ingratitude, and resent
it as an affront, not to be pardoned: And, Secondly, I thought if I went off
privately, without taking my leave, 'twould bring such an Odium upon me, that I
should never be able to wipe it out, the remainder of my Life.

Well, I found there was no Remedy, but I must instantly resolve upon one of
these Expedients; and truly as cases stood, I thought the latter was the most
proper; and accordingly having furnished my old Satchel (which I had still lying
by me, as a Reli^^ of my former Adventures) with all sorts of traveling
Necessaries. Upon the next Holiday in the Morning, to avoid Suspicion, I set
forward upon a new Peregrination; and at a Village about Four Miles off, I writ
this Note, which I got conveyed to 'em by a Messenger, etc.

SIR,
MY sudden departure I know must necessarily surprise you; it is an impetuous
gust of hard fortune that will have it so; the rest I leave to your own
Conceptions. Let this commend me earnestly to your worthy Family, to whom I
wish all the happiness and blessing of both Worlds. Accept my Thanks and
Prayers for your friendly Charity and Compassion to an unhappy Stranger; whom,
by a long Chain of faithful Kindnesses, you have inseparably bound to
acknowledge himself for ever.

Your most Obliged Usher. PEREGRINE.


Here the Muse would needs offer me her help in my Melancholy; and as I walked
along, dictated to me this short Ode.

Oh Life! you are nothing but a sound,
A weak built Isthmus, that a while does rise
Between two vast Eternities;
And then sinks down, and can no more be found.
Alas! alas! in vain,
With all our Care and Pain
We seek the tottering Fabric to maintain.
Our utmost Acts are Nonsense all;
It Is Nonsense all that we can do;
Through Paths unknown vast trains of ills pursue:
And Man, the Wretch must undergo 'em all.
'Twas a sad Truth spoke by the wisest King,
That better is the day of Death,
Than that black day that gives us Breath.
Since naught below can any Comfort bring.
It Is hard, methinks it is hard
That Man alone should be debarred,
Even from that ease the Toyls of Brutes reward.
But still it is Nonsense to complain,
It Is better sit and bite the Chain.
We must drudge through the Vale, and tamely go
Through the strange dismal Weilds and Labirinths of Woe.
CHAP. IX.
The Mendicant wanders into Buckinghamshire, is entertained by a Worthy old
Gentleman for his Curate; he preaches a singular Sermon upon Humility, the
chief heads of which he sets down at large.

WHen I had dispatched away the Messenger with the Note, and satisfied him to
his content for the trouble he would be at, I thought it was best, for fear
they should endeavor to recover me, to take a by-way cross the Country. I
don't know how far I wandered the first day, neither did I think it proper to
ask Questions; however, I found my self at night upon the edge of
Buckinghamshire; where, at a poor Alehouse in a small Country Village, I took
up my Station.

Whilst I was sadly reflecting upon the Family I had left, and entertaining my
self with the dismal Accounts of my own repeated Misfortunes, in comes a
Gentleman to enquire for Lodging, that came, as he pretended, directly from
London; amongst other things I asked him the News. News says he Sir! why, good
News for all honest Gentlemen, and especially for those of your Coat; General
Monk is upon a full march with his Army from Scotland, and the People begin to
talk publicly of the Restoration of the King.

This News pleased and diverted me, notwithstanding the piercing Agonies I was
under.

The Gentleman's Conversation in general was exceeding pleasant and jocular; we
eat and drank together, and indeed were forced to lie together too, the House
affording no more than one Bed, and that but a scurvy one neither; however,
there was no Remedy, but we must take up with that, or the Hay Mow; which, as
it happened afterward, had been the better choice of the two; to make short of
the matter, my Bedfellow proved a notorious Highwayman; and the very day before
had committed several Robberies in the Road between Dunstable and Wooborn; and
what was worse, about four a Clock in the Morning came a Constable with a hue
and Cry, and seized us both in our Beds.

My Companion indeed would willingly have cleared me by alleging I was an
absolute Stranger to him, but Mr. Constable would not Credit him, and so the
next Morning we were both carried before a Magistrate, he was committed to
Alesbury Goal, and I was remanded back to the Alehouse, under a strong Guard,
with Orders to be secured for three or four days, till the Persons that were
Robbed had viewed me, to try if any of them could give any Evidence against me;
but nothing appearing, and my Innocence growing every day more manifest, I was
at last set at liberty.

Being now delivered from this strange Dilemma, which, notwithstanding, had
exhausted all my Stock; Moneyless, Friendless, and Disconsolate I wander from
one place to another, till it began to draw toward Sunset, and what to do for
a little Food, and a Lodging, I could not imagine; Lying in the Field was a
dismal Apprehension, and to venture into an Inn, without Money to pay my
Reckoning, was as bad; but while I was thus ruminating upon my doleful
Condition, I observ`d a Shepherd following his Flock not far from me, to whom I
made up, in order to enquire where I was, and what Gentleman lived near.

The good Old Man perceiving by my Looks and Gesture, I was a Person in
distress, told me I was in the Vale of Alesbury, and that there were several
Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, but they were all Oliverians, and
Commonwealths Men, and good for little the only Gentleman (says he) that I
know in this part of the Country, is Mr. H. of Abbots Aston, a little Town
about a Mile off, and he too has been so often plundered and harrass'd since
the War, and has a great Family beside, that I Am afraid things are not so well
with him as they have been; however; I dare say, (a Stranger, and a Gentleman
as you seem to be) if you think fit to call upon him, will not want Lodging, and
Entertainment for a Night, etc.

I thanked the honest Shepherd for his kind Instruction, and withal, resolved
to take his Advice, and indeed found every thing beyond his Representation. The
worthy old Gentleman, upon the very first Recital of my Condition, with a
decent Gentleman-like Freedom invited me in, and truly I was entertained by
himself, and his Family, with so much Friendly Civility, that I had hardly met
with the like in the whole course of my Travels.

The next Morning, when I came to take my Leave, he gave me Half-a-Crown, and a
Letter to a Neighboring Clergyman, whom, he told me, if he was not very lately
supplied, wanted an honest young Man for a Curate, and in all outward
appearance, I seemd to be a Person fit for his turn.

One of his Sons did me the Favor to accompany me to the Gentleman's House,
who, after a short Examination of my Orders, and other Credentials, was pleased
to accept of me. We came to no fixed Agreement, further than that I was to have
ten Shillings a Sunday, and stay with him till something happened that might be
more to my Advantage.

The next Sunday I was obliged to Preach at one of his Churches* and as it is
common in the case of a Stranger, I had a very large and considerable Auditory;
the Substance of my discourse was upon Humility, which my Patron, that was
present himself, was so well pleased, and affected with, that he engaged me to
write it out, and give him the Copy, the Substance of which you have in the
following Abstract.

Matthew. 11.29.And learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart. THe Life of
the blessed Jesus, as it was altogether a Compendious President of the most
Holy and Divine Behavior, so in nothing more eminent and Exemplary than for
his Humility and Complaisance; he saw doubtless what a stubborn insolent World
he should leave behind, and therefore both by his Doctrines, and inimitable
Example of his Life, endeavors to leave this God-like Principle deeply
Stamped, and impressed upon the Minds of Men.

Indeed there is no body that contemplates that miraculous Life with that
profound Veneration and Regard, which the nature of the thing deserves, but
will soon find it answering the present Character, and withal, that it is the
most Innocent and Endearing Original for us, that pretend to be his Disciples,
to Copy, and be directed by. Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in Heart.

Beside this Introduction, after I had made a short Exposition of the Sense,
and Coherence of the Text, I divided my Discourse into these three general
Considerations.

1 st. I undertook to give a brief Representation of the Nature and Effects of
Humility, both with respect to God and our selves. 2 dly. To give a Character
of Pride, and the dangerous and mischievous Consequences of it. 3 dly. I
proposed the Life and behavior of our Blessed Savior, as the most convincing
Argument to persuade us to Charity and Humility.
First, For the Nature of Humility, I represented it to consist chiefly in the
Reflections upon our selves, in considering our own meanness, and demerit, and
putting a modest and Religious Value upon our Persons and Deserts, and being
constantly more ready to give others the Honor, and Esteem, than to be
affected with the Praises, and Commendation of our selves.

Secondly, I briefly demonstrated Humility to be a Noble and Generous
Principle, and though it was directly opposite to all Pride, and haughtiness of
Disposition, yet was in no respect inconsistent with the Beauties and Ornaments
of our Religion, i. e. Christian Courage and Fortitude.

Indeed I cannot in any respect conceive, that to be the Nature of true
Humility, which consists in a baseness, and lowness of Spirit, but rather an
Indication of Cowardice, and Abjectness, by which Men are hurried into the
violent transports of Joy or Sorrow, by the happy or adverse Success of every
little trifling Accident, or Concern.

None had so humble a Spirit as our Blessed Lord himself, and yet none a
greater Mind, and a more absolute Resolution; and truly it is the grossest
Mistake, to conclude a Man of a bold and Heroic Temper, because he is Proud and
Insolent, or of a poor and degenerate Spirit, because he is humble and
Complaisant. This is a common Mistake, it is true, but still it is a Mistake, and
can proceed from nothing else but from our not understanding a right the true
Nature and Effects of Humility.

For had we the right Notion of Humility, we should soon perceive the
Inestimable happiness of the humble Man; we should observe him open and free,
Serene and Calm, and not to be affected or discomposed with such mean and low
things as the proud Man is, he is always retired into the sweetness of himself,
wears a Soul above the reach of Flattery, or Contempt, and has a more absolute
Dominion and Sway over his Passions and Infirmities, than to suffer himself to
be grated or disturbed by any of 'em.

Then for the Effects of Humility, I endeavored to prove that the first great
Effect of it was, that it puts us in Mind of the common Corruptions, and
frailty of our Nature, and consequently urges us to reflect upon that vast
distance and disproportion, that is between Almighty God and our Selves, the
Consideration of which only can qualify us to worship him with that Reverence
and Prostration of Soul, as becomes the Greatness and Majesty of Heaven*

A second effect of Humility that I mentioned, was, that it gives us a quick
and strong Sense of the Mercies of God, and discovers to us the several degrees
of his Bounty, and Compassion.

An humble Man takes notice of every Blessing and Advantage, and then reflects
upon God as their Immediate, and direct Author, and the grand Fountain and
Original from whence they all Flow.

Such a Man believes every Mercy too large for his desert, and with the Holy
Psalmist, upon all occasions, is ready to say, What am I? and what is my House,
O Lord, that thou have brought hitherto? Still giving every Blessing its just
and proper Estimate, by comparing it with his own demerit, and contemplating
his own base Original.

Thirdly, I observed, that Humility teaches, nay, enables Men to undergo the
several Troubles and Calamities, that they are liable to be encountered with in
their passage through Humane Life.

The humble Person considers, and is satisfied that God is bound by no
obligations to alter and discompose the whole Scheme of his Providence for his
Sake, neither does he expect that every thing in this troublesome and uncertain
Vale should fall out just according to his own design; such a Man rather thinks
the Miscarriages of his Affairs to be the Product of his own Negligence, or
Imprudence, and upon no account will be seduced to charge God foolishly;
besides, he looks upon his Afflictions to be Tokens of Reconcilement between
himself and his Maker, and rather blesses and praises, than murmurs and
complains against the Hand that Chastises him.

Fourthly, I argued that Humility composed the Soul and Mind to a pious and
universal Resignation, to be satisfied, and acquiesce, whether it be at the
upper or lower end of the World, and diretced us to the shadow of the Divine
Wings in all our Calamities, and what is more, proposes to us too, a Serenity
and Composedness, not to be shaken or disturbed by any of the changes, or
charges of this Mortal Life.

It must be low and humble Thoughts doubtless, that can guide the Minds of Men
in making this happy Election, for so long as they look upon themselves with
false Optics, they can never arrive to this God-like disposition, nor never
will till they have unbent their Minds, dis-robed them of all their Arrogance,
and torn of that ugly Vizor their Pride has put upon them.

Thus far I urged the Nature, and effects of Humility, with regard to our more
solemn behavior to Almighty God; the next thing I proposed was, how requisite
it was, with respect to our common Dealings and Conversations in the World.

First, I offered it as a grand means to restrain us from attempting things
above our reach or station, than which nothing can render a Man more absurd,
and ridiculous, and this I enforced with the Pathetick Instance the Holy
Psalmist gives of his Humility. Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor my Eyes
lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, nor in things that are
too high for me.

There Is nothing renders a Man more the Scorn and Laughter of the World, than
to see him pretending to the Knowledge and Performance of things that are above
his Sphere, which Humility kindly prevents, by composing his Mind to his
Condition, and by giving him an honest and just Sense of his own abilities and
perfections.

Secondly, I briefly showed that Humility guides us in our receiving Praise and
Applause; it stamps upon our Minds that moderation and gentleness in the
bearing of it, that at once intitles us to the Character both of good and wise
Men; and instead of being mounted, and lifted up above our selves by it,
Humility directs us to look back, and consider who, and what we are.

Humility teaches us a decent and sweet Behavior to all Ranks and Degrees.

First, It guides the meaner sort how to pay a due regard to their Superiors,
and withal directs the Superior too how he ought to behave himself to his
Fellow-Christian; briefly, it keeps Men from the vain desire of Singularity, it
restrains 'em from crowding themselves upon the public, rebates their furious
thoughts of Precedence, makes them modest and cautious how they censure the
Actions and Dealings of others, nay, what is beyond all this, humility does
naturally endow us with a quiet Conscience, and a contented Mind, the two best
Blessings that humane Nature is capable of. This was the substance of my
Discourse upon the first General Proposion, i. e. the Nature, and Effects of
Humility, both with respect to God and our Selves.

The second thing I proposed was to give a short Character of Pride, and the
mischievous Consequences of it.

And first, I endeavored to represent Pride as a most Impious, and audacious
Vice, a Vice that was branded in diverse places of Scripture, as most detestable
to God, and most loathsome and obnoxious to Men, and was particularly signalized
to be so by the several Punishments it has been rewarded with.

'Twas Pride that turned Lucifer out of Heaven, and Nebuchadnezzar out of his
Throne, nay, out of all humane Society to boot, and indeed, it seems to have
still a great deal of the same Effect, nothing rendering a Man so
inconsiderable, hateful, and contemnable, for it sets him (in his own
Imagination at least) above both his Betters and his Equals, and consequently
renders him Intolerable to his Inferiors, and so to complete the Parallel,
seldom leaves him till it has turned him a Grazing, reduced him to some kind of
Extremity, and by that means to know himself.

This Vice is so well known to be an Enemy, and to have a malicious Influence
upon the common Conversation of the World, that we find the Wiser part of it
very cautious and vigilant how they admit a proud Person into their Society,
there being, beside the constant noise and impertinence, a perpetual hazard of
wrangling, and quarrels, if not of Murder and Tumults depending upon it.

Beside this, in the second place I represented Pride as the Grand Abbettor of
most of our Civil, and Ecclesiastical Feuds, and Divisions; it is indeed a most
prolifie Vice, there being few Sins, to which in some respects it is not either
a Parent, or a Nurse, but more especially to our Religious Debates and
Contentions.

If we trace the Heresies and Schisms from Simon Magus, his days, down to our
own, we shall find Pride still a principal Actor in every Scene, though perhaps
in a different Shape and Dress.

There has been nothing, though never so Sacred, but upon this account has
been prostituted, and mis-used; when Diotrephes seeks Pre-eminence, the
Dictates of an Apostle must be rejected, nay even the Divinity of our Savior,
God blessed for ever, must be trampled upon when Arius wants a Footstool to
climb up to his affected Greatness.

In a word, if we could examine the Occurrences of all Ages, we shall find that
the Pride of some, animated and supported by the Malice and Revenge of others,
has been the black Original, of all the Wars and Blood that has been shed for
these many Years.

I urged several other things, as a further Representation of the mischievous
Consequence of Pride, but those for brevity sake I shall omit here.

The last thing I proposed was the Life and behavior of our Blessed Savior as
the most convincing Argument to persuade us to Charity and Humility.

First, I represented his whole Life as one continued Scene of Innocence,
Humility, and Holy Actions; I showed from his own words how solemnly he
protested against, and disdained the Honor and Applause of the World.

I seek not my own Glory, says he, I receive not my Honor from Men, my
Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me; My Father dwells in me, and he
does the Works.

He did not do any of his miraculous Actions with any kind of Pomp or Noise,
but with an humble Calmness, and Complacency, agreeable to the Prophecy; no
Acclamations could alter, or subvert the composure of his Mind; the greatest of
his Triumphs we ever read of, was that of his riding to Jerusalem, and then too
instead of praising and magnifying himself, he only bid them tell the Daughter
of Zion, That her King came to her Meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt
the Foal of an Ass, as is Recorded by the Evangelist Mat. 21.5.

He was no less eminent in bearing Affronts, Revilings, and Persecutions. In
the great Article of all, his Crucifixion, he was so far from showing any
manner of Passion or Bitterness, even against those that had falsely betrayed
and condemned him, that instead of Aggravating their Guilt, he Compassionately
entreats his Father to forgive `em, representing it rather as a Sin of their
haste and Ignorance, than Revenge*

In these, and many other Instances I proposed the Example of our Savior's
Life and Doctrine, as the most convincing Arguments to Charity and Humility,
and then to conclude, I urged that the most natural way to express a true
Veneration and Esteem for any Person, was to come as near as possible to his
Likeness and Similitude.

Our utmost Love, without this, looks like Dissimulation and Pretense; it is
doubtless therefore the highest Concern of any one that pretends to be his
Disciple, and to have a Value, and Regard for him, to transcribe his Godlike
Copy, to imitate him as far as we can in the several Virtues of his Life, and
to observe all his Holy and Divine Precepts, of which this is one of the
foremost; Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in Heart.

CHAP. X.
Upon the Restoration of King Charles he leaves his Curacy, and goes to London,
makes several insuccessful Attempts to get Preferment, and afterward in a deep
discontent, and Melancholy, leaves the Town, with a Resolution to return into
the Country, in quest of New Adventures.

UPon the delivery of the Copy of my Sermon, the worthy Gentleman made me a
very handsome Present, and withal, was pleased (much beyond my Desert) to
commend the happiness of my Expressions; the manliness of my Style, and the
contexture of my Discourse, and moreover directed me in my Methods of Study,
and gave me a Catalogue of the Books that were most proper to be read to
improve my Judgment, and ground me in the true Principles of the Doctrine of
the Church of England.

In this happy State I passed off Diverse comfortable Months till the Kings
Restoration, and then I thought, considering my Father had first spent his
Estate, and afterward Sacrific`d his Life in the Service of the Crown, upon
the Representation of my condition, I could not fail of getting some sort of
Preferment.

When I came to London, I found Multitudes in my own Circumstances, abundance
of worthy Gentlemen that had wasted their whole Fortunes in the Kings cause,
and were now watching about Court for some kind of business, that might Entitle
them to a subsistence in their declining Years.

For my own part, I tried all the methods that the Nature of my Case would
bear, but all to no purpose; the King was advised it seems, to Encourage and
Caress his Enemies, and to depend upon the generosity of his Friends, which, as
some about him told him, was a high Argument of Policy and Wisdom; whether it
was or not, I think may be easily discerned from the future success of things;
but that is Foreign to my purpose.

I stayed in Town, expecting the moving of the Waters, seven or eight months at
least, and in the interim had contracted an Acquaintance with several Gentlemen
that came thither upon the same Errand; with one especially, who, above all the
rest, I perceived to be a person of extraordinary Parts and Disposition; with
him I often met, and condol'd the Misfortune of Loyal Men, and could hardly
refrain, (among our selves) from making some Reflections upon our hard Usage.

This Gentleman (as he told me) had spent Eight Hundred Pound per Annum, in the
Wars; and what was worse, had a Wife and several Children in the Country, that
must unavoidably fall into public Extremity, if the King did not do something
for him. It would grieve and surprise a man, to hear him give a Relation of his
Sufferings; and indeed it was a very Melancholy and Astonishing Prospect, to
see so many brave Men in a Neglected Starving Condition, whilst those that had
been the Grand Instruments of the Rebellion, nay, in some measure, that had
been actually engaged in the Murder of the King, advanced to considerable
Places of Trust and Profit.

In short, I continued in this wretched State of Dependence, till I had eat up
all my Books, and worn out my Clothes; and after all, perceiving there was no
good to be done at this ungrateful, mercenary Court, I packed up the poor
Remains of my Equipage, and resolved once more to commit my self to the blind
guidance of my hard Stepmother Fortune; and in the morning, just before my
departure, in a deep and profound Melancholy, I writ the following Eight
Verses, and left 'em sealed up for my Friend.

Fly from this Scurvy Town, all Courts despise,
And never torment thy Soul with thoughts to rise.
Never thenk thy Merits can Preferment get:
First be a Knave, and then thou may be great.
Virtue has no Prerogative at Court,
It only serves 'em there for scorn or sport.
The Fools and Villains rise, the Loyal fall,
And the same rigid fate seems to attend us all.
CHAP. XI.
The Mendicant leaves London, wanders into Dorsetshire, takes upon him the
Habit of a Shepherd, and gives an Account of several other Adventures that
befell him.

HAving waited six tedious Months in a fruitless Dependence upon an Ungrateful
Court, I saw at last 'twas in vain to expect Preferment among 'em; Interest and
Flattery, I perceived, carried all before 'em, and so I resolve to steer back
into the Country, to endeavor to find out some poor Employment that might
entitle me to Bread and Liberty.

I set forward from London the 20th of March, and the first Night wandered as
far as Vxbridge, about fifteen Miles from London, without any considerable
Adventure. I spent the Evening in a melancholy contemplation upon the variety
of Accidents and Calamities incident to human Life; and truly, upon the whole,
was ready enough to conclude that Death was much preferable to it, unless it
was upon the grand Account, as it is a State of Trial and Probation, for
Immortality and Happiness.

And indeed I cannot conceive (excepting the assurance of the Immortality of
our Souls) what it is that can support Men, and encourage 'em with so much
Patience and cheerfulness, to undergo the several Turns and Revolutions of
unconstant Fortune, to submit so tamely to be bandyed, like Tennis-Balls, to
and fro, upon the Racquets of every cross and malicious Accident, from Pain to
Pleasure, from Fullness to Want, from Honor to Infamy, and so back again, till
the Game is played out, and then to return into Eternal Silence and
Insensibility.

With such kind of Reflections I spent the Night, and the next Morning early I
set forward again, bending my course still Westward, resolving not to make any
Attempts for a Settlement, till I had removed my self a considerable distance
from London.

The sixth day, at night, upon enquiry, I found my self in Dorsetshire; and,
what was worse, was unhappily straggled so far upon the Hills, that 'twas
impossible for me to recover a Town to lodge at, before 'twas dark; and so I was
forced to betake my self to the shelter of one of the little Hats the Shepherds
had thrown up in the fields, to defend 'em from the Rain and Heat.

This unlucky Accident mightily terrified and discontented me; however, I found
there was no Remedy, but I must endure it; therefore laying my Satchel under my
head, for my Pillow, and putting my self in the best posture I could contrive,
to defend me from the cold, I laid me down upon one of the Seats, which was
only Stones and Earth, covered with a Turf, and endeavored to compose my self
to rest.

I know not how it came to pass, whether it was my Weariness or Discontent or
both together, but betwixt 'em they threw me into a deep sleep, which lasted
till break of day the next morning, and truly I was extremely rejoyc't I had
past off a doleful night with so much ease and safety.

The Lark was upon the Wing, singing her welcome to the morning, before I
turned out of the Earthen Habitation; and what was more, and indeed what I have
often thought upon with the highest and most profound Thankfulness and
Admiration, notwithstanding the Night was very cold, and the Wind blew exactly
into the mouth of the Cabin, I did not find my self in the least afflicted or
disordered afterward.

In my passage over the Downs, I met several Shepherds trudging cheerfully to
their Folds; and indeed their Looks and Gestures methought bespoke so much
honest Satisfaction, and true Content, that I could not forbear wishing my self
in the same Condition. The more I reflected upon their harmless and inoffensive
manner of Living, the more still it seemed to please and delight me, till at
last I grew so much affected, that I resolve to use my utmost Endeavors to
qualify my self to undertake the Occupation of a Shepherd.

To fit my self for this odd Adventure, I perceived there was Three Things to
be done in course: First, To provide me with a suitable Habit. Secondly, To
instruct my self in the methods of ordering the Sheep, and setting the Folds.
And Thirdly, To find out some sober, prudent person for a Master, that had the
Reputation of a Man of Honesty and Sense, and a good Governor of his Family.

As to the first, I went directly to Dorchester, and bought a coarse Frock, and
other Accoutrements, as near as I could remember, answerable to those I
observed the day before with the Shepherds; but then I was at a great Loss to
contrive how to dispose of my Satchel, and the Clothes I pulled off; which,
after a great many thoughts and resolutions, I was forced, after all, to commit
to the protection of an hollow Tree.

Next to this, my business was to find out a means to get some general
Instructious how to remove the Fold, and manage the Sheep; and truly, here I
found there was no Remedy, but I must even apply my self to some honest
Shepherd.

I took several turns upon the Downs, before I could meet with a Swain, whose
Face and Deportment spoke him fit for my purpose. At last, having pitched upon
One, whose Answers, etc. showed him to have a little more Generosity and
Understanding than is common among such sort of Illiterate People, I gave him a
short Account of my condition, to this effect, Viz. That I was a poor
Unfortunate Young Man, out of all manner of Business; that my Stock began to
waste apace; that I had a Particular Desire to fall into the Employ of a
Shepherd, and should be glad, for a Beginning, to accept of a Place, tho never
so inconsiderable, that would but defend me from Public Extremity.

The good man at the very first sight seemed mightily affected with my hard
Circumstances, and withal told me, 'twas almost impossible for a Lusty Young
Man to want an Employment at that time of the Year; and, moreover, asked me, if
I understood the business of a Shepherd? Says he, There are several other
things necessary to make a man a complete Shepherd, beside following the Sheep,
and shifting the Fold, which I don't question your Judgment in. But then the
great Inconveniency of all, is, your being an absolute stranger; so that unless
you can give a very good Account of your self, you will find it a difficult
matter to prevail with any body to take you into their house.

I could not very well tell what to say to the honest Shepherd's Objection; at
last I told him, I was sensible my being a stranger would consequently be very
prejudicial to me; But then I told him too, That I did not question, if I could
be once so happy to get a Place, but by my Diligence and Integrity, in a little
time to recommend my self beyond exception.

As for my own part, says the Shepherd, I am fully satisfied; you have the
Looks and Behavior of an Honest Man; and you may depend upon it, I Will do my
best to get you some business; and therefore if you will come to morrow, and tend
my Sheep, I Will go to some of the Neighboring Towns, and try what can be done.

I told him the only business I was desirous of at present, was a Shepherd's
Place, and if he could assist me in that particular, I should endeavor, by
some means or other, to make him amends. His Answer was very pertinent, and
unexpected, That without any dependence of amends, etc. he had always a pity
for poor men in distress, especially for those that seemed to be honest, as I
did. If you deceive me, says he, it is your fault, you have a good Look; but if
there be a Woolf within, who can help it? However, I Will expect you to morrow;
and in the mean time, I shall be sure to have you in my remembrance.

CHAP. XII.
The Mendicant is Entertained by a Shepherd, as his Servant: He gives a
Diverting Relation of the Circumstances of his Admission, and the manner of his
Instructions, etc.

ACcording to our Appointment, I was with the Shepherd early next morning, who
I found busy in changing his Fold, and disposing every thing in order, that I
might have nothing to do, but Just to follow the Sheep, and keep `em from
intermixing with other Flocks. He left me his Dog, his Scrip and his Crook,
with Orders to lead 'em to a particular place, upon an adjacent Plain, where
(as he expressed it) he used to drive 'em to Lare about Noon. The Friendly
Shepherd had no sooner left me, but several of the Swains that belonged to the
Downs, came about me, being very inquisitive to know who I was, and from whence
I came, as it is their common custom, when a Stranger comes among 'em.

They asked me several questions, which indeed I was sufficiently puzl'd to get
over; however, with a great deal of difficulty, I did blunder through most of
'em, being still very cautious how I directed my Answers, apprehending, that if
I should mistake their Dialect, or use any Terms that did not square with their
Rustic way of expressing themselves, I should perhaps offer 'em some occasion
of Suspicion, which might consequently ruin my future design.

In short, we had soon done with our Questions and Ceremonies, and in a little
time began to grow as familiar, and well acquainted as possible. My business
was to learn as many of their Calls and Whistles to their Sheep, and as much of
their Language as the time and opportunity would permit; and truly, in three or
four hours (as I found afterward) I had gathered up several of their most
usual Expressions.

About Four the Old Shepherd returns, and found me by the Flock leaning upon
his Crook, a posture which I had observed very common among 'em. Well, honest
Friend (says he) I see you are very diligent, and truly I have not been altogether
idle neither. I Will tell you what I have done, and if you approve of it, and
think good of my Proposals, why then the business is over.

He told me he had undertaken for Twenty Shillings a month to tend Squire F --
's Sheep till Michaelmas, and that he would give me Two Shillings per Week,
Meat and Lodging, and I should look after one of the Flocks, till I could find
out a place that would be more advantageous to me.

I was much affected with the Generous Offer of the honest Old Man, and told
him, I should never trouble my self to seek after any other place, but did
Joyfully accept of his Proposals, and should do my best to discharge my
business, and be always ready to signify how much I was obliged to him for his
Just and Fair Offer.

Without more to do, it was agreed that I should go home with him, and stay
there till Monday, when he was to take the Squire's Flock into his custody.

I need not tell you how exactly all these Circumstances fell out to my Wish.
In these three or four days Interval, I had opportunity to Equip my self with
Instructions requisite to carry on my design; which would have been almost
impossible for me without. About Seven we put the Sheep into the Fold; and so,
with as much satisfaction as the Nature of my Case would bear, I trudged
Joyfully home with my honest Master.

When we came home, the good woman was at first a little surpised, to see her
Husband bring in a Stranger; but that was soon over, by his telling her the
Substance of our Agreement. Upon which she bid me welcome; and the next thing
in course was the Supper; which, I think was put upon the Table in less than
half an hour after we came into the House; 'twas a good cleanly Dish of Bacon
and Carrots; which I eat of with as good a gust, and as much content as if I
had been at the greatest Entertainment.

While we were at Supper, in comes the Son, and a Boy that drove the Plow,
that it seems had been in the Field a sowing Barley, a little later than
ordinary: At the Table his Father gave him an Account of our Proceedings. The
young man seemed at first to make some Objections against 'em, but his Father
soon overrul'd; and so every thing was adjusted beyond Expectation.

After Supper, the young man takes down a Book, as 'twas customary, and read
diverse pages in it: I have forgot the Title of it now; but I remember it was
one that was writ by a Presbyterian Preacher, for the use of Country Families;
and contained Little in it beside Enthusiasm and Nonsense.

This was the most ungrateful Scene in the whole Adventure: However, I did not
think it proper for me, as Cases stood, to make any Remarks; and yet, when I
observed how zealously the Fellow read, and how intent his Father and Mother
were to him, I had much a-do to contain my self.

The next thing was, whether I could read or no? Yes, I told 'em, I could. The
Old Man would not be satisfied till he had heard me; and so I took a Bible that
lay upon a Shelf, at the End of the Table, and read Two Chapters in the
Lamentations of Jeremiah, but withal, was forced to change my Voice, and alter
my Pronunciation, that I might come a little near to their Country Tone.

I Will warrant you, says the Old Man, you can write and cast Account too: I told
him I could do a little of both. Samuel, says he to his Son, Peregrine will
assist you: when I first cast my Eye upon him on the Downs, I durst have swore,
by his Behavior, he was well bred: Come, Wife, says he, I think we should not
make a Bargain with dry Lips; give us a Jug of the best Beer.

I cannot recollect every particular Occurrence that past, but this I remember,
that we had two or three large Jugs of very strong well-brew'd Ale, that both
the Mother and her Son spoke very pleasantly and freely to me, and told me, tho
I was a Stranger, they liked me so well, that they would be helpful to me in
any thing that lay in their power.

About Nine we went to bed; but I should have told you, in the first place,
That the Old Man Lived in his own Estate, which was about Twenty Pounds per
Annum: And that the Sheep he looked after, were all his own; and that he
approved a Shepherd's Life beyond any other; and therefore made it his choice
to tend his Flock himself, being indeed a little lame; and so not so well
qualified to undertake any Laborious Business.

As to my bed, I must confess, there were several things, with respect to that,
that I had much ado to undergo, but particularly, the ungrateful Smells of my
Bed-fellows Body and Feet. The young man, the Son, with whom I lay, tho he was
as Cleanly a Fellow as most in the Country, yet his hard Labor occasioned him
to sweat, and consequently to smell rank and nauseous; however, in a weeks time
all things grew customary, and I slept as naturally as if I had been bred up
among 'em.

In the morning, between Four and Five, the Old Man constantly rises, and calls
up the Family; puts some Victuals in his S^rip, and some Drink in his Bottle,
and so to his Fold. I went along with him, observing all his Motions very
narrowly, that I might get what Instructions I could against Monday; and truly,
barring their Sheering and Taging, and some such kind of business, I found my
self as well qualified as the best Shepherd of 'em all.

Upon Monday the Old Man committed his own Flock to my charge, being betixt two
and three Hundred; and truly I was extremely vigilant to govern 'em directly
according to his Method and Prescription.

In a little time I grew acquainted with several of the Shepherds, and indeed
had soon made my self an Exact Master of the whole Profession. The business
grew very easy and delightful to me too, and the manner of Life was so
inoffensive in it self, that I began to think it one of the most quiet and
comfortable States that ever I was in.

The next thing now (being so thoroughly fixed) was to recover my books, and to
dispose of 'em, so that there might be no discovery. I found I had abundance of
time upon my hands, which I could hardly pass away without their help; and
therefore I resolved, by some means or other, to fetch 'em out of the Custody
of the hollow Tree, to some place nearer to me.

In order to which I thought it most proper to tell my Dame, that I had some
Linen* and other Necessaries, that lay upon the Road till I called for 'em,
and that (with my Master's Permission) I would go in a day or two, and fetch
'em: but then I wanted a box to lock 'em up in, which she procured for me, and
so the next day I fetched home my Satchel, and conveyed my books privately into
the box.

Every thing being thus disposed of, and settled, my next business was to think
upon a Method how I might pass away the spare hours I had upon the Downs, with
the most advantage. I foresaw if I suffered the Shepherds to come to a close
Familiarity, their Conversation would soon grow burthensom; and therefore
thought it proper to carry my self with a little more Sowrness than usual, that
I might by no means give 'em encouragement.

I found that the toylsome part of a Shepherd's business, did not commonly take
up above two hours of the day, and that all the rest I had nothing to do but to
walk about after the Sheep, the only inconvenience that I perceived in a
Shepherd's Life: However, to fence against this as well as I could, I applied
my self to my Books, and my Meditations, till at length I had drawn all my
Affairs into such a regular posture, that I must needs say, I was never in a
more perfect and complete state of quiet and satisfaction in the whole course
of my Life.

The Old Shepherd was a very sober discreet man, and an excellent Governor of
his Family; and indeed both his Wife and his Son, extremely good natured and
inoffensive: The only Objection I had against 'em, was, that the mischievous
times had spic'd'em with Phanaticism and Commonwealth Principles; but those too
in a little time I convinced 'em of, and withal persuaded 'em against the
Presbyterian's book the Son used to read in before bedtime, and introduced, in
the room of it, the King's Meditations in his Confinement: At last, I had
wrought upon 'em so far by gentle Arguments and Admonitions (which, with
submission, I presume will appear the most regular and successful way to reform
an Error of any sort) that they admitted of the Common Prayer Book, and
particularly they gave me leave to read the Litany, as I did constantly every
night during my stay among `em.

CHAP. XIII.
The Mendicant entertains himself with some short Reflections upon his present
Condition, and writes a Letter of Advice to his Brother in London.

NOtwithstanding I had fixed my self in my Shepherds State, with as much ease
and advantage as `twas possible for me to imagine, yet still I could not resign
my self so effectually, but now and then some melancholy Reflections would
break in upon me. Indeed I did my utmost to fence against `em, but for all that
I could not so entirely vanquish the Defects of human Nature; but I must often
be sadly ruminating upon my former and present condition.

The utter Ruin and Destruction of my Family was a very heavy and piercing
Consideration: and what was worse, I could not apprehend the least Prospect of
a Possibility to retrieve it; and then again, the hard Circumstances, and
severe Usage I had been encounter`d with, since my cruel Stepmother Fortune
first drove me into the wide World to shift for my self, were very sharp and
grievous Aggravations; to find my self destitute of all manner of Friends and
Relations, slighted and rejected by those that had promised me, and indeed,
were in point of Honor, Justice and Gratitude, oblig`d to assist me; to find
my self sunk to the Lowest Ebb of Life, the mean condition of a Shepherd; and
what was the most tormenting consideration of all, in a great measure depriv`d
of the advantages of Books, Study and Conversation; were such embittering,
cruel Reflections, that I was very often, I must own, unable to bear up under
`em.

As to my Shepherd`s State, `twas truly the best that could be, of that kind;
and indeed the melancholy Opportunities suited so well with my Inclinations,
and the fixed aversion I had taken against the World, together, that they had
almost persuaded me to resolve to make my way thro` the Briers and Thorns of
human life in the same capacity.

But to go on with my Account: After I had fixed my self in all respects,
according to my former Relation, I thought now it was high time to write to
London, to deliver my Friends from those doubts and apprehensions which I knew
my private departure must necessarily occasion. We had every day Carriers
traveling over the Downs for London: So that I had convenience enough by that
means to send my Letters with as much privacy as I pleas`d. The first I sent
was to my Brother, that by the assistance of some Friends, was plac`d with an
Attorney of Staples-Inn in Holborn; and was in effect as follows.

The Mendicant's Letter of Advice to his Brother.
My Dear Alexander,
I know my hasty and private departure from London, must necessarily occasion
the Apprehension of some, and the Surprise of most of my Acquaintance. As for
thy own part, I am very sensible thou have been particularly affected; but by
this thou will see I am among the Living however; and I tell thee that, in a
far better capacity of ease and satisfaction, than that scurvy Town thou art
doomed to inhabit, can pretend to: Where I am, or what I Am about, is no great
matter to thee, only this thou may depend upon, I am doing nothing that is
unjust: I Am in pursuit of a quiet Life, where I may breath with freedom, and
get a little Food and Raiment, which is all I want or wish, without being
exposed to the Perplexities and Hurries, the Scramblings, Cheats and
Undermining of a base, mercenary World; and this thou may`st tell my Friends,
if I have any that think me worth their Enquiry: and now I`m writing, I conjure
thee not to take it ill, if from the truest Dictates of Brotherly Friendship, I
send thee a few hasty Admonitions; I Am confident, if they do thee no good, they
can do thee no harm; and so at worst thou must look upon 'em as a well intended
Impertinence.

First then, I caution thee as a Brother and a Friend, not to disquiet and
torment thy self about the success o`things; do but thy duty, and let God
dispose of thy Affairs as he thinks fit; if thou disturbs thy self never so
much, thou can never remedy their course; but, like a wild Beast in a Net,
the more thou strugglest and flouncest, the more still thou entanglest thy
self, and at last, perhaps wilt hamper thy self so effectually, that thou art
never to be extricated afterward.

Thou art of a good Family, `tis true; but then don`t let the Notion of that
make thee haughty, or ill-natured; `tis thy Virtue and Modesty that will give
the Richest Tincture to thy Blood, and will stamp a Character upon thy Name,
large as thy Wish, and lasting as the World.

Let the Honor of our Family be a Memento to thee against all Vicious Actions,
and be constantly in thy View, to deter thee from any thing that is either base
or mercenary, or can give the least stain to the Reputation of our Worthy
Ancestors.

I have already read thee several Lectures upon the Vices and Follies of the
Town, which I hope thou have not yet forgot; and I must tell thee again, that
`twill require thy utmost caution and defense to guard thy self against 'em.

There thou will be exposed to all degrees of Villainy and Vice, to Cheats and
Prostitutes, to Knaves, Bullies and Sharpers, in almost all conditions and
capacities. Thou will find (my Dear Alexander) in that Lewd Town, whither thy
unhappy circumstances have drawn thee, little else but Herds of Wild Beasts and
Monsters; so that if thou should ever be so unlucky to neglect thy grand
Defense, I mean thy Virtue, they will be sure to attack thee upon the first
discovery, in thy unguarded part; and then it is the greatest odds but they
wound thee mortally.

As to the Law, the business that thou art confined to march through thy Life
in, it is in it self a very honest and reputable Profession; but then it is so
strangely corrupted, by cunning Wiles and Tricks, by Covetousness, Bribery,
Extortion, and sinister Ends, that there is but little of its Native Design to
be discovered.

I know thou will it Pardon thy Brther, if he should by chance say any thing to
thee, that did not so exactly suite thy temper and Inclination, and under that
Notion I will Venture to caution thee of one thing, which indeed I cannot
mention without Dissatisfaction; don't let the furious desire of getting money
distort thee from thy proper frame, or urge thee upon any unjust or Irregular
Practice; and take this along with thee too, that one penny well got, will do
thee more good in the end than a Million otherways.

I must commend indeed thy generous resolution to attempt the recovery of the
Ancient seat of our Family, but yet I would not have it purchased at the dear
Price of fraud or avarice; I have observed thee with the deepest discontent in
my Judgment, too fierce and eager in the persuit of Advantage; but don't let
the dangerous distemper grow too far upon thee, least at length it get the
Mastership, and so make thee a Wretch in both Worlds.

As to thy Religion, I Am sure thou 'rt well Principl'd, I have heard thee give
a very Handsome account of the Articles of Faith, and Doctrines of thy Church,
and let those be thy guides to conduct thee through all the Labyrinths and
turns of thy Life.

For Loyalty, `twas a Principle our Father Lived and died in, it cost him both
his Estate and his Life, it was the cause of the Destruction of his Family, and
has driven thee and I Naked and defenseless into an ungratfuell World, but what
then? He did no more then his Duty and what the Laws of God and Nature
required; he fell a Martyr to a Glorious Cause, and left a lasting Character of
his fidelity to his Prince behind him, which I hope both you and I shall do our
best to preserve to our selves, and then awfully deliver the sacred depositum
to be Religiously handed down to his Posterity.

For thy conversation I have often cautioned thee to have a special regar'd to
that; our Companions are a sort of Looking-Glasses to us, by which we Dress our
selves and shape our Actions and behavior; so that if the Mirror be false the
Garb and equipage will consequently be wrong put on: and then be they never so
Rich and costly we make but an awkward tawdry Figure.

Beware of contracting a sudden Familiarity with Strangers, or plunging your
self at a Venture into mixed Societies. A few Acquaintance and a few books,
Provided they are both true, are enough; and if they are not they are too many,
you will find the forming a proper conversation to be one of the highest
Indications of a prudent Person, and if you mistake in that you will find too
it will be a difficult matter, for you, to manage your self in London.

Your Education and Diversion will require a great deal of your Circumspection;
the one should be neither formal nor pedantick, nor the other lewd or
Extravagant; but they should be both Genteel and useful, and adapted entirely
to the comfort and quiet, or the advantage of human Life.

Well, Alexander, I will not trouble thee any more now, but reserve the rest of
my admonitions till another opportunity; as for my own part, I am accidentually
fallen into a bye Corner of the World, where, if some spiteful Accident does
not remove me, I intend to fix my non Vltra. Greatness I despise and abhor,
next the Falsehoods and flatteries of the Court; the Town I abominate too, and
truly am heartily sorry thy hard fate has confined thee to it. Bread and
Liberty I have, and the plentiful opportunity of wholesome Air, and Innocent
Company. I want nothing but a little Library and one Learned Friend upon whom I
could depend for advice and assistance: and were these ensur'd to me for Life,
I Would freely quit all future pretentions. Let all my Friends know I send 'em my
Prayers, and Love; take a double Portion of 'em to thy self, and believe me to
be in all Capacities,

thy affectionate Friend and Brother. Peregrine.


CHAP. XIV.
The Mendicant Writes a Letter to his Friend in London; wherein he makes
Passionate reflections upon the Town and Court, and gives a further account of
a Shepherds Life.

Dear Capt.
My sudden departure from London, I perceive has been the Subject of no small
reflection amongst my Friends; but why they should be so much Surpised and
concerned at it, I cannot Imagine. Indeed I Am as much at a stand, what it can be
that can influence them to undergo, so long, the Din's and Impertinencies, the
Dangers and Disappointments, and the contagious stinks and Smoaks of a fulsome
beastly Town. I know the pretense is preferment from Court, but why they should
be so blinded to exspect any thing from thence, I profess is a greater Mystery
to me, than either of the former.

A Person with half an Eye may easily see which way the game is like to go,
Knavery and Hypocrisy are the two only thriveing qualifications at Court, and
poor passive Loyalty is doomed to rags and contempt, or to subsist upon its
own Primitive excellence.

Alas! my Friend, Virtue has utterly lost her Perogative, and unless she will
condescend so low to sneak and cringe to the Knave, and the Fool, she may
Perish at Court; and who but a Coward or a Natural can stand by with Patience,
and see her starving to Death?

I potest I stayed shivering upon the Brink of the Waters as long as I was
able, and there I might have stayed till Doom's Day before any Body would have
pushed me in, unless a deceitful look, or a false promise would have done it.

But thanks to providence, I am removed out of the Verge of your ungrateful
Court, and the Noise and filth of your Town. Where I am, or in what Post, is
nothing to the purpose, I Live and enjoy bread and Retirement, and what I Value
equal to 'em both, I am removed not only out of the reach, but even from the
pain of exspecting any manner of greatness or preferment.

It Is true I ought to have taken my leave of you and some other Friends, but
Indeed my Distemper was grown so Hectic, I could not stay to do it. Sir,
you're the only Man that know the true State of my condition, and therefore I
think I must depend upon you to get me excused.

Since my absence, I have composed a few short Essays, upon the Calamities of
Human Life, which I intend to trouble you with, as soon as I have time to Write
'em out; in the mean time by Virtue of our Old true Friendship, let me advise
you to remove your self from Court, with the first opportunity: it is a
Dangerous Place; and if you Venture to stay long there, it is ten to one but
you will have cause to repent it when `tis too late; in my next, you may exspect
a more Particular account,

from your true Friend and Fellow sufferer. Peregrine
May 25. 1662.

To return to my Former Narrative* I kept my Shepherds post about five Months,
in which time I had so effectually learnt the whole Mystery, that, as the
General report of me went, I was one of the best shepherds upon the Down; My
honest Master was extremely obliging and courteous to me, and so indeed was his
Wife and his Son; nay, the whole Village, by Virtue of the Old Man's Character,
behaved themselves to me, with a respect and distance, as I thought, much
beyond what they did to other Shepherds.

But still my unlucky Fate pursues me; my Industry among the Shepherds, in
teaching of 'em to read, and Reprimanding 'em as often as I found 'em in any
manner of Vice, or Irregularity, had not only gained me a sort of respect among
themselves, but likewlse urged 'em, much beyond my desert, to spread my
Character all about the Neighborhood.

Squire F -- it seems had heard of me among the rest, and nothing would serve
his turn, but I must needs come to him. The Innocent Old Man my Master was
apprehensive; at first it was only to hire me for his Shepherd, and so made
abundance of excuses and objections against it, but all to no purpose. Within a
day comes the Bailiff with Positive orders that he and his Man Peregrine must
come next Sunday, to the Hall, to Dinner.

In the Interim I discovered, by one of the Shepherds, that the common Censures
and Conjectures concerning me run very high; some were of Opinion that I was a
Jesuit in Masquerade, and come down into the Country for a Spy; others that I
was some discontented Person, or a Person that some Crosses or disappointments
had driven out of my own Country, and that I had taken upon me the business of
a Shepherd, the better to keep my self concealed. The Squire and his Family
were of Opinion that I was a Gentleman, in disguise, and had taken up a
Shepherd's habit, purely to Gratify a Curiosity, or a humor, which was
strongly confirmed to them by the report the Shepherds made, that I was often
observed to desire to be by my self, where I might Write, read, and Meditate
with the lesser Disturbance; which I suppose was the cause that made 'em so
earnest to see me, that they might attempt to learn who I was, and upon what
account I came into Dorset-shire. All this the Old Shepherd at last knew well
enough, and yet never once Mentioned it to me, nor suffered his son or his Wife
to take the least Notice.

In short, I found this was no abiding place for me; if I Stayed here I foresaw
it would be Impossible for me to escape, being discovered, which I was resolved
to prevent at all Hazards: But then the next consideration was how I should
bring it about, and at the same time acquit my self Handsomely and fairly, to
the honest Shepherd and his Family. In order to which I could think of no
better expedient, than to pretend some accidental business at Dorchester, which
would require me to be there for a Day at least. The Old Man readily complied
with my request in this Particular, and withal offered me one of his Horses, to
carry me thither; which I rejected; However he told me his Son should tend my
Sheep in my absence.

Having thus far settled the manner of my Departure* the next thing was how to
convey away my Satchell, Books etc. Which was no other way to be effected, but
by waiting an opportunity when all the Family was gone abroad; and then taking
`em out, and putting them in a secret place at a convenient distance from the
House. This happened to my Wish, and upon Friday Morning I set out, and when I
had recover`d my Satchell, instead of Dorchester I directed my course for
Shaftsbury.

I need not tell you what a Contest I had in my mind upon the resignation of my
Shepherds Profession. The Friendly Entertainment I had receiv`d from the good
Old Man and his Family, pierc`d me to the Soul, insomuch that I was sometimes
almost resolv`d, to return and Venture a discovery; and I believe I had done it
too, if it had not been upon the account of some Relations I had in the County,
to whom Notwithstanding their unkindness (indeed I might say unjustice) I was
loath to give occasion of scandal or reflection.

CHAP. XV.
The Mendicant having left the Shepherd goes to Shaftsbury, from whence he
Writes several Letters, one to his Master, the Shepherd, another to Squire F --
and a third to Capt -- to whom he sends some short Essays upon the Calamities
of Human Life, which he Writ upon the Downs etc.

About twelve a Clock I reached Shaftsbury, which as I was Informed was Nine
Miles from my former Habitation. To prevent discoveries I had disrobed my self
of my Shepherds habit, and put on that I came from London in, but 'twas so
rumpl'd and disordered by being Crammed up so long together in my Satchel, that
I looked so very ruff and Particular, that I was both afraid and ashamed to go
into the Town with it; however I got into a little Ale House, as far out of all
observation as I could, and after I had refreshed my self, Pursuant to my
resolution upon my walk, I Writ the following Letters.

The Mendicants Letter to his Master.
Good Master.
THis comes to Inform you I have quitted your Service, but not out of any
dislike to you or your Family. I must own you have used me with the highest
Friendship and Civility, the remembrance of which I shall preserve with the
greatest Solemnity through every Capacity. I need not tell you the cause that
forced me to leave you privately; you're sensible of that already, but why your
Neighbors should grow so very Inquisitive to know what I am, which is a secret
that at present I don't think convenient to discover, that I cannot conceive;
but for their better Satisfaction you may tell 'em, I am no Jesuit in
Masquerade, nor a Person that has run his Country for Debt; but an Unfortunate
young Man, that a great many unhappy accidents, and several cross turns of
Fortune have driven into this part of the Kingdom. I may Live to see you again;
but if I never should, I hope you will not forget the Instructions, your poor
Servant Peregine left you; I mean, those in Particular relating to your
Religion and the Government of your Family. As to the Rubric of the Church of
England, I have so well Instructed my Bedfellow in it, that I hope it will be
needless now to put him in mind of our Method, i. e. To read the Psalms and
Chapters for the day, every Night, with the Litany, and some other proper
Collects which I have marked, in your common Prayer Book: you will excuse me I
presume that I did not formally take my leave of you, and attribute the reason
of it to some secret cause; pray all possible thanks and service to my good
Dame and her Son, and in return for all your kindness and Civility, accept the
Prayers and acknowledgments of

Your faithful Servant, Peregrine.
Shaftsbury Aug. 27. 62.

The Letter to Squire F --
SIR
IT seems the Character of an unfortunate Shepherd has spread it self as far as
your Family; poor Peregrine is become the common talk of the Country; some
Censure him, others Judge and condem him, and every Body mistakes him, so that
to be out of the general clamor, he is constrained to withdraw himself from the
service of a most honest worthy Master. Who and what he is, is the Grand Query.
Some will have him a Jesuit; some a Cheat, others an humorist, when in short
he is nothing else but the neglected offspring of deceased Cavalier, whom a
conjunction of cross Circumstances, have bandyed hither in the quest of bread,
etc. I know, Sir, my private departure will inflame the reports, and perhaps
may occasion some reflections upon my Master; That indeed I would prevent at
any Hazard, and rather than he shall suffer the least Injury, Notwithstanding
my solemn resolutions to the contrary, will discover my self to your Worship.

Sir, I beseech you to Pardon this Insolent trouble from an unfortunate
Stranger that with the utmost distance and Submission,

Subscribes

Shaftsbury Aug. 27. 62. Peregrine


The Letter to Capt. M -- with a short Essay upon the Calamities of Human Life.
Dear Capt.
I Promised you some short Essays upon the Calamities of Human Life, which I
have here enclosed. I know upon the first sight you will be apt to conclude
that I have stretched the point a little too far; Experience is our best
Mistress in such Cases, and I dare be bold, if the Generality of Men consider
their Birth simply as an entrance into Humane Life, and their Death as an exit
out of it, they will find in the main, without the enforcement of Philosophy,
that the assertion of the Wise King is a great truth, that the Day of our Death
is upon many accounts much preferable to the Day of our Birth.

I have some other Melancholy observations which I intend to trouble you with,
but those I Will reserve till my next. Accept of these lame and defective as they
are, and allow their unworthy Author some low place amongst the Catalogue of
your Friends, who shall ever esteem it his happiness to be thought fit to be,

Your Affectionate, Peregrine.
Shaftsbury August 27. 62.

ESSAY I.
Upon the General Calamities of Human Life.

IN all Accounts of Wise Men, we find every thing esteemed more or less,
according as it most Imports to their Interest or Happiness; and so far Humane
Life, considering it simply, Quatenus Humane Life, only, is either good or ill
in proportion to the advances it makes toward a State of Wretchedness or
Felicity. To take a proper Estimate therefore of Humane Life, it will be
necessary to examine whether there be not in the general, more Loss than Gain,
more Pain then Pleasure, and more Evil than Good, attending upon it; which I
suppose will be easy to Demonstrate, according to the common Rules of proving
any thing of that kind. Look but into the Original of Nature, and you will find
her very Being and Constitution Engrafted with so many Solid and Substantial
Ills, and has so many Seeds of Mortality scattered all over her, that at the
very first sight, if you don't look with false Optics, you must needs perceive
her condition to be far too wretched to be relieved, by the most Powerful
Advantages of this Life.

I know this will seem a very odd Paradox to those, that perhaps have neither
sense nor Grace to reflect in earnest upon the Circumstances of Human Life, but
for all that, they will find it at last a sad truth, and be forced to conclude
with Valerius Maximus, that the Thracians were a very Wise People, in
establishing a Custom to celebrate the Birth of Men with Mourning, and their
Death with Joy; which they did without any manner of Instructions or advice,
but as it were from the very Motions and dictates of Nature, or from the common
observations of the troubles and Calamities of it.

The Original depravation of Nature is an Invincible Argument against the
felicity of Humane Life; from thence spring up such an Infinite multitude of
pains, sorrows, Disappointments, deseases etc. That from woeful experiences
make it too plain that Life with all the additions that this World can offer,
is at the very best but a Wretched disconsolate comfortless thing: for let us
consider how many there are that are oppressed with Slavery, or pine'd with want,
worn out with sickness, and consumed with Vexation, wracked and alarmed with
fears and dismal apprehensions, and stung with the Guilt and remorses of
Conscience, I make no doubt but we shall find the Latter much out-ballance the
former; that the Evils of Humane Life, do in the main Surmount the Goods, and
then it is a plain case that if we take it in the sense, I am now discoursing of
it in, that Death is much perferable to it.

Alas! what have we here that can engage us to be fond of Life with any
reasonable pretense; our pleasure, our profit, our health and our Liberty, are
all Dependent and precarious; we are at best but Tenants at Will to 'em, and by
any rough turn of fate, or at least upon the first disobliging of our Landlord,
may be forced out of third Possession in a Moment.

Happyness and contentment we all pretend to search after, we toil and tug for
'em, and pursue 'em through abundance of Dangerous Wilds and Labyrinths, but
after all, but few, I Am afraid, none of us overtake 'em in earnest.

It Is true, it is in our own power to make our selves happy, but then our
Natures are so Stubborn and restive, so depraved, awkward and defective, that
they never cease Jilting us into some sort of Vice or Vanity: Man's born to
Trouble, to Pain, Danger, Diseases and Folly too; all, or some of which
constantly twist themselves about his Life, like the Treacherous Ivy round the
Oak, till they have sucked up, and exhausted all his Felicity, and then, after
a great many Pangs and struggles, forced him to wither away and die.

He comes into the World screching and struggling, and goes out of it again
Groaning, and Gnashing his Teeth; his Youth is nothing else but a mixture of
Danger and folly, and his Age a Composition of pains, diseases, troubles,
sorrows, disappointments, and altogether; and his Manhood too stands between
'em like a Parenthesis of Woe, and can by no means be Instated in any tolerable
condition of Indolence or ease.

He Is born to sin and Vanity, and indeed exposed to so many Hazards between
his Cradle and his Crutches, that his preservation amidst 'em, to a reasonable
Man, seems almost as miraculous as his Creation. Homer calls him a Leaf, and
Pindar the Dream of a shadow; and another that spoke with a better Spirit then
'em both, says his Life is but a vapor; he is a Creature so unfixt and
perishing, that in all the Memoirs of God's Creation, we hardly find any thing
more exaltedly wretched and deplorable; Alas Vain Men, we know not what we are,
or upon what account it is we put such a value upon our selves; a few days more
will put an end to all our foolish dependancies; the Grave and the
Winding Sheet will do it effectually, and it is those and nothing else can
secure us from the Calamities of Human Life, and defend us from the Cares and
Troubles, the sorrows and perplexities of the World.

To have done: the general experience we have of the Calamities of Humane Life,
sufficiently supercede the even necessity of future enlargements, it is at best
but a dismal Vale full of briers and thorns; and there`s none of us must expect
to make our passage through it without being torn and scratch't and Tormented
by 'em.

This, or something like it, is most certainly the Condition of Humane Life;
but let it be so, it is still Insolent in us to Murmr, and without doubt our
best way will be to take up the Poets resolution.

Praetulerim -- delirus inersque videri,
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant.
Quam sapere and ringi.
Horat. lib. 2.
ESSAY II.
He demonstrates Death simply, considered as an exit out of the World, to be
much preferrable to Life, both upon the account of the Evils from which it
delivers us, and the Goods into which it Instates us.

Life considered under the simple Notion of self Activity, is so far a good or
ill, as it is actuated by a Greater or Lesser sense of Pain and Pleasure, so
that those Persons only that are sensible of more Pleasure then Pain, Life,
considered barely in it self, can be any ways desirable, and then I Am afraid
too when we come to make the Parallel, we shall find that the Latter in General
does so much out Balance the former, that an exit out of the World, both upon
the Account of the Evil from which it delivers us, and the good, into which it
Instates us, is in most, if not in every thing, preferable to a continuance in
it.

It Is true indeed Humane Life may now and then enjoy some feeble short lived
pleasures, but what then, they are so short and so uncertain beside; Nay, and
what is worse, are so apt to cloy us to boot; that in all their narrow Circle
the greatest part is little else but a mere privation of pain and Misery.

Most of the pleasures of Humane Life, are but as it were some small reprieves
from Grief and trouble, a sort of Intermissions from pain and Misery, of
which, if we had never Lived we had never been sensible.

And besides all this too, our Insensibility of Misery, is but partial and
Imperfect, there allways clings some unlucky Circumstance to our chiefest
pleasure, that gives our sweetest Gust a bitter farewell.

But Death cures us at once, when we go down to make our Beds in the Dust,
there we sleep on and rest our selves, not only, out of the reach of a vain
turbulent Noisy World, but even out of the distance of the frailty and
depravation of our own Humane Nature.

Seeing therefore that Death renders us entirely Insensible of pain and Misery,
and that Life in its best and most Improved state, is constantly exposed to so
many Dangerous Ills, it naturaly follows, that Death considered in it self,
without any respect to the consequence, is really preferable to Life.

What it is that engages Men to be so much in Love with a little Paultry Flesh
and Blood, I cannot guess, I am loath to think it is Cowardice or
Inconsideration; and yet when I come to take the matter into pieces, and put it
together again, I must own I can hardly believe to the Contrary, they must
either want a right state of their Condition, have a wrong notion of Life, in
General, or else be afraid to quit the World, and die, for besides those, I
cannot Imagine what it is that Inclines 'em to dote so passionately upon their
own Infelicity.

And Pray, after all, what mighty advantages are there that they can morally
propose to themselves in Living? Is it that they may have a little time longer
to Pamper their lusts, entertain their Voluptuousness, and appease the raging
Importunities of an unbounded appetite, if that be all, there is nothing but a
Mouthfull of Earth will do their business, that Indeed will quench the flame of
their Impatience, and mitigage the pain of their desires together; and then I
appeal to any Man of sense, if it be not far better to be deprived of their
pain of a furious Expectation, then to be gratified with a troublesome
Enjoyment that commonly grows flat and loathsome as soon as it is in our
possession.

Or perhaps they would Live longer that they may get greater Estates, and so remove
themselves further out of the reach of wretched Indigence, and be more secure
from uneasyness and fatigue. But alas Poor man! if that is thy meaning, thou
must even seek repose in the Grave, or no where. This World's so full of Noise
and Nonscence: the Vanity is so Incorporated with the Vexation of Spirit, and
thy own Nature is so Giddy and loose, so frail and so Imperfect beside; That
it is the Vainest thing, a kind of folly exalted into madness to expect any
tolerable Satisfaction in this Life.

When you go to the Grave indeed, you will want your Friends to advise and
comfort you, and your Companions and Acquaintance, to laugh and rejoice with
you, and you must be laid up in an Eternal state of separation.

But what then, as you have no Friends to assist you, nor no Companions to
divert you, so you will want none, and then what mighty Injury will it be to be
deprived of that you have no use for; beside you will be delivered from the
Danger of false Friends, from sly Acquaintance and Injurious Companions, which
I must tell you, by the way, is no Inconsiderable Advantage; you will be out of
the reach of Treachery, Peevishness and Insolence, be delivered from
Impertinence, vexation and discord, and all the rest of the Inconveniences
that perpetually await Human Society.

What if you do cease to laugh and to be merry, you will cease to weep and to be
sad too, and truly I am apt to think that upon a fair Survey, that the sorrows
of our Lives do so much out Number our Joys, that by exchanging the one for the
other, we should be very great Gainers by the Bargain.

But then when you come to die you must undergo many a fierce Pang, many a
bitter Agony; you must go out of the World through extremity of Torture, Raving,
and Foaming, Groaning, and Gnashing your Teeth; this is often true indeed, and
the Consideration is dismal enough; but, what, is there no Torments in Life as
well as in Death? is there no Wracks of mind, no Tortures, nor Stings of
conscience, no ungrateful Jealousies, or dreadful apprehensions? Is there no
Pains nor Aches, no Gout, nor Stone, nor Strangury, appendant to our Mortality?
Yes, yes; they are all the sad Appendages of our Humanity, and from Woeful
Experience, might convince us, if we had not lost our Sense of Feeling, that
Life, dressed up with all the Advantages that Humane Nature is capable of, is, at
the very best, a most painful and dolorous thing.

What if we did enjoy a competent share of the Trifles of this World, or rather
suppose, that all the Elements of Outward Happiness were amas'd together, and
thrown upon us at once, what good would they do us, if we could not form from
'em a satisfaction of Mind; and that is almost impossible too, considering how
many embittering Circumstances are entwisted and grafted into our very Being
and Constitution.

Dic homo, vas Cinerum, quid confert flos facierum?
Copiae quid rerum, Mors ultima meta dierum.
I must own, it has been often the Subject both of my Wonder and Sorrow, that
the Fear of Death, for I can imagine it to be nothing else, should so weaken
and defeat the Courage, nay, the Understanding of Men, that they should be
afraid to suffer the Grand Remedy of all their Calamities; the Cause of it must
be this or nothing, they have lived Immoral Vicious Lives, and so are frighted
at the consequence.

There is indeed one thing in Humane Life, and but one, that renders it a
little comfortable, I mean Virtue, without which it is all a perfect Wilderness,
a mere Weild of Misery, only a flat Parenthesis of Time, encompassed on both
sides with Dangers, Sorrow, Vanity and Vexation.

The Virtuous Man alone can be said to live; the Vicious does but suck in and
breathe out a little Air, as the rest of the Insensible Animals do; but he that
lives virtuously, lives a Life worth being born for: and yet even a virtuous
Life too is made more eligible and advantageous by Death, upon the account it
makes our Happiness more complete, our Enjoyments more extensive, and our
possessions of 'em more fixed and permanent.

In the highest Enjoyments of Humane Life there is still more of Phantastry
than of Real Good; our Expectations commonly overrun our Reason, and swell our
Notions of things beyoud what they will Naturally bear: such wretched Cheats
and Delusions are most of our Temporary Goods, that they will hardly endure the
Test of a Fruition; so that from the repeated Trials of the Truth of this,
methinks we should at least grow a weary of this tiresome Scene of Vanity and
Misery.

Upon the whole, Life seems to me to be a strange Composition of Good and Ill,
some grateful Intermixtures there are indeed that make it a little the more
pallatable: but yet for all that, if we consider it only under the Notion of
self-activity, or rather as an Entrance into, or an Exit out of the World,
Death, I Am sure, must be judged preferable to it upon many accounts.

While we continue here, we are in a continual flow and reflow of things; to
day Great, and Rich, and at ease; to morrow poor, and in contempt, and pain;
now advanced to the top, anon crushed underneath the Wheel, and so secure of
nothing but misery.

Mors ipsa beatior inde est^
Quod per crutia mina Lethi
Via panditur ardua Justice,
Et ad astra doloribus Itur.

FINIS.
Books Printed for E. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain.
MEdicina Practica: Or, Practical Physic, showing the Method of Curing the
most usual diseases happening to Humane Bodies, as all sort of Aches, and
pains, Appoplexies, Agues, Bleeding, Fluxes, Gripings, Wind, Shortness of
Breath, diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Abortion, want of Appetite, loss of
the use of Limbs, Cholick, or Belly-Ach, Apostems, Thrushes, Quinfies,
Deafness, Buboes, Chachexia, Stone in the Reins and Bladder, with the
Preparation of the Praecipiolum, or the Universal Medicine of Paracelsus, to
which is added the Phylosophick works of Hermes Trismegistis, Kalid Persicus,
Geber Arabs, Artesius Longaevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon and George
Ripley; All translated out of the best Latin Editions, and carefully claus'd
or divided into Chapters and Sections, for the more pleasant reading and easier
understanding those Authors, together with a singular comment upon the first
Book of Hermes, the most ancient of the Philosophers, the whole completed in
three Books, by William Salmon, Professor of Physic, Price 5 s.

Panarithmologia, being a Mirror for Merchants, a Breviate for Bankers, a
Treasure for Tradesmen, a Mate for Mechanics, or a sure guide for Purchasers,
Sellers, or Mortgagers, Land-Leasers, Annuities, Rents, Pensions, etc. In
present Possession or Reversion, and a constant concomitant fitted fot all
Men's Occasions. In three parts; all performed by Tables ready cast up, whereby
all Questions relating to any of the Forementioned Particulars, are easily and
exactly resolved, without the Aid of Arithmetic, for the most part by
Inspection into the Table only: and (in any Case) by common Addition and
Substraction. All which Tables are made easy by Variety of Examples.
Calculated and Published by W. Leybourn. To which is added a necessary
Appendix, containing Heads of Daily Use to all Traders. Price 5 s.

An Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in
America; containing the most Exact Relation hitherto published, of their
unparalled Cruelties on the Indians, in the Destruction of above. Forty
Millions of People. With the Propositions offered to the King of Spain to
prevent the further Ruin of the West Indies. By Don Bartholomew de las Casas,
Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eyewitness of their Cruelties. Illustrated with
Cuts. To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a man may dispose
of his Travels to the best Advantage, Price 4 s.

The Country Gentleman's Vade Mecum: Or his Companion for the Town. In Eighteen
Letters, from a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the Country, wherein he
Passionately disswades him against coming to London, and Represents to him the
Advantages of a Country Life, in Opposition to the Follies and Vices of the
Town. He discovers to him most of the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of the Town,
which as a Gentleman and a stranger he is exposed to. And gives him some
general Advice and Instructions how he may best in his Absence dispose of his
Affairs in the Country, and manage himself with the most Security and
Satisfaction when he comes to London.

The Stage condemned, and the Encouragement given to the Immoralities and
Profaneness of the Theater, in the English Schools, Universities and Pulpits.
King Charles I's Sundays Mark, and Declaration for Sports and Pastimes on the
Sabbath, largely related and animadverted upon. The Arguments of all the
Authors that have writ in defense of the Stage, against Mr. Collier; Collier's,
and the Sense of all the Fathers, Councils, Ancient, Philosophers and Poets,
and of the Greek and Roman States, and the first Christian Emperors, concerning
the Drama; Faithfully delivered. Together with the Censure of the English
State, and of several Ancient and Modern Divines of the Church of England upon
the Stage; and Remarks upon diverse late Plays: as also upon those presented by
the two Universities to K. Char. I.


